A Book WHICH SHOWS THE life and manners of all true Christians, and how
unlike they are unto Turks and Papists, and Heathen folk.

Also the points and parts of all divinity, that is of the revealed will and
word of God, are declared by their several Definitions, and Divisions in
order as follows.

ROBERT BROWN.

MIDDELBVRGH, Imprinted by Richard Painter. 1582.

(...) 6 Which be the three persons?
God the Father.

God the Son begotten of the Father from everlasting, and after an
unspeakable manner, which also is called JESUS CHRIST.

God the holy Ghost, proceeding of the Father, and of the Son.

6 What dreams and imaginations have the Heathen of sundry persons in the
Godhead?
They have their Baals, Popes, and fatherhoode in mischief: They have their
sons also and children of their Gods, as mighty Gyaunts and subtle
wretches, which draw from their fatherhoode a course and force which is
mischeeuous. They have also their seducing and wicked spirits, which they say
are of God.

6
A person is a difference of the Godhead in the names and working in one
mutual agreement. The persons.


The Father is a person of the Godhead, which is, and works by his Son
begotten of him from everlasting, in a mystery unsearchable. The Father.


The Son is a person of the Godhead, which is, and works with his Father,
who begat him from everlasting. The Son.


The holy Ghost is a person of the Godhead, which is, and works from the
Father, and from the Son. The holy Ghost.


7 How is God all sufficient and most blessed?
His all sufficiency and most blessed state appears by his incomparable
Majesty, and by the show of his wonderful glory.

7 How do the Heathen Gods vanish, and have their wantes and harms?
They are vile and nothing worth.

They are unprofitable and can do nothing, except they be helped of others.

7
The all sufficiency and blessedness of God, is his perfect state, whereby he
wants nothing, nor has need of any thing, to better the same, but all
things have need of him, and have their being by him. All sufficiency of
God. In his Majesty and excellency above al. In the show of his wonderful
glory.



8 How is his Majesty incomparable?
Because he was never made nor created, nor seen of mortal man.

Because he staineth and confounds all things being compared with him.

And because he is only infinite.

8 How do they show them selves vile and nothing worth?
They are made, handled, and led by others.

They are worse then their makers, and more vile, then they which handle and
use them.

They are limited by others which rule them.

8
The Majesty of God is his incomparable excellency or greatness, whereby he
differs from all things, in a wonderful mystery, and stayneth and
confounds them, being compared with him. Majesty of God. Being vncreat and
invisible. Being incomparable. Stayning and confounding all things. Only
infinite.




9 How is he infinite?
He is and continues from everlasting to everlasting.

He is vnchau^gable and without corruption.

He is incomprehensible, and contained of nothing.

9 How are they Limited?
Their beginning is vile, and their end is worse.

They change and fade away.

They are caughte and taken in their corruption.

9
His infinitnes is a perfection of his Majesty, whereby he limiteth all
things, and is limited of nothing: and therefore he limiteth time and place
unto all things, and their working and chaunges. His infinitnes. In his
eternity. Without time. Without change.
In his inco^prehensiblenes.



10 How has God showed unto us his wonderful glory?
First, by his power and almightines.

Secondly, by the name of Chieftie, which he has by his power.

Thirdly, by his holiness in using his power.

10 Why are they unprofitable, and can do nothing, except they be helped?
Because of their weakness and deadnes in them selves.

Because they are maistered, and have their baseness.

Because they are misled and do fault by their weakness.

10
His glory is the show of his excellency in all his works. His glory In
power In the use thereof. In chieftie. In holiness.




His power and almightines, is a perfection of his excellency, where by nothing
is to hard for him, and he brings to pass whatsoever he will. His power In
creating all things. In guiding all things. Usually. More stra^gelie.




11 How is God known by his power and almightines?
By his creating of all things.

By his usual guiding of all.

By his meruailes and wonders which he shows besides use.

11 How are they weak, and dead in them selves?
They have their making and marring.

They are driven and drawn by their course and destiny.

Their best work is triflinge to no profit.

11
His creating is a work of his allmightines whereby he made all things of
nothing. Creating.


His guiding is a work of his power, in using all things to serve his
purpose, that nothing chances but by his will and commandment. His guiding.


His maruailes and wonders, are his extraordinary works, teaching man that he
has power over all his works, to use them against their nature, to do him
service, and set forth his glory. Maruailes.


12 How is he known by the chieftie which he has by his power?
He is Lord and Ruler of all.

He is God and Possessor of all.

He has the honor and praise of all.

12 How are they maistered, and have their baseness?
They are servile and slavish.

They are the curse, and the evil of those that seek to them.

They are the shame, and skorne of the wiser.

12
His Chieftie is the power which he has to use all things as he will. Chieftie
in Lordship and authority. Rule. Possession.
Honor.



His Lordship is his chieftye whereby he has all things subdued and obedient
unto him. Lordship.


His Rule and Government, is his Lordship, in using the obedience of all
things, to do his will. Rule and Government


His possessing of all, is his Lordshippe in using their service, for his
purpose and will. Possession.


His honor is the chieftie which he has by the homage and service of all.
Honor.


13 How is he known by his holiness in using his power?
He shows his holiness in perfect wisdom.

Also in his justice and righteousness.

Also in his goodness and grace.

13 How are they misledde, and faulty by their weakness?
Those men or evil spirits which have been made Gods, have their fondnes or
foolishnes.

Also their unrighteousness.

Also their hurtfulnes and harming.

13
His holiness is, the right and perfect use of his power, to do all things most
uprightly, and innocently. Holiness In his wisdom In using his authority. In
Justice. In goodness.




His wisdom is his holiness, by the perfect use of all understanding. Wisdom
of God is In knovving all things. In using the same. By counsel. By the manner
of working.




14 What say you of his wisdom?
By his wisdom he knows all things.

He is perfect in counsel.

He works all things in their due manner.

14 What say you of their fondness and foolishnes?
They have their ignorance and blindness

Also their rashness and lightness.

Also their evil handling and marring of matters.

14
His knowledge is that point of his wisdom, whereby nothing is hydd and secret
from him, but he has thoroughly found out the same. His knowledge.


His counsel is his minding and pondering of all things from everlasting,
according to knowledge. His counsel. Devising. Aduising.



15 What say you of his counsel?
He minds and searches out all things from everlasting.

He remembers and counts them.

He foreseeth and purposes all things.

15 How do they show them selves no godds, by their lightness and rashness?
Their may carelesnes and dulnes be spied in them.

Also forgetfulness.

Also vnwarines, and headdines.

15
His devising, and serching out of things, is his counsel from everlasting,
how all things shall be and fall out. Devising.
For Aduising, look after in the wisdom of man.


His iudginge and markinge, is his counsel of all things present how they
are. Marking.


His remembrance, as we understand it, is his aduising or counsel of things
which are past, as it were, by occasion of things present, though nothing is
occasioned to God. Remembrance.


His counting, or reckoning, is a whole and full aduising of things passed:
because he will take accounts of them. Counting.


His foresight is his counsel, whereby he is advised of all things coming.
Foresight.


His Purpose and Praedestination, is his counsel, whereby he is settled how
all things shall be. Purpose and Predestination.


16 How does he work things in their due manner?
He does al things in perfect readiness and order.

Also with speed and forcible endeavor.

Also in stedfastnes and finishing his enterprises.

16 What say you of their evil handling and marring of matters?
They are disordered and untoward.

They have their slacknesse and fainting.

They have their backwardnes, and disuauntage.

16
His manner of worcking, is the right use of his knowledge, in applyinge the
same unto practice.

His readiness is his perfect mnner of preparing al things; which may further
his works.

His order is his perfect manner of setting and compassing the work it self.

His speed is his hastening to dispatch the work.

His force is the endeavor, whereby the work wants no strength to bring it
to pass.

His Stedfastnes and finishing, is the continuance of his enterprise without
failing or letting till it be done. Manner of vvorking By preparation.
Readiness. Order.
By endeavor In taking the work in hand. speed. Forceablenes.
In stedfastnes therein. preuayling. Finishi^g





17 How is he just and righteous?
His righteousness stands in esteeming right and due.

Also in upholding the same: by appointinge to all things their work and
duty.

Also in taking accountes of their works and duties.

17 How are they unrighteous?
They mislike the right, and favor the wrong.

They lead others unto wickedness.

They suffer and let them ^lone therein.

17
His Justice and righteousness, is his holiness, in the right ruling and
governing of all things. Justice In esteeming right. In doing right. Appointing
duties. Taking accou^ts*




His Esteeming of right is that point of Justice, wh^rbey he is pleased
therewith, and displeased with the contrary. Esteming right. Pleased with
right. Love and joy. Zeal and jealousy.
Displeased with contrary, as Hatred. Anger and Wrath.




18 How does he esteem of right and due?
He is zealous and jealous for equity and innocence.

He loves those and rejoices over them which do right and duty.

He hates al vanity and wickedness, and is angry therewith.

18 How do they mislike right and due?
They make light thereof.

They loath it and take grief thereat.

They rest and please them selves in evil and wrong.

18
His zeal and jealousy, is his estimation of right and duty, for the
worthiness thereof: whereby he is said, as it were, provoked to hasten the
same, and makes it sure with all straightness and watchfulness. Zeal.


His Love and Joy is his high estimation of any in their goodness, whereby he
yields him self to them in one mutual happiness, and takes them as precious
and dear, which have so sought his name and his glory. Love.


His wrath and hatred is his troubled disliking of wickedness in any, for the
contrariety thereof to his holiness, provoking him to pursue them as accursed,
and to set him self wholly against the^ as hateful unto him. Wrath and hatred.


19 How does he appoint unto all their work and duty?
He has given unto all things power and means to obey and serve him, if they
had kept it.

He teaches us his will and word.

He directs us by his example and guiding.

19 How do they mislead?
They leave them in their weakness, or pervert their gifts.

They give them up to their ignorance, or deceive and beguile them.

They forsake the untoward, or make them more auke.

19
His appointing of duties is that part of his government, or that work of
his Justice, whereby all have their office and charge at his hands. Appointing
duties. Giving power. Directing the same By teaching. By example and
moderating.




His teaching is, whereby he reuealeth and makes known his will. Teaching.


His Moderating is a work of his government, using the obedience of his
creatures in following him, to put in practice, a duty or office appointed
unto the^. Moderating.


20 How does he take accounts?
He watches us himself, and by his Angels and messengers.

He examineth, and tries us by his word and our consciences, and by outward
affliction.

He recompenceth every one according to his works.

20 How do they suffer, and let alone in their wickedness?
They hyde wickedness, and shift it away, and seek occasions of evil.

They ouerslip wickedness, and pass by the same.

They flatter and excuse them in their sin.

20
His taking of accountes, is a work of his government, whereby he reckons
with all things, how they execute his will. Taking accou^ts In knowing right
and due. By watching. By examining.
In recompensing.



His watching is ^his continual mindinge of all his creatures, whereby he
marketh their obedience and service. Watching.


His examining and trying is his forceable taking of accountes, whereby he
makes known that which any would hyde. Examining.


His recompensing is a work of his Justice, whereby every thing, as it
shows forth his glory, so it has the name and the use thereof, in good or
evil. Recompensing.


21 Hitherto of the Justice of God. what say you of his grace and goodness
His goodness is in preserving and blessing his creatures, and especially man:
both in his first estate, wherein he was made after the image and likeness of
God: And in restoring him again being fallen away from his state.

Hitherto of the unrighteousness of Heathen gods. 21 What say you of their
cursednes and harming?
They are a present mischief.

They fail most, when they should cheeflie help.

21
His goodness is his holiness in doing good, and increasing his blessings
toward his creatures, more then the goodness which is in them deserves. his
goodness In maintayning things in their state. In restoring them being fallen.



His preservation or saving of things is, a work of his goodness, whereby he
keeps all his creatures, in their state of excellency and difference of
kind, by continuance of his blessing upon them. Preservation. In them selves
by their natures, and glory. By outward furniture.



22 How does he maintain and bless things in their state?
He gives to al their natures.

Also their glory and excellency.

Also all outward furniture needful unto them.

22 How are they a present mischief?
The course of nature is corrupted and changed by them.

All things are defased and stained.

All come to marring and spoil.

22
The natures of things, is the proper ableness which every thing has, to
keep it self in his perfect kind. Natures of things. In the working and
powers By life and quickening. Without life.
In the outward making.



Their glory and excellency, is the gift which they have to show forth the
glory of their Creator. Glory and excellency.


Their outward furniture, is the provision and stoare of outward helps and
furtherances of their welfare. Outward furniture.


23 What say you of the restoring of man being fallen away from his state by
the sin of Adam?
God has provided the means of salvation.

First, in his secret counsel.

Secondly, in his redines to help us.

Thirdly, in the show of his help.

That we may apply this unto Antichrist: 23 How has he most failed us, when he
seemed to help us?
Antichrist has ever an evil mind to the church of God.

He is always untoward and unfit to help it.

He is a plague and destroyer thereof.

23
The image of God in man, was the greatest show of his excellency in man:
whereby he resembled his God most lively in a wonderful happiness. The Image of
God in man.


His restoring and saving of man being fallen away, was the work of his
wonderful goodness, whereby he did remedy our miserable estate, and brought us
again unto happiness. Our redemption by The causes and preparation of help.
The counsel of God. His readiness thereon.
The sh^we of his help. In his promises. In keeping the same. Sending his
Son. Saving us by him.





24 What is his secret counsel?
He knows our miseries and wantes.

He minds and counts them.

He foreseeth and purposes what help^ we shall have.

24 Who is an Antichrist by his evil mind to the church of God?
The wilful hyders of the woes of the church, and blind to see the gross
corruptions thereof.

They that forget and ouerslip the same but watch to uphold their traditions.

They which have wicked devises against it.

24
His counsel.

His knowledge.

His mindfulnes.

His foresight and purpose etc.

His readiness were before defined, but here we have them applied unto our
redemption.


25 How is the Lord ready to help us?
He is full of mercy and compassion.

He loves his people and desires their welfare.

He is zealous and jealous for them.

25 Who be Antichrists by there towardnes and fitnes to destroy?
They which are fierce, and cruel in a false church government.

They which loath the righteous, and are at rest in their absence.

They which pursue and put from them the righteous as being their plague.

25
His mercy and compassion, is as it were, a troubled disliking of our
miseries, as if they were his own. His mercy.


His love was defined before.

Likewise his zeal and jealousy.

26 How does he show his help?
He has given his promises to help.

He is faithefull of his promise in sending his Son into the world for our
redemption.

He has redeemed and saved us, by his son Christ Jesus.

26 Who be Antichrists by the plague and destruction which they bring unto
souls?
They which have professed and vowed it by their calling and state.

They which hold the same course of profession, and begin the mischief.

They which make the destruction and havoc.

26
The promises are the Joyful show and teaching by message, speech, and
writing of his purpose to remedy our miseries. Promises.


The sending of his Son into the world, was the office and charge which he
gave him, to work our salvation, by taking our Manhood unto his Godhead. The
sending of his Son By his office and message as before. By generation which
was Of the spirit begetting. Of the seed of the Virgin made a quickening
spirit, and yet a liui^g soul and body.




27 How did he send his Son into the world?
He being God became also man, and took our nature upon him, sin only
excepted.

He was conceived of the holy Ghost.

He was borne of the Virgin Marie.

27 How do all Antichrists hold their course and profession to begin the
mischief?
They take on them the name and callings of shepherds in the churh, but have
no message.

They are bred from beneath in the bottomless pit, Revel. 9.

They break forth as Locustes, out of the smoke of the pit.

27
The Manhood of Christ, was the making of him a reasonable, living man, so
that in fashion, nature, and quality, he was like one of us, sin only
excepted. The Manhood.


His conceauing by the holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin, was the working
of the holy ghost in the womb of the Virgin, without carnal copulation with
manne, whereby the seed of her body, became a living man, having both soul
and body.

His conception was without sin, because the cursed seed was sanctified by
the spirit, so that it could no more sin, yet must it needs abide the curse
and punishment of sin. For the body sins not but by the soul. Now his
soul was ho^ie, and therefore also his body was holy, though it was of the
seed of the Virgin. The conception.


His birth was the bringing forth of the living seed into the world, being
perfect man, and yet without sin. The birth


28 How has Christ redeemed us?
He suffered our miseries for us.

He overcame and took away our miseries.

He restored happiness unto us.

28 How do Antichrists destroy, and undo the people?
They first will be sure of their outward welfare, and maintenance by the
people.

Then they uphold or bring in one spiritual plague or other, which peruerteth
all.

They wear, and spend away the whole spiritual welfare of the church.

28
The sufferinges of Christ, is the service and yielding up of his body and
soul, to feel and endure in them both the extremity of all miseries for our
cause. His sufferings. Of the cause of misery. The burden of our sin. The
wrath of God.
Of the misery it self.



29 How did he suffer our miseries?
Because he was man, he did also abide the wrath and dreadful curse of God,
which was due unto man.

He suffered death, and the torments of hell for us.

He suffered also in his members, which are his people and church.

29 How are they sure of their welfare first?
They get the favor of some patron or Bishop, or worldly man.

They get the grant of some benefice or stipend, without planting the church.

They live in iolietie, having ease and favor of men.

29
His suffering of the wrath of God, and the burden of our sins, was his
forsaking for a time, as unworthy of the favor and blessing of God, being
accursed and a castaway. His suffering of the wrath of God and burden of sin.


30 How has he overcome our miseries, and taken them away?
By his righteousness, he overcame sin, the cause of our misery, and took
it away.

Also by his death and torments, he overcame and took away the wrath of God,
and the debte of the Law.

Also by his rising again, he overcame the misery and curse it self.

30 How do they uphold, or bring in one or other spiritual plague?
By some open wickedness, or false doctrine, they overthrow the grounds of
religion, and the government of the church.

They make the^ selves, and their followers guilty of the breach of the whole
law, by perverting the chief laws: and so procure the wrath of God against
them.

The curse of God does light upon their labors: so that their shame and plague
appears.

30
His ouercomming was the work of his patience, whereby he got his whole
purpose in discharging al things wherewith man might be charged, and in taking
away all things, which hindered our happiness. His victory. Of the cause of
misery. Sin by his righteousness. Wrath of God. his torments.
Of the misery it self by rising again from death.



His ouercomming of sin, was his taking away of the guiltines thereof.
Ouercomming sin.


His ouercomming of the wrath of God was the appeasing of his anger, and
satisfying of his Justice, by enduring the curse thereof. Ouercomming of the
wrath of God.


31 How has he restored happiness?
He has him self obtained the love of God by his justification.

He has obtained his own happiness by ascending up into heaven.

He has also obtained the like for us, by his mediation.

31 How do they wear and spend away the whole spiritual welfare of their
flocks?
The people are under them whom God hates.

Also under them whom God curses.

Also they are made like unto them by obeying and following them.

31
His restoring of happiness was his work of redemption, whereby the means is
offered to all men for to be saved. His restoring of good was By getting it
himself as the Love of God by his Justification. The happiness it self by his
ascension
By getting it for us.



His Justification was the perfect fulfilling of the will of GOD, accepted of
him by pronouncinge his innocence. Justification.


The Happiness which he got, is the perfect sufficiency or most blessed state
which he has in God, or it is the blessing of God upon him, wh^reby he
wants nothing, nor has need of any thing else to better his state.
Happiness.


32 How has he gotten happiness for us?
He has gotten the causes of our happiness which are in god.

Also the means of our happiness as proceeding from God.

Also he has gotten the inioying of the happiness it self.

32 How do they make the people cursed like to them selves?
They are altogether brought into the displeasure and disliking of God.

They are left helples and without the means of salvation.

All woe and misery waits upon them.

32
The causes of our happiness in God, is the secret sufficiency which he has
in him self ^o save mankind. Christ has gotten The causes of happiness for us
In God. The means from God.
The happiness it self.

The causes in God His Counsel In electing. In predestinating.
His readiness thereon, as before.



33 What be the causes of our happiness in God?
His choosing, and predestinating of us unto this happiness.

His mercy.

His love toward us.

33 How are they brought into this displeasure of God?
They show them selves appointed and judged unto damnation.

Also that presently they are under the fierce wrath of god and his bitter
curse And that God hates and loatheth the^

33
His Electing or choosing is his free consent or will in his eternal counsel,
to save us for his names sake, without any desert of ours, to make known his
exceeding great mercies. Election.


His Predestinating of us, is his full consent or counsel, whereby he is
settled to save those whom he has chosen, and after that manner which pleases
and likes him. Predestination.


34 What be the means of our happiness from God?
Our calling and leading unto this happiness.

Our obedience thereto in mortifying our selves.

Our raising and quickening again.

34 How are they left helples, and with out the means of salvation?
They are called away, and misled to destruction without any hope of help.

They are desperately hardened.

They are most fearfully discouraged and troubled, when their evil state
appears.

34
The means of our Happiness from God, is the help which he gives us in our
selves, and among our selves. Means of happiness from God. Calling. Obedience
thereto.



His calling of us, is his using of all means and occasions, to move us to the
seking of salvation in Christ.

His calling of us in truth, is when the means which move us to seek unto
Christ, are clear to the conscience, vvihthout the outvvarde signs thereof.
Calling.


35 What is our calling and leading unto this happiness?
In the new Testament our calling is in plainer manner: as by the first planting
and gathering of the church under one kind of government.

Also by a further pla^ting of the church according to that government.

But in the old Testament, our calling was by shadows and ceremonies, as
among the Jews.

35 How do Antichrists call away and misleade the people?
Some are Antichrists, which professing the new Testament, pervert the same:
as they which supplant and overthrow the good state and government of the
church.

Which also establishe their false church and government in stead thereof.

And some are Antichrists, by perverting the old Testament: as the Jews,
which hold still the shadows and ceremonies of the old law, and deny Christ
to be come in the flesh.

35
The new Testament which is called the Gospel or glad tidings, is a joyful
and plain declaring and teaching by a due message of the remedy of our
miseries through Christ our Redeemer, who is come in the flesh, a Savior unto
those which worthelie receive this message, and has fulfilled the old
ceremonies. The new Testament


Our calling in plainer manner, is when the means, which move us to seek
Christ, are clear to the conscience, without the outward shadows and
ceremonies thereof. Our calling in plainer manner.


The Church planted or gathered, is a company or number of Christians or
believers, which by a willing covenant made with their God, are under the
government of god and Christ, and keep his laws in one holy communion:
because Christ has redeemed them unto holiness and happiness for ever, from
which they were fallen by the sin of Adam. The church planted or gathered.


The Church government, is the Lordshipp of Christ in the communion of his
offices: whereby his people obey to his will, and have mutual use of their
graces and callings, to further their godliness and welfare. The church
government.
Our calling and leading to happiness In the new Testament more plainly By the
first planting and gathering of the church under one government By a further
building according to the government.
In the old Testament more darkly.

The first planting and gathering of the Church, By the covenant, On Gods
behalf. On our behalf.
By the Sacrament thereof.



36 How must the church be first planted and gathered under one kind of
government?
First by a covenant and condition, made on Gods behalf.

Secondly by a covenant and condition made on our behalf.

Thirdly by using the sacrament of Baptism to seal those conditions, and
couenantes.

36 How do they supplant, and overthrow the good state and government of
the church?
They wrest and mock the Lords covenant, as if he offered the^ grace.

The people do yoke and bind away them selves by their covenant, from the
Lord and his grace.

They make their Baptism a pledge, and seal of gracelesnes and mischief.

36
The covenant on Gods behalf is, his agreement or partaking of conditions with
us that if we keep his laws, not forsaking his government, he will take us
for his people, and bless us accordingly. The covenant on Gods behalf. His
promise. His Spirit.



37 What is the covenant, or condition on Gods behalf?
His promise to be our God and savior, if we forsake not his government by
disobedience.

Also his promise to be the God of our seed, while we are his people.

Also the gift of his spirit to his children as an inward calling and
furtheraunce of godliness.

37 How do they wrest and mock the Lords covenant?
By a blasphemous abusing of the name and promises of God, they make the^
selves their Gods, by holding the^ bondslaues to there government.

Also they hold their children and seed in like bondage.

Also they inta^gle the^ with a spirit of error and continual misgeui^g from
good.

37
His promise to his church, is his sure covenant, remembered, taught, and held
by the church, and the seed thereof: whereby it only has assurance of
salvation in Christ. His promise To the Church. To the seed thereof.



The spirit of God in us, is an inward working of the holy Ghost in our
hearts, stirring and drawing us to take Christ for our Savior, and preparing
and stre^gthning us unto all goodness. The Spirit of God in us.


38 What is the covenant or condition on our behalf?
We must offer and give up our selves to be of the church and people of God.

We must likewise offer and give up our children and others, being under age,
if they be of our householde and we have full power over them.

We must make profession, that we are his people, by submitting our selves to
his laws and government.

38 How do the people yoke and bind away them selves from the Lord and
his grace?
They cut of and keep away them selves from the true church, to be among
the wicked.

They give up them selves and others to be of their popish parishes, and
felloshippe.

They bear the image and marks of Antichristian people, by obeying and
keeping the laws of Antichrist.

38
The covenant on our behalf, is our agreement and partaking of conditions
with God, That he shall be our God so long as we keep under his government,
and obey his laws, and no longer. The covenant on our behalf In offering and
giui^g up to be of the church. Our selves. Our children and seed.
In professing and leading a Christian life.



The giving up of our selves and our seed to be of the church, is a
duetifulnes in seeking holiness and happiness by Christ, in his Church, which
only we have, by a covenant to be under his government in the Church, and
by obeying thereto. Offering and giving up to be of the Church.


Our profession and submission to his Jaws and government, is the keeping of
our covenant, by leading a godly and Christian life. Professing and submitting
to the Church government.


39 How must Baptism be used, as a seal of this covenant?
They must be duly presented, and offered to God and the church, which are to
be Baptized.

They must be duly received unto grace and fellowship.

39 How do they make Baptism a pledge and seal of gracelesnes and mischief?
They are brought to be baptized unto Antichrist, and his popish parishes.

Then also in stead of due receiving, there is a graceless forceing, and
ravening of them unto damnation.

39
Baptism is a Sacrament or mark of the outward church, sealing unto us by
the wasshing of our bodies in water, and the word accordingly preached, our
suffering with Christ to die unto sin by repentance, and our rising with him
to live unto righteousness, and also sealing our calling, profession, and
happiness gotten by our faith in the victory of the same Jesus Christ. The use
of Baptism is, By due presenting and offering of the parties to be baptized.
By due receiving of them to grace and fellowshippe.



40 How must they be presented and offered?
The children of the faithful, though they be infantes are to be offered to
God and the church, that they may be Baptized.

Also those infantes or children which are of the householde of the faithful,
and under their full power.

Also all of discretion which are not baptized, if they hold the Christian
profession, and show forth the same.

40 How are they given up unto popish parishes?
The children of the wicked and unfaithful, are offered by godfathers and
godmothers, and brought to their parishes.

The parents and governors have no authority to present them.

They hold not the christian profession, nor show forth the same.

40
Presenting and offering of persons to be baptized, is a duetifulnes in the
parents and governors which offer, or in the parties which offer themselves,
whereby they seek their salvation by joining with the church in one christian
communion. Presenting and offering By the governors, As parents and Rulers
which offer their children, or them of their household.
By the parties them selves, having discretion.



The due receiving unto grace and fellowship is a duetifulnes of the Church in
partaking with those in one Christian communion, which are mere for the same.
Due receiving By due preaching of the word. By right applying of the sign
thereto.



41 How must they be received unto grace and felloshippe?
The word must be duly preached in an holy assembly.

The sign or Sacrament must be applied thereto.

41 What is their graceless forceing and ravening of them?
A law does bind the priest and people to a popish reading, or to a dead and
frutelesse form of words.

The sign is made a superstitious trifting and coloring of abominations.

41
By preaching the word of Baptism, we understand not the blind reading, or
fruitles prating thereof at random, but a due teaching bylawful messengers, of
our redemption, mortifying, and raising with Christ, The word of Baptism
preached, as Of our whole redemption, and the promises to the Church. Of taking
use thereof By mortifying. By raising.




42 How must the word be preached?
The preacher being called and meet thereto, must show the redemption of
christians by Christ, and the promises received by faith as before.

Also they must show the right use of that redemption, in suffering with
Christ to dye unto sin by repentance.

Also the raising and quickening again upon repentance.

42 What is their dead reading or frutelesse form of teaching?
A blind guide or priestlie Preacher, by a show of reading or telling a
redemption by Christ, does snare the^ with the abominations of Antichrist

They lead them to a desperate hardening, by the wicked guiding of their
parishes or charges.

They are utterly withdrawn from goodness to set them selves on mischief and
wickedness.

42
Our redemption is defined before.

Our sufferings and raising do follow after to be handled.

43 How must the sign be applied thereto?
The bodies of the parties baptized, must be washed with water, or sprinkled or
dipped, in the name of the Father, and of ye Son, and of the holy Ghost, unto
the forgeuenes of sins, and dying thereto in one death and burial with Christ.

The preacher must pronounce the^ to be baptized into ye body and government
of Christ, to be taught and to profess his laws, that by his mediatio^ and
victory, they might rise again with him unto holiness and happiness for ever

The church must give thanks for the party baptized, and pray for his
further instruction, and traininge unto ^aluation.

43 How is the sign made a superstitious trifle?
They blasphemously abuse the name of god in baptising the^, whereby they
further come under the fierce wrath of god and his bitter curse, to be more
desperately hardened in their sins.

They are pronounced to be baptized into their wicked fellowship and
government, to be taught and to profess with some laws of Christ, the laws
of antichrist especially, and to be set on mischief, and left helpless
therein.

The parish with a false worship and idol service give thanks, and pray unto
God as to an idol: whereby there is a further increase of wickedness and misery
to the party baptized.

43
Baptising in the name of God, is a due applying of the sign of washing or
sprinckling to the word duly preached, by him which is known to be sent of
God. Baptising in the name of God.


Baptising into the body and government of Christ, is when the parties
Baptized are received unto grace and fellowshippe, by partaking with the church
in one Christian communion. Baptising into the body and government of Christ.


Thanks giving and Prayer do follow after to be spoken of: here they be
mentioned by occasion.

Hitherto of the first gathering and planting of the Church. 44 How must it be
further builded, according unto church government?
First by communion of the graces and offices in the head of ye church, which
is Christ.

Secondly, by communion of the graces and offices in the body, which is the
church of Christ.

Thirdly, by using the Sacrament of the Lords supper, as a seal of this
communion.

Hitherto of supplanting of the true Church. 44 How do they establish their
false church and government in stead thereof?
They are first under one chief Antichrist the Pope, or under other
Antichrists, which rese^ble him: or sprang up of him, and receive their image
and marks.

They draw corruptions, and partake wickedness one with an other, in one common
plague.

They make their supper of communion, a pledge and seal of their wretched
confusion.

44
The communion of graces, is a mutual using of friendship and callings, to
pleasure and be pleasured in all christian charity. Communion of graces In the
Head and highest, as in Christ, by His Priesthood His rule.
In the body which is the church.



Christ is the Son of God, made by his Father the Head and Lord of the
Church, because he has anointed and filled him with his Spirit, and has given
him an office and charge, and the fulness of all graces to work our salvation.
Christ.


Antichrist is the child of the Devil, filled with the spirit of delusion and
hypocrisy, who has an usurped office over false christians, named the church
of God, and by the strength of his Laws, government, and superstitious
ceremonies, does overthrow their redemption by Christ. Antichrist.


45 How has the church the communion of those graces and offices, which are
in Christ?
It has the use of his priesthood: because he is the high Priest thereof.

Also of his prophecy: because he is the Prophet thereof.

Also of his kingdom and government: because he is the king and Lord thereof.

45 How are they under some one chief Antichrist, and receive his image and
marks?
They put religion, and holiness in their fellowship under his abominations, and
so he is their priest.

They follow his laws and ordinances: and so he is their prophet.

They hold his government, and so he is their king.

45
The Priesthood of Christ is his office of mediation and service in the
church, for atonement and sanctification, whereby all sin and uncleanness is
taken away. Priesthood of Christ. In making atonement By forgiveness of sins.
By justification.
In sanctifying us.



The Priesthood of Antichrist is his office of tolerating and dispensing with
wickedness, that it may remain, and agreement might be made between Christ and
Belial. Priesthood of Antichrist.


46 What use has the church of his priesthood?
Thereby he is our mediator, and we present and offer up our prayers in his
name, because by his entreaty, our sins are forgeuen.

Also he is our justification, because by his atonement we are justified.

Also he is our sanctification, because he partaketh unto us his holiness and
spiritual graces.

46 How is Antichrist their priest?
A vile person presents their prayers to God, as a spokesman for them and
pronounces absolutio^ of their sins: and that by stinting and limiting in
popish wise.

Also he tolerateth, and dispenses with wickedness, to justify iniquity.

Also by a vain hallowing and blessing them selves under him, they draw and
increase their corruption and filthiness by him.

46
His Mediation is a duty of his Priestlie office, in seeking and getting the
help and blessing of God toward us, by the favor of God toward him: and
therefore he complains and entreats for us, as belonging unto him. Mediation
of Christ.


The forgiveness of sins is the merciful grant of God to the prayer of
Christ, that the sins of his, for whom he answered in righteousness, might be
taken away. Forgiveness of sins.


Our Justification, is the full discharge of al duties wherewith the law
charged us, which delivers us from the guiltines of sin, by the
righteousness of Christ. Justification.


Our Sanctification is the partaking of the holiness and spiritual graces of
Christ Jesus, whereby we serve God in newness of spirit. Sanctification.


47 What use has the church of his prophecy?
He him self has taught us, and given us his laws.

He preaches unto us by his word and message in the mouths of his messengers.

He appoynteth to every one their callinges and duties.

47 How is Antichrist their prophet?
He gives them laws and injunctions, which they receive.

He sends his hirelings to preach and vphoulde, with some laws of Christ,
his own laws especially.

He misleadeth every one to his mischeuous business.

47
The Prophecy of Christ is his office of teaching and giving laws to his
people, whereby he uses their obedience to learn and know the same. Prophecy
of Christ. In teaching By him self. By his messengers
In directing By example. By charging.




His preaching by his servants, is the message he gives to those whom he
sends, to use the obedience of his people in learning, that they might know
his laws and his will. His message.


His appointing and moderating, is whereby all have their office and charge at
his hands. His appointing of duties.


The prophecy of Antichrist, is his office of teaching and giving laws to his
people, whereby he abuses their obedience to hold and learn with some laws
of Christ his own laws especially. Prophecy of Antichrist.


48 What use has the church of his kingly office?
By that he executes his laws:

First, by ouerseeing and trying out wickedness.

Also by private or open rebuke, of private or open offenders.

Also by separation of the wilful, or more grievous offenders.

48 How is Antichrist their king?
He forces his religion by civil power, or by binding their consciences:
whereby he hides and shifteth away their guiltines, which the word does bewray.

His officers chide and braule to increase their power and riches by those
which offend them.

They excommunicate some from their churches, to communicate damnation more
surely to those, which are in their churches.

48
The kingdom of Christ, is his office of government, whereby he uses the
obedience of his people to keep his laws and commandments, to their
salvation and welfare. Kingdom of Christ by Ouerseeing and trying out
wickedness. Recompense Rebuke. Separation.




The kingdom of Antichrist, is his government, confirmed by the civil
Magistrate, whereby he abuses the obedience of the people, to keep his evil
laws and customs to their own damnation. Kingdom of Antichrist.


The ouerseeing and trying out of wickedness, is his forceable taking of
accountes, by the watch in his church, and the ska^ning of things by his word,
whereby he makes known that which any would hyde. Ouerseeing and trying out
of wickedness by Christ


Rebuke, is a pronouncing of the known wickedness of any with condemning the
same in the hearing of the offe^der only if his fault be private, or of
witnesses, if he be wilful therein, and openly justify it, or of the church
if he yet be more wilful, or else if his fault be open in the presence and
hearing of those which see his fault, or if he be wilful, before the church,
whereby he may be ashamed and others fear. Church rebuke.


Separation of the open wilful, or grievous offe^ders, is a dutifulnes of the
church in withholding from them the christian communion and fellowship, by
pronouncing and showing the covenant of christian communion to be broken by
their grievous wickedness, and that with mourning, fasting, and prayer for them,
and denouncing Gods judgments against them. Separation from the Church.


49 What use has the church of the graces and offices under Christ?
It has those which have office of teaching and guiding.

Also those which have office of cherishing and releeuing the afflicted and
poor.

Also it has the graces of all the brethren and people to do good withal.

49 What is the common plague, in drawing corruptions, and partaking wickedness
together under Antichrist?
Some have office of deceauing, and misleading the people.

Some of providing for the belly and kitchen.

All the company do partake, and further wickedness, in a false worship and
ungodly behavior.

49
The office of teaching and guiding, is a charge or message committed by God
unto those which have grace and gifts for the same, and thereto are tried and
duly received of the people, to use their obedience in learning and keeping
the laws of God. Offices of teaching and guiding. Participate. Several.



50 Who have the grace and office of teaching and guiding?
Some have this charge and office together, which can not be sundred.

Some have their several charge over many churches.

Some have charge but in one church only.

50 Who have the office of deceauing and misleading the people?
Some have their authority, and power of ravening, joined together and
participate.

Likewise some have their several power, to rauene many churches.

Also some are tied toe particular churches.

50
The offices or charges participate and joined, are, which have their
execution and government, with consent and counsel of diverse in the same
office and charge. Offices participat. With many, as Synodes. Prophecy.
With fewer, as Eldershippe.




51 How have some their charge and office together?
There be Synodes or the meetings of sundry churches: which are when the
weaker churches seek help of the stronger, for deciding or redressing of
matters: or else the stronger look to them for redress.

There is also prophecy, or meetings for the use of every man's gift, in talk
or reasoning, or exhortation and doctrine.

There is the Eldershippe, or meetings of the most forward and wise, for
lookinge to matters.

51 How have they their Antichristian authority joined and partaking?
They have their popish Synodes, and counselles, and conuocations. etc.

They have their prophecies, common places, collegies, etc: for the abuse of
men's guiftes, by triflinges and stintings, inioyninges and charginges in
popish wise.

They have their spiritual courts, churchwardens sydemen, etc.

51
A Synod is a Joining or partaking of the authority of many Churches met
together in peace, for redress and deciding of matters, which can not well be
otherwise taken up. Synodes.


Prophecy is a joining or partaking of the office of many Teachers in
peaceable manner, both for judgment and trial, and also for the use of every
man's gift, in talk, reasoning, exhortation, or doctrine. Prophecy.


Eldership is a Joining or partaking of the authority of Elders, or forwardest
and wysest in a peaceable meeting, for redressing and deciding of matters in
particular Churches, and for counsel therein. Eldership.


52 Who have their several charge over many churches?
Apostles had charge over many churches.

Likewise Prophets, which had their revelations or visions.

Likewise helpers unto these, as Eua^gelistes, and companions of their iourneis.

52 Who have their false charge over many churches?
High popish Commissioners, and Legates. etc.

Archbishoppes, and Bishops. etc.

Also helpers unto these, as Chau^celours, Commissareis, Sumners, etc: rouing
and wandering Ministers.

52
An Apostle is a person having office and message from God, for the which he is
meet, unto all persons and churches, to show them their state of damnation
for some notable want or wickedness, and to use the obedience of all persons and
churches which receive him, to plant, reform, and set order for avoiding
that damnation. Apostles.


A Prophet is a person having office and message from God, for the which he is
meet, to foretell of plagues or of blessings which GOD has showed to the
Prophet, and to use the obedience of all which receive him, to plant, reform,
and set order for the avoiding of the plagues, and the obtaining of the
blessings. Prophets


Evangelists are persons having office and message of God, for the which they
are tried to be meet and thereto are chosen where the church is planted, or
received by obedience, when they plant the church, to help the Apostles or
Prophets, either by preparing a way for them to do the more good, or by
holding that way and course which the Apostles and Prophets appointe unto
them. Euangelist^s
Teaching and guiding many churches, Chief laborers Apostles. Prophets.
Helpers unto the^ Evangelists. Companions of their iourneys.




53 Who have their several charge in one Church only, to teach and guide
the same?
The Pastor, or he which has the gift of exhorting, and applying especially.

The Teacher, or he which has the gift of teaching especially: and less
gift of exhorting and applying.

They which help unto them both in ouerseeing and counsailinge, as the most
forward or Elders.

53 Who have their false charge over one church only, to deceive and misleade
it?
Priests, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and the rest of that rabble, which are thrust
upon the flock.

And helpers unto these, as every Questman, and the Clarks, and Readers, and
Singers, etc.

53
A Pastor is a person having office and message of God, for exhorting and
moving especially, and guiding accordingly: for the which he is tried to be
meet, and thereto is duly chosen by the church which calls him, or
received by obedience where he planteth the Church. Pastor


A Teacher of doctrine is a person having office and message of God, for
teaching especially and guiding accordingly, with less gift to exhort and
apply, for the which he is tri^d to be meet, and thereto is duly chosen by
the church which calls him, or received by obedience, where he planteth the
church. Teacher


An Elder or more forward in gift, is a person having office and message of
God, for oversight and counsel, and redressing things amiss, for the which
he is tried. etc. Single Elder
Teaching and guiding in one church only. Chief laborers. Pastor. Teacher.
Helpers unto them, as the Elders.



54 Who have office of cherishing and releeuing the afflicted and poor?
The Releeuers or Deacons, which are to gather and bestow the church
liberality.

The Widows, which are to pray for the church, with attendaunce to the sick
and afflicted thereof.

54 Who be for the kitchen, and for feeding the belly?
They have their civil collections popishlie established.

Also, Amners, Almsemen, Beade-houses, Mourners, Stewards, Cooks with all that
rabble.

54
The Releeuer is a person having office of God to provide, gather and bestow
the gifts and liberality of the church, as there is need^: to the which
office he is tried and received as meet. Releeuers.


The Widow is a person having office of god to pray for the church, and to
visit and minister to those which are afflicted and distressed in the church,
for the which she is tried and received as meet. Widows
Officers of outward provision. Releeuers. Widows.



55 How has the church the use of those graces, which al ye brethren and
people have to do good withal?
Because every one of the church is made a King, a Priest, and a Prophet
under Christ, to uphold and further the kingdom of God, and to break and
destroy the kingdom of Antichrist, and Satan.

55 How are the people of the evil churches a plague to them selves, by
partaking wickedness one with an other?
Every one is a captain and ringleader to mischief.

Also a spiritual infection, and abomination.

Also a false and wretched deceauour.

55
The kingdom of all Christians is their office of guiding and ruling with
Christ, to subdue the wicked, and make one another obedient to Christ. The
kingly office of al Christians.


Their Priesthood is their office of cleansing and redressing wickedness,
whereby sin and uncleanness is taken away from amongst them. The Priesthood
of every Christian.


Their Prophecy is their office of judging all things by the word of God,
whereby they increase in knowledge and wisdom among them selves. Every
Christian a Prophet.


56 How are we made Kings?
We must all watch one an other, and try out all wickedness.

We must priuatlie and openly rebuke, the private and open offenders.

We must also separate the wilful and more grievous offenders, and withdraw our
selves from them, and gather the righteous together.

56 How is every one a captain and ringleader to mischief?
They all seek occasions of evil, and hunt for the blood of the righteous.

They chide and brawle without shame both priuatlie and openly.

They drive and chase from them the righteous, and loath their company.

56
Look question 48. For watching and trying out wickedness. For private and open
rebuke. For separation.
Kingly office of all Christians In watching and trying out wickedness. In
recompensing Rebuke. Separation.




57 How are all Christians made Priests under Christ?
They present and offer up prayers unto God, for them selves and for others.

They turn others from iniquity, so that atonement is made in Christ unto
justification.

In them also and for them others are sanctified, by partaking the graces of
Christ unto them.

57 How are they a spiritual infection and abomination?
By a show of devotion in their false worship and idol service, they make
others like them in their wickedness.

They tolerate and cherish wickedness, to justify the same.

In them also and by them others be accursed, by drawinge their corruptions.

57
Look question 46. For praying for others. For Justification. For
Sanctification.
Priesthood of all christians. In atonement and appeasing By prayer unto
forgiveness. By Justification.
In Sanctification.



58 How are all Christians made prophets under Christ?
They teach the laws of Christ, and talk and reason for the maintenau^ce of
them.

They exhort, move, and stir up to the keeping of his laws.

They appoint, counsel, and tell one an other their duties.

58 How are they false and wretched deceauers?
They stand and reason for their laws and traditions.

They encourage and stre^gthen one another, with flatterings and pleasinges.

They misleade by their counsel and example, to their mischeeuous business.

58
Look question 47. and 53. For teaching. For exhorting. For appointing duties
by counsel and telling.
Prophecy of all by Teaching Doctrine and general truth. Exhortation.
Especial directing By example. By special telling and counsel,




Hitherto of the communion of offices and graces in the Church. Now follows
the right using of the Lords Supper, as a seal of this communion.
How men should enter and take on them Church callings, and offices, and
execute the same: Look question 114.
59 How must we use the Sacrament of the Lords supper, as a seal of this
communion?
There must be a due preparation to receive the Lords supper.

And a due ministration thereof.

59 How do they make their supper of communion, a pledge and seal of their
wretched confusion?
They are most toward and fit to receive their own supper, but not the Lords.

They handle their supper in a vile, and abominable manner.

59
The Lords supper is a Sacrament or mark of the apparent Church, sealing unto
us by the breaking and eating of bread and drinking the Cup in one holy
communion, and by the word accordingly preached, that we are happily
redeemed by the breaking of the body and sheaddding of the blood of Christ
Jesus, and we thereby grow into one body and church, in one communion of
graces, whereof Christ is the head, to keep and seek agreement under one
law and government in all thankefulnes and holy obedience. The Lords Supper.
In due preparation to receive it. In the due ministration thereof.



A shorter definition.
Or briefly, It is a seal of our partaking and growing together in one body,
whereof Christ is the head in one christian communion.

60 What preparation ^ust there be to receive the Lords supper?
There must be a separation from those which are none of the church, or be
unmeet to receive, that the worthy may be only received.

All open offenses and faultings must be redressed.

All must prove and examine them selves, that their conscience be clear by
faith and repentance, before they receive.

60 How are they most toward and fyt to receive their own supper?
They partake open wickedness in one wicked fellowship.

Open offenses and sins, are amongst them incurable.

All do flatter them selves with a superstitious likeing off an outward show
of some holiness.

60
Preparation to receive, is a duetifulnes in using means, that it may be in
right, and due manner. Preparation.


Separation of the unworthy, is a withholding of them from that communion and
fellowship in the supper, being not prepared nor meet thereto. Separation.


Redressing open offenses and faultings, is a duetifulnes in using means, that
the parties which do offend, may be openly known to be amended, or
separation made. Redress.


Examining our Conscience, is a due applying of the word of God unto the same,
to know our good and evil life, least the guiltines of our secret sins and
private offenses, do make us unworthy receyuers. Examining conscience.
Preparation to receive. Open. By separation. By redres.
Secret. By a clear conscience.




61 How is the supper rightly ministered?
The word must be duly preached.

And the sign or sacrament must be rightly applied thereto.

61 What is their vile and abominable handling thereof?
The law does bynd the priest and people to a popish reading: or to a dead and
fruitless teaching.

And the sign is made a superstitious trifling, and coloring of abominatio^s

61
Ministration of the Supper, is a due manner of using the same by applying it
to a right communion. Ministration of the supper. By preaching the word. By
applying the sign.



By preaching the word of communion, we understand not the blind reading or
fruitless prat^inge thereof at random, but a teaching by lawefull messengers,
of the right using of the body and blood of Christ in one holy communion, and
that with power. Preaching the word of communion.


62 How must the word be duly preached?
The death and torments of Christ, by breaking his body and sheading his
blood for our sins, must be showed by the lawful preacher.

Also he must show the spiritual use of the body and blood of Christ Jesus,
by a spiritual feeding thereon, and growinge into it, by one holy communion.

Also our thankefulnes, and further profiting in godliness unto life everlasting.

62 What is their popish reading, or dead and fruitless teaching?
By a show of reading, or telling of the body and blood of Christ, which were
given for them, they mock them with a shadow of his body, or rather a
counterfeit.

They make them guilty of the body and blood of Christ Jesus.

They are imbouldned, and made careless in their wickedness.

62
The death and torments of Christ, were defined before.

The spiritual use and feeding of the body and blood of Christ, is an
applying of his whole work of our redemption by that outward sign, to feel
effectually the remedy of our miseries by that partaking and growing together
in one body of Christ and spiritual Communion. Feeding by faith of the body
and blood of Christ.


Thanks giving and profiting in godliness are afterward defined.

63 How must the sign be applied thereto?
The preacher must take bread and bless and give thanks, and the^ must he
break it and pronounce it to be the body of Christ, which was broken for the^,
that by faith they might feed thereon spirituallie and grow into one
spiritual body of Christ, and so he eating thereof him self, must bidd them
take and eat it among them, and feed on Christ in their consciences.

Likewise also must he take the cup and bless and give thanks, and so
pronounce it to be the blood of Christ in the new Testament, which was shedd
for remission of sins, that by faith we might drink it spirituallie, and so
be nourished in one spiritual body of Christ, all sin being cleansed away,
and then he drinking thereof himself must bydd them drink there of likewise
and divide it among them, and feed on Christ in their consciences.

Then must they all give thanks praying for their further profiting in
godliness and vowing their obedience.

63 How is the sign made a superstitious triflinge and colouringe of
abominations?
They take bread or a wafer cake, and inchaunte it by reading a grace over it,
and a number of other prayers: they read it to be the body of Christ, which
is but an Idol in stead thereof, and they feed on it by their superstition,
and grow into one wicked communion: so the priest does eat of it himself,
and carries it round about unto them, with a vain babbling over every one,
which receive and eat it kneeling down before him.

Likewise also they take the cup, and inchaunte it, by reading a grace, or
other prayers over it: then they read it or by the book pronounce it to be
the blood of Christ, which is but an Idol in stead thereof. And so he and
they drinking it, do even drink their iniquity, and feed thereon.

So are they imbouldned and further strengthened in there sin.

Hitherto of our calling in the new Testament.

63
Applying of the sign, is a due manner of giving, taking, and using it in an
holy communion upon the word preached. Applying the sign.


Pronouncing the bread to be the body of Christ, is a warranting and
sanctifying thereof, by the authority of God in the message of the Preacher,
to be an outward religious sign, seal, or pledge of his body broken for
us, and of the spiritual grace received thereby. The bread the body of
Christ.


Pronouncing the drink to be the blood of Christ, is a warranting or
sanctifying thereof, by the authority of God in the message of the Preacher,
to be an outward religious sign and seal or pledge of his bloudsheading for
remission of our sins, and of the spiritual grace received thereby. The
drink the blood of Christ.


Now follows what calling the Jews had in the old Testament, as by shadows
and ceremonies, which now are abolished.
It were to long to write of all the Iewishe Ceremonies, seeing we would have
this Book so small as we could.
For the order of handling them, there is no difficulty, for look as the
points and matter of our redemption be, so must the ceremonies be applied
thereto.
64 What calling is there by ceremonies and shadows?
By outward sensible signs, they teach us spiritual graces: as the
ceremonies of the oulde law, which are abolished.

And in the new Testament, the two Sacraments before mentioned.

To apply this to the Jews at this time. 64 How are the Jews called away, and
misled by the ceremonies?
Their outward sensible signs, are a mockery of the spiritual graces: yea
Idols be they and superstitious trifles in stead of grace and truth, which is
by Christ Jesus.

64
The old Testament was a declaring and teaching by a due message from God, of
the redemption by Christ, who was yet for to come: but yet in darker manner, by
shadows and ceremonies applied to the doctrine, to represent Christ Jesus.
The old Testament.


Ceremonies be outward sensible signs, sanctified and applied by the word
duly preached, to be religious shows of some spiritual graces, which are
meant thereby. Ceremonies Remaining as the two Sacraments. Abolished.



Ceremonies remaining (which rather are to be called Sacraments) are Religious
Signs and seals, confirming and sealing unto us by the word duly preached, a
spiritual Grace received already. Sacraments.


For they be rather seals of graces received, then shows and shadows of
graces coming.

Ceremonies abolished are, which being fulfilled in Christ, whom and whose
dooinges they did signify, do cease to be held any longer: because Christ
Jesus has made our salvation so clear, that to use the old ceremonies, were
to darken the light with shadows* and to change Christ Jesus him self, for
the signs and shows of him. Ceremonies abolished.


65 Which be the ceremonies of the old law?
Some were ceremonies of the whole church, and of our whole redemption: As the
Garden of Eden after the fall of man. For the Tree of life which before the
fall of Adam was but a token of his obedience, of his welfare and happy life
thereby, was now made a sign of life in Christ Jesus: Also his driving from
the tree and garden, was a sign that he should seek life and redemption, by
Christ in his Church.

For the Garden also did shadow out the Church, as the Tree did shadow Christ
Jesus.

Also the Altar, and place together where it stood before the Tabernacle was
commanded. For the Church of God is as holy ground, for the Altar Christ
Jesus: and we, are ye place which he has chosen to put his name there. Christ
is the Altar, because that as by the Altar, the place and all that was done in
it, was sanctified, so by Christ both we and all that we do in our
regeneration is cleansed and sanctified. And therefore is Christ the Altar,
because that as it was for burnt and sin offerings, and for meat offeringes,
and peace offerings, etc. So Christ was slain to be our burnt and sin
offeringe, and he overcame and took away sin and misery, and restored our
happiness, to be our meat offering and peace offering.

The Arc of Noah, and the doare thereof, and the safety of his family
therein, did signify the spiritual house, and Church of God, whereof Christ is
the door: and also the spiritual safety and happiness therein, which shall be
perfected after this life.

The land of Canaan and the increase, and blessings thereof, were figures of
the Lords Church and people, and of the spiritual graces which the Lord
bestows thereon. For as the lands of the kingedome is the Kings
inheritance, so we are the Lords spiritual, inheritance, and his Canaan,
over which he reigns. The same also is to be sated of some places in the
land of Canaan.

The Passover and coming out of Egypt did foreshew our redemption from
Satan and Antichrist, and from all wickedness and misery. For we eat the
Paschall Lamb Christ Jesus, when we feed spirituallie on his death and
torments, and so die with him by repentance unto sin, and when we receive
the graces of his resurrection, and happiness with God, and so partake and grow
together in one body and church, in one Christian communion of graces, whereby
we go out of Egypt, as did the Israelites.

As the Rock from whom does flow the spiritual drink. The Tabernacle framed
and made for a dwelling to the Lord wherein he delights. The City Jerusalem.
Mount Zion. The Temple. The Sanctuary. The Slaughter of the Midianites: and
such great Deliverances. The Return from the Captivity. etc. Also certain
Families houlding the ceremonies, and true Religion: As the family of Noah:
and those before him, which were raised up in Abels room. Abraham and his
seed. Moses and the Kingdom of Israel in the hands of good Kings and Judges.
Aaron and his seed the Priests and Levites. David and his seed in the seat of
Judgment, till the coming of Christ. And other such like.

65 How do they make the ceremonies Idols, and mockeries of the truth?
They have some Ceremonies in place of the Church, and of the redemption by the
Messiah, which are Idols in stead of the Church and of the redemption.

As the Garden of Eden, and the Tree of life therein, they make an idol in
stead of Christ and his church if still they hold the^ as ceremonies, that the
Messiah our tree of life, is not come, and that he daily does not gather his
church, which is our garden of Eden. For therein we have our spiritual
beauty, and look for an end of this outward baseness and misery.

Likewise, their Altares at this day, and the places where they stand, they
do make Idolles in stead of Christ and his church, because they hold them as
ceremonies, that the Messiah our altar, is not come, and that the true
Christians are not the place of the Altar and church of God, which the Lord
has chosen to put his Name there, and there to dwell.

But they look to come again to their Jerusalem and mount Zion, and that
their Messiah shall bring them thither, who as yet they say, is not come into
the world.

But of this the Jews have their Idols and mockes, because they look for
safety otherwise then by Christ in his Church.

Of this the Jews have their Idols and mockes, because they dream of a
wordlie Canaan, to the which they shall come, not knowing that it ceased to be
a figure, when it was polluted with Idolatry, and when Christ came, and
reigned in his Church, as a King in his spiritual Canaan.

Of this the Jews have their Passover as an Idol and mockery: because they
deny Christ Jesus the Paschall lamb to be offered already, and because they
do not feed on his death and torments, nor receive the grace of his
resurrection and glorifiyng.

The like may be said of other such ceremonies and shadows of the whole
Church, and of our whole redemption.

66
Some were Ceremonies of some points of our Redemption: as of the Lords
secret Counsel and readiness to help us, which are handled in the 24. and 25.
and 33. question. For his love and mercy toward his people, and his electing
and predestinating of them unto salvation, with care and mindefulnesse over
them were showed, and figured by the Tithe, the first borne, the first
fruits, The numbering of families, The choosing of the Levites, The perfect
numbering and measuring of things about the Tabernacle and Temple. The Paschall
Lamb kept till the day of the Passover, figured that Christ was appointed
for the slain Lamb before the world was. Lottes, and divisions of the land
by lotte. The sums which Solomon raised for the building of the Tabernacle.
The casting of lottes mentioned in Nehemiah for to dwell in Jerusalem. The
writings in Ezra made to show their kindred. And other such like.

67
Some were ceremonies of the sufferinges of Christ in his Manhood: which are
handled in the 26.27.28. and 29. question. For he bare the burden of our
sins upon him. Which was shadowed by the sin offeringes, with confession
of sins upon the head of the sacrifice. Also by the fat and the kalle and
the kidneis: by the wood whereon the fire did kindle. Also by the false
accusations and slanders of those which were figures of Christ. And diverse
such like.

68
Also some were ceremonies of the wrath of God upon him for our cause. And of
his death, torments, and bitter curse. As the fire of the Altar ever burning.
The fire which came from heaven sundry times to consume the sacrifices. The
grate of brass like networke upon the Altar. The Rod in the Angels hand
that touched the sacrifice. The rosting with fire of the Paschall lamb, and
the burning of that which remained till the morning. The tables and stones of
slaughter. The fleshhookes, the knives for slaughter, the herth stones, the
beasomes, the pa^nes, the slaying of the sacrifices, the pouring and
sprinckling of the blood, the burnt sacrifice. Also the fleaing, cutting in
pieces, and cleeuing of the sacrifices, the seasoning them with salt, the
afflictions, torments, and troubles in conscience of those men which were
figures of Christ, as of David, Jonas. etc.

69
Some were ceremonies of his ouercomming and taking away of our miseries.
Look the 30. question. As of the taking away of our sins. As washings and
cleansings with water. The cleansing of the Altar, the washing of the
Sacrifices, the sending away of the escape goat, and of the live Sparow, the
offering of sacrifice with unleavened bread, the taking away of the
excommunicate thing: the high Priest bearing the iniquity ^f the people, the
taking away of the Ashes and excrementes. And such like.

70
Some were ceremonies of his victory over death and hell, and the power of the
wicked, and of our victory with him. As ye going out of Egypt by strong hand,
the going through the red Sea, the passing over Jorden. Great co^questes by
them which were figures of Christ: the swimming of the Arc of Noah upon the
waters: the escaping from the dangers of the captivity: Iaacobs preuayling
when he wrestled with the Angel: the taking down from the tree, the cursed
that was hanged: the eating of the Passover, with their Ioynes girded, and
shoes on their feet, and staves in their hands, and eating it in haste: the
remoouing of Joseph's bones from Egypt. And such like.

72
Some were ceremonies of the happiness, which he also obtained for us. As of the
causes of our happiness which are in God: mentioned before: And of the means of
our happiness proceeding from God, as first of the communion of the graces and
offices in the head of the Church, which is Christ.

The ceremonies therefore of his mediation and Priesthood were, Every
lawefull high Priest and Sacrificer, till his coming. As Abel, Noah, Abraham,
Melchizedecke, Job, Moses, Aaron, etc. Also ye Mercieseate upon the Arc, the
Altar of burnte offeringes, the altar of incense and sweet perfume, the
clensinges and perfumings of the high Priest. The high priest going into the
holy place for attonemente once a year, the Bells on the skirts of his
garments, when he went in for attonemente. The familiar appearing of Moses
and others in the presence of God, and their pleading and praying for the
people. Incense of hallowed fire, and not of strange fire, the fiery and
brazen Serpente, the door of Noah's Arc and the Tabernacle, the Porch of the
Temple, certain Pillars and stones, and such like.

73
Some were ceremonies of our Justification by his mediation and Priesthood. As
the grauing of the names of the Tribes of Israel upon stones, and imbossing
and setting them in gold, to be presented and borne on the breast of the high
Priest, the table of the Shewbreade with the things thereof: the stones of the
Temple perfected before they were brought to be laid on: the pureness and
perfection of all the stuff of the tabernacle, and such like.

74
Some were ceremonies of our Sanctification by his priesthood. As the holy
garments of the Priests: the seeling, gilding, and hanging of the temple and
tabernacle: the anointing of all things with holy ointement: the sanctifying
of the Priests: the Sabbath a sign of holiness, and such like.

Place this number 71. between 70. and 72.

71
Some were ceremonies of his restoring of happiness, look question 31. And
first of his own Justification and happiness. As the Sacrifices without spotte
and blemishe: the stones of the Altar whole and vnheawen: the writing of
holiness to the Lord, to make the high Priest acceptable: the making of the
Arc and Altar of Shittun wood.

The ceremonies of his happiness were, The precious ointment, wherewith man's
flesh might not be anointed: the taking up into heaven of holy men, which were
figures of him: the budding and fruit of Aarons Rod: the riches and glory
of Solomon, and such like.

75
Some were ceremonies of the prophecy of Christ, and of his word and
promises, and our calling to happiness. As the testimony and Oracles from the
Arc: the V^im and the Chummim upon the breastplate of Aaron: the ringes and
bars to carry the Tabernacle and the things thereof, that the people might
follow it to the land of Canaan: the pillar of a cloud, and the pillar of
fire, to lead them both day and night, that is the Lords Name of power and
Majesty: Manna from heaven: the giving of the Law in glorious manner: the
raising up and sending of the Prophets: the trumpettes and Lamps, and
Lights, and Candlestickes: the windows of the temple: the place where God did
put his name by the Arc and Altar therein: the chief workmen about the
tabernacle and temple to make and build them.

76
Some were ceremonies of Christ our King, and of his Kingly office. As the
lawful Kings and Judges of Israel: as Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Sampson, David,
Solomon, etc. The Crowns of gold: the Rod of Moses: the Thrones for
judgment, and such like.

77
Some were ceremonies of the communion of those graces and offices, which
either the guides and teachers, or all the brethren and people have to do good
withal. As the wisdom and towardness of those which made the tabernacle and
temple: the sum that Solomon raised to bring and prepare for the building of
the temple: the four score thousand Masons, and the seventy thousand that
bare burdens. Also the Priests and Levites, were figures of every Christian,
a priest and Leuite, and such like.

78
Some were ceremonies to us of the using of our redemption. And therefore our
mortifying and miseries were shadowed by circumcision, by fastinges and
sackecloth and rentinge of garments. The eating of the Passover with sower
herbs, the going through the wilderness, and through the sea, dwelling in
boothes, the cry for the bondage of Egipte, buying and selling of bondmen, the
blood of the couenaunte sprinkled on the people, the blood sprinkled upon
the door posts, the goings and iourneyings of Abraham, abstaining from wine
and strong drink, the law of the captive maid. The clothes rent, and the
head bare, and a covering on the lips of the Leper, the humbling of the
people on certain days. Sundry trialles of the Jews in the wilderness, the
Veil of separation in the Tabernacle and Temple. The marks and threats that
none should touch the mount, the fleeing of the people from the presence of
God, the oxen stoned and not eaten, which goared and killed any man, taking
usury on strangers, the court of the Tabernacle and Temple, the going out of
all, while the high Priest made attonemente by incense, separation from all
uncleanness. The redeeming of the unclean, by that which was clean, the veil
on Moses face, because the people could not look on him. The blood of the
sacrifice of consecration put upon the right ears, and thumbes and toes of
the Priest, the sacrifice for sins of ignorance and such like.

79
Some were ceremonies of the judging and condemning of our selves. As the
giving of a redemption, when the people was numbered: the cursinges upon mount
Ebal, the touching of unclean things, the cry of the leper, I am unclean, I
am unclean. The law of purifying weomen, and of clensing garments and other
things polluted, and of receiving a leper, or other polluted, being healed and
clean: the bitter and cursed water, and the curse therewithal. And such like.

80
Some were ceremonies of our regeneration and newnes of life. As the Nazarites
the refraining from fat and from blood, the abstaining from unclean meats,
the eating of unleavened bread: the shewbread, the offeringes to the building
of the Temple, or Tabernacle: the making and paying of vows. And such like.

81
Some were ceremonies of the happiness whereunto we are called, and which in
Christ we enjoy. As the coming into the land of Canaan, which shadowed the
Church, and our happiness in the heavens with Christ. The meat offeringes and
peace offeringes with joy and gladness. The feast of Tabernacles and of
especial deliueraunces. The Sabbaths and Iubiles. The blessing pronounced of
the high Priest, as of Melchizedeck, Aaron. etc. The beautifying and adorning
of the Temple and tabernacle. The outward blessings of the land of Canaan, a
figure of the spiritual blessings. Long life in that land, of the everlasting
life in the heavens: Also certain Wells and Springes in that land. The best
remnaunt of the meat offeringes belonging to the Priests. The redeeming of
the freedom of bondmen. The redemption of the sail of lands and houses, and
their return to the owner. The law that the Priests should not mourn for
the dead, and such like.

Hitherto of our calling both in the old and new Testament.

Now follows our obedience thereto, by mortifying, and the contrary of
these things in the wicked.
82 How must we obey to our calling by mortifying?
We must judge and condemn our selves.

We must suffer affliction.

We must repent, and change our minds and disposition.

82 How are the wicked hardened in their sins, and desperately refuse their
calling?
They flatter and please them selves.

They pamper and cherishe themselves.

They are froward and stiff.

82
Mortifying of our selves, is a daily decay and wearing away of our wicked
nature, and readiness to sin, by an effectual feeling of the curse and
misery we are in, whereby the love and liking of our selves is taken away.
Mortifying. By judging and condemning our selves. Afflicting and killing the
flesh By suffering. By repenting




Judging and condemning our selves, is a sure and certain consent in our
selves, by due examination of our state, that we are most wicked and wretched.
Judging our selves by Reckoning The multitude of sins. The greatness.
By applying desert.



83 How must we judge and condemn our selves?
We must count and reckon the multitude of our sins.

We must know the greeuousnes of them.

We must apply the deserte received or coming.

83 How do they flatter and please themselves in their sins?
They forgette and pass over their sins.

They trifle and sport them away.

They boast of their worthiness.

83
Reckoning and counting our sins, is a duty of right aduising of our
selves, wherein and how often we sin, by a due calling of our selves to
accountes. Reckoning sin.


Knowledge of the greeuousnes of sin, is the understanding or wisdom
whereby we have found out how far we have disobeyed and broken the laws of
God Knowing the greeuousnes.


Applying desert, is a judging of our selves worthy of such punishment, as the
sin and trespass has offended and abused the law giver which is God.
Applying deserte.


84 How must we suffer affliction?
We must be inwardly troubled in dread and horror.

We must be grieved and heavy unto death.

We must suffer outward affliction, and at la^t death it self.

84 How do they pamper and cherish themselves in their sins?
They are stout and sturdie against evils.

They are merry and pleasant,

They have their nicenes and tenderness.

84
Suffering miseries is a yielding over of our bodies and souls to feel in
them both such measure of the miseries, that Christ endured for us, that the
liking of our selves being taken away, we may only like and take Christ for
our happiness. Suffering Inward Fear and dread. Grief.
Outward



Grief is a troubled disliking of our wickedness, whereby we feel the hurt and
danger we are in, by the displeasure of God for our sins. Grief.


Fear and dread is a troubled disliking of our curse and misery which shall
come upon us by the wrath of God, whereby we feign would escape and get from
it. Fear and dread.


Suffering outwardly, is in withholding or wanting things needful for the
body. And this is defined before. Sufferings outwardly.


85 How must we repent?
We must be ashamed of our disposition and state.

We must be angry and displeased therewith.

We must hate and abhor the desires and thoughts of our hearts.

85 How are they froward and stiff iniustifiyng them selves?
They are bold and maliperte.

They are still and at rest in their sins.

They love their fancies and pleasures and delight in the same.

85
Repentance is an utter disliking of our selves by the feeling of our misery
and contrary nature to God, whereby we wish for the estimation of him, that
we had never offended him. Repentance Shame. Anger and hatred.



Shame is a troubled disliking of our own vileness, by the feeling not only of
the excellency of God above us, but contrary to us: whereby we are stricken
as dead at the show of the same. Shame.


Anger against our selves, is a troubled disliking of our shameful injury
done to the glory of GOD, whereby we are provoked to afflict, yea to destroy
our selves, wishing that we had never bin borne, but that some hope of mercy
does stay us. Anger.


Hatred of our selves, is an utter disliking of our selves, as being contrary
to the nature of God and his enemies: and therefore by his hatred against us,
do feel our selves a curse to our selves, and would that we were not, in
respect of our selves. Hatred.


86 How must we be raised and quickened again upon our repentance?
We must have faith to apply our redemption by Christ unto us particularly.

We must have clear consciences that our sins and miseries are taken away.

We must be sanctified unto newnes of life.

86 How ar they utterly discouraged upon their frowardnes, and fall away more
and more?
They are unfaithful and withdraw themselves from God.

They have their guiltines as never to be better.

They are set on mischief and wickedness.

86
Raising and quickening, is a daily renewing and strengthening of the godly
nature and spirit of Christ within us, by an effectual feeling of the remedy
of our curse and misery through Christ* whereby we profit in grace and
godliness unto life everlasting. Raising and quikning. By faith. By working of
faith. Clear conscience Newnes of life.




Faith is a full consent by heavenly inspiration, to our redemption in Christ,
provoking us to take him for our happiness, and wholly to yield up our selves
unto him Faith.


A clear conscience is a joyful consent, that by repentance and faith in
Christ, we have peace with God, and are made his children and heirs of
happiness. Clear consciences.


Newnes of life is, a straight obedience to the will of God, showing the
change of our wicked nature for a heavenly and godly nature, which is by
partaking the spirit of Christ Jesus. Newnes of life.


87 What is the happiness which we shall enjoy?
A blessed and holy life, which for evermore we shall have with our God in
the heavens.

The fellowshippe and communion of Saints.

The rising again of our seules after this life, and of our bodies at the last
Judgment day to be blessed for ever.

87 What woes and miseries do they abide?
A woeful and wicked life in hell for ever.

They have their portion with deuilles and abominable men.

They are condemned both body and soul unto eternal tormente.

87
Our happiness is the perfect sufficiency, or most blessed state which we have
and shall have in Christ: or it is the blessing of God upon us, whereby we want
nothing, nor have need of any thing else, to better our state. Happiness.


The fellowship and communion of Saints is the enjoying of that happiness which
we have and look for, by mutual use of the company, graces and duties one
of another. Fellowship and communion.


The raising again of our souls and bodies, is a restoring of us in both, by
putting away the old nature decayed, and making us new creatures in Christ,
having a pure and perfect nature, in stead of our former corruptions.
Resurrection.


Now follow the duties of godliness, which in newnes of life we ought to
keep.
88 Which be the duties of godliness in newnes of life?
All godliness is in the general duties of religion and holiness toward God.

Also in the special duties for his name and Sabbath.

Also in the duties of righteousness concerning man.

88 What be the sins and faults of the wicked?
All wickedness or sinfulnes shows it self in prophanes and worldlines.

Also in that special sin of hindering Gods name, and breaking his Sabbathes.

Also in all unrighteousness concerning man.

88
Godliness is the right using, or continual occupying of our gifts and powers,
both in soul and body, in such perfect duetifulnes, as is taught and
commanded us by the Lord our God. Godliness In Religion and holiness toward
God. In righteousness with man.



Religion and holiness is that part of godliness whereby we continually do
glorify God as we ought. Religion. In general duties of holiness. In special
duties.



89 What be the general duties of religion and holiness toward God.
They consist in esteeming him.

In honoring and worshipping him.

And in serving him faithfully with all our endeavor.

89 How does wickedness show it self in prophanes and worldlines?
Prophanes is in dispising God.

In making him a shame and a skorne so much as lies in them.

In unruliness.

89
Esteeming God is a duty of Religion and holiness whereby we take him for our
only happiness and consent, that he only has all worthiness in him. Esteeming
God. In his Majesty. In his authority In Justice. In goodness.




90 How must we esteem and accounte of God?
We must esteem him in his Majesty and excellency.

Also in his justice.

Also in his goodness.

90 How do profane and worldly men despise God?
They make light of his worthiness.

Also of his laws and commandments.

Also of his grace and blessings.

90
Esteeming God in his Majesty* is a duty of Religion, whereby we are
stricken with a feeling of the great excellency of God above all, and of our
unworthiness in respect of the same. Esteeming in his Majesty Reverence.
Bashefulnes.



91 What estimation must we have of his majesty?
We must reverence him highly.

We must be ashamed and abashed in comparison of him.

91 How do they make light of his worthiness?
They set vile things before him.

They are bold and maleperte before him.

91
Reverence of God, is an estimation of God for his worthiness in him self, and
for his own cause though he had made none of his creatures. Reverence of God.


Bashefulnes and shame of our selves before God, is a troubled disliking of our
own unworthiness, by the feeling of the excellency of GOD, which strikes us
with the great estimation thereof. Bashefulnes before God.


92 How must we esteem him in his justice?
We must fear and tremble thereat, least we displease him.

We must be zealous for his right and glory.

We must hate all vanity and wickedness, and be displeased therewith.

92 How do they make light of his laws?
They have their hardness and stoutenes of heart.

Also their doubling and halting.

Also they rest and flatter themselves in their wickedness.

92
Esteeming God in his Justice, is a duty of Religion, whereby we take him for
our Lord and governor, for his holiness in ruling us most worthelie. Esteeming
God in his justice. Fear, zeal. Hatred of wickedness.



The fear of God, is an estimation of his Justice, whereby we take heed to
please him in all things, and abhor to provoke him against us, because we
are sure, that as we set forth his excellency, so we shall have the name and
the use thereof. Fear of God.


Zeal to the glory of God, is an high estimation thereof, for his worthiness,
provoking us most earnestly to hasten and further the same as being our
happiness. Zeal to the glory of God.


Hatred and anger against wickedness, is a troubled disliking thereof, for the
cursednes and contrariety thereof, both to God and our godly nature,
provoking us to set our selves wholly against it. Hatred of vanity and
wickedness.


93 How must we esteem him in his goodness?
We must love the lord our God with all our hearts.

We must continually rejoice in his presence.

We must al ways hope and trust in his help.

93 How do they make light of his grace and blessings?
They have their misgeuing from goodness.

They take grief thereat.

They shrink away and doubt to go forward.

93
The love of God is an high estimation of God for his most perfect goodness,
whereby we take him for our happiness in feeling his presence and good will
toward us, and therefore yield up our selves wholly unto him. Our love of
God.


Our Joy in God, is an high estimation of the use of his goodness, whereby we
feel him to be our happiness therein. Joy in God.


Hope and Trust in God, is an high estimation of the help of God toward us,
provoking us to do all things in his name, with assurance of his promises and
grant to prevail. Hope and Trust in God.


We Hope when we have but the promise: we Trust, when we feel a further help
upon his promise. The difference of Hope and Trust.


94 What honor and worshipp is due unto God?
We must humble our selves before him.

We must seek to him, for his favor and help.

We must be thankful, for his goodness toward us.

94 How would they make God's shame and a skorne?
They have their loftines and pride or else their superstition and Idolatry.

They forsake the Lords goodness and withdraw themselves like straung children
to seek to false Gods.

They esteem their own worthiness and are unthankful to God.

94
The Honoring and worshipping of God is our holiness in showing by our lowlines
before him, how much we esteem him above us. The honor and worship of God In
hu^bling our selves to his gretnes In using his goodness In seeking to him. In
thankefulnes.




Humbling of our selves to God, is an honoring or worshipping of him, by
abasing our selves, according to our unworthiness and his excellency above us.
Humbling our selves Inwardly In meecknes. In patience.
Outwardly in homage.



95 How must we humble our selves unto God?
We must be meek, as despising our right and welfare.

We must be patient in abiding miseries.

We must be lowly in our hearts, and in our speech and behavior.

95 What is their loftines and pride or their superstition and Idolatry?
They are stout and stubburne: and yet slavish to false gods.

They storm and grudg in adversity and yet superstitiously torment themselves.

They will be gallaunte and lordly, and yet bow and abase themselves to vile
Idols.

95
Meekenes is an humbling or abasing of our selves in despising our right or
welfare, as unworthy to have or to seek it. Meekenes.


Patience is an humbling or abasing of our selves, gladly to suffer miseries
and temptations as being meet for us. Patience.


Lowlines and homage is an humbling or abasing of our selves as beseems his
worthiness, whereby we wholly yield up our selves to give him his honor.
Lowlines and homage.


96 How must we seek to him, for his favor and help?
We must confess our faults and offenses.

We must ask pardon and forgiveness.

We must complain of our wantes and crave his help.

96 How do they forsake the Lords goodness, and withdraw themselves like
straung children to seek to vain gods?
They excuse and justify themselves in their sins, or make confession unto
Idols.

They are froward and wilful in their sins, or seek their false pardons.

They chaleng deserts or complain and seek help by false gods.

96
Seeking to God is a worshipping of him by a willing desire to use his goodness
toward us. Seeking to God. For remedy of sin. Confessing faults Asking
pardon.
For the remedy of evil for sin. Complaining of wantes. Craving help.




Confessing faults is a seeking to God for his mercy, by showing wherein and
how greatly we have offended. Confessing faults.


Asking pardon is a seeking to God to have our sins forgiven us, with an
humble entreating of him for his Christ's sake. Asking pardon.


Complaining and Craving, is a seeking to God by showing wherein and how much
we have need of his help, with an humble entreating him for the same.
Complaining and Craving help.


97 How must we be thankful?
We must acknowledge his goodness toward us.

We must give him thanks for the same.

We must praise him in his marvelous works.

97 How do they esteem their own worthiness, and are unthankful to God?
They set light and think skorne of his graces.

They talk of their deseruinges.

They vaunte and boaste in their works.

97
Thankefulnes is an honoring or worshipping of God by abasinge our selves for
his blessings received, whereby we take our selves wholly indebted unto him,
and to be altogether unprofitable unto him, and never able to make him amends.
Thankefulnes to God. In acknowledging his goodness. In dutifulnes for the same,
Giving thanks Giving praise.




Acknowledging his goodness is a full consent and conscience thereof, by
continual mindefulnes and examining of his particular blessings. Acknowledging
his goodness.


Giving thanks is a witnessing or showing of the Lords deseruings both in our
hearts, or by voice and speech, whereby we confess the greatness of his
blessings and our unworthiness. Giving thanks.


Praising God is a confessing or reckoning up in our selves or to others, of
his great works and blessings to set forth his glory. Praising God.


Hitherto of Esteeming and Worshipping God. Now follows, How to serve him.
98 How must we serve God?
We must learn his will.

We must obey thereto in our calling.

We must give good accountes of our calling.

98 How are the wicked unruly?
They are foolish and full of ignorance and error.

They disobey the Lords will.

They are altogether set on their wills, and flee from the Lord.

98
Serving God is a duetifulnes in following our calling and using our gifts with
earnest endeavor, whereby the Lord has his whole honor by all things we do.
Serving GOD By learning his will. By obedience thereto In our calling. In
accou^tes thereof




Learning of his will is the service of our minds and understanding, in using
his goodness in teaching us, that we may know his will and lead our lives
thereafter. Learning the will of God. By getting knowledge. By using the same
to follow The example of God. His guiding.




99 How must we learn the will of God?
We must get the knowledge of his word and works.

We must follow him guiding us.

We must follow his example, so far as we are made according to his Image.

99 How are they foolish and full of ignorance?
They seek deep to deceive themselves, and increase their follies.

They follow lies and the lusts of their hearts.

They become clean contrary to God, and are wholly perverted.

99
The knowledge of the word and works of God, is defined before in the 2.
question.

Following the Lord guiding us, is an using of his government, to put in
practice a duty of office by his particular appointing. Following God guiding
us.


Following his example, is a fashioning of our lives to his image and likeness,
in such things as he would we should be like him, to show forth his holiness.
Following his example.


100 How must we obey the will of God in our calling?
We must take counsel in all things we do.

We must be forward thereon.

We must do all things in their due manner.

100 How do the wicked disobeye the Lords will?
They do all things in ligthnes and rashness, or with subtletie and craft.

They are backward and untoward.

They have their evil handling and marring of matters.

100
Obedience to the will of God, is the service of God by our gifts and graces
in using them rightly as his word does bind us. Obedience In taking
counsel. In dutifulnes thereby, as Our forwardnes upon c^u^sail. Our manner of
working.




Counsel, is a minding and pondering of all duties, where by we examine and
try how the Scriptures or word of God does warrant them. Counsel
Devising. Aduising.



A more full division of the points of wisdom and counsel, look for in our
table of Divinity, and Nature, and of Ordering Common wealths. Aduising Of
present things. Marking and examining. Consenting Judgment. etc. Conscience.
etc.

Of absent Past -- Remembrance. Counting.
Coming Foresight. Purpose and decree.





101 How must we take counsel?
We must attend and watch to our duties.

We must remember and count the same.

We must foresee and purpose what to do.

101 How are they light and rash in their doings?
They have their carelessnes and dulnes.

Also their forgetfulness.

Also their vnwarines and headines.

101
Our attendance and watching, is a continual minding of every duty, whereby
we take heed that we fail in no duty. Attendance and watching.


Our reckoning and counting is a due aduising or counsel of things done,
whereby we call our selves to accounts what things are amiss. Reckoning.


Foresight is our counsel whereby we are advised of things which may fall.
Foresight.


Purpose is our counsel, whereby we are settled, how any thing shall be by the
good help of god. Purpose.


102 How must we be forward?
We must desire to do our duties, with hope and trust of obtaining our
desires.

We must have zeal and courage thereto.

We must be joyful and comfortable therein.

102 How are they backward and untoward?
They have evil will to their duties, with shrinking and doubting to go
forward.

They are could and do better things by halues.

Their duties are wearisome and irksome unto them.

102
Forwardnes is a due preparation and stirring up of our minds, whereby nothing
can withholde us from beginning the work. Forwardnes.


Desire to our duties is a liking thereof, whereby we willingly consent for to
do them. Desire.
Forwardnes. Inclining Desire. Joy.
Provoking Zeal. Jealousy.




Joy, Hope, Trust, Zeal, were defined before.

103 In what manner must we do our duties?
We must be active and skillful.

We must labor and work.

We must be steadfast and constant.

103 What evil handling and marring of matters have they?
They are unfit and unskillful.

They are idle and slothful.

They are wavering and give over.

103
The manner of working is the right use of our counsel and forwardnes, in
applying the same unto practice. Manner of working.


Actiuenes and skill, is a due readiness in doing things in such due manner, as
best may further the business. Skilfulnes.


104 What skill or actiuenes is required?
We must order things by their times and course.

Also by their measure of work.

We must be semely and handsome therein

104 How are they unfit and unskillful?
They are disordered and do things by hazard.

They have their disuantage.

They are vntydie and boisterous.

104
Ordering by time and course, is a due manner of setting and co^passing our
works, to bring the^ to pass in their due season. Ordering by time.


Measuring our work, is an ordering thereof, by dispatching so much as we did
wisely purpose. Measure.


Seemelines and handsomnes, is a due manner of doing things in discretion and
warines, that nothing be hurt or hindered by hastines. Handsomnes


105 What labor is required?
We must use our force and might.

We must be speedy and quick.

We must be painful and strait that nothing fail.

105 How are they idle and slo^^hfull?
They have their weakness and fainting.

Also their slacknes and slownes.

Also their loathing and letting.

105
Labor is a manner of working whereby we overcome the hardness or hindrances of
any work or business. Labor.


Force and might, is a labor or endeavor whereby the work wants no strength
to bring it to pass. Force.


Speed is our endeavor in hastening to dispatch the work. Speed


Painefulnes is a labor or endeavor unto wearines, to bring any thing to pass.
Painefulnes.
Manner of working Gains or actiuenes. Order By time and course. By measure of
work.
Handsomnes.
Labor and diligence. Painefulnes, Speed. Forceablenes.
Stedfastnes, Patient bearing. Preuayling.





106 What steadfastnes or constancy is required?
We must be patient, whatsoever success we have.

We must prevail and gather strength.

We must dispatch and finish our work.

106 How are they wavering and inconstant?
They are discouraged if any thing miscarie.

They shrink and fail by their backwardnes.

They loose their labor and miss of their purpose.

106
Stedfastnes and costancie, is a continuance of labor and business, without
changing and letting, till our counsel and purpose take place. Stedfastnes In
patience. In preuayling.



Patience in labor is a stedfastnes in sufferinge the euilles that come to us
by any work, so that they can not discourage us. Patience in labor.


Preuayling and gathering strength, is a stedfastnes whereby we get vauntage
and further ablenes to bring any thing to pass. Preuayling Gathering
strength. Finishing.



Dispatching and finishing is a stedfastnes to the end of a work, bringing our
cou^saill and purpose to pass. Dispatching and finishing.


107 What accountes must we make unto God of our service?
We should always feel our selves clear from the guiltines of sin.

We should be free from the troubles and punishments of sin by peace in God.

We should use all things as a blessing and token of our justification.

107 How are they set on their wills and flee from God?
They have always a guilty conscience for their sins.

They are always troubled and afflicted by some thing amiss.

In all things they feel the Lords curse, and their condemnation, when God
does withdraw his peace from them.

107
Our giving of accountes, is our obedience in the service of God, whereby we
make a good reckoning of all duties toward God. Accountes Of duties by a
clear conscience. Of blessings by using them



A good conscience was defined before, quest. 86.

But here we define it as it should have been, if man had not fallen.

A good conscience, is a joyful consent upon the examination of our lives,
whereby we feel our selves happy in joy and peace with our God. A good
conscience. Without guiltines of sin. Without trouble.



Peace and Quietness in God, and the blessed use of all things, is an inioying
of the goodness of God in all things, whereby we feel him to be our happiness
therein. Peace and blessings.


Hitherto of the general duties of religion and holiness. Now follow the
special duties for the name and kingdom of God, and for keeping his Sabbathes.
108 What be the special duties for the name and kingdom of God?
They are for the worship of God, on some special occasions.

Or for some special furtheraunce of his kingdom.

108 Which be the special sins of hindering Gods name and kingdom?
They be when we give special occasions for men to skorne and be ashamed of
our profession.

And when we hinder the building of his kingdom.

108
Special duties for the Name of GOD are whereby God is chiefly glorified on
greater, or some times more rare occasions. Special duties for The name of
God. His Sabbath.



The Name of God is the knowledge of his excellency and worthiness, whereby he
is glorified accordingly.

To use his name rightly, is to glorify him according to the knowledge we
should have of his excellency. The name of God By his special worship. By the
furtherance of his kingdom.



For the difference of the name and glory of God, look the 10. question and
this 108. question.

The special worship of God is our holiness in giving him honor on greater or
more rare occasions. The special worship of God Our special humbling by special
judgments. Our special thankfulness in straunge^ blessings. By praising God.
By vowing vows, and performing them.




109 What special worship of God is there?
Our special humbling with prayer in stranger judgments.

Our special thankfulness, and praising of God in stranger blessings.

Our special vows which we are for to keep and perform.

109 What special occasions give the wicked of shaming and skorning the
worship of god?
They show their hardening and willfulnes in stranger judgments.

Also their sottishnes, in stranger blessings.

Also they hold their wicked course still, and are soulde to do evil.

109
The definitions of humbling, prayer, and thankefulnes, are given before: but
here the special occasions are to be considered. Humb. Pray. Thank.


A Vow is a faithful promise made by an oath, unto God in our hearts, or by
voice and speech, whereby we bind our selves to him, for some special
blessing which we have or look for, to show our thankefulnes in some special
duetiefulnes, which before we knew not, or did neglecte. Vows.


110 What special furtheraunce of the kingdom of God is there?
In talk to edify one an other by praising God, and declaring his will by
rebuke or exhortation.

In doubt and controversy to swear by his name on just occasions, and to use
lottes.

Also to keep the meetinges of the church, and with our especial friends for
spiritual exercises.

110 What hindrances be there of building Gods kingdom?
In talk to encourage to vanity and wickedness, and discourage from goodness.

To speak blasphemies, or to use idle oaths, or gaming and tryfling by Lottes.

To forsake the church meetinges or be negligent therein, and to be near and
friendly to the wicked to the increase of wickedness.

110
The kingdom of God which is called his church is defined before.

Edifying is a communion or bestowing of our graces in knowledge, counsel, and
due behauior, to further all godliness in our selves and others. Edifying


Rebuke is a pronouncing of the known wickedness of any, with condemning of
the same by the word of God, whereby they have shame that others might fear.
Rebuke.


Exhortation is an edifying by all comfortable words and promises in the
Scripture, to work in our hearts the estimation of our duties with love and
zeal thereunto. Exhortation.


An Oath or Swearing by God is an honoring of God in his Justice, when we call
him to be a Judge and witness of that truth, which can not otherwise be
found out, and an auenger of our lies, if we speak any thing faslie. An Oath
or swearing


Lotting is an applying of some thing which is chance unto us, to be a token
of Gods will in such doubts and controversies as he only is to determine. We
honor him by Lottes when we call and take him for our Judge and Guide in the^.
Lotting


The Church meetings are the due resorting and coming together of Christians,
for mutual comfort by their presence, and communion of graces to further all
godliness. Church meetings
Our special furthering of the kingdom of God. In spiritual edifying. In
talk by praising God, exhorting and rebuke. In doubt and controversies, as by
swearing and lotte^^.
In meetinges for the same. With the Church With special friends.




111 What special duties be there for the Sabbathe?
All the general duties of religion and holiness toward God, and all the
special duties of worshipping God, and furthering his kingdom, must on the
Sabbath he performed, with ceasing from our callinges and labor in worldly
things.

Yet such business as can not be putt of till the day after, nor done the day
before, may then be done.

111 What is the special sin of breaking the Lords Sabbathe?
It is notable prophanes and worldlines, and a chief hinderaunce of the name
of God, when we follow our worldly business, and callinges on the Sabbathe, or
give our selves to other vanity and wickedness.

111
The Sabbath or rest, or keeping of the Sabbath is an holy using of every
seventh day in all duties of Religion and holiness and worshipping God and
furthering his kingdom, and that with resting and ceasing from our calling and
labor in worldly things. Our Sabbath is on the Lords day which is the day of
his rising from the dead, and is held by the church for a Sabbath or rest unto
God, the next day after the Jewish Sabbath. The Sabbath.


So that we count every Sabbath from one Lords day to another.

Hitherto of the duties of religion and holiness. Now follow the duties of
righteousness concerning man.
112 Which be the duties of righteousness concerning man?
They be either more bounde^, as the general duties in government between
governors and inferiors:

Or they be more free, as the general duties of freedom.

Or else they be more special duties for each others name, and for avoiding
covetousness.

112 Which be the sins of unrighteousness concerning man?
They be either in the abuse of government:

Or in the abuse of freedom and liberty:

Or in special faulting by our own and others evil name, and by covetousness.

112
Our government is our Lordshipp, authority, or chieftie over any, whereby
we use their obedience and service, to partake unto them the use and graces of
our authority and guiding. Government In the entrance of that calling. In the
due execution thereof.



The definition above, set under this.

Righteousness concerning man, is that part of godliness, whereby we keep and do
all duties both toward our selves, and toward all men, and fail in none of
them. Righteousness concerning man In general duties More bounden concerning
Government. Submission.
More free for Our own and other men's persons. Furniture and goods.

In special duties For name and credit. For contentation and avoiding
covetousness.




113 What be the duties of Governors?
They consist in the entrance of that ralling.

And in the due execution thereof by ruling well.

113 How is gouernemente abused?
By an ambitious seeking and usurping of that calling which belongs not to
them.

And by an evil handling thereof for their pleasure and lusts.

113
Entrance or taking on us the calling of government, is a due manner of
beginning the same, being prepared and meet thereto. Entrance of that calling.
By assurance of our gifts. By our calling to use them. By Gods commandment.
By agreement of men.




114 How must Superiors enter and take their calling?
By assurance of their gift.

By special charge and commandment from God to put it in practice.

By agreement of men.

114 How do the wicked ambitiously seek and usurp their government?
They are unfit and unskillful to govern.

They are forbidden by God, and unsent to that calling.

They steal into that calling, or get it by force and ravening.

114
Assurance of our gift, is a conscience of our ablenes to follow that
calling, because we know our own readiness, to do all the duties thereof,
with preuayling and prospering by the help of God. Assurance of our gift In
our selves Knowledge, age, godliness. etc. Outward furniture. etc.
By others, as pare^tage and birth. and



115 What gift must they have?
All Governors must have forwardnes before others, in knowledge and godliness,
as able to guide.

And some must have age and eldershippe.

Also some must have parentage and birth.

115 How are they unfit and unskillful to govern?
They are untoward through their ignorance, and are worldly minded men.

They are children or of childish conditions.

They have no right nor succession by parentage or birth.

115
Knowledge is the right judgment or wisdom which they should have, whereby
they should have all things sought and found out belonging to that calling.
Knowledge.


Godliness is defined before.

Age and Eldershippe is a gift whereby they have greater authority as by
natural deserte of their wisdom, if so be by co^tinua^ce of time they have
gotten that wisdom. Age and Eldership.


Birth and Parentage, is a gift whereby they have greater authority as by
natural deserte of kindred and blood, or of begetting and bringing up, if so
be they answer in worthiness otherwise. Birth and Parentage.


116 What charge or commandment of God must they have to use their gift?
They have first the special commandment of furthering his kingdom, by
edifyinge and helping of others, where there is occasion and the persons be
worthy.

Also some special prophecy and foretelling of their calling, or some
general commandment for the same.

Also particular warninges from God unknown to the world, as in oulde time by
vision, dream and revelation, and now by a special working of Gods spirit in
our consciences.

116 How are they forbidden by God and vnsente to that calling?
They are chiefly forbidden to hinder the building of the Lords kingdom.

Also their is some general commandment, or some special warning and
example to stay them from that calling.

Also their own fancy, ambition or lust does thurst them on to that calling.

116
A commandment to use our gifts is a pronounced or written law or form of
words, appointing unto us that duty, by the authority of God in the
pronou^cer or writer. Commandment to use their gift. General law. Special
Prophecy. Warning.




The special commaundemement for this is defined before.

Prophecy or foretelling of their calling, is the pronounced or written decree
or will of God for their calling showed before hand, which appoints unto
them that calling, by the authority of God in the pronouncer or writer.
Prophecy of their calling.


Particular warnings is the stirring up and provoking of them, by the word,
their consciences, and the spirit of grace in them, and by the occasions of
doing good by their gifts, whereby they are compelled to use their gifts in
that calling. Particular warnings.


117 what agreement must there be of men?
For Church governors there must be an agreement of the church.

For civil Magistrates, there must be an agreement of the people or Commonwealth.

For Houshoulders, there must be an agreement of the houshouldes. As Husbands,
Parents, Masters, Teachers, or Scholemaisters. etc.

117 How do they steal into that calling, or get it by force and ravening?
They will shift and thrust themselves into the Church government as
Antichrists.

They will shift or thrust themselves into the civil government, as Tyrants.

They will shift and thrust the^ selves into home government, like Lorddanes, or
maisterly troublers.

117
Church governors are persons receiving their authority and office of God, for
the guiding of his people the Church, received and called thereto, by due
consent and agreement of the Church. Church Governors.


The Church government and governors are defined before.

Civil Magistrates, are persons receiving their authority and office of God,
for the due guiding of the common wealth, whereto they are duly received and
called, by consent and agreement of the people and subjects. Civil
Magistrates.


A larger definition may be this:

Civil Magistrates are persons authorized of God, and received by the consent
or choice of the people, whether officers or subjects, or by birth and
succession also, to make and execute laws by public agreement, to rule the
common wealth in all outward justice, and to maintain the right, welfare, and
honor thereof, with outward power, bodily punishemens, and civil forcing of
men. Civil Magistrates.


Householders or house keepers are persons authorized over their housholdes and
charges. Householders
Agreement of men. Ecclesiastical. Civil For Magistrates In peace In war.
For householders.




118 What agreement must there be of the church, for the calling of church
governors?
They must try their guiftes and godliness.

They must receive them by obedience as their guides and teachers, where they
plant or establish the church.

They must receive them by choice where the church is planted.

The agreement also for the calling of civil magistrates should be like unto
this, excepting their Pomp and outward power, and orders established meet for
the people.

118 How do they shift or thrust themselves into the church government, as
Antichrists?
They hide away their untowardness and wickedness, and color the same by an
outward brag, or countenance of authority, or by flatterings and pleasings.

They undermine, and take away by craft the liberty of the church, and bring
them into bondage.

They come upon them by power and force, and yoke them by cruel laws and
penalties.

The like may be said of Tyrauntes which usurp civil authority.

118
Agreement of men is the willingness or glad consent both of the Governors to
rule, and the people or inferiors to obey, for the assurance they have in God,
of welfare by each other. Agreement of men.


Trying of their gifts and godliness, is a taking of accountes of the same, by
a right judgment of them, by that which we have known and seen in them,
which does sufficiently warrant their meetenes. Trying gifts and godliness.


Receiving of them by obedience, is a duetifulnes in partaking to them the use
of our submission or service, because they partake unto us the use of their
authority and guiding. Receiving by obedience.


Receiving by choice, is an agreement or partaking of conditions between
Governors and inferiors, That so long as the Governors have right use of the
submission and service of inferiors and the inferiors also have the right use
and welfare of their authority and guiding, they shall hold that communion, or
else make a breach thereof, when once it shall tend to confusion and
destruction. Recyuing by choice.


We give these definitions so general, that they may be applied also to the
civil state. Agreement of the Church. By trying their gifts and godliness. By
prophecy. By life and manners.
Receiving thereon By obedience. By choice.




119 What choice should there be?
The prayers and humbling of all, with fasting and exhortation, that God may be
chief in the choice.

The consent of the people must be gathered by the Elders or guides, and
testified by voice, presenting, or naming of some, or other tokens, that they
approve them as meet for that calling.

The Elders or forwardest must ordeine, and pronounce them, with prayer and
imposition of hands, as called and authorized of God, and received of their
charg to that calling.

Yet imposition of hands is no essential point of their calling, but it
ought to be left, when it is turned into pomp or superstition

119 How do they come upon them with power and force, and yoke them with
cruelty?
With pride, threats, or wicked laws, they are thrust upon the people, by
their own might or by the strength of others: As of Bishops Patrones. etc.

The most wicked have gotten from all, the liberty of using their voice and
sentence: and do at their pleasures present, name and approve whom they will.
As the Examiner, the Patron, the Bishop. etc.

They command and give licenses with seals and fees and kneelings, and
blasphemously also will give the holy Ghost and the authority of preaching,
though they have not the gift: both which the lord only can give.

119
Prayer at the chosing is upon the word preached, a pronouncing of their
earnest desire to have God their gracious Governor, in so weighty a matter,
with an humble confessing wherein and how much they have need of his help, and
an entreating for the same in the name of Christ Jesus. Prayer at the chosing


The gathering of voices and consent of the people, is a general inquiry who
is meet to be chosen, when first it is appointed to the^ all, being duly
assembled to look out such persons among the^, and then the number of the most
which agree, is taken by some of the wisest, with presenting and naming of the
parties to be chosen, if none can allege any cause or default against them.
Gathering voices


The ordayning by some of the forwardest and wisest, is a pronou^cing the^ with
prayer and thanksgiving, and laying on of hands (if such imposition of hands
be not turned into pomp or superstition) that they are called and authorized
of God, and received of their charge to that calling. Ordayning.
Chosing. By God which authoriseth and sends. By men which receive and
confirm the authority By gathering voices. By ordayning With prayers and
thanksgiving. With pronouncing the^ called.





120 What agreement must there be in the householdes, for the government of
them?
There must be an agreement of Husband and Wife, of Parents and Children: Also
of Master and Servant, and likewise of Teachers and Scholars. etc.

This agreement between parents and children is of natural desert and duty
between them:

But in the other there must be trial and judgment of each others meetnes for
their likinge and calling, as is showed before.

Also there must be a due covenant between them.

120 How do they shift and thrust themselves into home government?
There is some disorder, wilines, or wrong in their agreement.

There is unnatural hardness in the parents toward the children: or the
children do refuse and cast of their parents.

They hide away their untowardness by some outward brag and countenance.

By craft, fear or power, they undermine them and bring them into bondage.

As for the covenant here between husband and wife, we understand not the
covenant which is in the communion of marriage, but that which is in the
communion of government. And this covenant is broken if either do seek the
destruction of other, or do persecute religion or goodness: likewise also it is
broken, if by keeping togethr the one can not hold the true religion through
the untowardness of the other in a wicked and false religion. And therefore in
such cases a brother or a sister is not in bondage but that the husband may
depart from the wife or the wife from the Husband 1 Cor. 7. Yet this departing
is not a breach of the covenant of marriage, but of that communion in
government, through leaving one an other for a good conscience.

120
The government of the Husband is, his authority, lordshippe and chieftie
over the wife, whereby he uses her obedience and service, to partake unto her
the use and graces of his authority and guiding. The government of Husbands.


Parents are persons authorized over their children to rule them, by natural
desert of begetting and bringing them up. Parents


Masters are persons authorized over their servants to rule them, by
covenant of some maintenance, wages, or benefit, for their bodily service.
Masters


Teachers are persons authorized over scholars to rule them, by covenant to
have maintenance or benefitte by them, for the learning which they get under
their guiding. Teachers.


Trial of each others gifts and meetnes is defined before, quest. 118.

The covenant of Government, is an agreement or partaking of conditions to
hold the communion thereof, so long as it tends not to the confusion or
destruction of either party. Covenant of government.
Home government. By natural agreement, as between Parents. Children
By covenant and choice made, as Between husband and wife. Masters and
Servants. etc.




Let this Definition be equally weighed, and it will appear whether wives may
depart from their Husbands, when the untowardness of the Husbands in a false
religion, and persecution withal, does drive them to seek their safety with
true Religion and a good conscience.

Hitherto of the entrance and taking on us the callinges of government: now
follows the due execution of those callings.
121 How must Superiors execute their calling by ruling their inferiors?
They must esteem right and due.

They must vphould the same:

By appointing to others their duties.

They must take accountes.

121 How do the wicked handle their government amiss, and abuse the same for
their pleasure and lusts?
They mislike the right, and favor the wrong.

They lead others unto wickedness.

They suffer and let them alone therein.

121
For the definition of rule and government, look question 112.

Execution of their calling is a duetifulnes in them, in partaking unto them,
which obey and serve them, the whole use, and all the graces of their
authority and guiding. Execution of calling By esteeming right and due. By
vpholdi^g the same, By appointing duties. By taking accountes.




Esteeming right and due in inferiors, is a duty of their calling, whereby
they are pleased with the worthiness thereof, and feel or know the use of the
same. Esteeming right. Pleased with it. Love and Joy. Zeal. Jealousy.
Displeased with contrary Hatred. Anger and Wrath.




122 How must they esteem right and due?
They must be zealouse for equity and innocence.

They must love those and rejoice over them, which do their duties.

They must hate all vanite and wickedness and be angry and grieved thereat.

122 How do they mislike right and due?
They make light thereof.

They loath it and take grief thereat.

They rest and please themselves in evil and wrong.

122
Their zeal and Jealousy, is the estimation of right and duty, for the
worthiness thereof: which provoke them to hasten the same, and to make it
sure with all straightnes and watchfulnes. Zeal.


Their Love and Joy is their high estimation of inferiors in their goodness,
whereby they yield them selves to them in one mutual happiness, and take them
as precious and dear, which are so obedient and rulie. Love.


Their anger and hatred is their troubled disliking of the wickedness of
inferiors, for the contrariety thereof, to their just guiding and authority,
provoking them speedily to redress such wickedness, or if that can not be, to
cast them off and forsake them. Hatred and anger.


123 How must they appoint unto others their work and duty?
They must teach them.

They must direct them by their guiding and help.

They must give them good example.

123 How do they misleade?
They give them up to their ignorance, or deceive and beguile them.

They forsake the untoward or make them more auke.

They go before the^ in wickedness.

123
Appointing of duties is that point of government, or duetifulnes in
Governors, whereby their inferiors have their office and charge at their
hands. Appointing duties By teaching. By special directing.



Their Teaching is their duetifulnes in using the obedience of inferiors, to
learn and know their duties. Teaching.
Teaching Delivering the grounds of Religion and meaning of the Scriptures. By
interpreting and opening The words. The matter, as The whole meaning The sum
and whole matter briefly laid out. The method and order.
The parts. Proofs. Sentences.


By gathering upon it General knowledge Of Religion and holiness Of
righteousness wiih men.
Applying to reform Skanning duties by Moving affections Cimending,
disco^mending. Exhorting, dehorting.



Confirming the same. By requiring again, and private applying. By trying in
practice.




124 How must they teach them?
They must teach them the grounds of religion, and the meaning of the
Scriptures.

They must exhort and dehort particularly for reformation of their lives.

They must require things again which are taught, by particular applying and
trying their gift.

124 How do they give them up to their ignorance, or deceive and beguile them?
They teach them heresies, or let them alone therein, and withholde them
from searching and learning the truth.

They encourage and stre^ghthen the^ in wickedness by flatteringes and
pleasinges: but discourage from goodness by taunts and threats.

They skoffe and mock at their graces and knowledge, if they have any, or
little regard their ignorance.

124
The grounds of religion are the pronounced, written, or known laws and
doctrine of God, teaching us the first necessary and chief rules of our
christian profession, whereof if one of them be denied or refused, it is the
overthrow of al religion, and of our whole redemption. Grounds of Religion.


Applying is an examining or trying out of the lives of men by the truth of
Gods word, to make known the secrets of their hearts unto them, and their just
deserts for the good or evil that is in them, or proceeds from them.
Applying.


For the definition of Exhortation, look quest. 110.

Dehorting is an edifying by sharp and blaming words with threatenings of
judgment, to work in their hearts a misliking of some vice and error, with a
hatred and grief against it. Dehorting.


Requiring again is a second or after teaching to confirm things which are
taught. Requiring again


125 How must they direct them by their guiding and help?
They must guide the^ in the worshipp of God, as in the Word, Prayer,
Thanksgiving, etc

They must gather their Voices, Doubts and Questions, and determine
Controversies.

They must particularly command and tell them their duties.

125 How do they forsake the untoward, or make them more auke?
They are a spiritual infection, and misleade others in a false worship and
idol service.

They make them slavish to their decrees and traditions.

They force, control and turn all duties which way they will.

125
Their directing and guiding is a duty of their government, using the
obedience of others in following them, to do any thing with them or after
the^. Directing To do things with us In religion and worshipping God* In all
other affairs In doubts and controversies to decide matters. In business to
commau^de and tell them their duties.

To do things after us by our example.



Guiding in the worship of God, is when they worship God with us, and after our
manner. In the worship of God.


Gathering voices, doubts, etc. is a diligent inquiry of them: and
determining controversies, is an using of their obedience to follow our
judgment in them, set down by the word of God. Deciding matters.


Particular commanding and telling of duties, is a pronou^cing with authority
what we appoint them to do: whereby we use their obedience to follow our will.
Particular commanding.


Good example is a duty of their government in forwardnes before them, to
show unto others, how they should follow them, and do any thing after them.
Good example.


126 How must they take accountes?
They must continually watch them by visiting and looking to them themselves,
and by others helping unto them.

They must try out and search their state and behavior by accusations and
chardgings with witnesses.

They must reform or recompense by rebuke or separation the wicked and unruly.

126 How do they suffer and let alone in their wickedness?
They hide wickedness and shift it away, and seek occasions of evil.

They ouerslippe wickedness and pass by the same.

They flatter and excuse them in their sin.

Hitherto of the duties of Governors, now follow the duties of submission
unto them.

126
Our taking of accountes is a duty of our government, whereby we reckon with
them, how they do their duties. Taking accounts In knowing right and due By
Watching. By examining.
In recompensing.



Watching, is our continual minding of them, whereby we mark their obedience
and service. Watching.


Examining and trying, is a forceable taking of accountes, whereby we make
known that which any would hyde. Examining.


Recompensing is a duty of government, whereby as they do their duties, so
we give them the name and the use thereof in good or evil. Recompensing.


For rebuke and Separation, look questoon 48.

127 what say you of the duties of submission to Superiors?
They consist in esteeming them.

In honoring them.

In serving them.

127 How are inferiors undutiful and faulty*
They despise their Governors.

They make them a shame and a skorne.

They are unruly.

127
Inferiors or persons governed are, which give use to their Governors of
their submission and service, and receive the use of their authority and
guiding, and houlde this communion so long, as it tends not to the
confusion, or destruction of either of them. Inferiors and submission. In
esteeming them. In dutifulnes thereon by Honoring them. By serving them.




Esteeming Superiors, is a duty of submission, whereby we consent, that they
are worthy and meet for to guide us. Esteeming In their persons Reverence.
Bashefulnes.
In their authority In justice. In goodness.




128 How must we esteem them?
We must esteem them in their Persons.

Also in their Justice.

Also in their Goodness.

128 How do they despise them?
They make light of their worthiness

Also of their will and pleasure.

Also of their goodness, and the graces, and blessings which they may have by
them.

128
Esteeming them in their person, is whereby we are moved at their presence, and
are stricken with their worthiness, for their continual good example and due
behavior. Esteeming their persons.


129 How must we esteem them in their person?
By reverence.

By shamfastnes and bashfulnes.

129 How do they make light of their worthiness?
They are too homely with them.

They are boulde and malepert.

129
Reverence is an estimation of them for their own worthiness, though we had not
to deal with them. Reverence.


Bashefulnes or shamefastnes, is a troubled disliking of our own unworthiness,
because of their presence, whom we better accounte of then of our selves.
Shamefastnes.


130 How must we esteem the^ in their justice?
By fear.

By zeal for their right.

By grief for their displeasure.

130 How do they make light of their will and pleasure?
They have their hardness and stoutnes of heart.

Also their dubbling and halting.

Also they rest and flatter them selves in their wickedness.

130
Esteeming them in their justice, is a duty of submission, whereby we take
them to be meet and righteous Governors. Esteeming the^ in their Justice. In
well doing Fear. Zeal.
In evil doing as grief.



Fear is an Estimation of their Justice, whereby we take heed to please them
in all things, and abhor to provoke them against us, because we are sure,
that they will recompense us according to our deseruings. Fear.


Zeal for their right is an high estimation thereof, for their worthiness,
provoking us earnestly to hasten and further the same, as feeling it our curse
if they lose their right. Zeal.


Grief for their displeasure, is a troubled disliking of our wickedness, and
injury done to them, whereby we feel the hurt and danger We are in, by their
displeasure against us. Grief.


131 How must we esteem the^ in their goodness?
We must love them.

We must rejoice in their presense and welfare.

We must hope and trust of their help in God.

131 How do they make light of their goodness, and of their graces and
blessings which they may have by them?
They have their misgiuing from them.

They are grieved and heavy before them.

They shrink away, and doubt of their help.

131
Love and Joy is an estimation of the^ in their goodness, whereby we yield our
selves to them in one mutual happiness, and seek their welfare before our
own. Love and Joy
Esteeming in goodness Present Love. Joy.
Coming Hope. Trust.




Hope and Trust is an high estimation of their help and favor, provoking us
to do any thing, wherein we have assurance of their good will or promise. Hope
and Trust.


Look question 93.

132 How must we honor them?
We must humble our selves before them.

We must seek to them for their favor and help.

We must be thankful for their goodness toward us.

132 How do they make them a shame and a skorne?
They have their loftines and pride or else toe much slauishnes.

They forsake their goodness and cast them of.

They esteem their own worthiness and are unthankful.

132
Honoring them is a duty of submission, whereby we set forth their
worthiness. Honoring them. In humbling our selves to them. In using their
goodness.



Humbling ourselves, is an honouringe of them, by abasing our selves, according
to our unworthiness and their excellency above us. Humbling. Inwardly In
meekenes. In patience.
Outwardly in homage.



133 How must we humble our selves?
We must show the lowlines of our hearts by our speech and behavior.

We must be meek in despising our right and welfare.

We must be patient in abiding their chastising.

133 How have they their loftines and pride, or their toe much slauishnes?
They will be gallant and lordly, or over wretched in flattering.

They are stout and stubburne.

They murmr or rage when they are corrected.

133
Homage is an Humbling or Abasing of our selves in our behavior toward them,
as beseems their worthiness, whereby they have honor therein. Homage.


Meekenes is an humbling or abasing of our selves, in despising our right and
welfare, as unworthy to have or to seek it at their hands, when they
wittinglie withhold it. Meekenes.


Patience is an humbling or abasing of our selves, gladly to suffer their
corrections as being meet for us Patience.


134 How must we seek to them for their favor and help?
We must confess our faults and offenses.

We must ask pardon and forgiveness,

We must complain of our wantes and crave their help.

134 How do they forsake their goodness and cast them of.
They excuse and justify them selves in their faults.

They are froward and wilful in the same.

They challenge their deseruinges*

134
Seeking to them, is an honoring of the^ by showing of our willing desire to
use their goodness. Seeking to them. In faults Confessing faules Asking pardon.
In other misery or need. Complaining of wantes. Craving help.




Confessing faults is a seeking to them for their favor and good liking, by
showing wherein and how greatly we have offended. Confessing faults.


Asking pardon is a seeking to the^ to have our faults forgiven us, with an
humble entreating them for the same. Asking pardon.


Complaining and Craving, is a seekinge to them by showing wherein and how much
we have need of their help, with an humble entreating them for the same.
Complaining and Craving help.


135 How must we be thankful?
We must acknowledge their goodness toward us.

We must confess the same in our words.

We must show kindness and duty again.

135 How do they esteem their own worthiness and are unthankful?
They set light and think skorne of good turns and benefits.

They talk and vaunte of their deseruings.

They vpbraide them and are undutiful.

155
Thankefulnes is an honoring of them by abasinge our selves for the good we
have by them, whereby we take our selves indebted unto them and unable to make
them amends. Thankefulnes to the^. In acknowledging goodness. In dutifulnes for
the same, Giving thanks Kindness and duty again.




Acknowledging goodness is a full consent and conscience thereof, by mindefulnes
and examining of their particular good turns toward us. Acknowledging their
goodness.


Giving thanks is a witnessing or showing of their deseruings, whereby we
confess their goodness toward us, and our unworthiness. Giving thanks.


Kindness or duty again, is a thankefulnes in pleasuring them for all the
goodness which they have showed toward us. Kindness and duty again.


Hitherto of esteeming and honoring Superiors: Now follows serving of them.
136 How must we serve them?
We must learn of them.

We must obey them in our calling.

We must give good accountes of our calling.

136 How are they unruly?
They are foolish and ignorant.

They are disobedient.

They are maisterly and set on their wills.

136
Serving them is a duetifulnes in giving to Supetiours the use of our calling
and gifts, with earnest endeavor to pleasure and profit them. Serving them By
learning of them. By obedience thereto. In our calling. In accounts thereof.




Learning of them, is the service of our mind and understanding, whereby we
use their goodness in teaching us, that we may know our duties, and do
thereafter. Learning of them. By getting knowledge. By using the same to follow
Their guiding. Their example.




137 How must we learn?
We must get the knowledge of such things as they teach us, and reform our
selves by them.

We must follow them guiding us.

We must follow their example.

137 How are they foolish and ignorant?
They are dull and deceived.

They become more untoward and auke.

They are contrary and against them in unlike behavior.

137
Knowledge of our duties, is the right judgment and wisdom we should have,
whereby we should have al things sought and found out belonging to our
calling. Getting knowledge by them.


Following them guiding us is a duty of submission in using of their
government, to put in practice any duty by their particular appointing, or
as we see them to go before us. Following them guiding.


Following their example, is an using of their godly life, to frame our own
lives accordingly. Following their example.


138 How must we follow them guiding us?
We must worship God by their guiding, and daily keep the meetings thereto
appointed.

We must yield and stand to their judgments, and debatings of matters by the
word of God

We must take and fulfill our task and duties at their appointing.

138 How are they untoward and auke?
They houlde a superstitious or false worship with them.

They are froward and contentious.

They are unprofitable, and bring loss or disuantage.

138
The worship of God, and the meetings for the same, are defined before.

Yielding and standing to their judgments, is a duty of submission in using
of their judgments, and aunsweres to learn what is truth and meet in any
matter, to follow the same. Yielding to their Judgments.


For Taking and fulfilling our task and duties, look number 146.

139 How must we obey them in our calling?
We must take counsel.

We must be forward thereon.

We must do all things in their due manner.

139 How do they disobey them in their calling?
They do things in lightness and rashness, or with subteltie and craft.

They are backward and untoward.

They have their evil handling and marring of matters.

140 How must we take counsel?
We must attend and watch to our duties.

We must remember and count the same.

We must foresee and purpose what to do.

140 How are they light and rash in their doings?
They have their carelessnes and dulnes.

Also their forgetfulness

Also their vnwarines and headines.

141 How must we be ready and forward upon counsel?
We must desire to do our duties, with hope and trust of obteining our
desires.

We must have zeal and courage thereto.

We must be joyful and comfortable therein.

141 How are they backward and untoward?
They have evil will to their duties, with shrinking and doubting to go
forward.

They are could and do better things by halues.

Their duties are wearisome and irksome unto them.

142 In what manner must we do our duties.
We must be active and skillful.

We must labor and work.

We must be steadfast and constant.

142 What evil handling and marring of matters have they?
They are unfit and unskillful.

They are idle and slothful.

They are wavering and give over.

143 What skill or actiuenes is required?
We must order things by their times and course.

Also by their measure of work.

And we must be handsome and tydie in our work.

143 How are they unfit and unskillful?
They are disordered and do things by hazard.

They have their disvantage.

They are vntydie and boisterous.

144 What labor is required?
We must use our force and might.

We must be speedy and quick.

We must be painful and strait that nothing fail.

144 How are they idle and slothful?
They have their weakness and fainting.

Also their slacknes and slownes.

Also their loathing and letting.

145 What stedfastnes and constancy is required?
We must be patient whatsoever success we have.

We must prevail and gather strength.

We must finish and dispatch our work.

145 How are they wavering and unconstant?
They are discouraged if any thing miscarie.

They shrink and fail by their backwardnes.

They loose their labor and mysse of their purpose.

For the Definitions and Divisions of all these before from number 138. until
number 146. Look the number 100. to the number 107.

146 What accountes must we make of our calling?
We must clear our selves from all accusation and suspicion of evil.

We must show and appreue our faithfulness.

We must fulfill our task.

Hitherto of bounden duties.

146 How are they masterlie, and obstinate in their wickedness?
They excuse and justify their faults.

They hide their unfaithfulness, and shifte it away.

They fail of their work and duties, and do them by halues.

Hitherto of abuse in gouerenment.

146
Giving accountes is our obedience in serving them, whereby we make a good
reckoning, of all duties toward them. Accountes In word In clearing our
selves. By showing our faithfulness.
In deed by fulfilling task.



Clearing of our selves is a giving of accountes, whereby we discharge our
selves of all things wherewith we are, or might seem to be charged. Clearing.


Showing faithfulness, is a giving of accountes whereby they mark and perceive,
that we keep trust and credit with them. Faithfulness.


Fulfilling task is an accounts in our deeds, discharging us of that work
and service which they appointed unto us, because we have duly dispatched the
same. Fulfilling task.


147 What be the more free duties?
They are concerning other men's persons, in goodness toward them.

Or concerning our own.

Or concerning outward furniture.

147 What abuse is there of freedom and liberty?
The wicked are cursed and ungracious to others.

Also to them selves.

Also they mar and spoil all things.

147
Goodness toward others is our righteousness in yielding and applying our
selves unto them to their behoof rather then to our own. Goodness By esteeming
and accounting. By dutifulnes thereon In honoring them. In pleasuring them.




148 What be the duties of goodness toward others?
They be either in esteeming them.

Or in honoring them.

Or in pleasuring them.

148 How are they cursed and ungracious to others?
They despise them.

They shame them or make them a skorne, so much as lies in them.

They are hurtful and mischeeuous.

148
Esteeming them is a duty of our goodness, whereby we judge and take the^, as
worthy thereof, and yield our selves to them. Esteming them In prosperity In
their persons. In their goodness.
In misery Grief, mercy and compassion.




149 How must we esteem the^?
We must esteem them in their person.

In their goodness.

And in their misery.

149 How do they despise them?
They have respect of persons.

They cast them of, and make light of their worthiness.

They forsake them in misery.

149
Esteeming them in their person is a duty of goodness whereby we yield our
selves to them, for their own cause and worthiness though we had no good by
them. Esteeming person Reverence. Shamefastnes.



150 How must we esteem the^ in their person?
By reverence.

By shamefastnes.

150 How do they respect persons?
By slavish abasing, by wondering, or by disdain.

By bouldnes and malepertnes.

150
Reverence is an estimation of them for the image of God in them, or for some
show of his excellency. Reverence.


Shamefastnes is a troubled disliking of our unworthiness, which we feel the
more by the show of their excellency. Shamefastnes.


151 How must we esteem them in their goodness?
By love toward them.

By joy in their presence and felloship.

By hope and trust of their favor toward us.

151 How do they cast them of and make light of them?
They have their misgiuing and anger.

Also their envy and grief.

Also their shrinking and withdrawing.

151
Esteeming them in their goodness, is our duetifulnes in yelding our selves to
them, for some communion of graces or duties which we have with them. Esteming
the^ in goodness Love. Joy.



Love is an Estimation of them, in their goodness, whereby we yield our selves
to them in one mutual happiness. Love.


There is also a love of our enemies, which is but an estimation of the show
of some excellency of God in them, which drives us for the Lords cause to
seek their welfare. These we can not love in their goodness, being wicked, nor
yield our selves to them in one mutual happiness. Love of our enemies.


Joy is an estimation of them, whereby we feel the blessings and graces we
have by the^, how much they further our happiness. Joy.


The definitions of Hope and Trust look before.

152 How must we esteem them in their miseries?
By mercy and compassion.

By partaking their grief.

By partaking their shame.

152 How do they forsake them in misery?
They are savage and unmerciful.

They are gladd and merry in their evils.

They disdain them and think skorne of them.

152
Mercy is a troubled disliking of their miseries as if they were our own.
Mercy.


Partaking grief is a feeling with them, of the hurtes and dangers they are
in, as if they were our own. Grief.


Partaking shame, is a troubled disliking of that vileness they are in, as if it
were our own. Partaking shame.


153 How must we honor the^?
We must humble our selves to them.

We must seek to them, and request them for their favor and help.

We must be thankful.

153 How do they shame them, or make them a skorne?
They have their loftines and pride, or their slavish pleasing.

They forsake their goodness and cast them of.

They esteem their own worthiness, and are unthankful.

153
Honoring is a duty of goodness toward them, whereby we set forth their
worthiness. Honoring By hu^bling our selves to them For their worthiness
Reverent speech. Courtesy and Ministering.
For agreement Meekenes in pleasing. Gentleness in sparing.

By using their goodness.



Humbling our selves is an honoring of them by abasing our selves, according
to our unworthiness which we feel in comparison of them. Humbling.


154 How must we humble our selves to them?
By lowlines in speech and behavior.

By meekenes in pleasing them.

By gentleness in sparing them.

154 How are they proud, or slavish in pleasing?
They are gallant and lordly, or wretched flatterers.

They are stout and wilful.

They are disdainefull and spightfull.

154
Lowlines is an humbling or abasing of our selves, whereby we prefer them
before us. Lowlines.


155 How must we be lowly in speech and behavior?
By using reverent names and speech toward them.

By courtesy and homage.

By waiting and ministering.

155 How are they gallaunte and lordly.
They rail, mock and jest, or otherwise abuse them by speech.

They are to homely, discourteous, or barbarous.

They are nice and strange.

155
Courtesy or civility is an hu^bling or abasing of our selves in our behauior
toward them, as beseems their persons, or deserts at our hands. Courtesy.


Ministering is a duty of humbling or abasing, whereby we apply our selves to
help and serve them as their need is. Ministering.


156 How must we please them in meekenes toward them?
By yielding to their request, or opinion.

By pardoning them any thing.

By appeasing them being angry.

156 How are they stout and wilful?
They are contentious and churlish.

They are fearce and furious.

They make trouble and provoke others.

156
Meekenes is an humbling or abasing of our selves in despising our right or
welfare, as unworthy to hold or seek it with their displeasure. Meekenes in
pleasing By yielding. By appeasing anger.



Yielding to them is a duty of meekenes, fulfilling their desire and suite,
though it be against our selves. Yielding To request Of suite. Of pardon.
To him that strives for his opinion



Pardoning is a duty of meekenes in receiving them to favor, and showing our
love, as if they had not offended us. Pardoning.


Appeasing their anger, is a duty of meekenes in using soft words and kind
behavior to get their favor in their wrongful disliking of us. Appeasing.


157 How ^ust we spare them in gentleness?
We must be mild in talk or rebuke.

We must forbear their infirmities.

We must be patient in their injuries.

157 How are they spiteful?
They are waywarde and bitter in talk and rebuke.

They stomach infirmities and seek vantage against others.

They are malicious and seek revenge.

157
Gentleness in sparing is a duty of humbling or abasing our selves gladly to
suffer their untowardness and weakness, though it be against our selves.
Gentleness in sparing By mildnes, By patience in forbearing Infirmities.
Injuries.




Mildnes in speech is a duty of gentleness in applying of our words to their
liking though it be against our selves. Mildnes in speech In talk. In rebuke
and admonishment.



Patience is a duty of gentleness in sparing and forbearing them, dealing
wrongfullie against us. Patience.


Forbearing infirmities is a duty of gentleness in sparing of them in their
unadvised or unwilling dealing against us. Forbearing infirmities.


Forbearing iniuiries, is a duty of gentleness in sparing of them in their
wilful dealing against our known right. Forbearing injuries.


158 How must we seek to the^ for their favor and help?
We must complain of our wantes, and crave their help.

We must confess our faults and offending of them.

We must ask pardon and forgiveness.

158 How do they forsake their goodness, and cast them of?
They match and compare them selves with them, and skorne their help.

They excuse and justify their faults.

They are froward therein.

158
Seeking to them, is an honoring of the^ by showing of our willing desire to
use their goodness. Seeking to them. In faults Confessing faults Asking pardon.
In other misery or need. Complaining of wantes. Craving help.




Confessing faults is a seeking to them for their favor and good liking, by
showing wherein and how greatly we have offended. Confessing faults.


Asking pardon is a seeking to the^ to have our faults forgiven us, with an
humble entreating them for the same. Asking pardon.


Complaining and Craving, is a seekinge to them by showing wherein and how much
we have need of their help, with an humble entreating them for the same.
Complaining and Craving help.


159 How must we be thankful?
We must acknowledge their goodness.

We must confess the same.

We must show kindness and goodness again.

159 How are they unthankful and esteem their own worthiness?
They set light by and think skorn of their good turns and benefits.

They talk and vaunt of their deseruings.

They vpbrayde them and are undutiful.

159
For the Definitions and Divisions in this number 159. look number 135.

160 How must we pleasure them?
By prayer for them.

By directing and furthering them.

By maintayning them.

160 How are they hurtful and mischievous?
They curse and wish evil unto them.

They misleade and hinder them.

They forsake them and fail them, when they should help them.

160
Pleasuring them is a duty of goodness and charity toward them, whereby we
do them good. Pleasuring them Secret by prayer for them. Showed By directing
and furthering them. By maintayning the^.




Prayer for them, is a seeking to God for his help and blessing upon them, by
shewinge wherein and how much they have need of his help, with an humble
entreating him for the same. Prayer for them.


For Directing, look number 125.

Furthering is a duty of goodness, whereby they get vauntage, and are
profited by us. Directing and furthering In word by Teaching. Counsel.
In deed By ayding, moderati^g By example.




161 How must we direct and further them?
By teaching and counsayling.

By ayding and moderating.

By our example.

161 How do they mislead and hinder them?
They corrupt them and hold them in their error and ignorance.

They trouble or withdraw them from their duties.

They are captains and ringleaders to mischief.

161
For Teaching and Counsel, look number 125. and number 53. And also 47.

Ayding and helping is a duty of goodness, whereby we use means or endeavor
our selves to remedy their wantes and necessities. Ayding and helping.


For Moderating and example, look number 125. and number 19.

162 How must we teach and counsel them?
We must use mutual conference and edifying in the Scriptures.

We must exhort and comfort.

We must dehort and rebuke.

162 How do they corrupt them, and hold them in error and ignorance?
They stand and reason to withdraw and pervert one an other.

They encourage and stre^gthen in wickedness by flatterings and pleasings.

They discourage from goodness by tauntes and threats.

162
For Conference and Edifying, Also for exhorting and dehorting, look number
110. and 124

Co^forting is a duty of goodness toward them, whereby we use kind words
and full of godly hope, either to remedy grief or impatience, or to make
them more glad and comfortable. Comforting


163 How should we maintain them?
By judging and defending their person and cause, and reconciling parties

By giving and lending and suertishippe, as they have need.

By visiting and ministering to them in their distress, though it cost us our
lives.

Hitherto of duties concerning goodness toward others.

163 How do they fail and forsake them?
They reproach, condemn, and betraye them.

They are unkind, hard, and pinchinge, and lend upon usury.

They have their straungenes, nicenes, and loathinge.

Hitherto how they are a curse and ungracious to others.

163
Maintaining is a duty of goodness and pleasuring them, whereby they want no
helps nor furtherances of their welfare, so much as lies in us. Maintayning,
In strift and controversy, by judging and defending their cause and person,
and reconciling parties. In peace and quietness In providing good things for
them. In doing good.




Iudgeing their cause is an assurance or conscience of their right and
innocence, wherebye we determine accordingly. Judging.


Defending is a maintaining of them in strift by using of law, power or
strength, to vphoulde their right. Defending.


Reco^ciling is a duty of goodness in judging and determining their cause,
whereby the parties offended, do willingly agree and strive no further.
Reconciling.


Providing things, is a duetifulnes in vsinge means to have them ready, that
we may bestow them. Providing.


Giving or liberality, is a duty of goodness, whereby we bestow good things
upon them without their cost. Giving


Lending is a duty of goodness in laying out and bestowing of our goods to
their use upon trust or assurance of payment again. Le^ding


Suertiship is a warra^ting of their faithfulness toward others by standing
bound in their behalf, upon trust of their faithfulness toward us. Suertiship.


For ministering, look number. 155.

Visiting is a duty of goodness in partaking unto them the use and comfort of
our presence and company. Visiting
Doing good In bestowing our goods Lending. Giving.
In bestowing our selves and our service Suertiship Visiting and ministering etc.




164 What duties are for our own persons?
We must defend and maintain our state and welfare.

We must use it comfortablie, and remedy our greefes.

We must use it seemly and honorably, as beseems Christians.

164 How are they a curse and ungracious to them selves?
They fail and are wanting to them selves.

They are their own grief, and increase their misery.

They shamfullie abuse their welfare, and make them selves vile.

164
Defending and mayntayning our state and welfare is a duty of pleasuring and
helping our selves by all lawful means. Defending
Duties for our selves In maintayning our Welfare In defending and keeping it.
In remedying it.
In using it -- Comfortablie. Honorably.




165 How must we defend our state and welfare?
By withstandinge the violence of the enemy, when it is for Gods glory.

By bouldnes in answeringe and pleading our cause.

By assailing the enemy with force, when the cause requires.

165 How do they fail, and are wanting to them selves?
They miscarie or perish through shrinkinge, or through wilful indaungering
them selves.

They are fearful or ouermatched in holding their cause, and betraie ye same

By flight or other vnwarines, they betraye their safety or welfare.

165
Withstanding is a strift against enemies, whereby we defend our selves, upon
trust of some ablenes in God to resist them. Withstanding


Pleading our cause is a defending of our right, making it known by proof and
examination. Pleading


Assayling is a strift against enemies, first provoking them to defend
themselves. Assayling.
Defending By with standing In deed. etc. In word etc.
By assayling



166 How must we use our state comfortablie?
We must use the blessings of God both mutual and several, as a remedy
against dulnes and grief.

Also against weakness and wearines.

Also against hurt, or vncomlines.

166 How are they a grief and misery to them selves?
They cast them selves into further heaviness and care.

They pine away or break them selves, with fasting and toiling.

They increase their disease and beastlines.

166
Using our state comfortablie is a bestowing or applying of the gifts and
graces of God to have the full joy and glory of the same. Using state
comfortablie.


Remedying of dulnes, grief, weakness, wearines, hurt, and vncomelines, is an
using of such blessings and graces of God, as may take them away. Remedying
want of comfort.


167 How must we use our state seemly and honorably?
We must refrain from lawful pleasures, as there is need, and bridle our
lusts.

We must be pure and chaste.

We must be sober.

167 How are they shameful and vile?
They pamper and cherish them selves.

They are unchaste and filthy.

They are given to wantonness and pleasures.

167
Using our state seemly and honorably, is a bestowing and applying of the
gifts and graces of God, to have our full reverence and honor thereby. Using
state honorably In abstinence In nature, as lust, appetite, delights, ease.
etc In other pleasures.
In moderation By pureness and chastiti^^ By sobernes.




Refraying and abstinence is a duetifulnes in disliking and refusing such
pleasures as being lawefull in them selves, yet by some occasion are unmeet
for us. Abstinence.


Moderation is a dutifulnes in governing pleasures, that we exceed not measure
and honesty. Moderation.


168 What chastity and pureness must we use?
We must use marriage duly.

We must have no filthy thoughts nor lusts.

Neither words nor behavior, nor outward helps to further the same, as,
evil company, excess in eating and drinking, bravery, nicenes, etc.

168 How are they unchaste and filthy?
They abuse marriage.

They have filthy thoughts and lusts.

Also words and behavior, and outward helps to further the same.

168
Pureness and chastity is a moderation of natural lust, that no filthiness be
in us. Pureness and chastity In marriage By preparing thereto. By due joining.
In single life



169 What is the right use of marriage?
There must be a due traill and judgment of each ohers meetenes.

Also a due covenant made on all parties.

Also due joining in marriage.

169 How do they abuse marriage?
They are deceived by some foolish fancy, and drawn together for some
worldly cause.

By shifting and wilines, or some wicked bondage, they make the match sure.

They come together by some wrong and disorder.

169
Marriage is a lawful joining and fellowship of the husband and wife, as of
two in one flesh, by partaking the use of each others love, body, and gifts,
in one communion of duties: and especially in generation and bringing up
children. Marriage By preparation thereto By trial of meetnes i^ the parties to
be married. By a due covenant.
By a due joining.



Trying their meetnes is a taking of accountes with our selves and others to
have warraunte of the same, by a right judgment of the^, in those things which
we have known and seen by them. Trying their meetnes By nature Sex, age,
kindred. Personage to our ^^king.
By nature and bringing up Godliness. Meetnes by trade.




The Definitions of Sex, age, kindred, persons, look for in our table of
Nature.

170 What trial of their meetenes must there be?
They must be two only, the man and woman, which for age, sex and kindred are
meet each for other.

They must be meet for each others liking in behavior and personage.

They must be meet for each others state and calling.

170 How are they deceived, and drawn away by their fancy, etc?
They fall to all filthiness, as incest buggerie, filthiness with beasts, and
untimely matching etc. or else forbid marriage altogether to some persons.

They take them meet for their lust, as for beauty, riches, or for some
outward countenance or benefit.

They trouble and hinder their state and calling.

171 What covenant must there be?
There must be a betrothing of each to other.

Also an espousing of the parties by witnesses.

Also an agreemente of parents or friends, if the parties to be married by
under their full power and government

But if not, and the parents or friends be froward and none of the church,
the marriage of the godly is not in bonage to their agreement.

171 How do they make the match by shifting, wilines or some wicked bondage?
They get a promiss each of other by forcing, or by some craft and flattery,

Likewise in espousing there is some such craft, wrong and disorder.

Also the parents by craft, fear or power do bring them together: or they
are stolen or withdraw them selves from the authority of their parents in
that matter.

172 How must they be duly joined in marriage?
Their betrothing and espousing must be further made known unto witnesses.

Their friends must be glad and rejoice together, in some ioyefull and
seemly manner.

They must give the use of their body for generation of children each to
other, and must not give that use of their bodies nor any token thereof to any
other, while they live together, and lawful diuorcement with death both not
follow.

172 How do they come together by some wrong and disorder?
They have grant of secret licenses to marie, or their popish banes are asked
in churches, and without a ringe and babbling prayers, and the minister to marie
them they can not be married. And so they make it a sacrament.

They have their feasts, dau^cings, and vain pleasures in heathenish wise.

By rape, force, fornication or adultery, or by unlawful diuorcementes, etc,
they defile marriage.

173 What sobernes must we use?
We must have no wanton thoughts nor delights.

neither words nor behavior.

neither outward helps to further the same.

Hitherto of free duties concerning persons.

173 How are they given to wantonness and pleasures?
They have their wanton thoughts, delights, words and behavior, also the
outward helples to further the same: as evil company, excess in eating and
drinking, bravery, nicenes, etc.

Hitherto of the abuse of freedom in undutifulness to persons.

174 What be the duties concerning goods and furniture?
They consist in getting, and increasing furniture and goods.

In saving them being gotten.

In doing right unto others about them.

174 How are they undutiful in goods and furniture?
They are unprofitable, and live up on others.

They are unthrifty, and their goods go to decay.

They do injury and wrong.

175 How are we to get and increase things?
By our callinges in studies of learning.

By work of body in sciences and crafts.

By the manner of laboring in these, as appears before.

175 How are they unprofitable, and live upon others?
They are untaught and without learning.

They have no trade nor occupation.

They have their evil handling and marring of matters.

176 How are we to save things?
By placing and counting them, that they be not lost.

By mending and dressing the^ before them be marred.

By spending and bestowing them without any wast.

176 How are they unthrifty, and let their goods go to decay?
They cast and lay things disorderedlie, and are careless of them.

They spoil and mar them.

They wast and lavish them away.

170
Their meetnes each for other is their state or blessing of God upon them,
whereby they are both most ready and prepared for the use each of other, both
for liking and calling. Meetenes.


Meetnes for liking, is the blessing and grace which they have of behavior,
personage, and comlines, not to be disliked as unmeet for each others degree.
Meetenes for liking.


Meetnes for calling is the blessing and grace which they have, whereby each
others calling and skill may serve sufficiently to their mutual maintenance
and profit. Meetenes for calling.


For meetnes by godliness, look number. 118

171
The covenant of Marriage is an agreement or partaking of conditions, to hold
the communion thereof, so long as death or lawful separation and diuorceme^t
does not break it. Covenant At marriage to give No use of their bodies for
generation to others. Nor token thereof.
Before marriage In the parties Betrothing. Espousing.
In friends as their agreement.




There is also a covenant before marriage as by bethrothing, espousing, and
agreement of friends and kindred.

Bethrothing is a covenant between the parties to be married, whereby they give
their troth that they will and shall marry together, except some laweful
vnmeetnes and disliking each of other do hinder it in the mean time.
Bethrothing.


Espousing is a covenant between them, whereby they are pronounced before
witnesses, to give them selves, and to be given each to other to become husband
and wife. Espousing.


172
Making it further known is the professing and showing thereof, whereby it is
further found out and manifest. Making it further known.


Gladness and Joy of friends, is a blessed partaking of the use and comfort of
each others presence and company, with mirth and feasting, for the blessing of
God toward them in that marriage. Gladness in meeting of friends.


The Marriage and Joining it self, is defined before, number. 169.

173
Sobernes is a moderation of Joy and delight, that no wantonness be in us,
neither in thought, word, nor behavior. Sobernes Inward. Outward In
speech. In behavior and furniture.




Duetifulnes concerning goods and furniture is our righteousness in using them,
and occupying our selves about them for profit and benefit. Duetifulnes in
goods By getting them. By saving them being gotten.



174
Getting and increasing goods, is a duty of using the blessings of God, unto
further vauntage and gain. Getting By labor in our calling In studies of mind
as the arts. In work of body as sciences and trades.
By the manner of laboring, as before.



Our calling is our appointed charge and manner of life in some honest work
wherein we are daily to labor as we may best profit therein. Callings.


175
Studies of learning are callinges wherein the mind labors to enable us
with knowledge and wisdom, the better to govern and reform us in all
duties. Studies of learning.


Trades and sciences in bodily work, are callings wherein the body also
labors by skillfull and diligent stirring, to make or do somewhat for living
and maintenance. Trades and Sciences.


For the manner of laboring, look numb. 100.

176
Saving goods, is a duty of profitablenes whereby we use means that goods
gotten, may be well kept. Saving by Keeping from the loss By reckoning and
Counting. By placing.
Bestowing and using well By spending without waste. By mending hurt and
vncomelines.




Keeping from loss is a saving of them by a diligent watchfulnes, to make them
sure, and to have them ready when need requires. Keeping from loss.


Counting them is a saving of them by the help of their number. Likewise
placing by help of their place. Counting and placing.


Bestowing them is a saving of them by heedines to have the full use and
benefit by them. Bestowing.


Spending is a wary bestowing of them, as they may reach furthest and last
longest in profitinge our selves and others. Spending.


Mending them is a saving of the^ by remedying their hurt as there is need.
Likewise dressing is in remedying the foulenes or vncomelines. Mending and
dressing.


177 How must we do right unto others in goods and furniture?
We must deal faithfully with them.

Also innocentlie in agreement and covenant.

Also vprightlie in general equity.

177 How do they injury and wrong unto others?
They are unfaithful and deceitful.

They are hurtful and oppressors of others.

They ar unjust and common doers of wrong

178 How must we deal faithfully?
We must pay our debtes, and keep our promise.

We must restore that which is borrowed.

We must deal truly with other men's goods, being in our hands or keeping.

178 How are they unfaithful and deceitful?
They are bankerupt and break promise

They borow, and restore not again.

They defraude, cousin, or beguile men of their goods.

179 How must we deal innocentlie in agreement and covenant?
We must bargain, buy or sell, with equal vantage in price and stuff: as by
goodness of stuff, by weight, number, greatness, measure, time.

We must do our work for our wages.

We must give the wages for work.

179 How are they hurtful, and grypers of others?
They bargain, buy and sell to the loss of others, as by evil ware, false
weight, evil measure, tale and count.

They are deceitful laborers, and work by halues for their wages.

They give wages by halues, or keep it wholly back.

180 How must we deal vprightlie in general equity?
We must permit unto every one their liberty and goods without robbery and
oppression.

We must not steal nor beguile with craft.

We must make amends, when we have hindered or defrauded any.

Hitherto of the general duties of righteousness with men.

180 How are they unjust and common dooers of wrong?
They are exactors, robbers, and oppressors.

They are thieves and pilferers.

They hold what they have evil gotten, and count it their own.

Hitherto of general undutifulness toward men.


