THE HISTORY OF the two valiant Knights, Sir Clyomon Knight of the Golden
Sheeld, son to the King of Denmark:

And Clamydes the white Knight, son to the King of Suauia.

As it has been sundry times Acted by her Majesty's Players.

VIRESSIT VULNERE VERITAS



LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1599.

The Prologue.
AS lately lifting up the leaves of worthy writers works,
Wherein the Noble acts and deeds of many hidden lurks,
Our Author he has found the Glass of glory shining bright,
Wherein their lives are to be seen, which honor did delight,
To be a Lantern unto those which daily do desire,
Apollos Garland by desert, in time for to aspire,
Wherein the froward chances often, of Fortune you shall see,
Wherein the cheerful countenance, of good successes be:
Wherein true Lovers finds joy, with hugie heaps of care,
Wherein as well as famous facts (...) place^are:
Wherein the just reward of both, is manifestly shown,
That virtue from the root of vice, might openly be known.
And doubting naught right Courteous all, in your accustomed wont
And gentle ears, our Author he, is pressed to bide the brunt
Of bablers tongues, to whom he thinks, as frustrat^ all his toil,
As peereles taste to filthy Swine, which in the mire does moile.
Well, what he has done for your delight, he gave not me in charge,
The Actors come, who shall express the same to you at large.
THE HISTORY OF Sir Clyomon Knight of the golden Sheeld, son to the King of
Denmark: And Clamydes the white Knight, son to the King of Swauia.
Enter Clamydes. CLamy. As to the weary wa^dring wights, whom waltring waves
(...),
No greater joy of joys may be, then when from out the Ocean
They may behold the Altitude of Billows to abate,
For to observe the Longitude of Seas in former rate.
And having then the latitude of Sea-roome for to pass,
Their joy is greater through the grief, then erst before it was.
So likewise I Clamydes, Prince of Swania Noble soil,
Bringing my Bark to Denmark here, to bide the bitter broyle:
And beating blows of Billows high, while raging storms did last,
My griefs was greater then might be, but tempests ouerpast,
Such gentle calmes ensued has, as makes my joys more
Through terror of the former fear, then erst it was before.
So that I sit in safety, as Seaman under shrowdes,
When he perceiues the storms be past, through vanquishing of Clouds.
For why, the doubtful care that drove me off, in danger to prevail,
Is dashed through bearing lesser brain, and keeping under sail:
So that I have through travel long, at last possessed the place
Whereas my Bark in harbor safe, does pleasures great embrace:
And has such license limited, as heart can seem to ask,
To go and come, of custom free, or any other task.
I mean by Iuliana she, that blaze of bewties breeding,
And for her noble gifts of grace, all other dames exceeding:
She has from bondage set me free, and freed, yet still bound
To her, above all other Dames that lives upon the ground:
For had not she been merciful, my ship had rusht on Rocks,
And so decayed amids the storms, through force of clubbish knocks:
But when she saw the danger great, where subject I did stand,
In bringing of my silly Bark, full fraught from out my land,
She like a meek and modest Dame, what should I else say more?
Did me permit with full consent, to land upon her shore:
Upon true promise that I would, here faithful still remain,
And that perform which she had vowed, for those that should obtain
Her princely person to possess, which thing to know I stay,
And then aduenturously for her, to pass upon my way.
Lo where she comes, ah peereles Dame, my Iuliana dear.
Enter Iuliana with a white Sheeld.
Iuliana. My Clamydes, of troth Sir Prince, to make you stay thus here,
I profer too much injury, that's doubtless on my part,
But let it no occasion give, to breed within your heart
Mistrust that I should forge or feign, with you my Love in ought.

Clamy. No Lady, touching you, in me does lodge no such a thought,
But thanks for your great courtesy that would so friendly here
In mids of misery receive, a foreign stranger mere:
But Lady say, what is your will, that it I may perstand?

Iulia. Sir Prince, upon a vow, who spowseth me, must needsly take in hand
The flying Serpent for to sley, which in the Forest is,
That of strange maruels bears name, which Serpent does not mis
By daily use from every coast, that is adyacent there,
To fetch a Virgin maid or wife, or else some Lady fair,
To feed his hungry panch withal, if case he can them take,
His nature lo it only is, of women spoil to make:
Which thing no doubt, did daunt me much, and made me vow indeed,
Who should espouse me for his wife, should bring to me his head:
Whereto my father willingly, did give his like consent,
Lo Sir Clamydes, now you know what is my whole intent:
And if you will as I have said, for me this travel take,
That I am yours, with heart and mind, your full account do make.

Cla. Ah Lady, if case these travels should surmount, the travels whereby came
Unto the worthies of the world, such noble brute and fame,
Yea though the dangers should surpass stout Hercules his toil,
Who fearing naught the dogged feend, stern Serbarus did foil.
Take here my hand, if life and limb the living Gods do lend,
To purchase thee, the dearest drop of blood my heart shall spend.
And therefore Lady lincke with me, thy loyal heart for aye,
For I am thine til fates untwine, of vital life the stay:
Protesting here if Gods assist, the Serpent for to kill.

Iuli. Then shall thou of all women win, the heart and great good will,
And me possess for spowsed wife, who in election am
To have the Crown of Denmark here, as heir unto the same.
For why, no children has my fire besides me, but one other,
And he indeed is heir before, for that he is my brother.
And Clyomon so hight his name, but where he does remain,
Unto my Parents is unknown, for once he did obtain
Their good wills for to go abroad, a while to spend his days,
In purchasing through active deeds, both honor, laud and praise,
Whereby he might deserve to have the order of a Knight,
But this omitting unto thee, Clamydes here I plight
My faith and troth, if what is said by me thou do perform.

Clamy. If not, be sure O Lady with my life, I never will return.

Iuli. Then as thou seem in thine attire, a Virgins Knight to be,
Take thou this Sheeld likewise of white, and bear thy name by me,
The white Knight of the Silver Sheeld, to eleuate thy praise.

Clamy. O Lady as your pleasure is, I shall at all assayes
Endeavor my good will to win, if Mars do send me might,
Such honor as your grace with joy, shall welcome home your Knight.

Iuli. Then farewell my dear Clamydes, the gods direct thy way,
And grant that with the Serpents head, behold thy face I may.
Exit.
Clamy. You shall not need to doubt thereof, O faithful Dame so true,
And humbly kissing here thy hand, I bid thy Grace adue.
Ah happy time and blisfull day, wherein by fate I find
Such friendly favors as is food, to feed both heart and mind:
To Suauia soil I swiftly will prepare my footsteps right,
There of my father to receive the order of a Knight:
And afterward address my self in hope of honors Crown,
Both Tiger fell and Monster fierce, by dint for to drive down.
The flying Serpent soon shall feel, how boldly I dare vaunt me,
And if that Hydras head she had, yet dread should never daunt me.
If murdering Minataure, a man might count this ougly beast,
Yet for to win a Lady such, I do account it least
Of travels toil to take in hand, and therefore farewell care,
For hope of honor sends me forth, among warlike wights to share.
Exit.
Enter Sir Clyomon Knight of the golden Sheeld, son to the King of Denmark,
with subtle Shift the Vice, booted. Clyo. Come on good fellow follow me, that
I may understand
Of whence thou art, thus traveling here in a foreign land:
Come why do thou not leave loytering there, and follow after me*

Shift. Ah I am in ant shall please you.

Clyo. In, why where art thou in?

Shift. Faith in a dirtie Ditch with a woman, so beraide, as it is pity to see.

Clyo. Well, I see thou art a merry ^o^panion, I shall like better of thy
company:
But I pray thee come away.

Shift. If I get out one of my legs as fast as I may
Ha lo, A my buttocke, the very foundation thereof does break,
Ha lo, once again, I am as fast, as though I had frozen here a week.

Here let him slip unto the Stage backwards, as though he had pulled his leg out
of the mire, one boot off, and rise up to run in again. Clyo. Why how now,
whither runst thou, art thou foolish in thy mind

Shi. But to fetch one of my legs ant shall please, that I have left in the
mire behind.

Clyo. One of thy legs, why look man, both thy legs thou have,
It is but one of thy boots thou have lost, thy labor thou do wast.

Shift. But one of my boots, Jesus, I had such a wrench with the fall,
That I assure, I did think one of my legs had gone withal.

Clyo. Well let that pass, and tell me what thou art, and what is thy name?
And from whence thou came, and whither thy journey thou do frame,
That I have met thee by the way, thus traveling in this sort?

Shift. What you have requested, ant shall please, I am able to report,
What I am by my nature each wight shall perceive
That frequenteth my company, by the learning I have.
I am the son of Appollo, and from his high seat I came,
But whither I go, it skils not, for knowledge is my name:
And who so has knowledge, what (...) he to care
Which way the wind blow, his way to prepare.

Cly. And art thou knowledge, of troth I am glad that I have met with thee.

Shift. I am knowledge, and have as good skill in a woman as any man whatsoever
he be.
For this I am certain of let me but lie with her all night,
And I Will tell you in the morning, whither she is maid, wife, or spright:
And as for other matters, speaking of languishes, or any other thing,
I am able to serve ant shall please, ant were great Alexander the King.

Clyo. Of troth, then for thy excellency* I will thee gladly entertain,
If in case that with me thou will promise to remain.

Shift. Nay ant shall please ye, I am like to a woman, say nay and take it,
When a gentleman profers entertainment, I were a fool to forsake it.

Clyo. Well knowledge, then since thou art content my servant to be,
And endued with noble qualities, thy personage I see,
Thou having perfect knowledge, how thy self to behave:
I will send thee of mine arrant, but haste thither I crave:
For here I will stay thy coming again.

Shift. Declare your pleasure sir, and whither I shall go, and then the case is
plain.

Clyo. Nay of no great importance, but being here in Sua^ia
And near unto the Court, I would have thee to take thy way
Thither with all speed, because I would hear
If any shows or triumphs be toward, else would I not come there,
For only upon feats of arms, is all my delight.

Shift. If I had known so much before, serve that serve will, I would have
served no martial Knight.
Well sir, to accomplish your will, to the court I will by,
And what news is there stirting, bring word by and by.
Exit.
Clyo. Do so good knowledge, and here in place thy coming I will stay:
For nothing does delight me more* then to hear of martial play,
Can food unto the hungry corpse, because of greater joy,
Then for the haughty heart to hear, which does it self employ,
Through martial excercises much to win the brute of Fame,
Where mates do meet which there unto their fancies seems to fra^^:
Can music more the pensive heart o^ daunted mind delight,
Can comfort more the careful corpse and over palled spright,
Rejoice then sound of Trumpet does each warlike wight allure,
And Drum and Fyfe unto the fight does noble hearts procure,
To see in sunder shiuered, the Lance that leads the way,
And worthy knights vnbeauered, in field amidst the fray,
To hear the rattling Cannons roar, and Hyles on Helmets ring,
To see the soldiers swarm on heaps, where valiant hearts does bring
The cowardly crew into the case of careful Captives band,
Where ancients brave displayed be, and won by force of hand.
What wight would not as well delight as this to hear and see,
Betake himself in like affairs a fellow mate to be,
With Clyomon to Denmark King the only son and heir.
Who of the Golden Sheeld as now, the knightly name does bear
In every land since that I foyld the worthy Knight of Fame,
Sir Samuel before the King, and Prince of martial game.
Alexander called the Great, which when he did behold,
He gave to me in recompense, this Shield of glittering Gold:
Requesting for to know my name, the which shall not be showen
To any Kight, unless by force he make it to be known.
For so I vowed to Denmark King, my fathers grace when I
First got his leave, that I abroad my force and strength might try.
And so I have my self behau'd, in City, Town and field,
That never yet did fall reproach, to the Knight of the Golden Shield.

Enter Subtle Shift, running. Shift. Gods ames, where are you, where are you?
and you be a man come away.

Clya. Why what is the matter knowledge to tell thy arrand stay.

Shift. Stay, what talk you of staying, why then all the sight will be past,
Clamides the Kings son shall be dubd Knight in all have.

Clyo. Ah knowledge, then come indeed, and good pastime thou shall see,
For I will take the honor from him, that dubbed I may be.
Upon a courageous stomach, come let us haste thither.
Exit.
Shift. Lead you the way and i will follow, we will be both made knights together,
Ah sirrah, is my master so lusty, or dares he be so bold?
It is no marvel then, if he bear a Sheeld of Gold.
But by your patience if he continue in this business, farewell master than,
For I promise you, I entend not very long to be his man:
Although under the title of knowledge my name I do feign,
Subtle Shift I am called, that is most plain.
And as it is my name, so it is my nature also,
To play the shifting knave wheresoever I go.
Well, after him I will, but soft now, if my master chance to be lost
And any man examine me, in telling his name I am as wise as a post.
What a villain was I, that ere he went, could not ask it?
Well, its no great matter, I am but half bound, I may serve whom I will yet.
Exit.
Enter the Ring of Suaui^ with the Herald before him: Clamydes, three Lords.
King. Come Clamides thou our son, thy Fathers talk attend,
Since thou art pressed thy youthful days in prowess for to spend:
And do of us the order ask, of knighthood for to have,
We know thy deeds deserves the same, and that which thou do crave
Thou shall possess: but first my son, know thou thy fathers charge,
And what to knighthood does belong, thine honor to enlarge:
Unto what end a knight is made, that likewise thou maiste know,
And bear the same in mind also, that honor thine may flow
Amongst the worthies of the world, to thy immortal fame:
Know thou therefore Clamydes dear, to have a knightly name
Is first above all other things his God for to adore,
In truth according to the laws prescribde to him before.
Secondly, that he be true unto his Lord and king.
Thirdly, that he keep his faith and troth in every thing.
And then before all other things that else we can commend,
That he be always ready pressed, his country to defend:
The Widow poor, and fatherless, or Innocent bearing blame,
To see their cause redressed right, a faithful knight must frame:
In truth he always must be (...)
That will receive a knightly name, his honor to enlarge.

Cla. O Father this your gracious counsel given to me your only son,

Shall not be in oblivion cast (...) be run:
What way does win (...) Honors (...)* those paths (...) steps shall
tra^e
And those that to (...) does lead, which (...) deface
True Honor in her Regal seat* I shall detest for aye,
And be as utter enemy, to them both night and day*
By flying force of flickring fame* (...) grace shall understand*
Of my behavior noble sire, in (...) lands
And if you (...) by true report (...)
Of wilfulness contrary this, your (...) charge:
Let ignomie to my reproach in ste^d of (...) fame.
Sound through the earth and (...) Skies the strained blast of sham^.
Whereby within Obliuions Tomb, my deeds shall be detained,
Where otherwise of memory (...) I might have (...).
So that the den of darksomenesse shall (...) my chest,
Where worthy deed^ prefers each wight, with honor to be blessed.
King. Well (...) right,

That here thou may receive of me the order of a Knight.
Here let (...) and us the King does go about to lay the (...) Clyomon take the
(...). Shift. Now prepare (...) self, or (...)

Clyo. Content thy self knowledge for i^^ quickly (...).

King. The Noble orders of a Knight, (...)
We give through due (...) that thou be,
Both Valiant, Wise, and Hardy.

Shift. Away now (...) be take ^ardie.

Exeunt. King. Ah stout attempt of (...) my son,
The Knighthood (...)
Ah Clamydes how art thou be rest of honor here?
Was like presumption ever seen, that one a stranger mere,
Should come in presence of a Prince, and tempt as he has done,
To take the Knighthood thus away, from him who is his son?

Clamy. Ah father, how am I perplexed, till I revenged be,
Upon the wretch which here has (...), the honor th^^ from me?
Was ever any one deceived of Knight hood so before?

King. Well Clamydes, my Lords return, stay till we do know more.

Enter Shift brought in by the two Lords, who pursued Clyomon. 1. Lord. O King
the knight is fled and gone, pursu^e prevails naught,
But here his slave we taken have, to tell why this he wrought.

King. Ah cruel grudge that greeues my ghost, shall he escape me so*
Shall he with honor from my son, without disturbance go?
Ah Catiffe thou, declare his name, and why he ventred here:
Or death shall be thy (...) su^e, by all the Gods I swear.

Shift. Ah (...) p^^ase you, I know neither (...) country nor (...).

2. Lo. What, what sir, are not you his servants will you deny the same*

King. Nay then you are a dissembling knave, I know very well.

Shift. Ant shall please your Grace, even the very troth I shall tell,
I should have been his servant when we met together;
Which was not full three hours before we came hither.

King. Well what is his name, and of what (...)*

Shift. That cannot I ^^ll (...) shall please you, you never saw servant to
such care:
To know his Masters name, neither in Town nor Field,
And what he was he would tell, but the Knight of the Golden Sheeld.

King. Well Clamides mark my charge, what I to thee shall say,
Prepare thy self for to pursue that Traitor on his way:
Which has thine honor re^t from thee, and either by force of hand
Or love, his name and native soil, see that thou understand,
That I may know for what in^ent, he bare this grudge to thee,
Else see thou (...) do return again to visit me:
For this impo^ts him for to be, of valiant heart and mind:
And therefore do pursue thy for, until thou do him find.
To know his name and what he is, or as I said before,
Do never view thy father I, in presence any more.

Clamy. Well father, ^ith it is your charge, and precept given to me,
And more for mine own honors sake, I franckly do agree
To undertake the enterprise, his name to understand,
Or never else to show my face again in Swa^^^ land.
Wherefore I humbly do desire, the order to receive,
Of Knighthood, which my sole desire has ever been to have:
It is the name and mean, whereby true honor is atchiued:
Let me not then O father dear, thereof be now deprived.
Since that mine honor cowardly was stolen by Caitiff^ he,
And not by dinted dastards deed, O father lost by me.

King. Well Cla^^^es, then kneel down, here in our Nobles sight,
We give to thee that art our son, the order of a Knight:
But as thou will our favor win, accomplish my desire.

Clamy. Else never to your royal Court, O father i will retire.

King. Well, then (...) Cla^ides dear, the Gods thine ayder be:
But come my Lords, to have his hire, that Ca^^^ffe bring with me.

Shift. Alas not shall please you, I am knowledge, and no evil did pretend,
Set me at liberty, it was the knight that did offend.

Cla. O father, since that he is knowledge, I beseech your grace set him free,
For in these affairs, he shall wait and tend on me:
If he will protest, to be true to me ever.

Shift. Ah Noble Cla^ydes, heeres my hand, i will deceive you never.

Clamy. Well then father, I beseech your Grace grant that I may have him.

King. Well Cla^ydes, I am content, since thou my son do crave him.
Receive him therefore at my hands. My Lords come lets depart.

All. We ready are to wait on you O King, with willing heart.

Exeunt. Clamy. Well knowledge, do prepare thy self, for here I do protest,
My fathers precepts to fulfill, no day nor night to rest
From toylsome travel, till I have reuengd my cause aright,
On him who of the golden Sheeld, now bears name of knight:
Who of mine honor has me robbed, in such a cowardly sort,
As for to be of noble heart, it does him not import.
But knowledge, to me thy service (...) thou must with loyal heart profess.

Shift. Use me that all other vill^ins may take ensample by me, if I digress.

Clamy. Well then come follow speedily, that him pursue we may.
(Exit.
Shift. Keep you before ant shall please you, for I mind not to stay.
Ah sirrah Shift, thou wast driven to thy shifts now indeed,
I dreamd bfore, that untowardly I should speed:
And yet it is better luck then I looked to have:
But as the proverb says, good fortune ever happens to the veryest knave.
And yet I could not escape with my master, do what I can,
Well by this bargain he has lost his new Seruing-man,
But if Clamydes overtake him now, what buffets will there be,
Unless it be four miles off the fray, there will be no standing for me.
Well after him I will, but howsoever my master speed,
To shift for my self I am fully decreed.
(Exit. Enter King Alexander the Great, as valiantly set forth as may be, and
as many soldiers as can.
Alex. After many invincible victories, and conquests great a^chiued,
I Alexander with sound of Fame, in safety am arrived
Upon my borders long wished for, of Macedonia soil,
And all the world subject have, through force of warlike toil,
O Mars I lawd thy sacred name, and for this safe return,
To Pallas Temple will I wend, and sacrifices burn
To thee, Bellona and the rest, that warlike wights do guide,
Who for King Alexander did, such good success provide.
Who bows not now unto my beck, my force who does not fear?
Who does not of my conquests great, throughout the world hear?
What King as to his sovereign Lord, does now not bow his knee?
What Prince does reign upon the earth, which yields not unto me
Due homage for his Regal Mace? What country is at liberty?
What Dukedom, Island or Province else, to me now are not tributarie?
What Fort of Force, or Castle strong, have I not battered down?
What Prince is he, that now by me, his Princely seat and Crown
Does not acknowledge for to hold, not one the world throughout,
But of King Alexanders power they all do stand in doubt?
They fear as Fowls that houering fly, from out the Fawco^s way,
As Lamb the Lion, so my power, the stowtest do obey.
In field who has not felt my force, where battering blows abound?
King or (...), who has not (...) his (...) to me on ground,
And yet Alexander* what art th^^ thou art a mortal wight,
For all that (...) lust g^t or won by (...) in fight.

I. Lo. Acknowledging thy state o King, to be at thou have said,
The Gods no doubt as they have been, will be thy sheeld and aid
In all attempts thou takst in hand, (...) no glory vain
Thou seek, but acknowledging thy victories and gain,
Through the providence of sacred Gods to happen unto thee,
For vain is trust, that in himself, man does repose we see:
And therefore (...) these victories which thou o King have got,
Should blind (...) eyes with (...) thy, noble fame to blot,
Let that victorious Prince his (...), of (...) thy fire,
To acknowledge still thy state O King, thy noble heart inspire,
Who afterall his victories (...) obtained,
Least that the great felicity of that which she had gained,
Should cause him (...) himself, (...) did provide,
Which came unto hi^ chamber door, and every morning cryde
Philip, thou art a mortal m^n, this practice of thy sire,
A midst all these thy victories, thy servant does desire.
O Alexander that (...) print within thy mind,
And then no doubt as father did, thou (...) sweet shall find.

Alex. My Lords, your (...) doubtless I esteem, and with great thanks (...)*
I do require (...) this is plain,
All (...): and since the Gods divine,
To us (...) this (...) does assign,
To have in our subjection the world for most part,
We will at this (...), with (...) zeal of heart,
In (...) gods, such sacrifices make,
Of thankfulness (...) our success, as they in p^^t shall take
The same, (...) from (...):
Come (...), to accomplish our intent.

Omnes. We (...) King, to follow thee with victory.

Alex. (...) Drums and Trumpets both, that we may march triumphantly.

Exeunt. Enter Sir Clyomon, Knight of G. S. Clyo. Now Clyomon a knight thou
art, though some perhaps may say,
Thou cowardly camst to Clamydes, and stole his right away:
No, no, it was no cowardly part, to come in presence of a king,
And in the face of all his Court, to do so worthy a thing.
Amidst the mates that martial be, and stern knights of his hall,
To take the knighthood from their Prince, even ^^^ger of them all.
It gives a guerdon of goodwill, to make my glory glance,
When warlike wights shall hear thereof, my fame they will advance:
And where I was pretended late, to Denmark king my sire,
His royal grace to see, homeward to retire,
Now is my purpose altered by brute of late report.
And where fame rests to be had, thither Clyomon will resort:
For as I understand by fame, that worthy Prince of might,
The conqueror of conquerors, who Alexander hight,
Returning is to Macedon, from many a bloody broyle,
And there to keep his royal Court, now after weary toil,
Which makes the mind of Clyomon, with joys to be clad,
For there I know of martial mates, is company to be had.
Adiu therefore, both Denmark king and Suania Prince beside,
To Alexanders Court I will, the Gods my journey guide.
Enter Clamydes and Shift.
Clamy. Come knowledge here he is, nay stay thou cowardly knight,
That like a dastard camst, to steal away my right.

Clyo. What, what, you rail sir princkocks Prince, me coward for to call.

Shift. Ant shall please you ^e is a coward, he would have hyrde me,
Amidst your fathers hall.
To have done it for him, being himself in such stay
That scarcely he durst, before your presence appear.

Clyo. Why how now knowledge, what forsake thy master so soon?

Shift. Nay master was, but not master is, with you I have done.

Clamy. Well for what intent can thou, my honor to steal away?

Clyo. That I took ought from thee, I utterly denay.

Clamy. Did not thou take the honor, which my father to me gave?

Clyo. Of that thou had not, I could thee not deprave.

Clamy. Did not thou take away my knighthood from me?

Clyo. No, for I had it before it was given unto thee:
And having it before thee, what Argument can thou make,
That ever from thee the same I did take?

Shift. That's true, he received the blow before at you it came,
And therefore he took it not from you, because you had not the same.

Clamy. Well, what hight thy name, let me that understand,
And wherefore thou trauailedst here in my fathers land
So boldly to attempt in his Court such a thing?

Clyo. The bolder the attempt is, more fame it does bring:
But what my name is desire thou to know?

Shift. Nay he has stolen sheep I think, for he is ashamd his name for to
show.

Clamy. What thy name is, I would gladly perstand:

Clyo. Nay that shall never none know, unless by force of hand
He vanquish me in fight, such a vow have I made,
And therefore to combat with me, thy self do persuade,
If thou will know my name.

Clamy. Well, I accord to the same.

Shift. Nay then God be with you, if you be at that point I am gone.
If you be of the fighters disposition, i will leave you alone.

Clamy. Why stay knowledge, although I fight, thou shall not be molested.

Shift. Ant shall please you, this fear has made me beray my self, with a
Proynstone that was not digested.

Clyo. Well Clamydes stay thy self, and mark my sayings here:
And do not think I speak this same, for that thy force I fear,
But that more honor may redound, unto the victors part,
Will thou here give thy hand to me, withouten fraud of heart
Upon the faith which to a knight does rightly appertain,
And by the loyalty of a knight, i will swear to thee again,
For to observe my promise just, which is if thou agree,
The fifteenth day next following, to meet Sir Prince with me,
Before King Alexanders grace, in Macedonia soil,
Who all the world subject has, through force of warlike toil:
For he is chief of chivalry, and king of Martial mates,
And to his royal Court thou know, repair all estates.
Give me thy hand upon thy faith, of promise not to fail.
And here is mine to thee again, if Fortunes froward gaile,
Resist me not, the day forespoke to meet sir Prince with thee,
Before that king to try our strengths, say if thou do agree,
For tryple honor will it be, to him that gets the victory,
Before so worthy a Prince as he, and Nobles all so publicly,
Where otherwise if in this place we should attempt the same,
Of the honor that were got thereby, but small would be the fame.

Clamy. Well Sir knight, here is my hand, i will meet in place forespoke.

Clyo. And by the loyalty of a knight, i will not my words revoke.

Clamy. Till then adieu; i will keep my day.
Exit.
Clamy. And I, if fates do not gainsay.

Shift. What is he gone, and did take no leave of me?
Jesus so unmannerly a Gentleman did any man see,
But now my Lord which way will you travel declare?

Clamy. Since I have fifteen days respit my self to prepare,
My Ladies charge for to fulfill, behold I do entend.

Shift. Your Lady ant shall please you, why who is your Lady, may a man be so
bold as ask and not offend*

Clamy. Iuliana daughter to the King of Denmark lo is she,
Whose knight I am, and from her hands this shield was given to me,
In sign and token of good will, whose noble grace to gain,
I have protested in her cause for to omit no pain
Nor travail, till I have subdued the flying Serpents force,
Which in the Forest of Maruels is, who takes no remorse
Of women kind, but does devour all such as are a stray,
So that no one dares go abroad, nor wander forth the way.
And since I have yet fifteen days, my self for to prepare,
To meet the Knight of the Golden Shield, my heart is void of care.
I will unto the Forest wend, since it is in my way,
And for my Iulianas sake, that cruel Serpent slay.

Shift. What are you a mad man, will you wilfully be slain?
If you go into that Forest, you will never come out again.

Clamy. Why so knowledge, do thou think the Serpent I fear?

Shift. No, but do you not know of Bryan sance foy, the cha^pion dwells there

Clamy. A cowardly knight knowledge is he, and dares fight with no man.

Shift. Ah a noble match, couple him and me together than:
Yea, but although he dares not fight, and Enchanter he is,
And whosoever comes in that Forest, to enchant he does not mis.

Clamy. Tush, tush, I fear him not knowledge, and therefore come away.
Exit.
Shift. Well seeing you are so wilful, go you before i will not stay.
Ah sirrah, now I know all my masters mind, the which I did not before,
He aduentureth for a Lady, well I say no more:
But to escape the enchantments of Bryan Sance foy,
That's Bryan without faith, I have deuisde a noble toy:
For he and I am both of one consanguinitie,
The veryest cowardly villain that ever was borne, that's of a certainty.
I Will fight with no man, no more will Bryan, that's plain:
But by his enchantments, he puts many to great pain.
And in a Forest of strange maruels does he keep,
Altogether by enchantments to bring men a sleep,
Till he have wrought his will of them, to Bryan straight will I,
And of my masters coming to the Forest inform him privily,
So shall I win his favor, and subtle Shift in the end,
Thou shall escape his enchantment, for he will be thy friend:
Well unknown to my master, for mine own safeguard this will I do,
And now like a subtle shifting knave, after him i will go.
Exit: Enter Bryan sance foy.
Bry. Of Brian sance foi who has not heard? not for his valiant acts,
But well I know throughout the world, does ring his cowardly facts.
What tho I pray all are not borne to be God Mars his men,
To toy with dainty dames in courts, should be no cop^smates then.
If all were given to chi^al^ie, then Venus might go weep,
For any Court in Venerie, that she were like to keep.
But shall I frame then mine excuse, by serving Venus she,
When I am known throughout the world, faint hearted for to be?
No, no, alas, it will not serve, for many a knight in love,
Most valiant hearts no doubt they have, and knightly prowess prove,
To get their Ladies loyal hearts, but I in Venus yoke,
Am forced for want of valiancie, my freedom to provoke:
Bearing the name and port of knight, enchantments for to use,
Wherewith full many a worthy wight, most cowardly I abuse:
As witnesses the number now, which in my Castle lie,
Who if they were at liberty, in arms I durst not try.
The feeblest there though he unarmed, so is my courage danted,
When as I see the glittering arms, whereby each Knight is vanted.
But how I vanquish these same Knights, is wonderful to see,
And Knights that ventured for her love, whom I do love they be.
That's Iuliana, daughter to the King of Denmarks grace,
Whose beauty is the cause that I do haunt or keep this place.
For that no wight may her possess, unless by vow decreed,
He bring and do present to her the flying Serpents head.
Which many has attempt to do, but none yet could him slay,
Ne afterward hence back again, for me could pass away:
For that through my enchantments lo, which here this forest keep,
So soon as I did look on them, they straight were in a sleep.
Then presently I them unarmed, and to my Castle brought,
And there in prison they do lie, not knowing what was wrought.
Lo thus I range the woods to see who does the Serpent slay,
That by enchantment I may take the head from him away:
And it present unto the Dame, as though I were her Knight,
Well here comes one, i will shroud my self, for sure I will not fight.

Enter Subtle Shift. Shift. Gogs blood where might I meet with that cowardly
knave Bryansance foy?
I could tell him such a tale now as would make his heart leap for joy.
Well yonder I have espied one, whatsoever he be.

Bryan. Nay gogs blood i will be gone, he shall not fight with me,
But by enchantment i will be even with him by and by.

Shift. A ant shall please you, i will fight with no man, never come so nigh.

Bryan. Why what art thou declare? whither do thou run?

Shift. Even the cowardly est villain ant shall please you that lives under
the sun.

Bryan. What of my fraternity, do thou not know Bryan sance foy?

Shift. What master Bryan, Jesus how my heart does leap for joy
That I have met with you, who ever had better luck?

Bryan. But touch me not.

Shift. Wherefore?

Bryan. A lest you inchant me into the likeness of a bucke.

Shift. Tush, tush, I warrant thee, but what art thou declare?

Bryan. Knowledge and it shall please you, who hither does repair To tell you
good news.

Shift. Good news? what are they knowledge express?

Bryan. A Knight has slain the flying Serpent.

Shift. Tush it is not so.

Bryan. It is most true that I do confess.

Shift. Ah what hight his name Knowledge? let me that understand.
Clamydes the White Knight, son to the King of Swauia land,
Who for Iuliana, daughter to the King of Denmarks grace,
Did take the attempt in hand, now you know the whole case.

Bryan. Ah happy news of glad somnesse unto my danted mind,
Now for to win my Ladies love, good fortune is assignd:
For though she be Clamydes, right won worthily indeed,
Yet will I sure possess that Dame, by giving of the head.
But Knowledge where about declare, does that Clamydes rest?

Shift. Even hard by in the Forest here where he slew the beast
I left him, and to seek you did hye:
But let us go further into the woods, you shall meet him by and by.

Bryan. Well Knowledge for thy pains take this as some reward,
And if thou will abide with me, be sure i will thee regard
Above all others of my men, besides i will give to thee
A thing, that from enchantments aye, preserved shall thou be.

Shift. Then here is my hand, i will be your servant ever:

Bryan. And seeing thou art a coward as well as I, i will forsake thee never.
But come let us go Clamydes to meet.

Exeunt. Shift. Keep on your way and i will follow, I trust if he meet him,
heel take him to his feet.
Gogs blood was ever seen such a iolt-headed villain as he,
To be so afraid of such a faint-hart knave as I am to see?
Of the fraternity quoth you? b^^lady its a notable brood:
Well Shift these chinks does thy heart some good:
And i will close with Bryan till I have gotten the thing
That he has promised me, and then i will be with him to bring.
Well, such shifting knaves as I am, the ambodexter must play,
And for commodity serve every man, whatsoever the world say,
Well after Bryan I will, and close with him awhile,
But as well as Clamydes, in the end i will him begile.

Enter Clamydes, with the head upon his sword. Clamy. Ah happy day my deadly
foe submitted has to death,
Lo here the hand, lo here the sword that stopped the vital breath:
Lo here the head that shall possess my Iulianas dear,
The Knight of the golden Sheeld his force, what need I now to fear:
Since I by force subdued have this Serpent fierce of might,
Who vanquished has as I have heard, full many a worthy Knight.
Which for to win my Ladies love, their lives have venterd here,
Besides that cowardly Bryan which the faithless shield does bear:
A number keeps as I have heard, as captives in his hold,
Whom he has by enchantment got, and not through courage bold.
Shall such defamed dastards, dard by Knights, thus bear their name?
Shall such as are without all faith, live to impair our fame?
Shall valiant hearts by cowardly charm, be kept in captives thrall?
Shall Knights live subject to a wretch which has no heart at all?
Nay first Clamydes claim to thee fell Atrapos his stroke,
Ere thou do see such worthy Knights to bear the heavy yoke,
Of cowardly Bryan without faith, his charms let daunt not thee,
And for his force thou needst not fear, the Gods thy shield will be.
Well, to meet the Knight of the golden Shield, yet ten days space I have,
And to set free these worthy Knights, but rest a while I crave.
Here in this place near to this fort, for that I weary am
With travel, since from killing of the Serpent late I came:
Here let him sit down and rest himself. Lo here a while I mind to rest,
and Bryan then subdue,
And then to Alexanders court, to keep my promise true.

Enter Bryan sance foy, and Shift. Bryan. Come Knowledge, for here he lies laid
weary on the ground:

Shift. Nay, i will not come in his sight, if you would give me a thousand pound.
For he is the terriblest Knight of any you have heard spoke,
Heel beat a hundredth such as you and I am down at one stroke.

Bryan. Tush, fear thou naught at al, I have charmed him, and he is fast
asleep,
Lying near unto the Castle here which I do keep.
And ten days in this sleep I have charmed him to remain,
Before nature shall overcome it, that he might wake again.
In the mean season, lo behold the Serpents head i will take away,
His shield and his apparel, this done, then will I convey
His body into prison, with other his companions to lie,
Whose strengths, ah knowledge, I durst never attempt to try.

Shift. Ah handle him softly, or else you will cause him to awake:

Bryan. Tush, tush, not if all the noise in the world I were able to make,
Till ten days be expired, the charm will not leave him,
And then I am sure he will marvel who did thus deceive him:
So now he is stripped, stay thou here for a season,
And i will go fetch two of my servants to carry him into prison.
Exit.
Shift. Well do so master Bryan, and for your coming i will stay,
Gogs blood what a villain am I my master to betray.
Nay sure i will awake him if it be possible ere they carry him to iayle:
Master, what master, awake man, what master, ah it will not prevail.
Am not I worthy to be hanged, was ever seen such a deceitful knave?
What villainy was in me, when unto Bryan understanding I gave
Of my masters being in this forest, but much I muse indeed
What he means to do with my masters apparel, his shield and the head?
Well, seeing it is through my villainy, my master is at this drift,
Yet when he is in prison, Shift shall not be void of a shift
To get him away, but if it ever come to his ear
That I was the occasion of it, heel hang me that's clear.
Well here comes Bryan, i will cloak with him if I may,
To have the keeping of my master in prison night and day.

Enter Bryan sance foy, two servants. Bryan. Come sirs take up this body, and
carry it into the appointed place,
And there let it lie, for as yet he shall sleep ten days space.

Shift. How say you master Bryan, shall I of him have the guard?

Bryan. By my troth policy, thy good will to reward
In hope of thy just service, content I agree
Carry him out. For to resign the keeping of this same Knight unto thee.
But give me thy hand that thou will deceive me never:

Shift. Here Is my hand, charm, inchant, make a spider catcher of me, if I be
false to you ever.

Bryan. Well then come follow after me, and the guard of him thou sha^ have.
Exit.
Shift. A thousand thanks I give you, this is all the promotion I crave:
Ah sirrah, little knows Bryan, that Clamydes my master is,
But to set him free from prison I entend not to mis:
Yet still in my mind, I can do no other but muse,
What practice with my masters apparel and shell he will use:
Well, seeing I have played the crafty knave with the one, i will play it with
the other:
Subtle Shift for advantage, will deceive his own brother.
Exit.
Here let them make a noise as though they were Mariners. And after Clyomon
Knight of G. S. come in with one. Clyo. Ah set me to shore sirs, in what
country so ever we be.

Shiftmai. Well hayle out the Cockboate, seeing so sick we do him see,
Strike sail, cast Ankers, till we have rigd our Ship again,
For never were we in such storms before, that's plain.

Enter Clyomomon, Boateswaine. Clyo. Ah Boateswaine, gramercies for thy setting
me to shore.

Boatswaine. Truly Gentlemen we were never in the like tempests before.

Clyo. What country is this wherein now we be?

Boats. Sure the I Will of strange Marshes, as our master told to me.

Clyo. How far is it from Macedonia, can thou declare?

Boats. More then twenty days sailing, and if the weather were fair.

Clyo. Ah cruel hap of Fortunes spite, which signed this luck to me:
What Palace Boateswaine is this same, can thou declare, we see?

Boats. There King Patranius keeps his Court, so far as I do guess,
And by this train of Ladies here, I sure can judge no less.
Exit.
Clyo. Well Boateswaine, there is for thy pains, and here upon the shore
I Will lie to rest my weary bones, of thee I crave no more.

Enter Neronis daughter to Patranius, King of the strange Marshes, two Lords,
two Ladies. Neronis. My Lords, come will it please you walk abroad to take the
pleasant air?
According to our wonted use, in fields both fresh and fair,
My Ladies here I know right well, will not gainsay the same.

1. Lord. Nor we sure for to pleasure you, Neronis noble Dame.

Nero, Yes yes, men they love entreaty much, before they will be won,

2. Lo. No Princes that has women's natures been, since first the world
begun.

Nero. So you say.

1. Lo. We boldly may,
Under correction of your grace.

Nero. Well, will it please you forth to trace,
That when we have of fragrant fields, the dulcet fumes obtained,
We may unto the Sea side go, whereas is to be gained,
More stranger sights among Neptunes waves, in seeing Ships to sail,
Which pass here by my fathers shore, with merry western gaile.

1. Lo. We shall your highness lead the way to fields erst spoke before.

Nero. Do so, and as we do return we will come hard by the shore.

Exeunt. Clyo. What greater grief can grow to gripe, the heart of grieved
wight,
Then thus to see fell Fortune she, to hold his state in spite.
Ah cruel chance, ah lucklesse lot, to me poor wretch assigned,
Was ever seen such contraries, by fraudulent Goddess blind.
To any one save only I, imparted for to be,
To animate the mind of any man, did ever Fortune she
Show forth her self so cruel bent, as thus to keep me back,
From pointed place by weather driven, my sorrows more to sack,
Ah fatal hap, herein alas, what further shall I say?
Since I am forced for to break, mine oath and pointed day.
Before King Alexanders grace, Clamydes will be there:
And I through Fortunes cruel spite, oppressed with sickness here:
For now within two days it is that we should meet together,
Woe worth the wind and raging storms, alas that brought me hither.
Now will Clamides me accuse, a faithless knight to be,
And eke report, that cowardlinesse did dant the heart of me.
The worthy praise that I have won, through fame shall be defaced,
The name of the Knight of the Golden Sheeld, alas shall be defaced:
Before that noble Prince of might, whereas Clamydes he
Will show himself in Combat wise, for to exclaim on me,
For breaking of my poynted day, and Clyomon to thy grief,
Now art thou in a country strange, clean void of all relief:
Oppressed with sickness through the rage of stormy blasts and cold,
Ah death come with thy direful Mace, for longer to unfold
My sorrows here it booteth not yet Clyomon do stay,
The Ladies lo, comes toward thee, that walked the other way.

Enter Neronis, two Lords, two Ladies. Nero. Come fair dames, since that we
have in fragrant fields obtained,
Of dulcet flowers the pleasant smell, and that these knights disdained
Not to bear us company, our walk more large to make,
Here by the sea of surging waves, our home return we will make.
My Lords therefore do keep your way.

1. Lo. As it please your grace, we shall obey,
But behold Madame, what woeful wight, here in our way before,
As seems very sick to me, does lie upon the shore.

Nero. My Lords, lets know the cause of grief, whereof he is oppressed:
That if he be a knight, it may by some means be redressed.
Fair sir well met, why lie you here* what is your cause of grief?

Clyo. O Lady, sickness by the Sea, has me oppressed in brief.

Nero. Of truth my Lords, his countenance bewrayes him for to be,
In health, of valiant heart and mind, and eke of hye degree.

2. Lo. It does no less then so import, O Princes as you say.

Nero. Of whence are you? or what is your name? you wander forth this way.

Clyo. Of small valor O Lady fair, alas my name it is,
And for not telling of the same, has brought me unto this.

Nero. Why, for what cause sir Knight, should you not express your name?

Clyo. Because O Lady I have vowed, contrary to the same.
But where I travel Lady fair, in City, Town or field,
I am called, and do bear by name, the knight of the Golden Shield.

Ne. Are you that knight of the Golden sheeld, of whom such fame does go?

Clyo. I am that self same knight fair dame, as here my Sheeld does sho.

Nero. Ah worthy then of help indeed, my Lords assist I pray,
And to my lodging in the court, see that you him convey,
For certainly within my mind, his state is much deplored,
But do despair in naught sir knight, for you shall be restored,
If Physic may your grief redress, for I Neronis lo,
Daughter to Patranius king, for that which fame does shoe,
Upon your acts, will be your friend, as after you shall prove.

1. Lo. In doing so, you shall have need of mighty love above.

Clyo. O Princes, if I ever be to health restord again,
Your faithful servant day and night, I vow here to remain.

Nero. Well my Lords, come after me, do bring him I require:

Ambo. We shall O Princes willingly accomplish your desire.

Exeunt. Enter Bryan sance foy, having Clamydes his apparel on his Sheeld, and
the Serpents head. Bry. Ah sirrah, now is the ten days full expired, wherein
Clamydes he,
Shall wake out of his charmed sleep, as shortly you shall see:
But here I have what I desired, his Sheeld, his coat and head,
To Denmark will I straight prepare, and there present with speed,
The same to Iulianas grace, as in Clamydes name,
Whereby I am assured I shall enjoy that noble Dame.
For why Clamydes he is safe, for ever being free,
And unto knowledge is he left, here guarded for to be:
But no man knows of my pretents, ne whither I am gone,
For secretly from Castle I, have stolen this night alone
In this order as you see, in the attire of a noble knight,
(...) yet poor Bryan, still thy heart holds courage in despite.
Well, yet the old proverb to disprove, I purpose to begin,
Which always says, that cowardly hearts, fair Ladies never win.
Shall I not Iulianas win, and who has a cowardlyer heart,
Yet for (...) brag and boast it out, i will will none take my part.
For I can sooke both grim and fierce, as though I were of might,
And yet three Frog^ out of a bush, my heart did so affright,
That I fell dead almost therewith, well cowardly as I am,
Farewell, Forest for now I will in knight Clamydes name,
To (...) to present this head, to Iuliana bright,
Who shall cowardly dastard ^ed, in steed of a worthy knight.
Exit. Enter Shift with sword and target.
Shift. Be your leave I came up so early this morning that I cannot see my way,
I am sure its scarce yet in the break of the day.
But you muse I am sure wherefore these weapons I bring,
Well, listen unto my tale, and you shall know every thing.
Because I played the shifting knave, to save my self from harm,
And by my procurement, my master was brought in this charm.
The ten days are exspir'd, and this morning he shall awake,
And now like a crafty knave, to the prison my way will I take,
With these same weapons, as though I would fight to set him free,
Which will give occasion that he shall mistrust, there was no deceit in me.
And having the charge of him, here under Bryan sance foy,
I Will open the prison doors, and make as though I did employ
To do it by force, through good will, and only for his sake,
Then shall Clamydes being at liberty, the weapons of me take,
And set upon Bryan and all his men* now that they are a sleep,
And so be revenged, for that he did him keep
By charm in this order, so shall they both deceived be,
And yet upon neither part mistrust toward me.
Well, near to the prison i will draw, to see if he be awake,
Hark, hark, this same is he, that his lamentation does make.

Clamydes in prison. Ah fatal hap, where am I wretch, in what distressed case,
Be reft of Tyro, head and sheeld, not knowing in what place
My body is, ah heavenly gods, was ere such strangenes seen:
What do I dream? or am I still within the forest green?
Dream? no, no, alas I dream not I, my senses all do fail,
The strangenes of this cruel hap, does make my heart to quail.
Clamydes ah by fortune she, what froward luck and fate
Most cruelly assigned is, unto thy noble state.
Where should I be, or in what place has desteny assignd
My sely corpse for want of food and comfort to be pind.
Ah farewell hope of purchasing my lady, since is lost,
The Serpents head whereby I should possess that jewel most.
Ah farewell hope of honor eke, now shall I break my day
Before king Alexanders grace, whereon my faith does stay.
And shall I be found a faithless Knight, fie on fell fortune she,
Which has her wheel of froward chance, thus whirled back on me.
Ah farewell King of Swauia land, ah farewell Denmark dame,
Farewell thou Knight of the golden Sheeld, to thee shall rest all fame.
To me this direful desteny, to thee I know renown,
To me the blast of ignomy, to thee dame honors crown.
Ah hateful hap, what shall I say, I see the gods has signed
Through cruelty my careful corpse, in prison to be pined.
And naught alas amates me so, but that I know not where I am,
Nor how into this doleful place my woeful body came.

Shift. Alas good Clamydes, in what an admiration is he,
Not knowing in what place his body should be.

Clamy. Who names poor Clamydes there? reply to him again,

Shift. Ant shall please you I am your servant Knowledge, which in a thousand
woes for you remain.

Clamy. Ah Knowledge where am I declare and be brief.

Shift. Where are you? faith even in the Castle of that false thief
Bryan sance foy, against whom to fight and set you free,
Look out at the window, behold I have brought tools with me.

Clamy. Ah Knowledge, then cowardly that caitife did me charm.

Shift. Yea, or else he could never have done you any harm,
But be of good cheer, for such a shift I have made,
That the keys of the prison I have got, your self persuade:
Wherewith this morning I am come to set you free,
And as they lie in their beds, you may murder Bryan and his men, and set all
other at liberty.

Clamy. Ah Knowledge, this has me bound to be thy friend for ever:

Shift. A true servant you may see will deceive his master never.
So the doors are open, now come and follow after me.
Enter out.
Clamy. Ah heavens, in what case my self do I see:
But speak Knowledge, can thou tell how long have I been here?

Shift. These ten days full, and sleeping still, this sentence is most clear.

Clamy. Alas, then this same is the day the which appointed was
By the Knight of the golden Sheeld to me, that combat ours should pass
Before king Alexanders grace, and there I know he is,
Ah cruel Fortune why should thou thus wrest my chance amiss:
Knowing I do but honor seek, and thou do me defame,
In that contrary mine exspect, thou all things seeks to frame.
The faith and loyalty of a knight thou causest me to break,
Ah hateful dame, why should thou thus thy fury on me wreake,
Now will king Alexander judge the thing in me to be,
The which since first I arms could bear, no wight did ever see.
But knowledge give from thee to me, those weapons that I may
Upon that Bryan be revenged, which cowardly did betray
Me of my things, and here from thrall all other knights set free,
Whom he by charm did bring in bale, as erst he did by me.
Come, into his lodging will I go, and challenge him and his.
Exit.
Shift. Do so, and to follow I will not mis.
Ah sir, here was a shift according to my nature and condition,
And a thousand shifts more I have, to put my self out of suspicion.
But it does me good to think how that cowardly knave Bryan sance foy
Shall be taken in the snare, my heart does even leap for joy.
Hark, hark, my master is amongst them, but let him shift as he can,
For not to deal with a dog, he shall have help of his man.
Exeunt. Enter after a little fight within, Clamydes three Knights.
Clamy. Come, come sir Knights, for so unfortunate was never none as I,
That I should joy that is my joy, the heavens themselves deny.
That cowardly wretch that kept you here, and did me so deceive,
Is fled away and has the Sheeld, the which my Lady gave
To me in token of her love, the Serpents head like case,
For which this mine adventure was, to win her noble grace.

1 Knight. And sure that same the occasion was, why we aduentred hither.

Clamy. Well, since I have you delivered, when as you please together
Each one into his native soil his journey do prepare,
For though that I have broke my day as erst I did declare,
Through this most cowardly catifes charms, in meeting of the Knight,
Which of the golden Sheeld bears name, to know else what he hight:
I will to Alexanders court, and if that thence he be,
Yet will I seek to find him out, least he impute to me
Some cause of cowardlinesse to be, and therefore sir Knights depart,
As to my self I wish to you with fervent zeal of heart:
Yet if that any one of you do meet this Knight by way
What was the cause of this my let, let him perstand I pray.

Omnies. We shall not misle o noble Knight, to accomplish this your will.

Exeunt. Clamy. Well then adue fit Knights each one, the gods protect you still.
What knowledge ho, where art thou man? come forth that hence we may.

Shift within. Where am I? faith breaking open of chests here within, for i will
have the spoil of all away.

Clamy. Tush, tush, I pray thee come that hence we may, no riches thou shall
lack.
Shift with a bag as it were full of gold on his back. I come now with as much
money as I am able to carry of my back.
A there was never poor ass so laden, but how now, that cowardly Bryan have
you slain?
And your Sheeld, the Serpents head, and coat, have you again?

Clamy. Ah no knowledge, the knights that here were captives kept, they are by
me at liberty,
But that false Bryan this same night, is fled away for certainty.
And has all things he took from me, conuayed where none does know.

Shift, O the bones of me, how will you then do for the Serpents head to
Iuliana to show?

Clamy. I have no other hope alas, but only that her grace
Will credit give unto my words, when as I show my case
How they were lost, but first ^re I unto that dame return,
He seek the knight of the golden Sheeld, whereas he does soiourne,
To accomplish what my father wild, and therefore come away.
Exit.
Shift. Well, keep on before, for I mind not to stay.
A fura, the crafties knave, the better luck, that's plain,
I have such a deal of substance here, where Bryans men are slain,
That is passes. O that I had while for to stay,
I could ^^de a hundredth cuts full of kitching st^^ffe away.
Well, its not best to carry too long behind, left my master ouer-go,
And then some knave knowing of my money, a piece of cosonage sho.
Exit.
Enter Neronis. Neronis. How cast that tree but withered be
That wants sap to moist the root?
How can that Vine but waste and pine,
Whose plants are trodden under foot?
How can that spray but soon decay,
That is with wild weeds ouergrowne?
How can that wight in ought delight
Which shows, and has no good will shown?
Or else how can that heart alas,
But die by whom each joy does pass?
Neronis, ah I am the Tree, which wants sap to moist the root.
Neronis, ah I am the vine, whose Plants are trodden under foot.
I am the spray which does decay, and is with wild weeds ouergrowne,
I am the wight without delight, which shows, and has no good will shown.
Mine is the heart by whom alas, each pleasant joy does pass,
Mine is the heart which vades away, as does the flower or grass.
In wanting sap to moist the root, is joys that made me glad,
And plants being trodden under foot, is pleasures that was had.
I am the spray which does decay, whom cares have ouergrowne,
But stay Neronis, thou say thou showest, and has no good will shown:
Why so I do, how can I tell, Neronis force no cruelty
Thou feast thy knight endued is, with all good gifts of courtesy:
And does Neronis love indeed, to whom love does she yield,
Even to that noble brute of fame, the knight of the golden Sheeld.
Ah woeful Dame, thou know not thou, of what degree he is,
Of noble blood his gesters show, I am assured of this.
Why belike he is some runnagate that will not show his name,
Ah why should I this allegate, he is of noble fame.
Why do thou not express thy love, to him Neronis then?
Because shamefastness and womanhood, bids us not seek to men.
Ah careful Dame lo thus I stand, as twere one in a trance,
And lacks boldness for to speak, which should my words advance.
The knight of the Golden Sheeld it is, to whom a thrall I am,
Whom I to health restored have, since that to court he came.
And now he is pressed to pass again, upon his weary way,
Unto the Court of Alexander, yet has he broke his day,
As he to me the whole expressed, ah sight that does me grieve,
Lo where he comes to pass away, of me to take his leave.

Enter Clyomon. Clyo. Who has more cause to praise the Gods, then I whose
state deplored?
Through physic and Neronis help, to health am now restored:
Whose fervent thrall I am become, yet urgent causes does
Constrain me for to keep it close, and not to put in proof
What I might do to win her love, as first my oath and vow,
In keeping of my name unknown, which she will not allow,
If I should seem to break my mind, being a Princes borne,
To yield her love to one unknown, I know she will think it scorn?
Besides here longer in this Court, alas I may not stay,
Although that with Clamydes he, I have not kept my day:
Least this he should suppose in me, for cowardlinesse of heart,
To seek him out elsewhere, I will from out this Land depart.
Yet though unto Neronis she, I may not show my mind,
A faithful heart when I am gone, with her I leave behind.
Whose bountiousnesse I here have felt, but since I may not stay,
I will to take my leave of her, before I pass away.
Lo where she walks, O Princess well met, why are you here so sad?

Ne. Good cause I have, since pleasures pass, the which should make me glad.

Clyo. What you should mean, O Princess dear, hereby I do not know.

Nero. Then listen to my talk a while, Sir Knight and I will show.
If case you will reaunswere me, my question to obsolue,
The which propound within my mind, does oftentimes renolue.

Clyo. I will O Princes answer you as aptly as I may.

Nero. Well then Sir Knight, apply your cares, and listen what I say:
A ship that storms had tossed long, amidst the mounting waves,
Where harbor none was to be had, fell Fortune so depraues:
Through ill success that ship of hope, that Ancors hold does fail,
Yet at the last she is driven to land, with broken Mast and sail:
And through the force of furious wind, and Billows bounsing blows,
She is a simple shipwreck made, in every point God knows.
Now this same ship by chance being found, the finders take such pain,
That fit to sail upon the Seas, they rig her up again.
And where she was through storms sore shakt, they make her whole and sound
Now answer me directly here, upon this my propound.
If this same ship thus rent and torn, being brought in former rate,
Should not supply the finders true to profit his estate
In what she might.

Clyo. Herein a right,
I will O Princess as I may, directly answer you.
This ship thus found, I put the case it has an owner now,
Which owner shall sufficiently content the finders charge:
And have again to serve his use, his ship, his boat or barge.
The ship then cannot serve the turn of finders, this is plain,
If case the owner do content, or pay him for his pain:
But otherwise if none lay claim, nor seem that ship to stay,
Then is it requisite it should, the finders pains repay:
For such endeavor as it is to serve for his behoof.

Nero. What owner truly that it has, I have no certain proof.

Clyo. Then can I not define thereof, but thus I wish it were,
That you would me accept to be, that ship O Lady fair:
And you the finder, then it should be needless for to move,
If I the ship, of duty ought to serve at your behooue.

Nero. Thou art the ship O worthy Knight, so shiuered found by me.

Clyo. And owner have I none dear dame, I yield me whole to thee:
For as this ship I must confess, that was a shipwreck made,
Thou have restored me unto health, whom sickness causd to vade,
For which I yield O Princess dear, at pleasure thine to be,
If your grace, O noble Dame, will so accept of me.

Nero. If case I will, what have you shown?

Clyo. Because I am to you unknown.

Nero. Your fame imports what you be.

Clyo. You may your pleasure say of me.

Nero. What I have said due proof do show.

Clyo. Well Lady deate, to thee I owe
More service then of duty I am able to profess,
For that thou did preserve my life amidst my deep distress:
But at this time I may not stay, O Lady here with thee,
Thou know the cause, but this I vow within three score days to be,
If destiny restrain me not, at Court with thee again,
Protesting whilst that life does last, thine faithful to remain.

Nero. And is there then no remedy, but needs you will depart?

Clyo. No Princess for a certainty, but here I leave my heart,
In gage with thee till my return, which as I said shall be:

Nero. Well, since no persuasion may prevail, this Jewel take of me,
And keep it always formy sake.

Clyo. Of it a dear account i will make, yet let us part dear Dame with joy,
And to do the same I will my self employ.

Nero. Well now adi^u till thy return, the Gods thy journey guide.
Exit.
Clyo. And happily in absence mine, for thee dear Dame provide:
Ah Clyomon let dolours di^, drive daunts from out thy mind,
Since in the sight of Fortune now, such favor, thou do find,
As for to have the love of her whom thou did sooner judge.
Would have denied thy loyalty, and against thy good will grudge,
But that I may here keep my day, you sacred Gods provide,
Most happy fate unto my state, and thus my journey guide:
The which I tempt to take in hand Clamydes for to meet:
That the whole cause of my first let, to him I may repeat.
So shall I seem for to excuse my self in way of right,
And not be counted of my foe, a false pe^iured Knight.
Exit. Enter Thrasellus King of Norway two Lords.
Thra. Where deep desire has taken root, my Lords alas you see,
How that persuasion (...) not, if contrary it be*
Unto the first expe^^^d hope, where fancy has take place,
And vain it is for to withdraw, by counsel in that case:
The mind who with affection is, to one only thing affected,
The which may not till dint of death, from them be sure rejected:
You know my Lords through fame, what force of love has taken place,
Within my breast as touching now Neronis noble grace,
Daughter to Patranius King, who does the Scepter sway:
And in the I Will of Marshes eke, bear rule now at this day.
Through love of daughter his, nay sorrows daily grow,
And daily do loves do me daunt, for that alas I show
Such Friendship whereas favor none, is to be found again:
And yet from o^^ my careful mind, naught may her love restrain.
I sent to crave her of (...) he answered me with nay:
But shall I not provide by force to fetch her thence away?
Yes, yes, my Lords, and therefore let your aids be pressed with mine,
For I will sure Neronis have, or else my days i will pine.
For King Patranius and his power, I hold of small account,
To win his daughter to my spouse, amids his men i will mount.

1 Lord. Most worthy Prince, this rash attempt, I hold not for the best,
For sure Patranius power is great, and not to be suppressed.
For why, the i will enuirond is, with sea on every side,
And landing place lo is there none, whereas you may have tide
To set your men from ship to shore, but by one only way,
And in that place a garrison great, he keeps at this day.
So that if you should bring your power, your travel werein vain,
That is not certainly the way, Neronis for to gain.
But this your grace may do indeed, and so I count it best,
To be in all points with a Ship, most like a Merchant pressed:
And sail with such as you think best, all dressed in Merchants guise,
And for to get her to your Ship, some secret mean devise,
By showing of strange Merchandies, or other such like thing,
Lo this is best advise I can, Thrassellus Lord and King.

2 Lord. And certainly as you have said, my Lord it is the way,
Wherefore o King, do prosecute the same without delay.

Thrasell. Of truth my Lords this your advise does for our purpose frame,
Come therefore let us hence depart, to put in ure the same
With present speed, for Merchant-wise my self will thither sail:

1 Lord. This is the way if any be, of purpose to prevail.

Exeunt. Enter Clyomon with a Knight, signifying one of those that Clamyde, had
delivered. Clyomon. Sir Knight, of truth this fortune was most luckely assignd,
That we should meet in travel thus, for thereby to my mind
You have a castle of comfort brought, in that you have me told,
Clamydes our appointed day, no more then I did hold.

Knight. No certis sir he kept not day, the cause I have expressed,
Through that inchanter Bryans charms, he came full sore distressed:
Yet fortune favored so his state, that through his help all we
Which captives were through cowardly craft, from bondage were set free:
And at our parting willed us, if any with you met,
We should inform you with the truth what was his only let.

Clyomon. Well, know you where he abides now, sir Knight I crave of courtesy?

Knight. No questionless I know not I, to say it of a certainty.

Clyomon. Well then adue sir Knight with thanks, I let you on your way:

Knight. Unto the gods I you commit, naught else I have to say.
Exit.
Clyomon. A sir, now the hugie heaps of cares that lodged in my mind
Is skaled from their nestling place, and pleasures passage find.
For that as well as Clyomon, Clamydes broke his day,
Upon which news my passage now in seeking him i will stay:
And to Neronis back again, my joyful journey make,
Least that she should in absence mine, some cause of sorrow take.
And now all dumps of deadly dole, that danted knightly breast,
A due, since salve of solace sweet, has sorrows all suppressed.
For that Clamydes cannot brag, nor me accuse in ought,
Unto the gods of destenies, that thus our fates has brought
In equal balance to be wayed, due praises shall I send,
That thus to way each cause aright, their eyes to earth did bend.
Well, to keep my day with Lady now, I mind not to be slack,
Wherefore unto Patranius court, i will dress my journey back.
But stay, me thinks I Rumor hear throughout this land to ring,
I will attend his talk, to know what tidings he does bring.
Enter Rumor running. Ye rolling Clouds give Rumor room, both air and earth
below,
By sea and land, that every ear may understand and know,
What woeful hap is chanced now within the i will of late,
Which of strange Marshes bears name, unto the noblest state.
Neronis daughter to the King, by the King of Norway he,
Within a ship of Merchandise, conuayed away is she.
The King with sorrow for her sake, has to death resignd,
And having left his Queen with child, to guide the realm behind.
Mustantius brother to the King, from her the Crown would take,
But till she be delivered, the Lords did order make,
That they before King Alexander, thither coming should appeal,
And he by whom they hold the Crown, therein should rightly deal
For either part, lo this to tell, I Rumor have in charge,
And through all lands I do pretend, to publish it at large.
Exit.
Clyomon. Ah woeful Rumor raunging thus, what tidings do I hear,
Has that false King of Norway stolen my love and Lady dear?
Ah heart, ah hand, ah head and mind, and every sense beside,
To serve your masters turn in need, do every one provide.
For till that I revenged be upon that wretched king,
And have again my Lady dear, and her from Norway bring,
I vow this body takes no rest, ah fortune fickle dame,
That can make glad and so soon sad, a Knight of worthy fame.
But what should I delay the time, now that my dear is go^^?
Avails ought to ease my grief, to make this pensive mon^^
No, no, wherefore come courage to my heart, and happy hands prepare,
For of that wretched King I will wreake all my sorrow and care.
And mauger all the might he may, be able for to make,
By force of arms my lady I, from him and his will take.
Exit. Enter Clamydes and Shift, with his bag of money still.
Clamy. Come knowledge, thou art much to blame, thus for to lode thy self
To make thee on thy way diseased, with carrying of that pelf.
But now take courage unto thee, for to that i will I will,
Which of strange Marshes called is, for fame declares still
The Knight of the golden Sheeld is there, and in the court abides,
Thither will I him to meet, whatsoever me betideth:
And know his name, as thou can tell my father charged me,
Or else no more his princely court nor person for to see.
Come therefore, that unto that i will we may our journey take,
And afterward having met with him, our viage for to make
To Denmark to my Lady there, to show her all my case,
And then to Swauia if her I have, unto my fathers grace.

Shift. Nay but ant shall please you, are you sure the Knight of the golden
Sheeld in the i will of strange Marshes is?

Clamy. I was informed credibly, I warrant thee we shall not mis.
Exit.
Shift. Then keep on your way, i will follow as fast as I can,
Faith he even means to make a martris of poor Shift his man.
And I am so tied to this bag of gold I got at Bryan sance foyes,
That I tell you where this is, there all my joy is:
But I am so weary, sometimes with ryding, sometimes with running,
And other times going a foot:
That when I came to my lodging at night, to bring me a woman it is no boo^e.
And such care I take for this pelf least I should it lose,
That where I come, that it is gold, for my life I dare not disclose.
Well after my master I must, heeres nothing still but running and ryding:
But i will give him the slip sure, if I once come where I may have quiet biding.
Exit.
Enter Neronis in the Forest, in man's apparel. Ne. As (...) ^he Hound, as
Lamb the Wolf, as foul the Fawcons dint,
So do I fly from tyrant he, whose heart more hard then flint
Has sacked on me such hugie heaps of seaceles sorrows here,
That sure it is intolerable, the torments that I bear:
Neronis, ah who knows thee, a Princes to be borne,
Since fatal Gods so frowardly, thy fortune does adorn:
Neronis, ah who knows her, in painful Pages show?
But no good Lady will me blame, which of my case does know:
But rather when they hear the truth, wherefore I am disguised,
Thaile say it is an honest shift, the which I have devised:
Since I have given my faith and troth to such a brute of fame,
As is the knight of the Golden Shield, and tyrants seeks to frame
Their engines to detract our vows, as the king of Norway has,
Who of all Princes living now, I find deuoyd of faith:
For like a wolf in lambs skin clad, he comes with his aid,
All Merchant like to fathers Court, and ginneth to persuade
That he had precious jewels bought, which in his ship did lie,
Whereof he wild me take my choice, if case I would them buy:
Then I mistrusting no deceit, with handmaids one or two
With this deceitful Merchant then unto the ship did go.
No sooner were we under hatch, but up they hoyst their sail,
And having then to serve their turn, a merry Western gaile:
We were lasht out from the haven, lo a dosen leagues and more,
When still I thought the Bark had been, at anchor by the shore:
But being brought by Norway here, not long in Court I was,
But that to get from thence away, I brought this feate to pass:
For making semblance unto him as though I did him love,
He gave me liberty, or ought that served for my behoue:
And having liberty, I wrought by such a secret slight,
That in this tire like to a page, I escaped away by night.
But ah I fear that by pursuit, he will me overtake,
Well here enters one, to whom some sure for service I will make.

Enter Corin a Shepherd. Cor. Gos bone turn in that sheep there and you be
good fellows,
Jesus how cham beraid^,
Chaue a cur here, an a were my vellow, cha must him conswade,
And yet an cha should kiss, look you of the arse, cha must run my self, an
chil,
An cha should ent^eat him with my cap in my hand, ha wad stand still.
But it is a world to zee what merry lives we shepherds lead,
Why where Gentlemen and we get once a thorn bush over our head,
We may sleep with our vaces against the zone, an were hogs
Bath our selves, stretch out our legs ant were a cennell of dogs:
And then at night when maids come to milkin, the games begin,
But I may zay to you my nabor, Hogs maid had a clap, well let the^ laugh that
win.
Chaue but one daughter, but chould not vor vorty pence she were zo sped,
Cha may zay to you, she looks every night to go to bed:
But it is no matter, the whores be so whiskish when their under a bush,
That their never satisfied, til their bellies be flush.
Well cha must abroad about my flocks, least the fengeance wolves catch a lamb:
Vor by my cursen zoul^, thale steal an cha stand by, there not a verd of the
dam*

Ne. Well to escape the pursuit of the king, of this same shepherd here,
Suspicion wholly to avoid, for service i will enquire:
Well met good father, for your use, a servant do you lack?

Cor. What you will not flout an old man you courtnold Jack?

Nero. No truly father I flout you not, what I ask I would have.

Co. Gos bones they leest, serve a shepherd an be zo brave?
You courtnoll crackropes, wod be hanged, you do nothing now and then
But come up and down the country, thus to flout poor men.
Go too goodman boy, chaue no zeruis vor no zuch flouting Iacks as you be

Nero. Father I think as I speak, upon my faith and troth believe me
I will willingly serve you, if in case you will take me.

Cor. Do not inocke?

Nero. No truly father.

Cor. Then come with me, by gos bones chil never vorsake thee.
Whow bones of my zoule, tho wilt be y^ brauest shepherds boy in our town,
Thous go to church in this coat, beuore Madge a sunday in her gray gown.
Good lord how our churchwardens will look upon thee, bones of god zeest,
There will be more looking at thee, then our sir John the parish priest.
Why every body will ask whose boy thart, an cha ca^tel the this by the way,
Thou shall have all the varest wenches of our town in the veelds vor to play.
There Is nabour Nychols daughter, a jolly smug whore with vat checkes,
And nabour Hodges maid, meddle not with her, she has eaten set leekes.
But there is Frumptons wench in the freese scake, it will do thee good to see
What canuosing is at the milking time, between her and me.
And those wenches will love thee bonnomablely in every place,
But do not vall in with them in any kind of case.

Nero. Tush, you shall not need to fear me, I can be merry with measure as
well as they:

Coryn. Well then come follow after me, and home chil lead thee the way.

Nero. Alas poor simple Shepherd, by this Princes may see,
That like man, like talk, in every degree.
Exeunt. Enter Thrasellus King of Norway, and two Lords.
Thras. My Lords pursue her speedel^, she cannot far be gone,
And lo himself to seek her out, your King he will be one.
Ah fraudulent dame, how has she glozd, from me to get away?
With sugared words how has she fed, my senses night and day?
Professing love with outward shows, and inwardly her heart
To practice such a deep deceit, whereby she might depart
From out my court so suddenly, when I did wholly judge
She loved me most entirely, and not against me grudge.
She made such signs by outward shows, I blame not wit and policy,
But here I may exclaim and say, fie, fie, on women's subtlety.
Well well my Lords, no time delay, pursue her with all speed,
And I this forest will seek out my self, as is decreed,
With aid of such as are behind, and will come unto me:

Ambo. We shall no^ slake what here in charge to us is given by thee.

Exeunt. Thras. Ah subtle Neronis, how have thou me vexed?
Through thy crafty dealings how am I perplexed?
Did ever any win a dame, and lose her in such sort?
The maladies are marvelous, the which I do support
Through her deceit, but forth I will my company to meet,
If ever she be caught again, I will her so entreat,
That others all shall warning take, by such a subtle dame,
How that a Prince for to delude, such ingins they do frame.

Enter Clyornon Knight of the golden Sheeld. Clyo. Nay Traitor stay, and take
with thee that mortal blow or stroke
The which shall cause thy wretched corpse this life for to revoke.
It ioyeth me at the heart that I have met thee in this place.

Thras. What varlet dare thou be so bold, with words in such a case,
For to vpbraide thy Lord and King? what art thou soon declare?

Clyo. My Lord and King, I thee defy, and in despite I dare
Thee for to say thou art no Prince, for thou a Traitor art,
And what reward is due therefore, to thee I shall impart.

Thras. Thou braggest all too boldly still, what hight thy name express?

Clyo. What hight my name thou shall not know, ne will I it confess:
But for that thou my Lady stolest from fathers court away,
I Will sure revenge that traiterous fact upon thy flesh this day.
Since I have met so luckely with thee here all alone,
Although as I do understand, from thee she now is gone,
Yet therefore do defend thy self, for here I thee assail,

Thras. Alas poor boy, think thou against me to prevail?

Here let them fight, the King fall down dead. Thras. Ah heavens, Thrasellus he
is slain, ye Gods his ghost receive,

Clyo. Now have thou justice for thy fact, as thy desert does crave:
But ah alas poor Clyomon, though thou thy foe have slain,
Such grievous wounds thou have received, as does increase thy pain.
Unless I have some speedy help, my life must needly wast,
And then as well as traitor false, my corpse of death shall taste.
Ah my Neronis where art thou? ah where art thou become?
For thy sweet sake thy Knight shall here receive his vital doom.
Lo here all gorde in blood thy faithful Knight does lie,
For thee, ah faithful dame, thy Knight for lack of help shall dye.
For thee, ah here thy Clyomon, his mortal stroke has taken,
For thee, ah these same hands of his, the Norway King has slain.
Ah bleeding wounds from ionger talk my foltring tongue does stay,
And if I have not speedy help, my life does wast away.

Enter father Coryn the Shepherd, and his dog. Coryn. A plage on thee for a
cur, A ha, driven me sheep above from the flock:
A thief, art not ashamed? i will beat thee like a stock:
And cha been azeeking here, above voure miles and more:
But chill tell you what, chaue the brauest lad of Jack the courtnoll, that
ever was zeene beuore.
A, the whorcop is plagely well loved in our town,
An you had zeene go to Church beuore Madge my wife in her holy day gown,
You would have blessed your zelues t'aue seen it, she went even cheke by ioule
With our head controms wife, brother to my nabour Nycholl,
You know ha dwells by master Justice, over the water on the other side of the
hill,
Cham zure you know it, between my nabour Filchers varme house, and the
windmill.
But an you did zee how Ione Ienkin, and Gilian Giffrey loves my boy Jack,
Why it is maruelation to see, Ione did so bast Gillians back,
That by Gos bones I laughed till cha be pist my zelfe, when cha zaw it,
All the maids in town valls out for my boy, but and the yongmen know it
Thale be zo ielisom over them, that cham in doubt
Ich shall not keep Jack my boy till seven years go about.
Well, cham nere the near vor my sheep, chaue sought it this voure mile,
But chill home, and send Jack forth to zeeke it another while.
But bones of God man stay, Jesus whather wilt? wha what meanst lie here?

Clyomon. Ah good father help me.

Coryn. Nay who there, by your leave, chill not come near.
What another? bones of me, he is either killed or dead?
Nay varewell vorty pence, year a knave, gos death a does bleed.

Clyomon. I bleed indeed father, so grieuo^s my wounds be,
That if I have not speedy help, long life is not in m^e.

Coryn. Why what art thou? or how chanst thou camst in this case?

Clyomon. Ah father, that dead corpse which thou see there in place,
He was a Knight, and mine enemy, whom here I have slain,
And I a Gentleman, whom he has wounded with marvelous pain.
Now thou know the truth, good father show some courtesy
To stop my bleeding wounds, that I may find some remedy,
My life to preserve, if possible I may*

Coryn. Well he are you gentleman, chould have you know this by the way,
Cham but vather Coryn the shepherd, cham no surringer I,
But chill do what cha can vor you, cha were loath to see you die.
Lo how zay you by this, have cha done you any ease?

Clya. Father thy willingness of a certainty, does me much please:
But good father lend me thy helping hand once again.
To bury this same Knight whom here I have slain,
Although he was to me a most deadly enemy,
Yet to leave his body unburied, were great cr^eltie.

Coryn. Bones of God man, our Priest dwells too far away.

Clyo. Well, then for want of a Priest, the Priests part I will play:
Therefore father, help me to lay his body aright:
For I will bestow a hearse of him, because he was a Knight:
If thou will go to a Cottage hereby, and fetch such things as I lack.

Coryn. That chill Gentleman, and by and by return back.
Exit.
Clyo. But Clyomon pluck up thy heart, with courage once again,
And I will set over his dead Coa^se in sign of victory,
My Golden Sheeld and Sword, but wi^^ the point hanging down,
As one conquered and lost his renown.
Writing likewise thereupon, that all passengers may see,
That the false King of Norway, here lies slain^ by me.

Enter Coryn with a Hearse. Co. Lo Gentleman, cha brought zuch things, as are
requisite for the zame:

Clyo. Then good father help me, the Hearse for to frame.
Chat chall Gentleman, in the best order that cha may:
O that our Parish Priest were here, that you might hear him say,
Vor by gos bones, an there be any noise in the Church, in the midst of his
prayers heel swear.
A he loves hunting a life, would to God you were acquainted with him a while,
And as vor a woman, well chill zay nothing, but cha know whom he did beguile.

Clyo. Well father Coryn let that pass, we have nothing to do withal,
And now that this is done, come reward thy pain I shall.
There is part of a recompense, thy good will to requite.

Cory^. By my troth cha thank you, cham bound to pray vor you day and night.
And now chil eue^ home, and send Jack my boy this sheep to seek out:

Clyo. Tell me father e^e thou go, did thou not see a Lady wandering here
about?

Cor. A Lady, no good vaith gentleman, cha zaw none cha tell you plane:

Clyo. Well then farewell father, gramercies for thy pain.
Ah Nero^is where thou art, or where thou do abide,
Thy Clyomon to seek thee out shall rest no time nor tide:
Thy foe here lies slain on ground, and living is thy friend,
Whose travel ^il he see thy face, shall never have an end.
My Ensign here I leave behind, these verses writ shall yield
A true report of traitor slain, by the knight of the golden sheeld.
And as unknown to any wight, to travel I betake,
Until I may her find, whose sight my heart may joyful make.

Exit. Enter Shift very brave. Shift. Jesus what a gazing do you make at me, to
see me in a gown?
Do you not know after travel, men being in Court or in Town,
And specially such as is of any reputation, they must use this guise,
Which signifies a fool to be sage, grave, and of counsel wise.
But where are we think you now, that Shift is so brave?
Not running to seek the knight of the golden sheeld, an other office I have:
For coming here to the court, of strange Marshes so named,
Where King Alexander in his own person lies, that Prince mightily famed
Between Mustantius brother to the late king deceased
And the Queen, through King Alexander, a strife was appeased:
But how or which way I think you do not know,
Well then give ear to my tale, and the truth I will show:
The old King being dead, through sorrow for Neronis,
Whom we do hear, Lover to the Knight of the Golden Sheeld is.
The Queen being with child, the scepter asked to sway,
But Mustantius the Kings brother, he did it denay.
Whereof great contention grew, amongst the Nobles on either side,
But being by them agreed the judgment to abide
Of King Alexander the great, who then was coming hither,
At his arrival to the Court, they all were called together.
The matter being heard, this sentence was given,
That either party should have a Champion to combat them between:
That which Champion were overcome, the other should sway,
And to be soughten after that time, the sixteen day.
Now my master Clamydes coming hither, for Mustantius will he be,
But upon the Queens side, to venture none can we see:
And yet she makes proclamation through every land:
To give great gift; to any that will take the combat in hand.
Well within ten days is the time, and king Alexander he
Staieth till the day appointed, the trial to see:
And if none came at the day for the Queen to fight,
Then without travel to my master, Mustantius has his right.
But to see all things in a readiness, against thappointed day:
Like a shifting knave for advantage, to Court I Will take my way.
Exit.
Enter Neronis like a Sheepheards boy. Nero. The painful paths, the weary
ways, the travels and ill fare,
That simple feet, to Princes seem, in practice very rare,
As I poor Dame, whose pensive heart, no pleasure can delight,
Since that my state so cruelly, fell Fortune holds in spite.
Ah poor Neronis in thy hand, is this a seemly show,
Who should in Court thy Lute supply, where pleasures erst did flow?
Is this an instrument for thee to guide a sheepheards flock?
That art a Princes by thy birth, and borne of noble stock.
May mind from mourning more refrain^, to think on former state?
May heart from sighing eke abstain, to see this simple rate?
May eyes from down distilling tears, when thus a love I am,
Resistance make, but must they not, through ceaselesse sorrows frame
A River of bedewed drops, for to distill my face?
Ah heavens when you are reuengd enough, then look upon my case:
For till I hear some news alas upon my loving Knight,
I dare not leave this loathsome life, for fear of greater spite:
And now as did my master will, as sheep that is a stray
I must go seek her out again, by wild and weary way.
Ah woeful sight; what is al^s, with these mine eyes beheld,
That to my loving Knight belongd, I view the Golden Sheeld:
Ah heavens, this Hearse does signify my, Knight is slain,
Ah death no longer do delay, but rid the lives of twain:
Heart, hand, and eueri^ ^ence prepare, unto the Hearse, draw nie:
And thereupon submit your selves, disdain not for to die
With him that was your mistress joy, her life and death like case,
And well I know in seeking me, he did his end embrace.
That cruel wretch that Norway King this cursed deed has dunne,
But now to cut that ling^^^g thread, that Lachis long has spunne,
The sword of this my lo^ing knight, behold I here do take,
Of this my woeful corpse alas, ^ final end to make:
Yet ere I strike that deadly stroke that shall my life deprave,
Ye muses aid me to the Gods, for mercy first to crave.
Sing here. Well now you heavens (...) my ghost, my corpse I leave behind,
To be inclosd with his in earth, by those that shall it find.

Descend Providence. Proui. Stay, stay thy stroke, thou woeful Dame, what will thou thus despair?
Behold to let this wilful fact, I Providence prepaire
To thee, from seat of ^^ghtie love, look hereupon again,
Read, that if case thou can it ^^de, and see if he be slain
Whom thou do love.

Nere. Ah heavens above.
All land and prais^ and ho (...) due to you I here do render,
That would vouchsafe your handmaid here, in woeful state to tender*
But by these same Verses do I find, my faithful knight does live,
Whose ^^nd unto my deadly foe, the mortal stroke did give:
Whose cursed carlcasse lo it is, which here on ground does lie,
Ah honor due for this I yield, to mighty Jove on hie.

Proui. Well, let desparation die in thee, I may not here remain,
But be assured, that thou shall ere long thy knight attain.

Ascend. Nero. And for their prouid^nce divine, the Gods above i will praise,
And show their works so wonderful, unto their laud always.
Well, since that the gods by providence has signed unto me
Such comfort sweet in my distress, my Knight again to see,
Farewell all feeding Shepherds flocks, unseemly for my state,
To seek my love I will set forth, in hope of friendly fate.
But first to Shepherds house I will, my pages tire to take,
And afterward depart from thence, my journey for to make.

Exit. Enter Sir Clyomon. Clyo. Long have I sought but all in vain, for
neither far nor near
Of my Neronis woeful dame, by no means can I hear.
Did ever fortune violate two lovers in such sort?
The griefs ah are intolerable, the which I do support
For want of her, but hope somewhat reui^es my pensive heart,
And does to me some sudden cause of comfort now impart
Through news I hear, as I abroad in weary travel went,
How that the Queen her mother has her proclamations sent
Through every land, to get a Knight to combat on her side,
Against Mustantius, Duke and Lord, to have a matter tried:
And now the day is very nigh, as I do understand,
In hope to meet my Lady there I will into that land:
And for her mother undertake the combat for to try,
Yea though the other Hector were, I would him not deny
What soever he be, but ere I go, a golden Sheeld i will have,
Although unknown, I will come in, as does my Knighthood crave:
But covered will I keep my Sheeld, because i will not be known,
If case my Lady be in place, till I have prowess shown.
Well, to have my Sheeld in readiness, I will no time delay,
And then to combat for the Queen, I straight will take my way.
Exit.
Enter Neronis like the Page. Nero. Ah weary paces that I walk, with steps
unsteady still,
Of all the gripes of grisly griefs, Neronis has her fill.
And yet amids these miseries, which were my first mishaps,
By brute I hear such news alas, as more and more inwraps
My wretched corpse with thousand woes, more then I may support,
So that I am to be compard unto the scaled fort,
Which does so long as men and might, and sustenance prevail,
Give to the enemies repulse, that comes to assaile^
But when assistance gins to fail, and strength of foes increase,
They forced are through battering blows, the same for to release.
So likewise I so long as hope, my comfort did remain,
The griefly greefes that me assaild, I did repulse again:
But now that hope begins to fail, and greefes anew do rise,
I must of force yield up the Forte, I can no way devise
To keep the same, the Forte I mean, it is the weary corse,
Which sorrows daily do assail, and siege without remorse:
And now to make my griefs the more, report alas has told,
How that my fathers aged bones, is shrined up in mold,
Since Norway king did me betray, and that my mother she,
Through Duke Mustantius, uncle mine, in great distress to be:
For swaying of the Septer there, what should I herein say?
Now that I cannot find my knight, I would at combat day
Be gladly there, if case I could with some good master meet,
That as his Page in these affairs, would seem me to entreat:
And in good time, here comes one, he seems a knight to be,
I Will profer service, if in case, he will accept of me.

Enter Clyomon with his Sheeld covered, strangely disguised. Clyo. Well, now as
one unknown, I will go combat for the Queen:
Who can bewray me, since my Sheeld is not for to be seen?
But stay, who do I here epsy? of truth a proper Boy,
If case he do a master lack, he shall sustain no noy:
For why in these affairs, he may stand me in passing steed.

Nero. Well, I see to pass upon my way, this Gentleman's decreed,
To him I will submit my self, in service for to be,
If case he can his fancy frame, to like so well on me.
Well met sir knight upon your way.

Clyo. My Boy gramercies, but to me say,
Into what country is thy journey dight?

Nero. Toward the strange Marshe, of truth Sir Knight.

Clyo. And thither am I going, high Jove be my guide.

Nero. Would Gods I were worthy to be your Page by your side.

Clyo. My Page my boy, why what is thy name? that let me hear.

Nero. Sir Knight, by name I am called Cur Daceer.

Clyo. Cur Daceer, what heart of Steel, now certis my boy:
I am a Gentleman, and do entertain thee with joy:
And to the strange Marshes am I going, the Queen to defend,
Come therefore, for without more saying, with me thou shall wend.
Exit.
Nero. As diligent to do my duty as any in this land:
Ah Fortune, how favorably my friend does she stand:
For thus no man knowing mine estate nor degree,
May I pass safely, a Page as you see.
Exit.
Enter Bryan sance foy with the Head. Bry. Even as the Owl that hides her
head, in hollow tree till night,
And dares not while sir Phoebus shines, attempt abroad in flight:
So likewise I as Buzzard bold, while cheerful day is seen,
Am forced with Owl to hide my self, amongst the Iuie green:
And dares not with the seely Snaile, from cabin show my head,
Till Vesper I behold aloft, in skies begin to spread:
And then as Owl that flies abroad when other fowls do rest,
I creep out of my drowsy den, when summous has suppressed
The head of every valiant heart, lo thus I shroud the day,
And travel as the Owl by night upon my wished way:
The which has made more tedious my journey, by half part,
But blame not Bryan, blame alas, his cowardly catiffes heart:
Which dares not show it self by day, for fear of worthy wights,
For none can travel openly, to escape the venturous Knights,
Unless he have a noble mind, and eke a valiant heart,
The which I will not brag upon, I assure you for my part:
For if the courage were in me, the which in other is,
I doubtless had inioyed the wight whom I do love ere this.
Well, I have not long to travel now, to Denmark I draw nie,
Bearing knight Clamydes name, yet Bryan sance foy am I.
But though I do usurp his name, his sheeld or ensign here,
Yet can I not usurp his heart, still Bryans heart I bear:
Well, I force not that, he is safe enough, and Bryan as I am,
I will unto the Court, whereas I shall enjoy that dame.
Exi^.
Enter Shift like a Waffler. Shift. Rowme there for a reckning, see I beseech
you if thale stand out of the way,
Jesus, Jesus, why do you not know that this is the day
That the combat must pass for Mustantius and the Queen?
But to fight upon her side as yet no Champion is seen.
And Duke Mustantius he smiles in his sleeue, because he does see
That neither for love nor rewards, any one her Champion will be.
Ant were not but that my master the other Champion is,
To fight for the Queen my self, I surely would not mis.
Alas good Lady, she and her child is like to lose all the land,
Because none will come in, in her defense for to stand.
For where she was in election, if any Champion had come
To rule till she was delivered, and have the Princes room:
Now shall Duke Mustantius be sure the Scepter to sway,
If that none do come in to fight in her cause this day.
And King Alexander all this while has he stayed the trial to see,
Well here they come, room there for the King, here is such thrusting of women
as it grieueth me.

Enter King Alexander, the Queen, Mustantius, two Lords, and Clamydes like a
Champion. Mustan. O Alexander lo behold, before thy royal grace
My Champion here at pointed day I do present in place.

Alexand. Well sir Duke in your defense is he content to be?

Clamy. Yea wo^thy Prince, not fearing who encounter shall with me:
Although he were with H^rcul^s of equal power and might,
Yet in the cause of this same Duke, I challenge him the fight.

Alexa. I like your courage well sir Knight: what shall we call your name?

Clamy. Clamydes, son to the Swa^ian King, O Prince so hight the same.

Alexa. Now certainly I am right glad Clamydes for to see,
Such valiant courage to remain within the mind of thee.
Well Lady, according to the order taken herein, what do you say,
Have you your Champion in like case, now ready at the day?

Queen. No sure o King no Champion I, have for to aid my cause,
Unless twill please your noble grace on further day to pause.
For I have sent throughout this I Will, and every foreign land,
But none as yet has proffered, to take the same in hand.

Alex. No, I am more sorry certainly, your chance to see so ill,
But day deferred cannot be, unless Mustantius will,
For that his Champion ready here, in place he does present,
And who so missed at this day, should loose by full consent
Of either part, the title right, and sway of regal Mace,
To this was your consentment given, as well as his in place,
And therefore without his assent, we cannot refer the day?

Shift. Ant shall please your grace, herein try Mustantius what he will say.

Alex. How say you Mustantius, are you content the day to defer?

Mustan. Your Grace will not will me I trust, for then from law you err:
And having not her Champion here, according to decree,
There rests naught for her to loose, the Crown belongs to me.

Shift. Nay ant shall please your grace, rather then she shall it lose,
I my self will be her Champion for half a doozen blows.

Mustan. Will thou? then by full congo to the Challenger there stands.

Shift. Nay soft, of sufferance comes ease, though I cannot rule my tongue,
i will rule my hands.

Mustan. Well noble Alexander, since that she wants her Champion as you see,
By greement of your royal grace, the Crown belongs to me.

Alex. Nay Mustantius, she shall have law, wherefore to sound begin,
To see if that in three hours space no Champion will come in.
Sound here once. Of truth Madam I sorry am, none will thy cause maintain,
Well, according to the law of Arms, yet Trumpet sound again.
Sound second time. What, and is there none will take in hand, to Combat for
the Queen?

Shift. Faith I think it must be I must do the deed, for none yet is seen.

Queen. O King let pity plead for me, here in your gracious sight,
And for so slender cause as this deprive me not of right:
Consider once I had to spowse a Prince of worthy fame,
Though now blind Fortune spurn at me, her spite I needs must blame,
And though I am bereft O King, both of my child and mate,
Your Grace some greement may procure, consider of my state,
And suffer not a Widow Queen with wrong oppressed so,
But pity the young Infants case, wherewith O King I go:
And though I suffer wrong, let that find favor in your sight.

King. Why Lady I respect you both, and sure would if I might
Entreat Mustantius there unto, some such good order frame,
Your strife should cease, and yet each one well pleased with the same.

Queen. I know your grace may him persuade, as reason wills no less.

King. Well, Sir Mustantius, then your mind to me in brief express,
Will you unto such order stand here limited by me,
Without deferring longer time, say on if you agree?

Mustan. In hope your grace my state will way, I give my glad consent.

King. And for to end all discord say, Madame, are you content?

Queen. Yea noble King.

King. Well then before my nobles all, give ear unto the King,
For swaying of the sword and Mace all discord to beat down,
The child when it is borne, we elect to wear the Crown.
And till that time Mustantius, you of lands and living here,
Like equal part in every point, with this the Queen shall share:
But to the child when it is borne, if Gods grant it to live,
The kingdom whole in every part, as title we do give.
But yet Mustantius, we will yield this recompense to you,
You shall receive five thousand Crowns for yearly pension due,
To maintain your estate, while you here live and do remain,
And after let the whole belong unto the Crown again.
Now say your minds if you agree?

Page. I would the like choice were put to me.

Must. I for my part O Noble King therewith am well content:
Well better half then naught at all, I likewise give consent.

Enter Clyomon, as to Combat. Clyo. Renowned King and most of fame, before thy
royal grace,
The Queen to aid, I do present my person here in place.

Mustan. You come too late in faith Sir knight, the hour and time is past.

Clyo. Your hour I am not to respect, I entered with the blast.

Cl^my. What Princ^x is it you, are come to combat for the Queen?
Good Fortune now, I hope ere long your courage shall be seen.

Clyo. And sure I count my hap as good, to meet with you Sir knight,
Come according to your promise made, prepare your self to fight.

Clamy. I knew you well enough sir, although your sheeld were hid from me.

Clyo. Now you shall feel me as well as know me, if hand and heart agree.

King. Stay, stay Sir knights, I charge you not in combat to proceed,
For why the quarrel ended is, and the parties are agreed:
And therefore we discharge you both, the combat to refrain:

Page. The heavens therefore O noble King, thy happy sheeld remain.

Clamy. O King although we be dischargd for this contention now,
Betwixt us twain there rests yet a combat made by vow:
Which should be fought before your Grace: and since we here be met,
To judge twixt us for victory, let me your Grace entreat.

King. For what occasion is your strifes sir knights, first let me know?

Clamid. The truth thereof renowned king thy servant he shall show:
What time O king, as I should take of Suauia king my sier,
The noble orders of a Knight, which long I did desire:
This knight a stranger comes to court, and at that present day,
In cowardly wise he comes by stealth, and takes from me away
The honor that I should have had, for which my father he,
Did of his blessing give in charge, O noble king to me,
That I should know his name, that thus bereaved me of my right
The which he will not show, unless he be subdued in fight:
Whereto we either plighted faith, that I should know his name,
If that before thy Grace O King, my force in fight could frame,
To vanquish him, now having met thus happily together,
Though they are greed, our combat rest, decreed ere we came hither.
Are you that knight that did subdue Sir Samuel in field,
For which you had in recompense of us, that Golden Sheeld?

Clyo. I am that knight renowned Prince, whose name is yet unknown,
And since I foyld Sir Samuel, some prowess I have shown.

Queen. Then as I guess, you are that Knight by that same sheeld you bear
Which sometime was restored to health within our Palace here?
By Neronis our daughter she betrayed by Norway king.

Clyo. I am that knight indeed O Queen, whom she to health did bring*
Whose servant ever I am bound wheresoever that she be,
Whose enemy O Queen is slain pursuing her, by me.

Queen. Know you not where she abides, Sir knight to us declare?

Clyo. No certis would to Gods I did, she should not live in care,
But escaped from the Norway king, I am assured she is.

Queen. Well her absence was her fathers death, which turned to bale my (blis.

Clyo. And till I find her out again, my toil no end shall have

Queen. Alas he is nigh enough to her, small toil the space does crave.

King. Well Sir knights, since that you have declared before me here,
The cause of this the grudge which you to each other bear:
I wish you both a while to pawse, and to my words attend,
If Reason rest with you, be sure Knights, this quarrel I will end,
Without the sheading any blood betwixt you here in sight:
Clamydes, wey you are nobly borne, and will you then sir Knight,
Go hazard life so desperately* I charge you both refrain,
Since for so small a cause, the st^^fe does grow betwixt you twain:
And let him know your name sir knight, and so your malice end:

Clyo. I have vowed to the contrary, which vow I must defend.

King. Well though so it be that you have vowed, your name shall not be known:
Yet not detracting this your vow, your country may be shown,
And of what stock by birth you be:

Shift. But Lady he is dashed now I see.

Clyo. Indeed this has astond me much, I cannot but confess,
My country and my birth, my state, which plainly will express
My name, for that unto them all my state is not known,

King. Sir knight, of our demand from you again, what answer shall be shown*

Clyo. Of Denmark noble Prince I am, and son unto the king:

King. Why then sir Chomon hight your name, as rare report does ring?

Clyo. It does indeed so hight my name, O Prince of high renown,
I am the Prince of Denmarkes son, and heir unto the Crown.

Clamy. And are you son to Denmark king? then do embrace your friend,
Within whose heart here toward you, all malice makes an end:
Who with your sister linked is, in love with loyal heart:

Clyo. And for her sake, and for thine own, like friendship I impart.

King. Well sir knights, since friendship rests, where rancor did remain,
And that you are such friends become, I certain am right feign,
In hope you will continue still, you shall to Court repair,
And remain if that you please awhile, to rest you there
Till time you have decreed which way your journey you will frame*

Both. We yield you thanks, beseeching Jove still to augment your fame.

Exeunt. Clamydes. Well, come my Clyomon let us pass, and as we iourne by way,
My most misfortunes unto thee I wholly will bewray
What happened in my last affairs, and for thy sisters sake.

Clyomon. Well then Coeur d'acer come and wait, your journey you shall take,
And seeing thou art prepared, and have all things in readiness,
Have thee before to Denmark with speediness,
And tell the King and the Queen that Clyomon their son
In health and happy state to their court does return,
But in no wise to Iuliana say any thing of me.

Curdaser. I will not show one word amiss contrary your decree.

Clamydes. Well then my Clyomon, to take our leave to court let us repare:

Clyomon. As your friend and companyon Clamydes every where.

Exit. Neronis. Oh heavens! is this my loving knight whom I h^^e serud so long*
Now have I tried his faithful heart, oh so my joys does throng,
To think how fortune favors me, Nerones now be glad,
And praise the gods, thy journey now, such good success has had.
To Denmark will I have with joy my message to declare,
And tell the King how that his son does homeward now repair.
And more to make my joys abound, fortune could never frame
A finer mean to serve my turn, then this, for by the same
I may unto the Queen declare my state in secret wise,
As by the way I will recount how best I can devise.
Now pack Nerones like a page, have hence lest thou be spide,
And tell thy masters message there, the gods my journey guide.

Exit. Enter King of Denmark, the Queen, Iuliana, two Lords. King. Come Lady
Queen, and daughter eke, my Iuliana dear,
We muse that of your Knight as yet no news again you hear,
Which did adventure for your love the Serpent to subdue.

Iulia. O father, the sending of that worthy knight my woeful heart does rue,
For that alas the furious force of his outrageous might,
As I have heard subdued has full many a worthy knight.
And this last night O father past, my mind was troubled sore,
Me thought in dream I saw a Knight not known to me before,
Which did present to me the head of that same monster slain,
But my Clamydes still in voice me thought I heard complain,
As one bereft of all his joy, now what this dream does signify,
My simple skill will not suffice the truth thereof to specify.
But sore I fear to contraries, the exspect thereof will hap,
Which will in huge calamities my woeful corpse bewrap:
For sending of so worthy a Prince, as was Clamydes he,
To sup his dire destruction there, for wretched love of me.

Queene^. Tush daughter these but fancies be, which run within your mind:

King. Let them for to suppress your joys, no place of harbor find.

Lord. O Princes let no dollors dant, behold your Knight in place:

Iulia. Ah happy sight, do I behold my knight Clamydes face?

Enter Bryan Sance foy with the head on his sword. Bryan. Well, I have at last
through ^rauell long, atchiued my iourneys end,
Though Bryan, yet Clamydes name, I stoutly must defend.
Ah happy sight, the King and Queen with daughter in like case
I do behold, to them I will present my self in place:
The mighty Gods renowned King, thy princely state maintain:

King. Sir Clamydes, most welcome sure you are to court again.

Bryan. O Princes lo my promise here performed thou may see,
The Serpents head by me subdude I do present to thee,
Before thy fathers royal grace:

Iulia. My Cl^mydes do embrace.
Thy Iuliana, whose heart thou have till vital race be runne^
Since for her sake so venturously this deed by thee was done.
Ah welcome home my faithful Knight:

Bryan. Gramerces noble Lady bright.

King. Well Iuliana in our court your lover cause to stay,
For all our Nobles we will send, against your nuptial day.
Go carry him to take his rest:

Julian. I shall obey your graces hest.
Come my Clamydes go with me, in court your rest to take:

Bryan. I thank you Lady, now I see account of me you make.

Exeunt. King. Well my Queen, since daughter ours has chosen such a make,
The terror of whose valiant heart may cause our foes to quake,
Come let us presently depart, and as we did decree,
For all our nobles will we send, their nuptials for to see.

Queen. As pleases thee, thy Lady Queen O king is well agreed.

Lo. May it please your graces to arest, for lo with posting speed
A messenger does enter place:

King. Then will we stay to know the case.

Enter Neronis. Nero. The mighty powers renowned Prince preserve your state
for ay,

King. Messenger thou art welcome, what have thou to say?

Nero. Sir Clyomon your noble son, knight of the golden Sheeld,
Who for his valiant victories in Town and eke in field
Is famed through the world, to your court does now return,
And has sent me before to Court, your grace for to inform.

King. Ah messenger declare, is this of truth the which that thou have told*

Nero. It is most true O Noble king, you may thereof be bold.

King. Ah joy of joys surpassing all, what joy is this to me?
My Clyomon in Court to have, the nuptial for to see,
Of Iuliana sister his, oh so I joy in mind.

Queen. My boy where is thy master speak, what is he far behind:
Declare with speed, for these my eyes do long his face to view:

Nero. Oh Queen this day he will be here, it is truth I tell to you.
But noble Queen let pardon here my bold attempt excuse,
And for to hear a simple boy in secret not refuse.
Who has strange tidings from your son to tell unto your grace.

Exit. Lord. Behold my Lord where as I guess, some strangers enter place:

King. I hope my Clyomon be not far, Oh joy, I see his face.

Clyo. Come Knowledge, come forward, why art thou always slack?
Get you to Court, brush up our apparel, untruss your pack:
Go seek out my Page, bid him come to me with all speed you can:

Shift. Go seek out, fetch, bring he^e, gogs ounds, what am I, a dog or a man*
I were better be a hangman, and live so like a drudge:
Since your new man came to you, I must pack, I must trudge.

Clyo. How stands thou knave? why gets thou not away?

Shift. Now, now sir, you are so hasty now, I know not what to say.

Clyo. O noble Prince, the Gods above preserve thy royal grace:

King. How joyful is my heart dear son, to view again thy face?

Clyomon. And I as joyful in the view of parents happy plight,
Whom sacred gods long time maintain in honor day and night.
But this my friend O father dear, even as my self entreat,
Whose noblenes when time shall serve to you he shall repeat.

King. If case my son he be thy friend, with heart I thee embrace:

Clyomon. With loyal heart in humble wise, I thank your noble grace.

King. My Clyomon declare my son in thine adventures late,
What has bin wrought by fortune most to advance thy noble state?

Clyomon. O father, the greatest joy of all the joys which was to one assignd
Since first I left your noble court by cruel fortune blind,
Is now bereft from me away, through her accursed fate,
So that I rather find she does envy my noble state,
Then seek for to advance the same, so that I boldly may
Express she never gave so much, but more she took away.
And that which I have lost by her, and her accursed ire,
From travel will I never cease, until I may aspire
Unto the view thereof oh King, wherein is all my joy.

King. Why how has fortune wrought to thee this care and great anoy?

Clyomon. O father unto me the heavenly powers assignd a noble dame,
With whom to live in happy life, my heart did wholly frame.
But not long did that glasing sta^^e, give light unto mine eyes,
But this fell fortune gins to frown, which every state despise,
And takes away through cancred have that happy light from me,
In which I fixed had my hope, a blessed state to see:
And daughter to the King she was, which of strange Marshes hight,
Bearing brute each where, to be dame Bewties darling bright:
Right heir unto dame Virtues grace, dame Natures pattern true,
Dame Prudence scholar for her wit, dame Venus for her hue.
Diana for her dainty life, Susanna being sad,
Sage S^ha for her soberness, mild Marpha being glad.
And if I should reentre make, amongst the Muses nine,
My Lady lackt no kind of art, which man may well define
Amongst those dainty dames to be, then let all judge that hear,
If that my cause it be not just, for which this pensive cheer
Fell fortune forces me to make.

King. Yet Clyomon good counsel take.
Let not the loss of the Lady thine so pinch thy heart with grief,
That nothing may unto thy mind give comfort or relief:
What man there Ladies are enough, although that she be gone,
Then leave to wail the want of her, cease off to make this moan.

Clyo. No father, never seem for to persuade, for as is said before,
What travel I have had for her, it shall be tryple more,
Until I meet with her again.

Clamy. Well Clyomon, a while refrain,
And let me here my woes recount before your fathers grace,
But let me crave, your sister may be sent for into place.
O King vouchsafe I may demand a simple bound,
Although a stranger, yet I hope such favor may be found,
The thing is this, that you will send for Iuliana hither,
Your daughter fair, that we may talk a word or twain together.

King. For what, let me know sir knight, do you her fight desire?

Clyo. The cause pretends no harm my Liege, why he does this require.

Ki. My Lord go bid our daughter come and speak with me straight way.

Lo. I shall my Liege in every point, your mind herein obey.

Exit. Clyo. Oh father this is Clamydes, and son to Swaui^ King.
Who formy sister ventured life, the serpents head to bring:
With whom I met in travel mine, but more whad did befall,
To work his woe when as she comes, your grace shall know it all.

King. My son you are deceived much, I you assure in this,
The person whom you term him for, in court already is.

Clamy. No father I am not deceived, this is Clamydes sure.

King. Well my son do cease a while such talk to put in ure:
For lo thy sister enters place, which soon the doubt shall end.

Clamy. Then for to show my name to her, I surely do pretend,
My Iuliana noble Dame, Clamydes do embrace,
Who many a bitter brunt has bode, since that he saw thy face.
Enter Iuliana. Auant dissembling wretch, what credit can thou yield?
Where Is the serpents head thou brought, where is my glittering Sheeld?
Tush, tush sir knight, you counterfeit, you would Clamydes be,
But want of these bewraies you quite, and shows you are not he,

Clamy. O Princes do not me disdain, I certain am your knight:

Iulia. What art thou frantic foolish man* auaunt from out my sight.
If thou art he, then show my sheeld, and bring the Serpents head:

Clamy. O Princess hear me show my case, by Fortune fell decreed.
I am your Knight and when I had subdued the monster fell,
Through weary fight and travel great as Knowledge here can tell:
I laid me down to rest a space within the Forest, where
One Bryan than Sance foy hight, who with cowardly usage there,
By chaunting cha^me, brought me a sleep, then did he take from me
The Serpents head, my coat and sheeld, the which you gave to me:
And left me in his prison lo still sleeping as I was.
Lo Lady thus I lost those things the which to me you gave,
But certainly I am your Knight, and he who did deprave
The flying Serpent of his life according as you willed,
That who so won your love by him, the same should be fulfilled.

Iuli. Alas poor knight, how simply have you framed ^his excuse*
The name of such a noble knight to usurp and eke abuse.

Clyo. No si^te you are decei^ed, this is Clamydes sure:

Iulia. No brother, then you are deceived, such tales to put in ure:
For my Clamyd^s is in Court, who did present to me,
In white attire the Serpents head and Sheeld, as yet to see.

Clamy. That shall I quickly understand, O king permit I may
Have conference a while with him, whom as your grace does say,
Presents Clamydes, for to be before your royal grace:

Iuli. Behold no whit ag^st to show himself, where he does enter place.

Cla. Ah traitor, art thou he that does my name and state abuse?

Iuli. Sir knight you are too bold in presence here, such talk against him for
to use.

Bry. Wherefore do thou vpbraid me thus, thou varlet do declare?

Clio. No varlet he, to call him so, sit knight you are too blame:

Clamy. Would thou perstand for what intent such talk I here do frame?
Because I know thou do usurp my state and noble name.

Bry. Who art thou, or what is thy name? can swear quickly make:

Clamy. I am Clamydes, whose name to bear, thou here do undertake.

Bry. Art thou Clamydes? vaunt thou false usurper of my state,
Avoid this place, or death shall be thy most accursed fate.
How dare thou enterprise to take my name thus unto thee?

Clamy. Nay rather, how dare thou attempt to usurp the name of me?

Iulia. You lie Sir Knight, he does not so, against him you have it done.

Clyo. Sister you are deceived, my frind here is Clamydes Prince, the King of
Suauias son.

Iulia. Nay Brother, neither you nor he can me deceive herein.

Clamy. O King bow down thy princely ears, and listen what I say,
To prove my self the wight I am before your royal grace,
And to disprove this faithless Knight which here I find in place,
For to usurp my name so much, the combat will I try:
For before I will mine honor loose, I rather choose to die.

Ki. I like well your determined mind, but how say you sir knight?

Bryan. Nay by his ounds i will gage my gown he dares not fight:
By gogs blood I shall be slain now, if the Combat I deny,
And not for the ears of my head with him I dare try.

King. Sir knight why do you not reanswere make in trial of your name?

Bry. I will O King, if case he dare in combat try the same.

King. Well then go to prepare yourselues, each one his weapons take:

Iulia. Good father let it not be so, restrain them for my sake.
I may not here behold my Knight in danger for to be,
With such a one who does usurp his name to purchase me:
I speak not this for that I fear his force or strength in fight,
But that I will not have him deal with such a desperate wight.

King. Nay sure, there is no better way then that which is decreed,
And therefore for to end their strife the combat shall proceed:
Sir knights prepare your selves, the truth thereof to try.

Clamy. I ready am, no cowarly heart shall cause me to deny.

Bry. Nay i will never stand the trial of it, my heart to fight does faint:
Therefore i will take me to my legs, seeing my honor I must attaint.

King. Why whither runs Clamydes? Sir knight seem to stay him:

Clyo. Nay it is Clamydes O King that does fray him.

Clamy. Nay come sir come, for the combat we will try:

Bry. Ah no my heart is done, to be Clamydes I deny.

King. Why how now Clamydes, how chance you do the combat here thus shun?

Bry. Oh King grant pardon unto me, the thing I have begun
I must deny, for I am not Clamides, this is plain:
Though greatly to my shame, I must my words revoke again:
I am no other then the knight, whom they Sance Foy call,
This is Clamydes, the fear of whom, my danted mind does pall.

Julian. Is this Clamydes? ah worthy Knight, then do forgive thy deefe,
And welcome eke ten thousand times unto thy Lady here.

Clamy. Ah my Iuliana bright, what is past I do forgive,
For well I see thou constant art, and whilst that I do live,
For this, my firmed faith in thee for ever i will repose.

Julian. O father now I do deny that wretch, and do amongst my foes
Recount him for this treason wrought.

King. Well Knowledge, take him unto thee, and for the small regard
The which he had to valiant Knights, this shall be his reward,
S^th he by charms, his cruelty in cowardly manner wrought,
On Knights, who as Clamydes did, the crown of honor fought,
And traitorously did them betray, in prison for to keep,
The fruits of such like cruelty, himself by us shall reap:
By due desert therefore I charge to prison him convey,
There for to lie perpetually unto his dying day.

Bryan. Oh King be merciful, and show some favor in this case:

King. Nay, never think that at my hands thou shall find any grace.

Clamydes, ah most welcome thou, our daughter to enjoy,
The heavens be praisd that this has wrought, to foil all future noy.

Clamydes. I thank your Grace, that you thus so well esteem of me.
Enter Knowledge. What is all things finished, and every man eased?
Is the pageant packed up, and all parties pleased?
Has each Lord his Lady, and each Lady her love?

Clyomon. Why Knowledge, what meanst thou those motions to move?

Knowledge. You were best stay a while, and then you shall know,
For the Queen her self comes, the motion to show.
You sent me if you remember, to seek out your page,
But I cannot find him, I went whisling and calling through the court in such a
rage:
At the last very scacely in at a chamber I did pry,
Where the Queen with other Ladies very busy I did spy:
Decking up a strange Lady very gallant and gay,
To bring her here in presence, as in court I heard say.

Clyomon. A strange Lady Knowledge of whence is she can thou tell me?

Knowledge. Not I ant shall please you, but anon you shall see.
For lo where the Lady with your mother does come:

Clyomon. Then straightway my duty to her grace shall be done.
The mighty Gods preserve your state, O Queen, and mother dear,
Hoping your blessing I have had, though absent many a year.
Enter Queen. My Clyomon, thy sight my son does make thy aged mother glad,
Whose absence long and many a year, has made thy pensive parents sad.
And more to let thee know my son, that I do love and tender thee,
I have here for thy welcome home, a present which i will give to thee.
This Lady though she be unknown, refuse her not, for sure her state
Deserves a Princes son to wed, and therefore take her for thy more.

Clyomon. O noble Queen and mother dear, I thank you for your great good
will,
But I am otherwise bestowd, and sure I must my oath fulfill.
And so I mind if gods to fore on such decree I mean to pause,
For sure I must of force deny, my noble father knows the cause.

King. Indeed my Queen this much he told, he loved a Lady since he went,
Who has his heart and ever shall, and none but her to love he'is bent.

Clyomon. So did I say, and so I will, no beawties blaze, no glistering wight,
Can cause me to forget her love, to whom my faith I first did plight.

Nerones. Why are you so straight lac't sir Knight, to cast a Lady off so coy?
Turn once again and look on me, perhaps my sight may bring you joy.

Clyo. Bring joy to me? alas which way? no Ladies looks ca^ make me glad:

Nero. Then were my recompense but small, to quit my pain for you I had.
Wherefore sir knight do wey my words, set not so light the love I show,
But when you have bethought your self, you will recant and turn I know.

Queen. My Clyomon refuse her not, she is and must thy Lady be:

Clyo. If otherwise my mind be bent, I trust your grace will pardon me.

Nero. Well then I see it is time to speak, sir knight let me one question crave,
Say on your mind. Where is that Lady now become, to whom your plighted faith
you gave?

Clyo. Nay if I could absolve that doubt, then were my mind at ease:

Nero. Were you not brought to health by her, when you came sick once of y^
seas?

Cly. Yea sure I must confess a truth, she did restore my health to me,
For which good deed I rest her own, in hope one day her face to see.

Nero. But did you not promise her to return, to see her at a certain day,
And ere you came that to perform, the Norway King stole her away?
And so your Lady there you lost:

Clyomon. All this I grant, but to his cost.
For stealing her against her will, this hand of mine bereft his life.

Ne. Now sure sir knight you (...) him well, to reach him know an other (...)
wife:
But yet once more sir Knight reply, the trwh I c^ane to understand,
In Forest once, who gave you drink, whereas you stood with sword in hand,
(...) least some had you pursude for sl^ying of your enemy?

Cly. That did a silly shepherds boy, which there I took my Page to be.

Nero. And what is of that Page become, rema^^^ he with you, yea or no?

Clyo. I sent him hither ere I came, because the King and Queen should know,
That I in health returned was, but since, I never saw him.

Ne. And sure he stands not far from hence, though now you do not know him.

Clyo. (...) from hence, where might he be?

Nero. Of (...) Sir Knight, my self am he:
I bought your (...) the King, as here the Queen can testify:
I gave you drink in Forest sure, when you with drought were like to die.
I found you once upon the shore full sick, when as you came from seas,
I bought you home to fathers Court, I sought al means your mind to pleas,
And (...) was that all this while (...) waighted like a Page on thee:
(...) hoping for to (...) might discover me.
And so by (...) at last I did, I thank your mothers noble grace:
(...) me courteously, when I had told her all my case.
And now (...) suffice my dear, I am Neronis whom you see,
Wh^ (...) gone, before and since I met with thee.

Clyo. (...) fight, O words more worth then gold,
(...), O my (...) arme^ I here unfold,
To clasp thy (...) corpse withal, twice welcome to thy knight.

Nero. And I enioyfull am no doubt, my Clyomon of thy happy sight.

Clyo. (...) my assured friend, lo how Dame Fortune favors me,
This is (...) my (...) love, whose face so long I wished to see.

Clamy. My Clyomon, I am arg^^d as you your self to see this day:

Ki. Well daughter though a stranger yet, welcome to Court as I may say.

Queen. And Lady as welcome unto me, as if thou were mine only child.

Nero. For this your gracious courtesy, I thank you noble Princes mild.

(...). Though strange and unacquainted yet, do make account you welcome are,
Your (...) day as well as mine, I know my father will prepare.

King. Yes we are pressed your nuptial day with daughter ours to see,
As well as Clyomons our son, with this his Lady fair:
Come therefore to our Court, that we the same may soon prepare.
For we are pressed throughout our land, for all our Peers to send:

Omnes. Thy pleasure most renowned King, thy servants shall attend.

FINIS.

