The agreement of the holy Fathers, and Doctors of the church, upon the
chiefest articles of Christian religion, as appears on the next side
folowinge, very necessary for all curates. Gathered together by John Angel
priest, one of the Queen's majesty's Chapleyns.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The contents of the book.
i. Of the holy and blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. ii. Of
the sign of the cross. iii. Of prayinge for the dead. iiii. Of penance,
confession, and satisfaction. v. Of praying to saints vi. Of the counsels, and
auctorities of the fathers. vii. Against the marriage of preistes.
To the most excellent and virtuous Princesses Queen Marye, wife to our
most soueraynge Lord, Philip by the grace of God. etc. John Angel, one of
your graces chaplyns of your honorable Chapel, wissheth perpetual
felicity, not only in this world, but also in the world to come.
Among the innumerable benefits which we have received of almightye God
(most worthy and excellent Princess) there is none in mine opinion for the
which we are more bound unto his merciful goodness, then for that it has
moved him of his gentle benignite, to call unto us again his true religion,
which our forefathers has kept from ye beginning. For who knows not that
this noble realm of England has been seduced even now of late days, thorough
ignorance, nay, nay, rather thorough stubbernes, and for lack of grace. For
they knowinge him as God, honored him not as God: but thinking themselves
wise, became fools. Who eue^ among ye simple people, perceaueth not what
intolerable abuses have been (under pretense of true relygion and godlynes)
used and maynteyned in this church of England? As false interpretinge of
Scriptures, utterly denying of ye holy doctors and fathers of Christ's
church, but only such as made for their purpose. Till such time that it
pleased him of his infinite mercy, to send us a new Judith, by whose godliness
the true light and knowledge of Gods word is now by her brought again,
which from the death of that noble prince her father Henry ye. viii. was here
in this realm extuncte, and utterly abolished, to the utter undoing of men's
conscience: but now thanks be to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
begins to spring and shine again. This noble Judith is our most
soueraygne Lady Queen Mary, a Princess garnished with so many excellent
gifts of grace, virtue, nature, and fortune, that she is in very deed, (and
therefore most worthily called) the perfect mirroure, and pearl of al
Christen Princess. To wade her in ye praise of her Princely qualities, and
noble acts, it is not my purpose, for that I know it to be an enterprise far
exceeding the compass of my simple wit and understanding. But only to
declare how much we are bound, chiefly unto God, and next unto her most
excellent highness, that we have now our old and true religion brought home
again: and are cured again through God by her, of our old blyndenes that we
were in, by the medecyne of verity. For we now having again the true
knoweledge of God, which our forefathers has left behind them by wrytinge,
we begin again to se and perfectly to know Christ to be in the Sacrament
of the altar, whom to know perfectly, is ever lasting life and salvation.
But so long as the said Scriptures were falsely interpreted, by Sedicious and
false preachers, and ye true knowledge of Scripture kept from the people, few
or none knew Christ aryght: and none less then they, who took upon them to be
ye chief professors, and setters forth of Christ's religion. For what else is
it know Christ, but to believe his word? Who shows me which is his word, but
the catholic church. For S. Augustyne says: I would never have believed ye
Gospel but by the church. So that it appears thereby, how greatly they are
deceived, that will take upon them to deny the old fathers of Christ's
church, to maynetayne their unthrifty purposes: yea, and not only those: but
also certain places of ye Bible that makes not for them. For surely it is the
holy fathers that shows and expounds unto us plainly the Scriptures,
which now of late has been in controversy, not with good men, (but with those
that be of the evil sort, as hereafter shall follow) whose judgments be very
godly.

Teachinge us truly to know by faith, how that the body of Christ is in the
Sacrament of the altar: because his words does so evidently declare the same,
saying: This is my body. And forasmuch as these holy fathers hereafter
following, has left their minds in writing (as concerning ye presence of
Christ's real body, to be in the Sacrament of the altar, and not only of
this, but of certain other matters which has been in question) unto all
people that will be saved, none except. For now (thanks be to God) I trust
that Idolatry, hypocrisye, and all ungodliness, is clean plucked up by the
roots: and that the true religion of God has taken his place again. Now is
false doctrine exiled, and Gods word truly preached and set forth. Now is
that abomination and desolation pluckte down: and the true worshyppyng of
Christ in the Sacrament set up again. Now I trust in almighty God, that
England has forsaken all their abominable preachers and teachers against the
presence of Christ to be in the Sacrament of the altar, with all their ungodly
devises, and deuelysh inuencions. For if that you (O England) had that grace
given unto the of God, that thou would call unto thy remembrance, how that
this Judith, at the risynge of our Holifernus, had the hearts of men, and not
the bodies: And that at the risynge, and proceeding forth of that pestiferous
traitor Wyat, had the bodies and not the hearts and yet overcame her enemies by
the power of God, it were such a miracle unto the, whereby to cause the to
forsake all thy noughty opinions and errors. But yet this you must think that
it comes by the mere mercy and goodness of almighty God toward us, and not
of our deseruinges: who has raised up unto us, now in these our latter days,
this noble Judith, a Lady of most excellent gifts, and singular qualities,
whollye given to the study of virtue and godliness. Wherefore all England has
just occasion to rejoice at this your graces doings, in that ye be so
studious to call us home again (like lost sheep that has run astray) to our
old and true religion, which our old fathers has left behind them from
time to time: besechinge almightye God therein to be your strength, shield and
buckler. Most humbly beseching your grace (most gracious Lady) in good past to
take this my good zele and diligence. And in case any thing shall not
sufficiently answer your graces mind, or desire, the same to impute rather to
the lack of faculty and knowledge, then to any defaute of good will in me. I
shall here without any farther circumstaunce of words, commend, and leave
this small work to the diligent reading, and folowinge of all true Christen
people. And with most hearty prayer, beseech almightye God long years to
prosper and continewe the prosperouse estate of your highness, to the end that
by your good help and means, the devout people of this your realm, may
receive this which is Gods procedynges, and your graces gentle embracinges, to
their continual health, and comfort both of body and soul, to the will of
GOD, through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the father, and the son,
and the holy ghost, be all laud, honor, and glory, both in heaven and earth,
for ever and ever. Amen.

Anacletus bishop and Martyr, in his first Epistle written to all
congregations.
GOd sacrificers, his divine mynisters, ought not in any wise to be troubled,
but to be mayntayned, vpholden and supported of every man. Gods sacrificers,
trewly while they execute that office, ought not alone to be without wytnes of
true and just performance of their deutie. But being occupied in this holy
action, to have assistens, coadiutors, and hearers: to thy lord god
promyscually in every place: but in that place which the Lord has chosen.
A Bishop sacrynge at the altar, let him have witness with him, (as I have
said before) yea, and more then any other priest. For as he sits on the
higher pynacle of honor: so it is behouable at his mynistrynge, yt there be
present greater nombre of records, upon more solemn days. A Bishop should
have seven, five, or three Deacons at the least, which be called his eyes, with
subdeacons, and other ministers, who clothed in holy apparelmentes, before and
behind, with preistes on every side, dyrectly of the right against the left,
Contrite in heart, and humble in spryt. Standing also with upright faces to ye
heauenwardes, shall keep him from all violence and vylanye. of the church.

Saint Clement martyr, the third from Peter.
ought to be believed enest ye things he has taught. And in his second Epistle
to James ye Lords brother, entyteled: de sacris, uasis, and uestibus. Bishop
Clement to his derely beloved James, Bishop of Jerusalem. Forasmoche as we have
so received, and be so taught by saint Peter, the Father of all Apostels, who
took the keys of heaven, how we should use the sacraments, and what we should
judge and defend of them, which are executed in ye holy places, it is semyng
that I instruct you of the order of the same. The sacraments of the divine
secrets, are committed to three degrees: yt is to say: a pressed, a deacon, and a
subdeacon, who with fear and trymblyng of god, ought to gather or keep
together ye fragments of the Lords body: Least any corrupcion be found or
stycke in the place where the hoosts ought to be kept, lest when it is
negligently laid up, the body of our Lord should be much indamaged. For
the communion of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, if it be neglygently
delte, and the preast do not regard ye admonyshments of lower officers, let
him be stryken with some grievous sequestracion, and humbled or ponyshed with a
plage. Certes, let so great and large sacrifice be offered in the alter in
quantytie, as be suffycient for the rated nombre of people: if there be any
surpluse remayninge after the dystrybucyon, let the^ not be reserved until the
next morning. But lowly and dreadefully let the clerks receive them. And they
which do consume the residue of the Lords body being left in the place of
reseruacion: let them not by and by go to gether, to assaye or fyl them selves
with common meats, and
lest they entermyngle other victual, to the holy porcyon which ought first by
degestyon to be conuayde into ye innermost and entier parts. Therefore if they
take repast of the Lords body, let the ministers which have so done in ye
morrow early, fast until the six hour. And if they have eaten the Lords
porcyon at the third or fourth hour: let them abstain from meat till night,
thus by secret sanctyfycation ye everlasting sacraments are to be kept. And
it to loweth: for the business of the Lord ought not to be slackly
accomplysshed. Again, and again, we demand, and command of ye fragmentes
and remanents of the body of our Lord, and the Chalice ordained for the vessel
of our Lords blood, let it be warely and dilyge^tly prepared by the mynister:
lest it scars clean washed by the deacon, may turn him to trespass in
offeringe. Thus with al honestye such things as we have before spoken of, must
be fulfilled. And in ye third Epistle to the same intent (of the office of
preistes and clerks) be not to be admynistred in ye holy scripture, both ye new
and tholde testamente instructynge us. This assertyon the Apostles have
received and learned of our Lord: And this have they delivered and taught us.
And these things we teach, and I join you all which have in hand any
spiritual charge, to hold, use, keep, and execute the same, with out any
repyne or reprehension.

S. Denyse the Arapagyte whom Paul makyth mention of in the Acts of
thappostelles.xvii. Chapter, and was his disciple.
Saint Denyse one of the number of the severe Judges of Athens converted by
Saint Paul. And by Saint Clement, with these holy men Rusticus and Elutherius
sent into France: In the third part of the second Chapter entreatynge of
Ecclesiastical governance. In the last end of al things dew to be done in
perfight baptysinge. The bishop calls ye baptized to ye most holy Eucharist,
and gives unto them the Godly communion of the chief and most sovereign
sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in the first
part of ye.iii. chap. Nor it is almost Godly or right any deutye belonging a
preistes office to be executed, oneles he acco^plishe this divine and most
riall sacrament of Euchariste. And in ye second part of the said chapter.
And the principalles of the same order together with the preistes do put upon
the altar the holy bread, and the chalyce of benedictio^: when there has
gone before an universal praise, and confession of the hole quere. That done
the reuerente prelate making an holy prayer, does show holy peace to all the
congregacyon. And when they have one another saluted, the mystical reheresall
of holy things is made. And when the prelate and other preistes have washed
their hands, the Bishop stands at the mids of the altar.

All the only elect and chosen preistes that shall receive, taken out of
the nombre of the mynisters do stand about. But the bishop as soon as he
has praised and extolled the Godly gifts: makes ye holy and high mysteries,
and shows openly those things which he has extolled, before hyd and
covered with reverent tokens. And holdinge in sight reverently the Godly
rewards, he him self is turned to the holy communion of the Lords maundeth:
and does exhort the people to take part. At the last communion received and
given to all that come to receive it, he gives thanks and fynyssheth ye
mysterys. And in the third part of the same Chapter, in this manner truly
when that the last and most excellent bounty of God is praised and magnified:
ye divine drink and cup of blessing is handled and propounded. worthily, and
purely distribute it. And yt they, who be about to receive ye holy communion,
may worthily take part with him. And so he mynistreth the most reuerente
mystery, and sets them in sight propounded holilye under signs. Either else
he opens, and discovers the covert and vndeuyded bread, brekynge it in
pieces and partynge one chalyce among the^ all, he does multyply shaply and
distribute ye unite of our Lords blood, contained within ye said chalyce.
Thus consumyth the holy mysterye. For that wine symply and secretly ye blood of
our Lord by his dyuyne word in his assumption of our humayne nature, has
gone before and occupied place or he was entered that compound and visible
sign of his incomparable bownty and power: wherein it is mercyfully made
evident with how suer a knot of socyetye, he has fastened us to him, ioyninge
his divine excellent existence to our earthy matters. Surely let us agree with
him, even as members with the body, and let us be glued unto him by
semblablenes of clean and godly living. Lest murdered with vglye vice, we may be
made unmeet for the dyuine and most delicate members, being not able to styck
with him, but slydynge into co^tynuance of naughty life.

The words of the holy man Marcial, which was sent of saint Peter to preach
the gospel
A Sacrifice is offered upon an alter unto God, not to man nor Angel. Nor that
is not only done upon an alter hallowed, but a clean sacrifyce is offered unto
God in every place as he does testifye, whose boody and blood we offer, to
obtain everlasting life. Truly even the same offering which the Jews made
in despyte, wenynge to have abolished his name out of the earth, which we
make in the consecrate alter for our salvation, knowing and believing only by
this remedy, to attain life and escape death. For this the Lord commanded us
to do in remembrance of him.

Ignatius the disciple of Saint John the Evangelist.


Saint Alexander bishop the First martyr. C.xx. Alexanderin his Epistle to all
churches.


Saint Ireneus, Polycarpus disciple, in his.iiii. book


For God in that he is God: has nether breath bones ne flesh. But speaking
as concerning that disposition and proportion which is like unto man which
stands compacte of flesh, synowes, and bones, which is norished with the
cup, which is the blood, and is enoreasyd with the bread which is his
body.

Tertulyane in his book of resurrection of the flesh.
OVre flesh eats the body and blood of Christ, that ye soul also may be
replenyshed and fully fed with God.

And in his book of prayer he says, bread is the word of the lyuinge God,
which came down i^to his footstool of the earth from his throne of heaven.
Then his veraye body is demyd and thought to be in the similitude of bread.
Saying: This is my body.

S. Cypryan martyr. ccxlix Cypryan Martyr in the first book of his Epistelles
in the second epistle.
NOw not only to the weak or sick but to ye valyant peace is necessary. Not
only to persons departing, but to the living communion should be minystred,
to ye intent we may not leave the^ naked and weaponles, whom we exhort to
battle. But yt we may defend them with the shield of the body and blood of
Christ. And when ye body and blood of Christ is ministered yt it may be a
sauegarde to the receauers, and that we Arm them with ye armor of the Lords
health, who^ we would save against our gostely enemy. For why should we teach,
or move them to spend their blood in confessinge Christ's name, if in this
chiuallry we deny them the blood of Christ? Or by what means do we make them
fyt for the cup of martyrdom, if we do not admyt them first to drink of the
chalice of ye righteous co^municatynge of ye Lord in ye church.

De cena domini.
this his most true and holy body, and makes it holy, blesses it, and
deuideth it to them which deuoutely receaueth it.

In the same.


And as in the person of Christ, ye manhod was seen and the Godhed hid, so
in the visible sacrament the divine nature invisible, infundeth him self, to
the intent that about the sacrament should be devotion.

And in the same.


Idem
The high pressed brings forth bread and wine, this is (says he) my body, they
eat and drink of the same bread after a visible form: but before these words,
yt meat was common, only it was profitable for the body to be norished, and
gave help of a corporal life. But from what time it was of the Lord spoken,
this do in remembrance of me, it is flesh and blood. As often as with these
words and this faith it is done (that supersubstancial bread, and cup of
benediction, solemplye consecrate) it does profight to life and health of the
hole Man: Also being a medecyn and brent offeringe to heal infirmyties, and
pourge iniquities. That it was an other thing, that first was set forth and
consumed, and an other that was given of ye master and distributed, when the
false mind of Judas touched ye holy meat. The holy sanctified bread enteryd
into the cursed mouth, the murdering mind not being able to sustain ye
might of so great a sacrament, was blown away like chafe from the flower,
and ran hedlynge to perdition, to desperation, and to the rope.

The sacrament, Christ sometime calls it his body, sometime his flesh and
blood, and sometime bread.

Origin in his.v. Homilye. Domine non sum dignus.
When ye receive ye holy meat and uncorrupted dishe, thou do use the bread
and the cup of life, thou eatest and drinkest ye body and blood of our Lord,
there the Lord enterest into thy house.

Did. Viii
The sacrament ye Lord did institute

When these words be spoken (says Origin) This is my body, and this is my
blood, there is a certain conversion made of bread and wine into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ.

Therefore ye Lord Jesus going to ye invisible things of his Fathers magestie,
the figuratyue paschall being scelebrate with ye disciples, excels.

Chrisostem in his.lxxxiii. Homili. Upon Saint Math.
LEt us believe God in every thing and not say against him, Verba dei
defraudari non pu^t
yea although the thing that he says does appear an inconvenience both to our
senses, thought, and understanding, and does also exceade our senses,
capacite, and reasone. Let us I beseech you, believe his words in all things,
but chefly in the sacrament, not only upon those things, which lie before us:
His words can no the deceived, our senses man easily be deceived
but considering also his words. For by his words we can not be deceived,
His words can not be false, oursences are most easy to be dyssayued. Wherefore
seeing Christ has said. This is my body, let us nothing doubt thereof but
believe and perceive it with the eyes of our understanding.

In his.iii. book, Dialogorum, Cap. iiii.
Behold the dignite of the preisthode whereupon we speak, for it is done in
earth, but his office is contained in heavenly busynesses. For consequently,
neither man, nor Angel, Non homo non Angelus, nec Archangelus hoc sacramentu^
instituit.
nor archangell, nor virtue, nor any other creature but ye holy ghost has
institute this office, and yet remaining in flesh, has given to peruse the
minystery of angels. For the which thing ye bishop must (as he that were in
heaven, and were mixed to ye virtues) do this thing, so it is lightenyd with the
brightness of life. For when you see our Lord offered, and the priest standing
at the altar with insence, and praing for him self and for ye people, thou
think thou art with men, and not straight way translatyd into the heuenes:
and excludinge al sense of the flesh out of thy mind, thou do with naked
soul, and with most clear remembrance, behold those things yt be in heavenly
places.



In his sermon of Judas the traiter.
Where will thou yt we prepare the passover. Not that, yt is ours: Sermons de
Jude proditione
but in the mean season he understood the Jews passover. And the disciples
did prepare, but this that is ours, he him self did ordain, and not only
ordain, but he is it yt made it. Why did Christ eat it? yea, for he did
fulfill al things thar were of the law. And because ye Jews passed away by
forgetti^g ye benefyttes of God, he with ye scelebracion of the festiuitie did
strenketh memory unto them of his benefittes, and therefore did he command ye
passover to be sanctified. And by that also was another greatter benefyt
showed, that that lamb was a figure of a lamb to come. Agnus paschalis umbra.
Christus veritas. Super Epistolam ad Hebreos, Cap. 17.
And that blood showed ye coming of ye Lords blood. That lamb was a shadow,
this a verite. And therefore in it, both ye passover of the figure and verite is
celebrat. Now therefore their sweet breades be unclean, their festiual days
unlawful. Quotidie offerendu^.
And this sacrifice is one, Vna est hostia,
not many. For that was offered into the holy of the holiness, and this
sacrifice is an ensample of that, ye very same do we offer, and not now one
lamb and to morrow an other, but always one. Therefore this sacrifice is one,
Vbique Deus offertur.
else by ye reason, because it is offered in many places, there be many
Christ's. No, Commemoratio.
but ye Lord is every where one, and here being full, and there full, one body,
for as he that is offered every where, is one body, and not many bodies, eue^
so also is the sacrifice one. Idem sacri sicium.
which then offered can not be consumed, and that we do, is done in
remembrance of him. None other sacryfyce do we but always the same. Super Math.

Let all men believe that even now also is celebrate ye supper in which Christ
him self did sit. For there is no dyfference between that and this. For that is
not made of man, and this of him. Therefore when thou seist ye pressed give yt the
body, think not that it is reached to the by the hands of the pressed, but by
christ's. For as in baptism, thou art not baptized of the pressed, but of God:
So has not God to Aungelles committed this office. But he being present
byddeth and says: let us here therefore as well the prestes as other. How
great, how marvelous a thing is granted to us. Let us here I pray you, and
be afraid of his flesh given to us, his own flesh offered, has he set
forth to the Jews every year in remembrance of his benefyttes. Christus
quotidie nobis proponitur.
God has set forth holy days to the: daily that you should not forget, is
he set forth. For this is a sacrament of peace. Let no Judas, no Simon come to
this thy table.

The Jews passover was an example but yt is void and past: but now is com unto
us the spiritual passover, which Christ him self made. For when they did
eat and drink, he took bread and brake it, and said: this is my body which
shall be given for you. They know what I speak, which be consecrate to divine
misteris. And afterward he took the cup and said: this is my blood which
shall be shed for you in remission of sins. And Judas was persent, Christ
saying these words, this is my blood. Say Judas, whom have thou sold for.xxx.
pense. This is the same blood of which thou made a bargayne before with ye
Pharyseys. Oh mercy of Christ. Dementia Jude,
Oh madness of Judas. He made a bargyn to sell Christ for.xxx. pense. And Christ
of his clemency offered to him the same blood that he had sold, that he might
have had remission of his sins, if he had not ben unfaithful. Remissio
peccatoru^ sanguine Christi
For he was present at the communicacion of that Sacrifice. And his fete also
Christ did wash, as of the others, that he should have had none excuse of his
malice: But he being detestable, thought the lyinges in weight of his mind.
But now, a convenient time does inuit us to the terrible table, and with a
congruent watching. Let no Judas be found there: Let no wicked person come
thereto, nor none priked with poison, nor no dissayteful words be pronounced with
the tongue, nor that ye lyinge in wayt be not hyd in ye mind, but that, yt the
will possesses: yea and let ye speech declare the same. For now is Christ him
self ready, which adornyd that table, and he does also consecrate this, which
we now have. For it is not man which (consecracion of the table being set
forth) does make the body and blood of Christ: but it is Christ which is
crucified for us. The words be spoken by ye prestes mouth, but they be
consecrated by the power of God.

De sacrorum perttcipacione misterioru^ quod communicare nole^s, nec oracione^
dignus est interesse, to, iiii. fo, ccxi, Hom. lx, Ioh. Euang.
Parents do often put their childern to other to be norsyd, but I say says
christ do not so. But with my flesh I do norishe, I put my self unto you,
willing you al to be gentelmen, and pretending good expectation of you of
things to come. Which do here give my self to you, much more in the world to
come. I have willed to be your brother. I have taken flesh and blood for you:
unto you again I give that same flesh and blood, by which I am made your cosyn.
This blood makes to us a floryshing image of a king. This blood is an honor
ye can not be done away. This blood does not suffer the gentelnes of ye soul
to consume, ever freshinge it and norishing it. For of meats blod springinge in
us, is not strayghtwaye made that, but some other thing. But this is not so:
but by and by it wateryth the mind, and brings in a certain grace, virtue,
or strength. Angels, for where they se ye Lords blood, devils fly away, and
angels come, to this bloudeshed wassheth all the world.

More saynges of Chrisostom in his Homily.xxiiii. 1. Cor. x.
The thing that is in the chalice is that which ran out of Christ's side,
and we are partakers of it.

Liber. iiii. cap. iii. de dignitate sacerdotali.
O Great good will of God toward us, O miracle, he yt syttethe upon the
right hand of his father in heaven above, is contained in men's hands, in
the time of sacrifice.

Homili. XVii. Episcopi. ad heb. ix. ca.
in every place where the Sacrament is, which is here in this place full, and
there in that place also full or hole.

Homil. ad Antiochenum populum


Homil, xlv, super Iohannem,
It is not man that makes our Lords body and blood, of those things set
forth upon the table to be consecrated, but it is Christ that was crucified
for us: The words are pronounced of ye priest, and these things, (bread and
wine) are consecrated by Gods power and grace, for he said: This is my body.
By these words the bread and wine are consecrated.

If a man look in how much he is bound to flesh and blood, To. li, 6, (...)
alogoru^ Cap. 5.
and to be able to be made nigh to ye blessed and simple nature, then
diligently should he understand that it were mete to honor priests by ye grace
of the holy ghost, Sacerdotes honorandi
for by them these mysteries be fulfilled, and other no less then these,
being so great, either because of our health, or else because of dignity. For
they ye inhabit earth and be conuersau^t in it, has deserved to dispense
heavenly things. Potestatem ligandi et soluendi dedit h^me^nibus non Angelis
nec arch^ angelis.
and they have received power, which god nether gave to Angels, nor
Archaungels: nor it was not said to the^, what things soever ye bind on earth,
they shall be hou^de also in heaven, and what things so ever ye loose, they
shall be loosed.

The princes of the world has also a certain power of byndinge, but which is
only laufull in bodies, Que sacer dotes agu^t in terris, Christus confirmat in
celis.
but this bo^de which is commyt to preistes, it goyth to the soul and passes
to heaven. That those things that preistes do beneth, God does also confirm
in heaven, and corroborateth the sentence, for it is no other thing to be
called, but woodnes to contempne that misterye, Sine sacramento Eucharistie
nulla salus nec promissa red. duntur.
with out which neither is health given us, nor those good things that be
promised should be given, for none shall be able to go into the kingdom of
heaven, but those that be borne again of water and of the spirit. And he that
eats not the flesh of our LORD and drynketh not his blood, shall not have
life everlasting, which be made with no other hands then with the holy hands
of the pressed, Solue sacerdos co^secrat.
nor can have the reward of promyses, nor escape the fire of hell, but by ye
office of these things. These be they that bring us forth in a spiritual
generation, and execute them by the generation of baptim, by them we be clothed
with Christ, and by them we be joined to the son of God, by them we be also
made members of that blessed head.

Saint Ambrose was within.cclxxx. after Christ in his.iiii. book of
sacraments. the.xiiii. cap.
WHo is the author of the sacraments, but our Lord Jesus? these sacraments
came from heaven, for all counsel is from heaven, but verily great and Godly
is the miracle, that God rayned from heaven to the people Angels food. Exodus
16.
And ye people labored not, and yet did eat, now the priest uses not his own
word, but the words of Christ. Therefore the word of Christ does make or
consecrate this sacrament. Which word of Christ? it truly, by the which al
things are made. The Lord commanded, and heaven was made. The Lord
commanded, and the earth was made. The lord commanded and the seas was made.
The Lord commanded and every creature was begotten and borne. See you than
how mighty in working the word of God is? therefore, if so great power,
strength: and virtue be in the word of our lord Jesus, ye things which were
not, began to be: how much more is it able to work yt the things were, might
be changed into another thing? heaven was not, ye sea was not, Psa. 14*
ye earth was not. But here ye prophet David speaking of god, he spoke the
word, and the things were made, he commanded and the things was created.
Than let me answer, it was not ye body of christ before the consecration, but
after the consecration I say unto the, that now it is the body of Christ. He
spoke the word and it was done, he commanded and it was created. Thou thy
self was: but thou was an old creature. After yt thou was dedicated to God
and baptisyd, thou began to be a new creature. Wylt thou know how new a
creature thou art? Every man (says Saint Paul) is by Christ anew creature,
here therefore, 2. Cor. 5.
lo, the word of Christ has been wont to change every creature: and
changes when it will the customs and ordinances of nature. Thou requirest
how? Harken. And first of all let us take example of Christ's generation. The
custom is, that man can not be generate but of man and woman, and wedlock
company: but because it was our Lords pleasure who choose this Sacrament,
Christ was borne of the holy ghost, and of a vyrgyn, that is to say: the
mediatoure of God and men, Christ Jesus very man. Than thou see, that
against the custom and order of nature, a man was borne of a vyrgin. Take an
other example. Exodus 14
The children of Israel was oppressed of the Egiptians, closed in with the sea
on every side, by the commandment of God Moses touched the water with his
rod, and the water divided her self a sonder: which verily was not after the
custom of her nature, but according to the grace of the heavenly
commandment. Take an other example. Exodus, 15.
The children of Israel was thurstye, and came to a fountain of water, the
which was bitter, not able to be drunk: Holy Moses did cast a tree into the
water, and it was made sweet which before was bitter, that is to say: it
changed the custom of nature, and took the swetnes of grace. Take also ye
fourth example It fortuned as a man was felling down a tree besides the floude
Iordayne, 4, Reg. 6.
the axe head full into the water and sonke to the botome (as the custom of
Iron is to do) the prophet Heleseus did cast a stick of wood into the water,
and immediately the Iron came up and swymmed above the water, the which verily
is against ye nature of iron. For the stuff and substance of Iron is much
heuyer than is ye element of water. Do thou the^ by these examples
understand how mightily the heavenly word works? if ye heavenly word has
wrought in an earthy fo^tayne, if it has wrought in other things, does not it
also work in ye heavenly sacraments? Pauis f^eory 9 christi.
than you have learned yt of bread may be made the body of Christ. And ye wine
and water is put into ye chalice: Respo^
so do thou drink the similitude of the preciouse blood, that there be no
fear of blood, and yet yt it may work the price of redemption. Thou have
therefore learned, that ye thing which thou take is the body of Christ, and
ye blood of our Lord.

Will thou know that it is consecrate with heavenly words. Here what the words
be. The pressed says: Make (says he) this oblation enrolled, reasonable which
is a figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: Qui pridie.
which the day before that he suffered, he took bread in his holy hands,
looked to heaven, to his holy father almighty God, geuynge thanks, blessed,
brake, and being broken, gave it to his Apostels and Disciples, saying: Take
and eat of this all, for this is my body that shall be broken for many. And in
like manner, he took the cup after he had supped (the day before that he
should suffer) and looked to heaven, to the holy father almyghtye, everlasting
God, geuynge thanks, blessed, gave it to his Apostels and Disciples, saying:
Take and drink of this all, for this is my blood. Se al these be the words
of the Euangelyst unto, Take ye, whether it be the body or blood, then be the
words of Christ: Take and drink of it all, ^ Corpus christi est.
but when the words of Christ come, it is the body of Christ. Furthermore
hear him saying: Take and eat of it all: this is my body, Lib. 4. de
Sacramentis
Now come with me to my proposition. It is surely a great and worshypfull
thing, that he did raygne Manna from heaven to the Jews. But understand, what
is more, the Manna from heaven, or the body of Christ? Surely the body of
Christ, which is maker of heaven. Bread is turned into the body of Christ.
This is my body, a misterye is done. And bread is turned into Christ's
body. If thou ask how? we leauinge these things not certain, do affirm
that which is of auctorities, that is to say, that the substance of bread and
wine, is converted into the substance of the body and blood of our lord.

And we be not ashamed to confess that we know not the manner of turnynge. For
the things that remain of the former substance, accidentia manent
be accidents, that is: the color, savor, form, and weyghte. Nor yet they
do make the body of Christ, nor can be grounded therein. But if it be asked
where they be founded, we say, Hic deo ide^s manet sine subiectodo uirtute
diuina,
that by divine miracle, they be sustained without substance.

This is truly a great misterye, and unsearchable. We be commanded to
believe: we be not permitted to discuss, We be commanded to believe, but not to
discuss.
all things that the Lord would he did in hea-and in earth. And because so he
would, so it was. So though the figure of bread and wine be seen: yet after
the consecration, we must believe nothing else, but the flesh and blood of
Christ. Wherefore the truth does say to his Disciples: This is my flesh for
the life of the world, and that I might speak more maruelously it is plainly
none other but that which was borne of the virgin Marye, and suffered on the
cross, and rose out of the grave. This I say is it. And therefore is it ye
flesh of Christ, which for the life of ye world yet to day is offered, the
bread of angels is made the meat of men: wherefore he says: I am the lively
bread which came down from heaven. Also, the bread which I will give is my
flesh for the life of the world. By these two sentences it is given openly to
be understood, that this bread and that, be not two, but one bread and one
flesh, and without doubt is made one body. That verily, yt surely, which was
taken of the virgyn, yt suffered, that was buried, that arose again and
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father, and
which is to come, to Judge the quick and the dead. And that thou may know
this to be a sacrament, the figure of this went before, afterward, know how
great a Sacrament it is, Of the excellency and gretnes of this Sacrament.
se what he says. As often as ye shall do this, so often shall ye make a
remembrance of me until I come. would take this oblation into thy high alter,
by ye hands of thy holy Angels, as you haste vouchesafe to receive the
rewards of thy Just seruante Abell, and the sacrifice of our patriarch
Abraham, and that which the high priest Melchisedech has offered unto the.
Therefore how often soever you do receive? what says the Apostel to ye. How
often so ever we do take, we do show the Lords death. If we show death, we
show remission of sins: Remission of sins.
how ofter so ever blood is shed, it is shed in remission of sins. I must
always take it that my sins may be remytted. I that always do sin must
always have a medison. De Sacramentis. li. 6. Cap. 1
For as our Lord Jesus Christ is the true son of God, not as men by grace,
but as a son of the substance of his father: So is it the very flesh (as
he said) and the very blood which we drink. But perauenture ye may say,
how very flesh? I that se ye similitude se not the truth of the blood.
First I told you of the word of Christ, which works that it is able to
change and convert kinds of nature institute. Farthermore when his disciples
did not take the word of Christ, but hearing that he would give them his
flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, they went back, yet Peter only
said, thou have the words of life, and shall I go from the? Therefore least
that mo should say so, as there were a certain fear of blood, but that the
grace of the redemer might abide still, therefore in a similitude thou take
the sacrament: but yet thou gettest the grace and virtue of the true nature.

In his first prayer at mass.
I O Lord reme^bringe thy passion, do come unto thine alter, all though I be a
sinner, yt I may offer to the that sacrifice, which you dydest ordain and
command to be offered, for our salvation in remembrance of the.

Aduersus uigilantium.
I reprove all opinions against ye church and openly condemn the^.

Amb. de fide ab Garcianum.
Away with Arguments where faith is sought

Thomas had a great cause to marvel when he saw Christ's body brought into the
house with out hurt through, ye gates closed, which could not be passed
through with men's bodies.

Saint Ambrose in his book De spiritu sancto, lib, iii. Cap. xii.


S. Augustyne. Fo. xxxviii Here begins the saying of Saint Augustyne,
priore contione. Psalm. 33. Cum fugerit David Saul persecutorem iniquiens ait.
Christ was borne in his own hands.
CHrist was borne in his own hands. How can that be in man? Who can
understand, for who is borne in his own hands? A man may be borne in other
men's hands, no man is borne in his own hands. How it may be understand
in David (after the letter) I find not, in Christ we find. Christ truly was
borne in his own hands, when he (giving his body) says: This is my body,
That body verily was borne in his own hands.

Contra literas Petiliani. Lib. ii.
It is another passover that the Jews do celebrate with a sheep, and an other
that we celebrate in the body and blood of our Lord. Christ in Sacraments,
few in nombre, most excellent in signification, has bound together a
felowshyppe of new people. As baptysme is consecrate in the name of the
Trinity, Ad Ianuarium. Epi. 118.
and the communicatynge of the body and blood of him. And if any other
thing be commended therein Scriptures canonical, it does plainly appear,
what time the Apostels took first the body and blood of our lord, that they
did not take it fasting, is it therefore to accuse maliciously the universal
church, that it is always received of the fasting? For that cause it pleased
the holy ghost, that in the honor of so great a sacrament, that the body of
our Lord should first enter into the Christian mouth before other meats.
Therefore thoroughout all the world this manner is observed. Let us hear our
Lord, not speaking of the sacrament of baptysme, De peccatorum merits et
remissionem.
but of the sacrament of his holy table. Except ye eat my flesh, and drink
my blood, ye shall not have life in you. What do we seek more? What can they
answer to this? except with stubbornes they do bend their brawling synowes,
contrary to the clear truth. Was not the Lord ones offered in him self? and
yet in the Sacrament, not only by all the solempnities of Easter, but every
day to the people is offered. Nor he does not lie, Omni die populus immolatur
which being demanded, did answer him to be offered. For if the Sacrament
had not a certain similitude of those things whereof they be Sacraments,
they should not be Sacraments at all. Therefore they be called sacraments,
because one thing is seen in them, and another thing understood. That which
is seen has a bodily form: Epistola ad bonifacium,
that which is understand, has a spiritual fruit. He that takes the
mysterye of an unity, and keeps not the bond of peace, he takes not the
bond of mystery for him self, but a witness against him self. I remember my
saying when I did treat of Sacraments, I told you that after the words of
Christ, that which is offered is called bread, Ante consecratione^ pa. dr^.
post consecrationem corpus appellatur.
but it is called the body. Therefore in the Lords prayer we pray, Our
bread, but as it is said in greek, (...), supersubstancial, not that which
goes into the body but that of eternal life, which vpholdeth the substance
of our soul. Qu^tidie.
Take dailye, that may dailye profit the. So live that thou maiste dailye
deserve to take it. Dailye holy Job did offer for his children sacrifice, lest
any thing either in heart, or word they should offend. Therefore thou hear
that as often soever the sacrifyce is offered, the death of the lord, ye
resurrection of ye lord, the ascension of ye lord is signified, and remission
of sins, and ye daily bread of everlasting life thou do not take? He that
has a wound, desires a medison, it is a wound that we be under sin. The
heavenly and honorable sacrament is a medison. The first sacraments which were
observed by the law, Contra Faustu^. lib 19. ca, 13,
were for messyngers of Christ to come, which when Christ did fulfill with
his coming were taken away. And therefore were they taken away, because
they were fulfilled. For Christ came not to break the law but to fulfill it.
And there be other institucions greater in virtue, better in profit, easyar to
be done, fewer in nombre, as by the Justice of God showed into the liberty, to
them that be called the childern of God. If in the old time righteouse men,
for this foreshowinge sacraments and figures of things not yet fulfilled,
Dani, 13, 2, Mac, 7,
were ready to suffer hard and horrible things: as of the three children which
in Danyell is manifest, and of the Machabes, how much the more now, for the
baptysme of Christ, for the body or Eucharist of Christ, every Christian ought
to be more ready to suffer all manner of things.

We worship the footstool of his fete, for it is holy. What is the fotestole
of his fete? The earth is the fotestole of his fete. Here I am in a doubt: I
am afraid to worship the earth, lest he should condemn me, that made
heaven and earth.

Again, I am afraid not to worship the stool of my LORDS feet, because
the Psalm nynetye and eyghte saying unto me: Thou shalt worship the stole
of his fete. I ask, what is the stole of his fete? Being thus tossed to and
fro, I turn me to Christ for him I seek here and find, how that without
violence of Gods honor, the earth may be worshypped, and so without
violation of GODS honor, the stole of his fete may be worshypped.

he took flesh of the flesh of Mary, and because in that flesh he walked here,
We eat the same flesh that was borne of the vyrgin Mary.
and gave the same flesh to be eaten of us for our salvation no man eats
that flesh, except he first have worshipped it. It is so found out how
souche a fotestole of ye Lord may be worshipped. be understand: and
spiritually understood, it will give life unto you, for visibly must this
Sacrament be celebrate, but my flesh shall be under the same invisible, and
invisible there being present it must be understand. Visibiliter celebretur
sed inuisibiliter intelligitur.
And though it be necessary, it to be celebrate visible it must needs be
understand invisible.

Concio^e.ii. Psalm. 33
David fled to Achimalech, and before him he changed his countenance, Fugit
David ad Achimelech, and eoram to mutauit multu^ suu^ 1, reg, 21,
and left him, and went his ways, for there was a sacrifice after the order
of Aaron, and afterward he of his body and blood institute a Sacrifice after
the order of Melchisedech. He changed his countenance in the preisthod, he
left the people of the Jews, and came to the Gentyles. He was borne in his
own hands, when he gave his body and his blood. This is my body, Eode^ psalm
contione primo,
The Sacrifice of Aaron is take away, and the Sacrifice is begone after the
order of Melchisedech. Therefore has he changed his countenance. I can not
tell how* who is this? I can not tell who. Sermo, 4.
Our daily bread whether we ask exhibition necessary to the body of the
father, signifienge in bread, what soever is necessary to us, or we do
understand that daiely bread which we are wo^t to receive of ye alter. We ask
well, that he may give it us. For what is yt we ask or pray for, but that we
commyt none evil, whereby we be separate from souche bread, and the word of
God that is daiely preached is bread, for because yt it is bread of the
soul. For when this life shall pass away, Sacramen. altaris.
we do not seek for that bread which honger seeks for, nor we ought not to
take the sacrament of the alter, that we shall be there with Christ, whose body
we take, nor the words ought not to be said to us, which we say unto you,
nor the book is not to be read that we shall se him which is Gods word, Sermon.
46
by which all things be made. The Lord Jesus has exhorted by promise of
eternal life, to eat his flesh and drink his blood, as it is manifest in ye
gospel in these words. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood.
Therefore they that now do eat and drink, let them think what they eat and what
they drink, least (as the Apostle says) they eat and drink their own
judgment, not iudginge the Lords body. They that eat not and drink not, let
them make haste to such dayntyes being hidden, Christ does daiely feed his
table is that which is set in ye mids. What cause is it, Christus quotidis
pascit.
Oh herears, that ye see the table, and comes not to the daynties?
perauenture ye think, Fideles norunt quo modo caro manducatur. Infideles
nesciunt.
how is the Lords flesh eaten, and his blood dronken? with infideles it is not
known, but the faithful know. Come to the profession, and thou have assoyled
the question. Let the faithefull live well that they eat not into judgment
and drink. Thinkinge upon your degrees, and kepinge your profession, come to
the flesh of our Lord, until the world be ended. Our Lord is above, but
yet for all that, the truth of the Lord is here with us: The body wherein he
arose in that kind, it becomes to be in one place, but the very body in form
of bread, is every where, Corpus Christi in omni altari,
that is to say: in every altar where it is consecrate.

Sermo. ii. de uerbis Apostoli.
We have hard the true master, the^ godly redemer man's savior, comme^ding to
us our praise, his blud. For he has spoken to us of his body and blood, that
he called his body meat, and his blood drink. A sacrament of the faithful, ye
faithful know, for hearing, what other thing do they hear but life,
commending such meat and souche drink, ye shall have (says he) life in
you, Qui integer ascendere potuit, consumi no^ potuit.
if you eat when some were offended, that this saying was herd. He answers:
does this offend you? ye wene that of this body that ye se I am about to
make parts, and to cut a sonder my members, and to give to you: what and if ye
se the son of man ascendynge where he was before? Surely he that could go
up hole, could not be consumed. Therefore of his body and his blood has he
given to us a wholesome refection, and so great a question of his holenes does
he assoyle. For so art thou refreshed, that it can not fail, whereupon thou
shalt be refreshed. Eat life, drink life, thou shalt have life, and the
life is hole, and that shall be, that is to say: ye body and blood of Christ
shall be life to every one, if that which in the sacrament is taken visiblye, be
eaten spiritually, in very truth be dronken spiritually. Caro nihil prodest.
Spiritus est qui uiui ficat. Super Ioh Cap. 6.
We have hard him self saying: It is the spirit that quickens, flesh
profits not at all, your fathers have eaten Manna and be dead. Why be they
dead? For that they did se they believed. That, that they did not se, they
understood not. Moses did eat, Aaron did eat, Phinees did eat, and many
other did eat, which pleased the Lord, and were not dead, for they
understood a visible meat spiritually: spirituallye they did hunger, and
spirituallye they tasted, that spirituallye they might be filled. For to day
we take a visible meat: but the sacrament is one thing, and the virtue of the
sacrament is another. Very many do take of the altar and dye, Altar
and in taking they dye. Wherefore the Apostle says: he eats and drinks
his judgment. Was not the Lords morsel poison to Judas? and yet he received:
De Judah.
and when he received, the enemy entered into him. Not that he received an
evil thing: but that he being evil, received that which was good. Se therefore
brethern, receive the heavenly bread spiritually, bring innocence unto the
alter: Sins though they be daily, yet they be not deadly. Ioh, ca. 6,
has life everlasting. That is not given in the meat which we take to
sustain the flesh, but it is in this meat and drink that is in the body and
blood of our lord. For he that takes not it, has not life, and he that
takes it, has life, and that everlasting. The sacrament of this thing, that
is of the unite of the body and blood of Christ, In some place it is done
daily. In some by certain space of days between. In ye Lords table let it be
prepared, and of the Lords table it is taken, of some to life, of some to
death, of this matter se more in the sixte of John. Here is the saying of the
Lords body, which he said he would give to be eaten for eternal life. He
did expound the manner of thattribution, and of his gift. He that abides in
me and I in him, Tractus super Johan nom. 27.
and has eaten a token and has dronken, that we might be in his body, under
that head in his members, eatinge his flesh, not leuinge his unity: many
hearing these things (not understanding) were offended for they thought not
heainge these things, but flesh yt they were to perceive after ye flesh is
death. And yet so it behooves to be spoken that it should not be understand of
all the secret things of God, it must make the^ attempt not contrary, for
these, did some shrynke from God, speaking such things. And in those words
they did not believe our Lord Jesus Christ, speaking a great thing, covering a
certain grace, eue^ as they would, so they understand, and after ye manner of
men. For Jesus might that: or Jesus did dyspose that the flesh wherewith the
word was clothed (as cut in pieces) destribute to the beleuers in him, Quomodo
caro non prodest quicquam,
the flesh avails no thing. O Lord good master, how does not the flesh
avail any thing? seeing yt thou said: Except one eat my flesh and drink
my blood, he shall not have life in him. Does not the life profit any thing?
And wherefore be we that we be, but that we may have everlasting life, which
thou promyseste by thy flesh.

What is it therefore? It profits nothing, the flesh profits nothing: But
how did they understand? truly thus: They understand the flesh, as it is
rent in the dead body, or sold in the shambles, not as it is quickened with
the sprite. Let the spirit come to the flesh and it profteth much. Ibidem.
Let the sprite come to the flesh, and it profits much, or else the word
should not have been made flesh, that it might abide in us. Thou have the
words of life said Peter, one for all, why said he that? but that he
believed. Thou have everlasting life in ye ministracion of thy body and blood:
and we believe and know. For if we should know before and then would believe,
we should neither be able to know nor understand. What believe we? and what
know we? That thou art Christ the son of the lyuinge God. For you art
eternal life, and thou geuest not in thy flesh, but that that thou art. All
that the Lord spoke of his flesh and blood, and that in the grace of his
distribution, he promised to us everlasting life, and thereby he would to be
understood the eaters and drinkers of his flesh and blood, that they might
abide in him, and he in them. And that they understanding carnallye, things
spiritual were offended. And that they being offended perishinge, comfort of
the Lord might be to the disciples, which remaining whom to prove he asked:
And will you also go away? that the answer of the abiding of the^, might be
known to us: for he knew who would abide. Therefore all this is auayleable to
us (most dearly beloved), that we eat not the flesh and blood of Christ in
Sacrament (which many evil does) but that we eat it unto the participation
of the spirit, and drink it that we abide in the Lords body as members:
that we may be quickened with his sprite and be not offended: yea, if many
eat with us, and drink temporallye this Sacraments which shall have in the
end eternal torments. For now the body is mixed, as upon the flore, but the
lord knows who is his. We be sure brethren that all we that be in the lords
body, abide in him, that he may abide in us. In this world we must neades
unto the end live among the evil. Not among these evil (I say) that
blaspheme Christ. For they be seldom found which with tongue do blaspheme,
but many with life: We must needs therefore live with them unto the end. Lib.
21. e^ 25. De ci. Dei.


He that is in the unity of his body, that is in the ioyninge of Christian
members: of whose body the faithful communicatinge of the alter, are acustomed
to take: it is true to be said: yt he receaueth Christ's body, and drinks
Christ's blood. And by this, heretics and scismatikes, being separated from
this unity of body, they may there upon perceive a sacrament: but not to them
profitable, yea, rather noisome, whereby they may be the more greuouselye
judged, or more slowly delivered, for that they be not in that bond of peace,
which is expressed in the sacrament. Christ eaten by parts, and abides hole:
hole in heaven. He is eaten by parts in sacrament, and abides hole in thy
heart. He was hole with the father, Christus co^mestus intigre manet.
when he came into the vyrgyn, and filled her, and he went not from him.
Sermo, Io De uerbis domini
that he might feed Angels. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
abides in me, and I in him: How must we understand? May we not here
understand them of whom the Apostle speaks on, that they eat and drink
their judgment, when they eat that flesh, and drink that blood. Did not
Judas (seller and betrayer of his master) De Jude
touch him first in his hands (being made a sacrament of his flesh and
blood) unworthily with other Disciples (as more plainly Luke declares) eat
and drink? did he abide in Christ and Christ in him? Many also that with
feigned heart eat that flesh and drink that blood, or when they have eaten
and dronken be made Apostelles: Do they abide in Christ, or Christ in them? But
there is a certain manner of eatinge that flesh and drinking that blood, as he
yt eats and drinks in Christ, abides in Christ, and Christ in him. That is
a cercertayne way, which way Christ saw when he said these words my flesh
is very meat.

Sermo. xxxii.
Let us Joy most derely beloved, and be glad in the Lord, which in this
day has consecrated to us misteryes of wholesome comfort. How has the
Lord commended to us his body, and his blood. How? but of his humility, for
if he were not meke, he would nether be eaten nor dronke^. Behold the highness
of him. Quia homo ad hu^c nequibat ascendere, Christus descend bat ut panis
fieret.
this bread vouchesafe to descend to man, and that with unspeakable pity was
done: for it was necessary that that table of Angels should give mylk, and
come to littell ones. yet healed with almose and fasting. And fear this: he
that eats the Lords body and blood unworthily, he shall be gylty of the
body and blood of our Lord. Therefore let a man prove him self and so let
him eat and drink of that cup.

How the body of Christ that honge on the Cross is received, and how not:
in his Epistle, ad Hyreneumin expositi. Psalm. liiii.


Ad Iulianum comitem, in the decres.ii. Did.
From these things the pity of our Lord Jesus Christ, deliver us, and give
us him self to be eaten, which said: I am the lively bread which came down
from heaven: he that eats my flesh, and so forth. But every one before he
receive the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, let him prove him
self, and (after the commandment of the Apostle) so let him eat of yt
bread, and drink of that cup. us the deuell, we perish deferryng and
concelynge or keeping our sins from day to day.

Austen in libro Sent. prosperi


My flesh verily is meat and my blood verily is drink: or else how shall it
be great? The bread that I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world.
Except it be very flesh it cannot give life: It is not lawful to tear christ
with teath
But because it is not leful to devour christ with teath, our Lord would this
bread and wine, in mystery truly, his flesh and his blood, by the
consecration of the holy ghost potencially to be create, and daily mistically
to be offered. As the virgin by the holy ghost, true flesh with out generation
is create, so by the same, of the substance of bread and wine, the same body
of Christ and his blood, The body of christ is both the verity and ye figure
The body of Christ is a verity, and a figure. It is a verite, when the body
of Christ and blood, felt. Again daily this oblation (though Christ once
offeryd) be cause we sin daily in sins, without which mortal infirmity
cannot live. And therefore be cause we daily do fall, christ daily, misticallye
for us is offered within the Catholic church in mystery of christ's body.
Nothing more is done of a good pressed nothing less of an evil priest,
Nothing more is done of a good Priests, then of an evil
for he is not consecrated in the merit of the consecratour: But in the word
of the creator, and in the virtue of the holy sprite. For if it were in the
merit of the priest, it should not pertayne to Christ. But now as he is which
baptiseth,

In Glo. ord. superi, Cor. ca. xi.
There be two manners of eating of our Lord, one is sacramental, by which,
There be two manner of eatings of Christ.
do eat as well the good as the evil. An other is spiritual whereby, the good
only does eat. And this is not only to eat Christ, and in his sacrament to
take his boodye, but to dwell in Christ, and have Christ dwellinge in him. For
they do eat him spiritually which in the unity of the Church (which that
sacrament does signifye) does abide. For he that discordeth from Christ, nor
eats Christ's flesh, though he do daily to his Judgment take a sacrament so
great a thing.

Contra. Epist. fundament. ca. v.


In his.iii. book.xxii. cha. xxviii. sermon against Maximinum.

The Sacrament of the alter is a figure of Christ's death and passion, of the
mystical body of ye Church,

Augustine de uerbis diu. Ser. xi.
That same that he also says: Who eats my flesh, and drynketh my blood,
dwells in me and I in him, how shall we understand it? May we understand
also the^ of whom the Apostle spoke, that they did eat to them self, and
drink judgment, when they did eat the same flesh and drink the same
blood, the flesh it self? ye blood it self? Did not Judas the wicked
sellar and betrayer of his master, when he did eat and drink (as Luke ye
Evangelist declares) the First Sacrament of the flesh and blood of Christ
(made his own hands) dwell in Christ or Christ in him? Finally many that with
feigned heart eat that flesh, and drink the blood, or when they have eaten
and dronken, be come apostatase, do they dwell in Christ, or Christian in them?
But without doubt there is a certain manner of eatinge that flesh, and
drinkinge that blood, after which manner whosoever eats and drinks,
dwells in Christ, and Christ in him. Therefore, not in what soever manner any
man eats the flesh of christ, and drinks the blood of christ, he dwells
in Christ, and christ in him: but after a certain manner, which manner he saw
where he said these words.

Ang. de bap. li. v. ca. viii.
It was nevertheless the body of our Lord also unto them, to whom the
Apostle said: he that eats unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to him
self.

Here follows the word of Saint Jerome upon the.xxi. cha. of Ose.
I Have given to the Jews the eatinge of my body. I being both the meat and
the gest, so did he understand christ's words.

Also upon these words of Malachye the first chap. ye offered upon mine alter
poluted bread, (says Jerome) we poluted bread, that is the body of Christ,
when we unworthily come to the alter and being foul, do drink clean blood:
for when sacraments be defiled, he whose they be is defiled.

super Math. ca. xxvi.
They supping, Jesus took bread when ye figuratyue passover was fulfilled, and
he had eaten ye flesh of the lamb with his disciples, he took bread, which
does comfort man's heart, and he went over to the sacrament of the true
passover: that as in prefiguringe of him Melchisedech ye priest of the high
god did, offeringe bread and wine he does also represent the truth of his
own body. Ad Litu^. Cap, i.
by whom eue^ we be christians. If lay men be commanded that for prayer, they
abstain from the company of their wives, what is to be done of ye byshope or
priest, which is dailye about to offer clean sacrifice for his own sins
and the peoples. Let us read the books of the kings, and we shall find that
the priest Abimalech would not first give unto David and his servants of the
shewbreades: But that he did ask him whether yt his servants were clean from
their wives (not from strangers, but from their own wives) and but that he
hard yt they abstayned yesterday, and ye day before from work of wedloke, he
would not have granted them the breades which he had before denied?



Saint Barnard says: as Christ gave his flesh for us, so he gave his flesh
to us, in that mystery to redeem us, in this to feed us.

Petrus Lumbardus, in his.iiii. book, Chap. xii.
PEtrus Lumbardus says in his.iiii. book. and the.xii. chap. After this, it is
asked whether that that the priest does, may be said properly a sacrifice or
immolation, and whether Christ be daily immolate and offered, or only once?

Whereunto it may be shortly answered: that which is offered and consecrated
of the priest, is called a sacrifice and oblation, because it is a memory and
representation of the true sacrifice, and holy immolation done in the altar of
the cross. And Christ was once dead on the cross, and there was offered in
him self, but he is daily immolate or offered in the Sacrament: because in the
sacrament there is made a memory of that is once done. Whereupon saint Augusten
in his.xxiii. Epistle, written upon the.vi. chap. unto the Romans, says: We
are assured that Christ rising from death, dies not now. etc. yet least we
should forget that is once done, in our memory every year is done, that is
to say: as often as the Pascha is celebrate, is Christ as often killed?

that in the open showing of his body and distinction of his members he did
hang only once upon the cross, offering him self to God the father an
host of redemption effectual for them whom he has predestinate. Also Saint
Ambrose. In Christ the host was once offered, being of power to health: what do
we then? Do we not offer every day? and if we offer every day, it is done in
the remembrance of the death of him. And the host is one and not many: How one
and not many? because Christ is once offered. This is the example of that, and
the same, and always the same is offered.

Therefore this is the same sacrifice, or else it may be said: because it is
offered in many places, there be many Christ's, which is not so: But one
Christ every where and here full, and there full, so as that which is offered
every where is one body, and so also one sacrifice: Christ has offered the
host, we do offer the same also now: but that we do, is a remembrance of the
sacrifice.

Hillarye in his book of the Trinite. lib. viii.
Our Lord leauinge nothing to the conscience of the faithful he taught the
effect of natural efficacye, saying that they may be one, even as we be one.
I in them, and they in me, that they be perfect in one. Them I do now sake
that do put an unity of will between the father and the son: Whether or no,
by the truth of nature, Christ be to day in us, or by concord of will. For if
we take truly the word being flesh in our Lords meat: How is it not to
be esteemed him to abide in us naturallye, which took the nature of our
flesh, then inseparable to him, being borne man? And the nature of his
flesh, to the nature of eternity, under a Sacrament of his flesh to us to be
given, has myngled for so we be al one. For even in Christ is the father,
and Christ in us. Therefore whosoever does generally deny the father in
Christ, let him deny first (not naturally) either him in christ, or Christ to
be in him. For the father in Christ, and Christ in us, makes us to be one in
them. If therefore Christ have truly taken flesh of the body of the vyrgyn,
and that, that very man which was borne of Marye be Christ, and we truly
under a mysterye, take the flesh of his body, and shall be one thereby because
the father is in him and he in us. How is the will of unite affyrmed, when a
propertye natural by sacraments is perfyghtlye a Sacrament of unity? It is
not for the wit of man, or the wit of the world to speak in Gods
words, nor by violent and shameful preaching of heavenly words, with
strange health, the frowardenes of a wicked understanding to be gotten out.
Let us read those things that be written, and then we shall use the office of
perfight says. For those things that we speak of the natural verity of
Christ (except we learn them of Christ, which we speak of him) we say and
learn folyshly and wyckedly. For he says: my flesh verily is meat, and my
blood verily is drink. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, he
abides in me, and I in him. There is no place left of doutinge of the verite
of flesh and blood. For now by our Lords profession and our faith, he is
verily flesh and verily blood. And these taken and dronken do that thing
that both we be in Christ, and Christ in us, is not this a truth? let it
happen plainly to them not to be true, which deny yt Christ is very true
God. And therefore is he in us by flesh, and we in him: when he with him self,
that that we be, he is in God. And for asmoche as by sacrament of flesh and
blood communicate, we be in him, he bears witness saying, and this world
does not now se me: but you shall se me. For I am in my father and you in me,
and I in you. If he would only the unite of will to be understand, why did he
expound a certain degree and order of unite to be consummate? but that when he
should be in the father by nature of divinity, we again should be in him, by
his corporal natiuite. And he afterward in us might be believed to be by a
mystery of sacraments. And that this natural unite is in us, he does thus
witness. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him. For none shall be in him, but in whom he will be. Thou have only his
flesh taken into him self, which took his own.

Basell the great. fo. i. v c.lxi. Anno do.ccc.lxxx.
Basil in the rule that he gave to his brethren, taught ye same of the
Sacrament, of the which by them there is a question put forth after this
manner. With what manner of fear, Timer dei fides.
or faith or affect, we owght to take the grace of the body and blood of
Christ is open: unto yt which question thus he answers. The Apstle teaches
us fear, saying. He that eats and drinks unworthily, he eats and
drinks his judgment, not iudgeginge the body of our Lord. The word of our
Lord teaches us faith saying: This is my body which shall be given for you,
Fides do^cetur desacramento.
this do ye in remembrance of me. Again the saying of John, that the word
is made flesh, and has dwelt in us, and we have seen his glory as of the
only begotten son of the father, full of grace and truth. Also the Apostle
says, which when he was in the form of God, thought it no robery to be
equal with god. But he did make him self of no reputacion, taking on him the
shape of a servant, and became like unto men, and was found in his apparel
as a man, he humbled him self and becam obediente unto the death, even the
death of ye cross: he therefore that beleuith these words and considers the
greatenesse of his glory, and does meruell at ye greatenesse of his humilite,
how such and so so great a one was obedient to the father unto death for our
life, I think that the soul may be provoked to affection of God the father,
which spared not his own son, but gave him for us all, and unto the love of
his only begotten son he shall the more be provoked, that he feith him
suffer most shameful death for our redemption. 2. Cor. 5.
Even as the Apostle did say of him: For the love of God does constrayne us
iudgyng that, that if one dyed for all, that they even which live, now live
not to them selves, but to him that dyed for them, and rose again. Souche
affecte and faith therefore, should he prepare in his mind, which does
participate of the bread and cup. If there be great threatenynges put for
them in the old law, that rashely go to those holy things which be of men
sanctified, What is to be said on him which unto souche and so great a
misterye (that is to say of the body and blood of our Lord) is folyshly
rash? For the greater that any thing is then they in the temple, after ye
Lords voice, so much the more greuouse and terrible it is to him that is
constitute in ye uncleanness of ye soul, rashely to touch the body of Christ,
the Apostle saying: he yt eats and drinks unworthily, shall be gyltye of ye
body and blood of our Lord. yea a more vehement, and more terrible judgment
expressing by repeticion: Let man prove him self. If a man only being
constitute in uncleanness, have so terrible judgment, how much more he which
when he is in sin, presumes to attain to our Lords body does get to him
self judgment. Therefore let us make clean our selves from all filthynes,
and so let us come to the holy things that we escape the judgment of them
that put our Lord to death.

Gycrilius super Ioh. lib. iiii. cap. xiii
WHen ye Capharnytes which perceived ye power of godly virtues of our Savior,
by miracle of tokens, should gladely receive his sermon, and if any thing
semyd hard they humblye should have desyered the solucion of them, To ask
this question how is a Iues word
but they allway do contrary saying: how can he give us his flesh? they cried
together of God with great wickedness, nor it came to their minds that
nothing is impossible with God. For when they were carnal (as Paul says)
they could not understand spiritual things. But let us I beseech you take a
ensample at the sins of others, and puttinge sure faith to mysteryes, ever in
so high things this word how: Let us either think or pronounce, for this is
a Jews word, and the cause of extreme torment. Therefore Nicodemus when he
said: how can this thing be done? he hard worthily. Art thou a master in
Israel, and know not these things? Therefore we being taught by the fault of
other when God works, let us not ask how. But let us grant to him only
the way of knoweleage of his own work. For as though none knew what god is
after nature, yet by faith he justified, when he believes him to give rewards
to them that seek him. So though he knew not the manner of his works, when yet
by faith he doubts not him to be able to do all things, he gets rewards
of this goodness, not to be contempned. For our Lord by Esaye represseth us
saying: My counsayles be not as yours, nor my ways as yours: As the heavens
be exalted from the earth, so be my ways exalted from your ways, and my
thoughts from your thoughts. Be not they worthy great torments, which do so
contempne God the maker of all things, that they dare in his works say how?
whom Scripture has taught that he is able to do all things. O thou Jew, how
cryest thou also now, this is folishnesse: I also gladly following, will ask
the, how dyddest thou go out of Egypt? How was Moses rod turned into a
serpent? How did waters goo into the nature of blood? How did our fathers
escape through the mids of the seas, as by dry land? How did wells of
water fly out of a stone? How stood Iordane? How by only cry, did strong
Hierico fall? There be innumerable things, Quomodo euerti^ totam dei
scriptura^ and eius opera de^ struit.
in the which if they ask how, thou must needs turn all scripture: wherefore
it did rather behoue you to believe Christ: and if any hard thing be seen unto
you, to ask of him mekely, then like dronkards to cry out, how can he give us
his flesh?

In the same book. Cap. xiiii.

It behooves first to stablysh the roots of faith in thy mind, and then to
enquire these things that be for man to be enquired, for to teaches Esayas.
Except ye believe ye shall not understand. But they before they did believe, did
importunately ask, and for that cause our Lord how it might be done, did
not disclose. But unto his disciples beleuinge, he gave the fragmentes of
bread saying: Take and eat this is my body, and of the cup, Drink ye of
this all: this is the cup of my blood Thou do perceive that unto them
enquyringe without faith, he did not show the manner of the mystery: Christus
misterium exposu^t credentibus, non infidelibus
But to them that believed (and not askinge how) he did expound. Let them
here this, which will not yet by reason of pride receive Christ's faith.
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you. For they cannot with sanctifienge of a blessed life, be
parteners of faith, which by mystical blessing has not received Jesus
Christ. For he is life after nature which is gotten before of man: But no
less does his body quicken. For it is joined unspeakably to the son of
GOD, of whom all things be quickened. Therefore it is called his body, and
is one with him.

For after the incarnation, it is one, and abides one without division at all.
But only that the word of the father, The word of ye father and the temple
taken of, ye virgin be not in nature one thing
and the temple taken of the vyrgin be not in nature one thing. For man taken
is not of the same substance with the word of GOD, yet one with it, in a
communication ineffable. How than? the flesh of our Savior to the word
of God, which is naturallye life being joined, is made lively when we eat
it, then have we life. Not only to the word always: but also touching often
times. Our Lord Jesus did raise dead men, as we read. Luke.vii. that he
might show his body also to be able to give life: that if by his only
touching, corrupt things were made hoole again, how shall not we live which
both taste, and eat that flesh? for he will always reform to his
immortality the parteners of him. Desire not thou Jew to ask how
Nor desire not thou Jew, to ask how: but remember, though water be naturally
cold, yet by the coming to of fire, forgetting his coldenes, it does
scalde. This same way also we, though our nature be corruptible, yet by
partakinge of life, (being called from our wyckednes to the proper tie of it)
we be fashyoned again to life. He that eats Christ's flesh, has life
everlasting. of hunger. But the holy body of Christ is noryshynge meat to
immortality, and life eternal. Therefore we be the body and members of Christ,
because by this blessinge of the mystery, we do take the veraye son of God.

He that eats my flesh. etc. For as much as it is an hard thing, and by
faith rather then otherwise. He is received many and diverse ways, he
expounds the maruelouse profight of it consernynge the foundation and ground
to be faith, Exemplu^ de cord, Vnum corpus Christosumus. Eodem lib cap. 19
as if one did put to molted wax other wax, he must needs mengle the one with
the other. Even so if one receive the flesh and blood of our Lord, he must be
joined with him, that Christ be found in him and he in Christ.

This is the bread that came down from heaven, surely they be great things,
which be done of great men. which followed Christ, not perceyuinge his
words, were trobled, they thought they were called of Christ to ye cruel
manners of wild beasts, and to be styred, that they should eat the raw
flesh of man and drink the blood, which to hear is horrible. For as yet
they did not know of this mystery the form and most Godly dispensacion. They
thought how the flesh of this man could give eternal life: but he, unto whose
eyes all things were naked and open, does by another marueylouse thing,
bring them to faith, you be (says he), troubled in vain for my words. What,
and if ye do not believe life to be given to you in my body? what will ye do
when ye shall se me ascend up to heaven? what will ye say then seeing that?
will not that be a great argument of your madness? If ye do think that my
flesh is not able to give you life, how shall it ascend into heaven as a
bird? how shall it fly through the air? This in like manner is impossible to
mankind. If so be that my flesh against nature, shall ascend to heaven, what
lets, that also against nature it may quicken. For he ye made this
earthely body heavenly, he also made it quicknynge. though by the nature of it
self, it be corruptible. But remember again Christ to be one, and not two, as
many do folishly affirm. Consider I say, that every where after incarnacion he
shows him self to be invisible. Super Iohannem.
The sprite it is that quickenyth, the flesh does nothing profight at all,
though the nature of flesh (as it is flesh) cannot quicken yet it may do
this, be cause it has taken so great operation of the word, for it is a
body, not of every man, whose flesh can any thing prosight. For not of Paul
or Peter or of others: But of the very life, and the body of our Savior Jesus
Christ, into which the fulness of the Godhead does inhabit may do it. For
seeing that honey is naturally sweet, it makes them sweet, with whom it is
myngled. Would it not be a folyshe thing to believe the lively nature of the
word, not to give to man in whom it dwellith, a virtue of quickenynge? For ye
flesh of Christ because in it the only son of God dwells, may alone
quicke^. For he calls him self a sprite. For God is a sprite. And how the
sprite quickenyth: we can neither understand, nor with tongue express. But by
scilence and sure faith we do take that. What does Christ promise? what does
he bring to beleuers? Surely no corruptible thing, but a besechinge which we
get by communicating of Christ's body and blood, whereby we may be brought
hole to ye incorrupcion. For it is a body of very life, retayninge in it the
virtue of the word incarnate. And full in power of him, whereby all things do
live and be: which things seeing they be so, let men baptized and being made
partenars of the godly grace. Though they go to the Church more seldom and by
long space of times for a cloked religion, refuse to communicate mistically
Christ, they do expulse them selves far from eternal life, for souche
refusing though it seem to come of religion it both causes offense, and
lays snares, wherefore it behooves with all strengthes, to be clensyd from
sin, and foundacions of good living, set with great confidence to run, to
take life and pleasure of the flesh, by continencye overcome, that we go to
the heavenly grace, that we be made partenars of the body of Christ. For so
shall we chase away the devil, and being partenars of the godly nature, may
ascend unto life and incorruptible.

Certain sayings of Theophilactus.viii.c.lxiii. upon the xxvi of Math.
THey eatinge, Jesus toke^ bread, and set it to the eaters that he might show
ye cruelty of Judas. For at the table and communion of the meats of it, when
he if he had not ben a wild beast, should have showed him self more tame
then he, neither when he was reproved understood. But tastinge his body he did
not repent, for saying this is my body, he shows that the body of our Lord
is bread, which is sanctified in ye alter, and not an answeringe figure. Non
est figura sed corpus
For he said not this is a figure. But this is my body. For it is transformed
by an unspeakable operacio^, yea though it seem to us bread, for we be weak,
Panis uidetur in specie, sed caro est,
and fear to eat raw flesh, chefely ye flesh of a man. Therefore does
bread appear, But it is flesh.

Super Marc. cap. xiiii.
When Christ had blessed he brake ye bread, and that do we also, puttinge
thereto prayers saying: This is my body. This that I do give, and you now take.
Cur earo non uidetur.
is not flesh seen? Oh man for our infirmity this is done. For bread and
wine be of those things wherewith we be accustomed withal. Them we do not
abhor: but blood and flesh set forth, we beholdynge could not bear, but
should abhor. Therefore the merciful God condescending to our infirmity,
Transelementatio
does keep the form or kind of bread and wine: and into the virtue of flesh
and blood he changes them.

Super Iohannem. Cap. vi.
Take that the bread that is eaten of us in mysteries, is not only a certain
figuringe of our lords flesh: but the very flesh. For it is transformed by
secret words.

That bread by a mystical blessing and coming of the holy ghost,
Transformatio.
is changed into the body and blood of Christ. then entered also how.
Wherefore, he willing to show that it is not impossible, but very necessary:
and that life can none otherwise be had, except ye eat my flesh.

Leo in his.xl. Epistle.
LEt those fantastical Christians tell me, what body Jesus brought into the
sight of his disciples, the gates being shut?

Anselmne Bishop of Canterbury, almost five hundred years paste, says
upon these words.
This is my body. It appears unto the utter senses of man to be but bread.
But know ye by the senses of the mind, because (says Christ) this is my body,
none other but that same in substance, which shall be given to death upon the
cross, and crucified for you.

Aug. in psalm. xxxiii.

Haymo. Homil, passione Christi. Math. li.


Damascen in his.iiii. book of the right catholyke faith, The.iiii. Chapter.
Do thou ask of me how bread is made Christ's body? and wine and water
his blood? I answer unto the: that the holy ghost works these things above
man's understanding: body is joined unto the deitye, which body is of the
virgin, not that the body taken of the virgin, commyth down from heaven: but
that the bread it self and wine are changed into the body and blood of God.

also think thou yt ye misteryes be consumed by the substance of the body

Damasen lib. iiii. ca. xiiii.
For as much as our Lord is the spiritual Adam, it has be seemed man's
natiuite to be spiritual. And also his meat natiuite is given to us by water
and ye sprite through holy baptizme (I say) and the meat bread of life. Our
Lord Jesus Christ which came down from heaven. For he was about to suffer
for us voluntarye death, in ye night which he offered his own self. He did
dispose a new testament to his disciples and Apostelles, and by the^ to all
others believing in him. In the parlor of ye holy and gloriouse Syon eatinge the
old passover with his disciples, and fulfillinge the old testament. He washed
his Disciples fete, gyuinge them a token of holy baptism.

Afterward breakinge bread he gave to them saying. Take eat this is my
body, which for you shall be broken in rem^ssion of sins. In like manner
taking the cupe of wine and water. gave to them saying. Drink of this all.
This is my blood of the new Testament which shall be shed for you in remission
of sins Do ye this ^n remembrance of me. For how often so ever ye shall eat
this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show the death of our Lord, and
confess his resurrection until he come. If the word of God be a living
thing, and of efficacite. And all things that our Lord would, he did? If he
said, let the light be made, and it was made? Be the fyrmamente made, and it
was made. If by the word of God the heavens were made, and with the sprite of
his mouth every virtue of them? If heaven and earth, water, fire, and air, and
all the ornament of them, by the word of our lord be made perfight, and man
him self an expressed beast? Vis uerbi dei continuo manet
If god him self a wylling word be made man, and of the most pure and
undefiled blood of the holy vyrgyn, and in him self without seed have
sustained flesh? Can not he make bread his body, and wine and water his
blood? Argumentum a minori.
This is my body, and this is my blood, Hoc Sacramentu^ tu^ continuo fiet
denec ueniat.
and this do in remembrance of me. And by the almighty precepte of God until
he shall come it is done, for as all things that God did, the holy ghost
workinge he did. And so now by the operation of the holy gooste, these he
does above nature, which nothing but only faith can take. How shall this be
done to me says the holy vyrgin, for I know not manne? The Angel answered.
Quomodo.
how is bread made the body of Christ? and wine and water the blood of
Christ? Even to this I answer the, The holy gooste shadoweth even these
works above speech and understanding. For the bread and wine be changed,
for GOD knowing man's infirmity does turn away, Transmutatio.
and not bear many things that be not commen in use. Therefore he does by his
acustomed co^desce^ding, use those things which be above nature, Aquaeo
unctio gratiae ^ritus se^ctis regeneratio
by things accustomed to nature. And as in baptism because it is a custom to
men to be washed, and anointed with oil, be joined to the oil and water, ye
grace of the holy ghost, and made it a lauer of regeneration, after the same
manner (because it is the manner to men, F^cit ^ ne^ corpi suum.
And if thou doste require the manner how it is done? Let it be ynowgh for the
to hear that it is done by the holy ghost. Even as of the holy virgin mother of
God with him self, and in him self, ye Lord sustained flesh, and nothing
else know we but that the word is true, pytthy, and allmighty. But the manner
is unspeakable, and unsearchable, nor it is not ready that to be told, how
naturally by eatinge of bread, and wine and water, by drynkinge into the
blood of the eater and drinker, should be changed and made a another body,
besides that, that it was of him. Even so ye bread of settinge forth, and
wine and water by invocation and coming of the holy ghost, Therefore it is done
to them that take it in faith worthily in remission of sins, and eternal
life, and for the keeping of the soul and the body. But to them that in
mysbeleue unworthily do take, they take it to ponyshment and pain. Morcebristi.
Even as Christ's death to the beleuers is made life and incorruptibilite into
the fruction of eternal blessedness. But to the infideles and murderars of
Christ to torment an everlasting pain Non est fygura.
) but it is the body of our Lord deifyed. The same Lord saying: this is my
body, not a figure of my body, but my body, and not a figure of my blood,
but my blood. And therefore this be said to the Jews: Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life
eternal. My flesh verily is meat, and my blood verily is drink, and
afterward he says: Manus in modu^ crucis forma^tes.
formyng our hands after the fashion of the cross, and let us take ye body
of Christ crucified. Melchisedech took bread and wine to Abraham coming from
the killinge of strangers which was the priest of ye highest God. Figur
christi Melchisedech.
That table prefigured this mystical table, as that priest of Christ ye true
priest before him has prefigured the figure and image. Panis propitiationis.

Hostia in cruenta


This bread did the show breades figure, this is a pure host bloudeles, which
from ye son rysynge to the sittinge, which the Lord speaks by the
prophet, to be offered unto him: That is ye body and blood of Christ, and
for a stablishment of our soul and body, unconsumed, vncorrupt, Non in
secessum iens
not going from the body as other meat (God forbid that) but into your
substance and conservation. Let us with all virtue awayte, that we take not
part in the participacion of heretics, nor give: Heretici obstinatiam fugiamus
For do ye give holy things to dogs? that we be not made parteners of their
error and evil faith and condemnation. For we be all one body, because we
participate of one bread. They be called also exemplaries of things to come.
Not as not trwely being ye body and blood of Christ, but by cause now by
them we participate the divinity of Christ, and then intellectually by only
vision.

Eusebius Emissenus Anno. ccxciiii.
In as much as he was about to take away his assumptid body from their
eyes, and to bring it in emonge ye sterres. in faith, not in form, not to be
judged by exterior love. Wherefore the heavenly auctorite confyrmeth: for my
flesh is very meat, and my blood is very drink. Away therefore with all
doubt of infidelity. For he that is the auctor of the gift, is also ye
witness of the truth. how much honorable benefits does the strength of the
divine blessinge work? How should it not be unto you a new thing, and
impossible? that earthly and mortal things may be turned into the substance
of Christ? Ask thine own self which art regenerate in Christ, lately thou
was a stranger from life, a stranger from mercy, and from the way of health.
Inwardelye thou being dead, was outlawed, suddenly being entered within the
laws of Christ, and made new through wholesome mysteries, into the body of ye
church. Not by seeing, but by believing thou haste ouerpassed. And of the son
of perdition haste deserved by pryuy clemency to be made the elected son of
God, abydinge in a visible measure, art made greater than thy self invisible*
without augmentinge, when thou was the self same thing. Much other ways was
thou in the procedinge of faith, nothing is added to in the outward part,
and all is changed in the inward part. And if manne being made the son of
Christ, and Christ being formed in the mind of man: as therefore without
corporal sense, the old wylynes put down, thou haste suddenly put on a new
dignity. And as in that, that GOD has cured in the things hurt. He has
washed things infected, he has wyped away things defiled. They be not
commytte to thine eyes, but to thy wits. And when thou goeste up to the alter
to be filled with spiritual meats, behold (yea, with thy faith) with thy mind,
take it with thy hand of thy heart, and most of all take a hole drawght of the
inward man.

S. Hierom in his.iii. book against the Pellagians says.
Christ taught his apostels that they beleuinge, should be bold to say daily
in the sacrifice of his body, the Pater noster.

S. Barnard in festo Martini. Anno dom. M.xiii.


Rupert in the, vi. chapt. of Ihon. Anno domini. M.xiii.
This is our Lords body which did hang upon the cross, and this is his
blood that was shed out for all the world.

Hugo in annotationibus in, i. corinth. xi. quest. xcix. Anno. M ccc,xxxiiii.
It is known unto the faithful person, and
that ye substance of bread passes into the body, and wine into the blood.
As Christ saying:

Bruno. Anno dom. M.C, lii.
the person of Christ.

Ioannes Gerson. Anno. M.cccc.xxix.


Oecumenius which was a greek in his.x. Epist. unto the Heb.


Sedulius which was.M.c.xix. past writes thus.
Beware yt ye eat not the body unworthily,

Gregory Emissene which was above.M.c. years past.
The invisible priest (Christ) turns the visible creatures of bread and wine,

Rabanus. Lib. i. in Exodum.
What avails it to receive with thy mouth Christ's body and blood, And to do
against him with all evil manners?

Nicolaus de Lyra, which was about.vc.xxxiii. years past.
These words that I spoke, says Christ. John.vi. are sprite and life. But yet
this spiritually is not so understand says Lyre, or so to be taken, that
Christ's flesh should be in the sacrament of the altar only as a sign, like
as certain heretics have said, for it is there really. But because Christ's
flesh is eaten in this sacrament after a certain spiritual manner, in as
much as the visible kinds are rent with the teeth, and eaten: and man's
spirit the soul is refresshed thereby, through the power of God knit unto the
flesh.

Damasus Epistola ad Stephanum. Anno dom. viii.c.lxx.


Athanasius. Lib. de passione imaginis Christi. cap. vii. Anno dom. ccclxxix.


Felix martyr. almoost a.M.ccc. years past.


The counsel of Laterane, in the which were assembled.M.ccc.xv. learned men,
which determined the presence of Christ to be in the sacrament of the altar.

There is one universal church of the faithful without which no man utterly
is saved: in which ye same priest him self (Jesus Christ) is ye sacrifice,
whose body and blood is truly contained in the sacrament of the altar,
underneath the kinds of bread and wine: and the substance of bread and wine,

Every Christen man is bound to believe steadfastly, that in the consecration of
the Sacrament, the bread and wine are turned into the very body and blood of
Christ, the kinds and forms of ye bread and wine only remayninge. Underneath
the which, the very body of Christ is really (or in very deed)

The sayings of Martyn Luther in his book entitled, the chief articles of the
christian faith.
Of the sacrament of the alter hold we, that bread and wine at the supper, is
the very body and blood of Christ. And is not only ministered and received of
the rightous, but also of wicked christians.

In the same.
Except that they before did alter and falsely interpretate gods words and
ordinance, as the present enemies of ye sacrament do, which would in very
deed have nothing but bread and wine, because they have not also the words
and ordinance instituted of god: but have perverted and altered the same after
their fantasy. In the same.

For even there is in this Christianity: and where as she is remission of
sins, that is a kingedome of grace and of right pardon. For there is the
gospel, baptism, and the sacrament of the Alter,

Melancton.
Saint Ambros would never have traueled, (says Melancton unto Oecolampadius) so
many miracles as he does speak of this matter, to the declarynge of gods
omnipotencye: and he had not thought, the nature of bread to be changed in
this mystery.

Erasmus Rothorodamus unto Coradus Pellicanus in his Epist. vi c.lxxvi. page


And farther he says: an other gospel than the catholyke church does
approve and allow* yea and the same church has persuaded unto me, to believe,
and to give credence to the gospel, and all other philosophers.

True it is, that the very body of our Lord and Savior Christ is there in
the sacrament, though it be not to man's senses or reason perceptible. But yet
is that sacrament a pleage and wonderful memory of his inestimable love
toward us, and a stedfost comfort whereby to stablysh our hope toward God.
The scripture does make for us. We have these plain words in holy scripture:
This is my body which is given for you. And this is my blood which shall be shed
for you. Where do they find in holy scripture,

They shall never be able to bring forth any place of the ancient doctors
which shall by plain and express words contain yt there is not in the
blessed Sacrament of the altar, the very body and blood of our savior
Christ.

I pray you what thing is in this matter which moves you thus highly to
extol this spiritual receiving of the body and blood of our lord in the
sacrament. Sacrament.

Erasmus in his epistle to Balthazar bishop of Heldesyn. page M.ccccc.lxxvii.
And suerly there is nothing more effectual to norish in our mother holy
church a perfight and an indissoluble concord, than that the same our mother
the Catholyke church, eatinge of one body, and drinkinge of one blood, by
one spirit is made and compacte into one body, by whom she also receauinge
life, is knit unto our living head Christ. And yet do we now se that all these
great benefittes, and high promocions notwithstanding, how that through the
flighty crafts of our desaytefull and strong aduersarye Satan, it is
brought to pass, that ye same most beneficial gift of the sacrament of the
body and blood of our most merciful and most te^derly loving Savior, given
unto us to bring all persons into unite and concord, has been the matter where
upon in old time so many discencions have rysyn, and of late years are now
again renewed, while ye some there be which do deny that there is any thing
else in ye blessed sacrament, but only the outward tokyns of the body and
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ. Some others do knowledge christ in ye
sacrament: but yet under ye substance of bread and wine. And again some there
were yt said, how that through ye words of consecration, the substance of
bread and wine do first perish, and so succedeth after the body and the
blood of our Savior Christ. Some others do hold that our Savior by the
words of ye consecration does become bread and wine by their fantastical
minds, making it but a light matter that was once incarnate, and did for our
sakes become man. There have also ben some that were called Starcoraniste, and
which irreuerent parsons deserved well so vile a name, because they both
ymagin and speak so vylye and without all reverence of so high a Sacrament.
The countreye of Greece also, to disquiet the unity of the Catholyke Church,
has sent forth amongeste us their leuayners, so called, because they dare
presume contrary to holy Scripture, to leave the use of pure bread vnlayuened,
and do consecrate in bread which is leuayned. And after he says, would to
GOD that such persons as have followed Berengarius in his manner of erryng
concerning the verity of the body and blood of our Savior Christ to be in ye
blessed sacrament of ye Alter, which thing he denied so to be, would in like
wise follow him in repenting of their selves as he did: and that which now in
our days be infected with the same error, would so unity them selves unto
the catholyke Church as he did, which dyed for his offense, full sore
repentau^t. Farthermore there has risen about this blessed sacrament
innumerable questions. As how is the transubsta^tiacio^ brought to pass? that
is to say: how does the substance of bread give place unto the very
substance of the body of our Savior Christ? Also how the accident of bread
and wine be preserved, and do remain after their former substauces be gone?
And how is it that these accidents do keep still their color, their smell,
their savor, and also have power to fill like other fode? All which qualytyes
the bread and wine had in them selves before yt they were consecrate. Also at
what moment the body and blood of Christ does seace to be in the sacrament?
Also whether yt after ye forms be corrupted any other fubstaunce do succeed?
Also how that one self same body may be at once in places innumerable? Also
whether the body of a perfight man may be under so little a broken peace of
bread? And many such other folysh questions, which behooves with soberness to
be entretyd of, amongst such persons as have their wits exercysed in
disputynge and reasonyng upon souche high matters. that they do believe, that
after the words of consecration be once by the minister spoken over ye
creatures of bread and wine, that there is incontinent the very body and blood
of our savior christ, which nether can be divided, nor yet receive any hurt:
nor is not mete to receue any manner of injury, whatsoever chau^ces do become of
the outward forms of bread and wine. For if the sacred body of our lord
should be thrown into the mire, or into any vile gonge, or any otherwise, unto
any irreuerent parsonnes, thinkinge should be injured or soylde: in deed the
most injury that can be done unto it, is when it is receued into the mouth of
a wicked and sinful parson, which is sore soyled and spotted with greuouse
and odible sin. Now surely it is therefore sittinge for our christian
religion, to entreat and order the outward forms of bread and wine of the
holy sacrament with all due reverence. But as concerning the very body of our
Savior it self: like as God after his nature, is no less glorious in a vile
synke, than he is in heaven, and can by no malice of man, or chance by man,
or otherwise happeninge, receive any hurt or iniurye, no more can the glorified
body of our savior Christ, what iniurye soever be done unto the outewarde
tokens of bread and wine. And to be breife against all doubts and seruples
of man's weak knowledge. Let us first? call to our minds, the immesurable
power of God, unto whom nothing is impossible: yea and unto who^ there is
nothing but it is light to be done, so it be his pleasure, yt it should so be
(which said) Take eat This is my body.

Thomas Cramner in his Cathechisme, in the.cc.xxxv. lefe, of the first side.
CHrist says of the bread, this is my body, and of the cup this is my
blood. Wherefore we ought to believe that in the sacrament we receive truly
the body and blood of Christ. For God is almighty, and he is able therefore to
do all things what he will. Wherefore when Christ takes bread and says. Take,
eat, this is my body, we ought not to doubt, but we eat his very body. And
when he takes the cup and says. Take drink this is my blood, we ought to
think assuredly that we drink his very blood. And this we must believe, if we
will be counted christi^n men. And where as in this p^^illous time, certain
dysceytfull persons be found in many places, who of very frowardnes will not
grant that there is the body and blood of Christ: but deny the same for
none other cause but that they can not compass by man's blind reasone, how
this thing should be brought to pass. ye good children, shall with all
diligence beware of such persons that ye suffer not your selves to be
deceived by them. For such men surely are not true Christians, neither as yet
have they learned the first Article of the Creed, which teaches that God is
almyghtye, which ye good children have already perfectlye learned, wherefore
eschew such erroneous opinions, and believe the words of our Lord Jesus,
that you eat and drink his very bo^^e and blood in the Sacrament, a^thoughe
man's reason cannot comprehend how and after what manner the same is there
present. Wherefore doubt not good children, but there is the body and blood
of our Lord, which we receive in the lords supper. For he has said so, and
by the power of his word has caused it so to be. Wherefore seeing Christ
says: do this as often as ye do it in remembrance of me, it is evident
thereby, that Christ causes, even at this time, his body and blood to be in
the Sacrament, after the manner and fasshion, as it was at that time, when he
made his mau^dye with his disciples. For else we could not do it in the
remembrance of him, that is to say: to receive his body and blood, even so
as he him self did give it to h^s disciples.

And let not the folysshe talk of unbelievers move you, who are wont to ask
this question. How can the preiste or minister make the body and blood of
Christ? To this I answer, that the mynister does not this of him self: But
Christ him self does give unto us his flesh and blood, as his words does
evidently declare.

In the.cc.xxxiiii.
And this is the meaning and plain understanding of the words of the Lords
supper. Wherefore learn them diligently I pray you, that when ye be asked, what
is the co^munio or the Lords supper? ye may answer, it is the true body and
true blood of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, to be eaten and dronken of us
Christen people under the form of brea^e and wine.

In the first book of common prayer, set forth by king Edward the syxt.
fol. c.xvi.
HEre us (O merciful father) we beseech the, and with thy holy sprite and
word vouchsafe to bless and sanctifye these thy gifts of bread and wine,
that they may be unto us the body and blood of thy most dearly beloved
son Jesus Christ.

And in the.cxxi. lefe
And ye must not think less to be received in part then in the hoole. But
in every of them the hole body of our savior Jesus Christ.

Of prayinge for the dead.
BE liberal unto al men living: yet let not to do good even unto them that are
dead. Ecclesiasticus.vii.

Set thy bread and wine upon the burieng of the just, and eat and drink not
thereof with sinners. Tob. iiii.

So he gathered of every one a certain, insomuch that he brought together two,
M. Dragmes of silver which he sent unto Jerusalem, that there might a
sacrifice be offered for the misdeede. In the which place he did well and
right: for he had some consideration and ponderinge of the life that is alter
this time. For if he had not thought that they which were slain, did yet
live, it had been superfluouse and vayn, to make any vow or sacrifice for them
yt were dead. But forsomuche as he saw that they which dye in the favor and
belief in God, are in good rest and joy, he thought it to be good and
honorable for a reconsilynge, to do the same, for these that were slain, that
the offense might be forgeuen.ii. Machab. xii.

Viset the sick, bury the dead, and diligently do their exequis and diriges,
and pray, and also give almose for them. Saint Clement in his compendiolo.

We do scelebrate the day of the departinge: for those that seem to dye, do
not dye. Therefore we remember ye saints our parents and our friends. And we
make a solemn memory for them that dye in the faith. And we rejoice as well
at their relefe: as also they desyeringe our Godly consummation and end in the
faith. And so we do not after that sort celebrate ye day of the nativity,
for they that dye (in the Lord) shall live always. Origin in Job.

And when thou haste asked before God for whose sprit thou make mention of,
and for whom thou geuest yearly oblations. etc. Tertulian de exortacione
castitatis pagi, ccccc.lxxxi.

Give rest (O Lord) to thy wel-beloued servant Theodosius, even that same
rest that thou have prepared for thy saynctes that his soul turn thither from
whense it descendyd. Ambrosius super obitu Thedosii imperatoris.

Some use to observe the day of the buryall, some ye third day, some
the.vii. day, some the.xxx. day and some the mon the day, and every obseruinge
has auctorite, by the which obseruinge the necessary office of godlynes is
fulfilled. Amb. in oratione super obitu Theodosii imperatoris.

I commend unto the, O Lord God allmighty the innocent soul of my brother
now dead. And I offer unto the my Sacrifice, take mercifully, and gladely ye
present or gift of a brother the sacrifice of a priest. Amb. in oratione de
obitu fratris sui satiri.

It is not to be denied that sowles of men departed are releued through the
godlynes of their friends alive, when the sacrifyce of our mediator Christ is
offered for them, or else almose be given for them in the Church. Aug. in his
enchiridion. ca. ex. ad dulcimum.

When the people shall stand holding up their hands with the priest, and the
dreadful sacrifice is set forth, shall we not obtain gods favor, praying
for the dead? Aug. upon the first chapter unto the Hebrews,

We must travel as much as may be, that the dead may be helped, not with
wepinge, but with prayer, supplications, almose, and sacrifice. Aug. in
his.xli. Homily. i. Cor. xv.

I Augustyne beseech the O Lord, for the sins of my mother. Here me by the
medisine of our wounds which hang on ye cross, and sitting on thy right
hand, and prays for us, etc. August. lib. confess. ix cap. xiii.

Thorough the prayers verily of holy church, and thoroughe the wholesome
sacrifice, and alms which is given for the spirits of them, it is not to be
douted the dead to be helped, that it may with them be done more merciful of
the Lord, then their trespasses deserved. This given of the fathers, ye
universal church observes, that they that dye in the communion of the body
and blood of Christ, when they be remembered to that sacrament, it is prayed
for them, and that is offered for them. Aug. sermo. xxxii. oration sacrificium
altaris and eleemosina prosint defunctis.

The souls of good men departed, are not separated from the church, or else a
remembrance of them should not be made at gods Alter, in the communion of
Christ's Alter for them. Aug. de ciuitate dei. lib. xx. cap. ix.

I did not weep in those prayers which we made to the (O Lord) when the
sacrifice of our price or redemption was offered for my mother Monica. Aug.
lib. ix. confessionu. cap. xii.

My mother Monica commanded us not to do these things for her, but only she
desired a remembrance of her to be made at thy altar (O Lord) which she
had daily served, from which altar she knew that the holy ghost or
sacrifice to be distributed, by which ye writing of our own hand (sin) that
was contrary unto us, is done away, by which hooste or sacrifice thy enemy the
devil is vainquisshed or overcome. Aug. in Lib. ix. confessionum. Cap. xiii.

When sacrifice either of the altar, or else of any manner of almose are
offered for the dead which were baptized. They are thankesgeuing for them that
be very good people and for them which are not very badde, they are
propiciations, for purchasinges of the mercy and favor of God. Either they do
profit unto this thing, that it may be full remission, or else at the least
that the pain be made more tolerable. Aug. in his prima precatione ad missa

O holy father, receive thou this offeringe for thy servant which Moses
received, when he did se in sprite. Receive the gift for thy servant, that he
feruentlye desired, that gift and offering which the holy man, the strong
man, and the lustye man does require. Receive the oblation of thy grace for thy
servant Valyntinian now departed, the which grace he did never refuse. Amb.
in oration funcb. super obitu Valent. Imperat.

And thou shalt perform unto me the mercy of the Lord, not only while I
live, but even when I am dead, and pluck not thy mercy a way from my house
for ever. i. Reg. i.xx.c.

Of penance, confession and satisfaction.
IF it chance at any time, yt any man's heart envy, infidelity, or any evil
of these which we have spoken of before has preuilye crepte in: Let him not
be ashamed to confess these things to him which rules, and takes care and
charge of the soul of man, that of him and by the word of our Lord, and the
wholesome council may be comfort, whereby he may avoid with safe faith, and
good works, the pains of eternal fire, and come to the reward of
everlasting life. D. Petrus, in Epistola Clementis ad Iacobum fratrem domini.

We coming by and by unto Christ, are commanded of Saint Clement to cast all
our evil thoughts out of our hearts, and to open them and show them to the
preistes of our Lord. Ad Clementem in compendiolo suo.

If we reuele, open and show forth our sins, not only before God, but also
before them which can heal or cure our wounds and sins, the^ our sins
shall be clean blotted out of him with faith. Behold, I will put a way your
sins and iniquites, even as the clouds which vanyshe and go their ways.
Origin in Luke.ii. the.viii. Homil.

There be some which do say it is sufficient for them to their health and
salvation, if they confess their fawtes only to GOD, to whom nothing is
hyd, who knows the conscience of men. But they will not, or else they be
ashamed, or else disdain to show them selves to the preiste, whom our Lord
has ordained the geuer of the law, to discern between leprye and leprye. But
I would not thee to be disceaued in that opinion. Forasmuch that thou art
ashamed to be confessed before our Lords vicare, consumed through shame, or
styffenecked through disdain. For even so his judgment ought to be obayde,
whom the Lord has not disdayned to set to be his deputy. Therefore thou
shalt desire the preiste to come to the, and make him only partener of thy
conscience. Vide august. De. uisitac. infirmorum. Liber. ii. Cap. iiii. and
Lib. i. cap. ii.

The remission and forgiveness of sins by penance is an hard and a
difficulte way, when the sinner does wash his couche in tears. For tears
are unto him bread both day and night. And when he is not ashamed to show
his sins to the priest of the Lord. Origin in leuiticum homilium. ii

A certain kind of heretics called nouatians, when they denied ye preistes
had power to bind and loose sins, they said, they deferred reverence and
honor thereof unto the Lord: to whom alone is reserved power or auctorite of
remittynge sins. yea they could do no greater Injury to any man, then they
which would break the commandment of him: and to restrain the authority
given and granted. Ambros. de penitentia. lib. i. cap. ii.

Of prayinge to saynctes.
ALl the saynctes that depart out of this life, having yet charity and love
toward them that are in this world, it shall not be conueniente, if they be
said to take or execute diligent of, or about their help, and to aid them
with their prayers and intercession before God. For it is written in the books
of the Machabees on this wise: Here is Hieremye the prophet of God, which
prays always for the people. Origin in his.iii. Homilye.

O blessed Job always living with God, and a continual conqueror and
veynequissher before our Lord the king: pray for us miserable sinners.
Origin in his ii. book.

I will begin to fall upon my knees and desire all the saynctes to help me,
that dare not my self desire God, for the excess of my sin: O holy
saints, I earnestly pray you with tears, and weping full of sorrow, that ye
fall down prostrate for me miserable sinner before the mercy of God. Origin,
in lamento statim abinijtio.

Alas that ever I was borne, father Abraham entreat thou for me, that I be not
put away from thy costs which I have greatly desired, not worthelye,
surely because of my great sin. Origin ibidem sublamenti finem.

The innocent children slain of Herod, have the chiefest rowme among the
saints, and be familiare neighbors, being preuye of ye deuyne secrettes, do
entreat Gods clemencye for our trauelles etc. And so they from the cradelles
transelate into heaven, are made councillors and Judges of the supernall
palace, optayninge pardon for sin not deseruyd. etc. Cypri. Ser. de stella,
et Magi.

Let us remember one a another that are of one heart and of one mind, Let us
allwaye pray on both parts, for our selves, and cease with mutual love, the
prolixte anguyshe, and troble of heart: and if any of us depart first from hence
with have as it shall please God let our love contynew allway with God, let not
prayer cease before the mercy of God the father for your brethern and systers
alive. Saint Cypriane, i. lib. i. Epistle

I would be now in those places where these bo^des of Paul other are said to
be, and would worship worthily those men which were of souche desyer toward
christ. I would desyer to se those chains which truly ye deuylles do fear
and tremble at, but ye Angels do honor or worship there. Joan. chrisost
homilium.viii. in ca. iiii. Ephe.

O Michaell the prince of the heavenly war, we unworthy desire the now, that
thou will help us with thy prayers, defending us under the shadow of thy
wings of thy nature that is vncorporate. We fall down prostrate and without
intermyssion we call unto ye, deliver us from all perilles and dangers, as ye
prince of heavenly power. etc. D. Joan Chriso. Ex missa.

O mother of God all things are gloriouse in ye, sealed with a secret
chastytie, and kept in virginity: thou art known a mother without any
dyssayte: which truly brought forth our Lord (we beseech the) to pray
humbly unto him, that he would save our souls. Chriso. in eadem missa.

O mother of God for as much as thou excellest all things that were made: we
that are not able worthily to praise the, we beseech the freely to have mercy
upon us undeserved. Chriso. in eadem missa

O father Nicholas be thou imbassadoure before our Lord Christ: that we may
obtain salvation for our souls. Chriso. in eadem missa.

The bodies of saints, and the Relyckes of ye blessed martyrs, as the members
of Christ are to be honored most purely, and we believe, the churches dedicate
to their names, ought to be gone unto with most Godly affertion, and faithful
devotion, as holy placys estemyd to Godly honor, if any man shall chance to be
against this opinion, is not thought a Christen man, but to be one of the
Eunominians and Vigilantians. Aug. ex ecclesiasticorn^ dogmatu. ca. lxxiii

If we will come to the company of martyrs or preistes, let us think upon the
following of the martyrs, for they ought to know some thing in us of their
virtues, that they may vochsaue to pray to our Lord for us. Aug. De
martiribus. Sermo. ii. et. iii

Honor with sobriety the birth of saints that we may follow them which
went before us, and that they may rejoice of us which pray for us: that the
blessing of our Lord may always contynew. So be it, and God grant it so to
be. D Aug. in psalm. lxxxiiiii.

We pray not for martyrs, but they pray for us. D. Aug. in euang. tracta.
lxxxiiii.

When our souls desyeryth any thing according to gods will, and that to be
given of God by ye saints whether they require it with the heart, tongue or
voice, the souls of saints which is all one for them to hear and to se, and
contrary wise to see or to hear, beholdynge not the voices, but the words,
they optayned of God for them those things that they desyered it for. S.
Austen of knowleage of true life the.xxxix. where he touches how the souls of
saints are understood to here the prayers of the living, and to help the^.
Thexamples of just me^ therefore ar set forth, not yt we should be justified of
the^: but that we following them, should be made righteouse also, of their
iustifier. D. aug. de catechisandus rudi. ca. 7

you therefore which have deserved to be made pertakers of the heavenly city,
and to take the commodity of the renoune of the everlasting glory, pray for
me to our Lord, yt he may lead me out of this prison in the which I am
holden captyue and bound. August. de spiritu et Anima. cap. lix.

O all ye multitude of saints entreat our lord. O ye most pitefull pray for
us, that we helped with your prayers and merits, may come with a safe sheep and
hole reward to the haven of perpetual health and quyetnes, and, contynew all
peace and rest, that never shall have end. Augustinus lib. meditacionu^.
capite xxiii

Nor yet do we ordain or erect temples, holy priesthode, and sacrifice to
these same matters, not because of them: but because their God is our god.
Certaynelye we honor the memorial of al them as holy men of God: which
trauoyled for the truth, unto death of their bodies, that the false and vain
religion vanquisshed and ouercomed, the true holiness of relygyon might be
known.

August. de ciuitate dei. lib. viii. cap. xxiiii.

The holy Angels both does punyshe them without wrath, whom they receive to
be punysshed with eternal law, and also do help their miseries without
suffering or passion of misery, and aid them without fear that are in parell
whom they love. yet nevertheless they use also in those, the names of these
passion, be ye custom of men's speaking, for a certain similitude of the deeds
or acts, not for the infirmity of the affections. As God according to the
scriptures is angry, notwithstanding is not troubled with any passion. Aug. de
ciuitate dei. lib. ix. cap. v Whosoever be immortal and blessed in the
celestial habitations, if they love not us, neither would have us blessed.
verily they are not to be honored. But and if they love us, and would us to be
blessed: surely from thense would they have us unto the place where they are
present. etc. Aug. de ciuitate dei. Lib. x. cap. xii.

What miracle soever they be, whether they be done by Angels or any other
way, they are done by the power of God, for they set forth the worshypping
and religion of one God, in whom only is the blessed life. We must believe
that those things be done indede of them, or by them which do love us
according to truth and godlynes. Aug. de ciuitate dei. Lib. x. cap. xii.

For when Aungelles do hear us, God him self does hear us in them, as in his
true temple, and not in the only temple made with hands: like as he hears
them which do his commandments in this world among his saynctes
beholdynge his everlasting law. Augusti. de ciuitate dei. Lib. x. cap. xii.

Truly he is worse then mad whatsoever he be, that denies all things to be
in the power of the only almighty God. Eiusde^ lib. ca. xiiii

The holy Aungelles to whose company and congregation we fervently desire to
come unto, in this most laboriouse pylgremage, as they have everlasting
being, Even so have they easy knowinge, and fortunate restinge, for they help
us without trouble, they labor without spiritual mocions for the clean and
free. Aug. de ciuitate dei. lib. x^ cap. xxxi.

Of diverse miracles which were done about the holy land, brought from
Jerusalem, and about the relics of saint Stephen, Geruase Prothase, and other
saynctes. Read S. Aug. de ciuitate dei. lib. xxii. cap. viii.

We do not build tempelles or churches to our martyrs, as unto Gods. But we
make remembrance as unto dead men, whose sprites lives with God, neither do
we set up aulters in the which we do sacrifice unto martyrs: but we do offer
both the martyrs and also our sacrifice unto one God. etc. Ibidem. lib cap. x.

Then without doubt the holy martirs make intercession for us, when they know
in us any thing of their virtues. Aug. Sermo. ccxliiii. de tempore.

Saying out deserts do burden us, that we be not in the favor of God: let us
know that we may be delivered by the merits of the^, whom God favors or
loves. Aug. question super exodu^. cap. cxlix.

Let us commend our selves to the prayers of saynct Stephen, for he is greatly
hard now of the everlasting God, our Lord Jesus Christ, for us his
orators. etc. Aug. sermo. ii. de sanctise

When ye call upon saints in your prayer, ye must think thus of them,
being constitute in the glory of the everlasting clearenes: if they be the
most bryghtest light shyninge above the glysteringe of the son, which may
have all good things, fully in the sight of god, as well may they myghtely
help all that call upon them. Aug. de cognitione vere uite. ca. ix.

Alexander the bishop of Capadoxi did go to Jerusalem for the love of
worshippinge, and seeing of the holy places of saynctes. Vide hist. Ecclesi.
lib. vi. cap. ix.

Theodosius the Emperor did lie in here, prostrate upon the ground, before
the tombs of martirs, and of the apostels, and required help or comfort to
him self with faith, and intercession of the^. Hysto. eccles. xi. cap, xxxi.

O holy Athanalius, look mercifullye upon us, from the high throne above, and
direct, or defend these holy people. etc. G^ego. Nasiansenus. oration. xviii.
in Athana.

A certain Christian vyrgin, moved to defyle her virginity of Cyprian, then
being an ydolater: but she calling upon the vyrgyn Mary, that she would save
her virginite then being in ieopardy, her prayer was hard. Gregory Nasiausen.
Oration. xix. in D. Cipriano.

It is an unseemly thing to will to honor any holy martyr with belly joy, whom
thou know to have pleased God with fasting and great abstinence. D.
Hyeronimus ad Eustochium.

O Paula, thy daughter Blesill does pray to God now for the, and I know that
her mind is such that she optayneth pardon for thee. D. Hyeronimus ad Paulam,
super obitu Blesille.

O Paula farewell, and help old ^oting age of thy suppliant and worshipper, by
thy prayers, for thy faith and thy good works do associate the unto Christ,
and thou being present with Christ, may far easyer obtain that thing
which thou requirest. D. Hieronimus in Epitaph Paul.

Of Images.
liber. ix. cap. ix.

Eusebius does testify, ye Christ our savior, Peter, and also Paul was
fygured of the ancient Christians, and says that these noble tokens of
aunciente men, are worthy to be reserved unto the remembrance of their
posterite, which is a true token of their honor and love Eccles. histo. lib.
vii. cap. xiiii.

When a certain paynter had presumed to paynte the image of our savior,
after ye similitude of Jupiter, his hand was made dry: who confessinge his
sins, the holy man Gennadius restored it again. Vide histo. ecclesi.
incephori sub Leone Imperat. page cccccc.

At Constantinople a Jew entered into the church of S. Sophy, and he
considering yt he was alone and saw the image of Jesus christ: he took his
sword and smote the image in the throat, and anon ye blood gushed out, and
sprenge on the head, and on the face of ye Jew. He being afraid, took the
image and cast it into a pytte, and anon he fled away. And it happened that a
Christen man met him, and saw him al bloudye, said to him, from whence come
thou, you have slain some man. And he said nay: And the Christen man said:
thou haste committed some homised, for thou art all full of blood: and the Jew
being ashamed said: O great is the god of the Christen men, and his faith is
firm, and approved in all things. I have smitten the image of Jesus Christ in
the throat: and as soon as I had stricken him, ye blood gusshed out of his
throat. And then the Jew brought the Christen man to the pit, and there
drew out the holy image: And the wound is yet seen to this day. And the Jew
became Christened, and led an honest life. In Hysto. Tripert.

Abagarus king of the Edesones, sent a paynter to paynt an image like to our
Lord, the which when he could not do for ye brightness of his face shining, our
Lord himself putting a cloth to his godly, and lively face, wiped of in ye
cloth his own image, and so sent it to the king Abagarus. Eusebius. Lib. i. cap.
xv. This history shows plainly ye images do pleafe Christ, and not to be
displeased with them, as heretics would have it.

Of ye sign of the cross.
Eccles. hyst. lib. xi. ca. xxix.

Iulyanus thapostita, blessinge him self with the sign of ye cross drove
away the devil, though it were against his will. Eccl. hyst. lib. vi. cap. ix.

The secrets of the christians has a certain worthy reuerente token, the
which token or sign they name the cross, by the imagination of the cross it
self: yt which both in deed, we affirm most worthy of honor: and also we
worship it for the remembrance of him that was crucified thereon. Aug. de
uisitatione infirmorum. lib. ii. cap. iii.

The cross is given to us upon our head, and that it is a shield, a buckeler,
and a cote of armoure against the devil. There this sign must be worshipped of
us, geuinge the honor and reverence to god. They that do worship rhis figure
of the cross, let them be (o Lord) partakers of Christ crucified, Damasene.
lib. iiii. cap. xxii.

By the sign of the Cross, all wichcraft, or sorcery, and the act or craft of
poisoning, is put away, if it be done in faith and devotion. Athanasius. lib.
de incar. uer.

It is read in the Hystoria Scolastica that the paynims had painted on a wall
the arms of one Serapis. And Theodosien the Emperor did put out the said
arms, and painted in the same place ye sign of the cross. And when the
paynyms of the priests of the ydolles saw the sign of the cross painted
there, anon they became christened, saying: that they learned of their elders,
that those arms should stand, until such a sign were set there, where in
shall be salvation.

S. Chrysostom says, that the cross and the wounds of Christ: shall give
more light at the day of judgment, then the son.

The devils saying Moses law feared not, nor trembled not, because it has not
wrought man's health, but seeing the cross which Christ dyed upon, they often
quake, flee, and vanyshe away. Of the which it first came, that meat,
drink, and all other things are blessed with the sign of the cross.
Athanas. xxiviii. quest.

When in Jerusalem the Jews were almost all slain with a round thing of fire
like a boule, and the rest for fear of death, were enforced and constrained to
confess Christ Jesus to be God: least that thing should have been thought to
have happened by chance, the night folowinge the sign of the cross did so
evidently appear in all their garments, that he, which for his unfaithfulness
would have taken it away, could not in no wise. Therefore let men beware you
do despise the picture of the cross, or the crucifixes of Christ, lest like
vengeance of God do light upon them. Tripert. history.

The good and godly emperor Constantine, when he was turned to christ's
faith, and hard much preaching of the cross, when he was in warfare, he
commanded cunning men to change his baner yt he had into a baner of the
cross made of gold, and precious stones. For chis sign of war was among
others more precious, or esteemed better, because it went before the emperor,
and the custom was of the soldiers to worship it. Hysto. Tri pert. lib. i.
cap. v.

The emperor Constantine after many and diverse notable victories, optayned of
his enemies, accustoming his soldiers to honor God, as he did him self, he
made their armoure to have the sign of the cross: he did most honor the
holy cross (as the Historye says) both for the good luck which he had in
war by the help of it, and for the sign which God showed thereby. Trip.
Hysto. lib. i. cap. ix.

When this emperor Constantine was in great care and thought* how he should
obtain victory against his ennemies, he saw in a dream ye figure of ye
cross brightly appearing in the firmament, and the angels standing by him,
wo^dering at the sign, saying: O Constantine in hoc uince. That is to say. O
Constantyne, thou shall overcome thy enemies, by this sign of the cross.

Sozomenus writ this above.xii c. years agoo. And it is also (says the story
Treportide) that Christ apeared unto him, and showed him a sign of the
cross, commanding him to make a like figure, and saying, that shall be thy
help in battle, whereby thou shall get the victory.

Of the counsels and auctorities of the fathers.
TRuly I would not believe the gospel, o^les the auctorities of the church had
moved me there unto: unto whom I have been obedient saying: believe the gospel.
Wherefore should I not believe the church saying: believe not the Maniches, Aug.
contra epistolam Manichei, qua^ fundamenti uocant. cap. v.

Now in mine old age I will keep ye faith that I was brought up withal,
Hyeronimus ad occanum et pammacheum.

It is my part to read the old fathers, and singularlye to hold and allow al
things that be good, and not to degresse from the faith of the catholyke
church. D. Hieronimus ad Mineruum.

We ought to learn the knowledge of the scriptures, of him which has kept it
from our ancient fathers after the truth given unto him. And he may affirm
co^petently those things which he has rightfully received. Clemens episto.
iiii. ad ecclesi ^hierosoli.

S. Clement Paul's companion in preaching the golpell, affirme^h that s. Peter
thapostel did teach that me^ ought to obey the bishops commandments in all
lawful things, though they did otherwise live, hearing in remembrance our
Lords precepte saying: Do ye the things which they say or bydde you do, but
do you not as they do, for they say and do not. Also he says: our hearts
and bodies must be prepared unto the holy obedyence of Gods
commandments, and his bysshoppes and preachers: that we may escape the
pain of Hell, and come to everlasting glory. In his first Epistle written
to saynct James. And fatther he says in the same epistle: let no man believe
that these commandments are to be despised, or dissembled without his
peril, because that he shall suffer by gods judgment the pains of fire
everlasting, which shall despise ye churches decrees, or determinations.

These things S. Clement learned of S. Peter's own mouth.

We have received the rightes which are observed and preached in the church,
part thereof we have received by writing, part by the traditions of the
Apostels, which both has like strength unto virtue, and no man has spoken
against this which at the last has had but a little experience of the
ecclesiastical law. For if we take in hand to despise old customs not
brought forth by writing, as having little strength: Truly we like unwise men
do infourme, and bring in danger unto the most chiefest fathers, nay rather
we do draw the very preachinge of the gospel to an evil name, or a naked
report. etc. Aug. ad emeritum contra Donatistas. Episto. C.lxiiii.

And the councels them selves that be done in every private region or province,
ought to give place without any doubt, to the authority of the general
councels, which is done through all Christendom, and al things that was
done before to be amended to our posterities, by some experience of things,
the thing is open which before was shut. And that is known which was hid
without any figure or proud sacrilege. And without the puffed up neck of
arroga^cye, and without the contencion of the yrefull malice, with holy
humility, catholic peace, and christien charity. Aug de baptismo, contra
donatistas. lib. ii. cap. ii.

In like manner as the littell bees does sit upon the flowers and herbs, with
their little feate and light wings, and does carye away the hydden Juice
without any hurre to the flower, that at the length they may minister unto
men the sweet honey combs made in their little holes: Even so the doctors of
the church are sytting about the plesaunte and grene bourgenynge of
scripture, with a light wynge of mind: And are very diligent drawing the Juice
of the holy ghost, of the hyd letter, that they may instill the most sweet
honey of faith into the hearts of the auditors. Chri. in psalm cxv. I do
confess my self said S. Gregorye, to receive and reverence ye iiii. counsels
even as the.iiii. evangelists. S. Gregory upon the counsel of Nece, and of
the.iiii. other counsels.

Vincentius Lyrmencis* anno. ccc.l.
If any man shall ask me, what need is it to follow the authority of Christ's
church, and here understanding of scriptures, saying the scriptures is
perfight of it self and sufficient. I answer to him, that we must needs so do,
because all men do not expound the scriptures in one sense. But every man after
his own wit and fantasy. And so thereby there should arise much dissencion
debate, strife, confusion, and many heresies spring up and be defended in
Christ's church except her exposition should be admitted. Esaias. vii. b

If ye believe not, it comes of this, that ye are unfaithful unto God. yea
truly, for the unfaithfulness that man will not give credit unto his words.
He therefore took away the intelligence of man that he shall not perceive the
mystery of his works, and so suffered him to run headling into destruction.

Against the marriage of preistes
THose that do vow their virginite unto God, albeit they receive an hyer degree
of honor and sanctify or holiness in ye church, nevertheless they are not
without matrimoni, for they do also pertayne in matrimonye with ye hole
church, in yt which Christ is ye spouse. Aug tractatu. ix. in Euange. Ioh.

All the church is called a virgin, there be diverse members of ye church, for
they do shine with diverse gifts. For there be some men married, and some women
married, some men viduate from their wives, and some women be also viduate from
their husbands, and after that seek not for marriage, some do conserve and keep
their virginity, even from their youth, and other of maidens and wom^n do vow
their virginity unto God. Aug. tracta. iii. in euang. Ioh.

A vow once made by virgins or wydowes (now not only to mary, but also if
they were not married) to will to mary, is damnable. For as the Apostle did
declare this thing, he said not, when they did live in pleasures they marrye in
Christ: but he said: when they will to marye, they have damnation on their
headdes, because they have made their first faith void not only in marriage,
but in willinge to mary: not because the marriage of such are Judged to be
condemned, but the dissayte of their purpose is condemned, and also the
brekinge of their wowe is condemned. Marriage which is ye lower goodness is not
condemned: But the vow unto God which is ye higher goodness is condemned, To
be short, all such are condemned, not because they do bring in ye second
matrimony: but because they have broken or made void ye first faith of their
contynency. Farthermore, those which do say that the marriage of souche is no
marriage, but rather aduoutrie: they do apeare to me not to speak sharpelye
enough, nor does not diligently consider what they may speak thereof etc. Aug:
de bona uiduitati ^ bide to receive christ's body which is greater then
prayer? if he forbere not his wives company for a time. If a lay man shall for
bear the company of his laufull wife: much more a priest to marye. Iheronimus
in apologia ad Iouinianum.

If lay men be commanded that they should abstain the company of their wives
for prayer sake, what is it to be thought of a bishop or a priest, which
should offer clean sacrifice unto God for them selves and the sins of the
people. Jerome in Tite.

They are not to be hard which does feign that Paul had a wife, when he
disputinge of continence and parswadinge men to follow the contynuall gift of
chastytie, for I would (says he), that al men should be, as I am. hiero ad
Eusto. All the Apostles except John and Paul had wives. Ambro. in. ii. Cor. xi

It is better to mary then to burn. This saying of the Apostel does not
belong to a woman that has her faith, nor yet with her which has not
taken ye vaele, But whosoever has promisid them self to Christ and has
received the holy vaele, is immediattlye married unto Christ, and forth with
married unto an immortal husband. If she after this, will be married by the
common law of wedloke, she lives in adultry, and is made the child of death.
D. Ambro. ad virginem lapsa^ cap. v. S. Paul said not (says. S. Hierome) let
him be chosen a bishop that mariethe a wife, and be gettethe chylder, but he
that has but one wife, and chylder brought up in all good order and
disciplyne. And this ye confess yourselfe, yt no man can be a bishop that be
gets chyldern after he is made a bishop. For if he be taken to have so done,
he shall not be counted as a laufull husband, but condemned for a very
aduoutrer. S. hiero. lib. i. contra Iouinianum.

A priest if he do mary, ought to be degraded, if he commyte fornication or
aduoutry, he ought to be cast out of the church, and be forced to penance
among ye laite. Consilium Neocesnense.

We utterly forbyde (says S. Clement) preistes, deacons, Subdeacons, and
monks to keep concubynes, or to contract marriage.

He only (says Origin) may offer the continual and everlasting sacrifice,
which makes a vow of continual and everlasting continency Orig. against
preistes marriages.

We do utterly forbid preistes deacons, subdeacons, and monks to have
concubynes or marye: for all such marriages shall be found unlawful, and the
parties driven to do open penance. Calixius ye holy man. Above all things the
priest which is assistant at the alter of God, ought to be garnished with
chastity Orig. in leuiti.

O Susan (says. S. Jerome) for gettyng this holy purpose, which had bound
thee to chastity, forgettinge thy parents, the holy church, the glory of
virginity, the honor of that high dignity, the promise of heaven, the
terrible day of Judgment, thou have catched in thine arms corruption, thou
have brought forth the fruit of confusion, and at the end a most cru^ll and
paynefull death everlasting, hiero. lxxiii. episto. ad rusticum.

Finis.
The auctors contained in this book.
Anacletus, Alexander Ambrose Augustine Aucelme Athanasius Basyll Barnard Bruno
Clement Chrysostom Ciprian Cirill Catho. Deonyse Damason Damasus Eusebius
Erasmus Felyxmartir Gregori Emissen Gerson Haymo Hyllary Hierom^ Hugo Ignatius
Ireneus Leo papa Luther Marciall Melancton Nicolaus de Lyra Origin Oecumenius
Petrus Lumbardus Rupertus Rabanus Sedulius Tertullian Theophilactus The Kings
book of common prayer The counsel of Loterane The determination of the hole
University of Pari^^
A table of the principal matters contained in the book.
A. Of bread is made the flesh, or body of Christ. fol. 10 11 12 21 24 25 31
46 61 63 71 73. B Bread and wine is turned, changed, ^ converted into the body
and blood of christ Fol. 12 13 25 43 44 61 63 66 69 71 72 73. C Of wine and
water is made the blood that redeemed ye people. Fol, 9 24 25 63 65 66 D Bread
does appear, but it is flesh. 61. E Of the royal presens of Christ in ye
sacrament, and of his corporal eating. fol. 72 73 74 75 76. F We eat the same
flesh that was borne of the virgin, and walked here in earth. Fol. 26. 27. 32.
50. 74. G Christ sits on the right hand of the father, and yet at the time
of sacrifice, he is contained in the hands of men, and given unto them. fol 15
19. H Christ has not only taken his flesh up with him into heaven, but also
has left it with us here in earth. Fol, 19. I After consecration it is not
called bread and wine, but the body and blood of christ Fol. 21 56 79 K Christ
was hole with the father when he came into the vyrgin and filled her, and hole
in every part of the host being broken Fol. 40 L The body of Christ is both
the figure, and the verity. Fol. 34 6 15 63 67. M How the body of Christ that
honge on the cross, is received inuisibly, and not visiblye. Fol. 42. N We
offer on the altar, ye body and blood of Christ, to obtain everlasting life.
Fol, 8 37 57 58 O In the sacrament of the altar is remission of sins. fol.
25. 49 74. P There is but one sacrifice, and one Christ offered, though it be
done in never so many places at once. Fol. 15 16 19 35 48. Q Christ was borne
in his own hands. Fol 31 29 34. R If Christ had not ben meke, he would
nether have been eaten, nor yet dronken. Fol, 34 41 S In the bread and wine
which we do se, we do honor and worship, that we do not se, flesh and blood.
Fol. 15 21 29 32 33 43 67 68 70. T There is as much difference between the
show breades and the body of Christ, as is between a shadow and a body. Fol 47
V The priest does not make the body and blood of Christ, but it is Christ that
was crucified for us. 7 8 19 21 44 46 47 71 72 73 X The Eucharist is the
flesh, body and blood of Christ. Fol 0 10 13 Y Christ gave to his disciples
that, that he was him self, that was his own body Fol. 15 13 18 33 3^ 46 z
There be to manners of the eating of our Lord. fol 44 and The holy portion
passes not through the body (as heretics would have it) like other meats,
Fol, 63 68 71 Aa At the time of sacrifice the description of saints is
present, Fol 78 80 Bb In old time all that were within the church degrees did
receive, Fol. 2, 6. Cc In old time they that were baptized, received the body
of our lord. Fol, 2 6 Dd It is not lawful to do sacrifice or mass in every
place, Fol 1 4 Ee Invocation upon the bread and wine used at mass, both by S,
Clement, and also by S, Ambrose. Fol 5 24 27 Ff The gospel is not to be
believed, but by the church, Fol, 11, 44, 75 Gg Of almose, and fasting. Fol,
41 Hh Of confession, penance, and satisfaction. Fol 42 87 Ii Of invocation and
praying unto saints, Fol ^9 Kk Of the councels and of the auctorities of the
fathers of Christ's church, fol 76 For the dead, Fol 73 Ll Of the cross, Fol
63 67 98 Mm Of images, Fol 97 Nn Against the marriage of preistes, fo. 46 Oo The
sacraments are committed to, iii degrees, fol 3 Pp Of the fragmentes of our
lords body and place of reservation, Fol, 3 4 Qq The chiefest office belonging
to a priest is to minister the Eucharist. fol, 6 Rr, Preistes are to be
honored, for they have power both to minister, and also to bind and lose in
earth, and so has nether angels, archangels, nor potestates, Fol, 14. 20
Imprinted at London in Aldersgate street by William Harford, for Wylliam
Seres. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


