THE Second part of the good Hus-wiues JEWEL.

Where is to be found most apt and readiest ways to distill many whole. some
and sweet Waters.

In which likewise is showed the best manner in preserving of diverse sorts of
Fruits, and making of Sirrops.

With diverse conceits in Cookerie with the Book of Caruing.

AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Edward White, dwellimg at the little North
door of Paul's Church at the sign of the Gun, 1597.

The Table.
TO boil mary bones for dinner. fol. 1 To boil a Capon. Ibidem How to boil a
capon with orenges. fol. 2 How to boil Teales, Mallards, pigeons, chynes of
porke, or Neates tunges, all after one sort, fol. 3 Mutton boiled for supper.
Ibidem To boil mutton with Nauons. fol. 4 To boil a Lambs head with
purtenannances. Ibidem How to stew a capon for dinner. Ibid. To boil a capon
in white broth. fol. 5 How to boil chickins. Ibidem To boil chickins with
spinach and Lettice. fol. 6 To make pears to be boiled in mear. Ibid To farse a
cabbadge for a banquet dish. fol. 7 To boil a breast of Veale or mutton farced.
fol. 8 To boil a Mugget of a sheep. fol. 2 To boil mutton for supper. Ibidem
To boil a Neats tung for supper. fol. 10 To boil mallards, teales, and chines
of porke with cabbadge, Ibidem For a goose giblots and pigs petitoes. Ibi. For
fricases of a Lambs head and Purtenance. fol. 11 For fricases of Neats feet
for supper. Ibi. A fricase of tripes. Ibidem How to roste a Lambs head. fol.
12 How to make a pie in a por. Ibidem To make allows to roste or boil. fol.
13 To make red Dear. Ibidem To farse all things, Ibidem A Sop of Onyons. fol.
14 To make gallantine for flesh or fish. Ibi How to stew Oysters. fol. 15. To
bake aloes of veale or mutton. Ibid. To bake a cunnie, veale, or mutton, Ibi.
How to make fine paste. fol. 16 Eor small pyes. Ibidem To make purses or
cremitaries. fol. 17 How to make a tart of spinach or wheat leaves, or of
coleworts. Ibidem For tartes of cream. Ibidem A tart of proines. fol. 18 A
tart of Eggs. fol. 19 A white Leache. Ibidem How to keep Lard in season.
Ibidem To make Iombils a hundred. Ibidem To make butterd Eggs. Ibidem How to
boil Neats feet. fol. 20 How to boil a carpe. ibidem How to boil a Pike
with Orenges, a banquet dish. fol. 22 How to boil a Pike another way. fol. 23
How to boil Roches, perches, and Dase with other small fish. fol. 24 How to
boil a Pike another way. ibidem How to boil a Tench. ibidem For Turbet and
Cunger. fol. 25 For fresh Salmon. ibidem For white pease pottage. fol. 26 To
make a caudle of Ote meal. ibidem How to dress a carpe. fol. 27 How to farse
Eggs. fol. 28 Sallets for fish days. ibidem Another. ibidem Another. ibidem
Another. ibidem Another. fol. 29 Another. ibidem Another. ibidem Another.
ibidem Another. ibidem How to make tartes or balde meares for fish days.
ibidem To make Alloes of fresh Salmon to boil or to baka. fol. 31 A troute
baked and minced. ibidem How to make a sprede Eagle of a Pullet. fol. 32 How to
make Martris of a Capon, Hen, or Pullet. fol. 34 How to make a Colluce. ibidem
A made dish of the proportion of an Egg for fish days. fol. 35 How to still a
capon for a sick person. fol. 36 How to preserve Quinces in Sirrop all the
year. fol. 37 How to conserve Wardens all the year in Sirrop. fol. 38 To
conserve Cherries, Damesins, or Wheat plummes all the year in the sirrop. Ibi.
To make a paste of Sugar, whereof a man may make all manner of fruits, and
other fine things with their form, as Plates, Dishes, Cups, and such like
things wherewith you may furnish a table. fol. 39 To confite walnuts. fol. 40
To make Mellons and Pompons sweet. fol. 41 To confite Orrenge peeles which may
be done at all times in the year, and chiefly in May, because then the said
peeles be greatest and thickest. fol. 42 How to purify and prepare Honny and
sugar for to confite sitrons and al other fruits, fol. 43 How to confite
peaches after the Spanish fashion. Ibidem A goodly secret for to condite or
confite ringes, citrons, and all other fruits in sirrope, fol. 45 How to bray
gold. fol. 46 How to make a condonack. Ibidem How to make confection of
mellons or pompions. fol. 47 To still a capon, a great restoritie. fol. 48 How
to make good soap. fol. 40 To make Quinces in sirrope. fol. 50 For to make
conserve of barberies. fol. 51 To make a pudding of a calves chaldron. How to
boil calves feet. fol. 52 How to stew Veale. Ibidem How to boil chickins and
mutton after the Dutch manner. ibidem How to make a cawdle. fol. 93 How to make
a haggasse pudding. Ibi. How to make Haggas puddings. fol. 54 How to make Ising
puddings. ibid. How to sees muscles. ibid. How to make a pudding. fol. 55 How
to stew steakes. ibid. To boil the Lights of a calfe. fol. 56 How to make a
Lenthen haggesse with poched eggs. Ibidem How to boil onyons. fol. 59 How to
boil citrons. ibidem How to bake Lampernes. fol. 57 How to make fried to ste
of spinach. ibid. How to bake a citron pie. fol. 49. Another way to bake
citrons. ibid. How to bake alloes. ibid. How to bray gold. fol. 60 How to make
conserve of Roses, and of other flowers. ibid. How to make conserve of
cherries, and of other fruits. ibid. How to sees a carpe. fol. 61 How to
sees a pike. ibid. How to boylecockles, fol. 62 How to boil a carpe in green
broth with a pudding in his belly. ibid. How to make an almond custatd. fol. 63
How to make a blanch marget on the fish day. ibid. How to bake chickins. How to
make a pudding in a pot, ibid. How to stew steakes. ibid. To roste a Pigge,
fol. 65 How to roste an Hare. fol. 66 How to make tostes* ibidem How to make
conserve of Mellons or pompons. ibidem How to make Sirrope of Violets. fol. 67
How to make Soap. fol. 68 How to preserve Orrenges. ibidem The stilling of a
capon a great restoritie. fol. 69 To make*dry Marmelet of Peaches. fol. 70 How
to make the same of Quinces, or any other thing. fol. 71 How to preserve
Orrenges, Lemmons, and Pomecitrons. ibidem How to preserve Quinces all the
year through, whole and soft. fol. 72
FINIS.
A Book of Cookerie.
To boil mary bones for for dinner.
FIrst put your mary bones into afaire pot of Water, and let them boil till
they be half enough, then take out al your broth saving so much as will
cover your mary bones, then put thereto eight or nine carret roots, and see
they be well scraped and washed, and cut inch long or little less and a handful
of Parselie and Isop chopped small, and season it with Salt, Pepper and
Saffron. You may boil Chynes and racks of Veale in all points as this is.

To boil a Capon.
LEt your capon be fair scalded and short trussed, and put into a fair pot of
water with a marybone or two, and a rack of ^utton cut together in three or
four pieces, and let them boil together till they be half boiled, then take
out a ladle full or two of the best of the broth, and put it into a fair
earthen pot. and put thereto ^ pint of white wine or of claret, and cut a
twelve or fourteen dates long ways and a handful of small raysons, a
handful of time, Rosemary and Isope bound together, and so let these persels
boil by themselves, and when your capon is enough, lay it in a fair platter
upon sops of white bread, and your mutton by him also, then take out the mary
from the bones whole, and lay it upon the capon, then take your made broth and
lay it upon your capon and mutton, and so serve it forth, your latter broth
must be seasoned with cinnamon cloves and mace, and salt and mace beaten also.

To boil a capon with Orenges.
TAke your Capon and set him on the fire as before with marybones and mutton,
and when you have skimmed the pot well, put thereto the value of a farthing
loaf, and let it boil till it be half boiled, then take two or three
ladleful of ye same broth and put it into an earthen pot, with a pint of the
wine aforesaid, and pill six or eight Oringes and slice them thin, and put the^
into the same broth with four peniworth in sugar or more, and a handful of
parceley, time, and Rosemary together tied, and season it with whole mace,
Cloves and sticks of cinnamon with two Nutmeg, beaten small and so serve it.

To boil teales, Mallards, pigeons chines of porke, or Neates tunges all after
one sort.
LEt them be half roasted, stick afew cloves in their breasts, then two or
three tostes of bread being burned black, then put them into a little fair
water immediately take them out again, and strain them with a little wine and
vinegar to the quantity of a pint: put it into an earthen pot, and take
eight or ten onions slyced small, being fried in a frying pan with a dish of
butter, and when they be fried, put the^ into your broth, then take your meat
from the spitte and put it into the same broth, and so let them boil together
for a time, seasoning with salt and pepper.

Mutton boiled for supper.
FIrst set your mutton on the fire, and trim it clean, then take out all the
broth saving so much as will cover it, then take and put thereto ten or twelve
onions pilled, cut them in quarters, with a handful of parseley chopped fine,
putting it to the mutton, and so let them boil, seasoning it with pepper, salt
and saffron, with two or or three spoonefull of vinegar.

To boil Mutton with Nauons.
FIrst pill your Nauons, and wash them then cut five or six of them into
pieces to the bigness of an inche, and when your mutton has boiled a while take
out all the licour saving so much as may cover well the mutton, then put the
Nauons into the pot of mutton with a handful of parselye, chopped fine, and a
branche of Rosemary, seasoning it with salt pepper and saffron.

To boil a Lambs head with purtenaunces.
FIrst skimme it well, then take of the broth, leaving so much as will cover it,
then put to it Parsely and Rosemarye, a branch of Isop and time, and a dish of
butter, with Barberies or Gooseberies, then let them boil being seasoned with
cloves Mace, salt, pepper, and saffron, and so serve it forth upon sops.

To stewe a Capon for Dinner.
TAKE a knuckle of Veale and boil it with your capon: putting to it proines
Raysons great and small, whole Mace, and let it boil together, seasoning it
with Salt and so serve it forth.

To boil a capon in white broth.
TAke a well fleshed capon and a maribone, and a quart of fair water, put them
together in an earthen pot, and let them boil till the Capon be enough, but
you must first take away the mary from ye bone, and when it has boiled take
the uppermost of the broth and put it into an earthen pot, and the mary with
it. Put to it small raisons, proines, whole mace, dates, and half a quartern
of sugar, six spoonefull of verdiuice, three or four yolks of Eggs, put
these all together, and when your Capon is boiled, lay him in a fair platter:
power your broth upon him, and so serve him.

To boil Chickens.
Boil them as the Lambs head and purtenance is boiled, and when you are to
serve them, strain three or four yolks of Eggs with vergious, and put it
into the pot, and let it boil no more: after the eggs be put in, season it with
salt, pepper, mace and cloves, and so serve them. Thus may you boil a connye
or Muggets of Veale, as the chickins are boiled.

To boil chickens with Spinnage and Lettice.
TAke a Platter of Spinnage and Lettice, and wash them clean, and when the pot
is skimmed* then put them in with a dish of butter, and a branch of rosemary
with a little vergious, being seasoned with Salt and ginger beaten.

To make Pears to be boiled in meat
TAke a piece of a leg of Mutton or Veale raw, being mixed with a little
Sheep sewet, and half a manchet grated fine, taking four raw eggs yolks
and al. Then take a little Time, and parsely chopped small, then take a few
gooseberies or barberies, or green grapes being whole. Put all these together,
being seasoned with Salt, saffron and cloves, beaten and wrought altogether;
then make Rowles or Balls like to a pear, and when you have so done, take the
stalk of the sage, and put it into the ends of your pears or balls, then
take the fresh broth of beef, Mutton or veale, being put into an earthen pot,
putting the pears or balls in the same broth with Salt, cloves, mace and
Saffron, and when you be ready to serve him, put two or three yolks of eggs
into the broth. Let them boil no more after that but serve it forth upon
soppes. You may make balls after the same sort.

To farse a cabbadge for a banquet dish.
TAke little round cabbage cutting off the stalks, and by the cabbadge then
make a round hole in your cabbadge, as much as will receive your farsing meat,
take heed you break not the brimmes, thereof with your knife, for the hole
must be round and deep, then take the Kidney of a mutton or more, and chop it
not small, Then boil six eggs hard, taking the yolks of them being small
chopped and also take raw eggs and a manchet grated fine, then take a
handful of proynes, so many great raysons, seasoning al these with salt,
pepper, cloves and Mace, working all these together, and so stuff your
Cabbedge. But if you have Sawsedge you may put it among your meat at the
putting in of your stuff, but you must leave out both the ends of your sawsage
at the mouth of the cabbadge when you shall serve it out. In ye boiling it must
be within the cabbadge, and the cabbadge must be stopped close with his cover
in the time of his boiling, and bound fast round about for breaking: the
cabbadge must be sodde in a deep pot with fresh beef broth or mutton broth,
and no more the^ will lie unto the top of the cabbadge, and when it is enough
take away the third, and so set it in a platter, opening the head and laying
out the Sawsadge ends, and so serve it forth.

To boil a breast of Veale or Mutton farced.
TAke a breast of Ueale or Mutton and farce it in like manner as your cabadg is,
so that you leave out the proines and great raysons, boil your veale or mutton
in the foresaid brothes, putting no more broth then will cover your meat, and
when your meat is half boiled, then put two handfulls of Lettuce or Spinach,
cutting it four times asunder and no more, and when your meat and herbs be
boiled, then put a little verdiuice in the broth, seasoning it with salt and
pepper, then serve your meat upon Soppes, casting your herbs upon it, and so
serve it.

To boil a Mugget of a sheep.
FIrst wash and sconre it clean, then per boil it a little, then choppe a piece
of a Kidney of Mutton small, and put it into a platter, the^ put the quantity
of a farthing lofe grated, with prunes and raysons of each a handful, Persely
and time chopped small, and three or four hard roasted eggs being chopped with
bread and Suet, then a little water put to and saffron, and color it with
three or four raw eggs, both yolks and whites, Salt, Pepper, Coues and Mace
being minced together, putting it into the Mugget, and so boil it with a
little Mutton broth and Wine, Lettice and spinnage whole in the same broth, and
so serve it forth.

To boil Mutton for Supper.
TAke Carret roots, and cut them an inch long, take a handful of parselie and
time half chopped, and put into the pot the Mutton, and so let them boil,
being seasoned with Salt and pepper, and so serve it forth.

To boil a neates tongue to Supper.
TAke a little wine or fair water, putting vnchopped Lettuce fair washed into
your Neates tongue, with a dishe of Butter or two, and season it with Salt,
Pepper, cloves and Mace, and so serve it.

To boil Mallards, Teales, and chines of porke with Cabbadge.
FIrst unloose your Cabbadge, and cut them in three or four quarters vnlosing
every leaf for doubt of worms to be in them, then wash the^ and put them into
a pot of fair water, and let them boil a quarter of an hour, then take them
up, and chop them somewhat great, then put them into a fair pot with the
broth of the Mallard and whole Pepper, and pepper beaten, with Cloves, mace,
and salt, and so let them boil together. etc.

For a Goose gibluts and pigges petitose.
LEt them be sodde^ thoroughly, then cut them in pieces and fry the^ with
butter, and when they be half fried, then put to a little Uineger with Ginger,
Sinamon and pepper and so serve it forth: thus may you use Calves feet boiled
in all points as this is.

For fricasies of a lambs head and purtenance.
TAke a Lambs head and cleave it, and cut his purtenaunces in pieces, and
perboyle it till it be almost enough, then take the yolks of two Eggs, and
baste your Lambs head and purtenance with it, and frye it in butter for sauce,
put to the butter, pepper, Uineger and Salt, frying them together a little on
the fire and so serve it.

For fricasies of Neates feet for supper.
TAke your Neates feet and clean them and baste the^ with butter and crumbs of
bread, and lay them upon a Grediorne, till they be thoroughly broyled, then
take Uineger, pepper, salt and butter, and put the^ altogether in a dish, set
on a chafingdish of coals boiling, and so let them boil there til you must
serve it, you must put to sauce, barberies or grapes, etc.

A fricase of Tripes.
LEt them be fair sodden, and sauce the^ take the leanest and cut it in
pieces, inch broad, frye them with butter or flats, and your sauce to be
vinegar, pepper and mustard, being put a little while in the friing pan with
butter or flattes.

To roast a lambs head.
TAke the head and purtenaunces being clean washed, cut the purtenances in
pieces, so that it may be broached, and roast the^ basting it with butter, and
when it is enough, take the yolks of two raw eggs, with a little parsely
chopped fine, beating them together, and baste your Lambs head with it, even
so long till your eggs be hardened on, then take it up, and serve it with the
sauce of pepper, vinegar and butter boiled a little upon a Chafingdish of coals.

To make a pie in a pot.
TAke the leanest of a Leg of Mutton and mince it small, with a piece of the
kidney of mutton, then put it into an earthen pet, putting thereto a ladlefull
or two of mutton broth, and a little wine, of proynes and raisons of each a
handful, or barberies. Let them boil together, putting to it half an orange,
if you have any, seasoning it with salt, pepper, cloves, mace, and Saffron and
so serve it.

To make allows to roste or boil.
TAke a Leg of mutton and slice it thin, then take out the kidneys of the
mutton having it minced small, with Isope, time, parsely, and the yolks of
hard eggs, then bind it with crumms of white bread and raw eggs, and put to
it proines and great raisons, and for want of them barberies or Goosberies, or
grapes seasoning it with Cloves, mace, pepper Sinamon, ginger and salt. You may
make a mugget of a Sheep as these allows be, saving you must put no mutton
into it.

To make red dear.
TAke a leg of beef, and cut out all the sinews clean, then take a roling
pin and all to beat it, then perboile it, and when you have so done, lard it
very thick, then lay it in wine or Uineger for two or three hours, or a whole
night, the^ take it out and season it with peper, salt cloves and mace, the^
put it into your past, and so bake it.

To farse all things.
TAKE a good handful of time, Isope, Parselye, and three or four yolks of
Eggs hard roasted, and choppe them with herbs small, then take white bread
grated and raw eggs with sweet butter, a few small Raisons, or Barberies,
seasoning it with Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Sinamon and Ginger, woorking it
altogether as paste, and the^ may you stuff with it what you will.

A sop of Onions.
TAKE and slice your Onions, and put them in a frying pan with a dish or two
of sweet butter, and fry them together, then take a little fair water and put
into it salt and peper, and so fry them together a little more, then boil
them in a little Earthen pot, putting to it a little water and sweet butter,
etc. You may use Spinnage in like manner.

To make gallantine for flesh or fish.
TAke brown bread and burn it black in the tosting of it, the^ take them and
lay them in a little wine and vinegar, and when they have soked a while, the^
strain them, seasoning it with sinamon, ginger, Pepper and salt, then set it
on a chasingdish with coals, and let it boil till it be thick, and then
serve it in saucers.

To stewe Oysters.
TAke your oysters, and put them either in a little skellet over the fire, or
else in a platter over a chaffingdishe of coals, and so let the^ boil with
their licour, sweet butter, vergious, vinegar, and pepper, and of the tops of
Time a little, till they be enough, and then serve them upon soppes.

To bake aloes of Veale or Mutton.
MAke your aloes ready to bake in all points as you boil them, laying upon
them in the paste barberies, Gooseberies or grapes green, or small Raisons,
and put in your Pie a dish af butter, and so set it in the oven, and when it is
baked, then put in a little vergious, and so seethe it in an Oven again a
while, and so serve it forth.

To bake a Connie, Veale, or Mutton.
TAke a Conny and perboile it almost enough, then mince the flesh of it very
fine, and take with it three yolks of hard eggs, and mince with it, the^ lay
another Conny in your Pie being perboiled, and your minced meat with it, being
seasoned with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Saffron Pepper and Salt, with two dishes of
sweet butter mixed with it, lay upon your Connie Barberies Gooseberies, or
grapes, or the small raisons, and so bake it.

To make fine paste.
TAke fair flower and wheat, and the yolks of eggs with sweet Butter,
melted, mixing all these together with your hands, til it be brought dowe
paste, and then make your coffins whether it be for pyes or tartes, then you
may put Saffron and sugar if you will have it a sweet paste, having respect to
the true seasoning some use to put to their paste Beef or Mutton broth, and
some Cream.

For small pies.
TAke the Mary out of the marybones hole, and cut it in the bigness of a bean
season your mary with Ginger, Sugar, and Sinamon, then put them in fine paste
and fry them in a frying pan with the skimming of fresh beef broth, or else
you may bake them in your oven a little while take heed they burn not, and
when you do serve them in a fair dish, cast blaunch powder upon them.

To make purses or cremitaries.
TAke a little Marow, small raisons, and Dates, let the stones be taken away,
these being beaten together in a Mortar, season it with Ginger, Sinamon and
sugar, then put it in fine paste, and bake them or fry them, so done in the
serving of them cast blaunch powder upon them.

To make a tarte of Spinnage or of wheat leaves or of colewortes
TAke three handful of Spinnage, boil it in fair water, when it is boiled,
put away the water from it and put the spinnage in a stone mortar, grind it
small with two dishes of butter melted, and four raw eggs all to beaten, then
strain it and season it with sugar, Sinamon and ginger, and lay it in your
Coffin, when it is hardened in the oven, then bake it, and when it is enough,
serve it upon a fair dish, and cast upon it Sugar and Biskets

For tartes of cream.
TAke a pint of cream with six raw eggs, and boil them together, and
stir it well that it burn not, then let it boil till it be thick, then take
it out of the pot, and put to two dishes of Butter melted, and when it is some
what cold, then strain it and season it with Sugar, then put it into your
paste, when your paste is hardened, and when it is enough, the serve it with
Sugar cast upon it. If you will have a Tart of two colors, then take the half
of it, when it is in Cream, and color the other half with saffron or yolks
of eggs.

A tart of proines.
MAke your Coffine two inches deep round about, the^ take ten or twelve good
apples, pure them and slice them, and put them into the Paste with two dishes
of butter among the apples, then cover your tarte close with the Paste, and
break a dishe of butter in pieces, and lay it upon the cover because of
burning in the Pan. And when the apples be tender, take it forth and cut of
the cover, and beat the apples together till they be soft, and they be dry
put the more butter into them and so season them with Sinamon, Ginger and
Sugar, then must you cut your cover after the fashion, leaving it upon your
Tarts, serve it with blaunch powder.

a tart of eggs.
TAke twelve Eggs and butter them together, then strain them with rosewater,
season it with Sugar, then put it into your paste, and so bake it and serve it
with sugar upon it.

a white leach.
TAke a quart of new milk, and three ounces weight of Isinglasse, half a
pound of beaten sugar, and stir them together, and let it boil half a
quarter of an hour till it be thick, stirring them all the while: then strain
it with three spoonful of Rosewater, the^ put it into a platter and let it
cool, and cut it in squares. Lay it fair in dishes, and lay gold upon it.

To keep lard in season.
CUt your lard in fair pieces, and salt it well with white salt, every piece
with your hand, and lay it in a close vessel then take fair running water, and
much white salt in it, to make it brine, the^ boil it until it bear an Egg,
then put it into your Lard and keep it close.

To make Iombils a hundred.
TAke twenty Eggs and put them into a pot both the yolks and the white, beat
them well, then take a pound of beaten sugar and put to them, and stir them
well together, then put to it a quarter of a peck of flower, and make a hard
paste thereof, and then with Anniseede moulde it well, and make it in little
rowles being long, and tie them in knots, and wet the ends in Rosewater, then
put them into a pan of seething water, but even in one waum, then take them out
with a Skimmer and lay them in a cloth to dry, this being done lay them in a
tart pan, the bottom being oyled, then put them into a temperat Oven for
one hour, turning then often in the Oven.

To make buttered Eggs.
TAke eight yolks of eggs, and put them into a pint of cream, beat them
together and strain them into a possenet all, setting upon the fire and
stirring it, and let it sees until it quail, then take it and put it into a
clean cloth, and let it hang so that the Way may avoid from it, and when it
is gone beat it into a dishe of rosewater and sugar, with a spoon, and so
shall you have fine butter. This done, you may take the white of the same eggs
putting it into another pint of Cream, using it as the yolks were used, and
thus you may have as fine white butter as you have yellow butter.

To boil Neates feet.
TAke your Neats feet out of the sauce and wash the^ in fair water, then put
them into your mutton broth, and take five or six onions chopped not small,
then take a quantity of time, Parsely and Isope chopped fine: boil
altogether, and when it is half boiled and more, the^ a d^sh or two of butter,
and put to it, then season it with pepper, salt and saffron, with five or six
spoonefulls of vinegar, and so serve it upon soppes.

To boil a Carpe.
TAke out the gall, cast it away, and so scalde not your Carpe nor yet wash
him, and when you do kill him let his blood fall into a Platter, and splet
your carpe into the same blood, and cast thereon a ladleful of vinegar, then
toste three or four tosts of brown bread and burn it black, and (...) them
into a little fair water, and the^ immediately strain them into the liquour
where your carp shall be sodden with three or four Onions chopped somewhat big,
with parsely chopped small, then set your broth upon the fire, and when it
begins to boil, put to your Carpe two or three dishes of butter, and a branch
of rosemarie slipped, and slippes of time, and if it be too thick, put to it a
little Wine, and so let it boil fair and softlye, seasoning it with whole
mace, cloves and salt, and pepper, cloves and mace beaten, and so serve it.

To boil a pike with orenges a banquet dish.
TAke your pike, split him, and sees him alone with water, butter, and salt,
then take an earthen pot and put into it a pint of water, and another of Wine,
with two Orenges or two Lemmons if you have them: if not, then take four or
five Oringes, the rines being cut away, and slyced, and so put to the licour,
with six Dates cut long ways, and season your broth with Ginger, pepper and
salt, and two dishes of sweet butter, boiling these together, and when you
will serve him, lay your pike upon soppes, casting your broth upon it, you must
remember that you cut of your pikes head hard by the body and the^ his body to
be spletted, cutting every side in two or three parts, and when he is enough,
setting the body of the fish in order: then take his head and set it at the
foremost part of the dish, standing upright with an Orrenge in his mouth, and
so serve him.

To boil a pike another. way.
TAke your Pike and pull out all his guts, and do not splette your Pyke, but
cut of his head whole, and cut his body in three or four pieces, and so let
him be boiled in wine, Water, and Salt, to the quantity of a pottell, then
take a pint of wine, and a ladlefull or two of the Pikes broth and put these
together into an earthen pot, with two dishes of butter, and three or four
Orenges sliced, small Raisons and sugar, Time and rosemary, slipped, and then
put in the effect of the Pike in the same broth, and so let them boil together
and when you be ready to serve, lay your Pike upon soppes, and put your broth
upon it, seasoning it with whole sinamon and mace, and a Nutmeg beaten, and so
serve it forth.

To boil Roche, Perch and Dase, with other small fish.
TAke fair water and put to it parsely Time and Rosemary slipped, and so let
it boil a good while together, then take a dish or two of butter, putting to
the same broth and your fish, and so let it boil together seasoning it with
cloves mace pepper and salt, and so serve them upon soppes.

To boil a Pike another way.
TAke and splet your Pike through the back and take out the refect, so done,
put your Pike into a pan of water with Rosemary, let it sees till it be
boiled, the^ take your refecte with a little wine and verdiuice with two dishes
of butter, put these in a platter, setting it on a chafing dishe of Coals, and
there let it voile, seasoning it with whole mace, this done, take up your Pike,
laying him upon sops in a platter, then take your refecte and his broth and
cast upon it, and so serve it forth with salt.

To boil a Tench.
Sees your Tench with a little water and a good deal of vinegar, when it is
sodden lay it in a fair dish, take out all the bones and put a little Saffron
in your broth with a little salt, and put the same broth upon your tench, and
cast a little fine pepper upon it while it is hot, and so let your tench stand
til it be on a gelly, and when you do serve it, take an Onion and Persely
chopped fine, and cast it upon your Tench, and so serve it.

For Turbot and Cunger.
Sees them in fair water and salt, and let them boil till they be enough,
then take them from the fire and let them cool then use them in the seasoning
as the salmon hereafter following.

For fresh Salmon.
TAKE your Salmon and boil him in fair water, rosemary and time, and in the
seething put a quart of strong Ale to it, and so let it boil till it be
enough, then take it from the fire, and let it cool, then take your Salmon out
of the pan, and put it into an earthen pan or wooden boule, and there put so
much broth as will cover him, put into the same broth a good deal of vinegar,
so that it be tart with it.

For White pease pottage.
TAke a quart of white Pease or more and sees them in fair water close,
until they do cast their husks, the which cast away, as long as any will come
up to the topp, and when they be gone, then put into the peaze two dishes of
butter, and a little vergious, with pepper and salt, and a little fine powder
of March, and so let it stand till you will occupy it, and the^ serve it upon
sops. You may see the Porpose and Seal in your Pease, serving it forth two
pieces in a dish.

To bake porpose or Seal.
TAke your porpose or Seal, and perboile it, seasoning it with Pepper and
Salt, and so bake it, you must take of the Skin when you do bake it and then
serve it forth with Gallentine in sawcers

To make a cawdle of Ote meal.
TAke two handful or more of great otemeale, and beat it in a Stone Mortar well,
then put it into a quart of ale, and set it on the fire, and stir it, season
it with Cloves, mace, and Sugar beaten, and let it boil til it be enough, then
serve it forth upon Soppes.

To dress a carpe.
TAke your carpe and scale it, and splet it, and cut off his head, and take
out all the bones from him clean, then take the fish and mince it fine, being
raw, with the yolks of four or five hard eggs minced with it, so done put
it into an earthen pot, with two dishes of butter and a pint of whit wine, a
handful of proynes, two yolks of hard eggs cut in four quarters, and season
it with one nutmeg not small beaten, Salt, Sinamon and Ginger, and in the
boiling of it you must stir it that it burn not to the pot bottom, and when
it is enough then take your minced meat, and lay it in the dish, making the
proportion of the body, setting his head at the upper end and his tail at the
lower end, which head and tail must be sodden by themselves in a vessel with
water and salt.

You may use a Pike thus in all points, so that you do not take the proines, but
for them take Dates and small raisons, and when you have seasoned it as your
Carpe is, and when you do serve it put the refect into the pikes mouth gaping,
and so serve it forth.

To farse Eggs.
TAke eight or ten eggs and boil them hard, pill of the shelles, and cut
every eg in the middle then take out the yolks and make your farsing stuff as
you do for flesh, saving only you must put butter into it insteede of suet, and
that a little so done fill your Eggs where the yolks were, and then bind
them and sees them a little, and so serve them to the table.

Sallets for fish days.
FIrst a sallet of green fine herbs, putting Perriwincles among them with oil
and vinegar.

an other.
Olives and Capers in one dish, with vinegar and oil.

an other.
White Endive in a dish with periwincles upon it, and oil and vinegar.

an other.
CArret roots being minced, and then made in the dish, after the proportion of
a Flowerdeluce, then pick Shrimps and lay upon it with oil and vinegar.

Another.
ONions in flakes laid round about the dishe, with minced carrets laid in the
middle of the dish, with boiled Hippes in five parts like an Oken leaf, made
and garnished with tawney long cut with oil^ and vinegar.

another.
ALexander buds cut long ways, garnished with welkes.

another.
SKirret roots cut long ways in a dish with tawney long cut, vinegar and
Oil.

another.
SAlmon cut long ways, with slices of onions laid upon it, and upon that to
cast violets, oil and vinegar.

another.
TAke pickeeld herring cut long ways and lay them in rundles with onions and
parsely chopped, and other herringes the bones being taken out to be chopped
together and laid in the roundles with a long piece laid betwixt the rundles
like the proportion of a snake, garnished with Tawney long cut, with vinegar
and oil,

another
TAke pickelde Herrings and cut them long ways, and so lay them in a dish, and
serve them with oil and vinegar.

To make tattes or balde meats for fish days.
TAke your dish and anoint the bottom well with butter, the^ make a fine past
to the breadth of the dish, and lay it on the same dish upon the butter, then
take Beetes, Spinach, and Cabbadges, or white Lettice, cutting them fine in
long pieces, then take the yolks of viii. raw eggs, and six yolks of hard
Eggs, with small Raisons and a little Cheese fine scraped, and grated bread,
and three or four dishes of Butter melted and clarified, and when you have
wrought it together, season it with Sugar, Sinamon, Ginger and salt, then lay
it upon your fine past spreading it abroad, then the cover of fine paste being
cut with pretty work, then set it in your oven, bake it with your dish under
it and when it is enough, the^ at the serving of it you must new paste the
cover with Butter, and so scrape sugar upon it, and then serve it forth.

To make alloes of fresh Salmon to boil or to bake.
TAke your Salmon and cut him small in pieces of thee fingers breadth, and when
you have cut so many slices as you will have, let them be of the length of a
woman's hand, then take more of the salmon, as much as you think good, and
mince it raw with six yolks of hard Eggs very fine, and then two or three
dishes of Butter with small raisons, and so work them together with cloves,
Mace, Pepper, and Salt, then lay your minced meat in your sliced Aloes, every
one being rolled and pricked with a feather, fall closed, then put your aloes,
into an Earthen pot, and put to it a pint of water, and another pint of Claret
wine, and so let them boil til they be enough, and afterward take the yolks
of three raw eggs with a little vergious, being strained together, and so put
into the pot, then let your aloes sees no more afterward, but serve them upon
Soppes of bread.

A Troute baked or minced.
TAke a Troute and sees him, the^ take out all the bones, then mince it very
fine with three or four dates minced with it, seasoning it with Ginger, and
Sinamon, and a quantity of Sugar and Butter, put all these together, working
them fast, the^ take your fine paste, and cut it in three corner ways in a
small bigness, of four or five coffins in a dish, the^ lay your stuff in
them, close them, and so bake the^ and in the serving of the^ baste the couers
with a little butter, and then cast a little blaunch powder on them, and so
sarue it forth.

To make a splede Eagle of a pullet.
TAke a good pullet and cut his throat hard by the head, and make it but a
little hole, then scalde him clean, and take out of the small hole his crop,
so done, take a quill and blow into the same hole, for to make the skin to
rise from the flesh, then break the wing bones, and the bones hard by the
knee, then cut the neck hard by the body within the skin, then cut off the
romp within the skin, leaving the bones at the legs, and also ye head on,
so drawing the whole body out within the skin of the hole, the bones to be
laid beneath toward the claws, and the feets being left also on, you must
cut of his bill: when you have taken out all these bones, and brought it to the
purpose, then take the flesh of the same pullet, and perboile it a little, and
mince it fine with Sheep Suet, grated bread, three yolks of hard Eggs,
then bind it with four raw Eggs, and a few Barberies, working these
together, season it with Cloves, Mace, Ginger, Pepper and salt, and saffron,
then stuff your pullets skin with it, putting it in at the hole at the head,
and when you have stuffed him, take him and lay him flat in a platter, and make
it after the proportion of an Eagle in every part, having his head to be cleft
a sunder, and laid in two parts like an Eagles head thus done, then must you
put him into the Oven, leaving in the platter a dish of butter underneath him,
an other upon him, because of burning, and when it is enough then set it
forth, casting upon him in the service blaunch powder, Sinamon Ginger, and
Sugar.

To make Mortirs of a Capon, Hen, or pullet,
TAke a well fleshed Capon, Hen, or pullet, scalde and dress him, then put
him into a pot of fair water, and there let it sees til it be tender, then
take it and pull all the flesh from his bones, and beat it in a stone mortar,
and when you think it half beaten, put some of the same licour into it, and
then beat it til it be fine, then take it out and strain it with a little
rosewater out of a strainer into a dishe, then take it and set it on a
chafingdish of coals, with a little Sugar put to it, and so stir it with your
knife, and lay it in a fair dishe in three long ^owes, the^ take blanch powder
made of Sinamon and Sugar, and cast upon it and so serve it forth.

To make a colluce.
TAke all the bones and legs of the aforesaid Capon, Hen or pullet, and
beat them fine in a stone Mortar, putting to it half a pint or more of the
same licour that it was sodden in, then strain it, and put to it a little
Sugar, then put it into a stone Crewes, and so drink it warm first and last.

A made dish of the proportion of an Egg for flesh days.
MAke in all your things, your farsing stuff as you do for your Cabbadge, even
so much as will fill a Bladder. Frst take a dry bladder and wash it clean,
that is of a Calfe or of a Stere, and cut a little hole in the top, and then
put in all your farseing stuff, and when you have filled it then close the
bladder top, binding it with a threede, and then put it into fresh Beef
broth, or Mutton broth, and there let it sees till it be enough, then take it
out, and let it stand still til it be somewhat stiff, then cut away the
bladder from it, and take another dry bladder and wash it clean: let it be
bigger somewhat the^ the other was before, and cut it broad at the top,
whereby your farsing stuff may in the hole go, and when it is in then so many
whites of Eggs being raw as may run round about him both above and be, neath,
within the bladder clean covered with it, then bind up your bladder mouth and
put into your broth again the Bladder, and there let it sees till the white
be hardened about the farsing, then take it out and cut away the bladder, then
set it in a fair dish, laying the parselie upon it, and so serve it forth.

Thus may you make small Eggs to the number of six or eight in a dish in like
manner, having a bladder for the same purpose.

To still a Capon for a sick person.
TAke a well fleshed capon fair scalded and dressed, and put him into an earthen
pot, put to it Burrage and Buglas, three handful of mints, one handful of
Hearts tung, and Langdebeefe, a handful of Isope, put thereto a pint of
Clarret wine, and a pint of clean water, and twelve Proynes, and when you
have so done cover the pot with a dish or saucer, and upon that all to cover
course paste that no air come out, then take the pot and hang in a Brass pot
up to ye brimmes of your paste, and so let it boil for twelve hours at the
least, and always as your water that is in the brass pot does consume, be
sure to have in readiness another pot of hot water at the fire to fill it as
long as it does sees for the twelve hours, and when the hours be past take
it from the fire, and let it cool for one hour, then unloose and strain the
licour from the capon into a fair pot, taking every morning warm four or
five spoone fuls next to your heart, which shall comfort and restore nature to
you being sick, using this aforesaid capon.

To Preserve Quinces in sirrop all the year.
TAke three pound of quinces being pared and cored, two pound of Sugar and
three quarts of fair running water, put all these together in an earthen pan,
and let them boil with a soft fire, and when they be skimmed, cover them close
that no air may come out from them, you must put cloves and Sinamon to it
after it is skimmed, of quantity as you will have them to taste, if you will
know when they be boiled enough, hang a linen cloth between the cover and the
pan so that a good deal of it may hang in the licour, and when the cloth is
very red they be boiled enough let them stand till they be cold, then put them
in Galley pots sirroppe, and so will they keep a year.

To conserve wardens all the year in sirrop.
TAke your wardens and put them into a great Earthen pot, and cover them close,
set them in an Oven when you have set in your white bread, and when you have
drawn your white bread, and your pot, and that they be so cold that you may
handle them, then pill the thin skin from them over a pewter dish, that you
may save all the sirroppe that falls from them: put to them a quarte of the
same sirroppe, and a pint of Rosewhter, and boil them together with a few
Cloves and Sinnamon, and when it is reasonable thick and cold, put your wardens
and Sirroppe into a Galley pot, and see always that the Syrrop be above the
Wardens, or any other thing that you conserve.

To conserve cherries, Damesins or wheat plummes all the year in the sirrop.
FIrst take fair water, so much as you shall think meet and one pound of
sugar, and put them both into a fair basin, and set the same over a soft fire,
till the sugar be melted, then put the reto one pound and an half of chirries,
or Damsins, and let them boil till they break, then cover them close til they
be cold, then put them in your gally pottes, and so keep them: this wise
keeping proportion in weight of Sugar and fruit, you may conserve as much as
you list putting thereto Sinamon and cloves, as is aforesaid.

To make a paste of Sugar, where of a man may make al manner of fruits, and
other fine things with their form, as Plates, Dishes, Cups and such like
things, where with you may furnish a Table.
TAke Gum and dragant as much as you will, and steep it in Rosewater til it be
mollified, and for four ounces of sugar take of it the bigness of a bean, the
juice of Lemons, a walnut shet full, and a little of the white of an eg. But you
must first take the gum, and beat it so much with a postell in a brazen
mortar, till it be come like water, then put to it the juice with the white of
an egg, incorporating al these well together, this don take four ounces of
fine white sugar well beaten to powder, and cast it into ye mortar by a little
and little, until they be turned into ye form of paste, the^ take it out of the
said mortar, and bray it upon the powder of sugar, as it were meal or flower,
until it be like soft paste, to the end you may turn it, and fashionit which
way you will. When you have brought your paste to this form spread it abroad
upon great or small leaves as you shall think it good, and so shall you form or
make what things you will, as is aforesaid, with such fine knackes as may serve
a Table taking heed there stand no hot thing nigh it. At the end of the
Banquet they may eat all, and break the Platters Dishes, Glasses, Cups, and
all other things, for this paste is very delicate and sauerous. If you will
make a thing of more finenesse then this: make a Tarte of Almondes stamped with
sugar and Rose water of like sort that Marchpaines be made of, this shall you
lay between two pastes of such vessels or fruits or some other things as you
think good.

To confite walnuts
TAke them green and small in husk, and make in them four little holes, or
more, then steep them in water eleven days, make them clean and boil them
as ye Orenges here after written, but they must seethe four times as much.
Dress them likewise with Spices, saving you must put in very few Cloves,
least they taste bitter. In like sort you may dress Goords, cutting them in
long pieces, and paring away the inner parts.

To make Mellons and Pompons sweet.
TAke fine Sugar and dissolve it in water, then take seeds ot Mellons and
cleave the^ a little on the side that sticks to the Mellon, and put them in
the sugared water, adding to them a little rosewater. Leave the said seeds so
by the space of three or four hours, then take them out, and you shall see
that as soon as the said seeds be dry, it will close up again. Plant it and
there will come of it such Mellons, as the like has not been seen. If you will
have them to give the savor of Musk: put in the said water a little musk,
and fine Sinamon, and thus you may do the seeds of Pompones, and Cowcumbers.

To confite Orange peeles which may be done at all times in the year, and
chiefly in May, because then the said peeles be greatest and thickest.
TAke thick Orange peeles, and them cut in four or five pieces, and steep
them in water the space of ten or twelve days. You may know when they be
steeped enough, if you hold them up in the sun and see through them, then
they be steeped enough, and you cannot see through them, then let them steep
until you may. Then lay them to dry upon a table, and put them to dry between
two linen clothes, then put them in a Kettell or vessel leaded, and add to
it as much Honny as will half cover the said peeles, more or less as you
think good, boil them a little and stir them always, then take them from
the fire, least the Honny should sees overmuch. For if it should boil a
little more then it ought to boil, it would be thick. Let it the^ stand and
rest four days in the said Honny, stirring and mingling the Orrenge and Honny
every day together. Because there is not honny enough to cover all the said
Orrenge peeles, you must stir them well and oftentimes, thus do three times,
giving them one bobling at each time, then let the^ stand three days then
strain them from the honny, and after you have let them boil a small space,
take them from the fire, and bestow them in vessels, putting to them Ginger,
cloves and Sinamon, mix all together, and the rest of the Sirrope will serve
to dress others withal.

How to purify and prepare Honnye and Sugar for to confite citrons and all
other fruits.
TAke every time ten pound of honey, the white of twelve new laid eggs, and
take away the froth of them, beat them well together with a stick, and six
glasses of fair fresh water, then put them into the honny, and boil them in a
pot with moderate fire the space of a quarter of an hour or less, then take
them from the fire skimming them well.

To co^nfite Peaches after the Spanish fashion.
TAke great and fair Peaches and pill them clean, cut them in pieces and so
lay them upon a table abroad in the Sun the space of two days, turning them
every morning and night, and put the^ hot into a Inlep of Sugar well sodden,
and prepared as is aforesaid, and after you have taken them out set them again
in the Sun turning them often until they be well dried, this done, put them
again into the Inlep, then set them in the sun until they have gotten a fair
bark or crust, and the^ you may keep them in boxes for winter.

a goodlye secret for to condite or confite Orenges, citrons, and all other
fruits in sirrop.
TAke Cytrons and cut them in pieces, taking out of them the juice or
substance, then boil them in fresh water half an hour until they be
tender, and when you take them out, cast the^ in cold water, leave them there
a good while, the^ set them on the fire again in other fresh water, do but
heat it a little with a small fire, for it must nrt sees, but let it simper a
little, continue thus eight days together heating the^ every day in hot water:
some heat ye water but one day, to the end that the citrons be not too tender,
but change the fresh water at night to take out the bitterness of the pills,
the which being taken away, you must take sugar or Honey clarified, wherein you
must the citrons put, having first well dried them from the water, and in wi^ter
you must keep the^ from the frost, and in Summer you shall leave the^ there all
night, and a day and a night in Honey, then boil the Honey or Sugar by it
self without the orenges or Citrons by the space of half an hour or less
with a little fire, and being cold set it again to the fire with the Citrons,
continuing so two morninges: if you will put Honnie in water and not sugar, you
must clarify it two times, and strain it through a strayner: having thus
warmed and clarified it you shall strain and set it again to the fire, with
Citrons only, making them to boil with a soft fire the space of a quarter of
an hour, the^ take it from the fire and let it rest at every time you do it, a
day and a night: the next morning you shall boil it again together the space
of half an hour, and do so two morninges, to the end that the Honey or sugar
may be well incorporated with the Citrons. All the cunning consists in the
boiling of this sirrope together with the Citrons, and also the Sirrope by it
self, and herein heed must be taken that it take not ye smoke, so that it
savor not of the fire: In this manner may be dressed the Peaches, or Lemmons
Orrenges, Apples, green Walnuts, and other list being boiled more or less,
according to the nature of the fruits.

To bray gold.
TAke Gold leaves, four drops of honey mix it well together, and put it into a
glass, and when you will occupy it, steep and temper it in gum water and it
will be good.

To make a condonack.
TAke Quinces and pare the^, take out the cores, and sees them in fair water
until they break, the^ strain them through a fine strainer, and for eight pound
of the said strained quinces, you must put in 3. pound of Sugar, and mingle it
together in a vessel, and boil them en the fire always stirring it until it
be sodden which you may perceive, for that it will no longer cleave to the
vessel, but you may sta^p musk in powder, you may also ad spice to it, as
Ginger, Sinamon, Cloves, and Nutmegges, as much as you think meet, boiling the
musk with a little Uineger, then with a broad slice of wood spread of this
confection upon a table, which must be first strewed with Sugar, and there make
what proportion you will, and set it in the sun until it be dry, and when it
has stood a while turn it vpsidown, making always a bed of Sugar, both under
and above, and turn them still, and dry them in the sun until they have
gotten a crust. In like manner you may dress Pears, Peaches, Damsins, and
other fruits.

To make confections of Mellons or Pompones.
TAke what quantity of Mellons you think best, and take them before they be
ripe, but let the^ be good, and make as many cuts in the^ as they be marked
with quarters on every side, and having mundified them and taken out the cores
and curnels, and peeled the utter rind, steep them in good Uineger, and
leaving them so the space of ten days, and when you have taken them out, take
other vinegar and steep them a new again other ten days removing and
stirring them every day, then when time shalbetake them out, and put them in a
course linen cloth, drying and wiping them, and set the^ in the air, the
space of a day and a night, then boil them in Honey, and by the space of x.
days give them every day a little boiling, leaving them always in the Honey,
and they must boil at every boiling but one walm then take the pieces and put
the^ in a pot with powder of cloves, Ginger and Nutmegges, and pieces of
Sinnamon, thus done, make one bed of the pieces of Mellons, and another of the
spices, and then power white Honnie upon all in the said pots or vessels,

The stilling of a capon a great restoritie.
TAke a young Capon that is well fleshed and not fat, and a knuckle of young
Ueale that is sucking, and let not fat be upon it, and all to back it bones and
all, and fles the cap on clean the skin from the flesh, and quarter it in
four quarters, and all to burst it bones and al, and put the Ueale and it
altogether in an earthen pot, and put to it a pint of Red wine, and eight
spoonfulles of rose water, and half a pound of small raisons and Currants, and
sour Dates quartred, and a handful of Rosemary flowers, and a handful of
Burrage flowers, and twenty or thirty whole maces, and take and cover the pot
close with a cover, and take paste and put about the pols mouth that no air
come forth, and set it within a brass pot full of water on the fire, and let
it boil there eight hours and then take the ladle and bruise it altogether
within the pot, and put it in a fair strainer, and strain it through with the
Ladle, and let no fat be upon the broth, but that it may be blown or else taken
with a feather, and every day next your heart drink half a dozen spoonefulles
thereof, with a Cake of Manus christi, and again at four of the clock in the
afternoon.

To make good soap.
FIrst you must take half a strike of asshen Ashes, and a quarte of Lime, then
you must mingle both these together, and then you must fill a pan full of water
and sees them well, so done, you must t take four pound of beasts tallow,
and put it into the Lie, and sees them together until it be hard.

To make Quinces in Sirrope.
TAke thirty Quinces to the quantity of this sirrop, take a pottel of water and
put it in a pan, and then take the whites of six eggs and beat them with an
other pottle of water, and then put it altogether, and put thereto twelve or
foureteen pound of Sugar, as you shall see cause, and sees it and skim it very
clean, and then put to it two ounces of cloves and bruise the^ a very little,
and let them sees until the some do rise very black, and then skimme of the
cloves again and wash them in fair water and dry them and put them in again
and your quinces also. Put to them half a pint of rosewater, and then put the
Sirrope in a fair earthen pot or pan, and lay a sheet four times double
upon them to keep in ye heat, and so let it stand a day or two, and then put
them and the sirop in a vessel that was never occupied, and cover them close,
but in the beginning pare your quinces and core them, and sees them in fair
water, until they be tender, and then take them up and lay them that the water
may run from them clean, and when they be cold, then put the^ into your
sirrope as it is above said.

To make conserve of Barberies.
TAke your Barberies and pick them clean, and set the^ over a soft fire, and
put to them Rosewater as much as you think good, then when you think it be
sodde enough, strain that, and then sees it again, and to every pound of
Barberies, one pound of sugar, and meat your conserve.

To make a Pudding of a Calves chaldron.
First take ye chaldron and let it be washed scalded and perboyled, and let it
be chopped and stamped fine in a mortar, and while it is hot strain it
through a cullender, and half a dozen of Eggs both whites and yolks, with
all manner of herbs to them a handful or two, let the herbs be shred small,
and put them to the chaldron and a good handful of grated bread, then take a
handful of flower, and put it to it all, then take an Drenge pil out of the
sirope and mingle with it, then season it with Sinamon and Ginger, and a few
Cloves and mace, and a little Rosewater and Marrowe or Suet, Butter a good
quantity thereof close it up, so it be not dry baked, then take the thinnest of
ye sheep kel and wrapped the meat in, then rease the coffin of fine paste and
put it in.

To boil calves feet.
TAke a pint of white wine and a small quantity of water, and small raisons and
whole mace, and boil them together in a little Uergious and yolks of eggs,
mingled with them, and a piece of sweet butter, so serve them upon bread
sliced.

To stewe veale.
TAke a knockle of Ueale and al to bruise it, the^ set it on the fire in a little
fresh water, let it sees a good while, then take good plenty of onions and
chop them into your broth, and when it has well sodden, put in Uergious,
Butter, Salt and Saffron, and when it is enough, put to it a little sugar, and
then it will be good.

To boil chickins and mutton after the Dutch fashion.
FIrst take Chickins and mutton, and boil them in water a good while, and let
a good deal of the water be boiled away, then take out the Mutton and chickens
and the broth, make whit broth, put in thereto Sinnamon and Ginger, Sugar and a
little Pepper, and a little Uergious, and a little flower to thicken it, and a
little Saffron, take Rosemarye, Time, Margerum and penirial, and Hisope, and
half a dish of butter, with a little salt, the liquor must be cold before the
chickins be put in.

To make a caudle.
TAKE a pint of Malmesie and five or six eggs, and sees them strained to
gether, so sodden, stir it till it be thick, and lay it in a dish as you do
please, and so serve it.

To make a Haggas pudding.
TAke a piece of a Calves Chaldron and perboile it, shred it so small as you
can, then take as much Beef Sewet as your meat, shred likewise, and a good
deal more of grated bread, put this together, and to them seven or eight
yolks of eggs, and two or three whites, and a little cream, three or four
spoonefull of rosewater, a little Pepper, Mace and nutmegs, and a good deal of
sugar, fill them and let them be sodden with a very soft fire, and shred also
with a little Winter Sanery parsely and Time, and a little Peniriall with your
meat.

To make Hagges Puddings.
TAke th liver of a Hog and perboyle it, then stamp in water and strain it
with thick cream, and put thereto eight or nine yolks of eggs, and three or
four whites, and Hogs suet, small raisons, Cloves and Mace, pepper, salt,
and a little sugar, and a good deal of grated bread to make it thick, and let
them sees.

To make Ising puddings.
TAke great Otemeale and pick it and let it soake in thick cream 3. howere,
then put thereto yolks of Eggs, and some whites, pepper, salt, cloves and mace,
and a little sugar, and fill them nod too full, and sees them a good while.

To sees Muscles.
TAke butter and vinegar a good deal, parseley chopped small and pepper, then
set it on the fire, and let it boil a whild, then see the Muscles be clean
washee, and put them in the broth shelles and all, and when they be boiled a
while, serve them shelles and all.

To make a Pudding.
TAke Parseley and Time, and chop it small, then take the kidney of Veale, and
perboile it, and when it is perboyled, take all the fat of it, and lay it that
it may cool, and when it is cold shred it like as you do sewet for
puddinges, then take marrow and mince it by it self, then take grated bread and
small raisons the quantity of your stuff, and dates minced small, then take the
eggs and roste them hard, and take the yolks of them and chop the^ small, and
then take your stuff before ^ehearsed and mingle altogether, and then take
pepper, Cloves and Mace, Saffron, and salt, and put it together with the said
stuff, as much as you think by casting shall suffire, then take six Eggs and
break them into a vessel whites and all, and put your dry stuff into the same
eggs, and temper them all well together, and so fill your haggesse or gut, and
sees it well and it will be good.

To stewe Steakes.
TAke a neck of Mutton and cut it in pieces, and then frye them with butter
until they be more then half enough fry them with a good many of Onions
sliced, then put them in a little pot, and put thereto a little parsely chopped,
as much broth of Mutton or beef as cover them, with a little Pepper, Salt,
and Uergious: then let it sees together very softly the space of an hour, and
serve them upon soppes.

To boil the lights of a calfe.
FIrst boil the lights in water, then take Persely, Time, Onyons, Penyriall,
and a little Rosemacy, and when the Lights be boiled chop all these together
Lights and all very small, and then boil them in a little pot, and put into them
vergious, Butter, and some of the own broth then season it with Pepper,
Sinamon, and Ginger: let them boil a little and serve them with sops.

To make a lenthen Haggesse with poched eggs.
TAke a Skillet of a pint, and fill it half with vergious, and half with
water, and then take Margerome, Wintersauerie, Peniroyall, mince, Time, of each
fix crops, wash them, and take four Eggs, hard roasted, and shred them as
fine as you can, and put the herbs thus into the broth, then put a great
handful of currants, and the crummes af a quarter of a Manchet, and so let it
sees til it be thick, then season it with Sugar, Sinamon, Salt, and a good
piece of Butter, and three or four spoonefulles of Rose water, then poch
seven Eggs and lay them on sippets, and pour the Haggesse on them, with
Sinamon and Sugar strewed on them.

To boil Onions.
TAke a good many onions and cut the^ in four quarters, set them on the fire
in as much water as you think will boil them tender, and when they be clean
skimmed, put in a good many of small raisons, half a spooneful of gross
pepper, a good piece of Sugar, and a little Salt, and when the Onions be
through boiled, beat the yolke of an Egg with Uergious, and put into your pot
and so serve it upon soppes. If you will poch Eggs and lay upon them.

To boil Citrons.
When your Citrons be boiled, pared and sliced, sees them with water and wine,
and put to them butter, small Raysons, and Barberies, sugar, sinamon and
Ginger, and let them sees till your citrons be tender.

To bake Lampernes.
FIrst make your coffin long ways, and season your Lampernes with Pepper,
Cloves, and Mace, and put them in the Pie, and put thereto a good handful of
small Raysons, two or three onions sliced a good piece of Butter, a little
sugar, and a few Barberies, and when it is enough put in a little Vergious.

To make fried toste of Spinach.
TAke Spinnage and sees it in water and salt, and when it is tender, wring out
the water between two Trenchers, then chop it small and set it on a Chafingdish
of coals, and put thereto butter, small Raisons, Sinamon, Ginger, and Sugar,
and a little of the juice of an Orange and two yolks of raw Eggs, and let it
boil till it be somewhat thick, then toste your toste, soake them in a little
Butter, and Sugar, and spread thin your spinnage upon them, and set them on a
dish before the fire a little while, and so serve them with a little sugar upon
them.

To bake a Citron pie.
TAke your citron, pare it and slice it in pieces, and boil it with gross
pepper and Ginger, and so lay it in your Paste with butter, and when it is
almost baked put thereto Uineger, Butter, and Sugar, and let it stand in the
Oven a while and soke.

An other way to bake Citrons.
WHen your Citrons be pared and slyced lay it in your Paste with small
Raysons, and season them with Pepper, ginger, and fine sugar.

To bake Aloes.
TAke a Leg of mutton or Ueale, and cut it in thin slices: take parseley,
Time, Margerom, Sauerie, and chop them small, with ii. or iii. yolks of hard
Eggs and put there to a good many Currants, then put these herbs in the
slices, with a piece of Butter in each of them and wrap them together and lay
them close in your Paste, season them with Cloves, Mace, Sinamon, Sugar, and a
little whole pepper, Currants and Barberies cast upon them and put a dish of
butter to them and when they be almost baked put in a little Vergious.

To bray Gold.
TAke Gold leaves, four drops of honey, mix it well together, and put it into a
Glass, and when you will occupy it, steep and temper it in gum water and it
will be good.

To make conserues of Roses, and of any other flowers.
TAke your Roses before they be fullye sprung out, and chop off the white of
them, and let the Roses be dried one day or two before they be stamped, and to
one ounce of these flowers take one ounce and a half of fine beaten Sugar, and
let your roses be beaten as you can, and after beat your roses and Sugar
together again, then put the Conserve into a fair glass: And likewise make
all Conserve of Flowers.

To make conserve of cherries, and other fruits.
TAke half a pound of Cherries, and boil them dry in their own licour, and
the^ strain them through a Hearne rale, and when you have strained them, put
in two pound of fine beaten Sugar, and boil them together a pretty while, and
then put your Conserve in a pot.

To sees a carpe.
FIrst take a Carpe and boil it in water and salt, then take of the broth and
put in a little pot, then put thereto as much Wine as there is broth, with
Rosemary, Parselie, Time, and margerum bound together, and put them into the
pot, and put thereto a good many of sliced Onyons, small raisons, whole maces,
a dish of butter, and a little sugar, so that it be not too sharp nor two
sweet, and let all these sees together: if the wine be not sharp enough then
put there to a little Vinegar, and so serve it upon soppes with broth.

To sees a pike.
FIrst sees the Pike in water and salt, with Rosemarie, Parsely and Time,
then take the best of the broth and put into a little pot, then put thereto the
ruffilt of the pyke, small Raisons, whole Mace, whole pepper, twelve or
thirteen Dates: a good piece of Butter, a goblet of white wine, and a little
yeast, and when they have boiled a good while, put in a little vinegar, sugar
and Ginger, so serve the pyke with the Ruffilt, and broth upon soppes.

To boil cockles.
TAke water, vinegar, pepper, and beer, and put the cockles in it, then let
them sees a good while, and serve the^ broth and all. You may sees them in
nothing but in water and salt if you will.

To boil a carpe in green broth, with a pudding in his belly.
TAke the spawn of a carpe, and boil and crumble it as fine as you can, the^
take grated bread small raisons dates minced, cinnamon, sugar, cloves, and Mace,
and Pepper, and a little salt mingled altogether, and take a good handful of
sage, and boil it tender, and strain it with three or four yolks of Eggs,
and one white, and put to the spawne, with a little cream and Rosewater, then
take the carpe and put the pudding in the belly, and sees him in water and
salt, and when he is almost boiled, take some of the spawne and of the best of
the broth, and put it into a little pot with a little white wine, and a good
piece of butter, and three or four Onyons, whole Mace, whole Pepper, and small
Raisons, and three or sower Dates, and when it is a good deal sodden, put in a
good deal of seeded spinnage, and strain it with three or four yolks of
Eggs, and the Onyons that you put into the Broth with a little Vergious, and
put it to your Broth: and if it be too sharp put in a little Sugar, and so
lay your Carpe upon soppes, and pour the Broth upon it.

To make an Almond Custard.
TAke a good sort of almonds blanched, and stamp them with Water, and strain
them with water and a little rosewater, and twelve Eggs, then season it with a
little synamon, sugar, and a good deal of Ginger, then set it upon a pot of
seething water, and when it is enough stick Dates in it.

To make a blanch marger on the fish day.
TAke whites of eggs and creme, and boil them on a chafingdish on coals, till
they Curd, then will their whay go from them, then put away the whay, then put
to the Curd a little Rosewater, then strain it and season it with sugar.

To bake chickins.
FIrst season them with cloves and mace, pepper and salt, and put to them
currants and Barberies, and slitte an apple and cast synamon and sugar upon the
apple, and lay it in the bottom, and to it put a dish of butter, and when it
is almost enough baked, put a little sugar, vergious and orenges.

To make a Pudding in a pot.
TAke a piece of a Leg of Mutton or Veale and perboyle it well, then shred it
very fine, with as much suet as there is mutton, and season it with a little
pepperand salt. Cloves and Mace, with a good deal of synamon and Ginger, then
put it in a little pot, and put thereto a good quantity of Currants and Prunes,
and two or three Dates cut the long ways, and let it seethe softly with a
little vergious upon sops, and so serve it with sugar.

To stew Steakes.
TAke the great Ribs of an Neck of mutton and choppe them asunder, and wash
them well, the^ put them in a platter one by another, and set them on a
chafindish of coals, cover them and turn them now and then, so let them stew
til they be half enough, then take Parseley, Time, Margerome and Onyons, and
chop them very small, and cast upon the steakes, put thereto one spoonful of
vergious, and two or three spoonfulles of Wine, a little butter and Marrowe,
let them boil till the mutton be tender, and cast thereon a little pepper, if
your broth be too sharp put in a little sugar.

To roast a Pigge.
TAke your pig and draw it, and wash it clean, and take the liver, perboile it
and strain it with a little cream, and yolks of Eggs, and put thereto
grated bread, marrow, small Raisons, nutmegs in powder, mace, sugar and salt,
and stir all these together, and put into the Pigges bellye, and sow the
Pigge, then spit it with the hair on, and when it is half enough pull of the
skin, and take heed you take not of the fat, then baste it, and when it is
enough, the^ crum it with white bread, sugar, sinamon and ginger, and let it be
somewhat brown.

To roste an Hare.
TAke the Hare and flay her, then take Parseley, Time Sauery, Cream, a a good
piece of Butter Pepper, small raisons, and barberies work all these together in
the Hares bellye: when she is almost enough, baste her with Butter, and one
yolke of an Egg, and make veneson sauce to her.

To make Tostes.
TAke the Kidney of Ueale and chop it small then set it on a chafingdishe of
Coals, and take two yolks of eggs, Currants, Synamon, Ginger, Cloves and
mace, and sugar, let them boil together a good while, and a little Butter with
the Kidnie.

To make conserve of Mellons, or Pompons.
TAke what quantity of Mellons you think best, and take the^ before they be
ripe, but let them be good, and make as many cuts in the^ as they be marked
with quarters on every side, and having mundified the^ and taken out the cores
and curnelles, and peeled the utter rind, steep them in good Uineger, and
leaving them so the space of ten days, and when you have taken them out, take
other vinegar and steep them ten days more, removing and stirring them every
day, then when time shall be take the^ and put them in a course linen cloth,
drying and wiping them, then set them in the air the space of one day and a
night, then boil them in honey, and by the space of ten days give them every
day a little boiling, leaving the^ always in the Honey, and they must boil at
every boiling but one walm, then take the pieces and put them in a pot, with
powder of Cloves, Ginger and Nutmegges, and a piece of synamon, this done,
make one bed of the pieces of Mellons, and another of the spice, and then pour
white honye upon all in the said pots or vessels.

To make sirrope of Violets.
FIrst gather a great quantity of violet flowers, and pick the^ clean from the
stalks and set the^ on the fire, and put to them so much Rosewater as you
think good, then let them boil altogether until the color be forth of them
the^ take them of the fire and strain them through a fine cloth, then put so
much sugar to them as you think good, then set it again to the fire until it
be somewhat thick, and put it into a violl glass.

To make soap.
FIrst you must take half a strike of Asshen ashes, and a quarte of Lime, then
you must mingle both these together, and then you must fill apanne full of water
and sees them well, so done, you must take four pound of beasts tallaw, and
put it into the lie and sees them together until it be hard.

To preserve orrenges.
TAke your Pills and water them two nights and one day, and dry them clean
again and boil them with a soft fire the space of one hour, then take them
out to cool, and make your sirroppe half with Rosewater and half with that
liconr, and put double Sugar to your Orenges, and when your Sirroppe is half
sodden, then let your orrenges sees one quarter of an hour more, then take
out your orrenges and let the sirroppe sees until it rope, and when all is
cold, then put your Orenges into the Sirrop: The white of an Egg and sugar
beaten together will make it to candie.

The stilling of a capon, a great restority.
TAke a young Capon that is well fleshed and not fat, and a knuckle of young Veale
that is sucking and let not fat be upon it, and all to hack it bones and all,
and flea the capon clean the skin from the flesh, and quarter it in four
quarters, and all to bruise it bones and al, and put the veale and it altogether
in an Earthen pot, and put to it a pint of Red wine, and eight spoonfuls of
Rosewater, and half a pound of small Raisins or Currants, or four Dates
quartered, and a handful of Rosemary flowers, and a handful of Burrage
flowers, and twenty or thirty whole Maces, and take and cover the pot close
with a cover, and take paste and put about the pots mouth that no air conie
forth, and set it within a brass pot full of water on the fire, and let it
boil there eight hours, and then take the ladle and bruise it altogether
within the pot, and put it in a fair strainer, and strain it through with the
ladle, and let no fat be upon the broth but that it may be blown or else taken
with a feather, and every day next your heart drink half a dozen spoonfulles
thereof, with a cake of Manus Christi, and again at four of the clock in the
afternoon.

To make dry Marmelet of Peches.
TAke your Peaches and pare the^, and cut them from the stones, and mince them
very sinely, and steep them in rosewater, then strain them with rosewater
through a course cloth or Strainer into your Pan that you will seethe it in,
you must have to every pound of peches half a pound of sugar finely beaten,
and put it into your pan yt you do boil it in; you must reserve out a good
quantity to mould your cakes or prints withal, of that Sugar, then set your
pan on the fire, and stir it fill it be thick or striffe that your stick will
stand upright in it of it self, the^ take it up and lay it in a platter or
charger in pretty lumps as big as you will have ye mould or printes, and when it
is cold print it on a fair board with sugar, and print the^ on a mould or
what knot or fashion you will, and bake in an earthen pot or pan upon ye embers
or in a feate cover, and keep the^ continually by the fire to keep them dry.

To make the same of Quinces, or any other thing.
TAke the Quinces and quarter them, and cut out the ccares and pare them
clean, and sees them in fair water till they be very tender, then take them
with rosewater, and strain them, and do as is aforesaid in every thing.

To preserve Orrenges, Lemmons, and Pomesitrons.
FIrst shave your Orrenges finely, and put them into water two days and two
nights, changing your water three times a day, then perboyle them in three
several waters, then take so much water as you think convenient for the
quantity of your Orrenges, then put in for every pound of Orrenges one pound
and a half of sugar into the water, and put in two whites of eggs and beat
them altogether, then set them on the fire in a brass vessel, and when they
boil skimme them very clean, and cleanse them through a Jelly bag, then set
it on the fire and put in the Orrenges. Use walnuts in like manner, and use
lemmons and Pomecitrons in like sort, but they must lie in water but one night.

To preserve Quinces all the year through whole and soft.
TAke as is aforesaid one pound of water, and three pound of Sugar, and break
it into very small pieces, and in all things as you did before, then take twelve
Quinces and core them very clean, and pare them and wash them, and put into
you sirrup, when the skim is taken off let them sees very soft until they be
tender, then take them up very softly for breaking, and lay them in a fair
thing one by another, the^ strain your firrupe, and set it on the fire again,
then put in your Quinces and have a quick fire, let them sees apace and turn
them with your stick, and when they be almost ready put in some Rosewater and
let them sees. and when you think they be ready take up some of the sirrope
in a spoone, and if it be thick like a zelly when it is cold then take of your
Pan, and put your Quinces into pots and your sirrope to the^, and put into your
pots little sticks of Sinamon and a few cloves, and when they be cold cover
them with paper pricked full of small holes.

FINIS.
THE Book of Caruing and Sewing.

And all the feasts in the year, for the service of a Prince or any other
estate, as ye shall find each Office, the service according in this book
following.

AT LONDON Printed by E. Allde for Edward White, dwelling at the little North
door of S. Paul's at the sign of the Gunne.

Terms of a Caruer.
Break that Dear, Leach that Brawn, rear that Goose, lift that Swan, sauce
that Capon, spoil that Hen, fursh that chicke^, unbrace that Malard, unlace
that connie: dismember that Heron, display that Crane, disfigure that Pecock,
vnioynt that Bitture, vntach that Cnrlew, alay that Fesaunt, wing that
Partrich, wing that Quail, mince that Plouer, thie that Pigion, brother that
passtie, thie that Wodcock, thie all manner of small birds.

Timber the fire, tire that egg, chine that Salmon, string that Lampry, splat
that Pike, sauce that place, Sauce that Tench ^^lay that Breme, side that
Haddock, tusk that Barbel, culpon that Troute, finne that Cheuine, transen that
Eele, traunch that Sturgion, vndertraunch that purpes tame that crab, barde
that Lobster.

Here ends the goodly Terms.
Here begins Butler and Panter.
THou shall be butler and panter all the first year, and ye must have three
pantry knives, one knife to square trencher loaves, another to be a chipper,
the third shall be sharp for to make smooth trenchers, than chip your
sovereigns bread hot, and all other bread let it be a day old, household
bread three days old, trencher bread four days old, then look your salt be
white and dry, the plouer made of Juory two inches broad, and three inches long
and look that your saltseller lid touch not the salt, than look your table
clothes, towels and napkins, be fair folden in a chest, or hanged upon a
perch, than look your Table knives be fair pullished, and your spoones
clean, then look ye have two tarriours, a more and a less, and wine cannels
of box made according, and a sharp gimlet and faucets. And when ye set a pipe
on broche do thus, set it toure fingers broad above the nether chine
vpwardes astaunt, and then shall the lies never arise. Also look ye have in
all seasons, butter, cheese, apples, pears, nuts, plumes, grapes, dates,
figs, and raysons compost, green ginger, and chard Quince. Serve fasting,
butter, plums, damsons, cheries, and grapes. After meat, pears, nuts,
strawberies, hutelberies, and hard cheese. Also blaundrels or pipins, with
caraway in confects: after supper rest apples and pears, with blanch powder
and hard cheese, beware of Cow cream and of Strawberies, hurtelberies, iuncat,
for cheese will make your sovereign sick, but he eat hard cheese.

Hard cheese has these operations, it will keep the stomach open, butter is
wholesome first and last, for it will do away all poisons: Milk, Cream and
Jouncate, they will close the maw, and so does a posset, therefore eat hard
cheese, and drink Rumney Modom, beware of green Salets and raw fruits, for
they will make your Sovereign sick, therefore set not much by such meats
as will set your teethe on edge, therefore eat an Almond and hard cheese,
but eat not much cheese without Romney modon. Also of diverse drinks if their
fumositiues have displeased your sovereign, let him eat a raw apple, and the
fumositiues will cease, measure is a merry mean, and if it be well used,
abstinence is to be praised, when God therewith is pleased.

Also take good heed of your wines, every night with a candle voth red Wine
and sweet wine, and look they reboyle nor leeke not and wash the pype heads
every night with cold water, and look ye aclenching iron, ads, and linen
clothes if need be, and if they reboile ye shall know by the hissing,
therefore keep an empty pipe with the lies of colored rose, and draw the
reboiled wine to the lies, and it shall help it. And if the sweet wine pale,
draw it into a Ramney vessel for leesing.

Here follows the names of Wines.
Red wine, White wine, Claret Wine, Osey, Caprick, Campolet, Rennish wine,
Malmesey, Bastard, Tire, Rumney, Muscadel, Clary Raspis, Vernage, Cute* piment
and Ipocras.

For to make Ipocras.
Take ginger, pepper, grains, canell, sinamon, sugar and fornesole, that look
ye have fine or six bags of your Ipocras to run in, and a perch that your
renners may ren on, than must ye have six peuter basins to stand under your
bags, then look your spice be ready, and your ginger well pared or it be beaten
to powder, than look your stalks of sinamon be well colored and sweet,
canell is not so gentle in operation, sinamon, is hot and dry, grains of
paradise be hot and moist, ginger grains, long pepper and sugar ben hot and
moist sinamon, Canell and red wine coloring.

Now know ye the proportions of your Ipocras, than beat your pouders, each
by them self, and put them in bladders and bange your bags sure that no
bag touch other, but let each basing touch other, let the first basin be of
a gallon, and each of the other a pottell, that put in your basin a gallon of
red Wine, put thereto your pouders, and stir them well, than put them into
the first bag, and let it ren, than put them in the second bag, than take
a piece in your hand and assay if it be strong of Ginger, and alay it with
sinamon, and it be strong of sinamon, alay it with sugar, and look ye let it
ren through six renners, and your Ipocras shall be the siner, than put your
Ipocras into a close vessel and keep the receipt, for it will serve for sewes,
then serve your sovereign with wafers and Ipocras.

Also look your compost be fair and clean, and your ale five days old, or
men drink it, than keep your house of office clean, and be courteous of
answer to each person, and look ye give no person no palde drink, for it
will breed the scab.

And when ye lay the cloth wipe the board clean with a cloth, than lay a
cloth (a couch it is called) take your fellow that one end, and hold you that
other end, than draw the cloth straight, the bought on the utter edge, take the
utter part and hang it even, than take the third cloth and lay the bought on
the inner edg, and lay estate with the upper part half a foot broad, than
cover thy Cubboord and thine ewrie with the towell of Diaper, than take thy
Towell about thy neck, and lay the one side of the Towell upon the left arm,
and thereon lay your Sovereigns napkin, and lay on thine arm seven loves of
bread with thres or four trencher loves, with the end of the towell in the
left hand, as the manner is, than take thy salt seller in thy left hand, and
take the* end of the towell in your right hand to bear in spoones and knives,
than set your salt on the right side, where your Sovereign shall sit, and on
the left side your salt, set your trenchers, then lay your knives and set your
bread one loaf by another, and your spoones and your Napkins fair folden
beside your bread, then cover your bread and trenchers, spoones, and knives,
and at every end of the Table set a Saltseller, with two Trencher Leaves,
and if ye will wrappe your Sovereigns Bread stately, ye must square and
proportion your bread, and see that no Lofe be more then another, and then
shall ye make your wrapper mannerly, then take a towel of reins of two yards
and a half, and take the towell by the ends double, and lay it on the table,
then take the end of the bought a handful in your hand, and wrap it hard,
then lay the end so wrapped between two towels, upon that end so wrapped.
This being done lay your bread bottom to bottom, six or seven loaves, then
see you set your bread mannerly in good form, and when your Sovereigns
table is thus arrayed, cover al other boords with salt, trenchers and cups: also
see thine ewry be arrayed with basins and ewers, and water hot and cold, and
see ye have napkins, cups, spoons, and see your pots for wine and ale be made
clean, and to the surnabe make the courtesy with a cloth under a fair double
napry, then take the towels end next you, and the utter end of the table, and
hold these three ends at once, and fold them at once that a pleit pass not a
foot broad, then lay it even there it should lie. And after meat wash with
that, that is at the right end of the table, ye must guide it out, and the
marshal must convey it and look to each cloth the right side be outward and
draw it straight, then must ye raise the upper part of the towell, and lay it
without any groaning and at every end of the towell ye must convey half a
yard that the sewer may take estate reverently, and let it be: and when your
sovereign has washed, draw the surnape even, then bear the surnap to the
midst of the board, and take it up before your sovereign, and bear it into
the ewry again: and when your sovereign is set, look your towell be about
your neck, then make your souerain courtesy, then uncover your bread and lay
it by the salt, and lay your napkin, knife, and spoone before him, than kneel
on your knee till the purpain pas eight loves and look ye set at the ends of
the table four loves at a mess, and see that every person have a napkin and
a spoone, and wait well to the sewer how many dishes be covered, and so many
cups cover ye, then serve ye forth the Table mannerly, that every man may
speak of your courtesy.

Here ends the Butler and Panter yeoman of the seller and ewry: and here
follows sewing of flesh.
THe sewer must sewe, and from the board convey all manner of pottages meats
and sauces, and every day common with the Cook, and understand and wit how
many dishes shall be, and speak with the panters and officers of the spicerie
for fruits that shall be eaten fasting. Than go to the board of sewing and see
ye have officers ready to convey, and servants for to bear your dishes. Also
if the marshall squires, and sergeants of arms be there, than serve forth
your sovereign without blame.

Service.
First set ye forth mustard and brawn, pottage, beef, mutton, stued fesant,
swan capon, pig, venison, hake, custard, leach and lombard, fruter vaunt, with
a subtilty two pottages, blaunch manger and gelly. For standard, venison, roast
kid, fawn, and conie, bustard storke, Crane, peacock with his tail, herensew,
^itture, woodcocke, partrich, plouer, rabets, great birds, larkes, doucets,
pampuffe, white leach, amber gelly, cream of almondes, curlew brew, snite,
quail, sparrowe, martinet, perch in gelly, pety peruis, quince bake, leach
dew^ard, fruter fage, blandrels or pippens with caraway in confects, wafers and
Ipocras they be agreeable. Now this have done, voye ye that table.

Here ends the sewing of flesh, and here follows caruing of flesh.
THe Caruer must know the caruing, and the fair handling of a knife, and how
he shall fetch all manner of foul, your knife must be fair and your hands
must be clean, and pass not two fingers and a thombe upon your knife. In the
midst of your hand set the haft sure, vnlasing the mi^sing with two fingers
and a thombe, caruing of bread, laying and voiding of crumbs with two fingers*
and a thombe* look ye have ye cure set never on fish, flesh beast ne fowl,
more than ii. fingers, and a thumb, than take your lofe in your left hand and
hold your knife surely, enbrewe not the table cloth, but wipe upon your
Napkin, then take your trencher lofe in your left hand and with the edge of
your Table knife take up your Trenchers as nie the point as ye may, then lay
four trenchers to your sovereign one by another, and lay thereon other four
trenchers, or else twain, than take aloafe in your left hand, and pare the
loaf round about, than (...) the over crust to your sovereign, and cut the
nether crust and void the paring and touch the loaf no more after it is so
served; than cleanse the table that the sewer may serve your sovereign.

Ye must also know the fumosities of fish, flesh, and fowls, and all manner
of sauces* according to their appetites, hese ben the fumositiues, salt, sour,
restie, fat, freid, sinews, skins, honey, ^roupes, young feathers, heads,
pigions bones, and all manner of legs of beasts and fowls to the otter
(...), for these be fumositiues lay them never to your sovereign.

Service.
Take your knife in your hand, and cut ^^^wne in the dish as it lies, and lay
on your sovereigns trencher, and see there be mustard.

Venison with furmitie is good for your Sovereign, touch not the venison with
your hand but with your knife, cut it out into the furmintie, do in the same
wise with peason, and bacon, beef, hen, and mutton, pare the beef, cut the
mutton and say to your sovereign, beware of fumositiues, salt, sinew, fat,
resty and raw. In sirrup, phesant, partrich, stockedoue, chickins in the left
hand, take them by the pinion and with the fore part of your knife lift up
your wings, than mince it into the sirrup, beware of skin, raw and sinewe,
Goose, teele mallard and swan, raise the legs, than the wings, lay the body in
the midst, or in another platter, the wings in the midst and the legs after,
lay the brawn between the legs* and the wings in the the platter, Capon or
hen of Greece, lift the legs, than the wings, and cast on wine or ale, then
mince the wing and give your sovereign: Fesand, partrich, plouer or lapwing,
raise the wings and after the legs woodcock, ^irture, egrit, snite, curlew and
heronsew unlace them break of the pinions, and break the neck, than raise
the legs, and let the feet be on still, than the wings. A crane raise the
wings first, and beware of the trumpe in his breast, pecock, storke, bustard,
and shouillard unlace them as a crane, and let the feet be on still. Quail,
sparrow, lark, martinet, pigion, swallow and thrush the legs first, than the
wings, fawn, kid, and lamb, lay the kidney to your sovereign, than lift up
the shoulder and give to your soueraign a rib. Venison roast, cut it in the dish
and lay it to your sovereign: a conny lay him on the back, cut away the vents
between ye hinder legs, break the canel bone, than raise the sides, than lay
the cony on the womb, on each side the chine the two sides departed from the
chine, than lay the bulk, chyne and sides in the dish: also ye must mince
four lesses to one morsel of meat, that your sovereign may take it in the
sauce. All bake meat that be hot, open them above the coffin, and and all
that be cold open them in the midway Custard, cheek them inche square, that
your soueralgne may eat thereof. Doucets pare away the sides and the bottom,
beware of fumositiues, Fruter, vaunt, Fruters they say be good, better is
Fruter pouch, Apple Fruters be good hot, and all cold touch not. Tansey is
good hot, wortes of gruell, of beef or of mutton is good. Jelly, mortrus,
cream, almonds, blanch, manger, iussell and charlet, cabadge and vmbles of a
deerr be good and all other potage beware of.

Here ends the Caruing of flesh, and begins sauces of all manner of fowls.
Mustard is good with brawn, beef, chine of bacon, and mutton, vergis is good
to boiled chickins, and capon, swan, with chawdrons ribs of beef with garlike
musstard, pepper, vergis, ginger, sauce of lamb pig, and fawn, mustard and
sugar, to Fesand, partrich and cony sauce game lin, to herensew, egript, plouer
and craine to brew and curlew, salt, sugar and water of camet, bustard,
shouillard and bitture, sauce gamline, wodcock lapwing, lark, quail, martinet,
venison, and snite with white salt, sparowes and throstles, with salt and
sinamon, thus with all meats sauce shall have the operation.

Here ends the sauces for all manner of fowls and meats.
Here begins the feasts and service from Easter unto Whitsontide
On Easter day and so forth to Penticost after the serving of the table there
shall be set bread, trenchers and spoones after the estimation of them that
shall sit there, and thus ye shall serve your Sovereign, lay trenchers, and
if he be of a lower degree or estate, lay five trenchers, and if he be of
lower degree four trenchers, and of another degree three trenchers, tha^ cut
bread for your sovereign after ye know his conditions whether it be cut in
the midst or pared, or else to be cut in small pieces: also ye must understand
how the meat shall be served before your Sovereign, and namely on Easter
day, after the governance and service of that country where ye were borne.
First on that day ye shall serve a calfe sodden and blessed, and sodden eggs
with green sauce, and set them before the most principal estate, and that
Lord because of his high estate, shall depart them al about him, then serve
potage as worts, roots or brows, with beef, mutton, or veale, and capons that
be colored with saffron, and baked meats: and the second course, Jussel with
mamony, and roasted endoured, and pigions with bake meats, as tarts chewets,
and flaunes, and other, after the disposition of the cooks: and at supper time
diverse sauces of mutton or veale in broth, after the ordinance of the steward
and than chickins with bakon, veale, roast pigions or lamb, and kid roast, with
the head and the purtenance of Lamb and pigges feet, with vinegar and parcely
thereon, and a tansie fried, and other bake meats, ye shall understand this
manner of service dureth to pentecost, save fish days.

Also take heed how ye shall array these things before your sovereign.
First ye shall see there be green sauce of sorell or of vines, that is, hold
a sauce for the first course, and ye shall begin to raise the capon.

Here ends the Feast of Easter till Pentecost. And here begins Caruing of
all manner of Fowls.
Sauce that Capon.
Take up a capon, and lift up the right leg and the right wing, and so array
forth and lay him in the platter as he should fly, and serve your sovereign,
and know well that capons or chickens be araied after one sauce, the chickins
shall be sauced with green sauce or vergis.

Lift that swan.
Take and dight him as a goose, but let him have a larger brawne and look he
have a chawdron.

Aley that Fesant.
Take a fesand raise his legs, and his wings as it were a hen, and no sauce
but only salt.

Wing that partrich.
Take a Partrich and raise his legs and his wings as a hen, and ye mince him
sauce him with Wine, powder of Ginger and salt, than set him upon a Chafingdish
of coals to warm and serve it.

Wing that Quail.
Take a Quail and raise his legs and his wings as a hen, and no sauce but
salt.

Display that crane.
Take a Crane and unfold his legs, and cut of his wings by the joints, than
take up his wings and his legs and sauce him with powder of ginger, mustard,
vinegar and salt.

Dismenber that Heron.
Take a Heron and raise his legs and his wings as a crane, and sauce him with
vinegar, mustard, powder of ginger and salt.

Vnioynt that Bitture.
Take a Bitture and raise his legs, and his wings as a Heron, and no sauce
but salt.

Break that Egript.
Take an Egript and raise his legs and his wings as a Heron, and no sauce
but salt.

Vntach that Curlew.
Take a Curlew, and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, and no sauce
but salt.

Vntach that brew.
Take a Brewe and raise his legs, and his wings in the same manner, and no
sauce but only salt, and serve your Sovereign.

Unlace that Conny.
Take a Cony and lay him on the back and cut away the vents, than raise the
wings and the sides, and lay bulk, chyne, and sides together, sauce, vinegar
and powder of ginger.

Break that Sarcell.
Take a Sarcellor a teele, and raise his wings and his legs, and no sauce but
only salt.

Mince that Plouer.
Take a Plouer and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, and no sauce but
only salt.

A Snite.
Take a snite and raise his wings, his legs, and his shoulders as a plouer,
and no sauce but salt.

Thie that Woodcock.
Take a Woodcock and raise his legs and his wings as a Hen, this done dight the
brain.

Here begins the feast from Pentecost unto Midsomer.
In the second course for the meats before said, ye shall take for your sauces,
ale, wine, vinegar, and pouders after the meat, but ginger and canel, from
pentecost to the feast of S. John Baptist.

The first course shall be beef and mutton sodden with capons, or roasted, and if
capons be sodden, array him in the manner aforesaid and when he is roasted, thou
must cast on salt, with wine or with ale, than take the capon by the legs,
and cast on the sauce and break him out, and lay him in a dish as he should
flee: first ye shall cut the right leg, and the right shoulder, and between
the four members, lay the brawne of the capon, with the croupe in the end
between the legs, as it were possible for to be joined together, and other bake
meats after. And in the second course, potage shall be iussell Charlet or
Mertrus, with young Gees;e, Veale, Porke, Pigions or chickins roasted, with
Pampuffe, fruiters, and other bake meats after the ordinance of the Cook.
Also the Goose ought to be cut member to member, beginning at the right leg,
and so forth under the right wing, and not upon the joint above, and it ought
to be eaten with green garlike, or with sorrel, or tender vines or vergis in
summer season after the pleasure of your sovereign: also ye shall understand
that al manner of fowls that has whole feet should be raised under the wing
and not above.

Hecre ends the feast from Pentecost to Midsomer: and here begins from
the feast of S. John the Baptist unto Michaelmas.
IN the first course potage Worts gruell, and furmentie, with venison and
Mortrus and pestles of porke, with green sauce. Roasted capon, swan with
chaworon In the second course, potage after the ordinance of the cooks with
roasted mutton, veale, porke, chickins or endoured pigions heronsewes, fruiters
or bake meats, and take heed of the fesant, he shall be arrayed in the manner
of a capon, but it shall be done dry without any moisture, and he shall be
eaten with salt, and powder of ginger: and the Herensew shall be araied in the
same manner without any moisture, and he should be eaten with salt and powder:
also ye shall understand that all manner of fowls having open claws as a capon
shall be tired and arrayed as a capon and such other.

From the feast of S. Michael unto the feast of Christmas.
IN the first course, potage, beef, mutton, bacon, pestles of porke, or with
Goose, capon, malard, Swan or Fesant, as it is before said, with tarts or bake
meats, or chines of porke. In the second course, potage, mortrus or Conies or
few, than roast flesh, mutton pork, veale, pullets, chickins pigions, teles
Wigions, Malards, Partrich, Wodcock, plouer, bitture, curlewe, Heronsew, Veson
roast, great birds, snite, feldfares, thrushes, fruiters, chewits, beef with
sauce, geloper roast, with sauce pogill, and other baked meats as is
aforesayds: and if ye carue before your Lord or your Lady any sodden flesh,
carue away the skin above, than carue reasonably of the flesh for your Lord
and Lady, and specially for Ladies, for they will soon be angry, for their
thoughts be soon changed, and some Lords will be soon pleased, and some not,
as they be of complexion. The Goose and Swan may be cut as ye do other
fowls that have whole feet, or else as your Lord or your Lady will have it.

Also a Swan with chadron, Capon or Fesand, ought to be arrayed, as it is
aforesaid, but the skin must be had away and when they been carved before
your Lord or your lady, for generally the skin of all manner whole footed
fowls that have their living on the water their skins be wholesome and clean,
for by cleanes of water, and fish is their living, and if they eat any stinking
thing, it is made so clean with the water that all the corruption is clean gone
away from it.

And the skin of a capon, hen, or chickin be not so clean, for they eat
foul things in the street, and therefore the skins be not so wholesome, for
it is not their kind to enter into the River, to make their meat void of the
filth. Mallarde, Goose or Swan, they eat upon the land foul meat, but anon
after their kind they go to the river, and there they cleanse them of their
foul stink. A fesand as it is aforesaid, but the skin is not wholesome, than
take the heads of all field birds, and wood birds, as fesand, Pecocke,
Partrich wodcock, curlew, for they eat in their degree, foul things, as
worms, toades and other such.

Thus ends the feasts and caruing of flesh.
And here begins the sewing of fish.
The first course.
To go to showing of fish, muscalade, menews in sew of porpas or of salmon,
baken hering with sugar, green fish, pike Lampry, salens, purpos roasted, bake
gurnard, and lampry bake.

The second course.
Gelly white and red, dates in confects, congre, salmon, dorey, brit, turbut,
halibut for standard, base trout, mullet, cheuin, sele, eles and lamprey roast,
tench in gelly.

The third course.
Fresh Sturgion, breme, perch in gelly, a ^oule of salmon, Sturgion, Welks,
apples, and pears roasted with sugar candy. Figs of malike and raisons, dates
capt with minced ginger, wafers and Ipocras they be agreeable, this feast is
done, void ye the table.

Here ends the sewing of Fish, and here follows caruing of fish.
The caruer of fish, must see to peaso^ and furmenty, the tail and the liver,
ye must look if there be a salt purpose or sele turrentine, and do after the
form of Venson, baken Hering, and lay it whole upon your sovereigns trencher*
white hering in a dish, open it by the back, pick out the bones and the row,
and see there be mustarde. Of salt fish, green fish, salt Salmon, and cunger,
pare away the skin, salt fish, stockfish, Marling, Mackrell, and Hake with
butter, take away the bones and the skins: a pike lay the womb upon his
trencher* with pike sauce enongh, a salt lampray gobon is in vii. or eight
pieces, and lay it to your sovereign: a place put out the water, then cross
him with your knife, cast on salt, wine or ale. Gurnard rochet, breame, cheuin,
base melet, roch, perch, soll, macrell, whiting, haddocke, and codling, raise
them by the back, and pick out the bones and cleanse the refet in that belly,
Carpe, breame, sol and troute, back and belly together, Salmon, conger,
sturgion, turbut, thirbol, thornbach, hound fish, and halibut, cut them in the
dishes the porpos about, tenche in his sauce cut two else and lampraies roast,
pull of the skin, pyke out the bones, put thereto Vinegar and powder a Crab
break him asunder in a dishe, and make that shell clean and in the stuff
again, temper it with vinegar and powder them cover it with bread, and send
into the kitchen to heat, then set it to your sovereign and lay them in a
dish: a creuis dight him thus, depart him asunder and slit the belly and take
out the fish, pare away the red skin, and mince it thin, put vinegar in the
dish and set it on the table without eating: a ioule of sturgion, cut it in
thin morsels, and lay it round about the dish.

Fresh lamprey bake open the pastie, than take white bread, and cut it thin,
and lay it in a dish, and with a spoone take out galentine and lay it upon the
bread, with red wine, and powder of sinamon, tha^ cut gobon of the lamprey,
and mince the gobon thin, and lay it in the galentine, than set it upon the
fire to heat, fresh hering with salt and wine, shrimps well picked, flounders,
gogines, menews, and muscles, eles, and lampries, sports is good in sew.
Muscnlade in wortes, oisters in sew, oisters in grauy, menews in porpas,
salmond in seele gellie white and red cream of almonds, dates in confects,
Pears and quinces in sirroppe, with parcely roots, mortrus of houndefish raise
standing.

Here ends the caruing of fish, And here begins sauces for all fish.
Mustard is good for salt hering, salt fish salt conger, salmon, sparling, salt
ele, and ling, vinegar is good with salt Purpos, turrentine, salt sturgion salt
thrilpole, and salt whale, lamprey with gallantine, vergis to roche, dace,
breme, molet, bace, flou^ders, salt crab and ch^uin, with powder of sinamon to
thorneback, hering, houndfish, haddock, whiting and cod, vinegar, powder of
sinamon and ginger, green sauce is good with green fish and halibut, cottell
and fresh turbut, put not your green sauce away, for it is good with mustard.

Here ends all manner of sauces for fish according to their appetite.
The chamberlain
The Chamberlain must be diligent and cleanly in his office, with his head
kembed, and so to his sovereign, that he be not retchles, and see that ye have
a clean shirt brech, petticote and doublet, than brush his hosen within and
without, and see his shone and his slippers be clean, and at morn when your
sovereign will arise, warm his shirt by the fire, and see ye have a foot
sheet made in this manner. First set a chair by the fire with a cushion, another
under his feet, than spread a sheet over the chair, and see there be ready a
kerchiefe and a comb, than warm his petticote his dublet and his stomacher,
and than put on his dublet and his stomacher, and than put on his hosen and
shone or slippers, than strike up his hosen mannerly, and tie them up, than
lace his doublet hole by hole, and lay a cloth upon his neck and head, than
look ye have a basin and an ewer with warm water, and a towell to wash his
hands than knele upon your knee, and ask your souerain what robe he will wear,
and bring him such as he commands* and put it upon him, and take your leave
manerlye, and go to the Church or Chapel to your soueraines Closet, and
Carpets, and Cushions, and lay down his book of prayers, than draw the
Curtains, and take your leave goodly, and go to your sousraigns chamber, and
cast all the clothes of the bed, and heat the feather bed, and the bolster,
but look ye wash no feathers, then the blankets, and see the sheets be
fair and sweet, or else look ye have cleene sheets, than lay the head sheets
and the pillows, than take up the towell and the basin, and lay carpets about
the bed or in windows and cupbordes laid with quishins: also look there be a
good fire burning bright, and see if the house of easement be sweet and
clean, and the privy board covered with green cloth and a Quishin, then see
there be blanket, down or cotton for your sovereign, and look ye have a
Basin or a ewer with water, and a towel for your sovereign, than take off his
gown, and bring him a mantell to keep him from cold, than bring him to the
fire, and take off his shone and his hosen, the^ take a fair kerchif of
reins, and kembe his head, and put on his kercheife and his bonet, than spread
down his bed, lay the head sheet and the pillowes, and when your sovereign is
to head, draw the curtains then see there be mortar or wax, or perchours
ready, than drive out dog or cat, and look there be basins and vrinall set
near your sovereign, than take your leave mannerly, that your sovereign may
take his rest merrily.

Here ends of the Chamberlain.
Here follows of the Marshall and the usher.
The Marshal and the Usher must know all the estates of the land, and the high
estate of a king, with the blood royal.

The estate of a King. The estate of a Kings son, a prince. The estate of a
Duke. The estate of a Marquis. The estate of an Earl. The estate of a Bishop.
The estate of a Vicount. The estate of a Baron. The estate of the three chief
Judges and the Mayor of London. The estate of a Knight bacheler. The estate of
a knight, Deane, Archdeacon. The estate of the master of the Rols. The estate
of other Justices, and Barons of Cheker. The estate of the Mayor of Callice.
The estate of a Doctor Divine. The estate of a Doctor of both the Laws. The
estate of him that has bin Mayor of London, and sergeant of the Law.
The estate of a master of the chancery, and other worshipful preachers and
clerks that be granduable, and al other orders of chaste persons and priests,
worshipful merchants, and gentlemen, all thesemay sit at the squires table.

A Duke may not keep the hal, but each estate by them self in chamber or in
pauilion, that neither see other, marquis, Earls, Bishops and vicaunts, al
these may sit at a mess: a baron and the Mayor of London, and three chief
Judges, and the speaker of the Parliment, all these may sit two or three at a
mess: and all other states may sit three or four at a mess: also the
Marshall must understand and know the bloede royal, for some Lord is of the
blood royal, and of small lyuelyhood: and some knight is wedded unto a Lady of
royal blood, she shall keep the estate of her Lords blood, and therefore the
royal blood shall have the reverence as I have showed you before: also a
Marshall must take he de of the birth, and next of the line of the blood
royal: Also he must take heed of the Kings officers of the chanceler, ste
ward, Chamberlain, Treasurer, and comptroler.

Also the Marshall must take heed unto strangers and putthem to worship and
reuereuce, for if they have good cheer it is your Soueraines honor. Also a
Marshall must take heed if the King send your Sovereign any message, and if he
send a knight receive him as a Baron, and if he send a Yeoman, receive him as
a squire, and if he send a groom receive him as a Yoman. Also it is no rebuke
to a Knight, tosette a groom of the Kings at his table.

Here ends the book of Caruing.
Here follows how to make Marchpaine and Ipocras.
How to make good Marchpaine.
FIrst take a pound of long small almonds and blanch them in cold water, and
dry the as posible as you can, then grind them small, and put no licour to
them but as you must needs, to keep them from oyling, and that licour that you
put in, must be rose water, in manner as you shall think good but wet your
pestell therein, when ye hau beaten them fine, take half a pound sugar and
more, and see that it be beaten small in powder, it must be fine, then put it
to your almonds, and beat them together, when they be beaten, take your wafers
and cut them compusse round, and of the bigness you will have your Marchpane,
and then as soon as ye can after the tempering of your stuff, let it be put
in your past, and strike it abroad with a flat stick as even as ye can, and
pinch the very stuff as it were an edge set upon, and then put a paper under
it, and set it upon a fair board and lay a latin basin over it, the bottom
upward, and then lay burning coals upon* the bottom of the basin: to see how
it baketh, if it happen to bren too fast in some place fold Papers as broad
as the place is, and lay it upon that place, and thus with atttending ye shall
bake it a little more then a quarter of an hour, and when it is well baked,
put on your gold and biskets, and stickin conficts, and so you shall make a
good Marchpaine. Or ever that you bake it* you must cast on it fine sugar and
rose water, that will make it look like Ice.

To make marchpane.
Take half a pound of blanched Almonds, and of white Sugar a quarter of a
pound, of Rose water half an ounce, and of damask water as much, beat the
almo^ds with a little of the same water, and grind them till they be small, set
them on a few coals of fire, till they wax thick, then beat them again with
the sugar fine: then mix the sweet waters and them together, and so gather the^
and fashion your marchpane: then take Water cakes of the broadest making, cut
them square, paste them together with a little liquor, and when you have made
them as broad as will serve your purpose, have ready made a hoope of a green
hasel wand of the thicknes of half an inche on the inner side smooth, and on
the outward side round and smooth without any knags: lay this hoope upon your
water cakes aforesaid, and then fill your hoop with the gear above named, ye
thicknes of the hoope: the same driven smooth above, with the back of a silver
spoone, as ye do a tart, and cut away all the parts of the cakes, even close
by the outside of the hoope with a sharp knife, that it may be round: then
having white paper vuderneath it, set it upon a warm harth or upon an
instrument of iron and brass, made for the same purpose, or into an oven after
the bread is taken out so it be not stopped, it may not bake but only be
hard and through dried: and ye may while it is moist, stick it full of cumfets
of sundry colors in comely order, ye must moist it over with rosewater and
Sugar together, make it smooth, and so set it in the oven or other instrument,
the clearer it is like Lantarne horn, so much the more commended* If it be
through dried and kept in a warm and dry air, a marchpane will last many
years. It is a comfortable meat for weak folks, such as have lost the taste of
meats by much and long sickness: the greatest secret that is in making of this
clear, is with a little fine flower of rice, rose water and sugar beaten
together, and laid thin over the marchpane, ere it go to drying: this will make
it shine like Ice, and ladies report.

To make Ipocras.
Take a gallon of wine, and an ounce of sinamo^ two ounces of ginger, and a
pound of sugar, twenty cloves bruised, and twenty corns of pepper gross
beaten, and let al those soke one night, and let it run through a bag.

To make Ipocras
Take of chosen sinamon two ounces, of fine ginger, one ounce of grains, half
an ounce, bruise them all, and steep them in three or four pints of good
odifferous wine with a pound of sugar, by the space of four and twenty hours,
than put them into an Ipocras bag of woollen, and so receive the liquor. The
readiest and best way is, to put the spices with the half pound of sugar, and
the wine into a bottell, or a stone pot stopped close, and after twenty four
hours it will be ready, than cast a thin linen cloth, and a piece of a
boulter cloth in the mouth, and let it so much run through as ye will
occupye at once, and keep the vessel close, for it will so well keep both
the sprite, odor, and virtue of the wine, and also spices.

FINIS.

