THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S WALK: With the most regardable and remarkable Steps
thereof, the true Rule according to which, and the manner how we must Walk:
Showing the infallible properties of the children of light.

As I have wrote in few words, whereby when ye read ye may understand. Ephesians
3. 3. Newly published by the Author Nathanael Cole, Preacher at S. Leonards
Bromley in Middlesex, on the backside of Stratford-Bow near London.

This is the way, walk in it. Esa. 30. 21. LONDON Printed by T. S. for Thomas
Pauier, dwelling in Iuy-Lane.

1624.

TO THE HOnorable and Worshipful Company of all our English MERCHANTS trading
to East India, Grace and peace, etc.
COnsidering with my self to whom I might present this work, being the third
fruits of my labors in this kind, I thought upon a saying of Solomon in his
Proverbs, A man that has friends, must show himself friendly. Prou. 18. 24.
Which speech being often recalled, was the occasion of this presentation, and
impulsive cause of the dedication of these Sermons to all your most respected
worthiness. The most deserving cause I confess, was the acknowledgement of
wonted benevolence, and your annual beneficence, whereof these few years I
have been partaker. So that, Commemoratio beneficij, became Commendacio
officij, to me,.i. The remembrance of your undeserved bounty, was a commending
and commanding of this my most deserved duty. The final cause, in regard of
God, is to seek his glory, in the good of his Church; in regard of you; to
testify my thankfulness for your choice of me among some other of my fellow
laborers, in this case; And as he that forgets the benefits of God or men,
cannot but be unthankful to both; so on the contrary, Qui quanta sibi gratia
collata sit, nescit, quantas largitori grates debet, non intelligit.i. He that
knows not what favor is bestowed upon him, understands not what thanks he
owes to him that gave it. And the more deserved praise belongs unto you,
because yours is a vital, not a funeral beneficence: Concerning which, it is
well of some observed, that being vital, it is free, and such as God accounts
of; it shows, first, your faith in Gods providence; Secondly, your love and
care to do good to Gods Ministers; Thirdly, that you trust not in uncertain
riches; Fourthly, it gains you the prayers of those to whom you are
beneficial; whereas a funeral beneficence, is most commonly formal, for
fashion, to do as others do; or extorted to the hazard of their goods, or
for vainglory, or to stop the mouth of an accusing conscience. Now because
I could no way better express my thankful heart, nor knew, having so many
friends, how to show my self more friendly, I have presumed to make an
exchange; for your temporal, to bestow amongst you all, this spiritual gift;
it being the best requital I can make, or content that I could give. I
acknowledge my self much obliged to you, though unknown to most of you; I
praise you in God, and bless God for you all; and though I cannot say, I am
yours to live and die with you, yet by Gods grace I shall ever be yours to
live and pray for you; that I may use the words of Samuel; As for me, God
forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you; but I
will teach you the good and the right way; Only fear the Lord, and serve him
in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things, he has done for
you, 1. Sam. 12, 23, 24.

And now give me leave, I beseech you, to speak freely to you all, as Paul did
to the Corinthians, My mouth is open unto you, my heart is enlarged; Now for a
recompense in the same, be ye also enlarged, 2. Cor. 6. 11, 13. Let your good
works be continued; And be not weary in well doing, for in due season ye
shall reap, if ye faint not, Gal. 6. 9. It is constancy in well-doing, that
crowns the work; In cassum, bonum quid agitur, si ante vite terminum,
deseratur. i. It is in vain to do any good thing, and to leave off before
death; as, Non coepisse, sed perfecisse virtutis est, says Jerome,.i. It is
the property of virtue, not to begin well, but to end well. Let your good
works be plentiful and abundant; More at last, than at first, Revel. 2. 19.
Yea, sometime superabundant; like the Macedonians, who to their power, yea, and
beyond their power were willing of themselves, etc. 2. Cor. 8. 3. Let all be
done discreetly; making much of them that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4.
Distributing to the necessity of Saints, Romans 12. 13. doing good to all, but
specially to those which are of the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. so
regarding, and rewarding most plentifully, those that labor painefully in Gods
haruesi. Thus let good doing be chearefully; not grudgingly, or of necessity,
but willingly, for God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9. 7. if there be first
a willing mind, God accepts it, 2 Cor. 8. 12.

And to stir you up the more, remember I beseech you what Solomon says, He
that pittieth the poor, lends unto the Lord, and what he has given him, will
he pay him again, Prou. 19. 17. Remember what Saint Paul says; To do good,
and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well-pleased,
Heb. 13. 16. Remember what our Savior Christ says; He that receives a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward, Math. 21.
22. God will reward you here and hereafter; He will reward you, 1 Donando, by
giving you all necessary good; 2 Condonando, by forgiving you all your sins;
3 Coronando, by crowning you with everlasting life. God will be with you; 1
Dirigendo; by directing you in his ways, and guiding you in alyour affairs. 2
Porrigendo, by reaching out his helping hand in all your distress. God will
be with you. 1 Detegendo, by discovering the plots and devices of your
enemies. 2 Protegendo, by defending you against all dangers at home and abroad,
both by sea and land. Thus, the Lord is with you, while ye be with him, no
longer, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. And if you become like David's blessed man, whatsoever
you do it shall prosper, Psalm. 1. 1. 2. 3. If you shall meditate in the law of
God day and night, and observe to do what is written therein, then shall you
make your way prosperous, and then you shall have good success, Joshua 1. 8.

Now give me leave, I humbly beseech you, to advance my speech a little
further to you all; you encounter with the mighty billows of the great Sea;
you endanger your selves, and yours, both in body and goods; In the midst of
life, they are in death; If it please God to honor you in a strange Land, with
the treasures of it, and to give safe return home, then labor to honor God
in your own Country, with that which he has lent you. So you honoring God,
he will still honor you, 1 Samuel 2. 30. If adversity comes, be humble; if
prosperity, be thankful; if death it self, be patient. I would not have
you timidi, nor tumidi; neither overmuch timorous, as doubting of Gods favor,
despairing of his love, or distrusting his providence; nor too presumptuous,
relying on your own means, trusting to your own merits, and so to sacrifice
to your own nets, Habak. 1. 16. for the first, remember, He that keeps
Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep, Psalm. 121. 4. for the latter, know, it
is Gods blessing which makes rich, Pro. 10 22. He gives, and he takes away,
Job 1. 21. If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, nor the mighty man in his might, nor the rich man in
his riches; but let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands and
knows God, who exercises loving kindness, judgment and righteousness in
the earth, Ier. 9. 23. 24. For though you may be domini titulares; only Lords
in name, yet God is dominus tutelaris; a God of power, a rock of defense, your
refuge, Castle, and deliverer. But first seek the Kingdom of God, and his
right ousnes, as the principal, (and all other things (as appurtenanc^^) shall
be cast upon you, Math. 6. 33. Seek it first; primo et maxim, first of all
and most of all; first in order, first in degree. Delight your selves in the
Lord, and he shall give you your hearts desire. Commit your way unto the Lord,
trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass, Psalm. 37. 4. 5. And I beseech
you lay to heart Saint Paul's charge, Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy; That they do good, that they
be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up
in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they
may lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18. 19.

Now craving pardon for my boldness; I commend you to GOD, and to the word of
his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among
all them which are sanctified, Acts 20. 32. and these my labors to your
Patronage, against al preiudicate opinion, calumnies, or supercilious censures
of any ouer-curious, or too envious; humbly beseeching Almighty God, to give
you and al yours, all happiness. i. External, in your bodies; Internal, in
your souls; Eternal, both in body and soul; for Jesus Christ sake, To whom,
for all his benefits, both temporal and spiritual; received and promised;
positive, and privative; be all thanks, and praise. Amen.

Your Honors and Worships in the Lord to be commanded, Nathanael Cole.

THE PREFACE to the WORK. OR, An ocular SERMON, fitting the Subject, being an
exposition upon PSALM. 119. 3.
IT is a most regardable, and remarkable saying, and worthy all observation,
which the Prophet David records in the Psalm, speaking of all those who are
blessed, both here, and for ever hereafter. They do no iniquity, they walk
in Gods ways. Psalm. 119. 3. In which place, are set down two infallible notes
of all Gods children, putting a maine difference between them, and all the
wicked impes of Satan. First, Gods Children do no iniquity. Which words must
not simply and properly be understood; for all men have sinned, and do sin,
both before and after conversion. If I John, and my fellow Apostles say we have
not sinned, we make God a liar, 1 Ioh. 1. 10. For all have sinned, Romans 3. 23.
Again, after conversion, If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us. 1 John 1. 8. For all our righteousness are as
filthy rags, Esaias. 64. 6. For there is not a just man upon earth that does
good, and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. It is not so meant then, that Gods
children never sin; neither, as the Papists hold, that original sin is so
abolished by Baptism, that, in the party baptized, there remains nothing
which God may hate; But the meaning of the words is this: They do no iniquity;
that is, they commit not sin so, as to live in a customarie practice of any
one sin; though they may fail in words, and do amiss in deeds, yet the
tenor and course of their lives shall be according to Gods commandments. They
lie not in their sins; sin reigns not in them; they give not themselves
over unto sin, to become slaves and servants unto sin; They sin not
against conscience, and knowledge, of set purpose; they sin not willingly,
wilfully and wittingly, with full consent and swinge of will: Neither can they
so sin, for being regenerated, the Spirit of God keeps them from so sinning:
Thus are the like places to be understood. Whosoever abides in Christ, sins
not, 1 Ioh. 3. 6. Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is borne of God, verse
9. This is a special mark to discern the child of God, and to distinguish
him from the wicked; for the wicked sins wilfully, customarily, lying, and
trading in his sin, without any sound repentance, or true remorse of
conscience, sporting and delighting in sin; going on in sin and
wickedness, Psalm. 68. hating to be reformed, Psalm. 50. he gives over himself
to siane, to obey it in the lusts thereof, Romans 6. In a word, as Paul says,
The wicked being past feeling, give themselves over to lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. and not only commit
wicked and ungodly deeds, but commit them ungodly, in an ungodly manner, as
Jude, Epist. Verse 15. that is, they do their works from an unrepentant
heart, and with a mind devoted and addicted to ungodliness; with a purpose to
sin aforehand; taking pleasure in sin; and running on in the same course
without repentance. Herein stands the sound trial of a man's self indeed,
whether he be in the state of grace or not; namely, if he can say truly in
the testimony of a good conscience, he does no iniquity, so, as I have showed;
First, he purposes it not beforehand, but it is both beside and against his
purpose. Secondly, he has a resisting and strife against it, and is not wholly
swallowed up in the pleasure of it. Thirdly, if he does fall, through
weakness and his own corruption, yet he lies not in it, but recouers
himself again by renewed repentance. And this is the first mark of David's
blessed man in the Text; and worthily are they set in the first place, being a
maine preparatiue to this walk; for first a man must cease to do evil, and
then do good; first, cease to do iniquity, then to walk in Gods ways.

Secondly, the godly walk in Gods ways. First, observe their action; they
walk, that is, they frame and lead their lives according to those ways which
God in his holy word has appointed to walk in. Secondly, wherein they walk,
and their discretion; not in their own ways, following the imaginations of
their own hearts; not in the ways of sin the world, the flesh, nor Devil;
but denying themselves, and resigning themselves wholly to Gods will and
pleasure in all things, they utterly abhor all false ways, Psalm. 119. 104.
128. they walk, (says the Text) in his ways.

Thirdly, mark the extension of their walk; not in some few; here and there
doing some good thing in a good mood, or by fits and snatches, but yielding a
general obedience to all Gods Commandments, as Zacharias and Elizabeth; They
walk in all his ways.

Fourthly, observe the persons, who only do and can walk in this way; they;
that is, only the godly, who are endued with sauing-grace, and have ceased to
commit iniquity, they walk in his ways; they stand not still in this way,
nor go backward, nor only begin well, and make some good proceedings, and
then stand at a stay, but they proceed in good duties, grow in grace, going
forward in the knowledge of Christ; they go on till they come to their
iournyes end. They walk^; thi^ is their progression: Second^^ they keep
themselves onel^ in Gods ways, avoiding a^^ bypath; this is their
discretion: Thirdly; in all Gods ways; there is their extension: Lastly, they,
and only they; this is their condition. This is another maine difference
between the godly and the wicked. The godly walk in the law of the Lord,
Psalm. 119. 1. He that is a just and righteous man indeed, walks in Gods
statutes, Ezech. 18. 9. and as David says here, they walk in Gods ways. But
the wicked, not so. For they walk not in Gods law, nor in his statutes, nor in
his testimonies, Ier. 44 23. They set themselves in no good way, Psalm. 36. 4.
The way of peace, they have not known, Romans 3. 17. They do always err in
their hearts, because they have not known Gods ways, Heb. 3. 10. They walk
in the vanity of their mind, Ephesians. 4. 17. They walk after their own ungodly
lusts, as Jude, Epist. Verse 16. 18. Yea, they walk, but they are enemies to
the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, Phil. 3. 18. They walk in the
counsel of the ungodly. Psalm. 1. 1. The godly walk as children of the light,
Ephesians. 5. 8. But the way of the wicked, is as the darkness, they know not at
what they stumble, Prou. 4. 19. The wicked walk on in darkness, Psalm. 82. 4.
All which must teach every one to avoid the path of the wicked, and to follow
the example of the godly, to hate every false way, and to keep our selves
only in Gods ways. Thus may we expect the gracious protection and providence
of God and his holy Angels, If we keep our selves in those ways he has
appointed for us, Psalm. 91. 11. Be not therefore companions with the wicked,
Ephesians. 5. 7. Walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their
path, Proverb. 1. 15. For, for such wicked courses comes the wrath of God upon
the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5. 6. Enter not into the path of the
wicked, and go not into the way of eu^ll men; avoid it, pass not by it, turn
from it, and pass away, Prou. 4. 14. 15. They leave the paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness; They rejoice to do evil,
and delight in the frowardness of the wicked, whose ways are crooked, and
they froward in their paths, Prou. 2. 13. 14. 15. Let therefore discretion
preserve thee, and understanding keep thee, to deliver thee from the may of
the evil man, that thou may walk in the way of good men, and keep the
paths of the righteous, Prou. 2. 10. 11. to 20. Then shall thou walk in thy
way safely, Prou. 3. 23. For the righteous walk in Gods ways, as the Text
says, They walk in his ways.

More particularly, observe out of this clause: first, what is meant by walk,
and the diverse kinds of it: secondly, what are these ways of God, and why so
called.

This duty of walking is taken in a good sense, or bad; In a good sense, as
here, and infinite like places both in the old and new Testament; In an evil
sense, as to walk in sin, in darkness, etc. both which I have showed at
large; From both acceptations, it is more than manifest; that, to walk,
signifies, to lead our lives orderly, warily, and circumspectly, and to have
our conversation every way suitable to those ways which God has set down in
his word, neither declining to the right hand, nor to the left; agreeable to
that of Solomon: Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established, Turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, Prou. 4. 26. 27. and
to that of Saint Paul, Make straight steps for your feet, lest that which is
lam^ be turned out of the way, Heb. 12. 13. And, take heed that ye walk
circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15. Thus, to walk, is to live thus and thus; to lead
our lives in this and that; to order our lives according to this and that,
taking the word of God for our only rule, to the obedience whereof our whole
lives are framed, and by which, all our actions toward God and man, through
the whole course of our lives are ordered and squared. This is to walk in Gods
ways; which may well be explained by the saying of David in the Psalm: To him
that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God, Psalm.
50. 23. making the walking in Gods ways, and the ordering of our conversation
aright, all one in effect. Therefore, as Saint Paul, speaking of this word,
Walk, in the bad sense, says, that the Colossians walking in sin, was
living in sin; in which, ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them,
Coloss. 3. 7. so say I, speaking in the good sense; then do we walk in Gods
ways, when we live in them. Whence we must note, that it is not a bare talking
and discoursing about Gods ways, that will serve turn, but a walking and
living in them; not to know them, but to do them; not only to be informed of
them in our judgments, nor only conformed to them in outward show, but
transformed inwardly, by the renewing of our minds, and reformed wholly in the
practice of our lives.

Moreover, this spiritual walk has relation, first, to God; secondly, to
Man. Both must be regarded, and great heed must be taken how we walk both
before God and men: for there are two extremes, into which men commonly fall;
the one is, so they have a good heart toward God inwardly, (as they say) they
never care how they seem to their brethren; whereas the duties of piety
toward God in the first Table must show themselves in the duties of charity,
and the light of an holy example to their brethren in the second Table. The
other is, so they can live a civil honest life, and make a fair show to the
world, to blind the eyes of men, they care not what they do, nor how
profanely and lewdly they carry themselves in the sight and presence of the
allseeing God.

First, to walk with God, or to walk before God, is so to carry our selves,
as in the sight and presence of God, acknowledging his all-seeing eye,
discerning all our thoughts, words, and deeds, and admitting him to be the
just judge of them all, and of the whole course of our lives: or, to walk
before God, is to lead a holy and godly life, fearing to offend God in any
thing, being fully persuaded, that wheresoever, among whosoever, or whatsoever
doing, that God himself stands by us, beholding and observing all our actions,
speeches, and thoughts, and will judge them all. It is (as Saint Luke has it
in the song of Zachary) to serve God without servile fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life, Luke 1. 74. 75. Thus did
Enoch; He walked with God, Genesis 5. 24. Thus, after him did Abraham; The Lord,
before whom I walk, Genesis 24. 40. So did David, purposing and resolving so to
do; I will walk before God in the land of the living, Psalm. 116. 9. Thus did
good King Hezekiah; I beseech thee O Lord, remember now, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, 2 King. 20. 3. And so must all of us do, that look to live
with him in glory; according to Gods commandment given to Abraham. and so to
us all, Walk before me, and be upright, Genesis 17. 1. In all which examples,
especially that of Hezekiah, we may observe; first, this duty of walking
before God; secondly, the manner of it, which is twofold; first, in truth;
secondly, with a perfect heart, that is, an upright heart; thirdly, his
exercise (...) this his walking; first, doing, secondly, that which was good;
thirdly, not in the presence of men only, to be seen of them, but as
approving his heart unto God, he did all in his sight. Fourthly, his
accustomed practice, through the whole course of his life, after conversion, I
have walked, and I have done; speaking of the time of his former life, not
deferring it till death, where we may see, walking before God, and doing of
good must go together: Fifthly, the clearenesse of his good conscience, out of
which he appeals to God; for this was not any pride, or presumptuous conceit,
that this good King had of himself, seeking any way to justify himself
before God, but it was his peace of conscience, which passes all
understanding: He knew well (that I may use the words of Saint Paul, and his
example) that he had lived in all good conscience before God until this day,
Acts 23. 1. and that he had exercised himself to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God and toward men, Acts 24. 16. His conscience bearing
him witness in the holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. Out of this good conscience, I say,
he appealeth to God; saying, I beseech thee O Lord, remember how I walked, etc.
A most notable and worthy pattern of all, both high and low, to be followed,
that we may so walk before God both in life and death.

This continual walking before God, to consider that we are always in Gods
presence, is, first, a special remedy against sin, and a motable means to
make us live in the fear of God. This kept Joseph from uncleanness, Genesis 39.
9. Job from impatiency; Job 1. 18. The Mid-wiues from murder, Exodus 1. Abraham
in obedience, Genesis 22. and 25. chapters. David in integrity: Secondly, this is
a maine sign that we are friends with God, and that he is well pleased with
us. So Enoch, by walking with God, is reported of, to have pleased God, Heb.
11. 5. All our glorious works without this, are nothing; He has showed thee O
man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee; surely to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, to walk with thy God, Micah. 6. 7.
8. The Prophet Amos says, Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Amos
3. 3. Under which interrogatiue, is included this negative; two cannot walk
together except they be agreed; and if they do walk together, it is a sign
they are agreed: So those that walk with God, are at agreement with him; In
Christ he is well pleased with them, Mat. 3. 17. and being at agreement with
him, shall continually have his love and favor extended toward them; as he
that is always in the Kings presence cannot but be highly in his favor, who
dare wrong him? Yea, what shall be done to the man whom the King will honor,
whom he delights to honor? Thus and thus shall it be done to the man whom
the King will honor, Esth. 6. 6. 9. 11. If this be so among those who are in
favor with earthly Kings, then what honor shall they have, that are always
in Gods presence, and daily tread his Courts? A thousand times blessed are
they, for God himself will honor those that honor him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. He is
with those that are with him 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. and if God be with them, who can
be against them? Romans 8. 31. Yea, he is with them in trouble he will deliver
them, and honor them; with long life he will satisfy them, and show them his
salvation, Psalm. 14. 15. 16. Thus, as they have walked with God here, in the
kingdom of grace, they shall for ever live with him in glory; which is meant,
Revel. 3. 4. They shall walk with Christ in white, for they are worthy; not as
the Church of Rome gather for the worthiness of their works, but of their
persons, accepted of God as righteous in Christ, his righteousness being
imputed to them, and made theirs.

The second kind of walking, is toward men: first, Public; secondly,
Private. Public walking concerns, first, the members of the Church, and all
believers; secondly, those which are out of the Church. Toward the first, we
must walk in love, peace, humility, meekness, etc. Walk in love, as Christ
has loved us, Ephesians. 5. 1. Walk with all lowliness and meekness, with
longsuffering, forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4. 1. 2. 3. And this is love, that
we walk after his commandments; This is the commandment, that as ye have
heard from the beginning, ye should walk in it, John 2. epist. verse 6. We
must walk, and live so, giving no just cause of scandal and offense, but
showing a good example to all men, in all things. We are children of the light,
we must therefore walk as children of the light, Ephesians. 5. 8. Letting our
light, of an holy example, so shine before others, that they may see our good
works, and glorify God, Math. 5. 16. Toward the latter we must walk,
wisely, honestly, no-offensiuely; taking great heed to our ways, and having a
special care of our carriage, that in nothing we give any just cause, either
of exception or of offense, to the wicked and unbelievers. Walk wisely toward
those which are without, redeeming the time, Colos. 4. 5. Study to be quiet,
etc. that ye may walk honestly toward them which are without, 1 These 4. 11,
12. Walk toward them, but not with them. To walk with them, is to walk as
they, to live, and do as they. To walk toward them, is meant to walk and
live amongst them and as occasion serves to have any dealing with them; in all
our carriage amongst them, we must do all things to the glory of God and good
of others. We must live so amongst them, that we may be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, among whom shine ye as lights in the world, Phil. 2. 15.

Private walking, concerns either our selves, or others; as our Children,
Servants, and families. In regard of our selves, we must walk in uprightness
and singleness of heart, approving our hearts to God, endeavoring that we
may be accepted of God, 2 Cor. 5. 9. with the Philippians, not in presence of
others only, but much more in their absence to obey God, Philip. 2. 12.
exercising our selves to have always a conscience void of offense, toward God
and man, Acts 24. that when we are falsely accused, slandered or reproached,
our conscience may excuse, not accuse us, so that we can truly say, I suffer
unjustly, my conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. Thus
in private, to give our selves to prayer, to reading, to searching of the
Scriptures with them of Berea, diligently, and daily, Acts 17. 11. to often
meditating in Gods word, and of his works; and in a serious consideration and
calling to mind of our ways, purposing and resolving for time to come to
amend things amiss, daily renewing our vows, and performing them: and
whatsoever we do, to do it heartily, as to the Lord, who sees our hearts.

to instruct our families in points of religion, and to bringvp our Children in
instruction and information of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. that we can truly say, I
and my house do serve the Lord, Joshua 24. 15. we must reprove sin in our
Children and Seuants, and not suffer them to sin; to make a discreet choice
of our Servants, making much of all those that fear the Lord, Psalm: 15. to
cast out of our houses, the wicked and ungodly, the liar, slaunderer, swearer,
idle, thief, adulterer, fornicators, and the like, not enduring them to carry
in our sight. Excellent is the example of David, worthy of all men in this
private walk to be followed, and let us mark it. I will (says David) behave
my self wisely in a perfect way; I will walk within my house with a perfect
heart; I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes; I hate the works of them
that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me; A froward heart shall depart from
me, I will not know a wicked person; who so privily flaundereth his neighbor,
him will I cut off, him that has an high look, and a proud heart, will I not
suffer; Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in the land, that they may dwell
with me; He that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me; He that
works deceit, shall not dwell within my house; He that tells lies, shall
not tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Let all Governors,
Parents, and Masters of families, walk thus as David did; not follow him in
his adultery, or making Vriah drunk, or murder, which is a common practice of
a number; but as Paul says, Follow him as he follows Christ, 1. Cor. 11. 1.
Let us walk by this rule prescribed in this Psalm, as Paul says, Let us
walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing: And mark them which walk
so, as you have us for an example, Philip. 3. 16, 17. This is that well ordered
walk, which beseems all Christians, which puts a maine difference between
the children of God, and the wicked, whose whole course of life is out of
order, neither walking with God: For they are without God in the world. Ephesians.
2. 12. nor yet walking in any good course, or duty amongst men: These Paul
speaks of; Many walk, of whom I have told you, etc. whose end is destruction,
whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mend earthly
things, Philip. ^. 18, 19. These walk disorderly; from whom, we are
commanded, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw our selves, 2.
Thessal. 3. 6, 11. These the Apostle Jude speaks of, denouncing a woe against
them: Woe unto them, for they have walked in the way of Cain, Jude 11. Lastly,
note briefly, that walking uprightly before God, and inoffensiuely before men,
must always go together; and that walking implies continuance in welldoing,
and holding out in Gods ways unto the end; for, he that continues unto the
end shall be saved, Matthew. 24. 13. And, in due time we shall reap if we
faint not, Gal. 6. 9. Therefore, ever follow that which is good, both among
your selves, and to all men, 1. These. 5. 15.

The second point concerns the ways wherein we must walk; In which I
observe, 1. what these ways are; 2. why called Gods ways. They walk in his
ways. The ways of God are set down in Scripture to be of two sorts. 1. Such
as properly concern himself, and which he himself walks. 2. Such as
concern us, and in which we may, and ought to walk. The first, are twofold;
Secret: Revealed. The secret or more The ways of God are twofold.
hidden ways of God, are the ways of his Judgments, Counsels, Wisdom,
Knowledge, secret will, his mind, in the Creation, disposition, and
government of all things. Hae viae magis adorandae, quam cognoscendae; that
is, These ways of God are rather to be adored of all, than known of any:
These are not the ways here meant; neither do they, being secret and
abstruse, belong unto us: For Secret things belong to God, Revealed things to
us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. For there is such a bottomless depth of Gods secret ways,
as it is impossible for any mortal man to know them. Of these S. Paul
speaks; O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God;
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who
has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? Romans 11.
23. and Esa. 40. 14.

The Revealed, or more manifest ways of God, are such as he has revealed in
his Word, contained in the books of Moses, and in the writings of the Prophets
and Apostles. And these revealed things belong to us, and we must know them.
Of these speaks the Psalm, He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts
unto the children of Israel, Psalm. 103. 7. These ways are the ways of Gods
works, and marvelous acts his signified will, as reue^ling what kind of God
he is, in what he delights, what he loves, what he hates, the redeeming
of mankind by his Son, the ordaining of him to be a Mediator, and the
like. Of these ways sp^akes David; The Lord is righteous in all h^^ ways, and
holy in all his works, Psalm. 145. 17.

These ways are distinguished from all other ways, by diverse Epithets given
unto them in the Word. They are called, Good ways, and right, 1. Sam. 12. 23.
Psalm. 2. 12. 1. King 8. 36. Secondly, an undefiled way, and perfect, Psalm. 18
30. Thirdly, a holy way, Esa. 35. 8. Fourthly, a chosen way, Psalm. 25. 12.
Fifthly, a straight way, Matthew. 7. 14. Luke 13. 24. Sixthly, the way of life,
Psalm. 16. 11 Prou. 6. 23. Seventhly, the way of truth, Psalm 119. 3. Eighthly,
the way of wisdom, Prou 4. 11. Ninthly, the way of righteousness, Prou. 8. 20.
and 16. 31 2. Pet. 2. Tenthly, the way of peace, Romans 3. 17. Luke 1. 79.
Lastly, Equal, Ezech. 18. 25. with many such like styles, as are given to Gods
ways: All and each of which, should teach us to be ravished with these ways,
to set our hearts upon them, to love them above all things, to learn them, and
know them, to teach them others, to search and enquire for them, and so to
walk in them, that is, to live in them, and to frame the whole course of our
lives according to them, which is the property of all Gods children, as the
Text has it, They walk in his ways: I proceed to the second.

Now, the ways of God which concern us, and which we must walk, may be
considered two ways; Generally. Specially. Generally; this way, is the way of
Christianity, entering into the course of Christian Religion, and professing
the Gospel of Christ, and the doctrine thereof. That this is called a way,
appears in these places, Act. 19. 9. when Paul was instructing them
concerning the Sacrament, and the doctrine of Christian Religion, disputing and
persuading things concerning the kingdom of God, it is said, Diverse spoke
evil of that way. Saul the persecuter desired to bring bound to Jerusalem all
that he should find in this way, Act. 9. 2. yea, he persecuted this way unto
the death, Act. 22. 4. There arose no small stir about that way, Act. 19. 23.
So Acts 24. 22. In all these places is understood the way of Christian
Religion, and the profession of the doctrine of the Gospel, or some special
point thereof, as appears by the Context.

The General way of Christian Religion is necessary unto salvation, without it
we cannot come to heaven, and yet this alone being but a bare profession
cannot bring a man to heaven; This is the way of a number, even of such as go
for professors, that yet for all this shall never come in heaven: Not every one
that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
7. 21. that is, Not every one that bears the name of a Christian, that
professes the Name of Christ, and God to be his God, shall be saved; not
every one that makes an outward show of profession, that can talk, reason, and
discourse of Religion, and points of doctrine, though they may have most
excellent and rare gifts, shall be saved: For many shall plead for themselves
at the day of judgment, saying, Lord, Lord, have we not preached in thy Name?
and in thy Name cast out devils? and in thy Name done many marvelous works,
and then he will profess unto them, he never knew them: Depart from me ye
workers of iniquity, Matt. 7. 22. There are many hypocrites in the Church,
even among professors, who will make profession of God with their mouths, but
deny him in the practice of their lives. They profess they know God, but by
their works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to every
good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. Thus we see, that though this be Gods way,
which he commands, Heb. 12. 1. a good way in it self, yet not able to bring
us to heaven.

Specially. The ways of God wherein we must walk, may properly be reduced to
one head, for indeed there is but one way to heaven, which is called the way
of life, the way of salvation; which, in a word, consists in holiness and
righteousness; holiness toward God, righteousness toward men. But because
their are many turnings, and many windings in this way; I mean, many graces
required, and many duties to be performed, therefore in the plural number
they are called Gods ways, They walk in his ways; I will reduce them all to
three heads, under which all the rest are comprehended.

The first way, and the The first way.
chief, is the way of Faith. This way went all the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, and all believers both in the Old and New Testament: A Catalogue of
whom, and of their faith, is set down at large in the whole Chapter, Heb. 11.
For as we believe to be saved through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, so
did they, Act. 15. 11. By faith the Elders, and all those believers, through
faith, obtained a good report. Heb. 11. 2, and 39. That this saving faith is
our way to heaven, the Scriptures make it plain: Saint Paul says, We walk
by faith, not by sight, 2. Cor. 5. 7. To walk by faith, is to live by faith;
as the Apostle explanes it, by alleging a place out of Habacuk, The just shall
live by faith, Heb. 10. 38. Thus did Paul: The life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. The whole life of a
Christian, both Spiritual and Temporal, in afflictions and temptations, must
be by faith; and that for these reasons. First, because, Whatsoever is not of
faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. that is whatsoever we do with a doubting
conscience, is sin. Faith must both put a beginning to the work, and persuade
us, that it is pleasing to God. Secondly, Without faith it is impossible to
please God in any thing, Heb. 11. 6. no not in the best things, as preaching,
praying, hearing, and the like. No true preaching without faith; whether we
respect the person of the Minister, who speaks, who must be faithful; as
Christ exhorts the Minister of the Church of Smyrna, to be faithful to the
death, Revel. 2. 10. or, whether we regard the doctrine which he teaches,
which must be the word of faith: This is the word of faith which we preach
unto you To. 10. 8. So says Paul, We believe, and therefore speak. 2. Cor. 4.
13. Again, No true praying without faith; For whatsoever we ask, believing,
we shall obtain, Mar. 11. 24. But he that asks without faith, is a wavering
minded man, and shall obtain nothing of the Lord, Iam. 1. 6, 7. Thus praying
without faith, we ask, but receive nothing, because we ask amiss, Iam. 4. 3.
It must be the prayer of faith, that must do the deed, and prevail with
God, Iam. 5. 15. Lastly, no profitable hearing the Word without faith: For the
Gospel was preached unto them of old time, as it is now preached unto us, but
it did not profit them, because it was not mixed with faith in those who heard
it, Heb. 4. 2. Thirdly, we must walk by faith, because the things promised
and expected of us, are invisible, and cannot be beheld in outward appearance;
as, remission of sins, justification, the resurrection and life everlasting;
Therefore, faith is the ground of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen, Heb. 11. 1. And thus in all the duties of our general and particular
callings, we must walk, that is, live by faith; not to post off all doing of
good until death, thinking to go to heaven, with saying, Lord have mercy upon
me; but he that will die in faith must live in faith: No pleasing of GOD
without faith; No salvation without pleasing of God, Ergo, no salvation without
living by faith. To which faith, true repentance must be joined, for one
cannot go without the other; faith must show it self in the fruits of
repentance; and howsoever the beginnings of repentance are before faith, yet
the act of repentance it self, and the fruits of it follow faith.

The second way of God, The second way.
wherein we must walk, is the way of Gods Commandments. And then are we said
to walk in this way, when we yield obedience unto all Gods Commandments;
Upright obedience, though imperfect, is walking in them. That the Commandments
are a way, and obeying of them, is the walking in them, it thus appears.
David says, I will run the way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. Here
they are called, a way; The children of Israel turned out of the way, which
their fathers walked in, obeying the Commandments of the Lord, Judge. 2. 17.
here obedience is walking in this way: For first, their fathers walked in this
way: How did they walk? Obeying the Commandments. What did the children of
Israel? They did turn out of the way, and did not walk in it; How so? because
they did not so as their fathers did, that is, they obeyed not the
Commandments. Therefore thou shall keep the Commandments of the Lord thy
God, to walk in his ways, Deuteronomy. 8. 6. This is the only thing which God
requires, And now Israel what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways? etc. Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Ye shall
walk after the Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his Commandments,
Deuteronomy. 13. 4. We must anouch the Lord to be our God, and to walk in his
ways, etc. And the Lord will anouch us to be his peculiar people. Deuteronomy. 26.
17, 18. See, I have set before you this day, life and good, death and evil;
life and good, in that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God, to
walk in his ways, and to keep his Commandments, etc. Deuteronomy. 30, 15, 16. In
all which places it is evident, that to walk in Gods ways, is to keep and
obey the commandments of GOD. For this cause, David acknowledging this to be
the good and safe way, prayed earnestly, O let me not wander from thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119 10. where we may note, that if we live out of this
way, of Gods Commandments, we do nothing but err, wander and go astray.
This made David so much to rejoice in the way of Gods testimonies, and have
such respect unto these ways of God. Psalm. 119. Now this obeying of Gods
Commandments, which is walking in them, must be, first, speedily, without
delay: David made haste, and delayed not the time, to keep them, Psalm. 119.
60. and 2. cheerfully; David will run them: 3. freely, without constraint: 4.
generally, to all Gods Commandments: 5. discreetly; David, in comparison of
this way, hates all other, He made choice of the way of truth, Psalm. 119. 30.
6 uprightly, without hypocrisy; David kept them with his whole heart: 7.
continually, without ceasing; David kept the^ unto the end: all these are set
down, Psalm. 119. at large. This was the way of Zacharias and Elizabeth; They
were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments of the Lord
blameless, Luke 1. 6. and this is the way, that all must walk in, that look
for heaven. For Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the Commandments of God, 1. Cor. 7. 19. that is, in the kingdom of
grace, no outward privilege or preeminence either of Jew or Gentile, is either
acceptable to God, or available to salvation, without the keeping of Gods
Commandments.

The third way, which God The third way.
has appointed for us to walk in, is, The way of good works. Boza opera sunt
via regni, non causa regnandi, says Bernard: Good works are the way to the
heavenly Kingdom, though no cause of reigning in that Kingdom; They are no
meritorious causes of salvation, as the Papists hold, (for so is only Christ
by the merits of his death and passion) neither can the merit, because they are
imperfect, but they are the way which God has appointed for us to walk in, and
live in: for, howsoever we are said to be justified and saved by faith without
works, it is to be understood, in the act of justification before God, yet not
as it is faith, but as it is an instrument to apprehend the object Christ; but
in the person already justified before God, good works must concur, to
declare us before men, that we are justified by faith before God; for though
faith alone be said to justify us, yet that faith which is alone without good
works, does not justify us. Good works are such, as without which, faith is
but a dead carkase, as the body without the spirit, and therefore, show me thy
faith by thy works at large. Iam. 2. And good works are a way to walk in, S.
Paul proves plainly. For we are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus
unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should walk in
them, Ephesians. 2. 10.

The Papists do us great wrong by their slanders, saying, that we teach, that
a justified person is freed from all keeping of the Law, and that the law is
fulfilled only in believing, and that the Gospel commands nothing but faith,
and the like; thus accusing our doctrine of licentiousnes; I say, they grossly
abuse us, and most falsely accuse us; Indeed we reject good works as they are
held by the Papists to be meritorious causes of salvation, but setting that
aside, and their absurd conceit of the merit of works of supererogation, and
we will urge them as strongly as they, though no^ in that manner as they; yea,
we urge them, and hold them necessary, not as causes meriting life eternal and
salvation, but as they are consequent effects and fruits of faith, without
which true faith cannot be; yea, we hold, that we cannot attain to life
eternal without them, as they are the way which God has ordained that we
should walk in them: we hold them necessary, not as causes of justification,
but effects of it, and to declare us to be justified; not deserving heaven, but
the way to walk in; and so we^ are tied to the Law, as it is the rule of good
life, in regard o^ obedience; though not under the Law, in regard of the curse
and condemnation; w^ are under the Law in regar^ of direction, instruction, an^
obedience, but not under ^ in regard of the rigor, exa^ction, accusation, and
pro^uocation of the Law: The Papists, I say, therefore do^ us great wrong, who
sland^ us, and our doctrine as a destroyer of the Law, because we teach, that a
man is justified freely, and only by faith, without the worke^ of the Law;
which we understand to be meant only in the act of justification before God,
and in his sight ^ but after a man is thus justified, good works must follow,
to declare us to be justified before men; thus says must be showed by our good
works: for first we are justified, regenerated, recreated in Christ Jesus
unto good works (which follow that justification and regeneration) which God
has ordained, that we should walk in them. Thus by the study of good works
a good conscience is retained; by a good Conscience, faith is maintained; by
faith, Christ is obtained; in Christ life eternal is attained. Thus far of
the ways of God, wherein we must walk; and by all which we are discerned from
all the wicked. For they set themselves in no good way. Psalm. 36. 4. They say
unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job.
21. 14. but, The righteous walk in Gods ways.

Now of the second point, why they are called Gods ways, and of this briefly;
First, they are called Gods ways; because he is the author, founder,
commander, and ordainer of these ways. It is he that is the author and
finisher of our faith, Heb. 12. 2. It is he that has ordained good works,
that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. It is he which established a
Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our
forefathers that they should make them known to their children, etc. Psalm.
78. 5. It is he that requires of us to fear him, and to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve him with all our heart, and with all our
souls, to keep his commandments and his statutes, which he commands us for
our good, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. 13. and almost in every Chapter of that book, they are
called, Gods charge, his statutes, judgments, ordinances and commandments
which he has commanded. Secondly, they are all divine and spiritual, and
such as please the Lord; divine for the matter, which is Christ and his
doctrine; for this way is Christ, as John 14. 6. and no man comes to the
Father but by him; divine for the manner; for, first, Christ is the first
teacher of them: Thou teach the way of God truly, Mat. 22. 16. and
howsoever they were uttered and taught by his Prophets and Apostles, yet these
holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Thirdly, God
is our only true guide, who orders and directs us in this way; I know that
the way of man is not in himself; it is not in man that walks to direct his
steps, Ier. 10. 23. It is God which teaches us in the way of wisdom, and
leads us in the right paths, Prou. 4. 11. A man's heart deuiseth his way, but
the Lord orders his steps, he directs them, Prou. 16. 9. Man's goings are of
the Lord, how can a man then understand his own way? Prou. 20. 24. I am the
Lord thy God which leads thee by the way that thou should go, Esaias 48.
17. God shall teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Micah 4.
2. Fourthly, they are such ways as bring us unto God; In the end, we receive
the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1. 9. He that
believes, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. What man is
he that lusts to live, and would feign see good days? Depart from evil, and
do good, Psalm. 34. 12. To him that orders his conversation aright, will I
show the salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23. Ask for the old paths, where is the
good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Ier. 6.
16. Mark and behold the upright and just man, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37. 37. He shall enter into peace; they shall rest in their
beds, each one walking before God in his uprightness, Esaias 57. 2. and he
that has walked in Gods statutes, is a just man, he shall surely live, Ezech.
18. 9. and 17. and thus much of the Reasons why they are called Gods ways.

Out of all that has been spoken, appears, first, the Excellency, secondly,
the Profit, thirdly, the necessity of these ways, and of this walk.
Excellent, because Gods ways; excellent, because by walking in them we are the
friends of God, and the Sons of God. Profitable, For there is no condemnation
to those which are in Christ, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, Romans 8. 1. The only thing that commends us unto God, is walking in
obedience to Gods commandments, 1 Cor. 7. 19. and to become new creatures,
Gal. 6. 15. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon
them, and upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. Necessary, for there are but two
ways, the narrow way, and broad way, and he that walks not in the narrow
way, as I have showed, goes on headlong in the broad way, to his own
destruction, Math. 7. 13. 14. All the knowledge of this way is nothing without
walking in it, and all our reading and hearing of the word to learn this way,
is nothing, unless we walk in it. For better it is never to have known the
way of righteousness, then after we have known it, to turn from the
commandment, 2 Pet. 2. 21.

To conclude: Seeing these ways of God are so excellent, profitable, and
necessary; Strive to enter in at the straight gate, (and that betimes) for many
(when it is too late) will seek to enter in, but shall not be able, Luke 13.
24. And if we know not the way, inquire and ask for it, Ier. 6. 16. Being
found, walk and live in it, and content not our selves with a bare knowledge;
(for he that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12. 47.) And take heed that ye walk circumspectly,
because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5. 15. If at any time we err from this
way, and step out of it, return speedily into it again, The just man falls
often, and rises again, Prou. 24. 16. And be sure to persevere and hold on
constant in this walk unto the end. The way of the upright is to depart from
evil; he that keeps his way, preserves his soul, Prou. 16. 17.
Righteousness keeps him that is upright in the way, Prou. 13. 6. The
righteous holds his way, Job 23. 11. And the Prophet Hosea speaks it in the
future time, signifying perseverance; The ways of the Lord are right, and the
just shall walk in them, Hos. 14. 9. and so says the Text, They walk, that
is, they continue walking, living all their days without fainting) in Gods
ways.

Now, because it is not in man that walks, to direct his steps, as I have
showed, Ier. 10. 23. Therefore we must pray earnestly unto Almighty God, to
teach us his way, and to direct our steps, and to guide our feet into the way
of peace. Let David's usual practice herein be our example. Show me thy ways
O Lord; teach me thy statutes, etc. Psalm. 25. 4. Teach me O Lord the way of
thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end, Psalm. 119. 33. O that my ways
were directed to keep thy statutes, verse 5. Make me to understand the way of
thy precepts, verse 27. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, verse
35. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, verse 80. Hold thou me up, and I
shall be safe, and I will have respect unto thy statutes continually, verse
117. Order my steps in thy word; and let not any iniquity have dominion over
me. verse 133. And especially pray earnestly for the good spirit of God, to
guide and lead us. Let thy good spirit lead me into the land of
righteousness, Psalm. 143. 10. For Gods way is a way of truth, Psalm. 119. 30.
And the spirit of God will guide us into all truth, John 16. 13. And thus much
for the general description of this walk; which I have penned only as an
ocular Sermon; it being a fit Introduction to the matter following:

Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord:

But cursed are all they that do err from his commandments,

Psalm. 119. 1. and 21.
THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S WALK.
THE FIRST STEP: AND FIRST SERMON.
Text. Proouing what is acceptable, or pleasing to the Lord. Ephesians. 5. 10.
THe Apostle, having in the end of the former Chapter, exhorted the Ephesians
to placability, in forgiving one another their wrongs, does in the beginning of
this present Chapter, conclude the said exhortation, enforcing it by a twofold
argument. The first, drawn from the example of GOD himself, who for Christ's
sake has forgiven us freely all our sins. Be ye therefore followers of God,
(namely in forgiving and forgetting of wrongs) Verse. 1. The second is taken
from the example of Christ, teaching us to imitate him in his love; for, as
forgiveness of wrongs is neither easily obtained, nor of any account in Gods
sight, unless it proceeds from love, therefore he ioynes this to the former,
And walk in love, as Christ has loved us. Verse. 2. Secondly, the Apostle
proceeds by way of Dehortation, dissuading them from three most pernicious
vices, and heinous sins, viz. Fornication, all Uncleanness, and
Covetousness, which were either not acknowledged to be sins at all, or at
least much extenuated or excused; as also from three sins of the tongue, viz.
filthiness, foolish talking, and jesting; all which he dehorteth from, by
four most weighty reasons. First, because, they become not Saints, Verse. 3.
Secondly, because they are not convenient, Verse. 4. Thirdly, because they
exclude us out of Gods Kingdom, Verse. 5. Fourthly, because for such things
sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, Verse 6. And
whereas many are ready to object, and say, that they are no sins at all, or
at least not so heinous as they are made, neither is there any such danger in
them, as is set down by Saint Paul, in the aforesaid reasons; He therefore
gives us an Item, and a special Caveat, teaching us, that all such objections
and allegations, contrary to his doctrine, are but idle and vain speeches,
whereby men go about to deceive and seduce us; and so shall all find that
trust to them; Let no man therefore deceive you with vain words; for most
certainly, the heavy wrath of God shall fall upon them that commit such
sins: Be not ye therefore companions with such, as ye would be loath to
partake of their judgments, Verse. 6, 7. Thirdly, he sets down a general
exhortation for the well-ordering of our lives; that is, not to live any longer
in the former darkness of our sins, but to walk as children of the light;
drawing his Argument from the diversity of their estate, partly from their
estate before conversion; Ye were once darkness; partly from their estate
after conversion; but now ye are light in the Lord: walk therefore as
children of the light. ver. 8. that is, live, and lead the whole course of
your lives answerable to your new estate and condition whereunto ye are called;
for even your calling out of the state of darkness unto light, requires it.
Hoc tempus alios mores postulat, This time requires another manner of life than
before, when you were in darkness. And, whereas it might be demanded how we
should so live, and wherein this walk consists? the Apostle shows
plainly, that this walk consists of three steps, 1. to prove, or approve
what is pleasing to the Lord, that so we may compose and frame our lives
according to Gods will, Verse.] 10. 2. not to communicate with other men in
their unfruitful works of darkness; 3. but even to reprove them rather;
not only in words, but by the light of an holy life, and good example, Verse.
11.] And thus much for the Coherence; according to the observed rule of the
Rabbis, Qui non aduertit, and quid supra, and quid infra sit scriptum, is
plane peruertit, per sanctum Dei verbum. He that marks not both what goes
before, and what follows after his text, peruerts the order of holy Scripture;
Now to the Text.

Proouing what is acceptable to the Lord.] These words are a continued speech,
as the word [proouing] imports, having dependence on, and relation to the 8.
verse. And they contain the First Step of the Christian man's walk; alluding
to the Sun, whose property is, by communication of her light, to display and
lay open things in secret, to search and try the nature of things, always
walking in her course, and never resting; So ought every man, who is the child
of light, through the whole course of his life, diligently to search, try, and
prove, what is pleasing to God, what displeasing, daily increasing in the
knowledge of Gods will, and obedience thereof, that we may prove, what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 2.

In the words I observe four points; 1. the duty enjoined, in the word
[proouing.] 2. the object. what is pleasing, (not to men, or the wisdom of
the flesh) but, to the Lord. 3. who must thus prove; that is, the children of
light. 4. the continuance of this duty; as appears by the connection of these
words with 8, verse, Walk proouing, etc. And first of the duty.

[Proouing.]
The Greek word is, (...), proouing, or approouing. Now, in observing the
Scriptures, I find, that (...), has a threefold signification; and all
necessarily required in the true performance of this duty here enjoined.
First, it signifies, to search, prove, examine, and try a thing; as here, so
it is 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. (...), trying all things. So, (...); Let a man examine
himself. And, (...), Try the spirits. So, (...). The fire shall try every
man's work, of what sort it is, 1. Cor. 3. 13. (...) (...), Examine your
selves. 2. Cor. 13. 5. knowing this, (...), The trying of your faith, etc. Iam.
1. 3.

Secondly, (...), signifies to discern, to judge of, to understand, and to
know by experience; (...), That ye may judge of, or discern things that
differ. Philipp. 1. 10. The same is, Romans 2. 18. So, (...), that ye may prove,
that is, know by experience what is Gods will. Romans 12. 2. (...): And I go to
prove them, to judge of, and have experience of them, Luke 14. 19. So (...),
that is, experience. Romans 5. 4.

Thirdly, it signifies to approve, (...), approved. 1. Cor. 11. 19.] and
allow; (...), as we are allowed of God. 1. These. 2. 4. Blessed is he that
condemns not himself, (...), in that thing which he allows. Rom 14. 22.
The same word is used 1. Tim. 3, 10. Let the Deacons first be proved, (...);
that is, not only tried and examined, but allowed of, and approved, before
they use their office. And all these must go together; for we must so search,
as to know; not theorically, but experimentally; and so know, as to approve
and allow of what is pleasing to God. Searching, without knowledge, savors of
ignorance; knowledge without practice, is but hypocrisy; Searching and
knowing, without doing and allowing, is a trick of a Pharisee; but first
search, then know; for knowledge without searching, savors of error; and
first know, then allow; for approouing without knowledge is but blind zeal.
Romans 10. 2. Search and try, understand and know, and approve and allow; this
makes an altogether Christian. Many search and try, but never come to
knowledge; like the simple women in Timothy; Ever learning, and never able to
come to the acknowledgement of the truth. 2. Tim. 3. 7. Many know Gods will,
but never do it, and to them it is sin. Iam. 4. 17. Many both seek and
know, but allow it not in their hearts; such are your close hypocrites, and
Church-papists, who will frequent the Church, and seem to search and prove
what is Gods will, and know it; But they draw near with their bodies, and their
hearts are far from God. Esa. 29. They hear, but understand not, they see,
but perceive not. Act. 28. 26.

That I may therefore the more orderly proceed, I will handle this duty in a
threefold observation, according to the threefold signification of the word;

First, I observe, that 1. Obser.
it is the duty of all Christians in general, and each one in particular,
diligently to search, prove, and try, what is the will of God; and this in the
first place. It is not sufficient to know, that there is a way, but to know
which is the right, straight, and true way; So it is not enough to know that
Gods will must be fulfilled, but to know what that will is, which God will have
us to obey; Therefore, as a traveler, not well knowing the way, makes inquiry
upon all occasions, and searches out the best way, and gets all the best
directions he can to bring him the next way to his iourneys end; So must every
Christian, that trauelleth the ways of God, seek, and make diligent inquiry,
what is the next way to heaven; namely, what is the will of God, which every
one must do that ever means to come to heaven. Math. 7. 21. For all the while
we are ignorant of Gods will, we err from Gods ways, and stray aside in
by-pathes; There is a way, that seems right unto man, but the end thereof are
the ways of death: Prou. 14. 12. yea, every way is right to a man in his own
eyes: Prou. 12. 1. the only true way, is to know the will of God and do it;
How great cause then have we with all diligence, to make diligent search, and
to prove what Gods will is; wherein it consists, what are the duties required
about it, and the like? Almighty God calls upon us for this; Stand in the
ways and see, and ask, seek, enquire for the old paths, where is the good
way, and walk therein, Ier. 6. 16. first, seek and enquire for the good way,
then walk in it; So I say, first search, inquire, and prove what this will of
God is; what to be done, and what to be undone; what is pleasing to God, what
displeasing, then walk in obedieuce to it. So the watchman cries, If ye will
enquire, enquire ye, Isay. 21. 2. The Prophets did not only know, that
salvation was to be wrought by Christ, nor only believe in him to be
exhibited, but as S. Peter notes; Of this salvation the Prophets have enquired
and searched diligently, searching what time, etc. 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11. So it is
not sufficient for us to hear of Gods will, and in general to know that his
will must be done; but to enquire and make diligent search what it is; that we
may prove what that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God is, Romans 12.
2.

In this search, I observe In this search, three things observed. Obser. 1.
three things; first. The rule of this search; secondly, the helps unto it;
thirdly, the manner of it. First, the Rule of this search, is the word of God,
contained in holy Scriptures. The Scriptures are able to make us wise unto
salvation, and all Scripture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction, 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16. Let the word of God dwell in you
plenteously, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves, Coloss. 3.
16. There is nothing needful to salvation, nothing either commanded or
forbidden, but it is contained in holy Scripture; and therefore if any man be
ignorant of Gods will, it is for want of knowledge in the Scriptures. Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures, Math. 22. 29. Therefore says Christ, Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me, John 5. 39. This must be done publicly, or privately;
In public, in hearing the word, to turn to places alleged, as the men of
Berea, who searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, which
Paul preached, Acts 17. 11. In private, by reading them and causing them to be
read; wherein when ye read, ye may understand, Ephesians. 3. 4. This word is the
touchstone to try all doctrines, as we are exhorted, 1 These. 5. 21. and 1 Ioh.
4. 1. therefore in all difficulties, doubts, and controversies, we must have
recourse to the word; as Esaias says; To the law, and to the testimony, Esaias 8.
20.

Secondly, the helps unto Obser. 2.
this search, are: First, Gods Ministers, who are, or should be endued with
such knowledge, that in matters of difficulty and doubts, they may be able to
give satisfaction, in all necessary (not curious) points concerning salvation;
the people must have recourse unto them; But to the shame of a number, be it
spoken, who to conceal their own ignorance, will never resort to their
Minister, because they will not bewray their blindness, ignorance, and error;
so they which are ignorant Gods will, will be ignorant still, for, as Paul
says, they have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to their shame, 1 Cor.
15. But let all such remember what the Lord says; The Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and the people should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is
the messenger of the Lord of hosts, Malachi 2. 7. Secondly, we must use
fervent and effectual prayer to Almighty God, to give us hi^ holy spirit, to
enlighten our understandings, to inform our judgments, that we may rightly
discern of things that differ, and that we may see what is Gods will; Thus
we should never go to hear or read the word, publicly or privately, but
first prepare our selves by prayer. Observe the practice of David often in the
Psalms, especially, 119. Open mine eyes O Lord, that I may see the wonderful
things of thy Law. Teach me thy statutes; Give me understanding; Teach me good
judgment and knowledge; and the like, The spirit searches all things, yea,
the deep things of God, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 10. 11. 12. 13. Thirdly, we must
compare Scripture with Scripture, one place with another; and observe the
coherence, and scope of the place, both what goes before, and what follows
after; for that which seems more obscure in one place, is made more plain in
another; In all these, we must truly humble our selves, acknowledging that we
can do nothing as of our selves; and God will teach the humble man his way,
Psalm. 25. 9.

Thirdly, the manner of Obser. 3.
this search must be; First, with understanding; for many please themselves in
bare hearing and reading, and think they do God high service, because they
read now and then upon the Sabboth-day a Chapter or two, and hear a Sermon,
whereas they understand nothing; They hear but understand not; and therefore
Paul, exhorting us to prove and search what is Gods will, explaines himself,
saying, Be not wnrise, but wise, understanding what the will of God is, Ephesians.
5. 17. nothing it, as a point of greatest folly, to search and not understand:
Let him that reads, understand, Mark 13. 14. Understand thou what thou
read? Acts 8. 30. Secondly, it must be frequent; The men of Berea searched
the Scriptures daily, Acts 17. 11. The word of God must dwell in us
plenteously, and richly, Colos. 3. 16. which cannot be unless we often acqu
into our selves with it, in reading, hearing, meditating, conferring and the
like. The godly man's delight is in the law of the Lord, and therein does he
exercise himself day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. and Josh. 1. 8. Meditate upon
these things, give thy self wholly to them, continue in them; 1 Timothy 4. 15.
16. Thirdly, it must be upright and in truth; with a desire to be bettered, and
a care to practife those things we learn; It is no dallying with edge-tooles;
Therefore if ye will enquire, enquire, Isay. 21. 12. that is, do it in deed;
and in good earnest, uprightly and in truth. My soul says David, breaks out
for the fervent desire that it has always unto thy judgments, Psalm. 119. 20.
We must incline our ears to wisdom, and apply our hearts to understanding;
we must seek as for silver, and we must search for her as for hid treasures,
and then we shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of
the Lord, Prou. 2. 2. 3. 4. but without this diligent and upright search, we
can never find the knowledge of Gods will; and therefore he says; He that
seeks, finds, Math. 7. 8.

This duty is excellent, and necessary; Excellent, for, it is the ground of
all happiness, and comfort; by it we have acquaintance with God himself, we
come to know his will; we are, as it were, of his Counsel, and all things
necessary to our salvation, he reuealeth unto us; Thus acquainting our selves
with God, thereby good shall come unto us, Job 22. 21. And the knowledge of the
holy God is understanding, Prou. 9. 10. By this, we perceive the truth it
self, for this word is truth, John 17. 17. Here we have rules for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction, for patiencein tribulation, for
resisting Satan's temptations, for remedies against sin, for attaining of
grace, for performing all good duties, both toward God and Men, through the
whole course of our lives. Necessarily also; First, for the natural and
carnal man; to bring him to knowledge; for the natural man perceiues not the
things of God, neither can he know them, 1 Cor. 2. 4. But it is the word which
gives wisdom to the simple, and light unto the eyes, Psalm. 19. No man
(naturally) understands or seeks after God, (namely in spiritual things)
Romans 3. 11. But the word is a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our
paths, Psalm. 119. 105. And whereas we cannot of our selves conceive aright of
God and his will, yet by searching the Scriptures we may, for they testify of
him, John 5. 39. Secondly, it is necessary for the spiritual man, namely, to
increase in the knowledge of Gods will; For we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9.
and we must go forward in the knowledge of Christ, 2 Pet 3. 18. And as newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, to grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
And if any man thinks he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2. And this be said of this first observation or
doctrine, containing the first property of the Children of light, that walk
in this first step. Now for the Uses; and first for Reproof.

This reprooueth the Popish For Reproof. Use 1.
teachers, and people, both for doctrine and practice; for they teach not the
word of Christ, nor suffer the people to search the Scriptures, but debar
them of them, and urge upon them traditions and humane inventions; teaching,
that it is not lawful for the common people to study the Scriptures, for they
will bring them to madness; and he is to be accounted the greatest Doctor,
that studies the Schoolmen, Jesuitical writings, and dunsticall Friars, and
accordingly do the people give credence unto them; thus neglecting the word;
whereas Christ says; Search ye, all; the Scriptures, both Ministers and
Laymen; Scriptures are for whole Churches, Revel. 2. and 3. Chap. seven times.

the Scriptures, what is Gods will.

They measure the Epha, and search the statutes of Omri, Micah 6. 16. but cast
the word of God behind them, Psalm. 50. 17.



For Instruction; teaching For Instruction. Obser. 1.
us to be very studious in the Scriptures, to give our selves to read them,
and thoroughly to search them, and never to be at quiet, or to think our selves
well, till we have proved, out of the word, what is the will of God; The will
of God must be the Rule of all our actions; if it be according to his will, we
must do it; if it be against his will, we must not dare to do it; But, if we
never search the Scriptures, in which his will is plainly revealed, and where
only we may find the knowledge of it; if we utterly neglect the Scriptures,
which teach us, what is to be done, and what undone, what one action can we
perform (being ignorant of his will,) pleasing or acceptable to the Lord? ^^is
is the ground of all our ^^edience, without which, we cannot but disobey God in
all things. Let us therefore follow the practice of David; O how I love thy
law, all the day long is my study in it, Psalm. 119. 97. And this be said for
the first observation; the second follows.

Secondly, I observe, that Obser. 2.
it is the duty of every Christian, to know Gods will, and do it; For there
is a twofold knowledge; theoricall, experimental; The first is necessary, but
not sufficient to salvation; we must, as I have said, know what Gods will is,
and to be informed in our judgments of the truth of it; this is the point I
have stood upon; this is theoricall knowledge, consisting only in speculation;
but this alone can save none; for he that knows his Masters will, and does i^
not, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 47. Experimental knowledge,
is when we so know his will, as to practice it in our lives; to know by
experience, what is Gods will; and this is saving knowledge; for he only that
does the will of God, shall be saved, Math. 7. 21. And this the Apostle
chiefly aims at in this place, when he says, Proouing what is pleasing to
God-, that is, discern and understand, and judge of by experience, and know
experimentally, what is Gods will. This he explaineth, Verse 17. Be not unwise,
but understand what the will of God is. For, as practice without knowledge
tends to superstition, so knowledge without practice, savors of hypocrisy;
therefore both must go together. And the more we are exercised in obedience to
Gods will, the more lively do we perceive, and know, what is pleasing and
acceptable to God. The simple knowledge which we have by the word goes before,
but this experimental knowledge follows after, and perfects the former. I
know honey is sweet, by reading, and because I hear men say so; but when I
taste it, I prove it so indeed, I know it by experience; and by this latter,
the former is perfected; This David exhorts to, Taste and see, how gracious
the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8. Thus Christ is said, to have learned (id est,
experimentally) obedience, by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. and of
this speaks Christ, Revel. 2. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give a
white stone, and in that stone a new name written, which no man knows (id
est, experimentally) save he that receives it. Therefore, as Christ says, If
we know these things, blessed are we if we do them, John 13. 17. not
because we know, but if we know and if we do, then blessed are we.

Now this doing of Gods Doing of Gods will twofold.
will is twofold. Legal and perfect: Evangelical and imperfect. The first,
is to do Gods will so as the law requires, in a most perfect and absolute
manner, according to the rigor, exaction, and strict order prescribed in the
Law, without the least breach of any part of any one Commandment, either in
thought word or deed. This absolute fulfilling of Gods will, in this life,
since the fall of man, none (Christ alone excepted) ever did, or can attain to
in this life, but in the kingdom of glory all Gods children shall perfectly
both know and do it: The second, is such a kind of obedience as the Gospel
requires, that is to say; It is an upright and sincere endeavor, whereby we
strive to the uttermost of our power, by using all good means, to do that
which is pleasing to God, and to avoid that which is displeasing in his sight.
This we may and must attain unto in this life, and that betimes; but this is
imperfect in the best in this world; and yet God accepts of it in Christ; and
the imperfections thereof are never imputed to Gods children, but the perfect
obedience of Christ is imputed unto us, and so in Christ and through him, God
accepts of our imperfect obedience, and beholds us in him, as righteous and
perfect before him. Yea, in all Gods children, where God sees this holy
endeavor, striving against sin and weakness, and that we are heartily
sorry, that we can do it no better, God in mercy accepts the will for the
deed. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that
a man has, and not according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8. 12. And this is
our comfort in distress of Conscience.

But here, let it be well observed; that those forenamed words of the Apostle,
are most grossly abused of a number, to licentiousness of living, presuming
and taking liberty to sin as they list; thinking that God will hold them
excused, for their intents, and good meanings, and that God will accept of them
for their good desires, for they love God in their hearts, and have a desire
and will to please him, though they live in their sins: All such do foully
deceive themselves; for the Apostle speaks not simply of bare desires, and a
mere will, but of such a willing mind, as endeauours sincerely, to forsake
all sins, and which uses all good means to come to faith and repentance,
and continues so doing; then, though frailty may fail grace for a time, and
we obey but weakly, yet God will accept of us for our upright endeavor, which
shall be well pleasing in his sight. Therefore says Paul in the same place,
Verse 11. Now perform the doing of of it, that as there was a read^nesse to
will, so there may be performance also; that is, an upright endeavor to
perform, Thus a willing mind, and a true endeavor to perform, must always
go together; for, as there is no true obedience, where there is not first a
willing mind, so there the mind never truly wills, where there is nor a
striving, and diligent endeavor to obey; neither does God accept of such,
neither will he be merciful to such as pretend a willing mind, and yet lie
in their sins without repentance: If any man that hears the words of this
curse, shall bless himself in his heart, saying; I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst; the Lord
will not spare that man, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy,
shall smoke against that man, and all the curses in this book shall lie upon
him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven, etc. at large,
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20. etc. And whereas our doing and performing is not in our own
power, (for as Paul says, To will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good I find not, Romans 7. 18.) we must be earnest suitors unto
Almighty God, to assist us with his grace and holy spirit, that we may be, as
willing, so able to perform; For it is God, which works both ^o will and to
do, Philip. 2. 13. Herein we must imitate the holy practice of David. Cause
me, O Lord, to know the way, wherein I should walk; Teach me to do thy will O
Lord, Psalm. 143. 8. and 10. It is a good prayer, and worthy our practice, in 2
Maccab. 1. 2. 3. 4. God be gracious unto us, and give us all an heart to serve
him, and to do his will, with a good courage, and a willing mind, and open
our hearts in his law and commandments.

Now that we may the better conceive of this duty of experimental knowledge
in doing Gods will, observe briefly the right manner of it. First; we must do
it uprightly, without hypocrisy; Thus we must worship God in spirit and in
truth, John 4. 24. we must serve him in truth with all our hearts, 1 Samuel 12.
24. Our whole service (whereof this doing Gods will, is a principal part) must
be with a perfect, that is, an upright heart, 1 Chro. 28. 9. and therefore we
must all pray with David, O let my heart be sound, or upright in thy statutes,
Ps. 119. 80. Secondly, it must be done speedily; without delay; as David did, I
made have, and delaied not the time, to keep thy commandments. Psalm. 119. 60.
Good King Josiah, when he was but sixteen years old, did that which was
right in Gods sight, and walked in the good ways of David his Father, and
sought the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 2. 3. Thirdly; we must do it willingly, without
constraint, and cheerfully without tediousness; Thus it was cur Saviors
meat and drink to do his Fathers will, John 4. 34. Thus the Angels do it in
heaven; and as we pray, so we must practice it, Thy will be done in earth, as
it is in heaven, Math. 6. It was David's delight to do Gods will Psalm. 40. 8.
Fourthly, we must do it faithfully, without partiality; obeying God in one
thing, as well as another; and to yield obedience to all Gods commandments as
well as one; so says David, I shall not be confounded, while I have respect
unto all thy commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. Fifthly, we must do it continually;
without ceasing; Paul ceased not to pray, that the Colossians might be more and
more filled with the knowledge of Gods will, and to increase in that knowledge,
Colos. 1. 9. 10. David says, I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes
always, even to the end, Psalm. 119. 112. It is not, to begin to go with Lots
wife, and then look back, for this procures judgment; and he that puts his
hand to the plough and looks back, is not fit for Gods Kingdom, Luke 9. 62.
But he that endures to the end, shall be saved, Math. 24. 13. and he that is
faithful unto the death, shall receive the crown of life, Revel. 2. 10.

This Experimental knowledge in doing Gods will, is, first, excellent;
secondly, profitable; thirdly, necessary. Excellent, for herein we imitate
CHRIST himself, and all the holy Angels in heaven; excellent, for by this we
come to be the friends of God, yea, Christ's nearest and dearest kinsmen, of
whom he makes most reckoning. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I
command you, John. 15. 14. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father, which is
in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother; says Christ, Mat.
12: So, what can be more excellent? Profitable also, for the more we do Gods
will, the more shall we know of his will; and the more shall we discern of
doctrines, which are true, which false. If any man will do his will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, John 7. 17. yea, if we seek to
please God, he will do to please us, and to give us all things fitting, that
we can desire of him. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we
keep his commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight,
1 John 3. 22. Necessary also, in diverse respects.

Why do ye call me Lord, Lord, and do not as I bid you? Luke 6. 46. What
have thou to do to preach my statutes, and to take my covenant into thy mouth,
whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my words behind thee? Psalm.
50. 16. The Pharisees say, and do not, Math. 23. 3. He that hears and does
not, is a foolish builder, Math. 7. 26. yea, he deceives his own soul,
James 1. 22. So, if we do those things which are pleasing in Gods sight, he
hears us, 1 John 3. 22. but otherwise, we may call upon God, but he will not
answer, we may seek him early, but not find him, because we hate to know
his will, and do it, and to live in the sear of God, Prou. 1. 28. 29. etc. If
we regard but one iniquity in our hearts, the Lord will not hear us, Psalm.
66. 18. Thus, a number, even of such as go for professors, have only a show
of godliness, but (in not doing Gods will) deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.
5. They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. A
fearful case.

bring us to heaven; but though we may have all these, yet, without doing Gods
will we may be, and indeed are, but workers of iniquity. Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he
that does the will of my Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 7. 21. and whereas
many shall plead for themselves, alleging their great knowledge, and
excellent gifts, yet Christ shall renounce them, saying, I never knew you, id
est, I never acknowledged you for mine, I never approved of you for mine own;
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity. verse. 22.

heavier, and our selves the more without excuse. To him that knows to do
good, and does it not, to him it is sin, James 4. 17. Yea, the more
knowledge, without doing, the more sin. He that never knew what God is, or
what his will is, the mere simple ignorant man, shall speed a thousand times
better, than they that have great knowledge, and do not according. Ignorance
shall not wholly excuse any from having no punishment, but from having so great
punishment; That servant that knows his Lords will, and does it not, shall
be beaten with many stripes; But he that knew not, and did commit things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. Luke 12. 47, 48.
Therefore, it is better never to have known the way of righteousness, and the
will of God, than after we have known it, not to do it, 2. Pet. 2. 21.
Indeed, if we never had heard of God, never had the means of knowledge, we had
had no sin; but we have had the means, Christ has spoken to us (by
himself, his Prophets, Apostles, and in these days by ordinary ministers, to
bring us to knowledge) therefore we are left without all excuse. John 15. 22.
Some there are, that doubt whether there be a God or no, some flatly affirm
there is no God at all; and others say, that they cannot see, and know that
there is a God; others go further, that acknowledge a God, but they glorify
him not as God: To all such I say with S. Paul, that the very book of Nature
shall condemn them. For the invisible things of God, even his eternal power,
and Godhead, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things which are made; so that they are without excuse; and,
Because that when they knew God they glorified him not as God, etc. Romans 1. 20,
21.

We must all appear before the judgment sent of Christ, that every one may
receuie in his body according as he has done, whether it be good or evil. 2.
Cor. 5. 10. The sentence of absolution shall pass upon them that have done
well; The sentence of condemnation against them that have done ill. All that
are in the graves, shall come forth; they that have done good to the
resurrection of life, they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation. John 5. 28. 20. Read more at large in Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

We are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Ephesians. 2.
10. And as every one that does righteousness, is borne of God, 1. John 2. 29.
So whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, 1. John 3. 10. Yea, as Paul
says, when men boast of God, and know his will. and yet do it not, they cause
the Gospel to be evil spoken of, and the Name of God to be blasphemed. Read
at large, Roman. 2. verse 17, to verse 25.

stians to know Gods will, and do it? This then reprooues a number, of gross
ignorance, that have lived a long time under the means of knowledge, under the
ministry of the Gospel, and yet, as Paul says, They have not the knowledge of
God, I speak this to their shame, 1. Cor. 15. 34. They are like those
disciples whom Paul found at Ephesus, and asking them, whether they had
received the holy Ghost since they believed, they answered they had not so much
as heard whether there were an holy Ghost or no. Act. 19. 2. This was a great
rudeness, and shameful ignorance, in those that professed themselves
disciples; and yet they were but new beginners, and nouices in Religion; what a
shame then is it in these days for ancient hearers, and old professors, of
many of whom we may truly say, that they do not so much as know what the
will of God is; No doubt they have heard of it often and often, but they are
ever learning, and never able to come to the acknowledging of the truth. 2.
Tim. 2. 25. They know it not in themselves by experience, and how then can they
do the will of God? A fearful case; that men shall live under the means of
knowledge 20. 30. 40. or 60. years, and yet not so much as know what faith and
repentance mean: Old age, says Solomon, is a crown of glory, if it be found
in the way of righteousness, Pro. 16. 31. but how can it be found in the way of
righteousness, when as they do not so much as know what that way means? but
like the superstitious Athenians, in a blind devotion, ignorantly worship an
unknown God. Act. 17. 22, 23.

their judgment. And as the former perish for want of knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. so
shall these perish for want of practice; in not obeying the Gospel. 2 Thessalonians 1.
8, 9. And all such I leave to consider of that sharp reproof of our Savior
Christ, Why do ye call me Lord, Lord, and do not as I bid you? Luke 6. 46.
As if he had said, Seeing a good tree brings forth good fruit, and a good
man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things, and out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; how comes it to pass, that
you like the Scribes and Pharisees, seigne your selves to be good trees, and
treasures, trusting only to your bare profession, calling me Lord, Lord,
whereas you do not as I bid you? you are but trees having only leaves, and no
fruit, good words, but no good works, having the leaves of a bare profession,
but wanting the fruit of practique obedience, and an holy conversation, and
therefore ye are accursed like the fig tree, of whom Christ has many years
together sought fruit, but finds none. Matthew. 21. 19.

Hos. 4. 6. so they want knowledge, and perish for want of preaching; Where
prophecy fails, the people perish. Prou. 29. 18. Faith, knowledge, and other
graces come by hearing, (as the ordinary means) and how can we believe in him,
of whom we have not heard, and how can we hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.
14. to 17. We Ministers must teach Gods people, and pray for them, or else we
sin against God, as Samuel says, As for me, God forbid that I should sin
against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you; but I will teach you the good and
right way. 1. Samuel 12, 23. I will teach you the fear of the Lord, says
David. Thus Ministers must do, as the Priests and Levites did. They read in
the Law of God, and gave the sense, and caused the people to understand the
reading. Nehe. 8. 7. 8. And let us mark it, that if the people perish in their
sins, for want of teaching, their blood shall be required at the Ministers
hand. Ezekiel. 3. 18, 20.

both Minister and people, to take heed how any of us content our selves with
bare knowledge, and above all things to become conscionable practitioners of
God will; This is the only thing, that commends a man to God, and is
acceptable to him; I^ Christ Jesus, (that is, in the kingdom of grace) neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith, which works
by love. Gal. 5. 6. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing,
(that is, all the outward Rites, Ceremonies, Dignities, Regalities,
Privileges, and Prerogatives, whether of Jew or Gentile; all outward Wisdom,
Ciuility, Wealth, policy, Strength; all outward Actions, Hearing, Praying,
Partaking of the outward Elements in the Sacraments, Preaching, Fasting,
Almes-deedes, and the like, are nothing) but the keeping of Gods Commandments;
that is, the doing of Gods will. 1. Cor. 7. 19. We must not receive the grace
of God in vain, 2. Corinthians. 6. 1. that is, the doctrine of the Gospel, which
is the doctrine of grace, must not be only in word, or only in a form of
outward profession, but a word of power, inabling us to perform it, quickening
us in the ways of righteousness, and making us pliable to obey that which is
taught. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, 1. Cor. 4. 20. not to
talk of the word, but to do it, and reform our lives according to it; We
must therefore be not only hearers and knowers, but doers. Iam. 1. 22. And
thus I end with that godly exhortation of S. Paul; Those things which ye have
both learned, and receuied, and heard, do; And the God of peace shall be with
you. Philip. 4. 9. And thus much of the Second Observation. The Third follows.

Thirdly: I observe from Obser. 3.
the word [Procuing,] that it is the duty of every Christian, to allow of,
and approve what is Gods will, and pleasing to the Lord; so much the word
signifies, to like of, to approve of, to allow of, as I have showed. For our
better understanding whereof, observe two things: 1. What it is to approve,
and allow of Gods will. 2. The means how we may come to allow of it. Of these
briefly.

in all things; resigning up our selves wholly to be ruled by God, according
to his good will and pleasure; and being content with whatsoever is Gods will,
approouing it in our hearts; whether it be by doing or suffering, in
prosperity or adversity, and all because it is Gods will. Thus did David
approve of Gods will; It is written in the book, that I should fulfill thy
will, o my God, I am content to do it; yea, thy Law is within my heart. Psalm.
40. 8. Thus did our Savior Christ, Not my will, but thy will be done. Mat. 26,
39. and 42. Thus did Ioab; The Lord do that which seems him good. 2. Sam.
10. 12. Thus did the people that besought Paul not to go up to Jerusalem; when
he would not be persuaded, they ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be done.
Acts. 21. 14. Thus did Eli, It is the Lord: Let him do what seems him good.
1. Sam. 3. 18. This duty is of great use, but especially in time of
adversity, in sickness, crosses, diseases, loss of friends, loss of goods,
in reproaches, slanders, false accusations, and in any distress, either of
body or mind; In all, and each of these, we must subject our wills, to Gods
will, and be contented, because it is Gods will; suffering patiently,
whatsoever it shall please God to lay upon us; I was dumb, says David, I
opened not my mouth, because thou, Lord, did it. Psalm. 39. 9. So must every
one follow his example: Come what will come, knowing it to be the good will and
pleasure of God, we must be silent, and say nothing, because it is the Lords
doing; In this regard, it is an excellent saying, (though in the Apocrypha) and
worthy all our practice, howsoever carnally we would wish the contrary;
Nevertheless, as the will of God is in heaven, so let him do. 1. Maccabees 3.
verse. 60.

This approbation of Gods will must be, 1. Voluntary; 2. Patient; 3.
Thankful; 4. General. First Voluntary, without compulsion; and therefore it
must not be because we cannot shift it, but because it is Gods doing; we must
serve God with willing minds, 1. Chron. 28. 9. serving him simply and
absolutely for himself, and so approve of his will, because he wills it;
David approved of Gods will, not because he could not other wise shift it, or
because he was constrained, but because thou Lord did it. Psalm. 39. 9.
Constrained obedience is when we obey, will we, nill we; this is nothing
worth, God regards it not; it may be in the most wicked man, yea, it is in the
devils themselves, who are constrained to obey the powerful and commanding
voice of Christ; as we may see in their many dispossessions at his Command,
and in the devils departure from Christ in the end of the combat, when Christ
gave him the Auaunt; but ours must be willing, and from the heart, not to say,
we are contented, and we allow of Gods will, but to say so from the heart, and
to like of it in our hearts; as David, I am contented to do thy will, O my
God, yea, thy Law is within my heart. Psalm. 40. 8. And, as Paul says, doing
the will of God from the heart. Ephesians. 6. 6. and even with good will doing
service. verse 7. They which are compelled, are like to traitors, who in
suffering death, are constrained to obey the Kings Laws.

Patient; As, if God lay any cross, or sickness upon us, we must bear it
patiently as knowing it is Gods will it should be so; We must take up our
cross daily, and follow Christ. Luke 9. 23. Patient in tribulation. Romans 12.
12. Christ suffered patiently, and we must arm our selves with the same mind.
1. Pet. 4. 1. Behold, we count them happy which endure. Iam. 5. 11. We must not
be impatie^t as the wicked, repining against God; For God does according to his
will both in heaven and earth, and no man can stay his hand, or say unto him,
What do thou? Dan. 4. 35. We must not complain, as the people complained
and displeased the Lord. Numbers 11. 1. We must not murmr, as the Israelites
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. 1. Cor. 10. 10. We must not be
discontent, a^ Jobs wife, who bid her husband, Curse God, and die. Job 2. 9.
But, we must be silent as David. Psalm. 39. 9. Patient as Job; Contented as
Paul. Philip. 4. 11. Dumb, as Christ, as a sheep before the shearer, not
opening h^^ mouth. Esa. 53. 7. And all this must be, because all comes from
God, whether prosperity, or adversity; and therefore we must thus reason with
the Prophet Jeremy, Out of the mouth of the most High, proceeds not evil
and good? does not all come from God? why then does the living man complain?
man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3. 38, 39.

Thankful; we are so to approve of Gods will, as that we testify our
approbation by thankfulness. This thankfulness is a true sign of
contentment, always provided that it proceeds from the heart; for many in
time of afflictions will seem outwardly to the world to be thankful,
whereas God knows their hearts speak the contrary, and in their hearts they
could and do wish the contrary; But what says Job? Shall we receive good at
the hands of God and not evil? that is, as well adversity as prosperity?) Job
2. 10. He knew it was Gods will that he should suffer afflictions, and behold
his thankful approbation: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, naked shall I
return again; The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the Name
of the Lord. Job 1. 21. He acknowledged all was as it pleased the Lord, so
come things to pass, therefore blessed be God: We must in all things give
thanks, 1. These. 5. 18. and give thanks for all things, Ephesians. 5. 20. if in
and for all things, then in all afflictions, and for all afflictions, thereby
to testify our approbation of Gods will; yea, then we may safely conclude unto
our selves, that we are both doers and approouers of the will of God, when in
all things we give thanks. Therefore Paul urges this duty of thankfulness
by this forcible Reason: In every thing thing give thanks, for this is the
will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. 1. These. 5. 18.

Lastly, This approbation of Gods will must be General; that is, we must be
content that God should have and work his will, as well in one thing as in
another, Gods will must have no limitation, neither can we, though we would,
limit God. Therefore if prosperity comes, be thankful, if adversity comes; be
both thankful and humble; whatsoever comes, resolve to be content. Many seem
to approve of it, in their health, wealth, peace, and liberty, they like this
well; but they like not to be afflicted: Some again can be content with this and
that cross, but they cannot endure to hear of othersome; but if GOD lay his
hand upon them more heavy then ordinary, then they take on like mad men, raging
and repining, foming out their own shame, and none are so crossed and plagued
as they: But what did Job? God took away his goods, who had abundance of
wealth; God took away his children, his servants, his whole estate; and
afflicted himself, suffering Satan to smite him with sore biles, from the
sole of the foot to his crown, that he was feign to take a potsheard to
scrape himself withal; yet Job in all these approved of Gods will; In all
this did not Job sin with his lips, nor charge God foolishly. Job 1. and 2.
Chapters. So says Christ, If any man will be his disciple, he mu^^ take up
his cross daily. Luk^ 9. 23. his cross, that is, his own cross, that is,
such a measure of cross as God shall lay upon him in particular, be it more or
less, that is his cross, and this he must take up, and not what man himself
lists. And thus did Paul approve of Gods will generally, in one thing as
another, I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content.
Philip. 4. 11. Thus I have showed, what it is, and the manner of it. Now of the
Means.

The Means how to become The means to become approouers of Gods will.
approuers of Gods will are these; Abraham thus denied himself and his own
will, in that great trial of his, in sacrificing Isaac he could never have
been drawn to have approved of Gods will, to sacrifice him. Our Savior
Christ says, If any man will come after me (in conforming his will to my
will) let him deny himself, and take up his cross, Luke 9. 23. first, deny
himself, before he can approve of Gods will in bearing the cross; yea,
though it seems to be against all sense and reason in man's judgment, yet we
must deny our selves, and do it; We must not do the things that seem good
in our own eyes, Deuteronomy. 12. 8. nor be wise in our own conceits, Romans 12. 16.

Secondly, to live in the fear of God; This is a means bot^ to know,
understand, and approve of Gods will; and he that lives without this fear, is
void of knowledge, and understanding, and so cannot approve of that they know
not; For this cause it is so often said, The fear of God is the beginning of
knowledge, Prou 1. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Prou.
9. 10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding
have all they that do thereafter, Psalm. 111. 10. Yea, blessed is he that
fears the Lord (come what will come, and let God work his will, he approues
of it,) for his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; his heart is established,
Psalm. 112. 1. 7. 8. This fear of God is, as it were a bridle to restrain us
from ouer-shooting our selves into all evil, and keeps us in awe and
obedience to Gods will, preserving us from rashness, unadvisedness,
coffeehouse, impatiency, and the like, whereby men do show themselves
dislikers and disalowers of Gods will. By the fear of the Lord, men depart
from evil, Prou. 16. 6. This also caused Abraham so willingly to approve of
Gods will, even beyond all reason in man's judgment, to offer Isaac in
sacrifice: Now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy
only Son, Genesis 22. 12.

Man has but a short time to live, and is full of trouble, Job 14. 1. Great
are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34. 19. through many tribulations we
must enter into Gods Kingdom, Acts 14. 22. And armies of sorrows are against
me, says Job 6. 4. And therefore, if we do not foresee and prepare our selves
aforehand, we shall be found unarmed and naked, not able to encounter with
the least trial and temptation; Dangers foreseen, are less grievous. We must
therefore with Job, All the day long, and every day of our appointed time,
wait till our change come, Job 14. 14. and so to pray to God aforehand, that
when it does come, he will arm our selves with patience to undergo what he in
his heavenly wisdom shall think good to lay upon us; and withal we must
resolve to be contented that God may have his will; The want of this means, is
a maine cause, why so many are so shamefully ouer-seene, in abusing themselves
by immoderate pensiveness and sorrow, as men without hope, more like bruit
beasts, or worse, which have no understanding; wherein they show themselves,
how carnally minded they are; and it is a sign that such are yet in their
natural estate.

In a word, we must, when God works his will, consider of the impossibility
of it, that it should be otherwise; for God will do what he will; and he
that is not contented with it, does, what in him lies, resist the will of God,
which is a fearful thing; David was grieved when he saw the child like to
die; but when it was dead, he comforted himself, partly in regard of the
happiness it was gone unto, and partly in regard of the impossibility of
returning again; saying, I shall go to him, but he shall not come again to
me: Therefore why should I fast and weep any more? 2 Samuel 12. 23. So in every
cross, under which the Lord shall exercise us, whether by sickness, by
losses, by death, either of our selves, or ours, our Parents, Children,
Husbands, Wives, Kinsfolk, Friends, or what way soever, consider it is GODS
doing, it is impossible it should be undone again, therefore rest upon God,
approve of it because it is his doing, and be content; for if by impatience we
resist Gods will, as Paul says in another sense, the like may I say here, They
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13. 2. And thus much
of this third observation. Now of the Uses.

Jerusalem, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which hillest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered you together, as
an hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Math. 23.
37. God said unto them, walk in the good way, etc. but they said, we will not
walk therein; And God set watchmen over them, saying, hearken to the sound of
the trumpet; but they said, we will not hearken, Ier. 6. 16. 17. And this is
the sin at this day, God would, but man will not; God would have men to be
saved, and come to the acknowledgement of the truth; 1 Timothy 4. but men will not
repent, that they may be saved; God gives men space to repent, but they repent
not, Revel. 2. 21. Thus they told the Prophet flatly to his face, they would
not hear him speak in the name of the Lord, but they would follow their
idolatry, and they would offer sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, Ier. 44. 16.
17. and thus at this day, God reuealeth his will by the mouth of his Ministers,
but men will not hear the voice of the charmers, charm they never so wisely,
Psalm. 58. 5. Thus they contemn Gods will; Their own hearts carry them away
(as it was objected against Job, but too truly verified in the wicked) and
they turn their spirit against God, Job 15. 12. 13.

For the carnal mind is enmity against God; and the carnal mind is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. So then they that are in the
flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8. 7. 8. We must not therefore be wise in our
selves, and from our selves in matters of salvation; if we do that which
seems good in our own eyes, we cannot do that which God commands; therefore
God commanding the one, forbids the other. Deuteronomy. 12. 8. reading from Verse 4.
to 12.

The natural man perceiues not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and this comes to pass, by reason of the hardness of
heart, which blindes the understanding; Having the understanding darkened,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their
hearts, Ephesians. 4. 18. God gave Iesabell a space to repent, (there was his offer
and revealed will,) but she repented not; there was her refusal, hardening her
heart, Revel. 2. 21.

may live in health, wealth, peace and liberty, and abound in worldly
prosperity, they like it well; but when trouble comes, they murmr and
complain against God, they like not then to retain God in their knowledge,
Romans 1 yea. when tribulation and persecution arises, because of the word, by
and by they are offended, Math. 13. 21. and in time of temptation they fail
away, Luke 8. 13. In a word, we must take great heed of hardness of heart,
unregenerate wills, unsanctified affections, as pride, hatred malice, and the
like, all which do greatly hinder us, that we cannot approve of what is
acceptable and pleasing to the Lord; And thus much be said of the word
Proouing; that is, searching and trying, understanding and knowing by
experience, liking of, approouing and allowing, what is the will of God;
proouing, what is acceptable to the Lord. And thus I conclude this first point,
with that loving exhortation of the Apostle; I beseech you brethren by the
mercy of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable
to God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world,
but be ye transformed, by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove, what
is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God, Romans 12. 1. 2.

Here ends the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON upon this FIRST STEP.
Proouing what is acceptable to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 10.
We have heard hitherto of the duty it self; now I proceed to the second
point in the Text; namely, what must be proved, and approved; The thing then
which we must prove, is, (...), What is acceptable, or wel-pleasing to the
Lord;

It is the counsel of the Apostle, 1 These. 5. 21. Try all things; hold fast
that which is good; as if he should have said, as I would not have you despise
prophesying, so I would not have you to admit and approve of every Doctrine
without discretion, but to prove the doctrines, and hold fast only that which
is good; I would have you to try the Doctrines by the Touchstone of Gods
word, and not to be carried away with every wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. I
would have you try the spirits, whether they be of God or no, but not to
believe every spirit, 1 John 4. 1. I would have you to approve of nothing but
what is well-pleasing to God; Thus I desire that ye may walk worthy of the
Lord, unto all pleasing, Colos. 1. 9. 10. And I beseech you brethren, and
exhort you, by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to
^^lke and to plea^e God, so ye would abound more and more, 1 These 4. 1. and as
the Text has it, to walk, proouing, what is acceptable to the Lord, or
well-pleasing to God. Not what is pleasing to men; for if we seek to please
men, we are not the servants of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. Not to seek and prove
what is the pleasure of the Pope, as the Papists do; Not what is pleasing to
the world, for he that will be a friend to the world, is an enemy to God, Iam.
4. 4. and the wisdom of the world, is foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 3. 19.
Not what is pleasing to our own corrupt natures, affections, humors,
dispositions, for this is to live unto our selves, and not to the will of God,
which is forbidden, 1 Pet. 4. 1. 2. Not what is pleasing to the devil, for so
we fall into the suare of the Devil, and are taken captine hy him at his will,
2 Timothy 2. 26. but what is well-pleasing to the Lord; that if it be agreeable to
his word, then to receive it, if disagreeing to his word, then to reject it; if
the word commands it we must do it; if the word forbid it, we must leave it
undone; and thus shall we walk, proouing what is pleasing to the Lord.

For our better understanding of this point, I will handle it; first,
Generally; showing what that is, in general, which is acceptable or pleasing
to the Lord; secondly, more particularly; what the pleasure and will of God is,
and wherein it does consist.

Generally, that is acceptable or pleasing to God, which is agreeable to the
will of God; this, and only this, is well-pleasing to the Lord; therefore the
Apostle exhorting us to prove what is pleasing to the Lord, explaines himself
afterward, speaking of the same thing, in the 17. Verse, be not unwise, but
understand what the will of the Lord is. Thus to please God, and in all things
to obey Gods will, are all one, and often taken for the same in Scriptures. S.
John says, 1 Epist. 3. 22. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of God, because we
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. Which he explaines
afterward speaking of the same thing; This is the confidence that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us, 1 John 5.
14. And so the Apostle in his prayer, shows, saying, The God of peace make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is
welpleasing in his sight, Heb. 13. 21. where he gives us to understand, that a
good work and well-pleasing to the Lord is that which is done according to his
will, and which he works by his spirit in his children. And so, on the
contrary, that is displeasing to the Lord, which is disagreeable, and contrary
unto the will of God; When they murmured against God, complaining that they had
nothing but Manna, they forgot God and were unthankful, this was contrary
unto Gods will; and this displeased the Lord, Psalm. 78. at large. Yea, forty
years long was God grieved with this generation, Psalm. 95. 10. and they please
not God, and are contrary to all men, 1 These. 2. 15. because they did such
things as were not according to the will of God, but contrary unto it, as, they
killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles,
and the like. Secondly, then we are said to do that which is well-pleasing to
the Lord, or acceptable to the Lord, when we labor in uprightness of he art
to keep Gods commandments; as on the contrary we do as highly displease
God, when we break his commandments. Whatsoever we ask of God, we receive,
because we keep his commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in
his sight, 1 John 3. 22. where we may se, that, to keep Gods commandments,
and to do what is pleasing in his sight, are in effect all one; and we can
not possibly please God in any thing, unless woe endeavor to yield upright
obedience to all Gods Commandments; and when no outward action, privilege, or
prerogative whether of Jew or Gentile, stands us in any stead, this does; for
circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19.

Quest. But how shall I know when it is agreeable to Gods will, and when it is
not? Answ. It is only then agreeable to Gods will, when it is agreeable to the
word of God; for his whole will is contained in the word, and when we do what
the word commands, and leave undone what the word forbids, then we do the will
of God, and please him; and when we do contrary unto the word, we utterly
displease him. Now the will of God is twofold: Secret, Revealed. The first is
the will of his good pleasure, which neither may nor can be resisted, My
counsel shall stand, and I will do al my pleasure, etc. Isay. 46. 10. 11. Of
which speak these places. God will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will, he hardens, Romans 9. 18. 19. He has predestined us according to the
good pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1. 5. and the like. This secret will, being
the will of his good pleasure, is not here meant, neither does this belong to
us to pry into, neither is this the rule of our actions. Secrets belong to God,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. But I speak of the revealed will of God, which is called his
signified will, which is revealed and made known to us in his sacred word;
Revealed things belong to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. And this is the only law and Rule
of all our actions, yea, of whatsoever is to be either believed or practiced;
Thus the Word is the will of God; both the Law and Gospel, because they serve
to declare, and manifest unto us, what is pleasing and acceptable to God, and
what is our duty both toward God, our selves, and others, thus
commandments, counsels, comminations, threatenings, prohibitions, promises,
and the like, are the signifying and revealed will of God, according to which
only, we must think, speak, and do.

Psalm. 50 17. How can such men do that only which is pleasing to the Lord,
and agreeable to his will; When, as Solomon says, or God by Solomon, They
refuse to hearken to the call of God speaking to them in his Word; they set at
naught all Gods counsel; they will none of his counsel, but despise all his
reproof? Prou. 1. 24, 25, and 30. verses. Yea, they say unto God, Depart from
us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Job 21. 14. It is a fearful
case, to see how little the word of God is regarded, and how much it is
despised, and in despising the Word, they despise the will of God, which who so
does, shall be destroyed: He that despises the Word shall be destroyed.
Prou. 13. 13.

of it, and give credence to Popish teachers, and writings of men, clean
contrary unto the word of God. How is it possible for these to please God,
whereas the word of God which contains his will, should be the only rule of
all their actions, and yet wholly neglected of them? Object. They say, it is
not lawful for Laymen to be acquainted with Scriptures, or to read and study
the Scriptures. Ans. But I say, what Christ says to one, he says to all.
Mark. 13. 37. if to all, then to Laymen. The Spirit, in the Word, speaks to
whole Churches, Revel. 2. and 3. Chapt. if to whole Churches, then to Laymen.
And that which Paul speaks of one Epistle, is true of the whole Scriptures;
that they belong to all the members of Christ, as well Laymen; as Ministers;
whereas they forbid Laymen the reading of Paul's Epistles, or any part of
Scriptures. I change you by the Lord, (let all Papists remember and regard this
strict charge) that this Epistle be read unto all the holy brethren, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 27. if to all the holy brethren, then to Laymen; or else, let the Papists
conclude, that Laymen a^^ none of the holy brethren.

Thirdly. This teaches all of us, to examine thoroughly, by the touchstone of
Gods word, what the will of God is, that so our whole worship of God, and every
part thereof, may be only such as is agreeable thereunto, or else it is
impossible for us to please God in any one part of his worship. Thus all our
prayers must be according to Gods will; If we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us. 1 Ioh. 5. 14. Thus all our preaching must be according to
Gods will revealed in his Word; If any man, or Angel from heaven preach any
other doctrine, we must hold him accursed. Galat. 1. 8, 9. Thus all our
hearing must be only to receive Gods word, to hear Gods own voice, not any
thing else. My shoope hear my voice, the voice of strangers they will not
hear, John 10. 5, 27. If any bring you not this doctrine, receive him not,
neither bid him God speed. 2. Epist. John 10. verse: So for the Sacraments,
they must be administered and received according to the will of God, that is,
the form and manner prescribed in Gods word. 1. Cor. 11. 23. All which
condemn the Papists, who neither pray, preach, hear, administer or receive,
or perform any service, answerable to Gods will and word.

Gal. 3. 10. how much more does this curse belong to those that continue in
breaking the whole Law, and do nothing written therein? And if he that despised
Moses Law, died without mercy, under two or three witnesses, of how much sorer
punishment, shall he be thought worthy, who (in stead of obeying the will of
Christ, according to his Word) has trodden under soote the Son of God, and
has (in stead of doing only what is agreeable to Gods will, and the good
motions of the Spirit) done despite to the Spirit of grace? as Paul says,
Hebr. 10. 28, 29. How is it possible for such to prove what is acceptable to
the Lord? In a word, it condemns all such as live in a custom of sin,
which is wholly disagreeable to the will of God; yea, it is as impossible for
such to do any good thing (in regard of humane power) as it is impossible for
the Blacke-more to change his skin, or the Leopard his spots. Ierem. 13. 23.
So far are these from proouing, and doing what is pleasing to God, as they
can do nothing but displease him. And thus much in general, what is pleasing
to the Lord.

Particularly: I come to show from the word of God, what this Revealed will of
God is, and the sundry particulars, wherein it does consist; A point, I must
confess, of great moment, as any in the whole Scripture, and yet as little
known, and less practiced; for let a man ask some, What is the only thing
to be looked after? Happily some will say, though very few, that the chief
thing is to live according to Gods will, to serve and please God; this is all
they can say, not knowing what it is, or how, to serve and please God. Some go
further, and by wrote they say, God must be served according to his will in his
Word, and this is all: But ask them, what the Word reuealeth, concerning Gods
will, and what this will is, wherein it consists, and the like, and they can
say nothing; A strange thing, that this question, What is the will of God
revealed in his Word, should set the greater part of the world, at Non plus.
And because it is of such great moment, and a maine point of Christian
Religion, I have therefore set it down particularly, from the word of God,
what is the pleasure and will of God, and wherein it consists; that so those
which have not known, may be enlightened in their understanding, and informed
in their judgments, and they which have known, may be more and more
strengthened, and be stirred to a further increase in proouing and doing what
is pleasing to the Lord; which, though I might handle at large, yet I have
reduced all to these few heads, as follows. First of the definition it self.

The Revealed will of God in his Word, is this; That we should live by faith in
the Son of God; believing in him with all our hearts, and daily repenting us
of all our sins; leading an holy and sahctified life; continually performing
both active and passive obedience, to all Gods Commandments; growing, and
increasing daily in grace and godliness, This in effect, is all that the Word of
God reuealeth; and no part of it, but aims at one of these; all which may be
reduced to these three heads: 1. Faith. 2. Repentance: 3. New obedience; in all
which the will of God consists. This Paul confirms, when he said to the
Elders of Ephesus: Ye know how I kept back nothing (namely of the revealed
will of God) that was profitable unto you, but have showed you and taught you
publicly, and from house to house, testifying both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
Acts 20. 20. 21. In which place, we may plainly observe, that the sum of
all the doctrine of the Bible is, that men should come to Faith, and
Repentance, which two things Paul teaching, (joined with New obedience) he is
said to have kept back nothing of the will of God, profitable for them. And
thus came Jesus preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying,
Repent, and believe the Gospel, Mark. 1. 14, 15. all his preaching aiming at
this, to bring men to faith and repentance; for indeed, all other things
needful to salvation, may be reduced to these two; and all other graces of the
Spirit necessary for Gods children, will accompany these in whomsoever they are
truly wrought.

But for the better clearing of this point, and for the further explaining of
this revealed will of GOD, I reduce them to seven heads: in which this will of
God consists. 1. In Believing. 2. In Repenting. 3. In Holiness and
Sanctification of life. 4. In Well-doing. 5. in suffering for well-doing. 6. In
General obedience. 7. In increase and growth of grace. All which I show from
places of Scripture, proouing what is pleasing to the Lord, as being an
exposition, or explanation of the Definition.

Believing. As our Savior himself says, This is the will of him that sent
me, that every one which sees the Son (that is, acknowledges him to be
the Messiah) and believes on him, may have everlasting life. John 6. 40. To
believe in Christ is not only to have a general persuasion of Gods mercy,
but to apply Christ upon found ground to be my and thy Savior in particular;
and not only that the promises of the Gospel are true in general, but that
they belong to me and thee in particular. This Application is the main thing in
saving faith, without which, Knowledge, Assent. Approbation, profession, and
Confession of Christ are nothing. And that every one may the better conceive of
it, and perceive it in himself, he must try it by this; It purifieth the
heart. Acts. 15. 9. It makes a man to become like to God in purity, to purge
himself as God is pure. John 3. 3. It will not suffer a man to live in the
darkness of his old sins; for Christ came a light into the world, that
whosoever believes in him, should not abide in darkness. Ioh. 12. 46. Thus
by believing we do the will of God; but he that wants these things, and
lives as bad as ever he was, wants saving faith, and cannot approve what
is the will of God.

Secondly, The will of GOD consists in Repenting: which appears in these
places. Have I any pleasure at all, that the wicked should die, says the Lord
God? And not that he should return from his ways, and live? Ezech. 18. 23. As
if God had said, I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but my pleasure
is, that he repent and live; and so the Prophet explaines afterward, saying,
As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his way, and live; Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? Ezeeh. 33. 11. Thus to
repent, is to do the will of God; yet not every repentance: Judas repented,
but it was but a worldly sorrow, in regard of punishment, which causes death.
2. Corinthians. 7. 10. But true repentance is a turning from all our sins, and
returning unto God, as in the former words of Ezechiel. It is the
through-change of the heart, mind, will, and affections, and an alteration of
the whole life of man, from evil to good, joined always with a purpose of not
sinning; This is, to cast off every transgression, whereby we have
transgressed, and to make us a new heart, and a new spirit. Ezech. 18. 32. It
is the dying unto sin, and living unto righteousness, and not to live any
longer in any one sin, Romans 6. 2. It is the ceasing from sin, and ceasing
to do evil; and learning to do well; and no longer to live the rest of our
time in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. Esaias 1. 16, 17.
and 1. Pet. 4. 1, 2. It is the awaking to live righteously, and sin no more.
1 Corint. 15. 34. to confess our sins, and forsake them. Prou. 28. 13. This
is that repentence which God wills, which cannot be in any Reprobate, and
wicked man. Esau found no place of this repentance, though he sought it
carefully with tears. Heb. 12. 17. Of Gods willing of repentance, S. Peter
speaks plainly; GOD is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. 2. Pet, 3. 9.

Holiness of life, and Sanctification of the spirit: This is plainly
expressed in the words of Paul, This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication, That every one of you
should know how to possess his vessel in Sanctification, and honor, not in
the lusts of concupiscence, etc. for God has called us, not unto
uncleanness, but to holiness, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, to 8. Thus being justified by
faith, we must be sanctified by the Spirit, serving God in righteousness and
holiness, all the days of our lives, without servile fear, before him. Luke
1. 74, 75. Thus being converted unto God, we must show forth the fruits of
repentance, Matthew. 3. 8. and being freed from sin, we must have our fruit
unto holiness. Romans 6. 22. This holiness must be in all manner of our
conversation, both before God and men, in public and private, 1 Pet. 1. 15.
and without this holiness no man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12. 14. It cannot
be perfect in this world, but only inchoate, and in part; Blessed and holy is
that man, which has part in the first resurrection, that is, from sin, to
grace, Revel. 20. 6. The most holy man can have but his part, and though it be
but in part, yet he is a holy man and blessed; and yet the righteousness of
Christ being imputed unto us, God beholds us, in and through him, as perfect.

of heart, and to the glory of God, and the good of our selves, and others.
Thus we must be full of good works, that others beholding them may glorify
God, Mat. 5. 16. For so is the will of God, that by well-doing, ye may put to
silence, the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2. 15. We must not therefore be
weary of welldoing, Gal 6. 9. and 2 These. 3. 13. but be steadfast, immovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. This will appear in
these particulars, all which are Gods will, acceptable and pleasing to the
Lord. First, to use holy and spiritual exercises, as prayer, thanksgiving,
spiritual rejoicing, holy meditations, and the like; Ever follow that which is
good, both among your selves, and to all men; Rejoice eueamores pray
continually; In all things give thanks; for this is the will of God, in Christ
Jesus toward you, 1 These. 5. 16 17. 18. It is Gods will that men pray every
where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting, Tim. 2. 8. and though
these words are spoken in the person of Paul, I will, etc. yet they being the
word of God, are his revealed will. Secondly, to pray for others, for all men,
for Kings, and all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptable in the sight of
God our Savior 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2. Thirdly, to be full of the works of charity,
mercy, bounty, and the like. Distributing to the necessity of Saints, Romans 12.
13. To do good and distribute, forget not, for with such sacrifice, God is
well pleased, Heb. 13. 16. The Kingdom of God, says Paul, is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, and be that in
these things serves God, to acceptable to God, and approved of all good men,
Romans 14. 17. 18.

Fifthly, in Suffering: Suffering is twofold; for euill-doing; this is not
acceptable to God; for what glory is it, if when ye are buffeted for your
faults, ye shall take it patiently 1 Pet. 2. 20. for well doing; this suffering
only is thanke-worthy; This is thanke-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2. 19. but if when ye do
well, and take it patiently in suffering for it, this is acceptable with God,
Verse 20. For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for
well-doing, then for ill-doing; as 1 Pet. 3. 17. Which must teach all to have a
care, that when they do suffer, they have a good cause, and a clear
conscience; and in this suffering, we obey the will of God; as if it be for the
profession of the Gospel, the confession of Christ, for the testimony of
Christ, and a good conscience, for hearing the word, and using all other godly
exercises, as prayer, singing of Psalms, godly conference and the like; for
these things Gods children suffer much wrong in the world; To all whom I give
S. Peter's counsel, Let them that suffer thus, according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful
Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 19.

commandment, as well as one; and passive, to suffer whatsoever it is Gods
will to have us suffer; for as Augustine says, He that is not content with
Gods will, in suffering whateuer it pleases God to lay upon him, his heart is
not upright in him, because he will not direct his will to Gods will, but will
have Gods will bent to his. This is all that God requires at our hands; Fear
God, and keep all his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man,
Eccles. 12. 13. and mark here, how Solomon calls this, the Conclusion of the
whole matter; as though all Gods revealed will were comprehended under these
two, to fear God, and to yield general obedience to all Gods commandments.
We must do that in truth, and uprightness, which the dissembling hypocrites
did with a double heart; namely; that when God shall declare unto us his will,
as he did by the Prophet Jeremy, who kept nothing of Gods will back from the
people, that then, I say, we resolve to do according to all things which the
Lord our God commands; whether it be good, or whether it be evil, (in all)
we will obey the voice of God, Ier. 42. 5. 6. This is the only thing which God
requires, to fear the Lord thy God, to walk (not in some) but in all his
ways; to keep (not some) but all his commandments and statutes, which he
commands us for our good, Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Then shall we not be ashamed, when we
have respect unto all Gods commandments, Psalm. 119. 6. It is Gods will and
command, that we should keep all his precepts diligently, Psalm. 119. 4.

grow in grace; Not sufficient to attain to any grace, and to stand at a stay
in Christianity, but to grow in grace, and to go forward in the knowledge of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. As newborn babes, desiring
the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 2. always
abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. Therefore Saint Paul prayed
daily for the Colossians, that they might be filled with the knowledge of Gods
will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding; that they might walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God, etc. Colos. 1. 9. 10. In which words we
see, that, he that will know, and do Gods will, and please him in all things,
must be fruitful in every good work, and increase in grace; like to the
Church of Thyatira, whose works were more at last, then they were at first.
Revel. 2. 19. This the parable of the Talents signifies; The graces of Gods
spirit, are these Talents, which must be put out to use and increased, Math.
25. 14. 15. 16. to 31.

Hence I observe, that the Obser.
only way to do the revealed will of God, is to labor for found faith, true
repentance, and new obedience, joined with both outward, and inward reformation
of life; without these it is impossible in all other things, though never so
excellent, to please God, or to fulfill the will of God; what more excellent
then preaching the word, prayer, working of miracles in Christ's name and
casting out Devils in his name? yet to many such, Christ shall say at the day
of judgment, I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity,
because ye have not done my Fathers will, living by faith, in repentance, and
new obedience, unto which only the promise of salvation is made, Mat. 7. 21.
22. 23. What more excellent then to be allied to Christ? yet Christ prefers
spiritual kindred by faith, repentance, and new obedience, far beyond it,
saying, Who is my Mother? and who are my Brethren? and pointing to his
Disciples, he said, behold my Mother, and my Brethren; for whosoever shall do
my Fathers will, the same is my Brother, and Sister and Mother, Math. 12. 47.
48. 49. 50. It was an excellent privilege, that the Virgin Mary was the Mother
of Christ, yet, with reverence be it spoken, had she not as well boren him in
her heart by faith living in repentance and new obedience, as well as she bare
him in her womb, she had never been saved. Let a man imagine, and think of
the most excellent gifts that can be named, yet none will avail any unto
salvation without this true faith sincere repentance, and new obedience, by
which only we become doers of Gods will who only shall be saved; Therefore
says Paul, In Christ Jesus, nothing avails, but faith which works by love,
Gal. 5. 6. Nothing avails, but the keeping of Gods commandments, 1 Cor. 7.
19. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

unto God; I say, the soundness and sincerity of these; for it is not every
kind of says, every kind of repentance and obedience, that will make us
doers of Gods will, but only that which is sound and sincere; Sound, in the
beginning and ground; sound in the fruits and nature; sound in the continuance.
Simon Magus believed, and was baptized, Acts 8. 13. The devils believe and
tremble, Iam. 2. 19. Judas repented, wisting he had never betrayed Christ, and
confessed his sin before God and men, Math. 27. 3. 4. Esau sought repentance
with tears, Heb. 12. 17. Saul and Pharaoh confessed Gods righteousness, and
their own, and the peoples sins, Exodus 9. 27. Ahab at the fearful and
heavy message of God, humbled himself, put on sacke-cloath, ^ent his clothes,
and lay in sacke-cloath, 1 King. 21. The wicked, and the Devils themselves obey
God, but against their will, But which of all these were doers of Gods will, or
ever attained to salvation? Not one, because all was counterfeit, in
hypocrisy, dissimulation, with a double heart; and though they had, and did
many good things, in themselves good, yet not good to them, because their heart
was not right with God, Psalm. 78. 34. etc. What great cause then have we to
look unto our selves, that all be sound, seeing both faith, repentance, and
obedience, in some sort, may be in the very reprobates, and closest hypocrites?

And because this is so maine a point to be learned, as being that indeed
which puts life to all grace, I will therefore show in some particulars,
wherein the soundness of the former graces of faith, repentance, and new
obedience consists, that so every one may approve unto himself, the
soundness and sincerity of them.

First, they must be all from the heart, and from the whole heart; This is the
ground and root, from whence they must spring; otherwise, all our faith is but
an outward show, yea, a lip-saith, and a lip-repentance, and all our obedience
is but only an outward reformation of life, which may be in an hypocrite, and
in many a one who shall never be saved. Thus we must be sound in faith, Tit.
2. 2. and so do the will of God from the heart, Ephesians. 6. 6. We must believe
with all our heart, Acts 8. 37. Thus we must turn to God with all our hearts,
and with fasting, weeping, and mourning, and rent our hearts. Joel 2. 12, 13.
and we must obey God in all things from the heart. Romans 6. 17. that is, we
must believe, repent and obey uprightly, unfeignedly, sincerely, and seriously;
and so whatsoever we do, we must do it heartily as to the Lord, and not
unto men. Coloss. 3. 23. This is that which God calls for in every good
duty, My son, give me thy heart. Prou. 23. 26.

Esaias; He that believes shall not make haste. Esaias 28. 16. that is, in all
estates he will stay himself upon the good will and pleasure of God; and
where there is not a through change of the heart and life, and such a
moderation of our affections, and passions, there is no true faith; Thus we
must bring forth the fruits of repentance, being changed in our minds, laying
aside the purpose of sinning, resolving by Gods grace to sin no more, and
being heartily sorry for offending so good a God; and so for obedience, to
endeavor in the use of all good means, to perform it from all the powers,
and parts both of soul and body; and where this is in truth, there will
follow a change in the will, thoughts and affections, and all the actions of
our life. For they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
affections, and lusts. Galat. 5. 24.

believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Luke 24. 25. Repentance must be of
all sin, or else of none; we must not have a dispensation, for any one
sin; and obedience must be total, to the whole will of God, in yielding
cheerful obedience to every commandment, without partiality; For he that
breaks one Commandment is guilty of all. Iam. 2. 10. Therefore Christ says,
Ye are my friends, if ye do (not some things) but, whatsoever I command you.
John 15. 14. And as Paul says, This is our proof, whether we be obedient in
all things. 2. Cor. 2. 9.

Gods children are described to be voluntaries; Thy people, O Lord, shall come
willingly at the time of assembly. Psalm. 110. 3. David gave Solomon this
counsel to serve GOD, (namely, in the whole course of his service, and in all
the parts of his worship, whereof Faith, Repentance, and New Obedience, are
chief) with a willing mind. 1. Chron. 28. 9. Thus did David himself delight
to do Gods will. Psalm. 40. 8. and it was our Saviors meat and drink to do
his Fathers will. John 4. 34. Thus do the Angels in heaven, who are described
to have wings, to show their speed, alacrity, willingness and cheerfulness in
doing Gods will, and we must be like them. Some believe but it is only for a
time, and in time of temptation fall away; such a faith was never willingly, so
never sound: Some rep^^t, o^ rather seem to repent, and to leave sin, when
sin leaves them, when in regard of opportunity, or fear; or age, or some
such like respect, they cannot commit sin, yet they regard sin in heart;
This is no sound repentance; and so for obedience, many perform a constrained
obedience, as the devils and wicked Church-Papists, and the like, and so no
sound obedience, and thus, though grace be imperfect, and full of many
infirmities, (as no grace can be perfect in this life) yet if there be in us a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has. 2. Cor. 8. 12. Thus
with the Corinthians, We must believe, repent, and obey, and not only begin
to do, but to be forward, and to have a readiness, as to will, so to
perform. 2. Corinthians. 8. verses 10. 11.

to have a conscience void of offense toward God and men. Acts 24. 16. that we
may truly say with Paul, I have lived in all good conscience before God until
this day. Acts 23. 1. Thus Saint Peter says, We must have a good conscience.
1. Pet. 3. 16. This good conscience is such as has no manner of purpose to
live in any one sin whatsoever, but is resolved to please GOD in all the
ways of his Commandments, and that continually; and it does excuse, not
accuse: On the contrary the bad conscience, is, when a man resolves to
cherish, or purposes to live in any one sin whatsoever. Thus Paul
counsels, to keep faith and a good conscience, from which good conscience
some have erred, and as concerning faith, (for it was but a temporary and
counterseit faith) have made shipwreck. 1. Tim. 1. 19. We must hold the
mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. 1. Tim. 3. 9.

Thus the end of the Commandment is love, out of a pure heart and a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned, etc. 1. Tim. 1. 5. 6. in which place it is
plain, that a pure heart, a good conscience, and a sound faith are three
inseparable companions, neither is it possible, one to be without the other:
so for Repentance, and Obedience, yea, the whole service of God must be with a
good conscience, as Paul says; My God whom I serve from my forefathers with
pure conscience. 2. Timoth. 1. 3. We must have a good conscience in all
things. Hebr. 13. 18. that we may say in all these, how I believe, repent, and
obey, my conscience bears me witness. Romans 9. 1.

be faithful unto the death, Reu. 2. 10. by living continually to our lives end
in Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience. We must be steadfast in the faith. 1.
Pet. 5. 9. We must stand fast in the faith. 1. Cor. 16 13. We must continue
in the faith grounded and settled, etc Coloss. 1. 23. So for Repentance, it must
be daily renewed, increased, and continued; for this cause our Savior Christ
so often urges the duty of repentance upon the Churches in the Revelation,
Chapt. 2. and 3. signifying the continuance and daily renewing of it, though
they had repented before; and great reason it should be thus, because so long
as we live, we sin daily; For there is not a just man, that does good, and
sins not. Eccles. 7. 20. therefore we must repent daily: so for Obedience,
we must with the Philippians, always obey, and still work out our salvation
with fear and trembling. Philipp. 2. 12. passing the whole time of our
soiourning here in fear. 1. Pet. 1. 17. and finishing our sanctification in
the fear of God. 2. Cor. 7. 1. And herein let this be well observed, that
where any grace is begun, if it be in truth, it is constant; if it fades away,
it was never true; Therefore this was Paul's persuasion, Being confident of this
very thing, that God who has begun a good work in us, will perform or finish
it, until the day of Jesus Christ. Philipp. 1. 6. Thus have I showed plainly,
wherein the soundness of these graces consist; and that I may use Paul's words,
this is sound doctrine, Tit. 1. 9. both to exhort and convince the gainesayers;
Thus have I spoken that which becomes sound doctrine. Tit. 2. 1. where we are
exhorted, to be sound in faith, love, patience, etc. verse 2. yea, this is
sound speech that cannot be condemned. verse. 8.

Matthew. 7. 21. So al such as live in these forenamed sins shall most
certainly be damned; He that believes not, shall be damned. Mark. 16. 16.
All those shall be damned, that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness; as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. The unbelieving shall have their part in
the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
Revel. 21. 8. and they cannot enter into the heavenly rest because of
unbelief. Hebr. 3. 19. So for impenitency; Except ye repent ye shall all
perish. Luke 13. 3. 5. If the wicked turn not from his wickedness, nor from
his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity. Ezech. 3. 19. So for
disobedience. The Apostle having reckoned up diverse sins, from which he
dehorts, enforces all his speech, by an argument drawn from the terrible
judgment of God upon all such, saying, For these things sake, or because of
these things, comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience.
Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6. Christ shall come in flaming fire taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall be punished with everlasting perdition, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7 8, 9.
All which should move us to hasten out of these sins, and not to flatter our
selves in them as the wicked do, and think all is well, when they are running
the broad way to destruction; and indeed if we live in these sins, and yet
cry peace and safety then shall sudden destruction come upon us, as travail
upon a woman with child, and we shall not escape. 1. These. 5. 3.

staves to trust unto, they are good things in their kind, but not sufficient
to salvation. These things, had Caine, and Judas, and many an hypocrite in the
world, who yet came short of salvation, because they wanted faith and
repentance, joined with an holy life, by virtue whereof, a man goes beyond all
hypocrites, in matters that concern salvation; Indeed, the civil honest life,
before men, is commenda^le, but this without faith and repentance, will never
commend us before God.

and a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things, and so on the contrary, Math. 12. 35. Solomon counsels us to keep
our hearts with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, Prou. 4.
23. Many good things may be done, good in themselves, but not good in the doer,
because the heart is wanting, or is unsound; Mark what the Psalmist says;
showing how far men may go, and yet be hypocrites, When God flew them, they
then sought him; and they returned, and inquired early after God. And they
remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer; Lo here,
how many excellent good things were in these? A man would have thought, nothing
had been wanting; but mark what follows; Nevertheless they did but flatter
him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues; Now see what
was the cause of all this, that for all the former good things, they were liars
and dissemblers? Because their heart was not right, and sound with God; neither
were they fiedfast in his covenant, Psalm. 78. 34. 35. 36. 37.

Fools make but a s^ort of sin, Prou. 10. 23.) Let all such know, that
howsoever they persuade themselves, in their own conceit I say they have no
faith, nor any sauinggrace, whereby they can believe or hope to be saved; For
if those that have had many good things, rare and excellent gifts, may live and
dye in a persuasion in their own conceit to be saved, and yet be damned,
Matthew. 7 22. 23. how much more these customary sinners, that live and dye in
these sins, whose lives are nothing but a continual disobeying of Gods will,
and his word? What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God? 1
Pet. 4. 17. Where shall these ungodly and sinners appear? Verse 18. They have
neither faith nor hope, nor any other sauing-grace, whereby to do Gods will.
For he that belieueth, abides not in such darkness of sin, John 12. 46 He
that hops to be saved, purges himself from these sins, as God is pure, 1
John 3. 3. Their end therefore is damnation, etc. Philip. 3. 19. Read 2 Pet.
2. 2. 3. Heb. 6. 8.

For he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will, he
hardens, Rom 9. 18. Therefore says the Apostle, All men have not faith, 2
These. 3. 2. meaning, the wicked, of whom he there makes mention. Again, it is
impossible that the wicked falling away, should be renewed again to repentance,
Heb. 6. 6. Esau found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears, Heb. 12. 17. Many after their haranesse, and heart that cannot
repent, treasure up unto themselves, wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5.
In all which it is more then manifest, that all have not grace to do Gods will;
and so al cannot be saved; All which should move our hearts with fear and
trembling, and rouse us up out of the dea^ sleep of sin, and never t^ be at
quiet, till we have gotten some good measure o^ faith and repentance, whereby
we may please God; according to the Apostles counsel, Let us have grace,
whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly fear; For our
God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28. 29. proouing, if God at any time will
give us repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 25. 26.
and as the Text here has it, proouing what is pleasing to the Lord. And thus
much be said of the object it self, what we must prove or approve, viz. what
is pleasing or acceptable to the Lord.

Now for the better performance of this threefold duty enjoined in the Text,
observe two things, 1. The Lets to be removed: 2. The Means and Helps to be
used. The Lets, which do hinder us from proouing, what is pleasing to the
Lord, are these:

so makes but a mock of it. The natural man perceives not the things of the
spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

through ignorance, the Gentiles had their understanding darkened, and were
strangers from the life of God, and committed sin with all greediness,
whereby they wholly displeased the Lord, Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. Ignorance, I mean,
both mere and simple, careless, wilful and affected, both of God, his word,
and will revealed.

the Gentiles had their understanding darkened through their ignorance because
of the blindness, or hardness of their heart, Ephesians. 4. 18. Thus the more
means God used, for the good of Pharaoh, (had he had the grace to have made
use of them) the more he hardened his heart, as we read at large, Exodus, God
gave Iesabell a space to repent, but she repented not, Revel. 2. 21. it was
her hardness of heart that hindered her; so, Romans 2. 5. and ler. 19. 15. They
hardened their necks, that they might not hear his words.

What could I have done more for my Vineyard? and yet we will not; This is
another maine let: It was the sin of Jerusalem, as our S^uiour Christ says,
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prephets, and stonest them which are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered you together as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Math. 23. 37. Thus
says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your
souls; but they said, we will not walk therein; Also I set watch men over you
saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet, but they said, we will not
hearken, Ier. 6. 16. 17.

for such do mind only the things of the flesh; and to be carnally minded,
is death; because the carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; so then they that are in the
flesh, cannot please God, Rom, 8. 5. 6. 7. 8.

For unto us was the Gospel Preached, as well as unto them; but the Word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it,
Heb. 4. 2. And without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. And
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14. 23.

what is pleasing to the Lord; Thus, through pride, or hatred, or both, Korah
and his comp^ny, gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, and said
unto them, Ye take too much upon you, Numb. 16. 1. 2. 3. And the like we have
in these days, who so saucily speak against Gods Ministers, who go about to
teach them what is acceptable to the Lord, they think presently, we take too
much upon us; against such, I may say, as Christ said, they are but dogs and
swine, and if we cast pearls before them, or give holy things unto them, they
will trample them under their feet, and turning again all to rent us, Math.
7. 6. Thus, when the good Prophet Micaiah, prophesied concerning Ahab,
according to the word of the Lord, Ahab, (because he hated him, 1 King. 22.
8.) commanded Micaiah to be put into prison, and to be fed with bread and
water of affliction. 1 King. 22. 27 Thus, pride in Korah, and hatred in Ahab,
bred all this contention, and hindered them from proouing what is well-pleasing
to God according as Solomon says, Only by pride comes contention, Prou. 13.
10. Therefore, if we would profit by the word, to learn from thence what is
acceptable to God, we must cast away, and lay aside all malice, and all guile
and hypocrisies, and enuies, and evil speakings, and so, as newborn babes,
desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2.
and as S. James says; We must lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
malitiousnesse, and receive with meekness the engrafted word, Iam. 1. 21. For
where such corrupt affections, as these, and the like, as envy and strife are,
there is confusion, and every evil work; This is not wisdom from above, but
earthly, sen^uall, and devilish, Iam. 3. 15. 16.

of their salvation; and all, because they presume too far, that God is
merciful.

In a word, these are great Lets, to the proouing what is pleasing to God;
first, Custom in sin, Ier. 13. 23. The customary sinner cannot possibly (in
regard of humane power,) do any good; secondly, Pride and Ambition, Psalm. 10.
4. The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God;
God is not in all his thoughts; thirdly, Love of this world, with the
pleasures, profits, and vain delights thereof, 2 Timothy 3. 4. Wicked men are
lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of God; Thus, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas
forsook Paul and fell away, having loved this present world: Saint James
says, Chap. 4. 4. The friendship of the world is enmity with God; whosoever
therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God. And Saint John
tells us plainly, 1 Ioh. 2. 15. If any man love the world, the love of the
Father is not in him: fourthly, Bad Company; this we ought to shun, as the
poison and bane of our souls, if ever we would please God, and be ^ccepted of
him, Saint Bet. 2 Epist. at large describes the wicked, and amongst the rest,
says: They cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, Verse 14. and
allure others through the lusts of the flesh, Verse 18. Beware, least ye being
led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness, 2 Pet.
3. 17. Wherefore, says the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. Come out from among them,
and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you;
and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says
the Lord Almighty. Lo here, how we may be received into Gods favor, and be
accepted of him, as his own children, viz. by forsaking the company of wicked,
unbelieving, Infidels, unrighteous, idolaters, drunkards, whoremongers, and the
like, of whom mention is made, Verse 14. etc. Therefore Paul having described
the wicked, by sundry Titles, at large, 2 Timothy 3. gives us this Exhortation,
From such, turn away, Verse 5. To these we may add, 1. Self-love, 2. Worldly
Cares. 3. Hypocrisy. 4. Intemperancie. 5. Delight in any one sin. 6. Carnal
security. 7. Dominion of Sin. 8. Contempt of Word and Sacraments. 9. Neglect
of holy duties, and the like; By all which it is manifest in holy Scripture,
that who so lives in these, or any of them, cannot possibly prove or approve
what is acceptable or well pleasing to the Lord. Thus much of the Lets. Now of
the Means and Helps which may further us in the performance of this duty.

The Means and Helps are these;

either Outward. Inward.

Outward Means is the Word of God, either read, or heard preached. Herein we
may see, whatsoever good duty is commanded, and whatsoever sin is forbidden;
what we should do to please God, and what we should not do to displease him.
Here are duties public or private; both concerning God, our selves, or
others. Here are sins forbidden, both against God, and man, either our selves
or others; Sins of impiety against the first Table; of uncharitableness
against the second. Sins reigning, sins less reigning. Sins of omission,
of commission. Sins inward or outward. Sins in thought, word, or deed.
Sins open, and secret, etc. Therefore, says our Savior Christ; Search ye
the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me. John 5. 39. Wherein
when ye read, ye may understand. Ephesians. 3. 4. To the Law, and to the
testimony. Esa. 8. 20. Let the Word of God dwell in you plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing your selves. Coloss. 3. 16. Therefore I say
to all, as the Prophet Esaias; Seek ye out the book of the Lord, and read.
Esaias 24. 16.

Means is fervent, and effectual prayer; this is very necessary and must
concur with the former, both before, and after reading, or hearing; for God
gives the blessing upon the Word, which blessing is obtained by prayer: This
David knew well, which made him pray so often, Lord teach me thy way, Teach me
thy statutes; Give me understanding; Make me to understand the way of thy
precepts. Teach me good judgment and knowledge? and the like, as we read
often in the Psalm 25. and Psalm 86. and often Psalm. 119. and many other;
We must know, that we may be enabled to see, and do what is pleasing to
God, and that we may have more and more understanding in the ways of
godliness; and therefore we must pray with David, in the sense of our own
weakness, Open mine eyes, O Lord, that I may see the wonderful things of thy
Law. Psalm. 119. 18. If David, so worthy a King, so great a Prophet, so wise,
so learned, had need to pray thus, much more then have we cause, who come
far short of him. Let us therefore confess our own weakness, and be
resolved of the truth of Paul's words, that we know nothing as we ought to
know. 1. Corinthians. 8. 2. and pray we with David heartily, Teach me, O Lord, to
do the thing that pleases thee, to do thy will. Psalm. 143. 10.

Means to know and discern of what is pleasing to God; for by this obedience
we shall be able to try the Spirits, and judge of rightly, whether it be
from God or man, which is taught us, and so being Gods, to receive it, and
practice it. and so to do Gods will. If any man will do Gods will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, etc. John 7. 17.

Fourthly; The worthy receiving of the Sacraments, especially the Lords Supper,
is a great Means to please God, viz. when it is done with due preparation
aforehand, and with all deserved praise and thanksgiving to God, for the
wonderful work of our Redemption; when it is done with understanding, and
knowledge of the mystery of Christ his Passion; when it is done in faith in
Christ, repentance for sin, and in love to God, and charity toward men; Thus
we do perform an acceptable service, are confirmed in grace, and do offer to
God a sacrifice of righteousness, with which GOD is always well pleased, as
David says. The Lord is pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness. Psalm.
51. Who so offers God praise, glorifieth him. Psam. 50. 23. I will praise the
Name of God, and magnify him with thanke^giuing; this also shall please the
Lord. Psalm. 69. 30, 31.

Lastly; The Inward Means is the holy Spirit of God; which does second, and
make powerful the word in our hearts, it helps our weakness, it
enlightneth our understanding, it sanctifies our affections it regenerateth
our wills, it renews our minds, it instructs and teaches us the ways of
God, and guides the whole man according to the will of God, whereas we of our
selves, are not able to think a good thought as of our selves. 2. Cornthi. 3.
5. Thus, the Spirit helps our infirmity. Romans 8. 26. The holy Ghost shall
teach us all things. John 14. 26. He is the Spirit of truth, and testifies
of Christ. John 15. 26. This Spirit will guide us into all truth. John 16. 13.
Thus by the help and direction of God, Spirit, we cannot but please God: And
whereas we cannot search into the deep things of God, we cannot of our
selves know them or perceive them; yet the Spirit searches all things, yea,
the deep things of God; The things of God knows no man but the Spirit of
God, and the things of God are spiritually discerned. 1. Corinthians. 2. 10, 11,
12, 15, 14. And thu^ much of the Means; and of the second point in the Text,
viz. the Object, what God would have us prove, viz. what is acceptable or well
pleasing to him. And I conclude with the words of Saint Paul, I will not cease
to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of
Gods will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding, that ye may walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing. Coloss. 1. 9, 10.

Here ends the second Sermon.
THE THIRD SERMON upon this FIRST STEP.
Proving what is well-pleasing to the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 10.
Having spoken hitherto of the second point, viz. the Object, I proceed to the
handling of two other points, by me propounded, fitly and necessarily offering
themselves to our consideration; which are necessarily included in the Text,
being a continued speech, and having relation to, and dependence on the 8.
verse. The first, which is the third in order, concerns the persons, to whom
this duty belongs; id est, those which are light in the Lord, and children of
the light. The fourth and last point, is the continuance of this duty, in the
word Walk, proouing what is acceptable to the Lord.

Concerning the persons; Though it be a duty which all without exception
ought to practice, and all should do it, yet Saint Paul applies his speech
only to the faithful of Ephesus; Such as were blessed with all spiritual
blessings in Christ, who were predestinate, elected, adopted, and accepted in
Christ, etc. Cha. 1. at large: Such as were dead in sins and trespasses but now
are quickened in Christ; Such as were far off, but now are made near by the
blood of Christ; Such as were strangers from God, without God in the world, but
now are reconciled, and are made fellow citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, etc. Chapt. 2. and so through every Chapter speaking of the
faithful, and believers, and particularly in this Chapter, Ye were once
darkness, but now are light in the Lord, walk as children of the light.
verse 8. proouing, etc. The persons then, are the regenerate, and such as are
converted; these must walk, proouing what is pleasing unto God. And, First,
greatest reason of all men have these to seek to please God; considering what
great things GOD has done for them; how he has chosen them, adopted them,
justified, sanctified, and redeemed them; how he has pulled them out of their
natural estate, to become spiritual; how he called them out of darkness into
his marvelous light. All these, and the like, well considered, are so many
motives, to make them walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing. Thus the
riches of Gods goodness leads them to repentance. Roman. 2. 4. if not, they
show themselves most unthankful to God or his great goodness, Walk
therefore, proouing, etc.

Unregenerate, and impenitent cannot possibly please God in any one thing; For
their inward parts are very wickedness; but God has no pleasure in
wickedness. Psalm. 5. 4, 9. Their heart is not right with God, therefore they
do but flatter, and lie, in all their best actions. Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37.
Again, they are out of Christ, and so it is impossible they should please God;
So Paul says, They are without Christ, and without God in the world, having no
hope. Ephesians. 2. 12. Now none can please God, unless he be in Christ; The
Regenerate only are in Christ, as Paul says. Romans 8. 1, and 2. Corinthians. 5.
17. Therefore they only can please God. For that which is spoken of Christ
himself, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Matthew. 3. 17. is
truly verefied in all the members of Christ, being regenerate, that, though of
themselves, and in themselves, they can do nothing acceptable to God; yet God
beholding them in and through Christ, cannot but be well pleasing with them;
joining the use of all good Means on their part; Walk ye therefore,
proouing, etc.

are regenerate, and borne anew, should lead their lives answerable, and walk
in newness of life. It is meet, because GOD makes us good, wise, holy,
sanctified, to this end, that we should bring forth answerable fruits; We are
created in Christ Jesus unto good (...) Ephesians. 2. 10. And ^ee are redeemed to
this end, to serve God in righteousness and helinesse. Luke 1 74, 75. It is
also necessary, because it cannot otherwise be, but that every one shall do
such things as are suitable to his new estate and condition. Vnumquodque
operatur secundum suam formam: Every thing works according to his own form;
as fire heateth; The Sun shines, inlighteneth, quickens, because it has
received such power of God; and so in all other things natural; so it is as
impossible for a man truly regenerate, and made light in the Lord, not to show
his light in words, manners, and whole life, as it is impossible for the Sun
not to shine. Ye therefore who are light in the Lord, walk as children of the
light, proouing what is acceptable to the Lord.

Your very calling from the estate of darkness, wherein you were before
conversion, unto the state of light after conversion, requires this at your
hands, that your lives should be congruent, and agreeable to your present
condition wherein ye now are; When ye were darkness, ye lived in darkness,
and walked in darkness, not knowing what ye did, because darkness had
blinded your eyes. 1. John 2. 11. And ye could not otherwise choose; but now
the case is altered, ye are light in the Lord: The night is past, the day is
at hand, you must therefore cast off the works of darkness, and put on the
armor of light, and walk honestly as in the day, etc. Romans 13. 12 13. Walk
therefore as children of the light, proouing, etc.

From hence, that the Apostle directs his speech unto the faithful,
regenerate, and already converted, exciting and stirring them up to this
spiritual walking, both in proouing what is pleasing to God, and in shunning
the unfruitful works of darkness, I observe these Doctrines.

Paul shows plainly, in urging this duty upon such as are converted to the
faith, (without which it is impossible to please God. Hebr. 11. 6.) as knowing,
and taking it for granted, that others cannot possibly know or discern, or
judge of by experience, what is pleasing or displeasing to the Lord. This is
confirmed by other places of Scripture. The wicked please not God, and are
contrary unto all men. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. They that are in the flesh, cannot
please God. Romans 8. 8. The natural man cannot perceive the things of God. 1.
Cor. 2. 14. And the reason is, because their understanding is darkened through
their ignorance. Ephesians. 4. 18. Darkness has blinded the eyes of their
minds. 2. John 2. 11. They live in impenitencie, and unbelief, whereby they
are so far from poouing what is pleasing to God, as on the contrary, they
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2. 5.

Again, he, on the other side that is truly converted, and regenerate by the
Spirit of God unto newness of life, is the only man that can, and does please
God. For first, he is in Christ, in whom God is well pleased with him. Secondly,
it is sin only which displeases God, but he that is borne of God, sins
not, does not commit sin (that is, he lives not in sin as the wicked, he
delights not in sin, sins not against conscience, and knowledge, of set
purpose, wittingly, and wilfully giving himself over as servant to sin, with
full consent, and swinge of will) for his seed remains in him, neither can
he (so) sin, because he is borne of God. 1. John 3. 9. We know that
whosoever is borne of God sins not; but he that is begotten of God, keeps
himself, and that evil one (that is, the devil) touches him not. 1. John 5.
18. Thirdly; The regenerate man is of God, and the child of God, for he that
does righteousness is borne of God. 1. John 2. 29. and he that loves is
borne of God. 1. Ioh. 4. 7. whereas, the unregenerate does not righteousness,
neither loves his brother, and so is not of God but a child of the devil. 1.
John 3. 10. Lastly; The regenerate has the Spirit of God in him, dwelling in
him, and ruling him, and so being led by the Spirit, he is the Son of God,
Rom 8. 14. But, the wicked have not the spirit, Jude, Epist. Verse 19. and so
having not the spirit, are none of Gods, Romans 8. 9. All which confirm this
doctrine, that first a man must be regenerate and converted, and enlightened by
Gods spirit, be light in the Lord, and a child of light, before he can see
what Gods will is, or prove what is acceptable or pleasing to the Lord.

to God. An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Math. 7. 18. Therefore
Paul says, We are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.
where the Apostle shows, that good works are done only of them which are
justified, regenerated, and made new creatures in Christ: The person must first
be good, before the work can be so; The person justifies the work, not the
work the person; and God respects not the work, so much as the worker, whose
person is justified, and accepted as righteous in Christ. Secondly,
Regeneration is needful for the life to come; For flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Except a man be borne of water,
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3. 5.
Consider this seriously.

And because it is so necessary, that every one may rightly conceive of it, and
approve it in himself, observe it briefly in these particulars; First,
whosoever thou art, approve unto thy self, thy Election; as Saint Peter
says, Make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. For only the Elect
are regenerate; because, 1. they only are called out of the world unto Christ,
effectually, and they only justified; now Justification is never separated
from regeneration. 2. only the Elect are belieuers, Acts 13. 48. As many as
were ordained to eternal life, believed, Wherefore Saint Paul calls it the
faith of the Elect, Tit. 1. 1. But only belieuers are regenerate, Ergo. only
the Elect, 3. Only the Elect are blessed in Christ with all spiritual
blessings, Ephesians. 31. 3. Regeneration is one of the maine spiritual blessings,
Ergo. 4. Regeneration is necessary only for such as enter into the Kingdom of
heaven; But the Elect only enter into the kingdom of heaven, Ergo. From all
which may be concluded, that those that can find and feel themselves
regenerate, have in themselves a certainty of their Election, and an infallible
testimony of their own salvation.

Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. some from that saying,
hold the contrary, only the mind is to be renewed in this life, and the body
at the resurrection; confirming their opinion from the words of GOD, and David,
I will take away the stony heart, and give you an heart of flesh, Ezech. 36.
Create in me a clean heart, Psalm. 51. where say they, mention is made only of
the heart; I answer; Regeneration, or Renouation, is begun in the mind, and
the mind in the first place, and principally is regenerate; but to deny the
body to be partaker of this present renouation in this life, is to go expressly
against holy Scripture, and is condemned by the experience, in holy men, and
such as are regenerate. Our savior Christ says, speaking of the whole man,
Except a man be borne again, John 3. 5. Totus homo, quia totus Caro natus;
whole man, because the whole is flesh borne. Secondly, Saint Paul says, Our
bodies are the temples of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19, but the holy Ghost
dwells not in bodies unregenerate or unsanctified. Thirdly, our bodies are
the members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 15. But if they be not capable of regeneration
by the spirit, they cannot be called the members of Christ. Fourthly.
Sanctification is Regeneration; ^^^^es are sanctified, 1 These. 4. Ergo Fifthly,
Paul prays to God to sanctify them wholly throughout, in soul, spirit and
body, 1 These. 5. 23. Thus the whole man in this life is regenerate, yet but in
part, not perfectly; the beginning being in the heart and mind, from whence
the efficacy of the spirit is derived into the body: for as out of an evil
heart, proceed many prauities and evil things, which defile the body, Math.
15. So out of a good heart, proceed good works of the spirit, for the good of
the body, to keep it pure, undefiled, vnpoluted, honest, chaste, temperate,
etc. All which should teach us, to have a care, as well of the body, as the
soul, that both be regenerate and sanctified; For Christ has bought both body
and soul, therefore we must glorify him in both because they are both his,
and Co^. 6. 19. 20. And hence I conclude, that in vain do they boast of the
Renouation or Regeneration of the heart and mind, whose bodies do abound with
most abominable wickednesses, as drunkenness, surfeiting, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, filthy lusts, swearing, cursing, lying, slandering,
backe-biting, murder, theft, and the like. Mark this well.

God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; it is with our Re-creation or
Regeneration, as in our Creation, both from the whole Trinity, Opera Trinitatis
ad extra sunt communia, i. e. The works of the Trinity from without, or
external works, are common to the whole Trinity. Thus Regeneration, is
called, a creation, Ephesians. 2. 10. and the Regenerate man is called, a new
creature, Gal. 6. 15. 2 Cor. 5. 17. to teach us that it is a divine, no humane
work; from heaven, not from earth; As the Creation is from the Father, by the
Son, in the holy Ghost; so, by way of excellency, Regeneration, is to be
attributed to God the Father; and we are regenerate in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 10. by
the holy Ghost, John 3. 5. Therefore Paul calls it the new man which is created
after God, Ephesians. 4. Yet so, as God requires means on our part, for the
continuing and consummating of the same; Therefore Paul bids us, be renewed in
the spirit of your mind. From all which, I gather three Conclusions: 1. That
the Son, and holy Ghost regenerating, are true and very God, against Ariaus.
2. That all our salvation is freely of God, and his work, not in our power or
strength, against Pelagians. 3. that we must earnestly beg it of God; Psalm,
51. 10.

life, and perfected after death; of this Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4. 22.
23. 24. That ye put off, concerning the former conversation, the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the
spirit of your mind; and that ye put on that new man, etc. Secondly the
putting off the old man of mortality and the assuming or putting on
immortality, and that glorinous resurrection to life eternal. This we are
with patience to hope and wait for; of which Saint Paul speaks at large, in
1 Cor. 15. The body is sown corruptible, etc. And as we have borne the image
of the earthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. But in the
Doctrine of Regeneration, the former is properly meant. 2 The pattern of this
grace, that is, Christ his righteousness and holiness; this is the very idea
of our spiritual and celestial nativity; in him it was most absolute and
perfect; but in us, in this life most imperfect; Thus, as Christ died, and rose
again for us, so we should die unto sin, and rise again to newness of
life, Romans 6. Every regenerate man will purge himself even as Christ is pure,
1 John 3. 3. as, in quality and conformity, but not as, in equality. There is a
corruption of nature, the one which is sin the other is the punishment of
sin; The punishment of sin, Christ had, as infirmity of the flesh,
imbecility of nature, and death; this he put off by his death, and put on the
new, viz. glory of immortality in his resurrection; but we must put off both
corruption of nature; We must always have our eyes bent upon Christ, and
labor to faction, here in this world, life is either lost, or kept, or saved;
If then there be no place of repentance after this life, then none for
regeneration; for what is repentance, but the change and renouation of the
mind? To this purpose says Christ, Work while it is day, the night comes,
when no man can work, John 12. 35. and 9. 4. Unless a man be regenerate
(namely in this life) of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. All which must teach us, first, to look about us while we
have time; for, that counsel, to put off the old man, and put on the new, is
not given to the dead, but living; this life is the only time for this
doctrine, not after death; secondly, it condemns the Papisticall fable of
Purgatory fire, wherein they say, the souls of the dead, shall be purged in
another world, whereas the blood of Christ is the only purgation for sin, 1.
John 1. 7. and Christ in this life does sanctify and cleanse his Church, etc.
Ephesians. 5. 25, 26.

Means, by which Regeneration is wrought: They are either Outward, or Inward,
Outward, as, 1. the Word. 2. The Sacraments. 3. Ministers of the Word. Thus
says Christ; Now are ye clean through the Word. John 15. 3. So for the
Sacraments, especially Baptism. Christ does sanctify, and cleanse his Church
with the washing of water, by the Word. Ephesians. 5. 26. not outward Baptism, but
inward saves, yet outward must be used, as a Sacrament, and sign of the
inward. Baptism saves us, (not the putting away of the filthiness of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God.) 1. Pet. 3. 21. Thus it
is called the Lauer of Regeneration: According to his mercy God saved us by
the washing of regeneration. Titus 3. 5. The Ministers of the Word also are
Means, as Paul says; I have begotten you in Christ. 1. Corint. 4. 15. that
is, Ministerially; The Inward Means are two. 1. The Spirit on Gods part. 2.
Faith on our part. The nearest cause of Regeneration, is the power and
efficacy of the Spirit, diffused into our hearts. He saved us, by the washing
of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. Tit. 3. 5. So we read of
Faith; God purifieth our hearts by Faith. Act. 15. 9.

Regeneration: The end is either Principal, or Subordinate. The chief end is,
that such as are regenerate may reign with Christ in heaven, without which
none shall; For the fearful, unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars,
shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which
is the second death. Revel. 21. 8. And there shall in no wise enter into the
holy City, any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or
makes a lie. verse. 27. For without the holy City are dogs, sorcerers,
whoremongers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. Revel. 22. 15. Flesh and
blood (that is, being unclean, and unregenerate) cannot inherit the kingdom
of God 1. Corinthians. 15. 50. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; except a
man be borne again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD. Ioh. 3. 5, 6.
Thus in regard of our admissio^ into Gods kingdom, this grace is most
necessary; for none but justified, sanctified and purged from sin, and made
new creatures shall enter thither; Therefore Saint Paul says; We are saved by
the washing of regeneration, etc. that being justified by his grace, we should
be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life. Titus 3. 5, 6, 7. The
other end is, that being made new creatures in Christ, we should lead a new
life, and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, to labor to know God truly,
to believe in him, to trust in him, to love him, to serve him, to keep his
Commandments, to do all things to his glory, and the edification of the
Church, and our own good, that so at length we may be brought by the way of
good works into the kingdom of heaven. That being delivered out of the han^s
of our enemies, (viz. the world, flesh, sin, and the devil,) we might serve
God in righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. Luke 1. This end
Paul notes; We are regenerate in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them. Ephesians. 2. 10. From all that has
been said concerning this grace of regeneration; we may observe a threefold
Argument to enforce us to labor for it. 1. The excellency of it, because it
makes us like unto Christ, and the image of God by it is restored in us. 2. The
profit of it; for by this we may approve our selves to be the children of
God, that our sins are forgiven us, and that certain is our salvation. 3.
The necessity of it; for without this grace, we cannot be saved, as has
been proved at large; and all which reasons considered, have forced me to
be more large then usually I am; neither could I content my self to speak a
little, it being one maine grace, belonging to salvation.

must be renewed, their knowledge must abound, their hope more established,
their love more enlarged, and all holy duties more and more practiced, and so
the will of God more and more sought out, discerned, known and approved. The
life of a Christian must not be idle; For Christ has redeemed us a peculiar
people to himself, zealous of good works. Titus 2. 14. that is, that we
should be more and more studious of good works; Though we are regenerate and
borne again, we must not stand at a stay in Christianity, but as newborn
babes, desire the sincere milk of the Word, to grow thereby. 1. Pet. 2. 2. We
must grow in grace, and go forward in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 3. 18. To this purpose Saint Peter tells us, That we
are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God;
which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy (and all to this end,
not to live idly, or as we list) but to show forth the praises of God, who
has called us out of darkness, into his marucilous light. 1. Pet. 2. 9, 10.
according to this end, as the Text has it, that once being darkness, and now
made light in the Lord, we should walk as children of the light, proouing what
is acceptable to the Lord.

we are no better now than last year, or many years agone, then we must
earnestly bewail this sin, and pray with the Apostles, Lord increase our
faith; and with the father of the possessed, Lord I believe, Lord help my
unbelief. And great reason is there of this growth in grace, because none but
such shall enter in to the kingdom of heaven; but contrariwise shall be
adjudged to perpetual torments in hell, as is most plain in the parable of
the talents, that he that gains nothing, is damned. Matthew. 25. Therefore,
whosoever will approve himself a true member of Christ, and of his Church,
let him not be at quiet till he can find in himself that he is bettered in
regard of his soul, and increased in godliness. For all the building fitly
framed together in Christ, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. Ephesians. 2.
21.

Whereas the Apostle wills those which are light in to walk, proouing what
is Gods will: Hence I gather, that the life of a Christian must be answerable
to his profession and new condition; as a man professes himself to be light
in the Lord, so he must walk, that is, live, as the child of light. This is
an especial note of a regenerate man, and the contrary, a mark of an
hypocrite; who professes he knows God, but by his works deny him. Tit. 1.
16. The Apostle having reckoned up many commendable virtues, and excellent
graces in the Philippians, concludes in this manner; Forasmuch as all these
things are in you, and you profess the Gospel, what remains? Only let your
conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. Philipp. 1. 27. as if
he should have said, all is nothing worth, unless your conversation be
correspondent, and suitable to your profession; So in the Text, whereas you are
enlightened, you must not think to live as you list, but your conversation must
show what you are, Walk therefore proouing, etc. This must not be an outward
civil life only, which may be in a Heathen, and wicked man, such as was the
life of the Scribes and Pharisees; but a religious life, that brings forth
the fruits of godliness, and performs the duties of piety and religion.

knowledge, understanding, and the like; and yet their lives do abound with
all manner of wickedness; Their understandings in some sort are enlightened,
their judgments are informed, and yet their lives and conuersations no whit
reformed, but swarming with all manner of vice, as drunkenness, whoredom,
adultery, fornication, uncleanness, pride, covetousness, swearing, lying,
theft, murder, cruelty, oppression, malice, hypocrisy, and the like; He that
lives in these, or but in any one of these, has small cause, or none at all,
to boast of his profession; yea further, be it so that the world sees not
these in him, yet his life may be most wicked, by living in secret sins,
which who so does, cannot be said to lead his life according to his
profession. Above all things therefore look we to our lives, both toward God
and men, in public and secret: The grace in the heart, will appear in the
actions of the life; and where a good life is not, the heart cannot be good;
and again, in stead of walking and living in grace, such lewd livers walk in
sin, because they live in sin. Coloss. 3. 7.

Lastly; From the persons here exhorted, we must be admonished, to take heed
of a common sin of this age, namely decay of grace; whereas a growth should
appear by our lives, we grow worse and worse, many were better, and had more
knowledge, zeal, love, joy, devotion, and the like, many years ago, than
now; which is a fearful case; The Lord had somewhat against the Church of
Ephesus for this decay because she had lost her first love Reu. 2. 5. And
surely, much has God against a great number in these days, where iniquity
abounds, and the love of many waxes cold. Mat. 24. 12. We are lights, our
light must shine before others. Matt. 5. 16. But it is a great sign of a great
blemish in us, and that light is going out, when the graces of God decay in us:
This is one maine cause, why Paul stirs up the Ephesians, already converted,
to walk thus and thus, namely, to put them in mind to keep and preserve the
former graces committed unto them, and not to suffer them to decay. In a word,
this exhortation to walk as children of light, condemns the customary
walking in darkness, darkness I say, of ignorance, blindness, errrour, and
of gross sins, going on still in wickedness, and not knowing what they do,
because darkness has blinded their eyes. 1. John 2. Having their
understanding darkened, through their ignorance, because of blindness of their
heart. Ephesians. 4. 18. Therefore, as Paul says, The night is far spent, the
day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us
put on the armor of light. Romans 13. 12.

walk proouing what is pleasing to God, then, To live in a course displeasing
to God, is a manifest sign of an unregenerate man, and one that is yet in
darkness. This Saint Paul confirms, setting it as a brand upon the wicked,
They please not God, and are contrary unto all men. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15.

David says, Thou art not a God that have pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with thee; thou hate all workers of iniquity. Psalm. 5. 4,
5. for such as displease God, shall have the displeasure of God, both in soul
and body, here and hereafter. And thus much be said of the third point,
concerning the persons to whom Paul speaks, viz. Children of light, walk,
proouing what is acceptable or well-pleasing to the Lord.

Walk, in 8. Verse. Walk, proouing what is acceptable to the Lord; By
walking, as I have showed at large in the beginning, is meant, living; a speech
borrowed from travelers, signifying to live, or to hold on a course of life,
to lead our lives thus and thus, either in the general duties of
Christianity; or in some particular calling. Thus, this word Walk, is taken
either in good sense, or bad. In good sense; as 2 Cor. 5. 7. We walk by says;
is all one with Gal. 3. 11. The just shall live by faith. In a bad sense; as
the Colossians are said to walk in sins, that is, to live in sin; In which
ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them, Colos. 3. 7. Many are the
places, to prove this truth, Gal. 5. 16. Walk in the spirit, that is, Order
your lives according to the direction and motion of Gods spirit. So Gal. 5. 25.
If we live in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit; where living and walking
are joined together; showing, that the spirit is not an idle spirit in any, but
it will manifest it self in a well-ordered conversation. Again, that which
Paul calls, Walking after the flesh, Romans 8. 1. he calls, living after the
flesh, verse 13. This being more then plain, sundry Doctrines are hence to be
gathered.

God, proouing what is pleasing to the Lord; for so the word, Walk, includes
the whole life of man, especially after conversion; agreeable to that of
Zachary, We must serve God in righteousness, and holiness, before him, all
the days of our lives, Luke 1. 74. 75. Thus did David; He turned not aside
from any thing that God commanded him all the days of his life, etc. 1 King.
5. 15. This was the accustomed practice of good King Hezek^ah, that made him
appeal to God with a clear conscience; saying, I have walked before thee O
Lord in truth, and with a perfect heart; and I have done that which is good in
thy sight, 2 King. 20. 3. not speaking in the present tense, or future tense,
but in time past, saying, I have lived thus and thus, through the whole course
of my life, to this time of my death. And thus did Zacharias and Elizabeth,
Luke 1. All which must be understood of their upright endeavor, and purpose
of heart so to live, and not of perfection of life.

Then thou have thy fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.
22. But on the contrary; if thy life be wicked, and conversation disordered,
boast not of thy conversion, yea, though thou live but in one sin, and
purpose so to do; thou may be dead in sin, but not dead to sin; For a
converted sinner, dead to sin, cannot live any longer therein, Romans 6. 2. He
can neither endure sin in himself, nor others.

own damnation, without speedy repentance; for the child of God truly
converted, walks; i. e. lives so, as using all good means to please God;
not in some part, but in the whole course of his life.

they can say, Lord have mercy on me, at the last gasp, they shall go to
heaven; whereas it has been proved that a man may dye with those words in
his mouth, and yet go to hell, if he have not in his life done Gods will,
Math. 7. 22. Let no man plead here the example of the Thief, who repented at
last; it was extraordinary; and it was one, that none should despair; it was
but one, that none should presume; and though it be true, repentance is never
too late, yet late repentance is seldom true; God promises forgiveness to
repenting sinners, but we find not in all the book of God, that he has
promised repentance to every sinner to repent when he list; we must not think
to die the death of the righteous, unless we live the life of the righteous;
God has given us our life as a space to repent in, Revel. 2. 21. that the
whole course of our life might be spent to his glory, and not to post it off to
death; again, we have no warrant, that God will give us grace at death.

Only then let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ,
Philip. 1. 27. Let us in our whole life, bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, Math. 3. i. e. works of mercy, charity, piety. Let us live godly,
righteously, and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2. 12. godly, in regard of
God; righteously, in regard of others; soberly, in regard of our selves. In a
word: Let us pass the whole time of our soiourning here, in fear, 1 Pet. 1.
17. Thus we shall approve our conversion, and walk so as pleasing God.

Walk, imports,; and the exhortation of the Apostle to the converted
Ephesians, is to no other end, but to teach them and us, that it is not
sufficient to begin to know Gods will, and make some good proceedings, but to
labor to hold on their whole course of their lise, in doing Gods will, to hold
out constant unto the end, and in the end, working out their own salvation
with fear and trembling, Philip. 2. 12. This perseverance is the only thing
which obtaines the Crown; and the want of it procures the curse of God; both
in this life, at the end of this life, and after this life, as will appear by
these places of holy Scripture. He that shall endure unto the end, shall be
saved, Math. 24. 13. God will render to every man according to his works;
eternal life to those that by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
glory; etc. Romans 2. 6. 7. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. and many such like places; showing, that
life eternal, and salvation, belongs to none, but those that walk, that is,
live in a constant course of well-doing, with perseverance and continuance in
doing what is pleasing to God. On the contrary, it is written; Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things, written in the book of the law to do
them, Gal. 3. 10. if a man could do the law, if he could do all things in the
law, yet if he did not continue in so doing, by the sentence of the law, he is
accursed. This the Apostle knew well, and therefore though these Ephesians were
already converted, and attained to great knowledge of God, yet still he
stirs them up to constancy and perseverance, saying, Wake -- proouing what
is pleasing to God.

and sincere in obeying Gods will? Go on then, in the name of God, be
constant; be stedf^st, and immovable, always ab^^^^ing in the work of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. As ye have ^^^aies obeyed, so make an end of your own
salvation, Philip. 2. 12. Finish your sanctification in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7. 1. Oh remember, that there is no pleasing of God, nor hope of glory in
the life to come without perseverance in obeying Gods will; therefore Saint
Paul ioynes both together, saying, Walkeproouing what is pleasing to God. There
is no way to please G^d, but by faith. Without (...) imp^ssible to pl^ase ^od.
H^b. 11. 6. but it is not the beginnings of faith, but the soundness,
appearing in pers^^^rance ^n the faith; If then thou would know certainly,
that God is reconciled unto thee; that Christ died for thee; that thy sins
are forgiven thee; and that thou shall appear blameless before God at the
latter day; then labor for perseverance. Mark what Saint Paul says most
notably for this purpose. You that a ere sometimes alienated, and enemies in
your minds, by wicked works, yet now Christ has reconciled; in the body of
his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and
unreprovable in his sight, if ye continue in the faith grounded, and settled,
and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, etc. Colos. 1. 21. 22.
23. Lo here, the maine thing of all, that shall be crowned; is perseverance in
the faith; Be therefore constant, be steadfast in the faith, 1 Pet. 5. 9. Watch
ye, stand fast in the faith, 1 Cor. 16. 15. Beware, lest being led away with
the error of the wicked, ye fall from your own steadfastness. 2. Pet. 3. 17.
Thus if ye continue unto the end, ye shall in the end, receive the end of
your faith, even the salvation of your souls. 1. Pet. 1. 9.

used to pray often with their families, but now all is forgotten, and laid
aside; They had wont to be bountiful, and liberal to the poor, doing good
to all, specially to the household of faith, but now their love is waxen cold,
not a good work comes from them; It has been meat and drink unto them, to
do Gods will in some measure, but now they count it too much preciseness and
niceness, to be occupied about the exercises of religion; The time was when
with the Galathians, they would have plucked out their own eyes to do Paul
good, but now, with the Church of Ephesus, they have lost their first love,
both to God, his Ministers, his Word, and to their brethren; They hold with
Paul, as Demas, for a time, and afterward fall to embracing this present evil
world. Thus they begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh, they give evident
testimenie that they are children of darkness, whereas they should walk,
that is, continue and persevere in proouing what is pleasing to God.

Paul exhorting the Philippians to perseverance, Work out your own salvation,
with fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12. presently he adds, verse 13. for it
is God, which works in you both the will and deed. God only is both willing
and able to make us persevere; without him we can dee nothing. John 15. 5. It
is he that begins a good work in us, and will perform or finish the same
until the day of Jesus Christ. Philipp. 1. 6. Such is the constant
immutabilitie of God, who makes an end of every good work which he
begins; now GOD works not only an holy will and desire to persevere, but
a real and constant persisting in grace to the end; and howsoever a man may
not feel at all times this real continuance, yet GOD accepts the will and
desire to persevere; pray therefore to God both for will and deed; as, Epaphras
always labored fervently in prayers, for the Colossians, that they might
stand perfect, and complete in all the will of God. Coloss. 4. 12.

Walkers in such a course as may best please God: as the Text says, Walk,
proving what is pleasing to God: But of this I have spoken at large. Only, I
will answer a question or two, and so conclude.

of light, and light in the Lord, who cannot choose but so walk? as the Sun
cannot choose but shine, and the fire cannot but heat; it may seem these
exhortations are needless and superfluous.

Augustine, that these exhortations are not vain, but by these (by Gods
ordinance) the grace of God is promoted, and more and more stirred up in us,
increased, and preserved; as by the preaching of the Gospel, faith is stirred
up in the hearts of the Elect, and by the same preaching, this faith being thus
excited, is promoted, enlarged, and increased.

howsoever it be true, that such as are the children of light, cannot but so
walk, yet he would have us to use the means; as to hear God speaking by his
Ministers, and so to suffer the words of exhortation.



then does the Apostle exhort here, saying, Walk as children of the light,
proouing what is pleasing to the Lord.

We must prove what is pleasing to God? And Paul seems to be contrary unto
himself. For, Galath. 1. 10. he says, Do I seek to please men? for if I
yet pleased men I should not be the servant of Christ; and yet he says, 1.
Cor. 10. 33. I please all men in all things.

Galat. 1. 10. he means if he should make it the scope of his ministry, to
frame his doctrine and speech so, as to please the affections and humors of
men, more then to seek Gods glory and please him, then he should not be
Christ's servant; But yet, in that which is good, and for the good of men; we
may and must please men. So Paul means in the place alleged, 1. Corinthians.
10. 33. I please all men, in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many, that they may be saved; And as Paul says excellently
elsewhere, Romans 15. 2. Let every one of us please his neighbor, for his good,
to edisication.

And thus much of the First Step.
THE SECOND STEP, and fourth SERMON.
Text. And have no followship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
reprove them rather. Ephesians. 5. 11.
HItherto I have spoken of the First Step of the Christian man's Walk: Now in
order out of these words, I observe the Second, and Third Steps. The first,
in these words, And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness: The other in these, But reprove them rather. To speak of the
first, we must not slightly pass over this word (And.) Which word shows the
connection of this Verse with the former; The Apostle having in the former
words exhorted, to prove what is pleasing to God, in this Verse does
presently dehort us from having fellowship with sin; joining both together as
inseparable; for, as he that will please God, must not live in sin; so, he
that communicates with sin, and sinners, cannot please GOD. Therefore, (as if
the Apostle should say) as I would have you spend your whole life in proouing
what is Gods will, so I would have you abstain from sin, and not only your
personal sins, but to have a special care, that you partake not with other
men in their sins; nor be accessory unto them; for if ye do, you cannot in
any case do that which is acceptable or well-pleasing to God.

Hence by the way I observe Obser.
thus much; That, living in sin, and pleasing of God, cannot stand together;
Sin is the only cause of displeasing of God; and we cannot serve two
masters; we cannot serve God and Mammon; we cannot serve God and the World,
God and the Flesh, God and the Devil, God and Sin: If we obey sin, taking
our delight therein, making a sport of sin. making it ou^ pleasure, we are
servants or sin, and not of God, we do the will of the Devil, and not of
GOD. Know ye not, (says the Apostle) that to whom ye yield your selves
servants to obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness? Romans 6. 16. Notable for this
purpose is that of the Apostle elsewhere. 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. Be not
unequally yoked together with unbelievers; for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? or what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has a
believer with an infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with
idols? etc. Wherefore, come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing, etc. according to our Text, Prcoue what
is pleasing to God, and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness: for it is impossible both should stand together. This Saint John
affirms, saying, If we say, that we have fellowship with God and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth. 1. John 1. 6. whence it is most
plain, that such as have fellowship with the works of darkness, practicing
them, living in them, and running headlong into them, with out fear, or
conscience, (for so much is meant by walking in darkness) such I say, cannot
in any case have any fellowship with God, nor approve themselves the children
of light; Saint Paul again to this purpose thus speaks; I would not, that
ye (speaking to the faithful of Corinth) should have fellowship with devils.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils, ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords Table, and the table of devils. 1. Cor. 10. 20, 21. So
long as we are the servants of sin, we are free from righteousness; but
being made free from sin, we become servants to God, etc. Romans 6. 20, 22.
All which confirms the truth of this doctrine; That living in sin, and
pleasing of God, cannot stand together, no more than light and darkness can
agree together.

to cast off the works of darkness. Romans 13. 12. to repent of all sin, to
make conscience of every sin, to shun all the occasions of sin, to hate,
abhor, detest, especially to leave and forsake every sin, and not to have
the least society or communion with sin; nor to live in any one known
sin; for we see here that any one work of darkness will hinder us from
proouing what is pleasing to God; We must resemble our heavenly Father in this
point; we profess him to be our Father, and to have communion with him; yea,
as Saint John says, Truly our fellowship (speaking of the faithful) is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. 1. John 1. 3. But God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all. Ver. 5. Even so we, who are light in the Lord,
and children of the light, should walk in the light, as he is in the light,
that we may have fellowship with God and his children. Verse. 7. We must purge
and purify our selves, even as God is pure. (in quality, not equality.) 1.
John 3. 3. that there may be no darkness in us at all, no one sin
remaining in us in regard of dominion; It is the nature and property of light,
to expel darkness; So should we which are made light in the Lord, labor to
abandon all and every sin; and not to give willingly the least occasion of
scandal, but to abstain from the very appearance of evil. 1. Thessal. 5. 22.
He that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is no occasion of
stumbling in him. 1. Ioh. 2. 10. Thus if we will approve our selves to be light
in the Lord, we must walk as children of the light, and have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness. Thus much of the Connection of the words,
from the word, And.]

Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.] These words
having relation to the 8. Verse, contain in them the Second Step of the
Christian man's walk; alluding to a second property of the Sun. As the Sun
shines upon all things, good and bad, even the most filthy things, neither can
it be otherwise; yet is not infectedwith, nor partaker-of any impuritie in
those things; So, we who are children of light, cannot choose but live amongst
wicked men in this world, (for if we look to have it otherwise, we must go
out of this world. 1. Corinthians. 5. 10.) yet we must not communicate with the
wicked men's works, nor be infected with their sins; In some sort, in some
case we may, yea, we shall, do what we can, communicate with wicked men
themselves, who are darkness; but in no case must we have fellowship with
their sins, and sinful actions, being unfruitful works of darkness:
according to the former speech of the Apostle, Verse. 7. Be not therefore
partakers with them; meaning, with the children of disobedience in the sins
aforenamed, for which things sake, the wrath of God comes upon them, verse 6.
But as it is, Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that yet receive not of her plagues.

In the words, I observe two points. 1. A Dehortation. 2. The reasons of the
Dehortation. The Dehortation in these words; Have no fellowship with (...);
that is, do^ not commu^^^ate with sin, and sinful a^tions of these times,
which we shall see to be in others. The Reasons are two. 1. Because all
sins are unfruitful. 2. Because they are all works of darkness. Have
therefore no fellowship with these unfruitful works of darkness. First, of
the Dehortation.

Have no fellowship.] The Greek word is, (...), N^ communionem habeatis, or,
ne communicetis, id est, Do not communicate, do not partake, or, be not
accessary-vnto; have not the least commerce, communion, society or fellowship
with the wicked works and sinful actions, which we shall see to be in wicked
men; but shun them, avoid them, and all the occasions of them, and take heed
of the company of wicked and ungodly men; for being infected with their evil
works; according to that, 1. Timoth. 5. 22. (...), id est, neither be
partaker of other men's sins. It is an argument drawn from their estate
wherein they are, from that which once they were; their vocation and calling
out of darkness, into this marvelous light. 1. Peter 2. 9. requires this,
that being once darkness, now made light in the Lord, they must know it was
to this end, that they should have fellowship with the light, and not with
works of darkness; For it is neither suitable to their new condition, nor
meet for them, nor yet beseeming God, in whom they are made light, that they
should be occupied in the works of darkness, or have the least fellowship
with them; Nay, it is impossible it should be so; for, what communion has
light with darkness? 2. Corint. 6. 14. as if he should say, There neither is,
nor can be any communion between them. As ye will then approve your selves
to walk as children of light, see to it, that you do not in any case
communicate with, nor be partakers of other men's sins; Be not any way
accessory to them, have not the least fellowship with them, yea, have nothing
at all to do with them; And this for the meaning of the word.

Solomon tells us, Thorns and snares are in the house of the wicked, Prou.
22. 5. Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burnt? Can
one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burnt? Prou. 6. 27. 28. A
companion of fools shall be destroyed, Pro. 13. 20. A man cannot possibly
company with such, but he shall be corrupted; So many vices, so many
infections; yea, the wicked man does never rest till he has wrought some
mischief; Frowardness is in his heart, he deuiseth mischief continually, he
sows discord, Prou. 6. 14. Wicked men sleep not except they have done
mischief; and their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall,
Prou. 4. 16. Nay, it is a sign of a bad man to keep company with wicked men;
for like will to like; and therefore Solomon says; A naughty person, a wicked
man, walks with a froward man, Prou. 6. 12. And all this tends to confirm
this doctrine, according to the meaning of the Apostle, he that has
fellowship with such, and does familiarly converse with them, cannot be
innocent, neither can they walk as children of the light. Desire not therefore
to be with evil men, Prou. 24 1.

Know, that for th^se things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children
of disobedience: Be ye not therefore partakers with them, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. The Apostle reck^ns up diverse sins, which shall be in the last days, and
perilous times; Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy; without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lon^rs of pleasures more
then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof; and then concludes, From such turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 3, 4, 5. It
is Salomons counsel; My son, walk not thou in the way with wicked men,
refrain thy foot from their path, Prou. 1. 15. Enter not into the path of the
wicked, and go not in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass by it, turn from
it, and pass away, Prou. 4. 14. 15. Keep not company with drunkards, Be not
amongst wine-bibbers; amongst riotons caters of flesh, Prou. 23. 20. Knowing
this, and laying it to heart, that thou neither do, nor can live
unreprovable, and inoffensiue, neither before God nor men, so long as thou
art a companion of such. If thou bees^ a wise man thou will foresee this evil,
Prou. 22. 3.

Have no fellowship, etc. Hence I observe, That sinning by communion, is no
less displeasing to God, and disagreeable to his will, then sins of
commission; for the Apostle exhorting to upright walking, to know and do Gods
will, does not so much dissuade from committing of sin; as communicating with
sin; herein teaching us that it is not sufficient to abstain from the
committing of personal sins actually in our selves, but to avoid the least
society or fellowship, in being accessory to the sins of others; for he is as
guilty that communicates with sin, as he that commits the sin. Saint John
would not have us to have the least commerce with false teachers, which oppose
the doctrine of the Gospel concerning Christ; Receive not such an one into
your house, neither bid him God speed; for he that bids him God-speede, is
partaker of all his evil deeds, John 2. epist. 10. 11. They are worthy of
death, not only who do commit wickedness, but who have pleasure in them that
do it, Romans 1. 32.

crimes; they would be sorry to be accounted such vile ones; True, all this is
good, and commendable in it self; but examine thy conscience, and thou shall
find, that thou have been too often faulty, and that most foully; that thou
have been accessary-to, and communicated-with the sins of others. How often
have thou seen thy neighbor drunk, and known it? others to have committed
^dultery, fornication, uncleanness? others to be common swearers, liars,
back-biters, slanderers? others to be common stealers, and the like? and yet
have never opened thy mouth to reprove them, to tell them of it, when thou
might, and ought, to admonish them, to persuade, them, to advise them, to
bring them to good; In this case thou art accessory to thy brothers sin, thou
have fellowship with him in sin; How often have thou heard Gods name torn in
pieces, as it were by horrible and fearful oaths, and would never speak
against it? Oh, remember what was the commendation of the Church of Ephesus, it
could not endure, or bear them which are evil, as Revel. 2 2. So, it is a
sign, and true note of Gods child, not to suffer sin in our neighbor, so
far as it lies in him: so says the Lord; Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him, Leuit. 19. 17. Mark what God says of the wicked; When thou saw a
thief, thou consentedst unto him, and have been partakers with the
adulterers, etc. There is the sin; These things have thou done, etc. but I
will reprove thee, and set before thee, the things that thou have done; there
is the punishment, Psalm. 50. 18. etc. where we see, how God punishes communion
with sin, as well as committing of sin.

me from such fellowship; and I will not say, The devil take them; but I dare
say, The devil will have them, except they speedily repent, and forsake such
wicked courses. O consider this ye that forget God, least he tear you in
pieces, and there be none to help, Psalm. 50^ Let us be of David's mind; not to
know a wicked person, etc. Psalm. 101. 4. etc. Let us resolve against such, and
say with David; Away from me ye wicked, I will keep the commandments of my
God, Psalm. 119. 115. Herein intimating thus much, that wicked company does
hinder us from keeping GODS commandments.

before men, so pleasing God. Solomon says, He that walks with wise men,
shall be wise, Prou. 13. 20. Oh, that we could truly say with David, (and in
truth, so it should be) I am a companion of all them that fear thee, O Lord,
and keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119. 63. All my delight is in the Saints
that are in the earth, and upon such as excel in virtue, Psalm. 16. 3. In the
godly man's eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honeureth them that fear
the Lord, Psalm. 15. 4. The righteous (says David,) shall resort unto my
company, Psalm. 142. 9. Read and observe diligently, Psalm. 101. wherein is set
down the true rule of a Christian man's walk, necessary for all sorts and
degrees, high and low, rich and poor; for Kings and Princes, for Ministers,
Magistrates, Parents, and Masters of families, one with another; showing the
manner of walking, the resolution against wicked men and their works, and the
choice only of the faithful and godly; And that all this may the better be
practiced of us, we must be carnest in prayer with our God, saying with the
Psalmist, Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works,
with men that work iniquity, etc. Psalm. 141. 4. for they purpose to overthrow
my goings, Psalm 140. 4. Cause me therefore O Lord, to know the way, wherein
I should walk, Psalm. 143. 8. and let me ever escape such wicked men, Psalm.
141. 10.

Have no fellowship, etc. Now I come to handle these words more particularly,
and to show, how many wares a man may be said to have fellowship, and to
communicate with the sins of others called here works of darkness. And we
must know, that evil works are of two sorts. 1. Such as are common to all
sorts. 2. Such as are more proper to this or that sort, degree or calling. The
first are twofold. 1. Such as go before the thing to be committed. 2. Such
as follow after the sin is committed. Before, a man may be said to
communicate, and to have fellowship, and to be accessory to the sins of
others, diverse ways.

by provocation; as when one shall provoke another unto sin, though he that
is pouoked, is guilty of the act of sinning, and commits the sin personally,
yet he who provoked him to that sin, is guilty also, as being accessory to
his brothers sin, and he has fellowship with him in his sin, and it is as
much as if he had committed the sin in his own person, both in regard of
the sin it self, and the punishment due unto that sin. This provoking of
others to sin, may be done two ways. 1. By incensing, urging, stirring up,
or compelling men to sin. 2. by entising, or alluring others unto sin: and
both these may be done two ways. 1. By word, 2. By deed: when a man either by
word or deed, shall excite, stir up, and draw on others to evil, as unjust
anger, wrath, revenge, hatred, coffeehouse, discouragement, drunkenness,
whoredom, and the like. First, I say, men provoke others to sin by
incensing, or stirring them up to sin; as Iezebel did Ahab, killing Naboth
for his vineyard: There was none like unto Ahab, who sold himself to work
wickedness in the sight of the Lord; whom Iezebel his wife stirred up, 1.
King. 21. 25. Thus did wicked Amnon ravish his sister Tamar; for he being
stronger than she, forced her, and lay with her. 2. Sam. 13. 14. This is a
sin in many parents, forbidden by Saint Paul, Fathers; provoke not your
children to wrath, least they be discouraged. Coloss. 3. 21. Now parents may
be said to provoke their children to wrath, three ways. 1. by unjust, wicked,
and unreasonable commands. 2. By contumelious words, rating, and reuiling them,
and miscalling them. 3. By extreme severity, and rigorous dealing, in their
striking and beating of them excessiuely in their mad mood, and rage, without
all reason. It was the sin of Saul against his son Jonathan. First, he
commanded him to bring unto him innocent David, that he might kill him.
Secondly, he miscalled him, and reviled him, calling him the Son of a
perverse, rebellious woman. Thirdly, he cast a iauelin at him, to smite him,
with purpose to kill him; thus Jonathan arose from the Table in fierce anger,
etc. 1 Samuel 20. from Verse 30. to the end of 33. But most common is this sin
amongst drunkards, and such as delight in drunken fellowship, who stir up,
and compel men to be drunk, or else will offer violence to their persons,
whereupon it comes to pass, that many not only hazard, but loose their lives
in this case.

by enticing and alluring others unto sin. This is made a note of a wicked
man, Sinners do entice etc. at large, Prou. 1. from 10. to 15. This appears
notably in the description of the Harlot, Prou. 7. through the whole Chapter;
where we may see, how the Whore, in the attire of an Harlot, and subtilty of
heart, in the twilight, in the evening, in a black and dark night, met among
the simple ones, a Youth void of understanding; So she caught him and kissed
him, and with an impudent face, said unto him (enticing him as there follows)
I have done thus and thus, and I have this and that at home, my bed is bravely
bedeckt, my husband is from home; come, let us take our fill of love till
morning, let us solace our selves with loves, from the 6. Verse, to the 21. Now
mark what follows; With much fair speech, she caused him to yield, with the
flatterings of her lips she forced him, Verse 21. thus by enticing him, she
provoked him to sin; And this is a common sin at this day, in all such as
delight in Whoorish company, and drunken fellowship, if they cannot compel
them to sin, they will by one means or other, allure and intise them to
sin; It is the brand which Solomon sets upon the wicked; A violent man
entifeth his neighbor, and leads him into the way that is not good, Prou.
16. 29. And this be said of the first way of having fellowship with others in
sin, viz. by provocation.

resolve fully to leave and forsake such ungodly courses, lest the wrath of God
smoke against such people, and there be none to quench it; for certainly, for
such things sake the wrath of God comes upon such. Again, this must teach
all to hate these courses; and instead of provoking to evil, to draw on others
unto good, according to our several places and callings, and charges committed
to us; as Magistrates their Subjects, Ministers their People, Parents their
Children, Masters their Servants, one neighbor another; to labor with them,
by exhortation, by persuasion, to entice them, to urge them unto good duties,
as Paul says. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering,
and let us consider one another, to provoke unto love, and all other good
works, Heb. 10. 23. 24. The neglect of this, is the cause why sin does so
much abound, and grow so rise.

consent; as if a man sees and knows another to commit a sin actually, and
yet he himself does not commit it in his own person, yet because he
consents to the doing of it, he is guilty, and becomes accessory unto the
other in this sin. And this is another note of a wicked man, who knowing the
judgment of God (that they which do commit such things, are worthy of death)
not only do the same, but take pleasure and consent with them that do them,
Romans 1. 32. So God reprooueth the wicked; When thou saw a thief, thou
consentedst unto him, etc. Psalm. 50. 18. This consenting to finne, is nothing
else but an approbation, or allowing of sin, without either contradicting the
sinner, or any grief or sorrow for the sin. Saint Paul complains of the
Corinthians for this, and checks them, that they were puffed up, and had not
rather mourned for the fact of the incestuous man, 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2. This consent
is either 1. Secret, 2. Open. Secret in the heart and mind; Open either in word
or deed; and whosoever consents but in heart, becomes accessory to the
sin, much more when he does it openly in word, or deed, or both. Thus the
Jews consented unto the death of Christ, saying, Let him be crucified, Math.
27. 22. 23. So whereas, Ioab slew Abner, smiting him under the fifth ribbe, that
he died, 2 Samuel 3. 27. Yet Abishai, Ioabs brother, is said also to stay Abner,
Verse 30. which must be meant in regard of consenting with Ioab concerning his
death. So Saul was consenting to the death of Steven, partly in word, partly in
deed, in stoning of Steven. And Saul consented unto his death, Acts 8. 1. that
is, he did approve and allow of his death; and thus all these had fellowship
with works of darkness.

that saw the thief, and consented with him, Psalm. 50. Let us therefore take
up the counsel of Solomon, My Son, if sinners entise, Consent thou not, etc.
at large, Prou. 1. 10. etc. Consent not, either with sinners, or their sins;
if thou do, remember the judgment of God, and his wrath hangs over thy
head, and thou must look for eternal death, Romans 1. 32. Our consent must be
only in good things, and with good men; as Paul says, I consent unto the Law
of God that it is good, Romans 7. and if at any time we are overtaken in any
sin, we must say, as Paul, That which I do, I allow not. Romans 7. 15. our
consent and approbation must be only of things more excellent, Philip. 1. 10.

by giving evil counsel. Thus was Herodias mother accessory to the murdering
of John, though Herod beheaded him: for Herodias being before instructed of her
mother, said: Give me here John Baptists head in a charger, Math 14. 3. to 11.
Thus bad counsel was a means of his death. Thus was Ionadab accessarie to the
incestuous rape of Ammon; Ammon indeed lay with his own sister, he personally
committed the sin, for he forced her; and when he had committed the fact,
he hated her more than before he loved her; but all this was by the evil
counsel of that wicked and subtle man Ionadab, who counseled him to feign
himself sick, and when David his Father should come to see him, Ammon should
desire of the King, that Tamar his sister should dress him meat, that so by
that, his lust might be fulfilled: The King granting his desire, Ammon took
his opportunity, forced her, and lay with her; at large, 2 Samuel 13. This giting
of bad counsel, is when one man persuades another unto sin; and it is a
great cause of much evil in the world; By this came the fall of our first
Parents, for Satan persuaded Eve, and Eve her husband, Genesis 3. 4. 6. And thus
by this bad counsel, were the high Priests and Rulers accessory to the
crucisying of Christ, because they persuaded the people to ask Barrabas (a
murderer and a robber, Acts 3. 14. John 18. 40.) and to destory Jesus, Math.
27. 1. and 20. And thus it is true, whosoever give bad counsel, and persuade
others unto sin, are accessory unto, and have fellowship with them in their
sins.

counsel, and for giving careto, and receiving bad counsel; Not to give any,
for by this means, we become partakers of other men's sins; but let our
counsels and persuasions be to good, and for good ends; A wholesome tongue is a
tree of life, but perverseness therein is a breach in the spirit, Prou. 15. 4.
To the counselors of peace is joy, Prou. 12. 20. The tongue of the wise, uses
knowledge aright, but the mouth of fools pours out foolishness. The lips of
the wise, disperse knowledge, Prou. 15. 2. 7. But a man of wicked devices God
will condemn, Prou. 12. 2. The mouth of the foolish is near destruction,
Prou. 10. 14. But in the lips of him that has understanding, wisdom is
found; The lips of the righteous feed many. The mouth of the just brings
forth wisdom, Prou. 10. 13. 21. 31. All which shows how we ought to be so
far from giving bad counsel, as all our speech should be sa^ou^y, gracious,
tending to Gods glory, and the edification of our brethren, as Ephesians. 4. 29.
Colos. 46.

Again, seeing bad Counsel is the cause of so much mischief, we must be
careful how we give any ear unto it, following the counsel of Solomon, Go
from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceiuest not in him the lips of
knowledge, Prou. 14. 7. Cease my son to hear the instruction that causes to
crre from the words of knowledge, Prou. 19. 27. Neither desire thou to be among
such evil men, Prou. 24. 1. O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto
their assembly be not thou united, Genesis 49. 6.

men's sins, by giving evil example, offense, and scandal; This evil
example appears in the practice of any one sin, known to others; The
profession of Christ, and true religion is called a way, and the giving of
offense is a stumbling-blocke laid in this way, to cause others to fall; yea,
such a man does in what him lies, destroy the soul of his brother, for whom
Christ died, 1 Cor. 8. 9. 10. 11. The case of such men must needs be
dangerous; for they are not only guilty, and accessarie unto the sins of
others, but are the occasions of many falls in others; and the greater is this
sin, because it is a sin and a cause of sin; In this regard, giving ill
example, is compared to wildefire, which inflameth all places whereon it
lights; and I may truly say, as many are drawn to sin by bad example, as
by any occasion given whatsoever; What fashion can be invented, but it is
presently followed of the most? what foolish, and gawish attire can be worn,
but forthwith it is generally received? What villainous, ribauld or bawdy and
beastly song invented, but presently learned, even of young children? Thus
evil example makes makes others to offend, 1 Cor. 8. 13. and therefore all
that give it, must needs have fellowship with the sins of those, who take
offense and occasion to fall, by their example, and offense given.

Take heed therefore that we walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil, Ephesians. 5. 15. 16. that is,
full of evil men, and manifold occasions to sin. Let our light therefore, of
an holy example, so shine before men, that they may see our good works, and
glorify our Father which is in heaven, Math. 5. 16. Having our conversation
honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as euill-doers,
they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day
of visitation, 1 Pet. 2. 11. But take heed that we become not a stumbling
block to those which are weak, 1 Cor. 8. 9. Give no offense, neither to the
Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. It is
impossible, but offenses will come, but we unto him, through whom they come,
Math. 18. 7. and Luke 17. 1.

Hitherto I have showed how many ways a man may have fellowship with others
before hand; now I come to set down how a man may communicate with the sins
of others, after the sin is committed, and this may be diversely;

Leuit. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but shall in any
wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Whence we may see,
that when men see others to sin, and will not speak to them, to tell them of
it, and reprove them for it, they suffer their neighbor to lie in his sin,
and his sin to remain upon him; and what is this else but to have fellowship
with him in his sin? This is a sin common to the most, which is the cause
that so many live in sin without reformation, Ungodly silence holds men in
sin; but thus it is, men are right of Cames disposition, they think they have
no keep of their brethren, Genesis 4. 9. They see and hear them sin
customarily, Parents their Children, Masters their Servants, one neighbor
another, and yet never find any fault, nor once reprehend them, either for
fear, favor, or affection; but let all such know, howsoever they make a light
account of this, yet if they will not speak, when they may and ought, they are
accessory to their sins, whom they suffer to go so unreproved. God speaking
of the Prophet, tells him, that he has set him a watchman over the house of
Israel, Therefore hear thou the word at my mouth, and give them warning from
me; if thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at hine hand, Ezekiel 3. 17. 18. Where we see, that
when we keep silence, when God would have us speak, we are not only guilty
of the sins of others, but of their punishments also. Qui tacet, consentire
videtur.

but plainly to rebuke our neighbor, and not suffer him to sin; thus we
shall discharge our souls; and most of all this concerns Gods Ministers, of
whom God speaks, Cry aloud and spare not, tell the people of their
transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins. Esaias 58. 1. Again,
speaking of Ministers, says God, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor night; Ye that make
mention of the Lord, keep not silence. Esaias 62. 6. But I only name this, as
having occasion to speak more largely of it afterward.

by smoothing up men in their sins; backing them, and encouraging them in
their sins; and this is done, first, by defending, and justifying them in
their sin; Secondly, by extenuating their sin, and making it less than it
is; Thirdly, by excusing their sin. All these ways are common, whereby men
communicate with the sins of others; For, what sin so vile and odious, but
has some back friend to maintain it? what person so vile, but has some
patron to defend him? yea, what wickedness or villainy can a man now a-dayes
commit, but he shall have some or other to countenance it? either to justify
the party that does it, soothing him and applauding him in his villainy,
making him believe there is no such danger in it, as men account of it; or else
they will make them believe that the sin is not so great as Ministers teach
it is, or else they will make it no sin at all; This is the common sin of
this age, and the occasion of many sins, and foul impieties in the world, to
soothe up others in their sins and wickedness; Thus the devil soothed up
our first parents, making them believe, that they should not die, though they
eat of the forbidden fruit. Genesis 3. It was the profaneness of the wicked
prophets, whom God never sent, They say still unto them that despise God. The
Lord has said, ye shall have peace, and they say unto every one that walks
after the imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you. Ierem.
23. 17. Thus is drunkenness maintained, under the term of good fellowship;
fornication is but a venial sin, they say, and a trick of youth;
covetousness is but good husbandry to provide for him and his; diverse weights
and false balance, are counted but lawful gain; no conscience made of
swearing, it is a matter of nothing; and the like: Whereas the Apostle tells
us plainly, that for these things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience. Ephesians. 5. 6. But this the wicked believe not; and
therefore they make but a mock of it, and sooth up themselves and others in
these and the like sins, mocking and scoffing with those wicked ones, saying,
Where is the promise of his coming? 2. Pet. 3. 4. Therefore, they make a
covenant with hell and death, persuading themselves, that the ouerflowing
scourge shall never come near them. Esaias 28. 15. This is to flatter our selves
and others in sin.

in their wicked courses, or justify any in their wickedness; for it makes a
man not only accessory to their sins, as has been showed, but also accursed;
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they
both are abomination to the Lord. Prou. 17. 15. He that says unto the wicked,
Thou art righteous, him shall the people curse; nations shall abhor him.
Prou. 24. 24. The Lord himself will not justify a wicked man. Exodus 23. 7.
Woe then to him that justifies the wicked, etc. Esaias 5. 22, 23. Woe unto them
that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light and light
for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Esaias 5. 20.

by Conniuence, winking at sin; either by seeing, and not seeing; or else, by
seeing, and not correcting: Thus was Eli accessory unto his sons wickedness;
The sons of Eli, were the sons of Belial (all for the belly; for so, when
Eli thought Hannah had been drunken, when she prayed to the Lord, she answered
him, Count not thine handmayd for a daughter of Belial, 1. Sam. 1. 13, 14, 25,
16.) The sons of Eli knew not the Lord; They abused the sacrifice and
offering which God commanded in his habitation; The sin of the young men was
very great before the Lord; for men abhorred the offering of the Lord; They lay
with the women assembled at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:
These were their sins; But how did old Eli behave himself when he heard of it?
He said unto them, why do ye such things? for I hear of your evil
dealings, by all this people; Nay my sons, for it is no good report that I
hear: ye make the Lords people to transgress. 1. Sam. 2. at large. But was
not this well done in Eli, thus to reprove his sons? Indeed the words were
good in themselves; but his reproof was weak, cold, and partial; he
honored his sons above God. 1. Sam. 2. 29. God threatened him and his sons
in the verses following. And he judged the house of Eli for ever, for the
iniquity which he knew, because his sons made themselves vile, and he
restrained them not. 1. Sam. 3. 13. Here was the sin of Conniuence; he saw
and knew their sins, but did not correct them, he did not frown on them, he
did not curb them, and use his fatherly authority to reclaim them, and to
restrain them from their wickedness, but in a weak, partial, and silly
manner, said, Nay my sons, it is no good report I hear, etc. Wherefore
according to the word of the Lord, It came to pass, that his two sons, Hophni
and Phinehas were slain, and old Eli their father fell down from a seat
backward, and his neck brake, and he died. 1. Sam. 4. 11, 18.

it, and they may, and ought to do it; yea, they despise God, if they do not;
So says God. 1 Samuel 2. 30. They that honor me (speaking of Eli and his house)
I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. It is a
common saying, Wink at small faults; and Solomon says, It is the glory of a
man, to pass by an offense. True it may be sometime among men, in regard of
some small wrongs, and personal offenses between man and man; but no sin
against God must be winked at, or be dispensed with, though never so small;
for as by Conniuence we are accessory, so we procure judgment.

By praising and Commending those that sin. This is a common sin, and as it
makes men accessory, so it is a great means to maintain and uphold men in
sin, and to countenance them in their wicked courses; such men may make a
show of love, and seem very fervent, yet indeed they are but counterfeit;
fawning, flattering; like the Iuie tree, which compasses, and clings about the
Oak, not for any love he bears unto him; but to suck out his juice and
sap; so by this commending of men in sinning, many are utterly undone, as it
appears commonly amongst drunkards, and such as delight in drunken fellowship,
who being applauded for good fellows, spend all they have, and bring
themselves and theirs to beggary; Thus they will be drunk, because they have
those that will commend them for it: This is a true note of the wicked man,
either to commend, or to be commended in this kind; A wicked man commends men
that are evil speaking well of them. As the covetous man, he will be
covetous, because others commend him for a good husband; and Solomon says, The
wicked speaks well of the covetous, whom God abhors. Psalm. 10. 3. Again,
it is a sign of a wicked man to be commended of the wicked; The world loves
his own. John 15. 19. and, Woe be unto you, when all men praise you. Luke 6.
26. (that is, if Christ commend you not; for Christ may condemn us, when men
may commend us and speak well of us) for so did their fathers the false
prophets; And in this sense, I take it, may that be understood; He that
blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall
be counted a curse to him. Prou. 27. 14. It is a sign of an hateful
dissembling and deceitful man; howsoever he may pretend love, to commend a man
in evil.

Salomons counsel; When he speaks fair, believe him not, for there are
seven, id est, many abominations in his heart. Prou. 26. 25. We must not give
ear to the wicked, but rather contend with him, by striving against his
temptations, as being nets spread for our feet; remembering always what
Solomon says, distinguishing the godly from the wicked; They that forsake the
Law, praise the wicked; but such as keep the Law contend with them. Prou. 28.
4. Let this move us all, as to be careful to give no countenance to such as
we know to be wicked, and hypocritical, to give no credence to them, so to
take heed of praising the wicked, knowing what Solomon says, An hypocrite
with his mouth destroys his neighbor. Prou. 11. 9.

By a careless neglect, and omission of that good which we may, and ought to
do. This makes men accessory; We are not only to observe the Commandments
in our selves, but to preserve them in others, by using all good means: As for
example; Thou shall not kill; there we are enjoined, so far as our ability
serves, and our calling will permit, to preserve the life of our neighbor; If
thou forbear to deliver those that be ready to be slain, If thou say,
Behold, we knew it not, does not he that pondereth the heart, consider it?
does not he know it? etc. Pro. 24. 11, 12. When Saul had made a rash vow, that
none should taste of any thing till evening, Jonathan having tasted a little
honey, Saul would have slain him, but the people rescued him. 1. Sam. 14.
Jonathan again rescued David from his father Saul. 1. Sam. 19. Obadiah hid an
hundred by fifties in a cave; We ought to lay down our life for the brethren.
1. John 3. 15. namely in time of persecution, and case of necessity. Hence we
may note then, that Pilate was guilty of murder, though he washed his hands,
because he did not defend our Savior Christ against the Jews: So all that
preserve not life when they may, it is all one as if they kill a man, they
become accessory to the murder; and so of the like.

In a word, as a man may be accessory, and have fellowship, both before and
after the sin, as formerly has been shown, so in the act of sinning, viz.
by cooperation; either by being copartners in the same fact doing, or by doing
the same thing which we see others to do; Wicked men are described to be
doers of the same things, and to take pleasure in those that do them. Romans 1.
32. And yet many times you shall see those to judge and condemn others, when
as they themselves do the same things. But what says Paul? Therefore thou art
inex cusable, O man, whosoever thou art that indgest: for wherein thou iudgest
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that iudgest do the same
things: But we are sure, that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against such as commit such things; And think thou this, O man that iudgest
them which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the
judgment of God? Romans 2. 1, 2, 3. And thus much of the common means, whereby
all sorts of men may become accessory to the sins of others.

Have no fellowship, etc.] Now of the means which are more proper and peculiar
to some sorts of men, whereby they become accessory to other men's sins: Of
these briefly.

for the Magistrate: The Magistrate is accessory three ways; first, by setting
forth wicked decrees: secondly, by unlawful commandments: thirdly, by
permission. First, by Decrees; as Nebuchadnezzar was accessory to the people
worshipping the golden image which he had set up; because he made a Decree,
that all should do so, and who-so refused, should be cast into a burning
fiery furnace. Dan. 3. 10. Thus Jeroboam made Israel to sin. 1. King. 14. 16.
But what says God by his Prophet? Woe be to them that decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grieuousnesse, which they have prescribed, etc. Esaias
10. 1, 2, 3, 4.

by Commandment; as lezabel commaundes Naboth to be stain. 1. King. 21. Thus
David is said to kill Vriah, David in his own person did not kill him, but he
commanded him to be killed by the sword of the Ammonites. 2. Sam. 11.

by Permission; by suffering evil, and wicked men to go unpunished, when as
they may and ought to reform evil: thus in not punishing vice, and
malefactors, as murderers, and the like, they become guilty of the sin of the
malefactor, and cause others to commit the same or the like; Magistrates are
here to remember, that they must not bear the sword in vain. Romans 13. The
Magistrate is to cut off by death, such malefactors as have committed capital
offenses, as murder, etc. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed. Genesis 9. 6. that is, by the Magistrate, who is not the author of his
death, for that is GOD, but an instrument of God, whose judgment he uses; A
Magistrate may not exempt a man from punishment at his pleasure, unless he
himself will sin against God, as the Prophet told the King Ahab; Because
thou have let go out of thine hand (says the Lord) a man whom I appointed to
utter destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life. 1. King. 20. 42.

Thus Ministers are accessory to the peoples sins, either by not giving them
warning, or not reproving them of sin, or showing a bad example, and living a
wicked life, by which they do more hurt, than good by doctrine. And thus are
all Superiors accessory to the sins of Inferiors, as Parents to their
Children, Masters to their Servants, some of those ways formerly named.

But thus much be said of the fourth Sermon.
THE FIFTH SERMON, being the Second upon these WORDS.
Text. Have no fellowship with unfruitful works [of darkness.] Ephesians. 5.
11.
HItherto, out of these words, I have spoken only of the Dehortation it self;
in these words, Have no fellowship, etc. Now I am to handle the reasons of the
Dehortation, showing why we must not communicate with the sins of others; The
reasons are two; first, because all sins are works of darkness: secondly,
because they are unfruitful. But before I come to the particular handling of
these Reasons; sundry questions or doubts are to be resolved, and answered,
both for the more clearing of the Text, and the better finishing of the
Dehortation, as follows.



and special familiarity with them; and so must all places of Scripture
forbidding fellowship with them, be understood of private and familiar
conuersing I say, it is not simply forbidden; first, because there is no such
absolute precept against it, extant in holy Scripture; secondly, Paul says, as
leaving it free, 1 Cor. 10. 27. If any man that belieues not, bid you to a
feast, and you be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking
no question for conscience sake; thirdly, if we would shun the company and
society of all wicked men, then we must go out of this world, 1 Cor. 5. 10.
Again, If any brother has a wife that belieueth not, and she be pleased to
dwell with him, let him not put her away; And the woman which has an husband,
that belieueth not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him,
1 Cor. 7. 12. 13. Lot conuersed with the wicked Sodomites, Christ with
Publicans and sinners: Therefore all society of wicked men themselves is not
simply and absolutely forbidden, but private and familiar fellowship, 1 Corinthians. 5. 9. 10. 11. mark the place.



Evil societies corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. and God forbad the Israelites
to marry with the Gentiles, or to have any familiar commerce with them, lest
they should be infected by them; Secondly, if the wicked by our keeping them
company, and seeing us not to shun them, should be confirmed, and more
hardened in their sins; Christ commands us in this case, that rather
obstinate sinners should be unto us as Heathen and Publicans, Math. 18. 17.
that is, account him as an heretic, or excommunicate, or one not belonging to
the Church. Thirdly, if the weak in faith, are by our keeping them company
offended; We must not abuse our Christian liberty in the smallest things,
whereby our weak brother may be offended; Take heed, 1 Cor. 8. 9. 10. 11. lest
by any means, this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that
are weak; for if any man see thee which have knowledge, sit at meat in the
idols Temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weak be imboldened to
eat those things which are offered to Idols, etc. much more then will a weak
brother be offended to see us converse with wicked men familiarly. Fourthly, if
by our company. keeping; the Gospel be evil spoken of, and the name of God
blasphemed, we must altogether abstain; Paul says, All things must be done
to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. But through such the name of God is blasphemed,
Romans 2. 24.



as City, etc. and thus we are to maintain outward peace with them; and show
outward courtesy unto them, so far forth, as it may stand with faith and a
good conscience, and with the honor of God, and the good of Gods Church. So
must we understand, Romans 12. 18. Tit. 3. 2. 3. Thirdly, consider them as
dwellers in the Church, and members of some particular Church by toleration;
and so we may live with them, and not separate from the Church, neither from
the Word nor Sacraments; Christ lived with them and communicated in their
Sacraments and service of the Temple, though many of them were notorious both
for life and doctrine; yet we must be grieved with Lot at their
abominations; and have no private and special familiarity with them, for
this is a means to countenance them, and encourage them in their sins.



about to draw us away from Christ, and to seduce us, then, Parents, Wife: and
Children are to be forsaken, rather then Christ; who says, He that loves
Father or Mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son
or Daughter, more then me, is not worthy of me. Math. 10. 37. Secondly, if we
are tied by mere necessity; as, if he that is wicked, cannot live without
thee, nor thou without him, as suppose thy father or brother, etc. Jacob, when
he could not conveniently live elsewhere, came with his Children into Egypt,
and lived among the Idolatrous people for necessity; but he communicated not
with the impieties of the Egyptians, neither must we be drawn hereby to
communicate with the works of wicked men; yea, we should rather famish, and
starve, and suffer any kind of death than to deny Christ, and communicate with
ungodly works; Christ says, He that loves his life more tha^ me, is not
worthy of me; and he that hates not his own life, cannot be my Disciple,
Luke 14. 26.

In a word, when we have an intent and desire to reclaim the wicked from
their wickedness, to be a means of their conversion, to win them, and draw
them to God, by godly conference, or to perform the duties of civil society;
and if after once or twice admonition they will not be reformed, then reject
them, Tit. 3. 10. Thus, all these ways we may converse with men themselves;
but only so long as it stands with a good conscience, and Christ not forsaken;
for this is an everlasting precept, that we must love Christ above all, and
not communicate with works of darkness.

Concerning the persons

for, what fellowship has light with darkness? 1 Cor. 6. we cannot be
partakers of the Lords Table, and the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 21. Be not
partaker of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Now the works of the wicked, are
either such as are properly their own, which in themselves are simply evil,
and void of all respect of good, as drunkenness, whooredome, adultery,
idolatry, and the like; and with these we must in no case communicate, have
nothing to do with them; Again, there are some works, which God works in
them, as to build Hospitals, to sustain the poor, to bring up children, to
fight against the common enemy, and such like civil and political works; and
with these works we may communicate, as they are good works in them;
whatsoever therefore is not of God, that is, which is not allowed by the word of
God, we must not communicate with it, for it is of men, not of God, it is of
darkness, not of light; it is not of faith, because it wants the word, and
therefore it is sin; But what need I to wade further in this assertion,
seeing the Text is so plain? Have no fellowship with unfruitful works of
darkness.

Naaman went into the house of Rimmon, an idolatrous place; and said; The Lord
pardon me in this thing, that when my Master goes into the house of Rimmon to
worship there and be leans on my hand, and I bow my self there in the house
of Rimmon, when I bow down my self in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing; And the Prophet said unto him, Go in peace, 2 King.
5. 18. 19. Therefore it seems the Prophet granted him leave to worship in the
idolatrous Temple, and so to have fellowship with idolatry, (...) work of
darkness.

Naaman in the house of Rimmon, was not religious, by way of adoration of the
Idol; as some have thought, and condemned it as a sin in Naaman, and say
that Naaman knew it to be a sin, and therefore craved pardon, if he did bow;
Neither did the Propher grant him leave to bow^ there, but only by that form
of speech, promised to pray to God to defend him, that he should not fall, and
if he^ did fall, to forgive him; as some others affirm; But the best answer
is this; that this bowing of Naaman was officious, civil and political, and
necessary, and so no sin; but Naaman thinking through ignorance it to be a
sin, the Prophet bids him be of good cheer, it was no sin, so he bowed not
to the Idol; but only for duty sake, to support the King who leaned on him;
The King went in to worship there, but Naaman is not said to worship there, but
only bowed himself to support the King, which he might without sin.

Daniel did worship Nebuchadnezzars image, and therefore was not cast into the
furnace; but say they, it is not recorded as a sin in Daniel, etc.

Daniel did worship is, neither do we read, that ever he was enjoined to
worship it, neither was it offered unto him to be worshipped; if it were,
happily they observed not his behavior toward it; if they did observe him,
yet happily he was not accused, because he was in great favor with the King;
if he were accused, yet the King for the great love he bare unto him, would not
punish him. But how does all this prove, that he did worship the Image? They
do great wrong to this holy Prophet; for shame Masters make better arguments.

Paul with four others took on him a vow, and after the manner of the Jews
purified himself with them, etc. but he did that which he condemned, and
disalowed, only for peace sake; Therefore say some, we for peace sake, and
charity, may be present at idolatrous places, etc. though things in themselves
not lawful; Acts 21.

Paul; of which opinion sometimes Zanchius confesses himself to have been;
but afterward, being better advised, he says, that answer is contrary to Acts
24. where Paul makes mention of this fact as well done; It is therefore to be
observed, that legal ceremonies for that time, were things indifferent, which
might be kept or not kept, so long as they were not urged as necessary to
salvation; but if they were urged as necessary to salvation, then they were not
lawful; as Paul circumcised Timothy, but he would not circumcise Titus,
because the Jews thought he could not be saved without it; and therefore it was
lawful for Paul, to take on him a vow, and to purify himself in the Temple,
when for concord sake, he did nothing but what was as then lawful, being
indifferent; This makes nothing for Papists, or others that think they may be
present at idolatrous service and Masses, which are both idolatrous, and
impious; things of their own invention, and none of Christ's institution, as
they falsely affirm.



Idolatry is forbidden not only in the mind, but the whole man; and we must
glorify God both in body and soul, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and God commends those, that
never bowed their knees to Baal; And the Prophet says, We must lift up our
hearts with our hands to God in the heavens, Lam. 3. 41. both to God, neither
to Idols.

Paul; who, to the Jews, became as a Jew, that he might win the Jews, to
them that are under the law, as under the law, that he might gain them that
are under the law; to those that are without law, as without law, that he might
gain them that are without law; to them that were weak, he became as weak,
that he might gain the weak; He was made all things to all men, that he
might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9. 20. 21. 22. Why then may not we be
present at their idolatrous services, and the like, in hope to gain others it
seems we may be any thing.

Paul's speech, must be understood wholly of things indifferent, not of things
simply evil; as their Papisticall courses, and Idolatrous practices are not
indifferent, but evil and wicked; And we must not do evil, that good may
come thereof, Romans 3. therefore not to be present at their Idolatries, in hope
to gain them; Thus their argument is worth nothing, being a long
dissimilibus, from things far unlike; Paul speaking I say of things
indifferent, which there are not.

Other arguments there are, which are not worth answering, as being proved
from holy Scriptures, or at least they are taken out of the books called
Apocrypha, which we reject, as not canonical, but these which I have named
are the maine, and from these may be answered the other; And thus have I
showed, how far forth we may or may not dwell with the wicked, or communicate
with their works.

All which should teach us to shun so much as in us lies, the very persons
of the wicked, and their company; but because as has been shown, this is
impossible (for then we must go out of this world, 1 Cor. 5. 10.) therefore
our principal care must be, to learn to know them and observe them, and in no
case to communicate with their sins, or to be partakers of their evil
deeds; rather choosing with Moses, to suffer affliction with the people of
God, than with the wicked to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, etc.
Heb. 11. 24. 25. 26. Yea, we should rather die, and be afflicted with any
torments, and suffer any punishment, than to communicate with Idolatrous
worships, and other works of darkness; as Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego,
had rather be cast into the hot furnace, then worship the golden image, Dan. 3.

Having now finished to the full this Dehortation, and answered such questions
and doubts as are commonly alleged to the contrary, Now I come particularly
to the Reasons which the Apostle lays down to dissuade us from this
fellowship, and communication with the sins of others. First, because they are
works of darkness; therefore have no fellowship with them.

Works of darkness.] These words contain the first reason of this
dehortation; and by works of darkness, are meant the sins of wicked men,
as wicked men themselves are termed darkness, Ver. 8. And the force of the
Apostles Argument stands thus; If ye must walk as children of light, then ye
must have nothing to do with the works of darkness. But ye must walk as
children of light. Ergo. And the reason of the consequence of the proposition
is this, because, there can be no fellowship between light and darkness. 2. Corinthians. 6. 14. In which place the Apostle handles more fully the same
Argument: Be not unequally yoked together with unbelievers; for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness, what communion has light with
darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that
believes with as infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of GOD with
idols? Here is the maier proposition, and reasons, Verses 14. 15, 16. But ye
are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Here is
the assumption, and his confirmation, Verse. 16. Wherefore come out from among
them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing,
and I will receive you. Here is the Conclusion, with a promise. verse. 17, 18.
Nothing can be more clear than this place. Again, the like Argument is used,
1. Corinthians. 10. 20, 21. which may thus be framed, If ye cannot drink the cup
of the Lord, and the cup of devils, nor be partakers of the Lords Table, and
the table of devils; then have no fellowship with devils. But ye cannot drink
the cup of the Lord, and the cup of devils, etc. Therefore have no fellowship
with devils. Do we provoke the Lord? verse 22. From both which places, this
general doctrine concerning all society with the wicked in their sins, may
be raised; viz. That the external profession of impiety and wickedness,
cannot stand with the nature of godliness; but that God is most highly
provoked to anger, when we do partake with the wicked in their wicked works,
especially in Idolatry, and false worships. And this for the scope of the place.

Works of darkness.] By works of darkness, are meant all kind of sins,
whether against the first Table, or second; What they are, the Apostle sets
down in this chapter and elsewhere: In this chapter, Fornication, and all
uncleanness covetousness, filthiness, foolish talking, jesting, whoredom,
idolatry, verse. 3, 4, 5. Again, Romans 13. 12, 13. rioting, drunkenness,
chambering, wantonness, strife, envying, and the like, are the works of
darkness, which he would have us cast off; And thus all other sins of wicked
men whatsoever are called works of darkness, according to the best
expositions, (...), that the works of darkness are every sin. Now sins
are called works of darkness in many respects.

all evil, Who is a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him; when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his
own; for he is a liar, and the father of it. John 8. 44. and so of all other
sins, the devil is the father of them, and the author of them, if not
always effectiuely, yet suggestiuely, and occasionally; and that of Job, may
well be applied to the devil, That he is a King over all the children of
pride. Job 41. 34. and this is a true position, Diaboli suggestione fere omne
peccatum peragitur, Almost every sin is accomplished through the suggestion
of the devil; and in this sense the wicked are said to see the works of their
father the devil. John 8. 38. viz. when they see and perceive his suggestions
in their hearts; thus he is called the father of the wicked, not, qui generat
per originem, sed imitationem; not originally, but by imitation; The wicked are
of their father the devil, and the lusts of their father, they will do. John
8. 44. imitating him especially in two things, viz. in murder, and lying, as
follows; From all which it appears plainly; that sins, and sinful
works, are the works of the devil, and the doers of them his children; and
therefore, Saint John says, He that commits sin, is of the devil: for
the devil sins from the beginning; for this purpose the Son of God was
manifest, that he might destroy the works of the devil. 1. John 3, 8. In
this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil;
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not
his brother; and so consequently they are of the devil. 1. John 3. 10. Christ
told the unbelieving Jews, that they do the works of their father the
devil; and that they hear not Gods words, because they are not of God, but of
the devil. John 8. 41. 47. Thus the devil is called, the prince of this
world. John 16. the prince that rules in the ^^^e etc. Ephesians. 2. Where likewise
he is called, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.
verse 2. where we may plainly perceive, that the works of the wicked proceed
from the devil, ruling them, and working all manner of evil in them.

Is there any evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6. I
the Lord create evil, I do all these things, I create darkness. Esaias 45. 7.
Out of the mouth of the most high God proceeds evil Lam. 3. 38. It may be
thought that works of darkness then, come rather from God, than the devil.

Omnis actio vt est actio, est a Deo, sed non malum actions. Every action, as
it is an action; may be said to be of God; but the evil of the action is not
of God, but of the devil: Secondly, Evil is twofold: Malum culpae, the evil
of the fault; and this is merely and simply evil, void of all respect of
good; and this is sin; but none of the former places speak of this evil.
Malum poenae; the evil of the punishment; as crosses, affliction, sickness,
adversity, and the like; and of this evil, God is Author; and this only is
meant in all the former places alleged; and this is not absolutely evil, but
has some respect of good; Of this evil Job speaks, Shall we receive good at
the hands of God, and not evil? meaning the evil of adversity.) Job 2. 10.



Quest.: But why did not God confirm them in grace; and give them the will and
perseverance it self? Answ. GOD gave them a power to will and persevere, but
not the will and perseverance it self, because he would not; so he could have
prevented their fall; but he would not; and so I may say, he could not,
because his power depends upon his will, not his will upon his power. Quest. But
why would not God? Answ. O vain man, who art thou that pleadest with God? etc.
Romans 9, 20, 21, 22. This is the first Reason; Works of darkness, because
they proceed from the devil, the Prince of darkness.

And it is as if the Apostle should have said, I would have you to conform
your selves to be like your heavenly Father, walking as children of light;
Now, God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. 1. John 1. 5. As then you
will approve your selves to be Gods children, as you profess your selves to
be; Then have nothing to do with any one work of darkness, for then ye
have no fellowship with God, if ye walk in darkness. 1. John 1. 6. but ye
have fellowship with the devil, and his sons you are, if ye do the works
of darkness, which come from him; As you will be loath to be accounted the
devils darlings, have no fellowship with the works of darkness.

viz. the wicked; Thus all not converted are called darkness: Ye were once
darkness. Ephesians. 5. 8. They walk in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened through their ignorance, because of the hardness of
their hearts. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. Thus they are darkened in ignorance and error,
wanting faith in their understanding; the heat of love in affection; and all
show of good in their example and conversation; The whole way of the wicked is
as darkness. Pro 4. 19. They are in darkness, and walk in darkness, and yet they
boast of fellowship with God, but they are liars, and do not the truth. 1. Ioh.
1. 6. Thus they are called the darkness; The light shined in darkness, and the
darkness comprehended it not. Ioh. 1. 5. Christ is the true light, that lights
every man that comes into the world, but the world (that is, the wicked)
neither know him, nor receive him. Ioh. 1. 9. It is Gods judgment upon them,
that seeing, they perceive not, hearing they understand not, their ears are
dull of hearing, and their eyes have they fast closed, lest they should see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and God should heal them. Esaias 6. 9. Acts 28. 26,
27. Thus David prayed, Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see.
Psalm. 69. 23. Romans 11. 10. God has given them a spirit of slumber, eyes that
they should not see, ears that they should not hear unto this day. Romans 11.
8. The Lord has powered out upon them the spirit of deep sleep, and has
closed their eyes. Esaias 29. Wherefore, unless you will be counted among the
wicked, have no fellowship with the works of darkness; for it is their
property only to commit them; for the righteous do no iniquity. Psalm. 119. 3.
He that is borne of God, does not commit sin. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.

Thirdly; Sins are work^ of darkness, because they love darkness, and
hate the light: This puts a difference between the godly and the wicked,
be^^^^^ers and vnbel^euers; Ch^^^ came a light into the world, that whosoever
bele^ueth on him should not abide in darkness John 12. 46. Here is a true and
infallible note of a true believer, viz. to come out of darkness of sin,
ignorance, and error* And he that does truth; comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. Ioh. 3. 21. Lo,
another mark of the godly: On the contrary; He that believes not is
condemned already, because he believes not in the Name of the only begotten
Son of God; And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness, rather than light, because their deeds were evil.
For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved, Ioh. 3. 18. 19. 20. Lo here, three brands
of a wicked man: 1. he belieueth not in Christ: 2. he loves darkness: 3. he
hates the light. They love darkness, because they love to do all things in
secret, as Paul says, It is a shame to speak of those things which are done
of them in secret, Ephesians. 5. 12. They that sleep, sleep in the night, and
they that be drunk, are drunk in the night. 1 These. 5. 7.

Thus adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, whooredome, love
darkness, and delight to be in secret; And whereas a child of sieve or six
years old would fray them, and make them not to dare to attempt such
wickedness, yet the allseeing eye of God does nothing daunt them; and so it is
with drunkards, thieves murderers, and the like; who commit such villainies for
the most part in secret. Thus, the young man was overtaken by the whore, in
the evening, in the twilight, in the black and dark night, Proverb. 7. 9.
10. They l^ue evil more then good, and lying rather then to speak
righteousness; yea, their tongue loves all devouring words, Psalm, 52. 3. 4.
Again, they hate the light. First, Christ, who is the true light. Secondly the
godly, who are light in the Lord. Thirdly, the light of the Gospel, because it
lays open, discouers, and reprooueth their evil deeds. Fourthly, Gods
Ministers, who are the lights of the world; Fifthly, the light of an holy
example; as we may read. They hated Christ, Ioh. 15. 18. the godly, Ioh. 15.
19. Gods Ministers, Math. 10. 22. the light of the Gospel, Ioh. 3. 20. holy
example, falsely accusing our good conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 16. Prou.
29. 27.

Sins are works of darkness, because they infatuate and besot the wicked,
as does darkness; As a man that walks in a dark night, cannot see to do
any thing, nor knows not which way to go, but stumbleth at every thing, and
knows not whether he goes, or where he is, because the darkness blindes
him; Even so, says Solomon, The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know
not at what they stumble, Prou. 4. 19. He that hates his brother is in
darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whether he goes,
because that darkness has blinded his eyes, 1 John 2. 11. for he that
walks in darkness, knows not whether he goes, John 12. 35. Thus through
drunkenness, whooredome, covetousness, and the like, a number are so
besotted, that for their lives they cannot leave them, but rather resolve to
live in them; The drunkard shall say, they have beaten me, and I was not sick,
they have stricken me, and I felt it not, when shall I awake? I will seek it
yet again, Prou. 23. 34. 35. Lo how they are besotted; The whore with much
fair speech caused the young man to yield, with the flattering of her lips;
she forced him, then mark; He goes after her straightway, as an Ox goes to
the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks, till a dart
strike through his liver, as a bird hastes to the snare, and knows not that
it is for his life, Prou. 7. 21. 22. 23. Lo how fearfully and dangerously he
is besotted; and no marvel they be thus besotted with sin, seeing as Paul
says, They walk in the vanity of their minds, having their understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of the blindness of their hearts, who being past feeling;
have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19. Thus in regard of this besotting, the wicked
are often termed fools, The fool walks in darkness, Eccles. 2. 14. I said
unto the fools, deal not so foolishly, etc. Psalm. 75. 4. I was envious at the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73. 3. Remember how the
foolish man reproacheth thee daily, O God, Psalm. 74. 22. and very often in the
Psalms. Saint Paul calls them, unreasonable men; Pray that we may be
delivered from unreasonable and wicked men, 2 These. 3. 2. They will not be
learned, nor understand, but walk on still in darkness, Psalm. 82. 5. And
their foolish heart is darkened, Romans 1. 21. etc. where ye may read at large of
the sottishness of wicked men by sin.

Cast ye, says Christ, the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, Math. 25. And he that had not on the
wedding Garment, was commanded to be bound hand and foot, and (...) away, and
cast into (...) darkness, Math. 22 1^. The children of the Kingdom shall be
cast out into utter darkness, Math. 8. 12. There is a twofold darkness, 1.
Inward, as blindness of mind; 2. Outer darkness, which is the eternal
night of damnation. This is the end of all, and every sin, without
repentance; For, every sin deserves it, Every transgression deserves the just
recompense of reward, Heb. 2. 2. that is, eternal death, for the wages of
sin is deaeth, Romans 6. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are
now ashamed, for the end of those things is death, Romans 6. 21. To the wicked,
the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 17. For if God spared
not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and delivered them
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment, The Lord then
knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished,
etc. 2 Pet. 2. 4. and 9. To whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever, Jude 13. Verse. The wicked are compared to briars and thorns, which are
rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 8. Whose
end is destruction, Philip. 3. 19. that is, eternal damnation, which is a
separation of soul and body from God, and an adiudging of them both, to
perpetual torments in hell fire, with the devil and his angels. And thus much
of the several reasons, why sins are called here works of darkness; Now
briefly of the Application and Uses of this unto our selves.

From that which has Obser.
been spoken concerning works of darkness, we may observe, what an
horrible, and abominable thing Sin is; it is most odious, and accursed; It
makes a man bondslaue to Satan* a pre^ for the Devil; servant to it self, an
h^ter of God himself; delighting in nothing that good is; It makes a man
blind, foolish, impions, sottish, darkening the whole (...), beginning in
darkness, and ending in utter darkness, where shall be weeping and ^^^shing
of teeth; This is all the good that sin does; and howsoever wicked men will
not beliue this, but flatter themselves in their mischief, and go on still in
their wickedness, walking on still in darkness, yet the time shall come, as
true as God has spoken it, when these shall go away into perpetual torments,
the reward of works of darkness, Math. 25. 46. where they shall houle and
cry in utter darkness, woe and alas, that ever we were borne, thus to be
tormented in this flame, never to be quenched, Thus we may see Sin as i^ were
anatomized before us and unmasked, and laid open in his colors, to the
astonishment and amazement of all that take pleasure therein, who shall be
damned, 2 These. 2. 12.

We are not of the night, nor of darkness, therefore let us not sleep in
sin, as do others, but let us watch, and be sober, 1 These. 5. 5. 6. And that
knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep, etc. Let us
therefore cast off the work of darkness, and let us put on the armor of
light; Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying, Romans 13. 11. 12.
13. And for the better doing of this, we must follow our Savior Christ, in
conforming our selves to be like him, who says: I am the light of the world,
he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
of life, John 8. 12.

to show forth the praises of him who has called us out of darkness, into
his marvelous light. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has
made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light; who
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his de^re Son, Colos. 1. 12. 13. whereas otherwise we might have
perished in utter darkness; And this of the first Reason.

The second Reason why we must not communicate with the sins of others, is,
because all sins are unfruitful; Have no fellowship with unfruitful works
of darkness.

Unfruitful works.] That sin is altogether unfruitful, as it appears here
in the Text, so it is confirmed by other places of holy Scripture, showing
there is no profit in sin. What fruit had ye then (says Paul) in those
things, whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death, Romans
6. 21. In which place we may observe a threefold Proposition, concerning sin,
1. every sin is unfruitful, 2. every sin is shameful, 3. every sin is
mortal. Here is a great loss no fruit, a bad end; yea, even then, when they
took most delight and pleasure in sin, and gave themselves over most of all
to the service of sin, even then, says Paul, ye had no fruit in sin. Saint
Paul exhorts, to maintain good works for necessary uses, that we be not
unfruitful, Tit. 3. 14. where he does intimate thus much, that as good works
make us fruitful, so evil works, or want of works, make us unfruitful and
unprofitable. He that received his talent, and did no good with it, is called
the unprofitable servant. Matthew. 25. 30. The hope of the wicked is vain, their
labors unfruitful, their works unprofitable. Wisd. 3. 11. Their thoughts are
vain, their words idle, their works sinful, all both sinful and unfruitful,
and therefore unfruitful, because sinful, as in the Text. It was Salomons
conclusion, All is vanity, and there is no profit under the Sun. Eccles. 2.
11, 22. and 1. 2, 3. and 3. 9. at large in that book.

many come to great wealth by these; sin therefore is profitable.

Nil prodest luerifacere temporalia, si perdantur eterna: It nothing profits
to gain temporal things, and to lose eternal; For what is a man profited, if
he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. 16. 26. So,
what profit do ye call that, when men get never so much, by the forenamed
sins, and afterward lose their souls for their labor?

The scope of the Apostle here, is to stir up the faithful to fruitfulness,
and to lead their lives fruitfully and profitably, that so they may walk
proouing what is pleasing to God; As if he should have said, Ye cannot
possibly please God, neither can your conversation be answerable to your
profession, if you communicate with wicked men in their sins, which are
altogether unfruitful. This place is well explained, Col^ss. 1. 9, 10. being
in effect all one; there the Apostle says, We cease not to pray for you, and
to desire you, that ye might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, in all
wisdom and spiritual understanding: That ye might walk worthy of the Lord,
unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, etc. What is this, I
say, but the same with this Text, Walke-proouing what is well-pleasing to GOD,
And have no fellowship with unfruitful works? If we would walk worthy of the
Lord, and as becomes our profession, then we must learn to know his will,
and please him; If we would please him, then we must be fruitful in every
good work; If we would be fruitful in every good work, then we must have
no fellowship with the sins of the wicked, for they are all unfruitful; yea,
howsoever our profession is if we live in the practice of these unfruitful
works, or have the least communion with them, We may profess we know God,
but by our works we deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate. Tit. 1. 16.

It is the saying of the Apostle, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to
all good works. 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. If all Scripture, then this of the Text,
aiming at this, that men should be fruitful; This is a faithful saying, and
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed
in God, might be careful to maintain good works, these things are good and
profitable unto men. But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and
contentions, and striuings about the Law, for they are unprofitable, and vain.
Tit. 3. 8, 9. and so it is true of all other sins whatsoever, they are
unprofitable, vain, and unfruitful: Indeed the bad fruits and effects of sin
are manifold; and wicked men bring forth most vile fruits in their lives and
conuersations, but there is no good fruit neither in sin nor sinners; Ye
shall know them by their fruits; Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles? Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruit; A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit.
Mat. 7. 16, 17, 18. etc.

Unfruitful works.] Sins are said to be unfruitful, many ways; both in
regard of God, our selves, or others; and this both in regard of soul and
body, goods, or good name, as I will show in order.

as being the Lawgiver, commanding what is to be done, and forbidding what is
to be undone; yea, as Aquinas says, (God being infinite in greatness and
goodness, infinite in might, power, majesty and mercy,) Sin may be not
unfitly termed, as it were an infinite injury; David seemed to have sinned
most against Vriah, in committing adultery with his wife, in making of him
drunk, in causing him to be murdered, as we read at large, 2. Sam. 11. yet,
as acknowledging, God most of all to be injured, being reproved by Nathan,
said, I have sinned against the Lord. 2. Sam. 12. 13. yea, he cries out in the
Psalm, Against thee, against thee only ^aue I sinned, and done this evil in
thy sight. Psalm. 51. 4 So when Joseph was intised to adultery, he acknowledged
God to be most injured, and therefore would not, durst not, saying, How shall
I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. Thus it is
said of Ananias and Saphira, who told a lie; Peter tells Ananias, Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God. Acts 5. 4. yea, the devil filled his heart to lie
to the holy Ghost, verse. 3. Thus by sin, God the Father is highly displeased,
2. Sam. 11. 27. The Son of God, Christ Jesus, crucified afresh, and put to an
open shame. Hebr. 6. 6. The holy Ghost grieved. Ephesians. 4. 30. Sin therefore
in regard of God himself is unfruitful.

All things must be done to the glory of God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. sin
dishonors and disglorifieth God. Through breaking of the Law thou
dishonourest God; The Name of God is blasphemed through such. Romans 2. 23. Thus
when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, but became vain, etc. Romans
1. 21.

only our conversation must be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Philipp.
1. 27. and we must adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Titus
2. 10. yet, sin does nothing but disgrace and discredit the Gospel, causing
the same and the professors thereof to be evil spoken of; The word of God is
blasphemed. Titus 2. 5. Again, the Gospel cannot profit us, because of
ignorance, unbelief; want of faith, etc. The Gospel was preached unto them of
old time, but did not profit them, because it was not mixed with faith, in those
who heard it. Heb. 4. 2.

Matthew. 16. 26. A wicked man may seem to be in great prosperity outwardly,
as Psalm. 73. 3. etc. but its no true prosperity; for he that hides his
sins shall not prosper. Prou. 28. 13. that is, his soul shall not prosper;
and then woe be unto them, if their soul prosper not. Secondly, in regard of
our bodies; witness the manifold plagues, judgments, punishments,
sickenesses, diseases, crosses, afflictions, which sin does pull upon us; as
we see plainly, yet lamentably set forth, at large, Deuteronomy. 28. Leuit. 26.
where in reading you shall understand. It causes death, not only the
corporal death, but eternal, both of soul and body; Destruction is from our
selves; (namely for sin.) Hos. 13. 9. Man suffers for his sin Lament. 3.
39. The wages of sin is death. Romans 6. 23. And every transgression deserves
the just recompense of reward. Heb. 2. 2. Destruction shall be to the workers
of iniquity. Prou. 10. 29. The peruercenesse of transgressors shall destroy
them. Prou. 11. 3. Infinite are the proofs hereof, that sin is most
unfruitful both in regard of soul and body, as being most hurtful to both.
Thirdly, in regard of our goods and outward estate; for either it hinders,
from receiving good at Gods hand; or else causes a curse upon them being
received; either outward things shall not go well with us, or they shall be
as snares unto us, heaping up wrath against the day of wrath. Your iniquities
have separated between you, and your God; and your sins have hid his face
from you, that he will not hear, etc. Esaias 59. 2, 3. If a nation do evil in
Gods sight, that it obey not his voice, then God will repent of the good,
wherewith he said he would benefit them. I'er. 18. 10. If ye will not hear,
and if ye wll not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my Name, says the Lord
of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings,
yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart; Behold, I
will corrupt your seed, etc. Malac. 2, 2. etc. Fourthly, In regard of our good
name; Sin brings upon us nothing but bad report, shame, disgrace, reproach,
yea, such as will never be done away. He that commits adultery with a woman
lacks understanding; he that does it, destroys his own soul; A wound and
dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. Prou. 6.
33. A wicked man is loathsome, and comes to shame. Prou. 13. 5. What fruit
had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans 6. 21. Thus,
Evil pursues sinners. Prou. 13. 21. The curse of the Lord is in the house of
the wicked. Prou. 3. 33. And sin is a reproach to any people. Prou. 14. verse
34.

In a word; Sin is unfruitful in regard of others: For hereby we do
greatly offend the weak brethren, Icandalize the Church, and harden the wicked
in their sins, and confirm them in their wickedness; By sin, we lay a
stumbling block in the way, and cause others to fall; A violent man entiseth
his neighbor, and leads him into the way that is not good. Pro. 16. 29.
Wicked men sleep not, except they have done mischief, and their sleep is
taken away, unless they cause some to fall. Prou. 4. 16. How unprofitable and
unfruitful all these ways are, appears. For he that offends one of the
little ones that believe in Christ, it were better for him that a millstone were
hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Woe
unto the world because of offenses, Woe to that man by whom the offense
comes. Matt. 18. 6, 7. And when we harden and confirm others in sin, what
is this but to justify the ungodly, which is abomination to the Lord? Prou.
17. 15. yea, such are accursed, Prou. 24. 24. Esaias 5. 23. Briefly; what is the
cause of subversion of Kingdoms, alteration of Princes, and the like? is it
not sin? For the transgression of a land, many are the Princes thereof. Prou.
28. 2. But what shall I say more? I cannot sufficiently express the
unfruitfulness of sin; but as the Text has it, so Solomon confirms it,
Treasures of wickedness profit nothing. Prou. 10. 2. And thus I end this
Doctrine: The Uses follow.

then shows the folly, and condemns the madness of wicked men, who give
themselves to nothing more than sin, wherein is no profit at all, and neglect
godliness, which is greatest gain. 1. Tim. 6. 6. Let all such remember, if a
man must give account for every idle word. Matthew. 12. 36. much more for every
idle, unfruitful and unprofitable work; For every tree that brings not
f^orth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. Matthew. 3. 10. The
unprofitable servant shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew. 25. and yet to see the madness of men,
as Solomon speaks, that fools make but a sport of sin. Prou. 19. 23.

practicing good wotkes, and bringing forth fruits of godliness, this will
make us that we shall not be unfruitful; For godliness is profitable to all
things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
1. Tim. 4. 8. Let us learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that
we be not unfruitful, Tit. 3. 14. This is a faithful saying, and these things
I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God,
might be careful to maintain good works these things are good and profitable
unto men; as Tit. 3. 8.

Lastly, this must teach ^^ all to repent heartily of o^^ unfruitfulness,
idleness, an^ unprofitableness, as kno^ing that if we live and die
unfruitfulness, our case fearful and damnable, has been proved; B^^ forth
therefore fruits meet for repentance, Math. 3. 8. And so, I pray God, that ye
may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good
work. Coloss. 1. 9, 10.

And thus much of the Fifth Sermon, and the Second Step of the Christian man's
Walk.
THE THIRD STEP, and sixth SERMON.
Text. But reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5. 11.
HItherto of the Dehortation; Now follows the second part of this verse, viz.
an Exhortation, But reprove them rather; In the former the Apostle dehorts;
first, from doing the former evils mentioned; secondly, from communicating with
those that do them; thirdly, in these words he exhorts to a contrary duty, to
reprove sin; which is not barely, but emphatically propounded, as the word
(rather) does import; as if he had said, So far be it from you, that ye
should in any case communicate with such unfruitful works of darkness, as
that ye ought rather to reprove them than to have the least to do with them,
and that, by conuincing the doers of them, that such works are altogethet
evil, unfruitful, hurtful, yea, damnable, and therefore to be avoided; that
others being thus reproved, and convicted, may be brought to a sight and
knowledge of their sins, and so repent and be saved, and not suffered to run
on headlong in their sins to their own destruction, as many do for want of
reproof; From this Dehortation and Exhortation thus joined together, arises a
twofold observation.

First, hence I gather, that Obser. 1.
it is not sufficient, not to do evil, but we must do good; It is a fault in
a number, that please themselves in this, that they are not such notorious
evil livers as many are, yea, but observe them well, they do no good; But, as
we must cease to do evil, so we must learn to do well, Esaias 1. 16. 17. As
we must put off the old man with his works, which ar^ corrupt, so we must be
renewe^ in the spirit of our minds, a^^ put on the new man, etc. A^ we must
not lie, so we must spea^ truth; As we must not steal, ^ we must labor
rather, worki^^ that which is good, etc. Eph^^ 4. 22. to the end. As we mu^^
dye unto sin, so we must live unto righteousness. As we must not
communicate with unfruitful works of darkness, so we must rather reprove
them.

Who so will reprove Obser. 2.
sin, must not be tainted with evil, neither communicate with evil; We must
first put in practice the Dehortation, before we can well perform the
Exhortation; We must first pull the beam out of our own eye, before we can
see to pull the moate out of our brothers eye, Math. 7. 5. We cannot reprove
sin in others, and be as bad our selves, either doing evil or communicating
with it; but of these by the way, and more fully afterward.

But reprove them rather.] These words contain the Third Step of the
Christian Man's Walk; alluding to a third property of the Sun. As the Sun by
her light, does discover lay open, and make manifest, things in secret and
unknown, (For it is light that makes all things manifest, Ephesians. 5. 13.) So
Christians who are made light in the Lord, should labor to discover the sins
of others unto their faces, conuincing them, that they are thus and thus guilty
of this and that sin, and make it manifest to the shame of the doer, and so
to reprove him for it, seeking the glory of God in the good of our brethren.

In handling of these words, I observe two things concerning Christian
reproof. 1. The Matter. 2. The Manner. In the Matter it self, consider three
things, 1. the duty, Reprove. 2. who must reprove? The children of light; as
appears from 8. Verse 3. What must be reproved? viz. not so much the persons
of men, as their sins; But rather reprove them. First of the duty.

Reprove.] This word in the original is more significant, than can be fitly
expressed in one English word; and therefore in diverse places of holy Scripture
it is diversely translated, yet all tending to the same effect; Commonly, in this
sense; to reprove, as here, and elsewhere; and thus it is taken either
actiuely, or passiuely; Actiuely, as here, and 2 Timothy 4. 2. (...), reprove:
Passiuely, as John 3. 20. He that does evil, comes not to the light, (...);
lest his deeds should be reproved. Sometimes it is translated to rebuke,
which is somewhat different from the former, as may appear by Paul's words,
distinguishing them; 2 Timothy 4. 2. Reprove, Rebuke, etc. thus it is, 1 Timothy 5.
20. Them that sin, (...), rebuke before all; and many other places. But most
properly, the word ((...)) signifies to convince; and thus it is often used; as
1 Cor. 14. 24. If all prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or
one unlearned, (...), he is convinced of all; So it is taken passiuely; so,
Tit. 1. 9. A Bishop must be able to exhort by wholesome and sound doctrine,
(...), and to convince the gainesaiers. So, I am. 2. 9. If ye have respect to
persons, ye commit sin, (...) etc. being convinced of the law, as
transgressors. So, Epist. Jude, and 15. Verse. Christ comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, (...), etc. to convince
all that are ungodly, and thus it is taken actiuely. All which significations,
laid together, the sense is this. Convince them in their consciences of the
forenamed sins, as fornication, all uncleanness, covetousness,
filthiness, foolish talking, jesting unseemly, idolatry, and the like;
Convince them, I say, that they are altogether evil, vile, abominable,
unfruitful, and without repentance, damnable, and therefore to be avoided; and
so think it not sufficient, that you avoid them in your selves, but they being
so convicted, proceed to reprove and rebuke them, and as occasion shall serve,
correct them, laboring by all means to bring them out of those sins, and not
suffer them to perish in their sins. And this for the meaning.

Hence I observe in the Obser. 1.
first place, that it is the duty of every Christian in general, and each one
in particular, to reprove the sins and vices of these times, which we shall
see to be in others, as well as to avoid them in our selves; This is that
Christian zeal that ought to be in every one, not to endure evil; not to
suffer sin to rest upon our brethren; So zealous ought we to be for Gods
glory, and so loving unto our brethren, as by Christian reproof to stop the
course of sin. We are redeemed by Christ from all iniquity, to be a
peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. Now, one maine good work,
is Christian reproof. This is strictly enjoined by. God himself; saying, Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him, Leuit. 19. 17. Whence we may gather,
That, as not reproouing, is a sign of hatred of our brother, so reproouing is
a means to make men leave their sins. It is cruelty unto men; and
unkindness toward God, not to reprove sin; cruelty to men, because we
knowing and seeing it, yet suffer them to perish, and will not hold them back,
so much as we can, when we see them straying to their own destruction:
Unkindness toward God, because we seek not Gods glory in the good of our
brethren, we show no dislike of their sins, we are not grieved, with Lot, at
their wicked conuersations; We are but disloyal and unfaithful subjects to
our heavenly King, when we suffer any to speak evil of him, or do evil
against him, and yet we will never set our selves against them; We are but
unkind and dishonest children, who will hear so good a Father, so wronged,
and we not to seek to maintain his glory; yea, it is a despising of Gods
Majesty, when we rebuke not men's vices.

things, and either for favor, fear, or affection, neither will nor dare
reprove their peoples sins; or if they do, it is partially, reproouing
some, not other-some; for fear of ill will, discontent, and displeasure; thus
fearing men more then God; so they may please men, care not how God is
dishonored; But let all Ministers take up the counsel of God by the Prophet:
Cry aloude, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my people
their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, Esaias 58. 1. Let us
take heed to that charge which Saint Paul gives us to discharge; I charge
thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Preach the word, be instant
in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering
and doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. For all Scripture is profitable, for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17.

A Ruler must be a terror to evil works; He must not bear the Sword in
vain, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him
that does evil, Romans 13. 3. 4. And for this cause, Magistrates must take heed
of partiality, bribes, receiving of gifts, respecting of persons, and the like,
which do greatly hinder the execution of justice, especially when they are to
sit in the seat of Judgment; yea, these make them to be so far from
reproouing and punishing of malefactors, as that rather they do harden them in
their wickedness, and encourage them to do evil, and they themselves become
accessory to the sins of malefactors; Let Magistrates therefore hearken
diligently unto that good counsel of that good King Iehoshaphat, and the more
regard it, because spoken by a King to the Judges; Take heed what ye do; for
ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment;
Wherefore now, let the fear of God be upon you, take heed, and do it; for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 7. Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not
respect persons, neither take a gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the
wise, and pervert the words of the righteous, Deuteronomy. 16. 19. ye shall do no
vnrighousnesse in judgment, thou shall not respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the mighty, Leuit. 19. 15. Neither shall thou
countenance a poor man in his cause, Exodus 23. 3. Thus shall ye do in the
fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect heart, etc. And ye shall
warn them that they trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon
you, 2 Chronicles. 19. 9. 10.

them, yet are silent, winking at their saults, though most horrible, either
seeing and not seeing, or seeing and not correcting; Thus though they know them
to live in daily drunkenness, whooredome, theft, pride, wantonness, dicing,
and gaming, idleness; lasciviousness, in swearing, and swaggering, in
reuelling and rioting day and night, yet are so far from this reproouing, as
rather they are ready to back and boulster them in their wicked courses, and
no man must control them; Such Parents and Masters have a fearful account to
make at the last day; and besides, they hold their children and servants in
sin; and in what them lies, plunge their souls into everlasting
destruction, suffering them to run on headlong the broad way to hell, when as
they may and ought to reclaim and restrain them; These are far from David's
mind, who would not suffer a wicked person in his house, Psalm. 101. But what
says Solomon? Chasren thy Son, while there is hope, and let not thy soul
spare for his crying, Prou. 19. 18. The blewnesse of the wound cleanses away
evil, Prou. 20. 30. Withold not correction from the child; for if thou
beat him with the rod, he shall not die; Thou shall beat him with the rod,
and shall deliver his soul from hell, Prou. 23. 13. 14. Foolishness is bound
in heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him,
Prou 22. 15. But it is an heavy case to think, how many children come to
untimely ends, some to the Gallows, some to the Stab, some to make away
themselves, for want of Parents education in not bringing them up in the
instruction and information of the Lord; Many children may curse their parents
for this, and undoubtedly will curse them in hell hereafter; In a word, this
condemns the most, who suffer their neighbors to sin commonly, and either
for fear, favor, affection, or some other sinister end, neither will nor dare
reprove them, where^s God says expressly, Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thy heart, but shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him. Leuit. 19. 17. Yea, let all such know, that they are guilty of his sin.
Leu. 5. 1, etc.

Paul: Suffer the words of exhortation. Hebr. 13. 22. So say I, Suffer the
words of reprehension; We must know, that if we will be lively stones of
the spiritual building, we must be first rough-hewen by the law, and then
smoothed and plained by the Gospel; we must hear of judgment as well as
mercy; we must endure the bitter pills of reproof, as well as the sugar of
affectionate persuasions; we must apply as willingly the corasiues of the Law,
(...) the cordials of the Gospel; knowing what Solomon says, Open rebuke is
better than secret love. Prou 27. 5. Quest. But what if people will no^ suffer
reproof? Answ. The peril be upon their own^ heads; the Minister has
discharged his own soul; ^ God by the Prophet spea^^eth; If thou warn the
wick^^ of his way to turn from it; if ^^ do not turn from his way, he shall
die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered thy soul. Ezekiel. 33. 9. But this
is the common fault of the most, to hear the Minister, so long as he sing
placentia, id est, pleasing things, speaking words of eloquence, using
flattering words, sowing pillowes under men's elbowes; but if he lance the
sore, and touch them to the quick, they hate him, they renounce him; They are
so impudent, as he was to Moses, saying, Who made thee a ruler over us? Exo.
2. 14. or else so shameless and ouer-saucie, like Korah and his company, who
told Moses and Aaron, Ye take too much upon you. Numb. 16. 3. Yet God
commands, Cry aloud, and spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet; show my
people their transgression, etc. Esaias 58. 1.

Now because we are backward to embrace this doctrine of reproof, let us
briefly observe these re^sons, to move us all thereunto.

Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him.
Leuit. 19. 17. Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins. Esaias
58. 1. Preach the word, reprove, rebuke, etc. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Let us all
remember, it is God who speaks out of his word by his Ministers. See
therefore, that ye refuse not him that speaks, for ^^ they escaped not, that
refusel him that spoke on the earth, much more shall not we escape if we
turn away from him that speaks from heaven. Hebr. 12. 25.

He that regards reproof is prudent. Prou. 15. 5. He is in the way of life
that keeps instruction. Prou. 10. 17. As an earering of gold, and an ornament
of fine gold, so is a wise reproouer upon an obedient ear, Prou. 25. 12. Let
the righteous smite, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent oil, or precious balm. Psalm. 141. 5. Reproves of
instruction are the way of life. Prou. 6. 23.

It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear the song
of fools. Eccles. 7. 5. It may be the song of fools is more pleasing, and
delightful to the flesh, but the rebuke of the wise is more profitable to the
soul. The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise; He
that hears reproof, gets understanding. Prou. 15. 31, 32. He that
regards reproof shall be honored. Prou. 13. 18.

He that hates reproof is brutish. Prou. 12. 1. He that hates reproof
shall die. Prou. 15. 10. Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses
instruction. Prou. 13. 18. He that refuses reproof, erreth. Prou. 10. 17.
Notable is that place of Solomon to this purpose; Because (says God) you have
set at naught all my Commandments, and would none of my reproof, I also will
laugh at your calamity. I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear
comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a whirlwind, when
distress and anguish comes upon you; Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, for
that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord; They would
none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof, Pro. 1. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30.

Who refuses to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so wisely.
Psalm. 58. 5. A scorner hears not reproof. Prou. 13. 1. Our Savior Christ
put this difference between the godly, and the wicked; For every one that does
evil, hates the light; neither comes to the light, left his deeds should
be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. John 3. 20, 21. A scorner
will hate him that reprooueth him. Prou. 9. 8.

In a word; Those that hate reproof, pull upon themselves swift damnation, and
endless destruction. Thus says God to the wicked, Thou hate instruction,
and castest my words behind thee, etc. But I will reprove thee, and set them
in order before thee, Psalm. ^0 16, to 21. Thus when they shall say peace and
safety, (promising to themselves most security) Then shall sudden destruction
come upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. 1. These. 5. 3. according to that remarkable saying of Solomon; He that
being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy. Prou. 29. 1.

Secondly, whereas the Obser. ^.
word translated, Reprove, signifies in the original, to Convince; Hence
further I observe, what is the right order and direct course in the duty of
reproouing; namely intending the good of the party, to convince him in his
conscience of his fault, making it manifest, that it is a sin in him, and so
to proceed to reprove, rebuke, admonish, and check him; and if occasion
serve, to give due correction; that the party so convicted may be brought to
a sight of his sin, and to amendment: It is therefore a preposterous and rash
course suddenly to reprove bluntly, without conuincing the conscience of the
offender. We must follow the example of God himself in this, viz. So to
reprove the party, as to set in order before his eyes the things that he
has done. Psalm. 50. 21. If all prophecy, and there come in one that
believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all;
and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on
his face he will worship God, and report, that GOD is in you of a truth. 1. Corinthians. 14. 24, 25. Without this conuincing, our reproves will be in vain;
the party reproved will be more hardened, and grow more desperate, and so we
shall do more hurt than good; besides, we shall be counted false accusers,
and busi-bodies in other men's matters. And thus of the duty, Reprove.

must reprove. It is a duty which indeed concerns all men; all ought to do
it, all should do it, though indeed all cannot: None are excepted, none
exempted; for that rule is indefinite, and concerns all, Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not
suffer sin upon him. Leuit. 19. 17. Here is a commandment general. Indeed
none ought to reprove either with scandal to himself or others, or with hurt
and hinderance to the party reproved, because every one should be clear at
least of open crimes, yet such are not simply freed from the performance of
this duty. But more properly, and in a more special manner, this duty belongs
to those that are regenerate by the Spirit of God, and truly converted; who are
come out of their natural estate, and become spiritual; who being once
darkness, are now made light in the Lord, walking as children of the light,
as appears from the ^. verse; Ye were once darkness, but now are light in
the Lord, walk as children of light, proouing what is pleasing to the Lord,
And have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them. They are called children of light, who being come out of the
darkness of their sins, ignorance and error, are renewed in the spirit of
their mind, being endued with the true knowledge of God, having their
understanding enlightened, their judgments informed, their heart and lives
reformed, their wills rectified, their affections sanctified, and the whole man
conformed to the will of God. As on the contrary, They are said to be children
of darkness, who walk in the vanity of their mind; having the understanding
darkened, being altenated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is
in them, because of their hardness of their heart; who being past feeling,
have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. unto these latter this duty does not so
properly belong; Therefore Saint Paul directly points at the parties who must
reprove; viz. children of light, expressing himself pl^inely elsewhere,
Brethren, if any man be suddenly overtaken in any offense, ye which are
[spirituall] restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, Galath. 6. 1. and
in this place, Paul speaks not so much of reproof by word, as by deed, by the
light of an holy life, which wicked men cannot perform.

Caine his disposition, Am I my brothers keeper? Genesis 4. 9. therefore let them
sink or swim, what is that to us? let them look to it whom it concerns,
for my part I will not meddle in it; This I say, is the common sin of these
times, most severely to be censured; for by this means, he which may save a
soul, and will not, (which often times may be done by this Christian
reproof) does in effect, in what him lies, kill and destory his brothers
soul, which indeed oftentimes perishes for want of brotherly correction and
reproof: Many have a care of the good of the bodies of others, and they are
bound in conscience so to do; much more care then ought they to have of the
good of their souls, being far more precious than the body? And look how
far a man excels a beast, so far should we regard the good of our brethren
more than a beast. It is written, if we see our enemies Ox or Ass to wander
or go astray, we must turn him back, much more our brother going the broad
way to destruction. Now to stir us up to the performance of this duty, let
us observe what Saint James says, Brethren, if any of you do err from the
truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which conuerteth a sinner
from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a
multitude of sins, Iam. 5. 19. 20.

No man lights a candle, and puts it under a bushel, but sets it on a
Candlestick, that it may give light to all in the house, Math. 5. 15.
signifying, that we must not conceal those gifts which God gives us, but
employ them to the good of others; according to that remarkable saying; When
thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren, Luke 22. 32. especially this
concerns Ministers, as Paul says, The dispensation is given me to you-ward,
Ephesians. 3. 2. Unto me the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I
should Preach to the Gentiles, etc. Ephesians. 3. 8.

Reprove them rather; [Them.] This may be understood, either of wicked men
who are darkness, or of their sins which are works of darkness; In this
place, the Apostle speaks properly of their sins; Have no fellowship with
unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them, that is, works of
darkness; Sins then are to be reproved. Quest. But may not persons
themselves be reproved? Answ. All that are of the visible Church, at lest in
show and outward profession, who are brethren in religion (though false
brethren) if they be of the same particular Church, living under the same
particular government, or being of another Church, yet profess the same
religion with us, may and ought to be reproved and censured. Thus, Kings and
Princes, the mighty Potentates, Magistrates, Ministers and all Superiors are
subject to reproof, as well as others. Thus Nathan reproved King David,
first, in a parable, afterward directly, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12. 1. to 7.
Thus Azariah the Priest, with fourscore more Priests of the Lord, that were
valiant men, withstood King Vzziah, and reproved him sharply, for burning
incense to the Lord, whereas it nothing pertained to him, but only to the
Priests; Go out of the sanctuary, say they, for thou have trespassed, neither
shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God, 2 Chronicles. 26. 17. 18. Thus Paul
reproved Peter to his sace, Gal. 2. 11. to 15. and Paul bids the Colossians,
to say unto Archippus, Take heed to thy Ministry, which thou have received in
the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col. 4. 17* But on the contrary, this reproof
belongs not to those which are out of the visible Church, as Jews Turks,
Pagans, and the like; reproof being a part of Ecclesiastical discipline
reaches not to such; as Paul says, What have I to do to judge them that are
without? i. e. those that are out of the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 12. And here, by
the way, I observe, that those Magistrates, Monarchs, Ministers, and other
Superiors, that will not endure the least reproof, do herein contemn Gods
ordinance, and are greatly to be censured; Let Superiors remember, they have
many that will flatter them, but few that will or dare reprove them; whereas
they being in highest place, are more subject to falling, and so most need of
reproof. But what says Solomon? He that rebukes a man, afterward, shall
find more favor, than he that flattereth with the tongue, Prou. 28. 23.

But the scope of the Apostle in this place, as I have observed, is to show
rather what must be reproved; namely, all Sin whatsoever, known and
certain; be it less or great; against God or man; even injuries and wrongs,
especially public, though not always private; public, I say, which are
dishonorable to God himself, scandalous to his Church, peruitious to him that
commits them.

Hence then I gather, that Obser.
the maine thing to be aimed at in our reproves, is Sin in man, not so much
man himself; it is Sin that is the bane of the soul; sin is mortal,
deadly, and damnable; Through sin, both soul and body perish, it being not
repented of; Seeing then we must labor to gain our brother from perishing in
his sins, every sin must be reproved. Object. But by reproouing of men's
sins, and men for their sins, I shall get ill will, much hatred, contempt,
and so thrust my hand as it were into a Waspes neast, therefore I had better be
silent, and let them alone. Answ. I answer with Solomon, Reprove not a
scorner, lest he hate thee; rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee, Prou. 9.
8.

the Stage, making them spectacles to the world, rather exclaiming of them,
than speaking in love to reclaim them; that I may say with Paul, They Preach
Christ of envy, Philip. 1. 15. And the same is common among the most of our
people, who lie in wait for their brethren; who, many times see, and hear
their neighbors to sin, and that grievously, both in public and secret,
yet never find fault with them; but when the least occasion is offered of
falling out, then they will rip up all that they can, though it be many years
after, to their utter overthrow, shame, and disgrace; yea, many times, in what
them lies, to the taking away of their neighbors life; and through this comes
so many nicke-names, reproachful terms and the like: This is, I say, the
common course of reproouing; whereas Saint Paul would have us, to reprove,
rebuke, with all long-suffering. 2. Tim. 4. 2.

Saul with his spear, if you awake them, its at your peril; ready with Herod
to behead John Baptist, or with Achab to imprison the good Prophet Michaiah;
yea, many there are, that do wilfully absent themselves from the Word, because
they cannot endure their sins should be reproved; and if they thought the
Minister would speak against such and such sins, they would never hear him,
and therefore many times it is seen; that such an one, having a guilty
conscience, though the Minister never meant him, will wilfully depart out of
the Church, and bear a continual hatred to that Minister, for speaking
against pride, swearing, swaggering, drunkenness, whoredom, usury, and the
like; Thus they that do evil hate the light, neither will they come to the
light, left their deeds should be reproved, John 3. 20. But these are
scorners, proud; ^ir a scorner hears not reproof. Prou. 13. 1. A scorner
loves ^ut one that reprooueth him; neither will he go unto the wise. Prou.
15. 15. But let such know, whosoever they are, That God scorneth all such
scorners. Prou. 3. 34.

Which who-so does, shall be destroyed; but he that fears the Commandment,
shall be rewarded. Prou. 13. 13. Many cry out of the Minister for reproving,
when it is the Wor^ of God. For the Word of Go^ is quick and powerful, an^
sharper then any two edge sword, pearcing even to the dividing a-sunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. Hebr. 4. 12.

while it is little, it is not prevented in the beginning, but suffered to take
a head; there is no conscience made of small sins, they are no whit regarded,
and therefore so seldom reproved. Let us observe this in the example of Cain:
The Lord reproved him for his wrath, and sad countenance, (which were
beginnings of further mischief) but he not regarding the Lords reproof for
those smaller sins, grew to the height of that grievous and crying sin of
murder; rising, up against his innocent brother Abel, slew him. Genesis 4. 6, 8.
whereas, if he had yielded to Gods reproof for his wrath, malice, and sad
countenance, he might have prevented murder. Thus a number being reproved
for their lusts, chambering, idleness, wantonness, lasciviousness, and not
regarding it, grow to whoredom: So when men are reproved for haunting bad
places, and keeping bad company, and not yield unto it, come at length to that
horrible sin of drunkenness, theft, and the like.

Ob. But if all sins are to be reproved, and all sorts are to be reproved,
why does Solomon say, Rebuke not a scorner. Prou. 9. 8. and Paul, Rebuke not an
Elder? 1. Tim. 5. 1. Answ. Solomon speaks of open and manifest scorners, and
contemners of the Word; otherwise all, though never so notorious, are to be
censured and reproved; and so must that place of our Savior be understood of
open scorners and persecuters of the known truth; Give not that which is holy
unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample
them under their feet, and turn again, and rent you. Matthew. 7. 6. Such holy
admonitions, and Christian pearl of Christian reproof, and brotherly
correction, are not to be cast before such dogs and swine as manifest
contemners of religion, and open persecuters of the Word. Whereas Paul says,
Rebuke not an Elder, he does not mean that it is altogether unlawful to
reprove an Elder, but to show the manner of reproof, and the right rule to
be observed; as, it must be done advisedly, mildely, gently, by way of
entreaty, and exhortation: A bare reproof is not so fit as exhortation; Rebuke
not an Elder, but entreat him as a father. Against as Elder receive no
accusation, but before two or three witnesses. Them that sin, rebuke before
all. 1. Timoth. 5. 19, 2. id est, those Elders being first privately
admonished, and accused before witnesses, rebuke before all; id est, the whole
Church.

Hitherto of the Matter; Now of the Manner of reproof: for it is not
sufficient to reprove, but to know how. The right Manner of reproof is
twofold: General. Special. Generally; we are to reprove two ways. First,
by word. Secondly, by deed: as follows.

Solomon, and Paul. Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer
sin upon him. Leuit 19. 17. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go
and tell him his fault between thee and him alone, if he hear thee, thou
have gained thy brother. Matthew. 18. 15. which Saint Luke explaineth; If thy
brother trespass against thee, rebuke him. Luke 17. 3. Them that sin, rebuke
before all. 1. Tim. 5. 20. that is, those Elders that have been first privately
admonished, and after that before witnesses, if they be accused before two or
three witnesses, then let the Pastors or Governors of the Church, reprove
those Elders before all men, that is, before the whole Church, and not before
all men, in all places, in all assemblies where they offend, and where they
become; for this were a disgraceful reproof; tending rather to their
hardening, than amendment. We must hold fast the faithful Word, as we have
been taught, that we may be able by sound doctrine both to exhort, and to
convince the gainsayers. Tit. 1. 9. Reprove, rebuke, exhort, 2. Tim. 4. 2.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness. 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith. Titus 1. 13. And
Solomon often in the Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, speaks of reproouing by word
of mouth, and hearing, and hating reproof, as I have formerly shown. But
howsoever this be a special duty, and necessary, and the want of it to be
bewailed, and though we ought by all means so far as our calling requires,
to reprove sins; yet the Apostle does not in this place and Text speak
properly of this kind of reproof by word, but of the other; by deed.

Precepta decent, Exempla trakunt: Precepts teach, Examples draw on others.
That this kind of reproof is here meant, appears by these reasons.

If thy brother trespass, rebuke him. Luke 17. 3. But here the Apostle
speaks of infidels who are darkness, and their works, works of darkness.

duty to do it by contrary manners, by an holy conversation of life, and by
declining from all communion with sin, and sinners.





words. 1. because they are done in secret; if they are done in secret, how can
we reprove things unknown by words? 2. it is a shame to name them, and to
speak of those things which are done of them in secret; how then can we with
honesty by words reprove them? which words are spoken emphatically, for if it
be a shame to speak of them, how much more shame to commit them?

To let our light of an holy example, so shine before others, that they may see
our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5. 16. We
must have our conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against us as evil doers, they may by our good works, which they shall
behold, glorify God, 1 Pet. 2. 12. Thus by the light of piety, and good
works; by a holy conversation of life, and good example, wicked men will be
reproved and convinced in their consciences, that those things which they do
are not good; whereas by the word of mouth, yea, by the word of God, they will
be no whit moved; according to the saying of Saint Paul; If all prophecy,
and there come in one that is an unbeliever, or one unlearned, he is convinced
of all, he is judged of all; And thus are the secrets of his heart made
manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report
that God is in you of a truth, 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25. Thus by this means sinners
are not offended, but more profitably reproved, and so are brought to a
knowledge of themselves, and being brought to a knowledge of themselves and
their sins, grow to a mislike of themselves, and of their sins and so are
brought to repentance, and salvation; And for this purpose, that saying of
Saint Peter is remarkable, and regardable; ye Wives be in subjection to your
own Husbands, that of any obey not the word, they may without the word be won
by the conversation of the Wives, while they behold your chaste conversation
coupled with fear, 1 Pet. 3. 1. 2.

offend the weak, scandalize the Church, harden the wicked, and confirm them
in their wickedness, wound their own, and their brothers conscience, causing
others to fall and go astray, and in what them lie, destroy their souls:
Evil words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15. much more evil works. And thus
much of the manner of reproof in General.

Specially, the manner of reproouing of Sin, consists in these particulars.
It must be 1. orderly, 2. certainly, 3. plainly, 4. discreetly, 5. mildely,
6. seasonably, 7. lovingly, 8. patiently, 9. considerately, 10. zealously, 11.
profitably, 12. impartially.

Servants, and kindred, then in strangers. This order to begin with our
selves, is very necessary; for it is a shame to reprove that in others, with
which we are tainted our selves; we are unworthy reproouers, neither can we
in love to them, or hatred to their sin, or zeal to Gods glory, reprove
others for that which we hate to reform in our selves; If we do reprove
others, and be as deep in fault our selves, it may well be said unto us,
Physician, heal thy self, Luke 4. 23. For wherein thou iudgest another, thou
condemnest thy self, for thou that iudgest do the same things. And think
thou O man, that iudgest them which do such things, and do the same, that
thou shall escape the judgment of God? Romans 2. 1. 3. And why beholdest thou
the moate that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is
thine own eye? Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull the moate out
of thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first
cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to
cast out the moate out of thy brothers eye, Math. 7. 3. 4. 5. This is that holy
order to be observed, besides the conuincing the offender in his conscience of
his fault, before he proceed to reprove. It is the counsel of the Apostle,
Let all things be done decently, and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. if all things,
then Reproof.

teeth, and altogether neglect their own faults, which are as great, or
greater; These are a curious people to look into other men's lives, but a
sloathfull people to look into their own; They are quicke-sighted and
Eagleeyed, in spying faults in others, but as blind as Moules to see their
own; They can spy the least moate in their brothers eye, but cannot discern
the great beams in their own. They are like unto an eye, which sees all
things, but cannot see it self Thus, they strain at a Gnat, and swallow a
Camel, Matthew. 23. 24. But let us mark what David says Let the righteous
smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be an
excellent oil, which shall not break my head, Psalm. 141. 5. Lo, he says
not here, let the profane, Iewd, wicked liver, who is tainted with the same or
greater sin reprove me, but let the righteous; signifying, that before we
correct and reprove others, we must first redress our own saults, and become
godly and righteous.

certainly. I mean, we must have a certain knowledge of the sin, or fault
committed, and be thoroughly informed of the offense, either in our selves, or
by credible information from others, who are known to be honest men, against
whom no just exception can be taken. In this case we may reprove peremptorily
and directly, as Nathan did David, Thou art the man, 2 Samuel 12 7. But if it be
a doubtful case, and the thing concerning our brothers fault uncertain, our
reprooie must be conditional; Besides, we shall purchase to our selves much
disgrace, the party reproved will deny that he knows any such thing, so we
shall be counted busybodies in other men's actions, spying out faults where is
none, whereby our brother is much offended, and we taken for false accusers,
because we have no ground or certain proof of the fault; It is the counsel
of the Apostle, Let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good
works, Heb. 10. 24. not consider one another to vpbraid one another, but the
better to discern of the fault, and to know how to reprove it. When Paul saw
that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, he
reproved Peter before them all, Gal. 2. 14. Here was a certain knowledge Paul
reproved the dissent^ among the Corinthians; For it has been declared unto
me of you, my brethren, by them which are of the house of Cloe, that there are
contentions among you, etc. 1 Cor. 11. 12. Here was a credible information;
which Paul believed, and therefore reproved them; I hear there are divisions
among you, (he heard it by report of the house of Cloe,) and I partly believe
it, 1 Cor. 11. 18.

their neighbor, and these are believed, though never so false, and from the
false report of such, men go to reprove the party so grossly and wrongfully
abused; and when the party so reproved, being most innocent, shall demand who
is the Author of such reports, this is the villainy of all, the reproouer will
conceal the Author, and will by no means reveal him, either for fear of
favor, and so leave a blot upon the good name of the guiltless party. Let
all such know they have no part in the Kingdom of heaven, Psalm. 15. 3.

plainly. To reprove plainly, is, 1. to lay open, discover, and make
manifest the fault to the face of the doer, and not to go behind the door
for the matter, as though we durst not be seen in it. For all things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light, Ephesians. 5. 13. Paul withstood Peter
to his face, and reproved him before them all; he went plainly to work,
being thoroughly informed of the offense, Galath. 2. 11. 14. Or, plainly; that
is, in plain terms; couching our reproof in plain words, to speak to the
capacity of the party reproved, and to the conuincing of him in his
conscience of his fault, that it is not a fault in general, but a fault in
him; so much the word in the original signifies. Or, plainly; that is, to
reprove in good earnest, iudicially, without sleighting of it over houerly,
and negligently, using no quirkes or quiddities, or equivocation; Or, plainly;
that is, to deal plainly, that is to say, simply, uprightly, innocently,
truly, without deceit, guile, vaineglory, dissimulation, or flattery. Thou
shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Lou 19. 17.

Eli to his sons. 1. Sam. 2. 23, 24. A second sort offend herein; who
propound their reproves by way of interrogation, demands, or questions; as,
where were you such a time, how did you behave your self, in what company were
you, in what case were you? (meaning he was drunk) the party replies, he
knows not what he means; so he leaves a blot upon his name, and durst not
directly tell him it was so; this is not to reprove plainly. A third sort
here taxed, are such as will seem to reprove, but it shall be in a
merriment, in a jesting vain, in a sporting manner, yea, it shall be in such a
manner, as he will abuse the Scriptures, and speak it by way of derision, and
mocking of those that do it in sincerity; for he would not for a world his
friend should take it in good earnest, lest, forsooth, he should be counted a
Puritan or Precisian for his labor. Thus fools make but a sport of sin.
Prou. 14. 9. This is not to reprove plainly, and in earnest, and to make the
reproof enter into a man as it ought; as Solomon says, A reproof enters
more into a wise man, than a hundredth stripes into a fool. Pro. 17. 10.

Discreetly: We must be wise to discern between party and party, between
sin and sin; to observe the quality of the one, and the nature of the
other; for all parties are not to be reproved a-like, nor all sins a-like:
Some are equals, some inferiors, some superiors, some public, some private,
some bond, some free; so according to each condition must be our reproof; some
by admonition, some by Exhortation, as Elders, Ministers, and Magistrates. 1.
Tim. 5. 1. Some with the rod of sharp reproof, as such as are known to be
notorious, and openly scandalous. T^. 1. 13. Some, not only by word, but by
due correction, as superiors toward those over whom they are placed, and
whose charge is committed to them, as Parents, Masters must reprove their
children and servants: Again, some sins are of infirmity, frailty,
ignorance, weakness; these must be reproved gently, friendly, tenderly:
Some are of malice, pride, wilfulness, presumption, contempt, and the like;
these must be reproved sharply, and with severity: To the former we must
be as Barnabas, the sons of consolation; To the latter, Boanerges, the
sons of thunder, thundering out the judgments of God against their sins.

put no difference at all, either between the parties or their sins; and so
either reprove not at all, or if they do, they sing the song of judgment in
stead of mercy, or mercy in stead of judgment, Law for Gospel, or Gospel for
Law; or else altogether mercy, or altogether judgment: This is a fault in many
Ministers, who should be wise and discreet to know the state of their flock.
Prou. 27. 23. and to know that their Congregation is a mixed company, some more
tractable, some more refrectary, and so accordingly should by wholesome
doctrine raise up one by the Gospel, and beat down the other by the Law, and
not to preach altogether damnation alike to all: This is a fault also in
inferiors, as in the Subject toward the Magistrate, in the people to the
Minister, who are ready upon every small occasion to reprove their superiors,
to censure them upon every report, whereas against an Elder we must receive no
accusation under two or three witnesses. 1. Tim 5. 29 Let us therefore take up
the counsel of Saint Jude: Of some have compassion, making a difference, And
others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire. Jude verse. 22, 23.

Mildely; that is, with a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the fight of God
of great price. 1. Pet. 3. 4. we must in reproouing, be free from all
reuengefull affections, rigor, and extremity; We must reprove, rebuke,
wxhort, with all long suffering. 2. Tim. 4. 2. The servant of the Lord must be
gentle to all men; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. 2.
Timoth. 2. 25, 26. We must deal in reproof, as a Surgeon with a bone out of
joint, or a sore wound, that is, tenderly, and gently, If a man be overtaken
in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness. Galat. 6. 1.

their corrections, as many poor children, servants, and apprentises, both in
City and Country, have cause to complain. But what says Solomon, A righteous
man is merciful to his beast, (much more to his child, or servant) but the
tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, Pro. 12. 10. As appears in such
cruel hardhearted Parents; especially stepfathers and mothers, and such
tyrant-like masters, who use their children and servants, more like dogs than
Christians.

Seasonably. We must observe a fit time and place, wherein to reprove; for it
is not fitting at all times, or in all places, or all companies; but the most
fit time is to be chosen. There is a time for all things, (if for all things,
then for reproof) there is a time to every purpose under heaven; a time to
keep silence, and a time to speak, Eccles. 3. 1, 7. The godly man brings
forth his fruit, tempore opportuno, in due season, Psalm. 1. 3. A word fitly
spoken, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, Pro. 25. 11. And a word
spoken in season, how good is it? Pro. 15. 23. A fool utters all his mind,
but a wise man keeps it in till afterward, Proverbs 29. verse 11.

Thus when we see a man in the heat of his passion of anger, we must not take
the present time to reprove it his heat, but stay till his heat be over; A
brother offended, is harder to be wo^ then a strong city, Pro. 18. 19. When a
man is drunk, it is no fit time to tell him of it in his drunken fit, but
afterward, when he is come to himself. Abigail reproved Nabal her husband,
for his churlish answer to David's servants, but she observed the fittest time;
For Nabal kept a feast of Sheepe-shearing, and his heart was merry, and he was
very drunken; but she told him nothing till morning, more or less, till the
morning light, when the wine was gone of his head, 1. Sam. 25. 36.

David says, The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks occasion to slay
him, Psalm 37. 32. This is against the rule of charity, which covers a
multitude of sins, 1. Pet 4.

Lovingly; to make the party see, that what we do; we do in love to his
person with hatred to his sin, and all for his good; both regarding the
reputation of his good name, which we ough^ to tender as our own; as also
aiming at the eternal good of his soul. It is the counsel of the Apostle, Let
all you things be done with charity 1. Cor. 16. 14. if all things, there
reproof. It is the rule of Charity; Whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, (...) so do ye to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matte. 7.
12. But as we would have others rebuke us in love, so must we our brethren;
and because they are brethren whom we must reprove, we must live and love as
brethren; we must imitate our Savior; saying, As many as I love, I rebuke,
and chasten, Reu. 3. 19. God corrects every son whom he loves, as, Heb.
12. 6. Thus, it must appear, that we do it both in love to his person, and in
love to God; that if we should be asked why we are so forward in reproouing?
for the love of God constrains us, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

own commandment; Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, Thou shall
plainly rebuke thy neighbor, Leuit. 19. 17. He that is malicious and
hateful, is so far from gaining his brother, as that Solomon tells us, Hatred
stirs up strife, Prou. 10. 12. Saint Paul says, All things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever does make manifest,
is light, Ephesians. 5. 13. But Saint John tells us again, He that hates his
brother, is in darkness, even till now; he is in darkness, and walks in
darkness, and knows not whether he goes, because that darkness has
blinded his eyes, 1 Ioh. 2. 9. 11. Thus it is as impossible for him that is in
darkness to reprove his brother, as for darkness it self to discover and
make manifest things in secret; we must in our reproves, be so lovingly
affected, as we should aim chiefly at the winning of souls; but, Saint John
tells us, that whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer, 1 John 3. 15.
This also makes against those, who in stead of love, in seeking their brothers
good, seek occasion to vex their brothers foul, by malicious, envious, and
cruel speeches, though he never deserved it, as David says, speaking cruelly,
despightfully, and disdainfully against the rightcous, Psalm. 31. They plot
against the just, and gnash upon him with their teeth, 37. 12. or else, their
reproves are to revenge themselves on their brethren, so taking Gods office
out of his hand, who says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, Romans 12. 19.

Patiently. This may seem to be the same, which I spoke of before, viz.
mildness, meekness, long-suffering; but it is not; for Saint Paul charging
us to reprove with all long-suffering, does in the former Chapter, distinguish
long-suffering from patience, setting them down as two seueralls; Thou have
fully known my long-suffering, charity, patience, 2 Timothy 3. 10. So again, The
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach;
patient, in meekness instructing, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 24. 25. where we see
again, patience, gentleness, meekness, are distinguished. This patience
must appear, not only in time of reproof, which may be called forbearance,
but also after reproof, to wait patiently for amendment of the party
reproved; All Scripture being profitable for reproof, for correction, for
instruction, 2 Timothy 3. 16. is called the word of patience, Revel. 3. 10.
because it teaches patience; is the instrument of patience; cannot be
maintained without patience; besides it is Gods word, who is the God of
patience, Romans 15. 5. and Christ calls it his patience, Revel. 3. 10. which
must teach us to beg it at Gods hand, when we are to reprove our brethren.
It is the saying of our Savior, The good ground, are they which in an honest
and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and brings forth fruit with
patience, Luke 8. 15. now one maine fruit is Christian reproof. Therefore let
us follow Saint Paul's counsel, joining both together. Warn them that be
unruly, comfort the feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all
men, 1 These. 5. 14. if toward all, then especially in winning and gaining a
brother by reproof.

Paul's counsel; Let your moderation, (as our common English translations has
it) Let your patient mind be known to all men, Philip. 4. 5. This moderation
must not be only in the practice of public Christian equity, but also in
private; even in our thoughts, words, and affections; This also reprooues all
those, that never reprove others, but in the heat of their passions, when
they are most impatient, most angry, most discontented, and most of all
provoked, or else out of a melancholy fit; then being furious and raging, they
foame out their venom, and their own shame, exceeding all mediocrity and
moderation, and be come implacable, not to be appeased; then they shoot
forth their arrows, even bitter words, and grievous to be borne; These an^
such like cursed fruits come through overmuch hastiness and impatiency. Let
us therefore hearken to the prayer and desire of Paul, That we may walk worthy
of the Lord, unto all pleasing, etc. strengthened with all might, according to
his glorious power, unto all patience and long-suffering, with ioyfulnesse,
Colos. 1. 9. 10. 11.

Considerately; that is, advisedly, without rashness; wisely, warily, upon
serious deliberation; taking the fittest opportunity, to show love, and to
keep love; Again, we must consider the party reproved, or our selves, who
reprove. 1. The party reproved; that he is a brother, professing the same
religion, and of the same Church, to whom we owe a special duty of love; or,
consider whether he be a scorner, an open contemner of the word, one that
mockes thee for thy labor; such an one reprove not; for, howsoever Solomon
says, To them that rebuke the wicked, shall be delight, and a good blessing
shall come upon them, Prou. 24. 25. yet he forbids to reprove an open
scorner. Reprove not a scorner; He that reprooueth a scorner, gets to
himself shame; and he that rebukes a wicked man, (meaning such an one as is
perverse in his ways, obstinately wicked, hating to be reformed) gets
himself a blot, Prou. 9. 7. 8. Secondly, we must consider our selves; either
that we have been as bad as other in time past, offending in the same kind,
or as great or greater. Remember that ye were in times past, thus and thus; at
large, Ephesians. 2. 11. 12. or, consider our selves as we are now; viz. weak,
frail, subject to fall every hour; or consider, that we may hereafter fall
into the same sins, or greater; for we are subject to the same temptations
as other men are. Therefore though we think we stand, we must take heed lest
we fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. It is a note of an hypocrite, not to consider himself;
Why beholdest thou the moate that is in thy brothers eye, and considerest not
the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast the beam out
of thine own eye, Math, 7. 3. 4. 5. It is a property of the wicked; They
consider not that they themselves do evil, Eccles. 5. 1. Therefore as Paul
says, when thou reproouest another, consider thy self, lest thou also be
tempted, Gal. 6. 1.

most convenient; for though I do not mean, as I have shown, that a man
should reprove a drunkard in his drunkenness, (which may be called the
present time) yet out of that we must reprove him betimes, the sooner, the
better; Sin breaks a bone in the new man; Reproof sets it again, but the
sooner a bone broken is set, the sooner it is cured, and with less pain; so
the sooner one is reproved, he is more easily recovered. Lastly, it reprooues
those that never consider themselves nor others, especially themselves, which
if they did, it would beat down the pride, presumption, ambition,
vainglory, indiscretion, rashness, overmuch boldness, which a number use
in reproouing others, insulting over their brethren, as though they themselves
were free from all reproof.

Zealously. As we must reprove in the spirit of meekness, so with Christian
Zeal; Zeal to Gods glory, seeking and longing after the good of our brethren,
and not to endure the least sin to go unreproved: Thus when we see Gods
glory to be hazzarded, and the salvation of our brethren like to be hindered,
we must for a time lay aside meekness, and be inflamed with Zeal; that we
may say with David, The zeal of thine house has even consumed us. Psalm. 69.
9. We are redeemed to be a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Titus. 2.
14. This zeal is the feruency of the spirit, arising partly of love, partly of
anger: Of love; causing us eagerly, and earnestly to maintain Gods worship
both in our selves, and others: Of anger; moving us to grief and anger, when
we see God dishonored; It is of that nature that it cannot bear with them
which are evil; which was the commendation of the Church of Ephesus. Revel. 2.
2. And Saint Paul says, It is a good thing, to be zealously affected always
in a good thing. Galat. 4. 18.

But cursed be he that does Gods work negligently. Ier. 48. 10. True zeal
will have his vent. Job 32. 18, 19. Secondly, This condemns the preposterous
zeal in a number, which is a bad zeal, proceeding neither from faith,
repentance, nor knowledge; as the zeal of Iehu, 2. King. 10. 16. to 29. 31. so
a number are so precise, as a man must do nothing, not so much as laugh, but
they are ready to find fault, they know not for what, even condemning them to
the pit of hell, for trifles.

I might instance in many particulars, wherein these curious, rash, bold-hardy
fools, show their preposterous zeal; a man must feed their humor, and do
nothing but as they do, and be of the same hew as they are of, say as they say,
and do as they do, or else we are worse then naught, according to their
censure; but they being so absurd and ridiculous, I forbear, yea, I am ashamed
almost to name them; This only I say to all such; They strain at a gnat, and
swallow a camwell, Matthew. 23. 24. They turn aside to vain iangling, for want
of true love, a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned; desiring to
be teachers, but understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm,
1. Tim. 1. 5, 6, 7. They zealously affect you, but not well, etc. Gal. 4. 17.
And I will bear them record, they have a zeal, but not according to
knowledge, Romans 10. verse 2.

Profitably; that is, so as it may be best for Gods glory, and the good of our
brethren; it must be for to win and gain them, Matthew. 18. It must be to
bring them to repentance, and to win them to the faith; we must always
propound this end in our reproves; for the end of reproof is to bring men to
repentance, and then reproof cease. We must not seek our own profit, but
the profit of many, that they may be saved, 1. Cor. 10. 33. Rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1. 13. We must reprove
with doctrine, 2. Tim. 4. 2. Now, all Scripture is given by inspiration from
God, and is profitable for reproof, correction, etc. 2. Tim. 3. 16. And
forasmuch as we are zealous of spiritual gifts (of which I spoke before) we
must seek, that we may excel, to the edifying of the Church, 1. Cor. 14. 12.
We must speak with understanding, that we may teach others, Verse. 19. Let all
things be done to edifying, Verse. 26. if all things, then reproof.

Saul to Jonathan, 1. Sam. 33. 34. Again, this condemns all such as are in
place of Magistracy, (I say not all) but those that abuse this censure
Ecclesiastical, for their own gain, excommunicating for every trifle;
whereas this being a maine part of spiritual Jurisdiction, ought to be used
with great conscience, reverence, care and consideration.

Impartially; that is, without partiallity, or respect of persons, either for
fear, favor, affection, or any other sinister respect: This partality is a
great hinderance to effectual reproof, and respecting of persons either makes
us altogether neglect it, or to do it by halfes; whereas we must do it
faithfully, in the fear of God, and with a perfect heart. 2. Chron. ^9. 9.
which place ought to be observed of Magistrates in place of authority,
especially when they sit in the seat of justice. We may be said to be
partial, either in regard of our selves, or others: In regard of our selves;
when we can be content to reprove some sins in our selves, but not other,
the smaller, but not the greater; and herein many are iniqui Iudices, partial
Judges, who will not lay the greater matters to their charge, lest they should
condemn themselves; but we must know for a truth, that God will admit no
dispensation for any one sin, be it great or small. In regard of others;
when we so regard men's persons, as we will reprove some, but dare not others,
some sins in them and not others; which proceeds many times from this, that
we are guilty of the same sins our selves: But Saint James says, Have not
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons; which if ye do,
are ye not partial? Iam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. I confess there must be a due
respect had unto men, according to their place and calling; as our equals must
be reproved by friendly admonition; Superiors, as Magistrates and Ministers,
with submisse exhortation; Those that offend of infirmity, with gentle and
affectionate persuasions; not always to use cutting, and searing, but
mollifying ointments, and mundifying waters; Those that are more refractary, to
do with sharp reprehension; and Inferiors, as occasion shall serve, to use
due correction; But so to regard any man's person, as either not to reprove at
all, or to do it partially, is flat against the word; This ought Ministers
especially to look into. Cry aloud and spare not. Esa. 58. 1. we must not
fear the faces of any, nor wink at sin in any: This partial reproof was
in Eli to his sons, honoring his sons more than God. And thus much for the
Manner of reproof.



fault, either having no certain knowledge, or at least a credible
information. Secondly, if we see our reproof will do hurt, or no good.
Thirdly, if the party to be reproved repents. Fourthly, if he does promise
speedily to amend. Fifthly, if it may better by others be done. Sixthly, if
another time will serve better, it may be omitted for the present. Now if any
think themselves too good or too great to be reproved; and so will not yield
their necks to this yoke, let them remember Gods judgment upon King Vzziah,
who resisting Gods ordinance in the ministry of the Prophet reproouing him,
was stricken with a leprosy to his death. 2. Chron. 26.

And thus much of the threefold Step of the Christian man's Walk.
AN ADDITION of certain places of holy Scripture, setting forth the true
Manner of this Christian Walk, both Exhorting, and Dehorting.
Exhortations.
THis Manner, I find in holy Scripture propounded to us by the Apostles, two
ways: Generally. Specially.

Generally, It must be according to the tenor of Gods Word; First, such as
the Word teaches. Secondly, such as beseems, graceth, and adorneth the Word.
Thirdly, only such, as being the only life. Only let your conversation be
as becomes the Gospoll of Christ. Philip. 1. 27. What it teaches the Apostle
shows; For the grace of God, meaning, the doctrine of the Gospel, teaches
us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live godly, righteously,
and soberly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Godly; in regard of God:
Righteously; in regard of others: Soberly; in regard of our selves.

Specially; This manner is propounded diversely: First; We must walk
Circumspectly; that is, warily, exactly, strictly, with great carefulnes, and
watchfulness, taking great heed to our ways, and looking narrowly to our
carriage; See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, (that is,
not in ignorance, but endued with saving knowledge) redeeming the time (that
is, using a double and treble diligence for time to come, for that we have
spent formerly so idly and vainly) because the days are evil, that is,
full of evil men, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. And the more evil the times are, the more
circumspect must we be.

Secondly; We must walk, Uprightly; that is, void of all hypocrisy before
God, and guile and dissimulation among men; simply, sincerely, in singleness
of heart, fearing God. Walk before me, says God to Abraham, and be upright,
Genesis 17. Who shall go to heaven? He that walks uprightly, Psalm. 15. 2. Qui
vadit plane, vadit sane. He that walks uprightly, walks surely, Pro. 10.
9. He that walks uprightly, shall be saved, Pro. 28. 18. Better is the poor
that walks in his uprightness then he that is perverse in his ways, though
he be rich, Pro. 28. 6. The just man walks in his integrity; his children are
blessed after him, Pro. 20. 7.

Innocently; that is, without offense; not that we can so live, as never sin,
or never offend, for that is impossible; for there is no righteous man, that
does good, and sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. But we must so walk, as that we
give no just occasion of offense or scandal unto any, whereby they may justly
blame us; this is to walk inoffensiuely: Thus Zacharias and Elizabeth walked
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, blameless, Luke 1. 6. God
has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
blameless before him, Ephesians. 1. 4.

Fourthly, We must walk. Honestly; There is a twofold honesty; Civil;
Religious. Civil honesty is necessary, but will not serve the turn to bring
us to salvation; as many will plead, I live in an honest calling, taking
pains in that calling, I give every man his due, I do no man harm, I wrong
no man, I defraud no man, I keep the Church, etc. All this is commendable, but
thus Caine might have pleaded, and many a wicked man. Religious honesty, is
that which is joined with godliness; when a man has a good and honest heart,
having care to keep faith and a good conscience, purposing and resolving to
live in no one sin whatsoever, but to please God in all his commandments
continually; as on the contrary, that is a dishonest and wicked heart, which
resolves to cherish any one sin whatsoever. Let us therefore walk honestly,
as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambring and
wantonness, not in strife and envying, Romans 13. 13. Having our conversation
honest among the Gentiles, etc. 1. Pet. 2. 12. For the time past of our life
may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine, etc. 1. Pet. 4. 3. We must pray for
Kings, and all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honestly, 1 Timothy 2. 2. where we see, godliness and honesty
joined together as inseparable.

chastely; abstaining from fleshly lusts, avoiding uncleanness, abstaining
from fornication, and knowing how to possess our bodies in sanctification and
honor, not in the lusts of concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God,
1 Thessalonians 4. 3. 4. 5. and that we may keep our selves chaste, we must
always have the fear of God before our eyes, as Joseph did, Genesis 39. for by
the fear of God, men depart from evil, Prou. 16. 6. Wives must have chaste
conuersations, coupled with fear, etc. 1 Pet. 3. 1. 2.

wisely; not in the wisdom of the world, which is enmity against God; There
is a wisdom which is earthly, sensual, devilish; But the wisdom that is
from above, is first, pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full
of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy, Iam. 3.
15. 16. Who is a wise man among you, and endued with knowledge? let him show
out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3. 13.
walk wisely toward those which are without, (that is, not only toward
believers, but toward such as are not yet come to the faith, and the true
knowledge of Christ.) Colos. 4. 5. and for an help hereunto, let us walk with
the best, who are the godly wise; For he that walks with the wise, shall be
wise, Prou. 13. 20.

lovingly; in love to God, and man; our whole conversation must be in love;
Walk in love, as Christ has loved us; in conformity, not equality, Ephesians. 5.
2. I beseech thee Lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto thee, but
that which we had from the beginning, that we should love one another; And this
is love, that we walk after Gods commandments. This is the commandment,
that as ye have heard, from the beginning, ye should walk in it, 2 Epist.
John 5. 6.

fruitfully; Our life must be full of good works, of piety, mercy, and
charity; We must therefore learn to maintain good works, that we be not
unfruitful, Tit. 3. 14. Paul prays for the Colossians, that they might walk
worthy of the Lord, unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God, Colos, 1. 9. 10. For we are Gods
workeman-ship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has
ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10. where we see good
works, are the Causey-way, not the cause why, we go to heaven.

humbly; This humility must be both outward, and inward; outward in gesture,
speech, countenance, behavior, in word, in deed; in ward in the heart and
mind; The outward may be in wicked men and hypocrites, as in Ahab; but the
inward only in the godly; Again, this humility must be both in regard of
God, and of men; In regard of God; as humiliation for sin, whereby we denying
our selves, and stripping our selves of all conceit of our own worthiness,
and of Gods undeserved goodness, do ascribe all to God, to whom it belongs,
Psalm. 115. 1. In regard of men; when we prefer our brethren before our
selves, submitting our selves unto them, and esteeming our selves worse than
others; I therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy
of the vocation, wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness,
with long suffering, forbearing one another in love, Ephesians. 4. 1. 2. He has
showed thee O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah 6. 8.

reformedly; Our life must be a space of repentance, Revel. 2. 21. We must be
renewed daily, and become new creatures, dying unto sin, and living unto
righteousness; and being dead unto sin, not to live any longer therein;
Therefore we are buried with Christ by Baptism into his death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we
also should walk in newness of life, Romans 6. 2. 4. If any man be in Christ,
he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; And as many as
walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel
of God, Gal. 6. 15. 16.

conformably; conforming our selves, and framing our lives according to the
example of Christ, and of the godly; who have left us an example that we
should follow their steps, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Be followers of me, and walk so,
as ye have us for an example, Philip. 3. 17. an example in holy virtues, not
else. We must imitate Christ, not as God, in his miracles, as walking upon the
waters, and the like; nor as mediator of God and man, as in the work of
redemption, etc. but as man, in his morals; in obedience, humility, love,
patience, meekness, contempt of the world, and the like. As ye have received
the Lord Jesus, so walk in him, rooted and built up in him, etc. Colos. 2. 6.
7. He that says, he abides in him, ought so to walk, as he has walked, 1
John 2. 6. Thus for Exhortation.

Dehortations.
THere are but two ways to walk in; the narrow way, and the broad way; the
one leading to life and happiness, and few there be that find it; the other
leading to destruction, and utter darkness, and many there be that go in
thereat; we mnst strive to enter in at the straight gate; (that is, our
principal care above all things, must be to come into the way of life
everlasting, and all worldly care, must come under this,) so much the word
Strive imports, Luke 13. 24. compared with Matthew. 7. 13. for the Kingdom of
heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, Math. 11. 12. that
is, there is such a forwardness, eagerness, and zeal in Gods children, that
they strive most earnestly to get heaven, striving who shall be most forward,
endeavoring earnestly in the use of all good means, which may bring them
thither. David professes, his heart brake in sunder for the longing desire
that it had always to Gods judgments, Psalm. 119. 20. His practice must be our
pattern, for our principal care must be to attain eternal life. And for
this cause as careful must we be to shun and avoid the broad way, wherein
we run headlong to our own destruction; We cannot walk in both; We cannot
serve God and Mammon; Let me therefore dehort all from following the multitude,
for the most go to hell; For as Paul says, many walk of whom have told you
often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of
Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory is in
their shame, who mind earthly things, Philippians 3. 18. 19. yea, a man may be
deceived in his own conceit; For, the way of a fool is right in his own
eyes, Prou. 12. 15. There is away that seems right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death, Prou. 14. 12.

Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19.
This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not
as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having their
understanding darkened, being ahenated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart; who being
past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ.

Proverb. 1. 10. to 16.
My Son, if sinners entise thee, consent thou not; If they say, Come with us,
let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without
cause, Let us swallow them up alive, as the grave, etc. We shall find all
precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil; Cast in thy Lot among
us, let us have all one purse; My Son walk not thou in the way with them;
refrain thy foot from their path; for their feet run to evil, etc.

Prou. 4. 14. 15. 19. 27.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men;
Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. For they sleep not,
except they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away unless they
cause some to fall; The way of the wicked is as darkness, they know not at
what they stumble; Remove thy foot from evil.

Prou. 15. 9. Psalm. 1. 1. 6.
Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful: For
the way of the ungodly shall perish; The way of the wicked is abomination to
the Lord.

2 These. 3. 6. Psalm. 36. 4.
Now we command you brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother that walks diserderly; (...) that is,
without order, against the laws of God and men, idly, dishonestly,
dissolutely, loosely, not laboring in their calling, but given to sloth and
other vices; with such have no familiarity. They set themselves in no good way.

Job 21. 14. Psalm. 68. 21.
The wicked say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. But God shall wound the head of these his enemies, and the hairy scalpe
of such an one as goes on still in his wiickednesse.

Jude 11. Psalm. 119. 21. Heb. 3. 10
Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, that is, in hypocrisy,
hatred, murder, lying, despair, carnal security, prophannesse, Genesis 4. And
cursed are the proud, and such as err from Gods commandments; The wicked do
always err in their hearts, for they have not known Gods ways.

Ephesians. 5. 5, 6, 7.
This ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man,
which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of
God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things
comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye
therefore partakers with them.

2. Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17.
Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers; for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial, or what part has he that
believes with an infidel, etc. Wherefore come out from among them and be ye
separate, and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you.

Esaias. 52. 11. Reu. 18. 4.
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go
ye out of the midst of her; Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20, 21, etc.
If the wicked hearing the words of this curse, shall bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst, The Lord will not spare him, but the
anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the
curses that are written in this book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his name from under heaven; And the Lord shall separate him unto
evil, out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the
covenant, which are written in this book of the Law, etc. And when posterity
shall ask, wherefore has the Lord done this? what means the heat of this
great anger? Then men shall say, Because they forsook the Lord, etc.

Leuit. 26. 21, to 40.
And if ye walk contrary unto me, says God, and will not hearken unto me, I
will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins, etc. And
if yet ye will not be reformed by these things, but will walk contrary unto
me, then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven
times for your sins, etc. And if ye will not for all this hearken unto me,
but walk contrary unto me, then will I walk contrary to you also in fury;
and I, even I will chastise you seven times for your sins, etc. at large.
Here is a treble, and a terrible commination and threatening, worthy all
observation; which must move us all, with all care and conscience, to take up
the counsel of our blessed Savior, Ioh. 5. 14. Sin no more, left a worse
thing come upon thee. But if ye will not do so, as God will have you, behold
you sin against the Lord; and be sure your sin will find you out. Numb.
32. 23.

Eccles. 11. 9.
But if all that has been said, will not yet serve turn, then I say with
Solomon, speaking by way of derision. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let
thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou, that for all these
things, God will bring thee into judgment.

Thus have I briefly only named these Exhortations and Dehortations; In most
of which, especially the Exhortations, I might, and would willingly have
enlarged my self, had not Solomon admonished me, that too much study is a
weariness of the flesh, Eccles. 12. 12. or rather God had seen good in the
penning hereof, to have added unto my health.

And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his grace, which is
able to build you further, and to give you an inheritance among all them, which
are sanctified. Acts 20. 32.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultlesse before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy; To the only
wise God our Savior, be glory, and majesty, dominion, and power, now, and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE ALPHABETICAL TABLE.
A
ALL: That all shall not be saved. 197
C
Civility: A censure of Civil honest-men. 192 Company: Whether we may keep
company with the wicked. 346. and how. 348. and how not. 350. 352. 355
Constancy: We must be Constant in doing the good will of God. 267. An
objection concerning Constancy resolved. 276. 279.
D
Darkness: Sins are called, The works of Darkness, in many respects.
370. Of a twofold Darkness. 387 (...): Proouing or Trying, has three
significations. 68 Doc: See Obedience: That Gods will is to be both known and
Done. 88. This Doing is twofold. 91. Of the right manner of Doing Gods will.
97. Of experimental knowledge in Doing Gods will. 99. In what respects it is
necessary. 101. The uses hereof. 107. The only way to Do Gods will. 174.
E
Evil: That we must not only do no Evil, but we must do good. 414.
F
FEllowship: Of evil Fellowship. 301. How many ways a man may be said, To
have Fellowship with the sins of others. 304
G
GRace: A sound trial whether a man stands in Grace or not. 5. We must beware
of decay in Grace. 255. Grow: That every godly man must Grow in Grace. 248
I
Justification: A Popish slander concerning our Doctrine of Iustifica. 48.
K
KNowledge: That Gods will is to be both Known and Done. 88 Of experimental
Knowledge in doing Gods will. 99.
O
OBedience: See Doing: Wherein the soundness of Obedience does consist. 160.
Its lets. 199. 209. Means to help us in our Obedience. 210.
P
PLease: What is Pleasing to God. 143. What is the right way to Please him.
147. The use of it. 149. Lets of Pleasing God. 199. Helps, both Inward and
Outward how to Please him. 210. 215. Reasons why the Regenerate (of all others)
should Please God. 220. None can Please God but the Regenerate. 226. That
living in sin, and pleasing of God, cannot go together. 283 Prove: The word
in the Original signifies three things. 68. We must prove what is the good
will of God. 72. Three things observed in this proof. 75. 77. 79. This duty
is both Excellent. 82. and Necessary. 83. The use of it. 84. etc.
R
REgeneration: That none but the Regenerate can so live as to please God. 226.
The use. 229. How to conceive aright of Regeneration. 231. Whereof Regeneration
consists. 237. Where, and when we must be Regenerate. 241. The means how.
243. The End. 244 Reproof: What the word signifies in the Original. 417.
That we must Reprove. 420. The effect. 421. The use to Magistrates. 422. To
Ministers. 424. To Parents. 426. To All. 429. Reasons to move us heereunto.
432. A right order in Reproouing. 437. The Persons which must. Reprove. 439.
Whether men's sins or persons may be Reproved. 446. 449. A Caveat herein for
Ministers. 450. Another for the People. 452. Of the manner of Reproof. 459.
Why by Deed. 462. Wherein the manner of Reproof specially consists. 467.
471. 474. 478. 481. 483. 486. 489. 493. 498. 501. 503. Three sorts of Reproves
condemned. 476.
S
Sin: That living in Sin, and pleasing of God cannot go together. 283.
293. That Sinning by Communion and by Commission are both displeasing to God.
297. The Use hereof. 298. How many ways one may Communicate with another
Sin. 305. 312. 315. 319. 323. 326. 330. 334. 338. The means whereby this
comes to pass. 341. etc. Sin called, The work of darkness, in many
respects. 370. 377. 383. 386. Whether God be the Author of Sin. 373. What an
horrible thing Sin is. 389. Its unfruitfulness. 393. 399. both in regard of
God, ibid. and of our selves. 403 Suffering: It is twofold. 169.
W
Walk: What it is to Walk. 11. How taken, ibid. Two kinds thereof. 14. 22.
How to Walk toward men. 23. etc. Walking, signifying Continuance. 259. etc.
The use. 262. 267. The true manner of this Christian Walking. 508. 521 Ways:
The Ways of God twofold. 30. Gods revealed Ways distinguished by many
Epithites. 32. 33. The Ways which concern us, are either general or
special. 34. 37. Gods Ways are reduced into three head. 38. 42. 46. Why these
Ways are called Gods Ways. 52. 53. The excellent Profit, and Necessity of
these ways. 55 Wickedness: Three brands of a Wicked man. 381 Will: Gods Will
is both to be known and done. 88. and approved. 119. which Approbation has
four qualities, ibid. etc. The means how to become approouers of Gods will.
127. The uses. 133. That only is acceptable to God, which is agreeable to his
Will. 143. 147. Wherein Gods revealed Will consists. 157. The same farther
explained by drawing it into seven heads. 160. 161. The only way to do the
revealed Will of God. 174
Places of Scripture expounded by the way.
2. King. 5. v. 18, 19. p. 358 2. King. 20. v. 3. p. 16, 17 Psalm. 119. v. 3. p.
1, etc. Ephesians. 5. v. 10, 11. p. 61. 140. 218. 281. 345. 412. Colos. 3. v. 21.
p. 307 1. These. 5. v. 21. p. 141.

