Title page enclosed in a decorative border. THE SHIP of assured safety,
Wherein we may sail without danger toward the land of the living, promised
to the true Israelites: Containing in four Books, a discourse of Gods
Providence, a matier very agreeable for this time, vvherof no commonly known
especial Treatise has been published before in our mother tongue.

What great variety of very necessary and fruitful matier is comprysed in
this work, convenient for all sorts of men, by the Table of the Chapters
following after the Praeface, ye may perceive.

Compyled by Edward Cradocke, Doctor and Reader of Diuinitte in the University
of Oxford.

1. Corinthians. 4. As touching me I pass very little to be judged of you, or of
man's judgment: 10 I judge not mine own self. 1. PETR. 5. Cast all your care
upon God, for he cares for you. Imprinted at London by H. Bynneman, for
William Norton. ANNO. 1572.



Heraldic impresa badge of Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester, showing a bear
chained to a ragged staff, with the motto of the Order of the Garter. HONI:
SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE:



That bears up this ioly Bear,
A vvoodden staff some say it is,
Ragged in form. But will ye hear?
I tell you plain, they say amiss.
Gods care it is that watches aye,
And never sleeps at time nor tide,
That of this Bear is the only stay,
The only supporte and the guide.
So long then as he holds it right,
Stand sure he shall against his foe,
And man, nor devil, day nor night,
Shall aye be able to work him vvoe.
God grant him many blessed days
To live, before his parting hence,
And that he may in all his vvayes,
Make God the staff of his defense.
AMEN. quoth E. C.
To the right honorable, and his especial good Lord and Patron, Lord
ROBERT, Earl of Leycester, Baron of Denbighe, Knight of the Honorable order of
the garter, of the Queen's Majesty's privy Counsel, and high Chauncellar of
the University of Oxforde. etc.
Edward Cradocke, Doctor and Reader of Divinity in the laid University,
wishes much health with increase of honor, and prosperous success in all
his godly affairs.
THere were three causes, right Honorable, and mine especial good Lord, which
moved me at this time to take pen in hand.

The first and principal, was the duty and service, which I owe to God,
who vvoulde not only that by preaching and reading, but also by all other
means possible I should seek the advancement of his kingdom.

The next was my zele toward the house of God: the ruinous and decayed
state whereof in this later age of the world I could neither forget without
impiety, nor remember without compassion, nor pass over, and neglecte
without great burden of conscience.

The third and last cause that provoked me, was that I might enter into some
pore account touching the course and race of my whole life, spent for the most
part of it in the University of Oxford, asvvell to other my good Lords and
Patrones, to whom I am much beholding, as namely also to your Honor, whom
not only we Oxford men acknovvledge as our good Lord and Chanceller, but also
next under the Queens Majesty, our chief head. Whose honorable and
courteous nature both shevved to other my far betters, and from me, though
unworthy, at no time vvithdravvne, what it might justly challenge, and whose
great authority and jurisdiction over us, what laufully and orderly it might
command, I could not be ignorant in any wise. It came therefore oftentimes to
my remembrance, that seeing your Honor, with other the furtherers of our
studies, have so honorably spared me your good word, I could neither without
infamy hold my peace, nor without want of good aduisement, not give out some
testimony of my bounden duty.

And for this purpose (to confess unto your Honor the very truth) how small
soever mine ability was: yet rather convenient leisure of me much desired
this great while, than any goodvvill utterly was wanting. But as God works
secretly many sundry vvayes to help that forward which he would have done: at
the last in deed fell out opportunity of me not so much coueted or wished
for, as heartily lamented and bevvailed, that the plague daily growing and
increasing in the University of Oxford, and the public lectures being for the
very same cause intermitted hoping by Gods assistance to provide sufficiently
for meself, more of a studious mind, than greatly urged by any need (for my
friends, hearing at the last where I was, vvrote me earnest letters to come
down unto them) amongst other I there remained. VVholely therefore being
addicted, and given to contemplation, from the which at that time there was no
great encombrance that might pull me back, I began now seriously to mind the
setting out and publishing of some book.

And being fully determined to write, upon the matter notwithstanding whereupon
I might fitliest ground my process, I was not by and by resolved. Sometimes it
came into my mind, to take in hand some controversy of this time. But
considering with meself what great learning has been lately showed in such
questions, I was quickly changed from that mind. For what could any body now
write of, for the improuing or defending of such things, which very
plentifully already has not been discoursed? Would a man gladly be instructed
touching the use of images? let him peruse D. Calfehils book against Martial.
Would he hear what can be said of the Mass? Not only master Deane of Paul's
his books against Dorman are to be seen, but also the treatise of the right
reverend father bishop Cowper, entitled The defense of the truth against the
mass, and the works of the late famous bishop of worthy memory D. Jewel.
Who in two of his great Volumes, has gone through with so many, and so
profou^d matters of religion, that for diverse needful points to be spoken of,
they might well serve a Divine for common place books.

Therefore taking more diligent and perfect deliberation, after many other
things which I thought upon, the very time and place where I then was, and
the remembrance of Gods Provident care for me from my youth, and
(notwithstanding my diligence in taking heed,) not least of al declared
toward me at that time, made me in love (as it were) with the argument of
Gods Providence.

Therwithal (which inflamed me not a little the more) it could neither be hidden
nor unknown unto me, how graciously besides our deserving, how wonderfully
beyond al reason, God has lately protected with his mighty hand, not only our
sovereign Lady the Queens highness, but universally the whole state of this
realm. For (o good Lord) what subtle undermining what crafty co^ueying,
what cruel conspiring has been attempted? What mischeuous heads, what
sly practices, what ungodly devises have been found out? Which neither
by any man's wisdom could come to light, when they were hid: nor by
man's strength and policy could be repressed, when they were broken out.
But that god, whose provident eye never slepeth, whose head is alvvayes
careful and mindful of us, whose arm stretched out is never idle, when
none other wise counsel could take place, by his marvelous forsighte has
provided for us, and when strength seemed to fail us, has pitched his tent
round about in our defense. Therefore may it well be said of these our privy
underminers, as Tullie that Roman oratoure spoke in his first inuectiue
against Catiline: They do nothing, they go about nothing, they think of
nothing, but by and by we do not hear of it only, but we see it also, and
plainly feel it with our hands.

And whereunto, I beseech your Honor, should we ascribe this so great a
benefit, but to the Providence of almighty God? By whose aid and furderance
(to use again Tullies own words, which he has in his oration pro Rabinio)
this common weal is much better governed, than by any reason or counsel of
mortal men. whereof (as Pindarus also says in quarta Oda Pythiorum) to shake
in sunder the foundations, it is for them also an easy mattier, who them
selves be weaklings, and of feeble strength, but to set a Realm again in
order, as it was before, if god be not the guide of Princes, it is a hard
point.

How greatly then have we cause to give God thanks, to praise him, to pray
unto him, to seek his glory, and the furtheraunce of his Gospel, to stay our
selves quietly under the vvings of his most gracious protection, to flee to his
almighty Providence, as to our sure ship of safety, our hope, our help, our
refuge far and near.

Whereof when I well considered how svveete and pleasant is the knowledge,
how profitable and commodious the use, how full of majesty the whole
mattier: it came streightvvay to my mind, that I could not by any means
attempt a more godly labor, or more fruitful for the edifying of the
faithful Christian. Of whom what great care I have had, both by the very
playnnesse and simplicity of my style, used for the most part throughout my
four books, and by that pains and travail which I have taken in opening
and dissoluing of perplexed douts, I trust to the indifferent reader it shall
well appear.

Which discourse of mine (such as it is) not over curiously in deed attired,
but yet (as mine hope is) enspired with a well meaning spirit, commits it
self presently into your Honors hands, as a refuge and sanctuary poynted out
and assigned by God him self, to be a supporter of all godly quarrels.

Sheelde therefore (I beseech your Honor) that work, which (according to
that ability that God has lent it) is a defense and mayntenaunce of that
cause, vvherby not your Honor only has been maruellously preserved and
advanced: but the Queens Majesty also, our most gracious and sovereign liege
Lady, yea the good state (as I said) of this whole Realm, so sore shaken and
lyfted at with rebellious blastes, has been straungely and wonderfully
protected. I mean alvvayes the good Providence of almighty God: which, as it
has been ever hitherto your Honors most trusty and assured stay: so God
grant it may never fail your Honor to the end, still furthering, blessing,
and prospering your good Lordeshippe. Amen.

Dated in London, Anno Domini. 1572. Maij 19. Your Honors humble Orator
always at commandment. EDW. CRADOCKE.

To the Christian Reader, grace and peace.
IT is a Proverb amongst the Greeks of no small antiquity, well-beloved in our
savior Christ, that if in evils any good may be found, the same must be
sifted out. A godly lesson surely, and very profitable to be observed in this
so great corruption of the world: Whereby it is very plainly set out unto us,
how we ought of all things to make our greatest advantage, not childishely
discouraged with all froward blastes, nor cowardly yelding to any crooked and
ouerthwarte assault, but taking the world as God sends it, to learn daily
the experience of godly wisdom, and by all means to embrace ye opportunity of
well doing. Therefore whether we be afflicted in body or goods, we are taught
by this Proverb to take hold of some godly lesson: or if the love of our
dear friends be any matier of discomforte to us, we are willed to consider
with our selves, whether this evil be so incommodious, that no goodness may
grow out of the same: or if cloked falsehood and hypocrisy have deceitfully
blinded us, and led us away, we are warned to look well about us, to see what
co^moditic might arise thereof: Or finally whatsoever heaviness or mischaunce
should touch us, we are charged to enter into a discrete and sober
meditation, whether in any respect we might learn to be the better for the
same. If any sweetness may be piked out of that that is sour, we must not by
and by refuse, and cast away either the nutkirnell for the husk, or the corn
for the chafe, or the rose for the pricks that grow about it: but waying all
things with indifferent balaunce, we must pick out such mattier as may
always stand us in good steed, and with great skill and aduisement make our
choice.

Wherein the great wisdom and Providence (shall I say, or else also ye
exceeding mercy of almighty god?) as in all other things notably, so in this
point wonderfully is discovered. Who as he whippeth us many and sundry times
with the rod of his sharp correction, to the intent our sluggishnesse might be
wakned, and our unstaid life and conversation might be bridled with the yoke
of discipline: so nevertheless, least we should be to much discouraged, there
is no inconuenie^ce that ever befalls to us so great, nor no calamity that
besetteth us so desperate and void of comfort, but that always there is
annexed to it some one thing or other, that avails us, and assuageth and
mollifieth our grief. Whereof it comes, that although much bitterness be
found in the life of man, and all things go not always as our hearts
desire: yet by reason of this temperature, wherewith al things naturally be
seasoned, to the wise and godly there is nothing that seems intolerable, yea
there is nothing that turns them not to much good.

Which truly is not avouched of my part as any idle invention of mine own
brain, but the same is plainly testified by the open scripture of Gods word,
and by manifest examples proved true. For first touching ye record of holy
scripture, who has not often heard to his great contentation the comfortable
saying of the Prophet David, affirming that the very light shines in the
midst of the darkness to them that be righteous, and fear God? Whereby his
meaning is nothing else, but that to such as be upright, and keep them selves
unspotted of worldly blemishe (as by S. James admonition we are taught and
informed by true religion) Jacob. 1.
God shows him self amiable often times, when with the clouds of despair
they seem in manner to be overwhelmed. And S. Paul shooting Romans 8.
at the same mark, says plainly, that to them which love God, all things
generally frame to a good end, be they never so comberously bestadde, or so
roughly and daungerously assailed.

The same, if all authority were set aside, as in a clear myrrour, is
represented and showed unto us in the daily experience of the world. Of the
stories of the sacred Bible so commonly known and talked of, what need I to
make long rehearsal? Wherein we see how maruellously, contrary to al men's
reason and expectation god has wrought for the safegarde of his elect:
bringing eftesones (as we have said) the light out of the midst of the
darkness, and using such strange means for thy preservation, as surely in
our carnal imagination would rather have tended to their undoing.

Who would ever have thought, that Iosephes bondage of his rule and lordeship,
or his grievous imprisonment of his so honorable preferment, would have
ministered so great occasion? Not they surely that did persecute him: who
contrarywyse were utterly of this mind, that there could not be possibly a
more speedy way to his destruction. Yet God so hampered his enemies, and so
brake them of their malicious minds, that not only it was vain, and void,
whatsoever they diuelishly attepted, but also overthrowing them in their own
devises, he made them the very instruments that should bring Joseph to
honor. The infant Moses, when in a panyer that was made of rushes, he was
cast down into a river, was he not in all men's judgment paste hope for ever
to have escaped? Yet God so wrought in the child's greatest extremity, that not
only he escaped in that heavy case, but by Pharaoes own daughter, that
chanced by Gods appointment to pass by, he was brought up, and fostred as her
own son. The same is declared manyfestly by that which God did for the
Israelites, soiourning at their great peril in the wilderness, by the history
of Judith and Hester, and other mo. Whereby we see clearly without doubt, how
true that answer was, which god made to S. Paul: Virtus mea in infirmitate
perficitur.i. my power is wroght in man's weakness, 2. Corinthians. 12.
or, then is my valiantness and strength most put in practice, when men
show themselves to be at the weakest.

Nevertheless if any man here make exception, saying, that God does not
always exalte those, whom he has humbled, or by the way of poverty call
men to riches, or send them worldly prosperity whom he has afflicted with
his heavy hand: if we speak of this naughty world, where wickedness for the
most part bears swaye, here in deed I grant well, the godly are not
always so advanced.

Yet this dare I boldly say, that god never suffers them so heavily and
intollerably to be oppressed, but that in the midst of all their evils he
finds out some way for them to release their smarte. So that even in their
deepest miseries and calamities they may either epsy out some light of
comfort, or else also take some advantage by the same, that might serve them
very agreably to some godly purposes. For we read not in deed of our father
Abraham, that after his fleing out of his native country, when he had set him
self manfully against many mishappes and mischaunces, he became by and by a
great Lord, like Joseph. But yet we read notwithstanding, that both when he
was in great danger by his wives occasion, and also after her discesse, in
his great anguishe and heaviness, and in all other his manyfolde and most
bitter troubles, God still was present with him in such sort, and so eased
him, and relieved him at his need, that he bare all things peaceably without
grutching, setting all worldely vanities at naught, in respect of the life to
come.

We read not of king David, that Princely prophet, that he never felt in mind
and body any grief and vexation that might disquiete him. Nay contrariwise, we
learn God so plaged him often times, that he was welnigh wasted with stark
anguish and woe. Yet God was ever so far of from forsaking him, that guyding
him with the light of his holy spirit, he gave him wisdom and dexterity to
pick good out of evil.

Whereupon he confesses in his Psalms, that the very rod and staff, which
he was beaten with, were his comfort, and that God humbled him and brought him
low, not to drive him to wanhope and despair of his goodness, but to teach
him his ordynaunces, and his statutes.

I pass over the Apostles of our savior Christ: who many times persecuted by
the Iewishe Synagogue, did not always escape their hands without all manner of
harm. And yet whatsoever it was that they suffered, there was nothing that
could cast them under the feet. Yea it is written of them in plain words,
that when they were checked and beaten before the Iewishe magistrates, and
high Priests, they departed from their presence with joy and gladness, that
Acts. 5.
they were accepted as worthy to suffer any rebukes for the name of Christ.

Neither will I say any thing of the blessed Martyrs, whose great patience
and constancy had never so famously come to light, if persecution of
Tyrauntes had been removed.

With one only example of Seuerinus Boethius I will stay, and satisfye
meeselfe. He being (as we read) a right worthy, wise and grave Senatoure,
and one that had so well deserved of the common weal, as no one of the Romayne
Senatoures could do more, was nevertheless upon displeasure of the
Emperor Theodorike, either because he had seemed ouer-earnest in maynteyning
against him the Senates honor, or else (as some think) because he showed
him self zelouse in impugning the sect of the Arrians, (unto whose faction
the said Emperor was thought to be enclyned,) was not only deposed from
his high estate, but also without any regard had to his former merits,
was first outlawed, and banyshed, and afterward in his absence, without
having any advocate to plead his cause (Oh unworthy and unseemly dealing)
was adjudged to dye by the same Senate, whom before so zealously he had
supported. Nevertheless he was so far off from murmuring against GOD, or too
vnpacientlye bearing this unkindness, that he has left behind him a very
godly and learned monument of his Christianly affected mind.

So well could he use his adversity, not only for his own advantage, but
also to the great furtheraunce of the posterity that should come after.

I for my part must in deed of necessity confess, that I am no wise to be
compared with any of these, not only in none other thing, but also (God be
thanked) touching either prosperity or adversity. Who as I never had great
wealth, wherein I give place to many both better learned, and more worthy: so
surely never hitherto has any such worldly inconvenience chanced unto me,
whereof I greatly made accounte.

But yet as in an unlike case, this (as meseemeth) fell not out far unlike,
which happened to me soon after midso^mer this last year. Who first fleeing from
Oxforde, where I was in danger, to the city of London for my refuge, upon
hope to have found there some stay, was yet afterward by reason of charges
which grew beyond mine expectation, forced to think of some other place. And
thincking diligently of the matter, to travel straight down to my friends, both
I thought it no way to be any great ease, their dwelling being so far of: and
also (as I well considered) my coming in that hot time of the plague, might
seem neither void of danger nor suspicion. Therefore, for want of a better
chifte, I concluded to return to Oxforde: nothing doubting by Gods help,
amongst other which remained there as well as I, to provide well inoughe for
meselfe. But suddenly not long after my coming back, (see I pray you, what
matter I had of discoragement) my neighbor hard by me, fell sick of the
Pestilence. Here I remembered one of Virgils verses, who says in one of his
Ecloges these words.

When fired is thy neighbors wall,
Surely thy danger is not small.
Therefore my mind gave me, that it was now high time for me to stir, and
by and by (as the phrase is) I removed away spedily with bag and baggage: not
only content in this case, but also very well apaide of a lodging somewhat
simpler than mine other was. Thither therefore I fled, and there, as I might, I
took my rest. Anon after, word came unto me, that my laundresse also,
which washed my clothes, had her house visited in like manner. Wherewithal if
I should say, I was never a whitte moved, I dare say, I should hardly be
believed of a great meinie. How much more might I have been troubled,
hearing the belles knolling both day and night, for such as but the day before
had been merry, lusty, and in good liking? yea and seeing also daily and
hourly whole housholdes going with corpses by my window side?

But God always be thanked, and praised for it, although my body in deed
was in some danger: yet my mind nathelesse was not much brought out of
quiet. Who as I sought not death wilfully, which I studied by all honest
means to avoid: so yet notwithstanding my delighte in the world was not so
great, but that heartily I could have yielded to Gods calling. In the mean
time seeing it pleased God to deliver me (as it were) out of the Dragons mouth:
I thought it my duty to embrace (as it were) that light, which seemed more than
half in darkness to be offered and presented to me, and amongst those evils,
and great perils, wherewith I was then assailed, to see whether I could pike
out any good.

Whereupon having advised meselfe, I saw forthwith ready at mine elboe, pen,
ink, and paper, and sufficient furniture of books: thereto such leisure and
opportunity was ministered unto me on all sides, that I could not possibly wish
greater. Breefely, my mind being at peace and rest, there was nothing that
might hinder me from well doing. Therefore, that I might not utterly be
unthankful to almightye God, and at least wise testify my good meaning
toward his dear espouse the congregation: I was fullye purposed with my
self to bequeathe (as who says) to the broad world some poor token and
monumente of my good will.

And in this case, dear brother in our Savior Christ, I refer it verily
to thine own conscience, whether with any thing more frutefully, my thought
might have been holde^ occupied, than even with this passing worthy, most high
and excellent consideration of that, which can never be praised inoughe, I
say, of Gods endless Providence. Whereof long before in a great meinie, and
now presently in meselfe such great proof, and experience was showed unto me,
that I supposed I should do very evil, not to make other partakers of such
wholesome lessons, as thereby I meself had then learned. From mine earnest
traveling wherein, although I knew I might be discouraged by reason of mine
own insufficiency: yet was I greatly comforted by the saying of a certain
wise man, affirming that in magnis voluisse sat est, that is to say: in the
enterprising of great things, it is enoughe to put forward a well willing
purpose.

What pains I have taken, and what I have brought to pass, that might make
for the furtheraunce of the christian reader, that will I gladly refer to
their judgment, that have perused other writers of the same matter. Who by
such diligente conference as shall be void of affecaffection and parcialitie,
shall quickly perceive without much ado, both what I have added of mine own
doing agreably to the doctrine of sound religion: and with what choice and
circumspection I have now and then borrowed ye authority of many other. Once
this will I boldly say, which I trust upon farther trial, shall be openly and
manifestly proved true: There is nothing avouched in this whole work, of a
singular and private judgment, (which kind of teaching, although I know it be
plausible in ytching ears, that take pleasure in novelties and strange
things, yet of my part I delight not in it.) Yea I will say farther, There is not
one thing taught in this discourse, not very well concording with the received
faith of Christ's Church, and very consonant to the rule of holy scripture.
There is nothing therefore I am well assured, that any godly learned man will
mislyke. The godly learned man say I, and I pray thee reader, mark well my
words: for ye superstitious I deny not, will in deed find great fault, who^
because they are the enemies of gods truth, I would be loathe to satisfy in any
wise. And this hitherto speak I freely with good conscience of the lerning and
matter of this book. Touching the fourm and method which I have used, I do the
christian Reader to understand, that in this my process I have followed that
kind of order which the Rethoricians and Melancthon namely, terms by the name
of Doctrinall. Therefore writing of Gods Providence, because I would not have
men think that I speak as Plato did of his common weal, or Tullie of his
perfect Orator, describing that, which neither is, nor shall be: I declare first
and formoste that Gods Providence is not an idle and bare name of a thing that
is no where to be had, but that which is, has been, and shall be ever. And hereof
make I open proof in my two former books, alleging in my first book
certain grounds and foundations, whereupon I build this my doctrine: and
replying in my second book, against their fond and vain reasons, which by
all means possible would impugn it. In my third book I proceed to disclose
the nature of Gods Providence, giving thee reader, to understand, that it is
not all one (as some ignorant think) either with Destiny or else
Predestination, much less with the naked prescience, and for knowledge which
some only would ascribe to Gods power. Which Providence after I have defined
what it is, at large I both prove and handle in the same book every membre
and clause of the definition. After this in my fourth book (so far as I am
led by holy scripture) I utter the power of Gods government: opening after
what sort God rules the inferioure bodies by the superioure, the earthly by
the heavenly, and the baser by the excellenter, and such as be of more
perfection. And because this so worthy a meditation might seem yet of little,
or no effect, if we should not apply it to some use: therefore the fruits and
commodities that flow and grow (as it were) out of the same, in ample manner
be set out.

Now in prosecuting, and going through with all these things aforemencioned,
from the beginning to the end of my four books, if it seem to any man
somewhat strange, that for the most part I rehearse ye testimonies as well of
the scriptures, as ye catholic fathers of ye church, not in their own
language, wherein they wrote, but by way of translation in our mother to^g: It
may please them to understand, that I considered I had to do with two sorts
of men: with some, that perchance are ignorant, and know neither the Greek
nor Latin speech, and contrariwise with other that have good skill, and be
profoundly learned in the^ both.

Therefore, although the inculcating of much Greek and Latin, might
peradventure have made a good show, and very well have served for the
enlarging, and amplifying of my discourse: yet the unskillful, I knew well
inoughe, could have slender forderance by such means, to the learned it was
always free to have recourse and refuge to those authors, as well Greeks as
Latins, which by me there are recited. By conference of whom they shall well
perceive and find out, how faithfully I have dealt in my translation.

It remains now, Christian brother, that thou catch not unto thee with the
left hand, that which is raughte out with the right: I say, that in no
wise thou be ouer-hastie to misconstrue me in any thing, that I write, but
syncerely interpretate my doings.

If there be any thing, which sounds not well in thine ears at the first
hearing: yet do not busilye condemn that, which thou conceiuest not by and
by. Before thou give out thy verdict, and proceed to thy rigorous censure, I
pray thee be well advised* Men see not always upon the sudden: but no man's
eyes are more bli^ded, tha^ theirs which malice has put out. If my shoe tread
not always streighte, I forbid not a brotherly admonition, which is void of
bitterness, and biting gall: for the which I shall heartily give thee thanks.
Only this I require of thee, that thou deprave me not behind my back.

This I write, much misdoubting the old crooked practice of some crabbed
Zoilus. Whose manner is, rather of envy to be nipping at other men's good
endeuoures, than of any charitable and godly zeal, himself to do any thing
for common profit. But let him say what he list, it shall not skill. For as
in publishing of this my work I sought not gredily the praise of the world,
which by the like doing I might have hunted for, not a few years ago,
having a book ready penned for the printe in the latin tongue: so neither do I
care a whit for the malicious dispraising of any ill disposed, envious, or
vain glorious person: let him play ye Momus, or the Mimus, with never so
crafty a pretense, yea or else disguise himself how he will. Whom moreover
fully I would have advertised, that I weighe more the honest testimony of
three or four godly and learned men, whose sincerity of judgment is well
known: than the cauilling of an hundred ungracious tongs. Yea, and were it so
(as I dare say of the contrary I might assure meself) that I should find
either none, or very few, who in a lawful quarrel would uphold my cause: yet
I set more by the witness of a good conscience, than any ill will, or
friendship to be had in the world. Farewell in Christ.

A Table of the Chapiters of the first book.
WHerefore the author wrote this work. Cap. 1. page 1. The division of this
discourse. Cap. 2. page 6 The corrupt judgment of some, denying Gods
Providence. Cap. 3. page 7. As there is a God that created the world: I o
there is a God that does govern it. Ca. 4. pa. 11 That God wants neither
might nor good vvil to govern the world. Cap. 5. page 17. That God governs
the world, it appears by the commodities that we receive by the bodies that
are above: and by the four Elements. Cap. 6. page 21. He shows Gods
Providence, by perusing the Anatomy of man's body. Cap. 7. page 29 Epicures
cauilling at the vvorkemanship of man's body, is confuted. Cap. 8. page 39.
Gods providence is proved out of scripture. Cap 9. page 44. He recites the
fathers to the same effect. Cap. 10. page 58. He shows that the very
Ethnikes approved this doctrine of gods Providence. c. 11. p. 61 That a certain
opinion of Gods Providence is rooted in our hearts by nature: which stirs us
up to pray to him, and to give him thanks. Ca. 12. page 66. The prodigious
wonders that come to pass in the world, be an argument also of Gods
Providence. Cap. 13. page 68 Examples out of the scripture to prove Gods
Providence. Cap. 14. page 73.
The Chapiters of the second book.
No tokens of gods providence toward us, can move us to be thanckfull, but
still we be carping and cauilling. Ca. 1. pa. 105 Our wills be not forced by
Gods Providence, vvherof. etc. Cap. 2. page 114 God is not the author of sin c.
3. pa. 126 How evil is done by gods vvil, the author makes further
declaration. c. 4. p. 147 Ordinary means be not excluded by Gods Providence.
Cap. 5. pa. 162. God is burdened with unequal distribution, first. etc. Cap.
6. page 181. An answer to the first part of this former objection, shevving
that the poor have no cause to complain. Ca. 7. pa. 183. The state of the
rich and the poor, being both compared, he shows in the end, that the
poores case is the better. cap. 8. page 195. The author does not simply
condemn riches, but he would neither have the pore discouraged, nor the rich
too much puffed up. Cap. 9. page 201. They are plainly disproued, that would
have all men brought to a like state. Cap. 10. page 206. An answer to the
second part of the objection of uneven dealing, shevving how gentry and
bondage first came in, and how necessary rulers be in a common weal. Cap.
11. page 216. It stands with good reason, that subsidies and taxes should be
paid. Ca. 12. pa. 225 That the servant has no cause to complain of his
state, nomote than the subject. Cap. 13. page 232. Though Princes be not
alvvayes answerable to our affections, yet ought we not therefore to rebel.
Cap. 14. page 239. That God suffers evil and hurtful things, without any
derogation to his Providence. Cap. 15. page 244. That the prosperity of the
wicked, and the adversity of the godly, is no stain or blemishe to Gods
Providence. Cap. 16. page 254.
The Chapters of the third book.
Making a recapitulation of the former book, he shows that Gods Providence
stands still invincible. Cap 1. page 268. That Gods Providence is neither
Destiny nor Predestination, and what it is, cap. 2. page 271. Of this, that
Gods Providence is an order what may be gathered, ca. 3 pa. 279. That Gods
Providence being an order thought upon from everlasting, is immutable. cap.
4. page 281. Gods Providence always being certain, whether chance and
fortune may take place. cap. 5. page 291. An answer to them that deny Gods
especial Providence to extend to all his creatures, as well small as great. ca.
6 p. 294. Gods special Providence is proved to extend to small creatures
as well as great, out of the sacred scriptures. cap 7. pa. 314. Ancient fathers
are alleged to the same purpose. cap. 8. page 316. That Gods special
Providence pertayneth also to the meanest creatures, he shows out of Plotine
and Plato him self. cap. 9. page 324. He answers an objection made against
him out of S. Paul, whereby it would seem that God has no care of oxen. ca.
10. p. 327 He entreats of provision to be made for Ministers, and namely of
tithes, declaring how far forth they depend of Gods word, and what they
borrowe of man's law. cap. 11. page 332. He returns thither from whence he
digressed, and shows that the government of Gods Providence is continual.
cap. 12. page 357. That God governs all things, according to the state of
their own nature. cap 13. page 362.
The Chapters of the fourth book.
Of the ministry of Angels in general, and of the order and manner of Gods
government: wherein a sentence of Gregory and Aristotle is discussed. Ca. 1.
pa. 379. The pre-eminence of Angels, and their authority is proved by the
circumstance of reason. cap. 2. page 386. The government of Angels is proved by
Scripture. cap. 3 page 392. The authority of Angels is made manifest also by
the learned fathers. c. 4. p. 393 The fifth chapter contains a disputation
touching a proper Angel, which the consent of antiquity ascribes to us, and
shows that it is a probable doctrine, and not directly (as some learned
think) repugnant to the authority of holy scripture. cap. 5. page 399. The
aid and furtherance that we have by the ministry of Angels, is showed by the
examples of the sacred Bible. c. 6. p. 405. The furtherance that we have by
Angels, is declared also by the examples of our time. cap. 7. page 409. Angels
(notwithstanding their government) must not be called upon in our prayers, more
tha^ any other creature. c. 8. p. 414 The profit that is to be taken by gods
Providence, as also by all other things, stands in the due use and
application. ca. 9. pa. 424. The comfort which we receive by Gods Providence.
cap. 10. page 428. What lessons we may pike out of Gods Providence, for the
mayntenaunce of godly life. cap. 11. page 448.


Gentle reader I pray thee in perusing this discourse, observe diligently these
faults escaped in the print, hereafter noted, if there be any other small
errors, I shall desire thee to use both thy patience and judgment, and to
correct them as thou see cause.

In the fifth page of the Epistle Dedicatorie, and first line, for Rabinio,
read Rabirio.

In the sixth page of the Preface to the reader, line 4. for thy, read their.

In the 13. page of the Preface, line 23. for power, read manner.

Pa. line Fault. Correction. 2 16 for ways read thus way ibi. 21 godly godlily
13 8 Achams dial Achaz his dial. For so I have since found it in printed
copies. And so neither does the note in the margente altogyther hold, for I
find it touched Esai. 38. and also 4. Reg. 20. 22 34 which we which if we 38 23
posidonius Possidonius. 48 10 tries try 49 12 ninth and four ninety and
four 52 2 param paratae 69 2 to work: to work them: 70 8 a thing of a thing.
75 5 Chareas Charras 77 20 brayded broyded 86 26 ye stayednesse stayednesse 89
1 honored? honored. 93 1 abashed) abashed:) 98 4 avail auale ibi. 15
quodthey (making answer) (quod they making answer) 110 20 the salt and the
salt 111 21 fantasy frenzy 114 13 to approach approach 115 23 Gods. Gods,
138 8 creature creator 146 15 Saying Saving 168 8 decree. decre? 169 18
destiny. destiny? 180 16 methink this methinketh is 181 21 reason: reason?
182 1 sense. sense? 257 14 doluor dolor 280 8 in and 290 2 no not 299 6 alone
all one 307 22 seem see 310 3 debating debasing 316 24 doutlesse the whole.
doubtless without ye regard of every small several part, the whole 330 23
liberally literally 336 12 will fully wilfully 356 25 not all not at all 366
16 it please him it might please him) 367 12 shall not that shall that 371 11
Bertrome Bertrame 424 1 in self in him self 465 12 you. him

The first Book of Gods Providence.
The first Chapter.
Wherefore the Author vvrote this work.

EVer since the time that our father Adam offending against the Majesty of
almighty God, had wilfully and desperately cast down him self into the gulf, and
whirlepoole of all mischief: so importable has been the penance that
mankind has suffered, that never after he has enjoyed any quietness, or any
safety and assurance in this wretched world. For whither could he cast his
eyes to see any matter of comfort? The earth he knew was accursed for his
sake: the fresh air so comfortable: to him before, did now fail him when he
most needed: the fire and the water was as ready to swallow him and devour him,
as to minister any thing for his necessary use: yea the very powers of heaven,
the sun, the moon, and the stars vapouring down contagious exhalatitions,
crossing him in all his doings with their crooked and ouerth warte
constellations, seemed often as the very instruments of Gods wrath, most
cruelly to conspire against him.

By means whereof, man being grievously encombred, has been driven, as it
were by force, to seek out some refuge for himself. And many ways surely it
has been attempted of many and sundry kinds of men. Some one ways, and some
an other, according to ye measure of their capacities. Worldly n^m have always
thought of worldly ay^es. Therefore the stay they sought for, could not be
surer than ye world it self. Such as were godly affected shot evermore at a
further mark not contented with the vanities of this present life, but ernestly
aspiring and prea^ing forward to that their peaceable country in the world to
come. Therefore where their tresure was, there also they reposed their comfort,
that is to say, with their God.

Whom guiding their ships, they never feared any tempests, nor rashly ran to
their destruction, upon the rude ragged rocks. Therefore nothing more rife in
their mouth, tha^ the saying of that kingly prophet: Although I walk in the
midst of the shadov of death, yet vvil I not be aghast, because thou art with
me. Agreably whereunto Isahac, not knowing what sacrifice his father meant: yet
because God was with him, and guided him to his great comfort, well perceived
how much more truly his father spoke, than he conceived when he made him this
godly answer? The Lord shall provide. And how much better it was to be
conducted by our savior Christ, than by the art and cunning of any mariner,
Christ's disciples learned in their great danger, very like (had not their
master ben there present to succor them) to have been overwhelmed in the
botome of ye sea. Therefore David, when he had said, O let the people rejoice
and be glad. What reason, I pray you, did he give? because they flourished in ye
world, because they had all things at their commandment? he said no such
thing: but going straighte to the fountain of all blyssednesse, because (says
he) thou shall judge thy people righteously, and govern the Nations upon the
earth: As who says, our hope is not limited within the bounds of this life,
neither make we any great account of any thing to be obtained in this world,
but this is the foundation of our joy, and the very ground of all our
felicity, which even then does us good at the heart, when the world seems
most to frown upon us, that thou art a righteous Judge, who both art able
to deliver the righteouse out of trouble, and to reserve the unjust dealers to
the due execution of thy just judgment to come. This benefit, with other more
out of number we obtain by the means of thy government. Of whom we are
most assured, that thou can suffer no wrong dealing unrevenged, nor no
virtue or godliness unrewarded.

Seeing then the knowledge of Gods heavenly and most gracious Providence is so
wholesome and comfortable a doctrine, I have thought good by the assistance of
his only direction, whom we speak of, to endeuer to write of so good a matter.
And the rather doubtless I have taken it in hand, for that I see other
mysteries of our religion very commendably set forth in our mother tongue:
touching this point so necessary to be known of al christian people, no
special treatise published to ye behofe and furtherance of our countrymen.

Therefore, not as one the best able, yet according to my poor talent, not the
lest willing, I have given the onset, to the intent that they which be
afflicted may behold (as it were) present, or at ye leastwise very nighe at
hand in their mistie darkness the clear beams of the sun of
righteousness, after grefe solace, after they have been tossed and shaken with
the wild waves of the sea, the most quiet haven of peace and rest. On the
other side, that they which be now set a loft, and have al things that their
hearts can desire, stand not to much in their own conceit, nor over proudly
display their Pecocks feathers, knowing in whose hand it rests to cast them
down from the pinnacle of their stout and lofty imaginations.

The.ij. Chapter.
The division of this discourse.

IN doing whereof it beh^ueth us diligently to examine: first whether there be
any such Providence, yea or no. And afterward (that being well proved, and
the adversaries refuted and convinced) to declare at large what it is, how
farfoorth it exte^deth, by what instruments God puts it in execution, and
the whole use and commodity that a true Christian man may receive by it. Which
points being thoroughly discoursed, so much as I shall think requisite for the
instruction of ye godly reader, my mind is henceforth to rest my self under
that mighty hand of his protection, whom in this treatise I have sought out*
Neither do I fear in this mine enterprise the grave censure of Clemens
Alexa^drinus, who condemns utterly (as it seems) the very moving or naming
of such questions: As for example (says he) to enquire for proofs of Gods
Providence, which being certain, it is a heinous matier to imagine, that
Prophecy came not by Gods providence, as also to doubt of that heavenly order
of dispensatio^, which concerns our Lord and savior Christ. For it is one
matier to move a question of infidelity, an other thing to discuss a question
that is moved, and doubted of by an Infidel. Which, were it not lawful to be
done, not only Theodorite, Chrysostomus, Augustine, might be disallowed, but
the said Clemens also himself might by just judgment be dysproued.

The.iij. Chapter.
The corrupt judgment of some, denying Gods Providence.

AND would to God this doctrine were so fired and established in men's hearts,
that there needed nothing to be said of it. But now who sees not in all ages
how deeply this Atheism has taken root? For first, what Epicure with his
sect fantasied, touching Gods ordring of the world, it is out of question.
Who to the intent he might safely, without any remorse, or any prick, or
terror of a wounded conscience, go on forward in his wickedness, and his
sensual voluptuous race, went about (as far forth as he might) to extinguishe
utterly, and to blot out all memory, and thinking of Gods power. In the last
Chore of Senecaes Tragedy, called Hippolitus, it is said, Res humanas ordine
nullo fertuna regit. etc. Fortune guides the world without any order, and
dispearseth her gifts with a hand that sees not what it does, in steed of the
better sort cherishing the worse. That the fruitful soil should yearly yield
her increase, Cyolops in Euripides ascribes it not at al to god, but either to
some lucky chance, or else to some course of necessity. An other of the^
says: Casus and fortuna in omnibus dominatur Chance and fortune bear sway in all things. And an other of the^ almost with the same words: Sed profecto
fortuna in omni re dominatur. But doutles Fortune in every thing has the upper
hand. Yea what plainer testimony can we have of this godless opinion that
has poisoned the world? Does not Virgile say, Fortune is almighty? and Cebes
in his Table set her out like a blind goddess, that bestows her gifts
without discretion?

Well, these were Heathen men, you will say: I grant it. But were they (trow
ye) only of that mind? No doubt, we christians also (at least wise as we
would be taken) how so ever we would countenance the matter otherwise, yet if
we would but descend into our own lives, no doubt (I say) we might find
our selves a great many of us, of as corrupt judgment as they. The fool said
in his heart (says the Prophet David) there is no God. O great abomination
(will some say) and worthy to be extreemely punished. But abide a while yet, I
pray you. Iwis he spoke it not in your hearing, that you might accuse him: Nay
(I warrant you) he was not such a fool. How said he it then? Mark the
Prophet: The fool said in his heart, there is no God. If you look upon his
Angels face, you would think he glistered like any gold: If you will hear
his goodly and godly words, you would pity him that he were not canonized
for a saint. But let him not deceive you: For if you will but view his life
and conversation, you shall see he fares much like a tree, which Alexanders
soldiers found in India: a mighty tree in deed to look to, very fair and of
a goodly heighte. Which nathelesse when they beheld with much wondering, and
woulds needs bring it away with them: they found, that what so ever was at
the root of it, was forthwith turned into baye salt.

Will thou see now, how like the case is? Thou see this worldling very high
and mighty in his own conceate, fair mouthed and well visaged: And thou
wonderest at him. But he is rotten at the root (if thou well examine him) he is
hollow, he is altogether as bitter as baye salt. Therefore he rangeth loosly,
as one that had never a bridle, imagining secretly with himself, that there is
no god to controlle him, or keep him under.

The.iiij. Chapter.
As there is a God that created the world. So there is a God that doethe
govern it.

But that this is an erroneous doctrine of them that teach so, and a godless
and senseless imagination of them that think so in their hearts: to the
intent I may open it, and make it plain: I will begin with that as my
foundation, which is the chief principle, and groundewoorcke of all religions.
And first I would demand this question of them, whether they believe that
there is any God? For he that will come to God (says the Epistle to the
Hebrews) first must believe that God is, and that he is a revvarder of them
that seek him. Which were it not well settled, and depely fixed in our minds,
all truth, godliness, and devotion should be utterly trode^ under the feet.

What say they then to the matier? If they deny it, I might prove it unto them
by the same reason, yt Dionysius uses to Apollophanes: who when he was willed
of Polycarpe, that he would write somewhat unto him, whereby the said
Apollophanes might be converted unto the faith, by his own Principles, being
counted excellent in Astronomy: Dionisius writing to the blessed Martyr, does
frame unto him this argument in form following: Seeing the order (says he)
whereby the bodies above move, is according to a certain rule: If that order by
any should be altered, it were manifest, that the same so altering it, should
be God. But the ordinary course of the celestial bodies was once changed and
inuerted, as Apollophanes him self could tell. Ergo, it was his part to have
concluded (said Dionysius) following the grounds, and the Principles of his own
Philosophy, that the cause of that alteration was the true God ruling in the
heavens. And therefore consequently, abandoning his Maumetrie, and his foolish
Idols, that he should only woorship such a God. That the ordinary moving of
the bodies above had been changed, he makes it evident by three examples.
First by this, that we read in the tenthe of Iosue, that the Sun clean
contrary to his custom, stood still for the space of a whole day, and went
neither backewarde nor forward, until the enemies of Gods people were put to
flight.

Secondly, he proves to him the same This I find no^ in the Bible, n^ether is
it expressed plainly in that copy of Dionysius his Epistle, which I have seen
extant in Printe, but only in Holcotte upon the Book of Wisdom.
conclusion by the mounting up of the Sun, appearing in Achams dial. And
this was so great a miracle, that it made the Babilonians to be astonished, me^
that diligently observed all the courses, and mouings of the supernall bodies.
By means whereof, without any field foughten or weapon drawn, they yielded to
Ezechias of their own accord. Whereupon the Priests of the Persians noting
that day, made afterward an annual feast, which they called the feast of the
tripled Sun: And the Priests that celebrated that day, having their name of
the feast, were termed the Priests of the tripled S^nne.

But because Apollophanes might chance to deny this example, albeit he had
seen before his face, the very testimony of the Priests against him:
therefore Dionysius writes to Polycarpe, that if he happen so ga^nsay these
aforenamed demonstrations, he should put him in mind of the third, to wit,
of the Eclipse, that befell at the time of Christ's passion: which being
contrary to all course of nature, he saw notwithstanding with his own eyes,
and could not in any wise say against it.

What ca^ Atheistes or Epicures bring into contrary this reason: Which as it
notably sets before us the divine power, and majesty of almighty God: So
does it well disprove their fond error, that would tie God to the necessity
of second causes, saying that he can rule none otherwise, but as destiny
draws him to and froe. For if so excellent a creature as the Sun so much
swar^ed, and declined from his woonted course, that Gods will and pleasure
might with due submission be obeyed: shall the aspecte of any inferioure
^arre, or the influe^re of any planets make us fear? And where is that fatal
fast lincked chain, that so brideleth and restraigneth the living God? Which
if it be of such force and efficacy, as the Stoike^ dream: Then his scepter
wrested out of his hands, must be left to the arbitrament of his creatures,
yea and Protagoras with his accomplices might face us down there were no God.

But how blind an assertion that is (for I will not say now, how
blasphemous) although we might justly some to have made already a sufficient
proof, yet hardly let us go on a little farther. Surely the very heathen wise
me^, albeit they were destitute of that knowledge, which more plentifully is
ministered by ye word of God: Yet wonder it is to consider, how far then
were hable to set their foot, having no^^ other light^ to guide them, bu^ ^he
very power of reason, and common sense. Especially touching this matter, the
disputing and reasoning of Chrysippus, is well worthy to be wa^ed. Who being
meruailously sharp witted, as Tullie says, handles this case in such a
sort, that he seems to have learned it of natures self, and not to have
invented it of his own brain.

For (says he) if there be any thing in the world, that man's wit, reason,
and power cannot compass: that thing surely, that does compass it, is better
than man: But the Angels, the stars in the firmament, and the Planets, with
all such things as move continually in their course, can not be wrought by any
man. That thing therefore whereby they are wrought, is better than man. And
that by what name should I rather call it by, than by the name of God? And by
and by after going forward, if thou behold (says he) a goodly portly great
house, although thou see not the Master of it, yet canste thou not be made to
believe, that it was builded of Mise and Rattes: And should thou not seem
to be stark mad, if so great furniture of the world, such great variety,
beauty, and comeliness of things in heaven, such a largeness and hugeness
of the sea and land, thou should ween to be thy house, and not the house
of the immortal God?

You see the drift of the Philosopher, (for what need I to wade in him any
further) whereby he attempteth to prove that, which neither. Christendom nor
Heathenesse, can be in doubt of, to wit, that there is a God. Which being (as
it is in deed) a most certain truth, it follows that we ascribe unto him
some action and doing in the world, agreeing and conformable to the divine
power of his majesty. But what can be more agreeable for the creator of the
Heavens, and the round earth, than to preserve by his heavenly wisdom, that
which he has formed by his endless power, than that which he has once made
to guide ever, and as well to show his mercy in saving, as his might in
creating? For what can be more unsavory, than that saying of the Poet Ennius?

Aye as I have said, so will I not spare,
In heaven of gods to say there is a race:
Mankind nathelesse in earth how he fare,
They pass, I ween, a straw for his case.
The.v. Chapter.
That God wants neither might nor good will to govern the world.

WHat (says he) has God no regard of his creatures? why so? does he loathe
them perchance? No, he saw from their first beginning, that they were very
good. How is it then? Belike either he can not govern them, or else he wa^teth
a good will. For either the one or the other he must needs say. Will he say he
can not? Either then God is ignorant in what order and fashion it must be done,
or else strength falls him, that he can not do it. To burden God with
ignorance we may not: for what else were that in effect, but to say in plain
words, he were no God? And how unlikely matier were it, y^ he which wroughte
all things with such unsearchable wisdom, he y^ teaches man knowledge, he
in whom all treasures of skill remain, the deep^ riches of whose understanding
the Apostle considering, is so amazed: I say, how unlikely a matier were it,
that he himself should be ignorant?

Again, if thou say God is unable to discharge such a weighty function: how
then was he able at the first to create all things of nothing? How could he
knitte things together so disagreeing amongste themselves with such an entier
band (as it were) of friendship, as for example: the fire and the water, the
day and the night, and make of all these such a consent and harmony, if he
can not look to them and provide for them? or how is he called almighty, if
there be any thing exempted from his power? He can therefore direct us, if it
please him: let no Epicure ever say against that.

But he will not peradventure: why will he not? He enuieth not his own
woorkmanship. How should he? especially seeing we depend of his goodness,
much less ca^ he hate that which he has made. Nay rather the same goodness
y^ caused him to make us, when we were nothing, should much more allure him to
do for us, when now by his wisdom we are brought to somewhat. And how should
he (I pray you) which is the fountain and well spring of al grace, be stained
with such foul vices and enormities, as he so much detesteth in his
creatures, I say, malice and envy?

Neither is it to be thought, that for the avoiding of pains he will neglect
us, seeing Christ our savior, who came down from heaven for our sakes,
suffered for us such cruel torments, and such terrible pangs of death. He
that loved us so dearly, what will he not do for us? Howbeit we have not only
to speak of that care, which God takes especially for mankind, but of this
general providence over all the world. The welding of the government whereof can
not certainly be harder to be atcheeued, than the wonderful works of his
creation.

Whereof it is said in the Psalms, he spoke but the word, and they were
made: he commanded, and they were created. For true is that saying of the wise
Pythias, which Herodotus rehearses to his commendation, In God it is all one
labor to say a thing, and to do it: And (as Aristophanes said almost with the
same words) to conceive in mind, and to express in deeds.

Seeing therefore he is not spotted with any blemish, or stain of ignorance,
who only is the author of all wisdom: Seeing he is almighty, and therefore hable
to do all things: Again, seeing he enuyeth not his own workmanship that
sets out his glory, he himself being blotted with no malice, but preserves
al things, especially the faithful: seeing also that nothing is hard for him
to accomplish, but he is able to do with much ease what so ever it shall
please him to take in hand: No dout he cares for the whole world, and leaves
nothing maysterlesse, or without a guide.

The.vj. Chapter.
That God governs the world, it appears by the commodities that we receive
by the bodies that are above, and by the four Elements.

Wherein if any man be yet so froward that he will not hear of it, or so dull,
ye he knows not what it means, or so graceless that he cannot broke it, or
so thanklesse and unkind to god, ye he will not acknowledge it, and confess
it: let the unspeakable commodities that he enjoys by the sea and the land,
by the fresh air, by the moon and the firmament, make him to blush, and to be
red for stark shame. For even as kings and princes take tributes and subsidies
of their subjects: So you of every one of gods creatures reapest as great
profit as you could desire. For the sun is the original cause as well of
light, as of heat, and ripeneth ye corn and ye fruit, whereby our weak bodies
be sustained. The moon wc her borrowed light, te^pereth (as it were) ye
darkness of y^ night season, and when the sun is gone past our orizont,
conducteth the wayfarers in their journey. The rest of the stars wc their
rising and falling in their course, show to the inhabitants of the earth the
four sundry seasons of the year, the winter, summer, spring, and harvest. And
in the sea they be guides to them that sail to their earnestly wished haven.
Shall we extenuate these great gifts of God? or derive their original from a
wrong foundation? which we esteem as slender, being of so precious and exceeding
value: what shall we say of this, that Patricius mencioneth in his third book
de regis, and regni institutione. For (says he) so sone as we come into the
world, of the Sun we receive a spirit, of the Moon a body, of the star Mars
blood, of Mercury wit, of Jupiter desire, of Venus an inclination to Venereal
acts, for the increasing and multiplying of mankind. Whereof every one of
them, at the hour of death, we seem to make due restitution. And to speak
somewhat of the elements, the air being received by the longues, assuageth the
heat that is about the heart, and when it is turned, and altered into rain, it
waters the earth wc sweet shoures. The same air with the sharp cold that
comes from it, as it were with a certain whip, keeps in the good juice in
the grafts and seeds, to the intent it break not forth out of season, but
lie hidden secretly in the roots, until the beginning of the primetide do
approach.

Consider besides this, the great number, and the variety of the birds in the
air, of whom we receive so great pleasure, that it well appears Gods
providence would not only supply our need, but also minister unto us things
delectable.

I let pass to speak of the fire, whereof as we feel no small comfort, when we
are pinched with the roughness of the winter: so also it avails us so many
and sundry other ways, that at no time of the year we can miss it, without
manifest danger of our health.

Yea the earth it self being but a heavy and gross matter, yet so commodious
it is by all means both for man and beast, y^ surely it is wonder to consider
it: which receives us into the world, as we come out of our mothers wombes,
and when we are once borne and brought forth, yields us sustenance always
after, till at the last when all the world besides has forsaken us, it receive
us tenderly into her bosom, like a mother to cover us, and to keep us safe
from the injury and violence both of foul and beast.

Hereof especially it is worth the labor to consider the manner and
constitution. For it is neither all even ground, nor yet all raised up aloft,
but with marvelous cunning partly it is made plain and smooth, and partly it
is divided into hills and dales. Therefore being brought into such a form,
that both the fluds in the winter season ouerflowing the green pastures, might
have passage, and the laborer that trauaileth by ye way, might enter ye more
co^modiously through ye narow straights.

It were a long labor, and the same, in such store of other matter perchance
not so needful to be told, what Colepittes of fuel, quarries of stone,
mines of gold, silver, iron, lead, and other metals are dug out of the
veins of the earth. Whereby we see not only many necessaries suffised, but
goodly and sumptuous houses erected, precious jewels, costely plate very
curiously and queintly forged. And not only these benefits before named, we
scrape and gather out of the earth: but therewithal pondes, brooks, wells,
rivers, all salt and fresh waters, all the mighty and main Seas do issue
and spring out of the same. So that with great plenty of savage and tame
beasts, wandering in the woddes, and the wild forestes: we have all kinds of
fishes, that our hearts could wish.

Be not these great signs and tokens of a God that is careful and tender over
us? What and if I put to this the great use that we have of the water it self
about our meats, in our drinks, in washings, in bathings, in purgings, in many
other things, which I let pass?

But this in any wise must not be skipped with silence, which Seneca speaks
of in the fifth book of his natural questions, that to the intent these large
and huge seas should not hinder any traffike betwixt man and man: God has
given us winds to help forward our ships and sails, that every countries
commodities might be made common.

At these wonders therefore above specified, and other more that came to his
remembrance, the prophet David maruelously astonished, cries out with great
exclamation: What is man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the son of
man, that thou so visitest him? Thou haste made him little lovver than the
Angels, with glory and honor thou haste crouned him, and thou have made him
to have the dominion over the works of thine hands. Thou haste put all things
in subjection under his feet: all beasts and Oxen, yea and the sheep of the
field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and what so ever
walks through the paths of the Sea. O Lord our governor, how
excellent is thy name in all the world?

Hitherto goes the Prophet. Who first (as you have heard) with great
vehemency demau^deth, repeting his question more than once, of what
excellency man is, or of what worthiness the son of man should be
esteemed, that God should make so much of him, or so highly and souerainely
advance him? Wherein is diligently to be observed the variety and shifte of
words that the Prophet uses. What is man (says he) what is the son of
man? as who says, neither God nor Angel, but a man, and the son of a man,
that is, a mere mortal and sinful creature, subject to vanity and
corruption. And yet as though he were thine own derling, so thou make of
him: being clothed in deed with the lothesome vesture of the flesh, but yet
in the same not much inferior to the blessed spirits: son of Adam by
deprauation of nature, but thy son, and thy dear son by acceptance of
grace: image of Satan by froward and peeuishe disposition, but thine own
image and resemblance by his first creation. Yea with so great glory and honor
thou haste set him up, that as thou reignest and rulest inuisibly in the
heavens: so next, and immediately under thee, thou haste given him visibly a
dominion and soueraintie in the earth. So that there is no beast, be it Ox, or
sheep, or any other, that can withdraw it self from the subjection of man.
No birds of the air, nor fishes of the sea, that can privilege them selves
from his bondage. Therefore must I say it, and say it again (says the
Prophet David) O Lord, O gracious Lord, thou that so honorably prouidest for
us, so favorably do shield us, so mercifully do protecte us, O how
high art thou magnified, not in heaven only, where is the seat of thy
habitation, but even thoroughout the whole earth? Where the strange works of
thine hands appear so much the more glorious, as the matier that they are
framed of is the more brittle.

The. vij Chapter.
He shows Gods Providence, by perusing the Anatomy of man's body.

MVche it is out of question ye this prophetical prince has spoken: but yet
me thinks (forasmuch as we entreat of Gods Providence) it should both be
very incident to our purpose, and also make the whole matier that he has thus
noted unto us the more plain: if we should here upon occasion offered, notify,
with as much brevity as we can, the making, constitution, and the whole nature
of a man. Which examination of ours being finished, we shall have afterward
the better opportunity to discourse more largely of his preeminence.

An hard matier perchance it might be thought for a man not yet entered in the
art of Phisike, to run through (as it were) the Anatomy of a^ man's body.
But nathelesse, so ferfoorth as I shall think it requised, I am the rather
encoraged to take it in hand, that I might fellow that yolde^ precept, which
bids a man know him self, so much made of (as Pliny says) in times past,
that it was painted in the porches of the Heathen temples, and received as an
Oracle that came from heaven. Which who so well weyeth and scanneth in very
deed, shall both be the better able to descend and enter into him self, and
learn the more wisely and fruitfully to consider and judge of Gods works.

Whose unsearchable and profound wisdom in all things that a man can turn him
to, can not but notably show it self. But where more clearly to ye eye that is
not utterly blered with sensuality, the^ in this passingly well favored frame
of ma^s bodily lineaments and proportion? Wherein what is there to be seen not
exceeding profitable and commodious? what, yt is unseemly placed? what not with
marvelous forecaste and singular dexterity contrived?

For to begin with one of the chiefest gifts, wherewith God ever endued man, I
mean speech and language, the very sedeplot of societies and common weles,
what engines and instruments has god devised, that the same not only might
be made perfect and apt for the expressing of men's minds, but round also and
pleasant, and very fit for all tunes of melodious Music?

Learn therefore, O thou y^ abusest this goodly quality, how the longs (as me
seems) not unlike to a pair of bellows, is not trodden with men's feet, like
the bellows of a pair of organes, but moved to and fro of the muscules and
braunes o^ man's bulk, compact with sinowes and hard flesh, whichdoth both draw
the^ together, and put the^ open, that the vital spirits, whereby men are most
refreshed, might conveniently have their recourse. These spirits being
brought to the windpype by the longues, with much stirring and moving provoke
the secret instruments of the tongue, and make it to break forth into a
voice. Which to the intent it might be the better fashioned, and not poured
out to much at randon, it is compassed (as it were) about with a double wall,
both of the teeth and the lips. Whereby we are given to understand, as it were,
by the secret operation of nature, that life and death, being (as it is said)
in the hands of the tongue, we should be well advised how we speak, and in
what order and manner we dispose and frame our communication.

I let pass other things so much the more tedious to be perused, as they are
hardelier conceived, and borne away. What should we say of the heart, which
being guide and captain of the rest of the body, whereunto it gives life, is
defended with ye breast, as with a fortress, from susteining violence from
without? Or what should we speak of the livers vain, which for releese and
sustenance of the heart conueyeth* blood to it like a conduite pype? Now as
the liver draws this norishing matier from the belly: So the belly draws
the same food to it, by the help of the stomach, when it is broken and
chewed with the teeth: Which first it keeps for a while, till it be altered
into a certain licour, much like to the juice of sodden barley, when it is
well beaten and pressed out, and afterward when it is well boiled and
digested, it is agreably distributed throughout all the body. And the liver in
deed has the purer part: as for the gross relics of it remaining, because
they are not fit for norishment, it repelleth them down to the entrayles. To
be short, there is no member of the whole body, which thereby receaueth not
both conforte and conueniente sustenaunce.

And were it so, that our weak capacities could not thoroughly reach to the
understanding of the curious workmanshyppe of our bodies: yet surely this
consideration should stir us up to the praise of God, that he has not
only garnyshed us with a certain quick liuelynesse of the mind, but
therewithal has given us such a shape, as to man's nature and disposition
might seem most aunswerable and correspondente. For whereas naturally other
living creatures be so formed and compacte together, that they be always
poring upon the ground: man only God has made bolte vprighte, with his face
looking up to heauenwarde, as to the chief house of his progeny, that his
eyes and whole heart being fast fixed upon it, he might the rather be
induced to know God.

Therefore in his upper part he has placed his head, like an high castle of
defense, and in the same has he set his brain, as a jewel and treasure of
great price. For look how the sallet is a safegarde to the soldiers head,
and even so the scull keeps in the brain, and saves it from the force of
the enemy. Against the which, least the brain lighting over sore, should
take some harm, God almighty has compassed it with two skins, called of
the Physicians meningas, i. the resmes. Whereof the one of them being thin and
slender, not only goes round about the whole brain, but also has passage
betwixt diverse turning ways, which are seen to be in the said brain. The
other being thicker and more substantial, is therefore set betwixt the brain,
and the brain pan, least the brain being tender, should take hurt and
damage by the hardness of the scull. Wherefore the brain (as I said before)
in the head, as it were in a high tower is conserved and kept like a great
treasure.

And whereas he that has charge over a garrison, has need of spies and
watchmen to foresee mischiefs to come, as well in peace, as in war: neither is
man's reason and understanding, being the very captain and guide of the body,
left helpless and destitute of these. For God has placed in the foresaid
tower, two eyes, as it were, two watchmen to look round about them where they
will, so quick and voluble of their nature, that they can quickly with a
little rolling turn aside from any thing that is hurtful. The nose adjoining
thereunto seems to stand beneathe like a wall, that is directly placed
betwixt the^ both. The eye liddes that cover the eyes, be made undoubtedly as
fit as can be, both to open and close again, as cause serves. And they be
trenched about (as it were) with the eye bries, by means whereof, whether they
be open or fast shut, if any mote or drop of moisture should fall upon them,
it might be easily repelled and kept off.

The ears and the nosethrilles, because the one of them hears a sound, the
nature whereof is to go upwards, the other of them smells and tastes
odoures, which likewise vapoure up a lofte: They are both of them very fitly
placed, both in the higher part of the body, and next the brain. Which
being the seat of our memory and understanding, not only conceyueth and
judges that which passes by the ear, but is much helped and refreshed by
sweet sauoures.

But I, that in all parts of the body go about to trace out Gods Providence,
take upon me as great a labor in my judgment, as if I undertook to number
the waves of the sea. I list not therefore to say any thing, either of the
neck, arms, or legs, or of the veins, and other secret parts.

I pass over likewise the five senses, the comely and necessary use of the
hair, with other such like things. The more curious handling whereof to them
chiefly appertains, which profess such learning and kind of knowledge.
For dear brother, I will appeal to thine own conscience: How think thou?
Does not this that I have touched already, sufficiently set out unto thee,
that clear light that shyneth of his own accord? Who can wander in
darkness, that has such torches in the firmament to give him light? Who
can pretend ignorance, that has his Scholemaister teaching him in his
bosom? Who so dull and blockishe of understanding, that can not learn so
sensible and plain a lesson, looking never besides his book? Unless we be
grown to such a desperateness, that we will wylfully bereeue our selves of
both our eyes. How can we not perceive and see that which so daily and
hourly is before our face? Before our face, quod I, nay I pray you, how can
we look besides it? for if thou cast up thy face toward the sky, the
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie works
If thou look down upon the earth, the very earth it self is full of the
Lords goodness, wherein thou haste so many arguments of his Providence, as
there be beasts in the fields, or the wild forestes: fishes in the maine
Sea ^trees, herbs, flowers growing upon the soil: if thou turn thee on the
right^ hand, or on the left, the wind blowing in thy face, the air
besettyng thee round about, will cast thee in the teeth with Gods benefits,
and very heynously charge thee, if thou find fault.

Lactantius tells us of one Archimedes, a Sicilian, who with a globe of
brass which he devised, could so counterfeite the making of the whole world,
that he resembled the rising and setting of the Sun, the waning and waxing of
the Moon, the moving and removing of the Stars and Planets, in such order
as they go forward and turn in the very heavens.

The like Tullie writes of Posidonius his familiar friend. And Patricius
speaks of a Dove that was so frained by Architas Tarentinus, and according to
the art of Geometry, so cunningly measured by due proportions, that the
tempered air that was shut into it, forced it to fly.

Certaynely these were strange devises, whereof no man could doubt that saw
them, but that by great slight and conueyaunce they were brought to pass.
What then might we conclude of him, that with a word made heaven and all the
earth. Whose power and wisdom in inuenting, if we must needs be driven to
confess, to be utterly unsearchable, and paste finding out, should we then
mistruste his goodness in protecting, that see the mighty hand of his
Majesty so plainly before us in creating.

The.viij. Chapter.
Epicures cauilling at the vvorkemanshippe of man's body, is confuted.

But abide you, whiles we stand thus reasoning of the matier, was there never
any Momus in a corner, y^ could espy an hole to creep out at. Yea (as says
the sect of Epicures) there be too too many things out of square. Go to then,
let them tell us hardely what they be. O (say they) there is no order, and many
things come to pass otherwise than they should. Wherein? Man, whom you so
advance, is borne utterly so weak and feeble, that he has no shifte in the
world to help himself. The brute beasts are armed every one with a certain
natural defense, the bulls with their horns, the Bears with their teeth, the
Lions with tearing and devouring, the beast called Bonasus with his dongue
casting, the Cuttle fish with an incke that he flinges about him, some with
flying, other with hiding of them selves, all one way or other can safegarde
themselves. But man comes naked into the world, in danger of fire and water,
impotente both of hand and foot, so tender of body, that in cold weather he
is benumbed with cold, in summer he is parched with heat, needle, and sickely,
subject to all casualities that may happen, griped eftsoons at the heart with
inward greefes of the mind, passions, pangs and perturbations, which other
living creatures be free from.

With these and other the like words, these Epicures dilate man's misery,
affirming that nature to mankind is a stepdame rather than any mother. Not
untruly in deed altogether, if the mark they shot at, were not open
blasphemy against God: but their conclusion utterly is to be detested. For
what if God have not given a man great claws, and talantes, nor covered him
with an heerie skin, like a bear? which as they were nothing seemly for so
gentle and mild a creature: so neither were they commodious for man's use.
For how should he scale a wall, or climb up a ladder, when he attempteth
the building of an house, or set sure foot, when he goes upon brick, or hard
stones, if he were pawed, and talanted like a Lion?

Man therefore being amiable, and lovely of his shape, has not in deed any
such thing: but what then? he has that which by all means is far better, I
mean, reason, and understanding, by the which we have affinity with God
himself.

Man has no scales like a Dragon, whereby he may bear off a cruel blow: But
he has art, and pollycie lodged in his tender brain, whereby he was not
only able to invent complet harnis for his body, but all engynnes and
instruments of warfare, yea, not only al engines and instruments of warfare,
but whatsoever else you could imagine either profitable, or pleasant for
mankind.

Man is not so strong of co^stitucion, nor so well fensed by nature against
heat and cold, as be sheep, Oxen, and other beasts: But their wool and
skins be at his commandment, wherewith he may be clothed from top to toe.
For this purpose of all other creatures, God has only given man hands, to
the intent he might put in execution that which reason wills too be done.

With them therefore he may make himself not only all kind of apparel,
but he may till and sow the ground, he may graffe trees, and plant
Vyneyardes: with them he may mow the grass, and reap the corn, inn it,
thresh it, grynde it, bake it, and make bread of it: With them he may make
conserues, siropes, preservatives, and all manner of confections: With them he
may write books and letters into far countries, and put in ure and practice
all Sciences. Whereof the huge number, the great skyll, the subtyle invention,
the most profitable and wholesome use too naught else, but the gift of reason
can justly and truly be ascribed. The power whereof is so great: that there
is no Serpent so venomous, no Lion so fearce, no Elephante so strong, no bird
so swifte, no dumb beast so furious, either by Sea or land, which by man's
industry and wisdom cannot lyghtely and easily be brought under.

So true is that saying before rehearsed out of the Psalms: Thou have made him
to have dominion over the works of thine hands, and thou haste put all
things in subjection under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of
the field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, and what so ever
walks through the paths of the sea.

And yet will fond Epicure open his polluted mouth, and say God has not well
provided for mankind? and yet will he complain of disorder, he himself most
disordered of al other, telling us that the world is out of frame. O vain man,
if I might call thee a man, nay rather godless monster, patched up of
blasphemies and loud lies.

The.ix. Chapter.
Gods Providence is proved out of scripture.

WHiles I am here about to make a pause, me thinks I am pulled at on both
elboes: Sir, (says one sort) you tell us a tale out of Philosophy, you
should rather teach us out of the word of God, which with your vocation is
more sitting. And by and by says an other company: Where is all this while
the consent of the Church, that we may know you speak not your own fantasy?

I will make a brief answer to them both: Patience a while I pray you, that I
may satisfy your reasonable expectation.

But to you my friends in the mean time a word or two: In this great
corruption of our nature, which our grau^dsire Adam has brought upon us, we
are not yet (God be thanked) left so bare, but that even in these our ashes
there be raked some sparks of fire: and although it be in deed through a
small clifte that it appears, yet the dawning of Christ our day star is
not utterly shut out of our hearts. And I speak this of us, as we are not
regenerate, and new borne by Gods especial sanctifying spirit.) By means
whereof, no doubt the very heathen Philosophers a great meiny of them (as
partly anon after you shall more perceive) saw so much in Gods matters,
that (as S Paul says, writing to the Romans) they are justly driven from all
excuse.

And would you then put our slender sparks, by debarring their due use, and
stop the course of that little ordinary light that is left unto us? Nay
rather (as it is our bounden duty) let us think it our part to give God
thanks for it, and even take that for an argument of Gods provident care that
he has over us.

But Scripture in deed must be preferred: neither have I truly forborne it.
Which in this case verily does offer it self in such abundance, that no
Christian heart can say against it. For to speak first of the Psalms, how
often is this doctrine there urged? how often does that kingly Prophet
against all adversities, against all enemies that oppressed him, set it as a
brazen wall: yea how does he solace him self with the very thought of it?
what sovereign comfort does he conceive by it? The Lord is my light (says
he) and my salvation: vvho^ then shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my
life, of vvho^ then shall I be afraid? When the wicked, even mine enemies,
came upon me, they stumbled, and fell. Though an host of men were laid
against me: yet shall not mine heart be afraid. And in the same Psalm: In the
time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea in the secret place of
his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me upon a rock of stone. And now
shall he lift up mine head above mine enemies round about me. Therefore will
I offer in his dwelling an oblatio^ with great gladness, I vvil sing, and
speak praise unto the lord.

Again in the.xj. Psalm, bringing in his friends by a dialogisme, that
counsayled him to flee from persecution: In the Lord put I my trust (says
he) how say ye then my friends, to my soul, that she should flee as a
bird unto the hill? Hereunto he imagines his friends thus to answer: Lo,
the ungodly bend their bovv, and make ready their arovves within the quiver,
that they may privily shote at the^ which are true of heart. For the
fou^datio^s of the common weal will be cast down. At these words this
Prophetical godly Prince, having his heart wholely fixed upon God, flteth to
Gods Providence for his only refuge. Ah (says he) what has the just done,
that he should so be entreated? But no force, the Lord is in his holy temple,
the Lords seat of judgment is in heaven. His eyes consider the poor, and
his eye liddes trie^h the children of men. How so ever I stand toward the
world, The Lord (I know) whose judgment is incorrupted, alovveth the
righteous: but the ungodly, and him that deliteth in wickedness, does his
soul abhor. Therefore as he is a just judge, no doubt, when he sees his
time, upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, storm, and
tempest, and this shall be their portion to drink. Neither is it to be merueiled
at (says the Prophet) that he is so zealous in the behalf of the godly. For
why the Lord being righteous himself, necessarily loves righteousness, as a
quality most agreeable to his own nature, therefore with a favorable
aspecte will his countenance behoulde the thing that is just.

Thus we see this heavenly Prophet, notwithstanding that he is so dreadfully
beset, his greatest foes being armed (as it were) to his destruction, the laws
neglected, justice despised, and all conscience being utterly banished and
exiled: How little yet he shrincketh for all this, or gives place at all to
their fury, yea how strongly rather he fortifieth, and protecteth himself
with the invincible bulworcke of Gods Providence.

So in the ninthe and fourth Psalm, after he had grievously poured out his
co^plainte against the triumphing of wicked and bloudthirstie men, saying:
Lord, how long shall the ungodly, how long shall the ungodly triumph?
How long shall all wicked doers speak so disdainefully, and make such
proud boasting? They: smite down thy people, O Lord, and trouble thine
heritage: They murder the vviddovve, and the stranger, and put the fatherless
to death. And yet they lay, tushe, the Lord shall not see, neither shall the
God of Jacob regard it. Forthwith he begins to take heart of grace, and very
bitterly he inueyeth against their folly. Take heed (says he) ye unwise
among the people. O ye fools when vvil ye understand? He that planted the
ear, shall he not hear? or he that made the eye, shall he not see? He that is
wont to chastise whole nations for their transgressions, and to schole men
ignorant of their duty with his sharp rod of correction, do ye not
think he would be revenged of you? As if he should say: Nay be you right well
assured, ye are not privileged but according to the wickedness of your
malicious dealings, so shall Gods heavy wrath and indignation light on your
necks.

And in the nynetie nine Psalm, he seems to use this anchor of Gods wholesome
and comfortable direction, to s^ays all the raging tempests of this
troublesome and unquiet world, saying the Lord is King, be the people never
so impatient: he fitteth between the Cherubines, be the Earth never so unquiet.

But what mean I so long to dwell in the Psalms? Whereof it is too too
evident, that their whole scope and drift chiefly tends to this effect, to
disprove and gaynesaye their vanity, who (as Chrysostomus writes in his
second Preface upon the Psalms) either disanul Gods providence altogether,
or else would suffer it to go no further than the precinctes, and lymites of
the heavens.

For trow ye, this was only the Prophet David's mind? Nay also even holy
Judith, a Matrone so well commended for the wise government of her self, her
great zeal toward her nation, her unconquerable godly courage, as none in
all the Bible more, so plainly speaks of this matter, that assuredly you
culd not wysh a more worthy testimony. But what says she then? when she had
put on sackcloth and ashes in stead of all other armoure, and for the better
withstanding of the most cruel assaults of Holofernes, she had withdrawn her
self into her oratorie, to make her earnest prayers to almighty GOD, amongst
other words, which she spoke in the bitterness and anguish of her heart,
submitting her self with all humilytie to the just judgments of GOD, Et hoc
factum est (quod she) quod ipse voluists. Omnes enim viae tuae paratae sunt,
and tuae iudicia, in tua prouidentia posuisti. That is to say: And this now is
come to pass, even as thou would thy self. For all thy ways be prepared,
and thought upon before, and thou have ordered thy judgments by thy
Providence. As if she should say, this affliction that so sore does touch us,
is surely come upon us by thy decree. For thou Lord do nothing, not
determined upon long before, and the very execution of thy judgments at what
time, and by what instruments it should be done, by thine everlasting counsel
it is appointed. It is our parts therefore to take that patiently, which thine
hand has justly laid upon us. After this sort seems the godly widow to pour
out her heavenly meditation. For what else can we gather by her words? which
how wisely and orderly they be cowched, whiles she proves her hypothesis by
her thesis. I say a particular case by a ground universally found true, the
learned undoubtedly can soon tell. Sentenciously therefore has she spoken of
a very pithy and sentencious matter.

But how much more severely Solomon in his book which he calls Ecclesiastes,
straitely forbidding us to let any thing pass us by way of talk, whereby ye
infirmity of our flesh, of it self being prone enough to all mischief,
might the rather be brought to an inconvenience: and very gravely charging us
by express words, not to be so hardy none of us all, as to say presumptuously
before our Angel, that there is no providence or government of the world: yea
moreover threatening us, that if we do so, God will bring all our handy works
to none effect. His words be: Ne dederis os tuum, vt peccare facias carnem tuam
neque dicas coram Angelo, non est prouide^tia, ne forte iratus dominus co^tra
sermones tuos dissipet cuncta opera manuum tuarum. That is, let not thy mouth
be an occasion, that thou should make thy flesh to sin, nor say not
before thine angel. There is no providence, least it chance ye the Lord being
angry at thy talk, bring to confusion all ye works of thine hands. This one
thing in deed by the way I must needs confess, that other translations be
otherwise. For insteade of Neque dicas coram Angelo, Non est prouidentia: that
is, and say not before thine angel, there is no providence, other say, Neque
dicas cora^ Angelo per imprudentia peccatum esse, that is, and say not before
thine Angel, that thou have offended unawares. Yea, some also vary not a little
in the interpretation of the sentence and clause following. The Greek text it
self neither makes mention of Gods providence, nor yet of our proper Angel,
for it says, (...). that is, and say not before the face of God, that it is
ignorance, to wit, that caused thee to offend. Yet certainly not only Glosa
interlinearis in Lyra his Commentaries, but also the famous learned man
Trittenhemius in the fourth book of his eyghte questions proposed unto him to
be assoyled by Maximilian the Emperor in his time, with other more, use this
very same place to none other purpose, than I have alleged it. Which the
rather makes me to believe, that the Greek Copy interpreted by the common
translatoure of the Latin bible, varied somewhat from that text of the 70.
interpreters now extant.

But what need I greatly to make matter, or to pass whether it be so, yea or
no. The Scripture (God be thanked) is plain enough otherwise. Whereby, if we
have not already sufficiently strengthened our assertion: what shall we say to
those flat words in the very first Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the
Ephesians? where it is expressly said, that God works all things according
to the advised determination of his own will. In which place also he uses
the word (...), that is, he effectually works, and not only of our doings
he moderateth and furdreth the success, as Pallas is feigned in Virgill, to
turn away Pandarus his darte from the breast of the stout champion Menelaus,
toward his bodies lower parts that were strongly harnised with his belte. He
adds immediately upon it, According to the advised determination, intent, or
purpose of his own will: that we may know, he does nothing without his
Providence.

What of this, that is written in the book of Wisdom? does it not plainly
set out Gods government: Gods wisdom (says the author) reaches from one
end to an other, mightily and comely does she order all things. Or this golden
sentence that is written in the book of Hester. Is it meet we should make of
it as nothing? Where good Mardocheus making his prayer: O Lord Lord (says he)
the king almighty. For all things are in thy power: and if thou have
appointed to save Israel, there is no man that can vvithstand thee. Or (to
bring in but one place more) which might woorthily stand in steed of all) what
godly man should doubt of Gods Providence, hearing Jeremy so fervent in his
Lamentations, bursting out so hotly into these words: Who says any thing is
done, which the Lord has not commanded? that out of the mouth of the
highest there proceeds not good and evil? But might this our learning
which we defend, be gathered only of the Prophets words? be not all ye
Prophecies in ye Bible a flat argument to prove the same? for how could they
(I beseech you) tell before hand of things to come, ne were it not that God
had before ordained them? Come their Prophecies of them selves, or of God? God
forbid we should say of them selves. S. Peter iwis teaches us an other lesson:
In times paste came prophecies unto us (says he) not by the motion of any man's
will, but the holy men of God spoke unto us in such sort as they were first
moved and set on by the holy Ghost. It was not they then so much that spoke
any thing, but rather God that used them as his instruments. And did God warn
before what he would do touching the captivity and deliverance of the
Jews, of Judas his traiterous dealing toward his dear Master, of the cruel
conspiracy of the Rulers of his people, of his Sons death, of Jerusalems
destruction. etc? What differs this (I pray you) from ordeyning? Could a man wyshe a more manyfeste proof out of Gods word?

The.x. Chapter.
He recites the fathers to the same effect,

WHereof although the authority be so inviolable, that of it self it only
should prevail, as well able to discuss al douts, and to open and decide all
controversies concerning the substance of our faith: yet seeing many men make
exceptions, as though nothing but forced gloses, wrested and racked textes,
singular and private inventions were brought in: go to, let us see a while
whether the ancient, catholic, and learned Fathers did any otherwise
determine of so great a matter. And first come forth I pray thee, godly
father Clemens Alexandrinus, tell us thy learned judgment. Who so ever Lib.
6. (...).
thinks there is no Providence (says he) me thinks he is worthy of
punishment, and a very wicked man: yea not so worthy that we should
vouchsafe to dispute with him. Do thou also tell us, Bishop Gregory, thou
worthy father of Nazianzene. That there In his second discourse (...).
is a God (says he) the cause of al things, both wrought and preserved, both
our eye sight, and the very law of nature can teach us. And thou also of
blessed memory, right reverend father, holy Basile, say thy mind, we beseech
thee in like manner. There is nothing (says he) which Upon the first Chapter of
Genesis.
God does not foresee, there is nothing which he does neglecte. The eye which
never sleeps, veweth and considers al things, with all things it is
present, safegarding and preserving every thing. Very well, but let us hear
one more of the Greek Church, Me thinks Chrisostomus offers him self, as
not unworthy to have concluded upon the case. Is there In Psalm. 13.
no foundation (says he) and how stands the building? Is there no keele, and
how holds the ship together? is there none that made the ship, and how was
it made? is there no builder, and how was the house erected? Is there no Mason,
and who builte up the City? In the end thus he knitteth up: What soever
thing in the world be done, practiced, and put in ure, they have some body to
ouersee them, and to work: and shall the world only be without a governor?

Enough now of the Greek fathers: what of the Latins? Certainly as they had
like judgments, so framed they also like arguments. Who would not think
(says Lactantius) that this world so maruellously wroughte, is governed by
some Providence? For there is nothing that can hold out, without some body to
guide it. So the house that is forsaken of the inhabitaunt, falls to ruin:
the ship that is without a gouernoure, goes to wrack: and the body that is
given over of the soul, comes to nothing. Much less let us think, that
this world being so mighty and huge of quantity, could either be founded
without a workman, or be able to stand so long without a guide. Worthily
spoken out of doubt, and very conformable also to that lesson, which S.
Austine techeth us in his third book de trinitate, affirming that nothing is
done which proceeds not out of the inward and intelligible court of the
sovereign Emperor, according to his unspeakable justice. And Leo archbishop of
Rome puts the matter so far out of al controversy, that he sticks not
to say these words: The hearts of the faithful do not doubt, but that Gods
Providence is always present in all parts of this world, and that the success
of our worldly affairs depends not of any power that the Stars have,
which is none, but all things be ordered at the most just and mercy full
pleasure of our Sovereign Lord.

The.xj. Chapter.
He shows that the very Ethnikes approved this doctrine of Gods Providence.

BUT what need we to speak more of the Fathers? Surely it is so far off,
that any godly man should need to doubt of this so christianlike and sound
doctrine, that the very best and wisest of the heathen men acknowledged it for
a certain truth. Therefore Hesiodus says of God, that he is (...), that is,
one that has a great broad eye, and a face that can look into every corner.
Sophocles likewise affirms, that he sees all things, and commands al
things to be done. So true is that saying of Theophilus in the second book ad
Autolicum: the Poets and Philosophers themselves have written of Gods justice,
of his judgment, of eternal condemnation, and moreover of Gods providence. As
for Marcus Cicero he has so largely entreated of this matter, not only in his
second and third book de natura Deorum, in his books de diuinatione, de
fato, de Legibus, de vniuersitate, that (only constancy excepted) we could
not greatly require any thing at his hands And that grave sentence of
Clearchus, mentioned by Xenophon lib. 2. (...), is not to be let pass,
teaching us, that neither swiftness nor darkness, nor strong bulwark of
defense, can be any refuge for us against God, because (says he) all things be
in his hands, and the whole world is governed by his divine power. Yea a great
many might be named besides these before mentioned and rehearsed: who being
only brought up in the schole of nature, were yet still of this judgment,
that there is a God ruling in the heavens, unto whom it was their duty to
submit them selves.

Therefore S. Austine writing contra Faustu^ Manicheum. Touching the Providence
Lib. 20. ca. 10.
of God (says he) both the Paganes be of the same mind that we be, and the
Jews, and you, and all Heretics, that by any means are called Christians.
And Lactantius yet somewhat more openly in his book entitled de origin
erroris, that Cap. 9.
ye world (says he) should be made by gods Providence, to say nothing of
Trismegistus, who professes the same: of ye Sibils verses, ye report as much of
the Prophets, who wc one spirit and voice bear witness that the workmanship
of the world is Gods making: even amongst ye Philosophers almost al in manner
it is agreed upon. The same also ye Pithagorea^s, ye Stoikes, the
Peripatetickes, those which were the chiefest Philosophers of every sect, did
acknowledge: till at the last many worlds after arose doting Epicure, which
was so bold as to deny that, that is most evident. And forsoothe for none
other cause, but for that he was desirous to invent novelties, that he might
make a sect of his own name. And because he could find out no new invention,
yet that he might appear to be singular, and to disagree from the rest, he
would feign overthrow their old learning, wherein he had all the Philosophers
barking round about his ears, and reproving him. Thus far goes Lactantius.

Ye see then, that the very heathen miscreantes, how sensual soever they were
otherwise, yet all of them do not hold against us. Nay contrariwise it is a
plain case, that not the meanest of the^, no nor the fewest neither be of
our side. And yet otherwise questionless very Paganes, men that could see
no further than they were led by the drifte of their own reason, men (as S.
Paul calls them) that were strangers from the common weal of Israel,
foreyners from the covenants of promise, without Christ, and without GOD,
What should we Christians do then, that are endued with a more especial
spirit, unto whom God has sent his own son, as it were directly out of
his own bosom to reveal unto us al godly knowledge? Shall we always stumble
in the open light? Shall we haulte and go crooked in the plain pathway?
Shall we wincke wittingly and willingly, when the sun shines so clearly
before our face?

For I beseech you, with the eyes of a sound judgment, all affection and
parcialitie set a side, let us yet look well about us: let us peise all
things diligently with even balance. We have heard Gods own lively voice,
speaking (as it were) nay rather thundering in his word: We have the
testimony of aunciente Fathers, the authority of whose consent we esteem,
and reverence in due place: we have the wisdom of worldly men, yt is to say
very nature, and common sense to teach us, where against busily to contend, it
were a labor doubtless to little purpose: yea we have heaven and earth, the
main Sea, the elements al in order, warning and admonishing us day and night
of the subjection and homage we owe to God. What more I pray you, could we
desire for our farther satisfying and instruction?

The.xij. Chapter.
That a certain opinion of Gods Providence is rooted in our hearts by nature:
which stirs us up to pray to him, and to give him thanks.

SVrely so clearly and manifestly all things make for our purpose, that were
it not for this, that we know, God governs the world, and has a care of
all things which he has wrought: why we should flee to him by our prayer to
crave the assistaunce of his aid, or wherefore we should yield him thanks for
any benefit received at his hand, I see no cause. And truly were it so, that
our prayer and thanksgiving should be frustrate, and of none effect: then all
fear and love which we owe to God, all faythfulnesse and truth beetwixte man
and man, yea and (to tell you at a word) all godliness and religion should
fall slat to the ground. Whereof (O the living God) what a great disorder and
confusion? what an huge heap of all euilles should ensue in the life of man?

But now seeing all men's breasts be enbawmed and seasoned with this lycour,
and seeing in all men's minds it is naturally (as it were) engrafte, that God
only is the protector of the world, no one thing in heaven, or in all the
earth being exempted, or privileged from the authority of his
jurisdiction: Thereof it is (as Gregorius Lib. de prouidentia cap. 7.
Nyssenus writes) that being driven to our shifts, we repair unto him:
thereof it comes, that we both fear him, and honor him with all our
hearts. Whereunto also perchance if any man be slack (as alas too many be)
out of what other fulsome pumpe does flow this abominable ordure, but from
the weakness and imbecillitie of our faith? When so ever therefore our
hearts quail, and we begin to fainte in this persuasion, (Satan daily
tempting us at our elboe,) it stands us verily much upon, to call heartily
unto God for grace, craving this above all things at his hands, that he would
vouchsafe of his great goodness to increase our faith: which if we do
unfeignedly with a true heart, then may we safely say with the Prophet: My
soul truly vvaiteth still upon God: for of him comes my salvation. He
verily is my strength, and my salvation, he is my defense, so that I shall not
greatly fall.

The.xiij. Chapter.
The prodigious wonders that come to pass in the world, be an argument also
of Gods Providence.

Nevertheless if I should here stay, and go no further, my Dysputation might
seem to some me^ either to be over coldely handled, or else not sufficiently
debated for the capacity of the common sort. Truth it is, the discourse of
reason must in deed with all men be of great force: but yet (as we be taught
by our own trial) not so much the subtlety of disputing, as the experience
of all such things as have been heard of and seen with the corporal eyes,
enter (I wot not by what means) a great deal more speedily into meaner heads.
To the intent therefore the cause which we take in hand may be set out and
beautifyed with more lively colors: let us see how eue^ by du^be signs God
himself has preached unto us this doctrine. And here (if need were) I could
be furnished to this purpose very many ways. For not only Fritschius Laubanus
has largely set out unto us ye strange wonders and mo^sters which have bin in
ye world: but also one Boaistuau surnamed Launaye, and one Claude de Fesserant,
a Parisian, in the French tongue, besides diverse other not a few. But I will
rest only upon an history rehearsed by Fabricius Montanus in a book of his,
the which he writes of this very same matter of Gods Providence. An history
(as he reports) not a thing done many worlds past, but such a thing as
chanced about Zurich, where he himself had his abiding, and the same also
in fresh remembrance, as both heard of, and seen in his time. And truly
even in this order he does tell it.

A certain vagabunde (says he) had myserably mangled and killed his fellow,
with whom he had turned in oner night to take his lodging in a barn and very
early in the morning, when he had removed the carkas of the body slain, as
far as he was able out of sight, he took his heels toward Eglisauium, a
town which belonged to the said Zurich. Now he which was the owner of the
said barn, who before had given a nyghtes lodgyng both to the rogue, and his
companion which he killed: when he had perceived in the morning certain
tokens of the murderer, he forthwith vttred it, and made it known. In the
mean time this murder was well forward on his way: nathelesse through the
crying of the ravens and Iayes, as he passed by, that seemed very boldly to
catch at him, he was bewrayed to the reapers dispersed here and there in the
fields, who were much agaste at this strange syghte. The verlet
notwithstanding kept still his high way, and even now one would have
thought he had been out of danger, when sodeynely come after him with huon
cry, such as were charged to pursue him, making very diligent inquiry,
whether any body had passed thereaway. To whom they answered again, that
saving one certain man, whom the ravens and the Iayes had much troubled in
his going, they saw utterly, no body, yet that they might soon conjecture,
that he was a naughty pack, and ungracious body, and that they themselves
gathered no less by the strange dealing of the iayes and the ravens, adding
further, that if they would hie them a good pase, it was an easy matter to
overtake him. They did so as they were advised: by means whereof, the wretch
being by and by apprehended, was soon after executed upon the wheel.
Fabritius says that he himself was present at his death, and not a little
maruailed at his patience, whiles he suffered those horrible and grifly pains,
which commonly all they endure, that abide such a cruel and shameful death:
for he neither roared nor lamented, as in that case a great many do, but at
every wound which was given him by the tormentor, he cried heartely unto God
with deep sighs, acknoweledging therewith the marvelous Providence of
almighty God whereof he had seen so great proof.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
Examples out of the Scripture to prove Gods Providence.

Would ye have me bring forth unto you an other kind of examples, as
thoughforsoth our whole life were not full. But be it so hardly: Whence then
shall we fetch them? whence better than from the Scriptures? For (O marvelous
God) surely when I read of the strange meeting betwixt Abraham's servant,
and Rebecca, I am even amassed to consider it. Whereof that ye may the better
understand the whole story, I will set it out, and declare it the more at
large. When the good old man father Abraham, being now at the last cast,
perceived he drue toward his grave (for age is a preamble to death) he
charged his servant to procure a marriage for his son Isaac, and that not out
of the number of the Cananites, amongst whom at that time he led his life, but
rather out of the race of his ancestors. Which also he should do upon an
assured confidence in Gods promises, which he held for certain, and out of
doubt. And to the intent he should not fail him in so weighty a case, he
caused him for his better assurance to take an oath.

Upon this the servant, most worthy of credit and estimation for his faithful
and good behavior, well waying and considering his masters words, upon a
conscience that he had to perform his faythed and sworn loyalty, and in
respect of that eye which sees what every body does, and with what
carfulness and true fear of God he is faithful in the accomplishing of his
affairs: first he moves this question, whether he might bring Isaac his
masters son son back again into his native country, the maid affiaunced
refusing to take any long journey. But when Abraham could not abide to hear of
this, still charging and commanding him in plain words, not in any wise to
convey his son homewarde where he was borne, but to follow that which he was
called to, not doubting of Gods assistaunce in so godly an enterprise as that
was: he took leave of his master, and all his household, and after he had
trauayled a long voyage, at the last he came into Chartas, a city of
Mesopotamia, where he sets his Camels to resse in the shade, to the intent
he might ease them of their labor.

In the mean time well remembering his masters lesson, and knowing that his good
success depended wholly on Gods Providence: what did he? O worthy example, and
meet of all Christians to be followed. He went not (as some would have
done) to consulte with wysardes, neither did he seek help of sorcerers, or
fled for his refuge to the enchaunters, no nor yet asked he any counsel at
what hour he might come to have his purpose. All these things verily and such
like, he either esteemed as mere vanities, or else detested also as ungodly
means. But what did he? falling down upon his knees before God, O Lord
(says he) the God of my master Abraham, prosper (I beseech thee) mine attempt
that this day I have undertaken, and extend thy goodness toward my master.
Behold I stand here before this well, and the damsels of this city come
forth to draw water. Grant therefore that it so fall out, that the maid to
whom I shall say, I pray thee set down thy tankarde, that I may drink, and
she say, drink thy self, and I will give thy camels drink also: that (I say)
it may be she whom thou have most certainly provided for thy servant Isaac,
and that I may be certified by this token, that thou haste delte graciously
with my master.

Thus lo he behaved himself, I say, this godly servant of the Patriarch
Abraham, and in this manner he proceeded in his suit. Wherefore who could not
justly marvel at the singular good zeal of this worthy man? Or who could
praise (as it deserves) every clause and particle of his prayer, wherein faith
and wisdom, as it were goodly dyamonds, be so apparaunt? for that he not
passing upon other things, depends only upon god, and in him reposeth his
whole hope, that surely is to be ascribed to his great wisdom conjoined with
a like godly purpose. And whereas he is persuaded of his masters God, that he is
a general sanctuary for all men that will flee unto him for succor, and
asks and wayteth at his hand for an happy conclusion of his voyage, that
eteraynely is a sign and token of an excellent and passing good faith.

What was therefore his reward? with what success went he forward or in his
matter that he went about? For it is a worthy thing doubtless to consider,
how graciously they are thought upon that fear God. He had all his will
at the first asking: for before his prayer was fully ended (see the strange
case) forth of the city comes Rebecca, not glystering (I warraunte you)
with any brayded hair, nor trymly garnyshed with Gold: but (as it became a
virtuous and godly maid) very soberly, decent and comely, with her earthen
vessel that she carried about her upon her shoulder, a very beautiful
damosel to look to, and thereto also a pure maid: down goes she to draw
water, she fills her stone pot, and up she comes again. The servant we
speak of seeing this, thought by and by with him self: this gear goes as I
would have it, now it is high time for me to stir. What will ye more? he
renneth me to her straighte ways, praying her that he might drink out of
her vessel. Whereunto very courteously she consented. Yea moreover whiles the
servant, being thirsty, drank a good draught, I will draw water (quod the
Damsel) for the camels too, that they also may be satisfied. Could any thing
chance more luckely, or more according to his desire?

Therefore when the servant afterward had reported in order what had happened
to Bethuel the maidens father, and to her brother Laban, not without great
wondering, they suddenly brake out into those words: This thing is the Lords
own doing, and we can not say against thee, good nor bad. Lo Rebecca is
present before thy face, take her to thee, and go away with her, and let her
be a wife for thy masters son, as God him self also has appointed. See we
not here in Abraham's servant the very image of Gods Providence before our
face?

But what shall we now say to Joseph? Alas poor man, I pity him to see how
miserably he was tossed. For when he dreamed as he was laid sleeping in his
bed, of a certain souerainetie to be given him over his brethren (for to
that effect his dream tended) and had told the same in their hearing to his
father and theirs: Jesus God, into what a flame of envy did he fall? how
terribly went they about all to tear him both with tongue and teethe, not
only renting him, and rating him with reprochefull sclaunders, the very
daughter of this smoking malicious rancor, but endeavoring also (if it were
possible) to devour him with bread and salt? And what did their hautie
stomachs leave undone to preuente him (shall I say) of his dream? Nay, God
him self rather, if it might have been? Their reverend hoare headed father,
unto whom Joseph was no small comfort and stay: the reverence of their own
brothers blood, the innocence of his tender youth, the consideration of the
vanity that is in many dreams, which oftentimes be but fantasies, and prove
to nothing, could not remove them, no nor move them from an heinous act.

O blind and beastly bold envy, that forgets nature, and forsakes all
humanity, whither carryest thou men headlong to thy bottomless pit of
mischief? For first they would have made him out of the way by defiling their
hands with this guyltlesse blood. Which cruel counsayls of theirs, if it
might have taken place, then in deed (Joseph being so dispatched of his
auisio^) it could not otherwise have been chosen, but that needs they must
have had their purpose.

But how true is the saying of the wise Solomon: In vain is wisdom. In vain
is forecaste, in vain is counsel taking against the Lord. And that which
his father David wrote in his* xxxiij. Psalm, how well proves it in this
case? The Lord brings ye counsel of the Heathen to naught, and makes the
devises of the people to be of none effect, and recites the consultations of
myghtie Potentates: But the Counsel of the Lord endures for ever, and the
thoughts of his heart from generation to generation.

Afterward their brother Ruben very earnestly entreating them, who not a
little abhorred this so unnatural a murder, crying out against them with open
mouth, for so vile and horible an attempt: they drue out their brother Joseph
out of a deep pit, where they had cast him, and because they could not
abide to look upon him with their devilish and despiteful eyes, whose rule and
dominion over them was so lively represented to them in a dream, they thought
good to sell him to certain Ismaelites, being newly come Merchants out of
Gilead For thus they imagined with the^ selves: When we have once by the sale
of him made a good pe^ce of money, and have sent him into far Countries,
where we shall not see him, nor hear of him any more: Then surely being made
a bondsman (I warrante him) we shall keep him short enough, from ever bearing
rule over us.

A shrewde devise I ensure you, and verily not unlikely to have prevailed, had
not God himself sworn to the contrary. But seeing he himself was set
against them, whose will no man is able to refiste, therefore that came to
pass, which Gregory writes of in his Morals: Lib. 6. cap. 11.
Cum dei voluntatem mutare volunt, f^^^t^nt dei voluntatem, and resistendo,
consi^^o dei obsequuntur. That is, whiles they would alter Gods will, they do
it, and whiles they would bend all their force to withstand Gods decree,
unawares they put it in execution. To go forward with the story: they sold
therefore their brother to the Ismaelites, and ye Ismaelites again (as God
would have it) put him from them to Potiphar the clarke of king Pharoes
kytchin. All this hitherto fell not out annsse for Joseph. For he being
constante at all assayes, shrunk never a whyt at the matter, nor held
himself ill appay^e, complaining of his change of fortune: but always
praised God, and gave him thanks: always bare himself after a like sort in
the base state of a bondeman, yet still carrying about him a free heart, and
in his mean servile condition not obscurely bewraying his gentle blood, in
body well set, and of feate and seemly proportion, of personage very comely,
in countenance full of favor, fellowelyke with his equalles, humble and lowly
to his superiors, kind to his friends, not rough to his utter enemies,
faithful in his affairs abroad, at home diligent in his service, in counsel
politic, in success happy, by nature gentle, and welfaring to deal with:
by education well nurtered, and brought up tro^ the beginning in all godly
knowledge, to be short, the corruptions and superstitions that reigned in Egypt
notwithstanding, yet abiding in faith and doctrine unhurt still, and vnmeimed,
in life and conversation vnslayned. No wonder therefore in my judgment, nor any
marvel at al it was to see, that a man so well favored and beloved of God,
should grow in such credit and authority with king Pharao, that he should
make him ruler ou^r his house. For whom could he have sought out more fit
to welde such a government? Nay whom could he have found comparable to him
in all Egypt?

But see the fickleness of the world, and how little we have cause to trust
it, our sweet is never so pleasant, but now and then it is tempered with a
sour sauce: our joy is never so perfect, which eftsoon is not sowced and
sauced with sorrow: our weal is never so welthy and well liking, but that
stound mele it is enterlaced and wrapte with woe. For the Devil his desperate
and deadely foe, with his slye engines and enchaunted snares, so busily sought
to do him mischief, that by and by he threw into the heart of the queen his
maistresse such a fyrebrande of flaming passions, that she (O wicked and
witless woman, without all stay of her self) not fearing God, paste al shame
of the world, not regarding that sacred ba^d before entered with her husband,
smally esteming her own honor, having first yielded wilfully up her hold to
the subjection and tirannie of Satan, sought afterward all subtle practices
blindfelde to carry Joseph into the same pit. Therefore being armed with
impudency, and fraught with falshodde and deceyte, she seems to fleere and
fawn upon him at the first, and with flattery and fair promyses to bayte her
hooks: then to pray him very instauntly, and to be earnest and importunate out
of measure: soon after also to lay hand of him, and to fall to some pretty
daliaunce in her husbands absence. But God so strengthened his servant, and
with the eye of his fatherly protection so directed and guyded his pathway,
that he passed all her ginnes without stumbling, and not a whit feared her
embushments. Therefore he considered not in this case that he was a servant,
and she his maistresse that might command him, nor feared her any thing the
more for her high power and dominion, nor was greatly moved with that
dangerous tempest, which he saw hanging presently over his head, to loose the
bridle to the flames of her inordinate desire, but with much steadfastness of
mind, and with an high constancy of courage, against the consideration of his
bondage, against the intycing of a corrupt nature, and his youthly appetite
not uneasy to be kindled and set on fire, against her smoothe sugared words,
and her manyfolde and great behestes, against an whole rableme^t of mischeues,
which he was sure should follow his repulse, he set only a godly and good
purpose, as sufficiently able to ouerwey them all. And first (as me seems)
the person of a servant laid aside, and taking upon him as a counsaylour,
and one that would give good instructions, very gravely he accuses all
wandering lusts, that are not bridled with the yoke of wedlock, and being a
ieoly lusty young man, to one that was stricken more in years, a servant to
his Lady and maistresse: yea moreover being yet a single man, and feeling his
own infirmity, to one that now lived in matrimony, and might use the
remedy that was provided concerning the stayednesse and sober mood, with
other like virtuous qualities, that had any affinity with the same, he gives
very fruitful and wholesome lessons. Me thinks now it were very well
done to hear Joseph speak him self, that we may learn the better his good
manner of behavior.

Behold (says he) my liege Lord has put me in trust with all things
belonging to him, and he knows not him self what he has in his house,
neither is there any thing that is not at my commandment, or not delivered
up into my hands, beside you madame, that are his wife. How can I therefore
do such a trespass, and offend against God? As who should say, You see him
not madam, whom I see: for this earthly affection of yours has made you drunk.
But no such wine has overcome me, that see always before me the guide and
governor of the whole world, who beholds the earth with such eyes as can
not swerve from the precyse rule of justice. For neither house to lurk in, nor
strong walls to keep out, nor gates fall shut upon us, nor the
darkness of any cloudie night can at all hinder his eye sight. Who not
only knows thoroughly, what every man thinks and says, but pearceth also
to the very secrets of man's heart. Mine eyes therefore being fixed on him,
I tremble and stand in awe, and as for wedlockes undefiled bed I have no
will to dyshoneste it, knowing well that it is the fountain of our birthe,
and the first gate, whereby we enter into the world, whereunto also we
impute the increase and continuance of mankind. Embrace then (O woman) that
yoke, and stay your self in it with contentation, break not the bands that
you are linked with in an holy society with your husband, nor look not upon
other men with curious eyes, but have your mind and thought upon your
bedfelow. And seeing you are made sure unto him, as it were with a nail of
Adamant, be always as true to him as any Steel, and go not beyond those
bounds that nature has limited for you both, defiling and dyshonouring
that bed, which God himself has so highly honored? And because you are
called to government, it is your part diligently to take heed, least yielding
your self a servant to the sweet dames of voluptuousness, and by their
egging and provocation breaking the laws of God and man, you blemish my
masters royal state with some notable spotte of infamy: or suffer your
self ye rule other, to be thrown down and maistred with brutish lust, or
when you have lost your self your right wits, by disgrasing your princely
dignity, you deprive reason also of her rule, and give it over to fond
affections. Which as I speak it of a good zeal (all bitterness and malice
set a part) so also could I wish you in like manner to accept it, and take
it in good woorthe. I truly madame (as it becomes me) desire nothing more
earnestly, than that you being loased and set at liberty from this fiery
chain that has entangled you, may keep the honor of your chaste wifehoode.
But if you will not do thereafter in calling your self home again to a more
sobre and godly consideration: Yet (be you right well assured) I of my part
both with hand and foot will shun, and abhor this enormous crime. For
albeit I serve in body, yet in mind I am free, and such a grievous offense as
this is, not only resisting chastity, but fighting also with all justice I
hate and detest with all mine heart. For whereas I have received great
benefits at my lieges hand: I should deal very unjustly and unkindly to
recompense him again with so shreude a turn. It pleased him when I was a
stranger, and bought with money, to prefer me before all his servants that
were borne at home in his own land, and now of late being chosen into his
own household, I begun to have authority over other, and by my masters own
acceptance being appointed the ouerseer of his house in all things I bear a
stroke, and my master would have nothing privileged or exempted from my
jurisdiction, you only his wife excepted, that are tied fast to your
husband, as to your head, with a knot by no means to be loased.

With what face therefore, or with what countenance could I look upon so
gracious a sovereign Lord, if with my diligent and faithful service I should
not travail to requite his kindness. For without doubt, vnthanckefulnesse
is most worthy of all men to be hated, and lothed even with detestation, being
not only one of the greatest vices in the world, but the very mother also of
all other vices besides. For notwithstanding that every unjust prancke is very
greatly and earnestly to be eschued, yet never from that bottomless infernal
lake came a more pestilente and pernicious fury, than is this vice of
ingratitude toward such as have well deserved. Seeing therefore my liege
Lord, that has done already so much for me, has such a confidence in mine
honest and upright dealing, that he has delivered up all his substance from
his own hand into mine. It is not my part in steed of husbanding and safe
keeping his treasure committed to my charge, to become a thief, and a false
harlot, and to lay hand on those things, which I have nothing to do with. For
I must not do as Adam my first father did, who, having all other fruit in
Paradise at his commandment, raught his hand to that tree which he should not
have meddled with at all, and so for unlawful coveting of one tree, lost the
lawful use of all the rest.

No doubt these and such like matters did Iosephe put into the Queens
mind, and God so held his hand over him, that in nothing that he did, he was
to seek: Soon after seeing she could not speed, she espied out her wished
opportunity, and when other were far enough out of the way, catching fast
hold of his cloak, she cried out mainly with a loud voice. But he fleeing her
force, and stopping his ears at her persuasions, when he had run away with his
cloak behind him, and walked up and down bare of his old apparel, but yet
clad with modest sincerity, and not naked of honest conversation. (For he
blushed not, as Adam did after the breach of Gods law, but he was so affected
in his mind, as our first parents were before their fall, whom the
nakedness of their bodies made not to be abashed). Then this wily madame, as
one that was her crafts maistresse, incenseth the king her husband against his
loyal and faithful servant, and sticks not, with a shameless mouth, to
call him a betrayer of chaste life, which was a chief defender of that virtue.
And although Joseph without any great ado could quickly confute such an open
slander, yet he had rather hold his peace, and quietly put up an injury,
than reuele the treachery of his mastresse, and publishe her disordred
appetites, to the world. Therefore without any cause known why, neither
hearing before of the quareile that was brought against him, nor being suffered
in the judgment hal to say any thing in his own defense, he was fettred and
cast into a deep dungeon, where (God wotteth) he had but a sorry lodging, and
endured full many a rough storm. O rufull and hard case: What would many a
one have done in the like taking? Surely they would have boasted their
innocence, they would have bragged of their faithful service, they would
have ratteled their accuser, they would lamentably have complained of their
own state, yea what would they not have done? I think verily they would have
murmured against God himself. None of all this does Joseph: but meekely and
mildely like a lamb he demeaneth him self in all respects.

And perchance thus he reasoned with himself, calling secretly to remembrance,
how much God had done for him in times past: I wisse long before this time I
have been as daungerously beset, as I am now, and yet (God be thanked) the
snare was broken: God gave me favor in their eyes, at whose hands I could
least look for any such thing. And now who knows, why I fall into this
affliction? It may be, God would have my patience to be yet further assayed: And
because no man is perfect, that is of flesh and bone, it is possible also God
will chasten me to make me the better to understand it: And what if also it
please God to use this as a way for my preferment? I know not in deed
perfitely how the matter stands, especially when I ask counsel of flesh
and blood: But sure I am of this, that God is just, and therefore he will not
suffer me to take wrong: I doubt not neither, but that as he has hitherto
preserved me far beyond all men's expectation: so he will continue his
loving kindness, and still be my grations and good Lord. In the mean time so
long as I do mine endeavor to pursue and follow my vocation, I will both hope
well, and hold my peace, humbling my self always (as it becomes me) under
his mighty hand. Neither will I study to tread in their malicious steps,
that so busily have bente them selves to work me woe, by seeking any means
to be revenged. But rather kiss the rod with submission, wherewith I am
scourged by Gods hand. So doing, be it so he have conceived any displeasure,
he will fling away again the rod of his indignation, and behold me with a
more amiable and cheerful countenance, than ever before he was accustomed.
Well in deed might Iosephe thus conceive with him self, and very like it is
that he did so.

Wherein the sequel that followed, declared how little he was deceived. For
whiles he grew in much credit with him that had the custody of the iayle,
he expounded the dreams of two of his prison fellows. By occasion whereof
being better known to king Pharao, who afterward dreamed in like manner, and
therefore sent for out of ward: king Pharao telling him of his swiuen, he
prophesied of a general dearth, that seven years after should molest the
world: aduertising the king in what order his majesty might best proceed to
prevent so great an inconvenience. The king that heard his wise counsel,
perceiving his profounde and deep wit, rejoiced much at his so well
governed demeanor, but especially to see in so tender and green youthly years
such ripe and grounded discretion. Whereupon highly esteming him for his
wisdom, he made him second person in his dominion, and committed unto him
as well the whole state of his realm, as the care and ordering of his provision
for the dear years that were expected.

In the mean time (see, I pray you how God works to put his counsel in
execution) the dear years come fast on the pore souls sterue for hunger in
every corner of the streets, the very rich men complain for wants of corn,
at a word, all the world is so troubled, that men are almost at their wits
end. But fair fare a good friend at need: For now worthy Joseph thou must
play thy part, that the fruit of thy wise government may show it self. This
famine daily increasing, and spreading it self far and wide, Jacob that was
a great way off, hearing of the provision that was in Egypt, rebukes his
sons of slouthe, and charge them forthwith without longer tarying, that
taking with them for their voyage a certain sum of money, they should be
packing into Egipte to buy them corn. What need many words in so plain a
case?

Away they go with all speed, as the spur of necessity must needs provoke
them: to their brother they come the straight way, and (will they nill they)
whom before they so deadly hated for his shadowed empire in a dream, to him
now they are forced to do homage, bearing sway, and reigning in a very truth.
Therefore they auail their bonets, and with great humility they fall down before
him, praying him to have ruthe of their afflicted state, and to relieve them at
least for their money in that great penury, that had pinched them. Here
Iosephe at the first, as though he had no manner of inckling who they were,
seeming to make it very strange with bent brows, and rugged looks fraineth
them of their country from whence they came. To whom quoth they (making
answer) out of Chanaan for soothe, to buy necessaries to preserve our life. All
this while being known to Iosephe, they knew him never a whit again, Joseph
beholding them with steadfast eyes, and remembering well his old dreams, whereof
he now sees the effect, to the intent he might come to the knowledge of such
things as he desired to hear of, begins to lay heinously to their charge,
saying he knew well inoughe they were but spies, come purposely to view the
weakness of the land, thereby the better to take occasion to break in
afterward wc their armies, and to subdue the realm. Hereupon making great
protestation, that there was no such thing meant of their behalf, that they
were his servants ready at commandment, al of them ye sons of one man,
men of peace and so forth: at ye length after many other words enterpartened
betwixt them to and fro, they fell into the mention of their youngest brother.

Whom after that with much entreating they had brought back with them from
their fathers house (for so Iosephe straightly enjoined them, utterly
discouraging them otherwise from coming any more in his sight) he (I say) this
said tender hearted Iosephe, that was enflamed with a dear affection, seeing
all his brethren before his face, when he had dissembled ye matter a long time,
could now no longer forbear, but freely and frankly disclosed himself to them
what he was: And betwixt tears and great joy suddenly breaking out into a
loud voice.

Be ye not dismaide (says he) my dear brethren, nor let it seem over
rigorous and hard dealing to you, that y^ sold me for money into this
country. For assure your selves, it was for your safegarde, that God sent me
hither into this place. Hitherto for the space of these two years passed,
there has been in the world a great dearth, and now there be five more
behind, wherein neither the ground shall be tilled, nor corn reaped. Therefore
God sent me before you, both to preserve your posterity, and to save you from
a very great danger that was toward you. It was not you then, yt sent me
hither, but it was God. Good Lord how flatly and evidently does he utter and
signify his good nature? How comfortably speaks he to his pore brethren, who
thought they had deserved no such thing? Here all Lordlinesse is set a side,
no mention at all of any quarrel: But so far off he is from accusing them, that
he seems rather to take their part. It was not you (says he) that sent me
hither, but it was God. As who should say, it was not my dear brethren, your
devise and conueiaunce, that brought me to this place. It was not (I say) your
doing, but Gods working. Therefore be ye not grieved wc the remembrance of my
former bondage, which was guided by God to so good an end: Pluck up your
hearts again, and set fear aside. Gently in deed spoken, and like a brother:
But what is this that he says, you sent me not hither: For truly it is
worthy to be examined. Did not Iosephes brethren procure his coming unto
Egypt? No surely (says he) for that they dealed so cruelly and unkindly with
me pricked forward with the sting of envy, it was their fault: but that in
their great rage of malice, I should come hither, rather tha^ to an other place,
it was fully and wholely the work of God, who secretly using them, as his
instruments by his own only direction brought it to pass. They in deed of
their parts did that which is evil, but God of their evil has wrought that
which is good: They sent me away, but God has set me in the right way: They
were the occasion that I was made a servant, but god was the cause y^ I am
become a lord.

Truly even here to stay, and to ease our selves, as who says in our Inn,
after a long and painful journey: How plainly does this history set out unto
us the very nature, and property of Gods Providence? wherein we see Joseph both
allow, and aloft, both serving like a bondsman, and reigning like a Prince: One
while oppressed iniuriouslye, an other while adua^ced justly, beaten (as it
were) black and blew with blustering whirle winds, and driven into unknown
coasts with the rage of outrageous te^pests: but ariuing yet at the last at a
peaceable and quiet haven. Such a guide had he to conduct him even amongst the
hard and huge rocks, that his ship in no wise could miscary: such an anchor had
he to fly to, when he stood in most danger of sturdie storms, that no
menacing waves could ouerwhelme him.

The Conclusion of this first book.
ANd shall we not now think that this God is a governor, whom Joseph found
such a fatherly protector? whom Abraham's servant had such a gracious
conductor: whom Moses in the midst of the river, past all hope, tried to be a
deliverer? under the shadow of whose wings the prophet David so safely rested?
under the banner of whose defense al godly men of all ages have been preserved?
For why should I in such store of examples out of scripture, not necessary,
neither at this time more largely and ple^tifully to be rehearsed, bring in
Oedipus and Iocasta, Iulins Caesar, or any such to prove that to us christians,
which Gods word so evidently preaches, nature teaches, reason ratifieth, long
trial confirms, the godly and ungodly acknowledges, all heaven and earth
confesses? Dull and doltish might we think our selves, if beset with such
testimonies, we conceived it not: hard hearter, if we conceived it, and
believed it not: unkind, if we believed it, and refused to commit our selves
into the hands of our gracious God, if we mistrusted his almighty power, or
doubted in any wise to depend of his goodness.

From the which so grievous a trespass, and so odious and de^estable an
offense, that we may show our selves earnestly to abhor, let us have that
sweet song of that prophetical godly Prince both ready always in our
mouth, and deeply rooted in our hearts: God is our hope and streng^h, a very
present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be
moved, and though the hills be carried into the midste of the sea: though the
vva^ers thereof rage and swell, and though the mountains shake at the tempest
of the same.

The second book of Gods Providence.
The first Chapter.
No token of Gods Providence toward us, can move us to be thankful, but still
we be carping and cauilling.

HItherto have b^n brought suc^e profes touching Gods Providence over y^ world,
as I have thought good to be alleged for the staying and satisfying of a
feeble conscience. Which albeit they be so apparent, that even in common sense
they be found agreeable to the truth: yet greatly doubtless it is to be
pitied, and to be lamented (as you would say) with bloody tears, that we
neither comprehend by our understanding, how great guyftes and benefits we
enjoy at Gods hands, nor show any token of our duties, and thankful
hearts for the same, but contrariwise we be so far off from being pricked
with any remorse of our unkind behauioure, that furiously like mad dogs
we bark and byte at the throne of Gods justice, and open our mouths wide
against heaven it self.

The hounde acknowledges his bringer up, and is always about his elbow, when
he is at home, and in his absence is desirous to see him, and at his return
shows no small signs of his rejoicing, hanging his ears, and wagging his
tail, thereby to show his submission and great kyndenesse to his master.
For albeit that he wants discretion, and have not the use of reason, as men
have: yet with him acquayntaunce of long continuance bears such a stroke,
and the daily benefits, which he takes at his masters hand, that he can
easily distinguishe a known manne from a stranger, and his master that
keeps him, from one that he never saw.

The Elephant (as Cassiodorus does write in his book de Opere variorum) being
a beast mighty of his limbs, but yet without joints and sinnowes, (by
means whereof he is not able to bow his legs, but is forced when he takes
his rest to lean directly with his whole body against a tree) is thus daunted
and broughtee into subjection. The hunter that pursues him observes well the
tree that he has recourse to, when he would take his ease in the night
season, which afterward he saweth so far a sunder, hard at the very root,
that the Elephante after repayring again to the same tree, with the very peyse
of his unwieldy body falls down together with it to the ground* and being
not able after his fall to get up upon his feet again, by reason of his
great styfnesse before specifyed, comes the hunter in the morning, and
helps him up. Which the kind Elephante so gently accepts at the hunters
hand, that from thencefoorth mindful of his benefit, the beast takes him
to his master, well content to submit himself to his order, and to be ruled
always after at his beck.

Thus can the brutish dumb beasts consider of such as have done them good:
where as we that be reasonable creatures, having wisdom and understanding to
lead us the way, than the which nothing is more swifte. (For the very
swiftness of the Sun in his revolution is nothing comparable to the lively
agilitie of the mind, the one going round about the earth within the space of
four and twenty hours: the other within the twinkeling of an eye, both
fetching his vagarie about, and with the wings of his thought, fleeing up
straight to heaven, and yet mounting up higher too, that it may as much as is
possible, both enjoy the contemplation of Gods majesty, and view the number
that is infinite, as well of the Angels as ye Archangels.) We (I say) that be
capable of understanding, and have a reasonable soul to guide us, have not yet
any feeling of Gods benefits, nor any weighty and grave consideration of his
manyfold and sundry guiftes: but contrariwise we spurn daily without
ceassing, at the provident care that he takes for us, converting those
excellent qualities, wherewith so liberally he has endued us, to the very
infamy and slander of his holy name.

For (even to touch the quick, and to come nighe to the matter which we take
in hand) what could God our most bountiful father do more for us, or how
could he more effectually show forth and express his dear love, which
continually he bears toward us, than in holding us up, when we are ready to
fall under the foot? in setting us straight, when we gadde out of the way? in
making his holy angels our servants and ministers to direct us? in preserving
us day and night from very desperate and dredefull dangers? Finally (to let
many other things pass, which it were an endless labor to rehearse) in
tourning the reproachful vessels, and heavy instruments of his deserved
wrath to the furtheraunce and comfort of his elect?

Yet so thanklesse have some been in all ages (yea I might say also so godless
and so utterly given over to themselves) that neither the high heavens,
setting forth the glory of almighty GOD, can bring them to a sound
judgment, or a right conceauing of Gods works: nor the Sun proceedyng
like a brydegroome out of his chaumber, and with his beams gyuyng light to
the whole world: nor the Moon with her waning and waxyng bryghtnesse, that
causes the Sea eftesoone to ebb and flow: nor the Stars, that one while
show them selves in the Firmaments, an other while withdraw their presence,
partelye conducting the marryners that are tossed with the waves of the wild
sea, and partly giving warning to the husbandmen, when they might best take
in hand their tyllage: nor the vapors ascending from the earth, the salt
and the fresh waters into the middle region of the air, and converted
afterward into clouds, and resolved either into sweet showers of rain, as
in the lusty spring and summer season it befalls, or else into hayle, frost
and snow, as in winter commonly it chances: nor the marvelous conjunction of
the earth and the sea: nor the continual course of the running streams: nor
ye cold springs of the clear and pure waters: nor the great abundance of al
kinds of fruit: nor the variety of birds, and beasts, and of salt and fresh
fishes of all sorts, and the commodity that ryseth by them many ways: nor
the feat framing of man's body, with an agreeable shape to a nature endued with
reason: nor the immortality of his soul, that with wisdom weldeth the whole
body: nor arts and sciences innumerable, not only serving for our
necessity, but ministering also things delectable, that serve for our pleasure
and recreation: finally, none other thing that is bestowed upon us by Gods
bountiful and free dispensation, can make mad me^ sober again, or reclayme
them from their fantasy to their right mind: but when they have all things
that can delight them, or do them good, as it were furious firebrands, blowe^
forward with ye sends of hell, incensed to mischeue and mischau^ce, they attempt
(as much as in them lies) to depose god of his empire, and to thrust him down
headlong from his throne, carping and cauilling at his wise government, and
with the poisoned arrows of their crabbed and cursed eloquence, directly
shooting against heaven.

Wherein they deal (as me seems) much like unto Caius Caesar, mentioned by
Seneca and Suetonius, and I fear it will happen to them not much better. This
Caius (as it is written of him) having ordained a rich and a royal feast for
his counsaylers, and peers of his Realm, it chanced that the very same day
that this great feast was kept, there was such thundering and lightening in
the element, and such terrible tempests of wind and rain, as though heaven
and earth should go together, and that dreadful day of doom were now ready
at hand. Whereat the unwise Emperor taking snuff, in a great chafe
proclaimed war against God, commanding all his subjects, that were skilled
either in the crossebowe, or the long bow, or were cunning in flinging of the
darte, or any other instruments of warfare, upon pain of death to bring
forth their artillarie, and to bend all their ordinance against the sky.
What will ye more? the fond Emperor found as foolish subjects, that
failed not in all points to do his will. But what followed? All their darts
and arrows falling down again upon their own heads, slew a great number
of the common people, assembled by all likelyhoode, to see this so wise a
spectacle.

Have we not now (trow ye) a like case in hand? yes surely have we. For
these curious carpers, that can never be satisfied nor content (because they
stand iolily in their own conceyts, and think nothing well ordered, wherein
they them selves have not to do) begin to murmr, and pick quarrels, and in
great haste to shoot out their foolish boltes against God, and his marvelous
Providence far passing the reach of all men's wits. But in the mean time,
what get they by it? When they would wreake their teene, and spitte out their
poisoned malice against God, they may be well assured they mysse fowlly of
their purpose. For in stead of preuayling against God, their blasphemous
slanders like mighty darts and sharp arrows, lighting heavily and
violently on their own heads, turn utterly to their own destruction.

The.ij. Chapter.
Our vvilles be not forced by Gods Providence, whereof they be instruments.

BUT now let us begin to join battle, and to approach somewhat nygher
to their armies. First what manner of men be they? and how come they
furnished and appointed? Certaynely there is no cause why we should fear
them, what face soever they set on the matter. For either they be such
kind of men as the famous aunciente father Clemens Alexandrinus speaks of
in his seventh book (...), Who not perceiving the liberty of man's soul,
which touching voluntary actions can not be compelled to any thraldom, and
taking to heart things done by unskillful injustice, think there is no God:
or else such as falling to sensuality, or else besides their expectation
lighting on some lamentable misfortunes, and pitifully bewayling their own
state, through impaeiencie run into the like follies, either grossly
professing plain Atheism, or else, if they confess there is a God, yet
saying at leastwise that he sees not all things which be done, all tending in
effect to one point.

For what engines of artillarie bring they forth? or with what rams would
they batter down the mighty walls of Gods Providence? First, and foremoste,
seeming to be very careful for man's state, and presuming, they should be
better ruled by their own wills, than by Gods. Oh (say they) if this doctrine
should take place, what should then become of our free will?

Lo ye here the^ buylders of the great tower of Babylon, crying out: Let us
go make us a city, and a tower so high, that the top may reach to heaven:
Genes^. 11.
and saying (as it is in S. James his Epistle) To day and to morrow Jacob. 4.
we will go into such a city, and there we will spend our time a whole year,
and we will make our bargaynes, and we will be gayners. A proud vaunte (I
ensure you) of an arrogant sort of men. But no force, God willing you shall see
them scattered by and by.

Only I will demand of them this question: Of what liberty do they speak?
is it of that which we received in our first creation? No man can challenge that
which will acknowledge him self raunsomed by Jesus Christ. For if we be
redeemed, it is necessarily presupposed, that we were once captives: if we were
captives, we surely lost the liberty which so freely was given us in our
creation. Ille enim captiuus dicitur, (says Chrysostomus, expounding these
words of the.xxv. Psalm Redime me, and miserere n^^i) qui efficitur no^
potestatis suae, sed ditionis alienae, qui suggestionibus ^ius subditus est.
That is, he is rightely said to be a captive, that is become not at his own
free choice any more to do what he list him self, but at an other man's
ordering and disposition, utterly bound to do that which it shall please his
keeper to put into his head. Were we captives then? Yea, we were so in deed
without question, and we were captives, not to the Turk, or any forrayne
Prince, but even to the Prince which rules in the air, and works Ephe. ^.
in such stubborn and wilful children as would needs be governed by their
own will. Therefore touching the liberty of our first creation, we may as
soon pype in an yuie leaf, as any more have authority to make claim to
that. Nam libero arbitrio male vtens Aug Encherid. ad Laur. ca. 30.
homo, and se perdidit, and ipsum. For when man in Paradise had abused his
freewil, he both lost him self and his freewill too, says Saint Austine.

What liberty then speak they of in Gods name? is it of that which Christ
has procured us by the benefit of our new birth in Baptism? Neither is
that truly so perfect in this life, but that we also which have received
the first fruits of the spirit, sighyng and groaning in our selves, may
still give attendaunce for our adoption, that is to say, the redemption of
our bodies from many frail imperfections, that they carry with them: justly
crying out with Saint Paul: Ah wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
Romans 7.
from the body of this death? Which being spoken of saint Paul in saint
Paul's own person (as by the coherencie of the text appears, and S. Austine
Lib. 1. contra duos Epistolas Pelag. ad Bonifacium. Lib. 1 de Nuptijs and
concupiscentia. ca 29. 30. and. 31. Lib. 1. Retract. cap. 23.
in many places confesses, reknowledging the same also in his retractations,
induced as he says, by the grave authority of other godly fathers, his
predecessors, whom he also mentions by name, writing against the Pelagians)
which I say then, being spoken of saint Paul, in his own person, whom no man doubts to have been the very child of God: what shall then any of us
that are regenerate, esteem, or deem of his own self, but that at the least
he is as much entangled as he was, and wrapte in the wretchedness of bondage?

Neither yet do I therefore derogate from the benefit of our Savior
Christ. GOD forbid. Whom the John. 8.
son of God has made free, those (I know) are free in very deed. But from
what? From all kind of miserable thraldom, that our great graundsires guyle
has brought upon us? from sickness? from peril? from anguishe of mind?
from adversity? from nakedness and famine? from all kind of sins and
infirmities? from death it self? Yea truly. But when? in this life? Yea sir,
by hope, even in this life. So S. Paul also speaks, saying: We are saved by
hope. For else should Romans 8.
I not only strive against reason, but also fight openly with our common sense.
For who sees not that death, sickness, and affliction, with all other kind of
calamities be remaining still: notwithstanding the redemption of our savior
Christ, and that even to the regenerate? Now so long as death is not yet
thoroughly swallowed 1. Cor. 15.
up, neither shall the sting of death, which is sin, be utterly removed or
put away, for the effect continuing in his full force, it is necessarily to
be presupposed, that the cause went before. Not that this temporal
resolution of our souls and bodies the one from the other is precisely and
absolutely wroughte by our sin (the reward whereof is rather a death that
is everlasting) or that it abides as a punishment that the godly suffer for
the same: but that sin and death be so jointly conjoined together, that so
long as the one of them takes place, the other by the course of Gods
ordinance, can not of necessiti^ be far of. Such dear affinity there is
betwixt them, and such straight cosinage and alliance.

Now where sin is, there also is bondage, as Saint Peter tells us 2.
Pet. 2.
in plain words. And where bondage is residente, there truly can be no
tarrying for freewill. Where then is become at last the freedom of our
renewed nature? The hard necessity whereof (as Saint Augustine terms
Retract. lib. 1. cap. 1.
it) preceedeth from none other fountain or spring, than the offense and
trespass of our father Adam. Surely where so ever it be, (if it be any, as I
deny not altogether but that it is) this I must needs say of it, it is maimed,
it is mangled, it is much defaced with the remaining relikes of our old man.

But let it be hardly what they will: for what does Gods Providence anoy it?
Has it a natural possibility, whereby This distinction is to be found, lib.
3. Hypognosticon, being assc^ibed to S. Augustine, and not far from the
beginning
we can do the works of nature, eat, drink, walk, and talk, and such
like? Let it have so still. Yet though will also be joined with our power,
oftentimes even in such things we come to short. How many lusty and strong
men have appointed on this or that day, to take such or such a viage, when such
occasions suddenly have fallen out by the will and providence of God, that they
were feign to alter their mind and tarry at home? How many have been on their
journey to go this or that way, and were prevented?

The king of Babylon purposed to invade the Moabites: yea he purposed it not
only, but he now made thitherward with all his power. And yet even in the midst
of his journey, God turned him an otherway, and caused him to come against
Jerusalem. Whereupon the Prophet Jeremy crying out: I know Hieremie. 10
Lord (says he) that man's way is not his own, neither is it in man to
govern, or to direct his own steps. And Solomon very agreeably unto the
same, says in deed that man's heart advises Proverb. 16
him of the way vvhither he will go, but that God guides his steps
notvvithstanding.

How many purpose to do this or that which their strength serves them to do
very well, and yet are let? The Prophet Balaam being sent for by Balac the
king of the Moabites, was minded Nume. 22. 23
more than once to have curssed the people of Israel: But when it came to the
point, he confesses himself that he could not, no though the king would
give him an house full of silver and gold. Why then chances all this? For
that our will is compelled by violence? No not so. For so voluntary a thing is
our will, that if it be forced to any thing, it is no more a will. Therefore
thus Austine defines it: Voluntas est animi motus, cogente nullo, ad aliquid
vel non amittendum, vel adipiscendum. That is to say, Will is a moving of the
mind without compulsion, either to save, or else to get somewhat.

Have we also a strength natural in civil actions, pertaining to outward
conversation? Well may we so have, for any foraine force. Yet the very Heathen
men could say this, that if mankind Cicero de natu. Deoru^. lib. 2
have any understanding, faith, virtue, or concord, they could be povvred
upon the earth from no where else, but from above. Whereby what else do they
declare, but that nature of it self is naught else but a barraine soil,
utterly unable to yield fruit, if the dew of grace coming from heaven,
with his wholesome licoure do not moysten it.

Is there (say they) in our reformed nature a certain liberty and freedom
to do things acceptable in Gods sight? I will not stand here to allege the
falls and frailties of Gods children, nor show how little they are able to
satisfy from point to point the comaundementes and laws of God: Esa 64.
Bernde verbis Origenis, sermon 1. in festo omniu^ sanctorum, sermon. 5. de verbis
Esaiae.
nor prove that even after their regeneration, they are yet by ye consent of
grave fathers, like the soyled cloth of a woman in her flowers All this and
more to I will let alone, nay I will grant unto the^ rather of mine own
accord, ye by faith in Chirst Jesus, our works be accepted in very deed, yea
moreover that they us ghostly, holy, and pure sacrifices, which must be offered
and dedicated unto God. For it likes me not now to dispute with them in that.

But this will I say, and say again: what so ever possibility we have either
in deeds natural or moral, or in actions which spring from faith, and be
spiritual, Gods Providence hurts it not at all. The property whereof is
such, that it conducteth us always, as it were by the hand, and drives
nothing by violence against nature. Therefore aliter agunt (...), aliter
(...), one manner of moving have those things that be void of choice, an other
kind of moving have those things that be moved of their own arbitrament. And
both of them in deed serve Gods ordinance, but yet not both after one sort.

Sticks and stones can not stir to or fro, but a violent hand must first move
the^. Therefore in them the similitude that Chrysippus uses in the defense of
destiny, Aul. Gell. de noctib. Attic. lib. 6. cap. 2.
may take hold, to wit, of a roller that is cast down a steep hill, which
although it begin not to go down voluntarily at the first, yet afterward
the swift tumbling of it downewardes, is to be ascribed (says he) to the
roundnesse of the proportion, after the which it is framed.

But men and reasonable creatures have an inward motion of their own, not
moved by compulsion, as such senseless things be, but of their free choice and
deliberation. Neither is it consequent (as Austine sets it out very well)
that if the order of all causes be certain to God, therefore nothing should be
in our freewill. For even our wills themselves, be amongste the order of those
causes, which be certain to God, and comprehended by his for knowledge, in as
much as men's wills, be also the causes of men's works. Therefore it is so
far off, that our wills should be excluded in this case, that contrariwise I
take them to be the very instruments, whereby the will of God works.

The.iij. Chapter.
God is not the author of sin.

ANd hitherto we are burdened but as injurious to man. This accusation is the
more heinous, that they say, we are not content to keep us only at that stay,
but that we prease forward boldly without blushing, making God the author of
all the corruption and deformity that is in any man's naughty doings.

Which saying of theirs, if it could be proved true, then all that we have
well said before, were quite disgraced. For what greater blasphemy can be
devised, than to make him author of our evil, from whom as from a most clear
and precious fountain, is derived and fetched all our goodness? what more
swaruing from all reason, than that he which should be reue^ger of all
innocents, and the only executor of justice upon the face of ye whole earth,
should be found himself to do wrong? But the more grievous the offense is that
we are burdened with, and the more outrageous the enormitie is to be accounted
yt is laid unto us: the more substa^cially should they prove their pretended
quarrel. Go to then: let them orderly open and declare unto us, who ever yt
professed the gospel, brinced such poisoned doctrine to ye flock and
congregation of the faithful people?

Yes (says Staphylus) Nicolaus Gallus Staphylus in his second reply against
Smideline.
writes, that Melanchthon affirms in his notes upon Paul's Epistle to ye
Romans, that as well these works which be stark naught be wrought in us by
god as the adultery of David, the cruelty of Manlius and such like: as also
these works, which be indifferent and betwixt both, eating, drinking, and like
things appertaining to the necessity of this present life. Says Melanchthon
so? Why be not his own words rehearsed in such order and manner as he wrote
them? Forsoothe there is a good cause why: for then no doubt he should bewray
him self to be the very same man that he is in deed a peeuishe counterfaiter
and a forger.

But Nicolaus Gallus does write so of Melanchthon A pretty matter in deed,
that when men be bent maliciously to coin slanderous fables, they must be
fathered upon such as Nicolaus Gallus. For this I must needs tell them (let
them deal as colourably, as they list) it is a shame for any man to belie the
devil. Sure I am Melanchthon writes no such thing, nor none other that
professes as he does, but rather the flat contrary.

Mary if they be disposed to cauil with us for this, that we make god a
punisher of transgressors, I cannot well skill of such dealing. For what kind
of punishment do we attribute unto God, which same the scriptures do not
express? Say we, that God takes vengeance upon them that have him in
contempt, by delivering them up unto a leude mind? They be the very words of
S. Paul in his first chapter to the Romans. Or affirm we, that he sends
strong illusions, whereby such as will not embrace the love of gods
everlasting truth, are brought to believe lies and vanities? S. Paul also
says the same in his second chapter of his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians. Or is our manner of speech, to say that God sends evil
spirits with a commandment and power given them to do harm? We speak it
not without the warrant of Gods word, read who so list. 1. Reg. 22. and. 2.
Paral. 28. also Job in the first and second chapter. Or does this seem so
strange unto them that it is said, God hardens the hearts, or blinds the
eyes of the wicked, or that he makes them druncke with the wine of giddiness?
These in deed be the phrases of the holy Ghost, we deny not, uttered Exodus.
4. 7. 9. 10. 11. 14 Deuter. 2. Iosue. 11. and the first book of Samuel, the
second chapter, Paral. 22. and the second book, and Psalm. 105. Or finally is
this our doctrine, that there is no evil done in all the world, that the
hand of God does not direct? The prophet Amos seems to speak yet more hardly,
whiles he asks this question in the third chapter of his prophecy,
Whether there be any evil in the city, which the Lord has not caused? And
God himself in the prophet Esaias, when he had promised that he would make king
Cyrus to come from ye East, to ransacke the city of Babylon, and to subdue
many nations: demands, who it is that has brought these things to pass?
whereunto making answer again, I the Lord (says he) the first and the
last, I am he. But roughlier yet (as it seems) in the five and forty
chapter of the same prophecy, where he professes that he is the Lord, and
that there is no more but he, raming light, and causing darckenesse, making
peace, and creating evil. But neither ye place of Amos, nor this of ye prophet
Esaias we understand or construe any otherwise, than we are taught by the
consent of the learned fathers. Therefore we say with Basile, Creat Deus mala,
hoc est, transmutat ipsa, and in meliorem statum, exitumque deducit, vt i^m
mala esse desinant, bonique naturam accipiant. To be Englished thus, God
creates evil things, that is to say, he tra^sformeth them, and brings them
to better state and conclusion, to wit, than they were done for, so that those
things which be evil of themselves, cease now to be evil, as God uses them,
and take upon them the nature of that that is good. The reason also that is
given by Clemens Alexandrinus in his seuenthe book of Couerturs, (...), why
God by no means is the author or cause of evil, seems to tend to the same
end. For by him (says he) that is Lord of all, all things be ordered and
ordained both universally and particularly for the safety of the whole state
Soon after the said Basil understands this word evil in an other sense, as
if it should signify wars, plages, dearths, withal such kind of afflictions
as may happen in this mortal life: evil in deed to them that suffer the^, but
in respect of God, who justly scourges, So says Austine, contra Adimantum.
cap. 26.
when he sends the^ nothing less.

Breefely, if we speak of our evil works themselves, I say, they are to be
considered after two sorts, as they have evil qualities and imperfections in
them, whereby they are properly called evil, and so they cannot directly be
ascribed to God: and again, as they be brought out and wrought in nature, and
so it is evident, that they can not be done without God. For this not only the
divines, but the philosophers also teach, that God being a pure form, that is
always doing, and sequestered from all concretion of any matter, he moves all
things continually, and suffers nothing to be idle. But (as I said before)
he moves every thing, according to every things nature: one way, things ye be
liuelesse: an other way, things that bear life: and of things that bear life,
not all of them after one sort neither, but otherwise he moves brute
creatures, otherwise such creatures as be reasonable: and of such as be endued
with reason, otherwise good men, whose nature is reformed by gods spirit:
otherwise evil men, that be left in the corruption which they sucked of Adam.

And like as a good horsema^ governs He shows by an apt similitude, how
God makes his creatures to move.
in deed all his horses: but yet such of the^ as have sound lims, and be
lusty geldings he makes to go lively, and with an easy pace: other that be
lame and ill liking, go under him halting and ill fauoredly, when he spurreth
them forward, not through the fault of the horseman, but through the
lamenesse of the jade, which lamenesse notwithstanding could not be perceived
without this spurring forward of the horseman: even so God, who has the guiding
of us, and can bridle us, and order us as it pleases him, uses to deals with
all men, that can move themselves forward, when they are spurned: no dout as
every man is, so he makes him to go, either soundly, if he be regenerate, or
lamely, if he remain in his corruption.

Hereof it comes that God is said in the seriptures, to strike wicked men
blind, to harden their hearts, to seduce the prophets, and send men the
spirit of error, that they may believe lies, and so forth.

Upon this occasion it is likewise, that tyrants and notorious evil men be
called the Lords scourges, axes, hammers and swords.

Gods goodness therefore, and his judgments in all places we acknowledge, and
have in reverence, yea although we be not able to give a reason of them.
Contrariwise the instruments themselves, which be evil, and their peevish and
ungracious doings we condemn, I mean the treachery and wiliness of Satan,
the mercilesnesse of Manlius, the envy and malice of Joseph's brethren, the
wickedness and hardness of Pharaos heart, the rebellious mind, and the
detestable inceit of Absolon: king David's adultery, and vain glorious
numbering of his people, the railing and scolding of Semeis, the rancor and
treason of David's ennimies, the wicked Apostasy of Jeroboam and the.x. tribes,
the ravening of y^ Chaldeans, the insatiable avarice of the Babilonians, their
impotent rage, and their intolerable vau^ting of themselves, the wood fury of
the Jews and Pharisees against Christ. Finally, we altogether misselike the
diuellishe conspiracies and beastly cruelty of all the ennimies of Contra
Faust^^ Manich. li. 22. cap. 78. Pulgentius ad Monymum.
Gods church. Whereof we confess undoubtedly with S Austine and Eulgentius, that
God in deed was the very orderer and disposer, in as much as he used their
corruptions, as he thought best for his glory: but in no wise the proper
woorker that infused or poured into them such noughtinesse. For that they did
evil (as the same Austine tells us very well) it Lib. 1. de Predestin.
sauct. cap. 16. and lib. de libero arbi. and great. cap. 20. and. 31.
came of themselves. But that in sinning against God, their noughtinesse
should do this or that: it was not in their power, but in the power of God.
Who divided their darckenesse, and dispearsed it in such order, that of this
also that they did expressly against his will, there was nothing brought to
pass, but his will. That then which now we have already spoken touching the
cause of sin, we see it so manifest and plain a matter, that it needs not
to be discoursed upon with any longer process.

For I would gladly demand of the adversary: what of all this can be
disproued? Will he say that graceless men be so priuileaged, that there is no
God to master them, and to keep them under? Let him tell me then why they
should have y^ prerogative. Or if he grant unto me, that GOD maistreth them:
will he say they are not Gods instruments, that serve in the execution of his
will? Let him say then how God can be a master, toward them which serve him not
to any purpose. Or if this poisoned infection, this venime of cursed malice, yt
lies lurcking and loytering in the bosom of every lorell, be stirred up by
the hand of God, as it were the fulsome humor of a carrion that is drawn up by
the sun beams: shall we say then, that God is defiled with it? It were more
than abominable to think it, to say it, open and flat blasphemy: to
stand to it, damnable apostasy.

For contrariwise it is so far off, that whereas three things concur in
every evil action, asi utia suadentis (as S. Augustine says) nequitia
volentis, and Contra Faustu^ Manichaeu in lib. 21. cap. 9.
iustitia punientis, the subtilitie of the devil persuading, the peevishness
of the man that is willing, and the just vengeance of God punishing and
forsaking: God only doubtless is free from blame, as doing nothing that
swarueth from justice: the rest are stained shamefully with all iniquity. They
of kind malice, mind nothing but to follow their corrupt desires: God of
his native goodness, the creator of all things that have natural existence, so
measures al things with just reckening and even waightes, that those things
also which were no sins, no were they not directly against nature, may be so
judged and ordered, that they trouble not natures universal course. Therefore
the very doings of naughty men, as they be instruments directed by the hand
of God to that end which they little think of, in nature and substance be
Gods good works: on the other side, as they be set forward by satan's egging,
and depraved by the corruption of man's ill will: there lo by their
deformity they are espied to be hatched in the devils nest.

Now how this might agree and hang together, that ye* same work should be
both evil and good, of the diverse fountains that it springs off, and the
diverse ends and marks, whereunto it tends and shoots forward: if it can
not be so well perceived: Anselmus in his book de casu diaboli, so far
forth as it touches God, seems by an apt similitude very pretily to open
it, and set it out, saying: that like as we are not afraid to confess that,
that is a creature of Gods making, which is begotten notwithstanding by man's
leudely disposed will (for we say God is the creature of that infant which is
borne in whordome and adultery) so in some manner of respects he sees no
cause why we should make danger to say, God had to do with that work, which
nevertheless has his beginning of an evil affected disposition.

To make the matter more plain, I pray you, was not Gods delivering of his
son Christ to the Jews, by the hand of Judas, as his instrument, a good
deed? it was so questionless: for it was done for the salvation of the
faithful. Yet it was not good, as it came of Judas, who partly carried away
with hatred, partly blinded with avarice, betrayed his master.

After the same manner it may be said of the hangman that executes a fellon at
the commandment of the Magistrate. The doing whereof may have two
originalles, either the magistrate, whose instrument the hangman is, and so
this execution of the fellon is good, or else the hangman that does that which
he is about, with an inward moving of his own, whereby he also is the cause of
the felons death, whom he executes. If the hangman therefore put this felone to
death for the better maintenance of justice, the execution is good, and
deserves commendation: but if he be stirred up to the slaughter of him with
hatred (because peradventure he was his enemy, whom he is about to dispatche
out of the way) then can he not chose before God, but he must needs be gyltie
of his death. So we see ye the same work, as it may be considered in two
several respects, is both a good work, and it is faulty also: and one way
to be done laudably, an other way with blame and shame inoughe. Even so we say
of God, who although he work all things willingly, which be done in the
world: yet does he not all things with the same mind, as peradventure do
some of his instruments, by whom he works: neither wills them to be done
with the same intent, which makes Gods works to be praise worthy, man's
doings oftentimes to be nothing so. Thus far I have traveled metely well in
loasing this same knot of Gordius, I say, in discussing such a doubtful and
hard point, as being let alone, might peradventure rather have wounded a weak
conscience, than have any thing edified the reader.

Yet if this that is said be not sufficient, I dare undertake that S. Austine
might supply the rest. He in his Enchiridion, Cap. 101.
furnishing us very handsomely with a feate example: Presuppose (says he) that
an vntovvard child vvish the death of his father, whom god also would have to
dye. In this case we see God, and the unthrifty child vvil in deed both one
thing, namely the death of the man. But is this naughty son therefore to be
allowed? No. For God and he willed it not both after one sort. For the
unthrifty son wills it to enjoy his fathers goods, God wills it, to
rid him out of misery, if he be of the elect, or to give him due punishment,
in case he be otherwise.

By this it appears how vain and foolish their talk is, that come in with
such fond objections: If a thief be the minister of Gods will, why find we
fault with him? if a murderer execute Gods judgments, why is he not
rewarded? for truly the answer is soon made. Their meaning was not (say I)
as Gods was. Whose will and pleasure if they had so greatly desired to
satisfy: why followed they rather that their froward and desperate
inclination, than Gods will reveled in his word?

Hereby also we may learn what to answer them, which will object Gods hatred
against sin, and such as be delighted with a naughty life, saying: If God
stir up sinners to do evil, and make them vessels of reproach: how can he
hate them or their sins, and not rather love them, and make much of them?
For he hates nothing of those things which he made. Sa. 12. To this Austine
replieth writing ad Simplicianu^, after Lib. 1. que. ^.
this manner, as it follows: VVheras God of the number of the wicked, whom he
does not justify, makes vessels serving to reproach, he hates not in them
that which he made: for asfarfoorthe as they be wicked, they be odible in his
sight. But as farfoorth as they be vessels, they be made to some use, that by
the punishment that is ordained for them, the vessels which be made to
honor, may take profit. Therefore God hates not the vessels of reproach,
neither as they be men, nor as they be vessels. That is to say, neither that
which he made in them by creating, nor that which he does in them by
ordayning. For he hates nothing of those things that he made. But yet that he
makes them vessels of perdition, he does it for this use, that other may be
corrected. For he hates wickedness in them, which was not of his making. And
as a Judge hates theft in a man, but he hates not his punishment, that he is
condemned to a minepitte to dig for metal: for the theft was of the thieves
doing, the punishment the Judges appoynting: So God, whereas he makes
vessels of perdition of the dough of the wicked, he hates not that which he
makes, that is to say, the work of his casting them away, that perish in such
pains as are due unto them, whereby such as he has mercy upon, find
occasion ministered unto them of salvation. So it was said to Pharao: For this
purpose have I styrred thee up, that I may shevve my power upon thee, and
that my name might be spoken of throughout all the earth. This showing forth
of Gods power and this bruting of his name throughout all the earth, helps to
make them to stand in awe, and to seek the reformation of their own ways,
unto whom such an effectual calling appertains. So says Austine: whereby
it is manefystly showed, that the work, and the deformity of the work be not
all one.

So then that act which in some respect is a sin (namely for that it erreth
from Gods law, and tends not to yt end which it ought to level at, and
moreover fails of yt due perfection y^ might justly be required in it.) That
act (I say) which Lectione. 143. iu. 11. cap. Sa.
is a sin, and is wroughte (as Holcotte writes upon the book of wisdom)
both by God and man after some sort: on Gods behalf, by whom man's hydden
malice is only caused to come forth, like an adder that is pulled out of his
hole) is done justly: and therefore it has not in it the nature of sin, so
far forth as it is done of God. But as it is done by man, it is done
unjustly, and therefore as it is wrought by him, it may properly be called
sin. And for this cause, according to Austines mind, God is not the author
of sin, because although that thing which is a sin is done of God, yet for
any thing that God does in it, it is no sin.

Hitherto Holcote some what obscurely in deed, but yet not without a good
reason. For although the deed it self that is naught comes of God, yet this
noughtinesse that is in it, can not justly be laid to Gods charge. Who makes
both the work, and the man that does it, to serve his most holy and
vnblamed purpose.

Unnatural therefore, and ungodly was the dealing of Joseph's brethren, that
made sale of their brother Joseph, and would send him into foreign countries:
good and gracious was Gods doing, that so well could use these his wicked
instrumenets, seeking nothing but their brothers hinderaunce, not only to his
highpreferment, but also to the relieuing both of them, and their good old
father, and generally for the sustenance of all the coasts round about him.
Wickedly doubtless did Pharao, that so cruelly entreated Gods own people, the
Israelites: justly and mercifully dealed God, who not only overwhelmed both
him, and all his horsemen and chariots in the red sea: but mightily delivered
them out of his hands, whom he so maliciously pursued. Most traitorously and
villanously did Judas, that delivered up his master to the Jews his extreme
foes: most lovingly and bountifully did God, who spared not his own only
son, but gave him up into their hands Romans 8.
for our benefit. Finally to let other things pass, both Herod and Pilate,
with all their accomplices, that so bloudily conspired against Christ, did most
abhominably and detestably in the sight of God: God him self, by whose
secret counsel and determination (as it is in the Acts) it was appointed
upon Cap. 4.
long before, did that which was seemly for his goodness, and thereto very
well framing and consonante to the severity of his justice, for the raunsoming
of his elect out of Satan's bands. In which, and such other like cases (as
Saint Austine says) what greater Epistola. 48.
cause can be rendered, why GOD should be just, and man a trespasser, Nisi
quiam re vna quam fecerunt, causa nonest vna ob quam fecerunt? Saying, that in
one, and the very same thing, in the doing whereof God and man joined, the same
cause of doing it can not be assigned?

Now that this deformity before mentioned must be distinguished from a
deformed act, as it is clearly showed by that that has been said already:
so Thomas of Aquine does set it out yet Thom contra gentes. lib. 3. c. 26 2.
adhuc peccatum.
somewhat more plainly. For every fault proceeds (says he) of somewhat that
is amiss in the next agent, and not of any influence that comes directly
from the first mouer. As for an example: the lamenesse that makes a man to
haulte, aryseth of some sore or hurt done to the leg, and not of that
natural force, whereby we are able to move our selves: whereas
notwithstanding it comes all of our native force, whatsoever perfection we
should have to move, that seems by our lame going to be wanting. Even so
fares it in this case concerning our deformities and deformed doings. The
next and secondarie agent that moves man to sin, is his will. Therefore the
default and blemish that is in a sinful action, is to be arrected to man's
will, and not to God the first agent: from whom notwithstanding whatsoever
makes for the perfection of a deed that is done sinnefully, as from the
fountain of nature, must needs have his beginning.

The.iiij. Chapter.
How evil is done by Gods will, the author makes further declaration.

THis case therefore being so clearly and manyfestly discussed, and so diverse
and sundry ways sufficiently proved and confirmed, that God being not in very
deed the author of our acts and doings, as they be so ilfauouredly shape^
and brought out, I mean, with that vicious quality that is in them: is yet
the only worker whereby our sinnefulnesse is brought to light, and the
dyrectour and guyder of the same: this question of many men is moved, and of me
not lightely to be passed over, whether GOD be wylling that any sins should be
done, yea, or no. For the words of the prophet David in the fifth Psalms seem
utterly to sound to the contrary, where he says, according to the common
translation of the Latin Bible: Non deus volens iniquitatem tu e^. Thou art
not a God that wills any iniquity. And no less plainly speaks the author
of the book of wisdom in his. 14. Chapter, saying that God hates alyke
as well the wicked man, as his wicked deeds. For see (I pray you) what a sequel
may be inferred, if he hate the^, belike he has no mind to them, and if he
have no mind to them, why should he will to have them done?

But surely the premises being considered, it were not at all to any purpose
to stand long in resolving of such a doubt. For first is this a well settled
foundation, and a clear case to be agreed upon amongst them that dispute this
controversy, that al things, be they good or bad that are done in the world,
be disposed and ordered by Gods Providence? As for that point I trust, it is
already made so plain, that it needs not any longer to be in question. Well
then, if God from the beginning did for see that evil things should happen,
evil (I say) in them that were the instruments by whom they were wrought, as
slaughters, or whoredoms, treasons, etc. If he determined with him self, not
to resist them, but to suffer them to go forward, and to have their course:
yea moreover if he ordained, that they should be done, either punishing one
sin by an other, in leaving men to them selves, or else for some other
meaning best known to his secret wisdom: finally if he him self also
were a medler in them, as one that made them to break forth, for the better
disclosing of the hypocrisy that is lodged and harbored in men's hearts:
how can we say that GOD forsawe any thing to be brought out by his own
working, and yet had not to do with it? or that he had to do with it, and
yet ordained it not? or ordained it, and yet would not suffer it? or was
content to suffer it, and yet would not have it done? had not he
knoweledge inoughe to preuente it, that so long foresawe it? or wanted he
power, that wrought it? or wisdom, that so wisely ordered it? or will, that
suffered it? Let them tell then, who forced him to suffer it contrary to his
mind? But that verily were as hard for them to do, as to find me out one,
by making search within the compass of heaven, and the round earth, of more
might and puissaunce than God him self.

Therefore this sentence of Sayncte Austine, which he writes in the hundredth
chapter of his Enchiridion, is well worthy to be considered and thought upon:
For therefore (says he) great be the works of the Lord, sought out of all
them that have pleasure therein, inasmuch as it comes to pass by a
maruellouse and unspeakable way, that that is not done besides his will,
which also is done against his will. For why? it should not be done, if he
would not suffer it: and surely he suffered it not vnvvillyng, but with his
will. And it could not be, that he^ which is good, would suffer any thing
to be done that is evil, unless that he also being almighty, were able to
use an evil work to the accomplishing of a good. These be Austines own
words.

Wherein by those his distinct terms, Besides his will, and against his will,
methinketh he would give us to understand, that in Gods will, which of it
self is no more but one, there be yet distinct manners of willing a thing to be
done. Whereof it comes, that that which God would not absolutely and in all
respects, he would yet for some certain end, whereunto he would use it.

And this which I now have spoken, needs not to seem strange to the
hearer. For it happens even in the affairs of our daily life. The merchant
that is daungerously storm beaten upon the seas, when he brings home that
which he has toyled for, is doubtless willing enough of his own part to save
his marchaundise, and to bring them away with him to land: but for fear of
shipwreck, and coming in danger of his life, he will not even in that
respect save his wares, and therefore he casts them into the sea, that he
him self may escape safe without shypwracke. A good magistrate will kill none
of his citizens, the preservation of whom he knows is committed to his
charge. But yet if there be any man that is a thief, molesting and troubling
the common weal, to the intent such naughty packes might be punished, and
other men frayed by his example from the like leaude practices and attempts,
such a one he can be well content to dispatche, and rid out of the way.

Be it spoken, that we have said for example sake, not to signify, that God
is urged to do any thing in like manner, who has all his creatures at his
commandment, and most freely deals in all things that he takes in hand:
but rather to show and make it manifest, that for these and those
considerations which may move us, or not move us, as occasion may serve us to
or fro, we may once, and at one present time both will and not will the same
thing.

Which as I have examplified it of our selves, so truly and very agreeably to
the scriptures, the same may also be applied to God. Forbids he not (I pray
you) in his ten commandments, that any manslaughter or murder should be
committed? And yet it is written of Elie 1. Reg. 2.
his sons, that they had not the grace to hear their fathers counsel, in as
much as the Lord was willing to kill them. And does not god condemn in like
manner all co^spiracies that be made to overthrow the innocent? And yet would
he have Iosephe sold by the false train of his brethren, that by that
occasion he might come to Egypt. Which Iosephe himself also witnesses,
speaking to his brethren with these words, Genes. 45. It is not ye, but God
that sent me before ye, to the intent I might be a stay to you in the time
of the dearth. Does he not condemn adulterers in like manner, and committers
of abominable and wicked incest? yet would he with the incest of Absolon, that
defiled himself with his fathers wives, punish the adultery of King David
being his father. For eue^ so says God his own self. 2. Reg. 12. I will
stir up evil against thee out of thine own house, and I vvil take thy vviues
before thine own eyes, and I will give the^ to thy neighbor, that shall
sleep with them in the sight of this Sun. Thou haste done it in secret:
But I will do it before all the people, and in the sight of the Sun.
Breefely (to bring but one other example) is not theft plainly condemned in
Gods word? yet he would have the Israelites to rob the Egyptians, yea he
would have the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans to vex Job with driving away of his
cattle, and taking from him his camelles, and other of his moveable goods.
For when Satan required of God to lay hand upon Job, and to afflicte him, so
God makes answer again unto Satan: Behold I permit to thine arbitrament,
whatsoever he has in possession. The Sabaeans then, and the Chaldaeans, were
set on by Gods voluntary permission, to spoil Job, and to rob him of all his
goods. Which Job considering with himself, puts all up mildely and
quietly, saying: The Lord gave me, and the Lord has taken from me again:
Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Whereby we may easily gather, how true the saying of S. Austine is, affirming
that many things be done against Gods will, which nevertheless be not done
besides his will. Against Gods will be traiterous and deceytefull trains,
whereby the innocent is entrapped: against Gods will, is the enticing away of a
man's son or daughter, or any servant to him belonging without consent of
the party that has just title and right unto them: against Gods will is
incest, and taking away of other men's goods: and yet ye all this is not done
without gods will, of Jacobs children, of Absalon, of the Sabeans. etc. it is
evident by the words of the holy scripture.

And this is the very same distinction, that others also have taught, saying
that Gods will is understand after two sorts, sometimes of those things which
God simply aloweth, sometime of those things which he likes not simply and of
themselves, but only that it pleases him to use them to some certain end.
In the first sense we say, that god wills those things which he commands
in his law, and that he wills not those things which be forbidden by his
commandment. And of this will Christ spoke, when he said, Not all that say
Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will
of my father which is in heaven. And in that meaning we say in our Lords
prayer, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. This will amongste the
schoolmen, is called Voluntas signs, whereof you may read in the Master of
sentences, lib. 1. did. 45. In the second sense, we say God wills many
things which he forbids, not that he likes them for any thing that is in
them: but so far forth as by them he either puts good men to their trial,
whom it likes him to chasten, or else is reue^ged of sinners, by giving them
over from one sin, to fall headlong into an other. Therefore he stirred up
some of the Palestines to kill Elie his children. For they were not ruled by
their fathers counsel, because the Lord was willing to kill them. 1. Reg. 2.

Notable is that figured representation in Job, of the talk that is imagined
betwixt God and Satan: who asks God leave to afflicte Job. By the which we
may see, that both Job was distressed of the Devil, that desired to undo
him, and of the Sabeans, and the Chaldeans, that were greedye of their pray:
But yet not without the will of God, unto whom Job ascribes the great anguishe
and calamity that was brought upon him, saying: The Lord gave, and the Lord
took away. The end therefore that God respected in making him a pray for
thieves, was to put him to the exercise of his patience. The end of Gods
purpose in Absalons incestuous act, was to punish the adultery of his father
David, in the conueying away of Iosephe by his brethren, to send him before
into Egypt, that in the time of the great dearthe, he might provide for his
father and all his household. Therefore it is neither the stealing away of
Joseph, nor Absalons incest, nor the robbing and ravening of the Sabaeans and
Chaldaeans, that God aloweth, as they be the breach of his law, the
disturbing of a fellowshippe, and society amongste men, and the hindera^ce of
love, and charity of one man with an other, but as by them he executes his
purposed determinations, either in being revenged of the wicked, or in
exercising the patience of the elect, in keeping them in modest and humble
behauior in their affliction, and in making them to continue steadfast against
all assaults, even like stout champions unto the end. These be those marvelous
counselles of almighty God, whereby out of darckenesse he fetches light, and
(as it were) from amongst thorns makes Roses to spring forth: this is the
wonderful coupling together of his goodness and almighty power, that makes
him to suffer nothing to be evil done, which he does not convert to a good
end, as before we have declared out of Austine. Enchirid. cap. 100.


These therefore, and the like places may be quickly answered, Thou art not a
God that wills iniquity. And God hates wicked me^ and their wickedness
alike. For true it is in deed, that he wills not the iniquity it self, or
rather (as the Hebrew word of the Psalm might be translated) he deliteth not
in it: nay also (that more is) he hates not it only, but him that does it.
And why? for so far forth as he makes himself ougly with this deformity
of sin, he studieth to blotte Gods image out of his heart, wherein he was
created in true holiness and righteousness, and to printe in himself the
Deuilles shape. Which in Gods sight ca^ not choose, but be a hateful thing.

And yet that he permits both An idle permission may not be ascribed to God.
sin and sinful men, shall we say it is against his will? No truly, such a
permission as it openly fights with Gods Providence, so does it manifest
violence to Gods word. Which so plainly teaches us, that no man needs to
be in doubt, not only that god permits evil me^, but that also he ordains
them: not only that he ordains them, but that he uses them also as his
instruments. Therefore David calls his adversaries the sword and hand of
the Lord in the 13. and. 14. verse of the. 17. Psalm. And the lord calls the
Medes and the Persians his consecrated people, and the instruments of his
wrath. Esaias. 10. and. 13. For the same reason the king of the Babilonians is
compared to an axe and a saw, in the very same tenth chapter of Esaias before
mentioned: and in the. 27. Chapter of Jeremy, God calls him his servant.
Not that either Nabuchodonozor, or the Medes and Persians, or any other
infidels and godless men do God any such kind of service, as the godly that
submit themselves to Gods will reveled in the scriptures: but that God so
orders their malice, that unawares they execute Gods decreed will and pleasure
from everlasting. And this will is it, that is termed of the schoolmen voluntas
been placiti. Whereof says Mardocheus in the thirtienth Chapter of the book
of Esther, that there is no man able to resist it.

I omit diverse words in the Bible, of seducing, blinding, deceiving, sending
strong illusions, giving men over to themselves and such like, spoken not of
creatures only, but of God himself. Which if any man would think to salve
with the gloss of naked permission: he should not only force upon them a sense
nothing coherent, but also fall into that error, which Julian the Pelagian
did maintain. Against whom for the same doctrine S Austine in sundry places
has written too too manifestly and plainly: especially contra Iulianum Pelag.
Lib. 5. cap. 3. and lib. 3. cap. 5. lib. de praedestinat. sanct. cap. ^0. in
Psalm. 104. and lib. de gratia and libero arbitrio, cap. 20. 21. 31.

And certainly (say we what we list) if God purposely remove that away from
us, which is the only mean, whereby sin is debarred, albeit that he does
it justly: yet how ca^ it be said, that he would in no wise have sin, which so
necessaly follows the wtdrawing of his grace?

This therefore is our brief resolution touching this point, ye God in deed
would a sinful act, as it is a thing ye is brought out in nature: for why,
were it so, that he would not have it to break out, certain it is, that it
should still be repressed. But the deformity of a sinful act, and the want of
godliness that is in it, simply and in all respects he would none of, saving
only so far forth as it is a punishment for sin, and an instrument of Gods
direction, whereby he works wonderfully beyond all man's reason the effect
of his hidden and unknown will.

The.v. Chapter.
Ordinary means be not excluded by Gods Providence.

WE stand yet (God be thanked) upon even ground: man's will is saved
harmless, and Gods is sufficiently defended, if not by me peradventure, who
am able to say but little, yet by the goodness of the cause it self. And would
to god we were every man so affected, that we could be content willingly to
give place to a truth, that is manifest and out of doubt. Surely less would
the world be disquieted, and with more Christian and godly concord, might all
matters of dissension be taken up. But now who seeeth not this self love,
that almost rules and reigns in every state?

By occasion whereof, it comes to pass, that Gods cause being rather
outwardly for a show pretended, than inwardly any synceritie in the heart
intended, error grows, wickedness flows, smoothe hypocrisy prevails,
faith and truth fails upon the earth.

But (to give over, and cease all complaints not so needelesse peradventure in
this so corrupt an age, as bootelesse altogether and frutelesse:) has the
adversary of Gods Providence nothing else to reply? Yes, now comes he
forth with a fell blow, not unlike if our armor be not the better, to give us
such a wipe as was never heard of. For see you not (says he) the great
absurdity of your doctrine? see you not into what a foul inco^uenie^ce you
will bring us? If it be true ye you teach us, to what purpose should we either
give counsel to any other, or our selves take any deliberation? for howsoever
we take aduiseme^t, whatsoever we would do to the contrary, that that God would
have done (say you) for any man's will, must needs be. And what the^ should it
avail us to take heed to our selves, or to seek means to prevent a
mischeeue? Why should we send for the physician, when we are sick? or require
help of the surgeon, when we have received a wou^d? And as for prayer to what
purpose should it serve? if God have before appointed to satisfy our hearts
desire: doutlesse he will then do it of his own accord without our prayer: if
not, who sees not ye we waste our wind all in vain?

These and the like objections, are thought to press us very sore, either
because they contain odious matter, that might exulcerate at the first
hearing, the mind of him that gives ear: or else because they are so thick
heaped, and so vehemently forced upon us with such earnest and hot demaundes.

But let us pull them a while in sunder, and examine them severally by
themselves, that by this mean we might the better epsy their force. What is
ye then, that he says? Be consultacions hindered if Gods Providence bear sway
in the world? And why more (on Gods name) than our free will? Which how little
it is let by this occasion, it is not now needful to be told, seeing
already it is answered (I trust) enough for our purpose For I would gladly in
few words ask one question or two, of this Disputer: Can will, which is the
power of reason, and not only depends of appetite, which we have common with
brute beasts, be severed, or sequestered from election? Or can there be an
election, where no choice is offered? or can there be a choice offered, where
there is no consultation? Surely no. For either good or bad counsel goes
before all our voluntary actions. And voluntary actions I call those, wherein
reason deals, and not only the appetit^ has to do. Whereof it comes,
that whatsoever is done of ignorance, or only upon a braide of mind by the
Philophers judgment is not voluntary. Which in case it were otherwise to be
determined, then brute creatures also, which are carried away headlong with
their sensual mouings, might be said to have voluntary actions: than ye
which there is nothing that can sound more out of course. To return then to
the point whereupon I stand, if man's will do not therefore sustain
hinderance or damage, for that it is ruled by Gods: neither is counsel and
aduisement-taking, (without the which our free will can not hold,) by the same
reason abolished and pulled away. Still therefore it continues (who can say
nay?) how so ever that at sometimes it take no place. For true it is that is
said of the wise Solomon, The heart of man advises him self of his way,
notvvithstanding that God does Proverb. 16.
direct his steps.

Yea what said I? it continues? nay it serves to the executing of Gods
counsel also. For to what other effect tended the advice, that Judas gave his
brethren, as the Ismaelites came soiourning by them, when he brake out suddenly
into these words? What were we Gene, 37.
the better to kill our brother, and afterward to hide his bloodshed? Come,
let us sell him to the Ismaelites, and let us not stain our hands with such a
foul act: for he is our brother, and of our flesh. Whose words when his
brethren hard, and well liked, they straighte ways made their merchandise of
their brother Joseph: which was the only occasion that he came into Egypt. The
counsel which the younger sort gave Roboam in the. 12. chapter of the third
book of kings, was a mean that afterward Gods decree was executed against
him, disdaining to give ear to the people. The counsel of Chusai was
preferred of Absalon, before the advice of Achitophel: and why? The reason is
given in the. 7. chap. of the 2. book of the kings. The Lord forsooth had
ordained ye (Chusai his persuasions prevailing,) Achitophel with his instructions
should not be heard, to the intent the Lord might bring evil upon Absalon.
Great consultations had the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, deliberating to
put Christ to death, least the Romans should come upon them, and take from
them their Empire, whereby unwitting, and unknowing what else were they but
instruments of gods decre. I let other examples pass, seeing these are
sufficient to serve our turn. So then, if God work by our counselles, how
be they against his Providence? if they be not against his providence? why may
not they stand with it?

But no counsel can serve, if God have appointed otherwise. What then? Neither
is it thy part to desire, that thy counsel should prosper against God. Follow
thou thy docation, do thy duty, consulte and be advised, as God shall put it
into thy mind. In the mean time stand not so in thine own conceit, that
thou should prefer the counselles of thine head before Gods.

But to what purpose should we study to prevent a mischeeue? Or desire the
Surgeons and Physicians help, if our state depend wholly upon Gods will? Such
an other idle reason was much made of amongst certain Sophistes, that
disputed of destiny in times paste: which S. Origin rehearses in his second
book contra Celsum. One going about to persuade a sick man, not to seek
help of the Physitio^, reasons the matter with him in this manner: It is
concluded by destiny long before, that either you shall recover your health,
or no. If it be your destiny to recover, you have no need of the Physician: if
it be not your destiny, the Physician can help you nothing. An other also
dissuadeth his friend by a like argument from marriage. But what answer now
made they that defended destiny. They faygned the sick man thus to inuerte
the argument, yes mary (answering again) if it be my destiny to escape my
malady, I will send for the Physician, because he professes to heal them
that be sick, that by his means I may have that which destiny has decreed.
The other that was dehorted from entering into wedlock, they imagined thus, to
wreste his friends argument out of his hand: If it be my destiny to have
children, because that can not otherwise be brought to pass, than by the
copulation of the male and the female, I will the rather marry a wife, that my
destiny may agreably take his place.

Thus we see how that they also which supported destiny, and wrapped all things
in the necessity of the second causes, yet dealed not with us in such sort,
that they excluded the means, whereby that which was fatal came to pass. No
surely, it never came into their minds to be so fond. For even Tullie in his
book de Fato, alleging this very same argument, which was made to the
sickeman, brings in Chrysippus the Philosopher, finding fault with it, and
refelling the vanity of it with this distinction. For (says he) in all fatal
chances, some things there be that are simply determined without any
condition that is annexed: and some things there be that be so linked to their
causes, that the one can not be without the other. As for example, this is
destiny without concondition, Such a day Socrates shall dye. Therefore to this
man, whether he do any thing to hasten his destiny, or leave it undone: in
this sentence before going, his dying day is precisely and without any addition
foreappoynted. But if the sentence of destiny be thus, Oedipus shall beget
Laius, it can not be said, whether he company with a woman, or no. For this
company-keeping, is a thing ye is necessarily annexed to it, and (as you would
say) alike, fatally conjoined. So in like manner (says he) if a body should
tell before, that it should be Milo his destiny to wrestle in the games of
Olympia, and an other would conclude upon it, Ergo, whether he have an
adversary, or no adversary, it will be his destiny to wrestle, he should
conclude but fondly. For this clause, It shall be his destiny to wrestle,
has a relation to an other thing that is annexed. For without an adversary
no man can wrestle. Therefore all such captious as these be, are confuted
after a like manner. And by and by he brings in the reason made to the
sickeman, and before rehearsed out of Origene: If it be thy destiny, whether
thou call for the Physician, or no, thou shalt recover, saying that it is a
captious kind of spech, because it is as fatal for the sick man to send for
the Physician, as it is to recover his health. Hitherto out of Tullie de Fato.

That which Chrysippus and the Sophistes could say in the defense of destenie,
we may with much better cause apply to the mayntenaunce of Gods truth. By
whose most wise Providence from everlasting, not only the effects, and
consequents of every thing be ordained, but the causes also, and the
antecedentes be in like sort ordered and disposed. Therefore he that has
committed to us the care and charge of our own health, as he wills the
preservation of the same, so he gives us warning, whenever we are beset with
any danger, he puts it into our head to take heed, he shows us provided
remedies, which we may use: briefly he does furnishe us with all kind of
helps, and tells us all means to save our selves. And what must we do
now of our own parts? shall we think it inoughe to lie tumbling us, and
rolling us in the mire, and to say only, God help? no, if God have betaken to
us the custody of our own lives, it is good reason that we look to them: if
he offer us helps, it is meet to use them: if he give us warning of any
perilles that may fall upon us, we should not rashly and unadvisedly run upon
them: and if he minister unto us shifts and remedies for our sauegarde, it
were great folly and madness to neglect them.

But there be some which follow your Objection.
counsel, and yet speed not a whit the better, there be other before this
time, that have done nothing thereafter, and yet sometimes have success good
enough. Yea, what if it stand with Gods pleasure Answer.
to deal extraordinarily at sometimes, that his almighty power may be the
better known: were it our parts therefore to tempte his majesty, and to
look for that, as of duty, which is done of an especial privilege? Nothing
less. We surely must stick to that that is ordinary, and we must not
presume any other way to help our selves, than God has laid evidently before
our face^ if that do not always serve, we must think it gods punishment for
our deserts. Who thereby does us to understand, that we should not trust over
much to any worldly stays, knowing that without his favor our best
nourishement is but poison, our surest buckler of defense naught else but a
ruinouse and rotten pillar. We must therefore crave evermore his blessed aid
and assistaunce, and diligently fly unto him by prayer. Than the which there
is nothing that he more requires at our hands.

Nay, but that is to no purpose (will some say) if God so long ago have
appointed what he will do. For what intreting might cause him to change his
mind? Thereto I answer, our entreating te^deth not to that end, that for our
sake God should alter his own determination. For we wish nothing but the
satisfying of his holy will. Therefore when we pray for any worldly thing, we
remember always the exception which is taught us by our Savior Christ: Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Contrariwyse, when we make suit
unto God for any thing that perteyneth to our souls health, we nothing
doubt, but that as God has stirred up in us this good desire (which we take
to be a sure token of his favor toward us) so he will mercyfully
condiscende to our most godly request. For all that call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved: and, He is nigh Joel. 2. Romans 10. Psalm. 145.
to all them that call upon him, I say, that call upon him with an unfeigned
heart. He will do the will of them that fear him, and he will grant their suit,
and save them.

We waste not then our wind in vain (whatsoever the godless lift to say) so
often as we have recourse to God, no not though he have determined before what
to do. Who if he give us not our asking, yet he gives us at leastwyse that
which is more expediente: like a wise and skilful physician, forseeing much
better what is good for his pacient, than we do, that are biinded with our own
disease.

Certaynely if these men's talk were ought worth, what should we say to the
Patriarch Isaac? Because God had said before, that a great posterity should
come out of his loins: should not he therefore desire God to perform his
promise which he made him? What a fond reasoning is that? For willingly he
suffers many times, that things should happen, which seem clean contrary
to his promises, yea he performs not his behests, which he makes to any man,
but first entreated with much suing. God had given Isaac a barreyn wife. What
could be more repugnaunt to the promised fruit of his body? And yet that
Rebecca should conceive, Isaac (as Moses tells it) makes his earnest Gene.
25.
prayer unto God.

It is a goodly lesson, that Raphael the Angel gives the younger Tobie, when
he counseleth him to take Sara to his wife, a woman not so well reported of
amongst the common sort, and all for the death of her seven husbands, but
yet promised unto him notwithstanding by Gods own mouth. When thou come
Good counsel for new married folks.
(says he) into the chamber with her, where you both must lie, for the
space of three days you shall forbear her, and you shall do nothing with
her all that while, but only fall both of you to your prayers. That done, take
the heart of the fish brought thither, and thereof make a certain perfume. The
sauoure whereof so soon as the evil spirit perceives, he will fly away from
the damoysel, and never come to her any more. Afterward, when it shall be thy
mind to couple with her, first arise out of bed, and make thine humble prayer
unto God, that it might please him to extend toward you his mercy, and to
work so effectually with the medicine, that the maid may be cured and made
whole: of whom sone after you shall beget male children. But set fear aside,
for she was ordained for you before the world was begone, and by your means
God will deliver her from the devil. So far goes the Angel.

Who sees not now that by Gods Providence the diligent use of prayer, and the
exercise of good works is not taken away? Sara from the beginning of the
world was lotted to be Tobias his wife: and yet they were both of them
commanded to consecrate (as it were) this their marriage unto God by prayer.
This also was Gods decree, that Sara should be set loose from the devil: and
yet at the Angels commandment Tobie uses a perfume in driving away the evil
spirit. What? that long journey ye Tobie made, when he went a suitor for his
wife, was it against Gods Providence? Are the two Tobies, either the younger or
the elder therefore the slacker in godly exercises, and in doing of virtuous
deeds? do they nothing but live at their own ease, loking when ye should fall
unto the^ sleeping soundly and quietly on both the ears, which God had
appointed them from everlasting? Would not Tobies father take the salve made of
the fish to recover his sight therefore? Did that make the good old man's
son disobedient to the Angels counsel, either in helping Sara, or in
calling to God for mercy, that his marriage might the better prosper?
Questionless all that we have spoken of, was mente toward them a long while
before the world was created, and surely by none other but God himself, who
is always true in all his promises, and defraudeth i^ man of any thing which he
behesteth. And they without douting or delaying followed on (of their parts)
with a good courage, as Gods providence in all things did conduct them. They left
no good work undone, whereby they might procure Gods favor, they were
continually earnest in prayer, they gave alms to ye poor, of that which God
sent, they neglected no physike ordained of god, they co^sulted as well of other
matiers belonging to the^, as also about their voyage, how they might make it
for their most advantage: finally they left nothing undone, that their calling
and election might by all means possible be made sure to the^: and there was
nothing more liefe unto the^ in all the world, than to do good where need was,
and to hang always upon God.

What needs much to be said? Christ our savior records his own self, ye god
knows what we have need of before we ask, and yet he exhorts his disciples
to pray. He knew ye he should die upon the cross, a most terrible and
shameful death: whereof he also gave warning to his Apostles before, ye he
should go to Jerusalem for that end: yet makes he his prayer to his heavenly
father, as though it had been all uncertain, saying: Father if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me. Howebeit not my will, but thine be done.
Why was this prayer uttered by our savior Christ, but to give us an example,
that we also should do the like, not harping so much upon Gods ordinance, that
we should refuse the duty of our vocation.

To say plainly in the end what I think: the conclusion of these disputers,
that would either have prayer or counsel, or physic, or any other such
thing removed, because of Gods Providence, methinke this not much otherwise
framed, than if a man should thus reason: we must not cate for the
sustenaunce of our body, nor plowe the ground to have corn, nor walk
forward to come to the end of our journey: for whether this be done, or no,
that which God has foreseen, must algates be. For if this kind of reasoning
be captiouse, as before we said: I ensure you their peevish prating cannot be
void of blame. Still therefore we must hold this for a like certain, ye. God in
determining before of the end, whereunto every man is directed, does also at
the same time appoint ways and means that might lead us (as it were) by the
hand to the same end. So then, there is nothing left, either touching the way
or the end, that perteyneth not to the ordering of Gods Providence.

The.vj. Chapter.
God is burdened with unequal distribution, first, because all men be not
alike rich, and secondly because they be not preferred after a like sort.

WHo sees not now these good fellows, that so busily urge their absurdities,
and would make all the world to believe, that we uphold our cause utterly
without reason: who sees not, I say, that sees any thing, how far wide
from the mark they be themselves, how far destitute they are, not of reason
only, but almost I might say, of common sense. Yet all the store is not spent.
Some odd corner or other must be shaken up, that some hidden treasure may be
found, not before peradventure heard of. Let them fall to then, and bring it
forth. Where is it? what is it? let us see at leastwise for our love, if it may
not be bought for money.

For surely (say they) if the affairs of the world were as well ordered as you
pretend, there would be a more equal distribution and even dole, tha^ there is.
Now begin they to pour out, by all likelyhoode anon we shall hear of somewhat.
Why? what is it then on Gods name? Let them speak, that it may be redressed.
Is this reason (say they) that one man should have al, an other nothing? that
one should l^^e plesantly and al at ease, an other should get his living with
the sweat of his brows?

And what has one deserved more (I pray you) tha^ an other, yt there should be
such a diuinatio^ of degrees and states? he serves, he rules, he is base, he
is noble, he is a master, he is a servant, he is a king, he is a subject. Were
we not all descended of our father Adam?

When Adam dolue, and Eve span,
Who was then a gentleman.
Then touching the flesh, there is no such prerogative: much less there
should be any such prehemine^ce touching our spiritual generation. By the which
undoubtedly we are Gods children, and that not only for our new birthes sake
(for so some should be excluded) but even for this cause also, yt we are al
creatures of gods making, framed and fashioned every one of us according to his
own image.

The.vij. Chapter.
An answer to the first part of this former objection, showing that the poor
have no cause to complain.

THis complaynt (as meseemeth) of uneven dealing, finds fault, especially
with two states of man's life, namely poverty and bondage, and sets all
felicity in great wealth and riches, in living all at ease, in bearing of
authority and sway of rule.

To the intent therefore that our conference may the better appear, wherein
we must set together by way and manner of comparison as well the poores state,
as the condition of him that is rich, and the servants as well as the
masters and Lords: I will entreat severally and perticularly both of the
leading of a poor life, and of him that is an inferior, and lives by service.

First, what say they against poverty? can they blemishe it with any note of
infamy? There is nothing slaunderouse or reproachful, which is not also
marked as dishonest: nothing is dishonest, which is not also enemy to virtue.
Let them say then what virtue it is, that is hindered by means of poverty? Is
it any of those virtues, which proceed of our understanding?

Which of them is it? the knowledge of God? or of our selves? God is better
known of none, than of such as be humbled, and brought low. None more humble
tha^ such as are left destitute of worldly stays: which how true it is, who
can better witness, than ye Israelites? In whom wealth always ^used
wantonness, and wantonness wrought vile Idolatry: whereas oppressed with
penury, they were forced to fly to God, as their only sanctuary of refuge.

Does it let us then from the knowledge of our selves? Nay rather what can
more further us? for it remoueth pride, the root of all other vices, and
therewithal it brings with it a contempt of the world, and a diligent
consideration of our latter end. The meditation whereof cannot choose but make
us to descend oftentimes into our selves. So far is it of, that it should
bring us into any oblivion of our own state.

What then? is it any impediment to human learning, as the skill of
Philosophy and the seven sciences? They can not say that neither. For the very
Philosophers themselves (the most of whom, as it is well known, were not
rich) thincking it should be a foul encomberance to them to be welthy, that
they might the more quietly apply their books, either flung their substance
into ye sea, or else otherwise dispersed it, as they themselves thought it:
most convenient.

As for these manuarie arts, called handy crafts, being so much in the use
of our daily life, what else could drive us to invent them, but pure need?

Let us now go to those virtues that are cheefely placed in y^ appetite.
Whereof if there be any that might be stayed, or tangled through any want,
there were none more like than liberality. But that Christ himself denies
utterly, who measuring this liberal and large dealing not so much by the
value of that that is given, as by the free affection of man's heart,
prefers the poor widows myte in the gospel, before the rich gifts of
many other. For be it so, that we have a ready and pro^pt good will, S. Paul
tells us, it is accepted according 2. Cor. 8.
to every man's ability, and not after the rate of that which he has not:
as who says, it is sufficient liberality to have a bountiful and
beneficial mind, yea though our pursse be nothing correspondent. Which
doctrine is so sound and sensible, and by all means so agreeable to reason,
that they also which were but trained in natures school, have held it for a
most sure and most certain truth. What shall we say then? that the poor may
have a good will, there is no doubt. Whereupon with good cause we may in like
manner inserre, that notwithstanding his poverty, he may be liberal. And may
he deserve so good a name, (say we?) having nothing to bestow thereafter? Yea
surely may he, and not only for A poor man may use liberality.
the cause mentioned, I mean his good heart, but also for this that he may
show himself bountiful, in not rigorously exacting all his own (for
liberality consists not in giving only, but in taking) in helping with his
service, in surdering with his counsel, in assisting and ayding with his pains.

How much more may he have a godly and a Christian courage? which could never
surely be better tried, than by bearing himself vprighte in his poor estate.

How much more might he be temperate in forbearing these vain worldly
pleasures, and in restrayning his unbridled appetites with in the narrow
precinct of reason? Happy is that necessity, that makes them healthful of
their body: the happier, that it makes them wise, and keeps them sober and
discreet: but without all comparison most happy, that it spurreth the^
forward to be virtuous. and what spur more forcible and violent, than the
want of this worldly pelf? For look where poverty is resident, and there
riotte and ba^ketting dare not come in place, where ryote and banketting be
far off, there always moderate and sober diet: moderate and sober dyette,
brings the state of a man's body into good temper, cutting of all
superfluous humors, that by any means might disturb the same: the temperature
of the body woorcketh a stayed moderation in the mind: the mind, when it is
kept in a good stay, does not boysteously break out into any outrage, is not
disordred with pangs and passions, nor carried away rashly wc any heat. Whereof
there arises necessarily a great calmnesse, yea (I might say) a goodly harmony
in the body and mind of man: in comparison whereof, all muficke and worldly me
lodie is doutlesse as nothing to be esteemed. For whereas reason the maistresse
rules, according to a right measured rule, and the brute appetite stands in
awe, there wisdom, there temperance, therr gentle, modest, and good comely
behauior, there peace of conscience, and joy in the holy ghost: finally, there
all virtue and godliness, yea and God himself surely is abiding.

O blessed state of poverty, that is any occasion of this. Who would now
marvel, that Christ himself would be poor? that he chose such poor men to
his Apostles? that he is said to be sent ambassador from God his father, not
to the rich worldlings that received him not, but to preach the gospel of
most glad tidings to the poor? And who (I pray you) of all other, either
took hold of it more assuredly, or embraced it more comfortably, or stood in
it more constantly to the death? Therefore S. Paul speaking of such men, My
brethren (says he) 1. Corinthians. 1.
ye see your calling, how that many of you be not wise according to the
flesh, not many of you mighty, not many of you noble: but God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise: and the vveake
things of the world God has chosen to make the strong ashamed: and the base
and contemptible things of the world God has chosen, and those things which
were not, that he might put away those things that are: and all to this end,
that no flesh might boaste it self in his sight. Is that now any hinderance
to virtue, that is such a great furtherance to Gods kingdom, where unto we
can not pass, but by the way of virtue?

For what should I go for ward to speak of justice, to the which it is
appropried to give every man his own? Surely poverty is not the cause that
any man is despoyled of his own.

O but the poor (say thou) do robb^ and pilfer by the high way.

Blame not his poverty for that: So do the rich. But why does any man rob
or pilfer? forsooth for the desire of riches. The desire of riches, is cause of
robberies, and not poverty.
Riches then is it that makes robberies, much rather tha^ simple poverty.
Wherewith if men could content themselves, just dealing out of doubt would
more flourishe, and every man might the better hold his own. But because
man's greedy gutte is never stanched: thence comes the ordure of all
iniquity, thence flows the most fulsome stream of all sin and
wickedness into the world. For questionless, qui festinat ditescere, non er^t
innocens, he that makes Proverb. 2^
haste to be rich, can not be guiltless. Therefore when Sylla ouer-gloriously
displaying his pecockes feathers, made great bragges in the Roman Senate, of
the notable wealth that he was grown too: there steppeth me up a grave father
amongst the rest, who very quickly, and sharply making answer. How it is
possible (says he) that thou should be good, who having nothing left
thee by thy fathers testament, haste yet aspired in so short time, to such a
great abundance of vvorldly wealth?

And because we are now fallen into some mention of Romish matters: what shall
we say of Rome it self? Which so long as it was bare in riches, was cladde in
virtue. But soon after, when poison was shed into it, I say, when it was
endued with large possessions: then wantonness began to have her will, and
without bitte or bridle to run at riot? Therefore S. Austine in his fifte
Epistle ad Marcellinu^, replying against their cauils, that reported the
Roman Empire had sustained much harm by Christian Emperors, sticks not to
tell them plainly, that before the coming of our savior Christ, Rome was
in far worse case. For proof whereof he brings in Tullie and Saluste, the
very heathen miscreants own authors, but especially one singular place out of
the sixthe Satyr of the Poet Iuuenale. Who setting out the felicity of that
worthy city, whiles it yet was but poor, and in mean estate, concludes
afterward with these words:

The evils now that peace to us
continuing long has brought,
We rue full sore: for now alas
loase life much harm has wrought
More fearsly, and more furiously
that now on us does fall,
Than weapons force, and lo the world
subdued, it makes thrall
By cruel vvreache. Since pore estate
from Rome is gone away,
There wants no sin, no heinous act.
This says Iuuenale of poverty, or rather S. Austine out of Iuuenale. Then
enemy it is not to good manners, as some peradventure would not stick to
say, but rather a very dear and especial freende.

I say nothing now, how agreeable it is to nature, (which notwithstanding
makes very much for the praise and commendation that it may deserve:) but I
pass over to the commodity that it brings with it. For in deed this poor
man that lives (as we term it) but from hand to mouth, can not maintain at
his table so many sumptuous and dainty dishes, nor is hable to fill in so many
pottes, nor to use such variety of wines that are fetched from far
countries, or to drink always to his friends of the best marchebeare or
ypocras: yet can he sleep as soundly upon his hard couche, and live as merrily
with his salt butter, his onions, and his heads of garlic, as the best:
perchance also so much the more healthily, as he fares the more sparingly and
hardly.

Wotte ye what Aurelianus the Emperor was wont to do? Vopiscus says of
him, that when so ever he fell sick, he would never call at all for any
Physician, but in stead of all other Physic, it was his manner to cure
himself with forbearing of his meat and his drink.

That which he did voluntarily, the poor plowman of the country is forced to
do many times for very need. Therefore Aurelianus observed it, but as a
remedy when he was sick: the other uses it for the most part, as a
continual preservative.

Therefore these poor laboring folks very ^^l^ome f^^le themselves diseased.
If at any time they be, a posset of milk, and a little ginger will stand them
in a great deal more stead, than all the costly cons^racs of a ^elthy
Apothecarie, will fu^der a richer man: So falls it out, that where there is
greatest scarcity of things needful, there nature most of all woorcketh.

The.viij. Chapter.
The state of the rich and the pore, being both compared, he shows in the
end, that the poores case is the better.

AND here I can not but note the great wisdom of our creatoure, reducing
that which is unequal yet in some things to an equality. For the diseases
and maladies wherewith the rich are most troubled, he eftsoons eases with
the provided help of Physicians. So the dangerous childbearing of these
tender dames, that be their wives, is relieved with the care of many skillful
and cunnyng middewiues. But where these remedies be not at hand, natures self
is so bountiful, that she supplyeth the room of a Physician.

Look also upon the children as well of the rich as the poor, when they be
newly borne, and you shall see in them utterly no difference. For substanciall
men's children be not clad with purple, nor poor men's infantes wrapped in
rags, when they come from their mothers wombes: but both the one and the
other naked, both drawing breath from the air in like manner, both after a
like sort sucking milcke at their mothers bresres.

Neither yet have they only such a reremblance, when they be first borne and
brought out: but also when God sends his messenger to call them hence. For
death summoning us to the grave, no All men be at deaths beck.
man so hardy that dare disobey. Whose power and dominion is so great in this
middle earth, that he neither fears riches, nor ^redeth any harnessed men,
nor yet steppeth from them a foot, that are attyred in clothe of silver, and
decked up in garments of beaten gold: but sets at naught all these
mighty high walls, these strong toures, and these courtly palaces of
princes. Yea (ye more is) he enters into their secret chambers, not moved
with their tears, not pacifyed with their gifts, not humbling himself to
their Physic, nor always giving leave to his subjects to bequeath their
legacies: but every one of them he pulls upon their knees, he tormenteth, he
teareth them, he consumes, and all to wearith them.

Therefore be he rich, or be he poor, they all hie them to one end: and when
their race is run out, that they be now tumbled into their graves, their
lothesome and ongly shape is not far unlike. For then all men's bodies rot
away, O that al men would consider it.
all to begnawne with worms, that crepe and cral about their carcass. Then
the menacing tyrants eye is piked out, and the mouth that never could be
satisfied, licketh up the duste, and the slanderous tongue is but matter of
daltance for the vermin: and the white neck, that stood up so bolte upright,
is not only made to come down, but it is quite disfigured and disgraced: and
those big cheeks so puffed up before, are not now only suncke in and
shrunken to the hard bone, that all the teethe may be seen standing in a
grisly manner, but they fall clean away, and turn to duste: To be brief,
those wicked fingers that had done so much harm with crafty writing, lie
scattered one ioynte from an other.

In this therefore the rich man has nothing singular above other folks:
Except this perchance be his prehemine^ce, that the nicelier he was dieted and
pampred up, the fulsomer will be the ordure that steymeth from him.

In other things, the poor man shall not need greatly to give him place,
having as much need to seek to him for his art, as he to run to him for
his money.

In this point also far beyond him, that he can sleep quietlyer in his
bed, and go the kings high way with less danger.

For now, if it please you, a little Riches and p^^ertie compared.
while let us set poverty and riches both together, that contraries set one
against the other, may the better show themselves what they be. We have proved
already, that Poverty is no hinderance to any godly knowledge, but an occasion
rather and a mean, whereby we are driven to seek after it. Contrariwise
riches and wealth oftentimes make men to forget themselves, and God too.
Poverty spurreth men forward to learn Arts, whereby they might help both
themselves and theirs. Riches for the most part engenders idleness, and
contempt of learning, and learned men. Poverty causes sobriety, and makes
men virtuous and discreet. So Tullie defends Ro^^ius Amerinus that led a
poor husband man's life, against his great enemy Er^^us, saying, that the
poor country life which he so opprovricusly called rude, was the maistresse
of frugalitie, diligence, and upright conversation. On the other side, riches
be the sinnowes of vice, (as (says Bion Botisthenites) at least the occasion
as records Isocrates. Therefore said our savior Christ, that it was
easier for a camel, or (as some Math. 19.
translate it) a gable rope to go through a needels eye, than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Poverty is the nourice of concord, and
an entier band of amity and frendshippe, making one man to have need of an
others help: Riches and wealth breeds discord (as experience teaches)
causing bear friends now and then to be at deadly fode one with the other.
Therefore we read Genes. 36. that Jacob and Esau, being both brethren, could
not yet dwell peaceably together. Poverty makes men healthful, and to be
quickly cured when they be sick: Riches, surfytting, and diseases with much
neschnesse and tenderness of men's bodies be lincked and coupled in a strait
league of alliance. Poverty makes men to be quiet minded, and to tune up
their pipes with a merry note: abundance of riches (says Ecclesiastes) will
not suffer a man Eccle 5. Ma^h 13, Man. 4. Luke. 8.
to take his rest. Therefore the great care y^ is about the^, in the scripture
is compared to thorns: whereupon no man is able to tread without pricking and
tearing of his tender flesh. If I were disposed to go forward with the
comparison, perchance I might yet say more. But it may be, some will think I
have gone already tootoo far. Let this hardly suffice.

The.ix. Chapter.
The author does not simply condemn riches, but he would neither have the
poor discouraged, nor the rich too-muche puffed up.

SVrely what so ever has been said, precisely I condemn not riches. Which if
they be gotten lawfully and by godly means, and spent honestly and liberally,
as the purse is able to bear out, especially with a greater care to relieve
our brothers extreme need, than to maintain a bravery our selves: in this
case surely for my part I am so far from condemning the use of them, that I
say rather with Solomon: To wise men their riches is a crown. Proverb 14.


I know Zacheus was rich, so was Joseph of Arimathia, Ioachim Susannaes
husband, Mardocheus, Abraham, and other mo. Whom I know were very godly
notwithstanding, and of the number of them that shall be saved.

And surely it is very well noted of S. Austine upon the. ^1. Psalm, that
Lazarus being but poor and simple, was carried by Angels into the bosom of
Abraham, that was rich, to give us a plain signification, that it is neither
riches nor poverty that offends God, but a mind rather that is covetous and
over greedy of the world. That rich men have done harm with their goods,
that is true in deed: but they have also done with them much good: as we in
Oxforde have had lately two such founders of rich men, as have not been seen
before these many years. Riches (will some say) have carried some to the devil:
so have they in deed. But some also have Luke. 16.
made them friends with the riches of iniquity, that might receive them,
when they should need, into such perdurable mansion-places as should never
fail.

Neither be those words of our savior Christ, whiles he seems to make such
Math. 19. Mark. 10. Luke. 18.
an impossibility for a rich man to enter into heaven, so to be scanned or
taken, as though he simply prouounced sentence against him that were rich.
For Christ our Savior his own self, who undoubtedly could best tell his
own meaning, interpreted himself otherwise. Who seeing his Disciples strycken
blanke, with the rigorouse comparison which he had used: to open him self to
them more plainly, spoke to them again with these words: O children, how
hard is it for Mark. 10.
the^ that trust in riches, to have entrance into the kingdom of heaven?

It is not then the riches, but the confidence in riches that our savior
Christ so misliketh. Which if rich men either could or would avoid (as
surely it stands the^ much upon) I should then think the^ thrice happy:
first happy, y^ they have riches, the^ happier y^ they use the^ to gods glory,
but finally happiest in this respect, that being laded and clogged with such
Math. 7. Luke. 13.
mighty and heavy burdens, they can enter yet into so narrow a throughfare, as
must lead them by the hand to everlasting life.

And this verily is not my saying, but the writer called Ecclesiasticus in
effect, Ecclesi 31.
I ensure you, says as much: whose words to rehearse in this place, it is
surely nothing from the purpose: Blessed is the rich man (says he) that is
found without blemishe, and has not gone after gold, nor hoped in money and
treasures Who is he, and we will commend him? for wonderful things has he
done amongst his people. Who has been tried thereby, and found persite? Let
him be an example of glory.

Therefore (as I began to say) I think verily riches, being Gods good guyfte
employed upon us, to be no damnable or displeasaunt thing before God. But yet
would I not have the^ so much made of neither, as though the poor laboring
man, that has not this great store of coin, should therefore loathe or
myslike his own state, or believe he is therefore less favored or beloved of
God.

For he is not able in deed to tell many bags of gold. What of that? He
has so much the less to answer for.

He wants this great substance: I ween God does much more for him than he
is ware of. He wants therefore much matier of temptation, which percase it
were hard for him to resist.

He has not much wealth. Whether it be mickle or little, it skilleth not, so
he have that which may suffice. A small Psalm. 37.
thing to the just man (says the Prophet) is better than great riches to
the wicked. And S. Austine writing to the Expla. 121. c. 1.
widdowe Proba, tells her, It is better to have sufficient, than to flow in
wealth. But king Solomon in his Proverbs Cap. 17.
goes further with us, saying, that a dry morsel, if peace be with it, is
better than an house full of sacrifices with strife.

What speak we of his poverty, all the while he is able to get his living?
The common Proverb is, God never made the mouth, but he made also the meat.
Certayuely the world can not go so hardely with him, but that one or other,
for his good service at leastwyse will entertayne him. Unless peradventure he
has so leudely bestowed his time, that like an unprofitable and untoward
graffe, he show him self meeter to be cut off from the common weal, than to
live longer in the world like an idle drone be, that can neither help him
self, nor any other.

Godliness is a great gain (S. Paul 1. Timo. 6.
says) if a body can be content with that which God sends. Therefore let a
faithful Christian in any wise stay him self, and considering that we brought
nothing into the world, nor yet (saving our winding sheet) are likely to
carry any thing out: if it please God that we have sufficient food, and
apparel to cloth our naked bodies, let us never compain of poverty.

The.x. Chapter.
They are plainly disproued, that would have all men brought to a like state.

FOr whereas some think they speak wisely, when they talk of an equal
distribution, and would have no man richer than an other, but every man to be
brought to like estate: they say (I will be plain with you) they wot not what.
For do they not see (say they?) or else dissemble they, what a disordered
confusion their folly would bring unto the world?

Doubtless (as to me it seems) these fellows handle the matter in such a
sort, as though they were not half well pleased that the soote can not see as
well as the eye, or that the hand can not smell as well as the nose, or that ye
sense of hearing is not in like manner communicated to the legs, as it is to
the instrument of the ear, or finally that all the distinct offices and
scuerall parts in man's body, were not cast and shuffled into one confused
heap. Which if they think to be a foul absurdity (as in deed it is, and
they can not deny:) what might move them to wyshe the like in the body of the
common weal: which (as Tullie says truly in his second book of Duties)
for this end chiefly was first founded and erected, that every man in safety
might keep his own.

Does it grieve them (say they) that there is no just dealing? I would gladly
ask them then what justice is. A virtue (I trow they will answer me) that
gives to every man his own. They say well. But I would demand again of
them this question, how every man could have his own?

Shall that be called every man's own, that is extorted and wrested from his
mate? where is theft then?

Shall no man have any thing in his possession, which he might lawfully
challenge as his own? Where is then Non concupisces alienum Thou shall not
covet that that is another man's? But this gear, I dare say, they will much
mislyke. And good reason truly, that they should do so. For it fights (as
well they see) against justice, and openly contrarieth Gods commandments.

What say they now to almes-giuing, so much commended in the scripture? and
what is their opinion of liberality? I hope they will not so foul forget them
selves, that they will profess any enmity to virtue. S. Paul says, a man's
good will is accepted, according to that which is his own to give. And these
men resign all their right, and will have nothing. How then, for Gods sake
will they be liberal? Will they rob Peter to clothe Paul? and hurt one
man, to the intent they may help an other? Where learn they that? not at that
wise Prince king Solomon, I am right well assured: for he telling them utterly
an other tale, says, Fontes tui deriuentur for as. Proverb. 5.
etc. that is, let thy fountaynes be made to flow abroad, and the rivers of
waters in the streets. Whereby he counsayleth us in deed to be free and
liberal of that we have: but what follows? But let them be thine, even thine
only, and not the strangers with thee.

But liberality and justice must divide equally (they say) that one man may
not have al, an other a little, or never a whit.

I hold well with that: but yet equally equalitate Geometrica, non
Arithmetica: equally (I say) according to such a due measure and proportion,
as for every body is most fit, not equally in such sort that every body
should have alyke. Which truly were neither agreeable to justice, nor yet to
reason. For justice, even as it is a virtue, has this property, that it so
frames and moderateth it self, as the prescription of wisdom would
require. Is it therefore wisdoms advise, that every body should have
equally one like to an other? Let them have so then hardly: for my part I
would not speak to the contrary. But I am right well assured, it is
otherwise. For wisdom rather would foresee how every man would use that
that is given him: it would not put a sword into a mad man's hands, nor
suffer a soole to inherit, who knows not how to use that that is left him.
Nay wisdom would rather way what men deserve, and what they are best able
to dyscharge, and thereafter bestow her guyftcs, and employ her benefits and
rewards. Then if either all men were fit for all things, or every man's
deserving were alyke, then (I say) their accusation of Gods justice might have
some color. But seeing the contrary is so evident, that no man needs to
be in doubt: how dare they presume but once to open their wicked mouths in
controlling Gods unsearchable and hid works? Who looking out of the high
prospecte of his Prosa, 6. lib. 4.
Providence (as Boethius says) knovveth what for every body is best
beseeming, and (as it were) shapeth every body such a garmente, as he
knovveth to be meetest for their wearing, whiles according to their rate he
provides for them.

But every thing must be ordered according too their foolyshe fantasy. What
a peeuishe dealing is this? Cunning workmen, when they see themselves set to
the schole, and rebuked of them that have no skill, are commonly wont to take
scorn, and to find themselves grieved not a little, that every fool should so
rashly entermedle himself, and so unwisely shoot his bolte at he well knows
not what. Alas we are but children in comparison of God, or rather nobody at
all: little knowing what the government of the world requires, or what were
best in the welding of so great a charge. And yet like ioly wise heads, that
carried whole commonweals about us, as though we were worthy to be of Gods
own counsel, as though all the wisdom of the world were remaining with
us: so arrogantly will we take upon us in Gods matiers. And trow ye that his
divine majesty, has cause to take it in good part? And is it like, that he
will bear it patiently, and not rather conceive just indignation to be snapped
at, and taunted of us poor silie wretches, that are nothing but duste and
ashes?

But let them in the name of god have their will: Let every man without any
restraynte, be an heir of fair lands, and not one having an inche more than
his fellows. What will they get by it? Surely by all lykelyhoode this must
needs follow, that men will strayghtway begin to be very lordely, every man
taking scorn to seem any thing seruisable to his fellow. For who (I pray
you) would perform any duty of his office to an other, were he as well
able to live, as he? Who would play the cook in seeing the meat dressed,
that should serve his equal? Who would winnowe the corn, or grynde it, or
sifte it, or make it into doughe, and kneade it, or finally bake it in the
oven, enduring even in the summer season such intolerable pains of heat?
Who would go to the plowe, and the carte, to stand an other man in steed, and
there alto weary him self, going up and down with his great quarter shoes
in the myrie furrows, what wind or wether soever chance? What mason or
carpenter would bestow his labor in the buylding of an other man's house?
or what sclater would venture him self to be shaken with every burly blast,
whiles he stands upon high far from the ground, about to tyle the
building that is erected, if stark need did not compel him? Who would be a
maryner, or a shypmaster, to be tossed in such danger of the Seas: to say
nothing of the great pains that poor weauers take, tayllers, shoemakers,
smythes, tanners, cobblers, tynckers, tapsters, souters, and a great meynie
other more? If no man were wrynged with pouertye, if all men had like
possessions, none would do service to an other. But one of these two things
should happen whether we would, or no, that either every body should be
feign to learn all the sciences that pertayne to the mayntenaunce of our
life, or else all men generally should dye up, for want of necessary
relief. Now that one man can not learn all handye crafts, it is so
euidente that it needs not to be proved. For experience tells us for the
most part, that one artificer can not excel in two grounded arts both at
once, but that the one of them is such an hynderaunce to the other, that he
can not follow them both himself to any purpose. And surely good reason why:
for the mind being earnestly occupied with comprehending of many and sundry
matiers, is so disstraught and haled too and fro, that it can take no sure
hold of any one of them, every art requiring for the better accomplishing
thereof, not the half man only, but the whole. Whereof (I pray you) what
other sequel could we look for, but that all men should miserably go to
wrack, and all long of this equal distribution? But it fares with them, which
would so feign have this equality of Lacedaemon, as it does commonly with
those, who for the nourishing of their bodies eat and drink of the best, so
long as the belly of them will hold. For as these gorbellies, which be swollen
with much quaffing, and laying of one fine morsel upon an other, very dayntily
discern the differences of tastes and sauors, being so nicely dieted that they
can not skill nor brook any common meats: so these fellows being bewitched
with the love of riches, had rather want necessaries, and so sterue at last
for stark hunger, than embrace painful poverty, that is used to a little.

But let us give them leave to play the fools: In the mean time of our
parts let us acknowledge Gods Providence, which not only has the care and
ouersighte of things in heaven, but especially of those things in the earth,
which concern us that be men, and that the rather, because of this
distributio^ of worldly goods, to them seeming so unequal: and thereof let us
fully be persuaded, that this unequal dealing, in appearaunce, is in deed the
original fountain of al good order, not in men's private cases only, but also
in the affairs of the public weal.

The.xj. Chapter.
An answer to the second part of the objection of uneven dealing, showing how
gentry and bondage first came in, and how necessary rulers be in a common
weal.

THat part of their quarrel which lay parcialitie to Gods charge, for not
induing all men with like wealth, I have answered so far forth as I have
thought good. It follows now that I say somewhat touching the other part of
their complaint, wherein they find fault with bondage, showing themselves (as
it seems) very sorrowful that every man can not be advanced in like manner:
alleging also that they are all lineally descended from their father Adam, and
(that more is) created and formed every one of them after the image and
likeness of God himself. A sore argument (as it seems) and be it so we
look not to it in due time, not unlike to give us a foul wipe. For is the
matter so plain, (will some say?) that we have all that dignity by our
creation, that we be not only Adams, but Gods children also? What could be
more said? For if we communicate in such an high prerogative, it would seem to
stand with good reason, that we should not be inferioure the one to the other
in any smaller dignity of less importance. What answer then hereunto are we
able to make?

That which Chrylostomus that godly father has left written upon Genesis in
his. 29. homily, may very well in this case serve our turn. In the
beginning (says he) all men's honor was alike, and no man was preferred
before an orher. But when sin entered into the world, it marred our
liberty, and disgraced the authority which was given to nature, by bringing
in servitude and bondage. We had then at the first in deed, such an equality
as they tell us of. That I grant well. But what tell they us of that which we
had at the first? God it knows we have lost it many worlds past, yea even
in him we lost it, in whom we first had it: I say, in our father Adam whom they
brag and boast of so much. Who when he had maimed his nature by sinning
against God, fell with all his posterity from good to evil, and from evil
daily to worse and worse, and so held on the course of wickedness, and the
plain pathway of corruption, til the general floude threatened (Noe only with
certain other excepted) had overwhelmed universally the whole world. For soon
after, when Cham had done otherwise than was comely for him, his fathers curse
distinguished both him and his, from all his brethren. Then began gentry, and
bondage not before so well known as merited, took fully his place: Then was it
thought needful to keep men in awe, that had no stay or measure of
themselves.

And as sin brought in disorder, so The first beginning of magistrates.
disorder brought in laws, and laws could not well be executed without
officers, and officers without authority and pre-eminence to be given them
above the rest, what could they do? Therefore were magistrates ordained of all
sorts, that should see both well doers condignely and woorthily rewarded, and
malefactoures severely punished: namely, in private houses the good man: in
schools, the professor of the faculty which he undertakes: in villages
Constables: in towns and cities Mayres and Bayliues: in universities
Chancellers: in shyres Shiriffes, and Justices of peace: in Diocees Bishops:
in armies Capitaines: in Counties and Provinces Dukes, Earls, Archbishoppes,
or any other the Princes Deputies: and (to leave out many inferioure Officers)
in realms and dominions, Kings, Queens, and Emperors having power and
jurisdiction over all the rest. Who unless with their sword in hand, they
restrained the unbridled fury, and repressed the rage of vnsobre heads:
unless they should bend their whole force to see justice executed upon
felonous, unquiet, and seditious persons: O the living God, what a world
should we have? whiles some should be poisoned in their cups, other The
inconvenience which should follow the want of magistrates.
murdered in their beds, not a few killed in the common streets, many slain
very cruelly in the hie ways? Yea meethinketh I see in my mind, as if I were
present at the thing done, and saw it with my bodily and outward eyes, what a
stir and hurlyburlie in every corner of town and city, by these loytering
loselles should be stirred up: whiles some poor souls should be forced for
very fear to take them to their heels, other that were of more courage, as in
the defense of themselves and their dear friends, should be driven to take
themselves to their weapons, grievously anguished and pinched even at the heart
root to see their silie infantes, that think no body any harm, had away
from their mothers breasts, to be tossed and tormented upon their spears,
their wives and daughters defloured and ravished before their faces, that wealth
that they had gotten with great pains, for the maintenance of them and
theirs, ruffled and rifeled of every royster, rudely rushing into their houses,
and in the end (least perhaps any mischeeue should be left undone) after all
sacrileges, spoils, and robberies committed, not without terrible shedding of
much blood, their very houses and churches fired, and flong down upon their
heads. For if experience it self does teach us, not without our great
grief, that there also where princes put in ure and practice their
commissio^s, yet the heat of those factious and furious flames flashe abroad:
almost no politic invention being either able to prevent it before it be
thoroughly kindled, or to quench it without tragical and heavy slaughters,
when it is once broken to an issue: what devilish tempests, (trow ye?)
should we have, if all princely authority set aside, all laws and
magistrates utterly trodden under the feet) every rogue and naughtipacke might
have his swinge? It might be quickly told, what, I ensure you. No doubt all
the world would be in such an uproar, that ye would think doomes day were
at hand. He was a wise Prince therefore out of question, and whether it were
by his own trial, or otherwise, he could not choose but see much that spoke
these words: where there is none to govern, there the people go to vvracke:
but Proverb. 11.
where there is much wise counsel, there is the safegarde of the common
state. Blame not then the gouernoure of the world, for keeping us in comely
order, but considering what a disordred thing sin is, that so straightly
needs to be kept under, beware of it, and fly it, as a stinging serpent. But
as for the laws, and good orders which thereby are caused, making some for the
commodity of others to be exalted to government in the common weal, against
them in any wise do not murmr, nor she we not thy self in any case to
conceive thereof any grief.

Surely, I think there is no man, By a similitude he shows the decency of
order.
but seeing the ship how smoothely it cutteth the waves, as it hyeth
forward toward the haven, with spread sails and wind all at will, he
maruelleth at the decent course that it holds forth. Wherein first, they
that sail sit quietly in the ship, and do nothing: The mariners next,
either row with their ores, or draw at their cords, or do some other thing
else, that they are charged with. Then after, he that sits in the former
part of the ship, casts his eyes as far as ever he is able to look, to
mark whether he can see any dangerous rocks, or any strait way of passage,
that he may give warning thereof to the shippemaister, who sitting at the
stern, ouerseeth all the mariners, and tells them always what they have to
do.

Here I think no man is so fantastical, to thyncke that all men should
meddle with the stern. Yea it is so far off, that any sober manne would
find fault with this appoynting of every man to his several task, that he
would rather like very well of it, to see every thing done in such decent order.
What then should move any man to desire or wish, that the house or common
weal where he lives, should not be ruled and ordered in like manner?
Especially seeing there is as great a resemblance as may be possible, betwixt
an house, a common weal, and a ship?

The same we might say of an army royal, where the captain general is
chief governor of the band, having other under him, that be captains and
guides in like sort, some of a greater number of soldiers, and some of a
less: who taking their watch word of their graunde captain, sometimes make
their armies to gather round on a plumpe, sometimes to stand four square, and
(accordingly as they see their advantage,) one while after one sort, an other
while after an other. None of all the which, could well and commodiously be
done, ne were it not that these bands had as well inferioure souldioures, that
would gladly submit themselves to an order, as heads and capitaines to
infourme them, and teach the^ what to do. For in an army nothing does more
harm, than to have many ringleaders that should guide the people. Of whom look
how many heads there be, and commonly so many sundry minds, affections and
judgments are wont to follow. Tell me now I beseech you, what can more be
against reason, than to commend much in a ship the chief rule and
government of one man: and to like well, that an army should have one
principal captain to lead the rout, having under him likewise according to
his own discretion some thought fitter to be put in credit and authority,
than other: and yet either in the ordering of a private house, or (that more
is) in the governing of a whole kingdom and Empire, being so like and
comparable to a ship or army in all respects, odiously to inueigh against the
rule of one?

The.xij. Chapter.
It stands with good reason, that subsidies and taxes should be paid.

OFut (will some say) it is a foul matter to be burdened with subsidies and
taxes, to be at beck and commandment, when a body is called: to be put to
such toil and labor, as poor subjects and servant be encombred with.

It is well said of ^ullie, as an Heathen writer, that when we speak our
lib. 3. delegibus
pleasure of any thing which we mislike, we deal neither reasonably nor
indifferently to ouerslip the commodities thereby enjoyed, and to make only
mention of those things that offend us. We can gladly find fault with ye
leuying of subsidies and taxes: but we consider not in the mean time what
great costs and charges the Prince for our sake is put unto. We can speak
of our homage and attenda^ce which we give to the Prince: but we say nothing of
the great care and trouble, that we are content to lay upon the Princes
shoulders. We can amplify and set out to the uttermost the pains and labors
that we take our selves: but how busily the Prince watches about us, for
fear of the invasions of foreine enemies: in what peril of life our
sovereign stands by the occasion of rebels, and rebellious hearts,
undermining the whole state of the realm, the smarte whereof must needs
touch us, if their pestilent devises should take effect: thereof we will not
once make one word.

Yet surely S. Paul teaches us very plainly, that we should be subject
Romans 13.
and serviceable to Princes, not only for fear of their displeasure, if we
frowardly So seems Chrysostomus to understand this place.
behave our selves: but also (the great benefits considered, whereof by their
means we have fruition) even for very conscience sake. And for this cause also
it is (says he) y^ ye pay your tributes, your subsidies and your taxes:
whereupon immediately enioyning unto us this charge, Give therefore to all men
(says he) their duty, tribute to whom you owe tribute, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom ye owe honor. Neither had that
chose^ vessel the Apostle, sucked that wholesome lesson out of his own fingers,
but rather long before learned it of our savior Christ. Who being captiously
demanded of the Pharisees, and other that were Herodes accomplices, whether it
were lawful to give tribute to Caesar, yea, or no: after he had well viewed
their tribute coin, understanding by their answer, that the image and
superscription of it was Caesar's, Give therefore (said he) to Caesar, Math.
22. Mark. 12. Luke. 20.
those things that are Caesar's, and give unto God, those which are Gods. See
ye now here I pray ye: Ye have heard the holy Apostle counselling, Christ
our savior commanding, yea reason and conscience also requiring, that we
should yield to Princes their due subsidies. What greater arguments could we
He means such subsidies, as the necessity of the common weal requires not
such as Roboam exicted. 3. Reg. 12. Luke. 2.
seek out, that more thoroughly and effectually could persuade us? Would we see
the practice of godly men, by whose example we might be moved? Lo here at
hand the good old father Iosephe, who went up from Galile out of a city
called Nazareth into Iudaea, unto y^ city of David, which is called Bethlehem
(because he was of the house and lignage of David) purposely to be taxed with
Marie, that was given him to wife, she being now great with child, and
therefore (as we may well conjecture) very unable to travail so long a
journey. So then not only to pay their money it seemed good and reasonable
unto them, but also, for that only end so endure unreasonable great pains.
And should we in any wise think it too much, sitting quietly at home in our
own houses to pay our duties? They, because of their subjection, were content
to make this payment to a foreine Prince, being utterly unto them a stranger:
And should we not render willingly, withal our hearts, such right, as
belongs to our Princes, being borne at home in our own country? They
yielded this duty to an heathen prince: and should we deny it to such a
governor, as by all means surdereth Christ's gospel? What a peeuishe
frowardness were that? But of Joseph and the virgin Marie let this be said:
Let us see now what a pattern has been prescribed unto us by our Lord and
savior his own self. What did he, I say which taught us to give Caesar, yt
which is Caesar's right? Would he (trow ye?) that is chief mirror of
constancy, and the only example of true obedience, either so much swerve from
their virtuous and godly steps, ye had been his bringers up from his tender
youth, or so far step aside from his own doctrine, that he would refuse in
his own person to do that himself, which before he had willed and charged
other? Nothing less. For so far was Math. 17.
he of from that mind, that although (as he truly said) kings children of
right should Christ being soon of an eternal king, but heyr of no vvorldly
coheritaunce and therefore f^ce, having nothing to pay, would yet rather work
a miracle, than be any example of disorder.
go free: yet rather than he would give occasion to the weaker sort to fall or
stu^ble into any error, he would charge Peter his disciple in this manner, saying
unto him: Go to the sea, and cast in an angle, and take the first fish that
comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of
twenty pence: that take, and give it unto them for me and thee.

Wherefore I can not but marvel so much the more at the great impudency of
our Lords accusers, who sticked not to set on a brazen face, and with a
shameless mouth to make him author of contumacie, who only is the vpholder
of Princes thrones, saying: we have found this man perverting the people, and
forbidding Luke. 23.
to pay tribute to Caesar. Wherein they blushed never a whit, to father ye
loathsome heresy upon our blessed savior Jesus Christ, which Josephus an
ancient Hystoriographer ascribes rather Antiq lib. 18. cap. 2,
to one Judas Gualonites. But what lie can be so abominable, or what
slander can be so paste all shame, which despite, envy, and devil: she
malice can not quickly coin of their own accord?

Even so are we handled now adays, that be the professors of the gospel of
Jesus Christ. There is no phrenticke dream of any Anabaptiste, Libertine,
Swinckseldian, or any such so vain, sottishe, and void of reason, which the
proctors of the Popes peerless power can not find in their hearts to lay to
us. But with how little equity, or synceritie in this case, as in all other
they use to deal with us, Josias Simlerus, Bullingerus, with such other as
themselves have impugned their erroures, may against them be open witnesses.
We therefore (of our parts) following the steps of our Savior Christ,
do very lightly esteem such uncharitable forged tales. Whereof the falshoode
being once known, we are sure, with all godly men, will much more discredit
their pretended quarrel, than by any means hinder Christ's gospel.

The.xiij. Chapter.
That the servant has no cause to complain of his state, no more than the
subject.

THat which has been said in the defense of Princes, may proporcionablye in
some points be alleged for them that weld but ye government of their private
houses. The servant has all the labor, (they say:) but ye master has as well
all the care. The servant has not all the liberty, but so much the more
healthful peradventure. The servant yields a duty and due obedience to
his master: and why not: I pray you? the master yields him his wages,
meat, drink, and raiment. The servant is at the masters check, and now and
then must suffer his correction: and good reason he should, if he deserve it:
but he has far less occasion to break his sleep, than his master has,
whiles after his good days work done faithfully, and painfully in his masters
service, he lays him down quietly to take his ease, without care of any
thing that should trouble his head.

Neither is that true that they ground upon, when they tell us the servant
has all the toil. For whether he be Prince, or subject, Lord or tenaunte,
private man or one that weldeth office, gentleman or page, citizen or man of
the country: finally, whatsoever his vocation or calling be that lives here
in the vale of this miserable mortal world, what is he that one way or other
is not subject to toil and labor? Was it not laid upon our father Adam for
his wicked transgression of Gods iniunctio^, that in the sweat of his brows he
should eat his bread? And with what face can thou tell me, thou art of Adams
lygnage, taking scorn of the punishment enjoined ever from the beginning to
Adams children? Then if thou will live, labor: if thou will thrive, take some
pains: refuse not the sweet nutkirnell, because of the bitterness in the
buske, or the hardness in the nutshale: contemn not the odoriferouse and
pleasant rose, for the sharpness of the pricks that be about it: shrynke not
to gather the primrose in the lusty fresh flourishing fields, for fear of
the snake or adder, that lies sunning her self upon the green bancke. For he
that never ventured, never wanne: without some hazarding of him self the rich
marchaunte never came by his goods: without great business and travail in
this wretched world, no man could ever compass his hearts desire.

That God in deed must help us forward and be he that must give us the
success, it is a true saying. But surely In Ctimeno.
Euripides said true: God helps them forward that take pains. And no less
worthy of credit is that seat sentence of Plutarche: It is impossible for him
in Paulus Emilius his life.
that never slyngeth the darte, to light iumpe upon the mark. Therefore if
the sleepie sluggarde will not plow the ground in the winter for cause of the
cold, he must go on begging in the summer (says Solomon) and yet (which would
anger Prou. 20.
him a little more) nothing shall be given unto him notwithstanding. What is he,
that he would be privileged from that which is lotted to him from his very
birth? Man is borne to swincke and labor (Job tells us) none other-wyse Cap.
5.
than the foul is hatched to fly.

What makes he of him self in the name of God, that he disdaineth to sweat
for his living? Does he think him self better than the worthy Patriarchs of
the old Testament? or nobler than the mighty Monarkes, and great potentates
of this world? Noe thought not scorn to he we timber for his arc his own
self, to square it, to smothe it, to dress it, and to spare no pains to
bring it to that form and fashion that God required. Father Abraham, being a
master of a very great meynie servant, yet gave not his men the charge to
entertayne his guestes, but him self brynging a calfe out of his stable,
killed the beast, commanding also not his maids, but his wife, to make cakes
for his strangers. Rebecca being now ripe for marriage, and therewithal a
gentlewoman of a good house, did not think it much to bear either the
pitcher, or the tankarde, or some other kind of vessel not far unlike it, and
to water the cammels that Abraham's servant, whom she knew not, brought with
him a great way of. The famous Jacob her own son made it not toughe to keep
sheep twenty years space, having a conflicte many times with wild beasts,
that would have all to torn him with their teeth, in the day time burned with
the heat of the Sun, in the night season taking himself little rest.
Neither were his wives such coy damoysels, but that they could look to their
own sheep, nor his sons so lordely brought up, but they could welinough
play the herdmen, yea and take more pains to than any of the servants of
their fathers household. What life Moses led a long time, and how little
skemishe or dangerous his wife made it for such matters (to say nothing of
other histories of the Bible) it is well known. And this of the Pariarkes.

If we speak of kings and Emperors, Iustine, who lived. 509. years after
Christ, in his childhoode was a swyneheard, and after a neatheard, next he
served a poor carpenter, last of all he betook him self to warfare, where
began all his preferment. Of Alexander the great, Plutarche gives this
testimony, that nether wine bibbing, nor sleping, nor pastime for the
recreating of himself, nor brydales, nor the beholding of strange sightes,
which are wont to make meaner folks to forget themselves, could pull him away
at any time from doing of Princely acts. Where of the short time that he
lived, bare witness, wherein he achieved many noble enterprices worthy of
immortal fame. Jason is commended in Xenophon to have been so payneful and
politic a captain, that when he attempted to ouerfetche his enemies, or to
preuente them of their purposes, or to set upon them with main force, for the
most part he never failed to bring it to pass. Who also (as he says)
night and day was in a like readiness for all things that he had to do, not
as much as then idelly occupied, when he sat at his meat. He was never wont
to take his rest, before he was come to the end of his journey, and had
brought his matiers to good effect. He caused his soldiers to accustom them
selves in like manner: whom also he made exceedingly much of, whenever they
had done any notable warlyke feate, being persuaded every one of them that
should deserve any wages at his hands, that recreation and quietness should
none otherwise be purchased, than with taking pains. Ranulphus in his
Polychromcon says of Aluredus sometime king of this land, that to the intent
he might never be idle, he divided the day natural, consisting of 24. hours,
into three parts. Whereof eight hours he spente in reading, writing Lib. 6.
cap. 1.
and praying: eight more in looking to his bodies health: the last eight hours
about the affairs and business of his realm. For the distinguishing whereof
he caused a candle to be set up in his chapel divided into. 24. parts. Of
Theodosius Lib. 1. cap. 1.
son to Gratian the Emperor, Sozomenus writes in his tripartite history,
that he was wont in the day time to be exercised in the deeds of arms, and
to deal in such matiers as pertayned to his subjects, and almost all the
night long to go to his book. But to rehearse all their examples that have
consumed the course of their whole life in continual exercises, it were surely
a needelesse labor. Seeing then it is not the subject or servant only that
takes pains: what cause have they any of them both, under the pretense of
labor, to find fault with subjection?

The.xiiij. Chapter.
Though Princes be not always answerable to our affections, yet ought we
not therefore to rebel.

NAy sir, but all governors (will they say) do not favor Gods truth, and some
do not further justice, nor do in all points as they ought to demean them
selves in their government.

Who does that? Surely not thou thy self, that layest it to Princes charges.
But beware how thou resistest them notwithstanding. They can not be worse than
Herod and Pylate was: yet Christ (as thou may read in the Gospel)
acknowledged their authority to be from his father, so far of from
withstanding their lawful power, that he submitted himself to all the
extremity they could use.

When soever God shall give thee any occasion to complain of that, take heed
it be not the just plague of God, which he will lay upon thy shoulders for
thine own deserts. The Scripture truly is plain inoughe in this case,
affirming in deed that sometimes God sends such rulers as be not the best
or godliliest disposed, but prop^e^ peccata populs, because the people have
Job. 34.
offended God. And thereof it comes, that he speaks such terrible and
threatening words by the mouth of the Prophet Zachary, saying, that the Cap.
11.
shepeheardes of Judah and Israel he cut of in one month, and that his soul
lothed them, and their soul abhorred him. Whereupon holding on his process,
he pronounces against them a very heavy sentence: Then said I, I will not
feed you: that that dies, let it dye: and that that perishes, let it
perish: and let the remnaunt eat every one the flesh of his neighbor. This
comes to pass, so often as we fear not God, and embrace not his Gospel, as
we ought to do.

It is our parts therefore that have true English hearts, to make carnest
suit unto God, for the Queens Majesty's long prosperous reign, and so
reliligiously always toward God, so loyally toward our Queen to behave
our selves, that we may still have virtuous and godly rulers. But in case it
so fall out, that Princes always should not satisfy us, I say, that their
manners and demeanor seem not always answerable to our desires: yet must
we diligently take heed, that in any wise we observe two things: first,
that we prevent not Gods judgment, ouerhastily giving our ungodly verdite of
them, whom we ought not without great reverence once to name: and secondly, that
we be not lightly moved to shake the foundations of a well settled state, tearing
and renting out our own bowels, and not only bringing our native country,
which we ought to tender above all things in the world, but our selves and al
ours into desperate peril. For surely (talk we never so long at our pleasure
and fantasy what we list) it is hard for any body to be utterly void of
imperfectio^s. Julius Caesar was rayled at for ambition, the great Alexander
was noted for his drunkenness, Pyrrhus was thought rash in his counsel,
Hanniball not to be sure of his promise, Fabius to be too great a lingerer,
before he would join in battle with his army, Marcellus contrariwise to be
greedy of fighting. And many other great Potentates there were mo, which had
somewhat in them to be amended.

But seeing we enjoy by their occasion no small safety and quietness, and not
one of us all is able to do all things at all times as we should: it were
more reason we should dispose our selves (if need were) to be bearers, than
to be headlong and rash disturbers. The kingdom of the Persians held on
(says Isocrates) a long time, and not through any other virtue which was in
them, but because they had their Prince in such high honor and estimation.
Ibi enim Contra Faustu^ lib. 21 ca. 14.
sunt regna felicia (as Austine notes) vbi pleno omnium consensu regibus
obeditur. For there be the happy realms, where Princes and headrulers with
all men's full consent be obeyed. Whereas certain it is, that the contrary does
commonly breed so much mischief, that it is too pitiful to hear of it.
Therefore if it can not be made to sink into our heads, that we should obey
our Princes for conscience sake, or because they be appointed over us by the
infinite wisdom of Gods Romans 13.
Providence: yet the great and manifold inconvenience that springs out of the
fountain of sedition, should of force move us to stand in awe. Thus hitherto
we have gone forward without any great resisting, at least wc out any great
harm.

The.xv. Chapter.
That God suffers evil and hurtefull things, without any derogation to his
Providence.

But Epicure yet our heavy friend, says plainly, he will not take up so.
And now methinketh he begins to fall sadly to his business, and to take
upon him like a clercke. For now he presses us very hardly, demanding us if
God govern the world, how is it that he suffers evil? For (says he)
either God would take evil away, and is not able: or else he is able, and yet
not willing: or he is neither willing nor able: or he is both willing and able.
If he be willing (says he) and not able, it comes of weakness, which very
much swarueth from Gods nature. Again, if he be able, and not willing, he
seems enuiouse, and that agrees with him as little. If he be neither willing
nor able, he is both envious and weak too, and therefore consequently not a
God. If he be wylling and able also, which is the only property of a God:
then whence (I pray you) comes evil? or why takes he it not out of the
way? And this his argument is set out by Lactantius in a book that he
writes de tra Cap. 13.
Dei. Wherewith he tells us, that many of the Philosophers were so troubled,
that mauger their beardes they were almost driven to this point, that they
could defend Gods Providence no longer. Whereof truly I do not so greatly
moruayle, considering how hardely our dull eyesighte is able to pierce into
the Sun beams, so long especially as it is not cleared with the bryghtnesse
of Gods word.

But what answers Lactantius to it him self? For I would gladlyer hear
other men's solutions in mattiers especially of such weyghte, than mine own.
God (says he) is able to do what he will, and no weakness or envy is in
God. He is able therefore to take evil out of the way, but he will not. And
yet we must not conclude that he is therefore envious: for therefore he
takes it not away, because (as I have taught) he also gives us wisdom
with it, and there is more good and comfort in wisdom, than griefs in
euilles. Wisdom also makes us to know God, and by that knowledge to
obtain immortality, which is the gretest good we can have. So then unless we
first learn to know evil, neither shall we be able to come by the knowledge
of that that is good. But this Epicure saw not, nor any other of the
philosophers, that by the removing of euilles, wisdom also should be removed,
and that no steps of virtue can remain afterward in man, the showing
forth whereof consists in bearing the bytternesse of euilles, and in
ouercomming and keeping of them under. How little cause therefore have we to
find fault with God, if it be true that Lactantius says? And truly he has
spoken nothing, which both in reason and conscience we find not true. Oh
howr much therefore are we beholding to almighty God, who so sweetly and
comfortably disposes all things, that even that which were otherwise most
noisome, and could not but ill fauouredly break out: yet by his marvelous
working he turns to good?

But my mind greatly gives me to hear an other while father Origene: who
entreating of this very same mattier, so largely and amply sets it out,
that we could not wyshe or require any more. God (says he) vvroughte not
malice, but yet being able to let it In Number. ca. 23 homil. 14.
from going forward, after it is found out of other, he does not so, but
uses both, it and them that have it, for conueniente and necessary causes.
For by them in whom malice is abiding, he has made them well known and
tried, who go on the way toward renown, that comes by the exercise of
virtue. Which malice if it should be destroyed, doubtless there should be
nothing left that should set it self against virtue. And virtue not
having any contrary to strive against, could not so clearelye shine forth
and become brighter, (as it were) and better scoured. Now virtue, if it be not
proved and examined, is no virtue.

But if this be said only by me and not confirmed by the testimonies of holy
Scripture, it will seem rather to be a gay painted flourishe, set together
by the art of man's wit, than a truth, and a thing that is out of doubt.
Let us search then, whether out of the Bible we may pieke any such lesson.
Let us come to the history of Joseph. Take away the malice of his brethren,
take away their envy, take away all the bloody conference that they had one of
the^ with an other, so cruelly raging against their brother, until such time
as they had sold him: I say, these things taken away, see how much thou
shall overthrow the whole manner and order of Gods Providence. For with the
same labor thou shall undo all that ever Joseph did in Egypt for all men's
safegarde and preservation. Pharaos dream had been never expounded, through
the envy of his brethren: Joseph being pulled (as it were) from his fathers
side, had not come into Egypt: no man had understood what God had reveled to
the king: no man had gathered up in Egypt such a great deal of corn
together: no man by his wise provision had remedied the extreme need, that
men should have been driven to, by the occasion of the dearthe: all Egypt had
sterued for hunger, yea and the countries had died up round about: Moreover,
Israel himself should have ended his days in like manner, and his sede begging
their bread, if they had not entered into Egypt: neither had the children of
Israel come thence again with such wonderful works of the Lord: no where
had been those plages, that had been poured upon Egypt, nor those vvondrous
works which God did by Moses and Aaron: nobody had gone over the red sea
dryshod: no man in this mortal life had been acquainted with the food of
Manna: no fresh streams of water had gushed out of the rock, that followed
them: the law had not been given man from God: none of all that that is
vvrytten in Exodus, in Leuiticus, in the book of Numbres, and in Deuteronomy,
had comen to the knowledge of ma^kinde: certainly their fathers inheritance,
and the land of promise, none of the Israelites had entered. And (to come to
the text of the history which we have in hand) take away the malice of this
deuillishe king Balac, which made him so desirous to have the Israelites
cursed: take away his subtilitie, vvherevvith he enticed Balaam to curse them,
and thou shall take away altogether the order of Gods dealing, and the favor
of his Providence toward Isreal's children: no where shall be those
prophecies to be seen, foretold by the mouth of Balaam both to the children
of Israel, and to the Gentiles.

And hitherto we have brought proves out of the old Testament. Now if you
couette an other while to have this that we say confirmed by the testimonies
of the nevve testament, if you set aside the malice of Judas, and leave out
his treason, you shall remove away with it altogether, both Christ's
cross, and his passion: and if Christ's cross be gone, the principalities,
and powers, can not be spoiled, nor triumphed over upon the vvoodde of the
cross. If Christ had not died, neither had he risen again, neither had
there been any the first begotten of the dead. If there had been none the
first begotten of the dead, neither could we have had any hope of our
resurrection. Of the devil himself if we put now the like case, to
vvitte, that he had been restrained by some necessity from committing
sin, or that after sin committed, his malicious vvil had been taken from
him: therevvithall out of doubt there had been taken from us the strife
that we have against the vvilye trains of the devil, and the crown of
victory could not have been looked for of his part, that had lavvfully
vvrastled and buckled with him. If we should have no ghostly ennimies that
vvoulde stand against us, there could not then (I say) be any bickering, nor
rewards should be laid up for the ouercommers, nor the kingdom of Heaven
should be provided for them, that have the upper hand, nor this light
afflictyon of ours, which in comparison, lasts for the space of the
tournyng of a man's hand, should cause unto us a far greater vvaighte of
glory in the time to come, neither could any of us for suffering of
tribulations in this world, hope for the infinite glory of the world
hereafter. Out of all which premises we may now infer this conclusion,
that God does not only use good instruments, but bad also to the doing of a
good work For in this great house of the world, there be not only vessels
of gold and silver, but of wood also, and of clay, and some of them serving
to honor, other of them to dishonor, and yet neither of both sorts could
be spared. Thus far goes Origene speaking so much of the use of the evil
that is in sin, that we might well hold our selves satisfied.

But of serpents and beasts venomous, with such other pernicious things what
say we? are we able to stand in the defense of them, saying that they also are
expedient? The mad sect of the Manichee^ had always against them a great
quarrel, calling them as they did also mothes and flesh flies, gentes
tenebrarum the Bentiles of the darckenesse. But what trow ye, is the answer
that S. Austine makes them? These heretics Dc ciuitar. lib. 11. cap. 22.
mark not (says he) what force they have used in place, and considered as
they be in their own kind, and in how goodly order they are disposed,
moreover how much they garnishe the world for their proportion, as it
were a weal public common to them and us, yea what commodity they bring
to us our selves, if we can use them agreeably, and according to knowledge:
Insomuch that the venimes themselves, being therefore damageable, because they
agree not with our nature, yet vvhe they are used in time and place, and in
such sort and manner as they ought to be, they become wholesome medicines.
Nether do they observe how on the contrary side, even these things,
vvherevvith they are delited, as meat and drink, and this light vvherof they
have the fruition, through the immoderate use of them out of time are
perceived, and felt to do harm. I leaus out that which Austine writes in the
same place, wherein he proceeds so far, that he says, nothing that is
natural is evil. If touching this matter there be any scruple yet remaining
(as it is not like) you may resort to that long ninth chapter of S. Austines
third book de libero arbitrio, where this Theme is handled very largely.

The.xvj. Chapter.
That the prosperity of the wicked, and the adversity of the godly, is no
stain or blemishe to Gods Providence.

But that evil should be in ye world, were it for none other thing, but for our
exercise, ye to some peradventure would seem tolerable enough. This (say
they) touches the quick: why be the godly defaced and disgraced? and why does
God suffer them to be thrust down of every wily and ambicious hypocrite? We are
well content, seeing you would algaces have it so: let it stand hardly wc Gods
Providence, ye men wickedly disposed and set on mischeeue, should lead here
in this world their desperate and ungodly life: yet at least wise, why are they
suffered so to prosper? why are they born, and boulstred up (as it were) in
their wickedness?

Here Epicure (as Lactantius says) took a great aduau^tage, and derived (as
De falsa sapientia, lib. 3. cap. 17.
it were) out of this fountain, al his honey sweet sugared doctrine, that so
pleasantly tickled the senses of the common sort.

Yea not only it furthered Epicure wc other of ye shameless brood, but it
evermore much troubled and discouraged all such as were godlily affected, as it
well apeareth. Job. 21. Psa. 73. Ier. 12. Hab. 1. etc. in so much that it made
the^ to stagger, as they themselves also confess.

Wherewith then shall we stay our selves, that the like do not happen unto
us? If we speak of the wicked, Asaphe solaceth himself thus, saying: that he
entrod into Gods sanctuary, where he Psalm. 73.
savv how God had set them on a slippery place. The good Poet Claudianus
being almost shaken out of ioynte (as he says) with the like consideration
of naughty men's prosperous success, yet confirms himself afterward in
the like manner, seeing how heavily God had taken vengeance upon that godless
and graceless man Ruffinus; saying that now he knew well inoughe, that they
were but hoysed up alofte, to none other end or purpose, but that their
svvinge down again, might be the more grievous. They walk therefore in this
world, as it were, through a goodly green pasture, or rather some pleasant
Paradise, where there wants nothing that is deloctable either for the sight
or the sense: but as soon as ever they set out their foot to come forth, there
is a foul monstrous donge on to receive them, where laded with as many yrons
as they can bear, they shall sit all in horrible darcknesse, having nobody
that ca be suffered to have access unto them, but the vyting and stinging
serpents, the loathsome and foul ougly todes, snakes, adders, wc other most
venomous and lothely beasts. They are fatted and grased in the fertile fields:
but therefore be they fatted and grased, that when they are butchorde and
knocked in the head, their flesh might be the fitter for the shambles. I say,
these souldioures of satan's band take their pleasure in deed whiles they here
be, they are clad in purple, and fare deliciously at all times, they ryote,
ruffle, and keep reuill routs. But they shall come down again with a
mischeeue: their seat (assure your self) was never so high set up, but
hereafter it shall be trodden under feet ten times lower: They were never in
such iolitie here on earth, but they shall be broken hereafter with double
and triple, and without all comparison with more doluor and sorrow, than their
joy was ever able to counteruaile.

Now if we speak of ye godly, whose life is hidden with Christ in God (as
Paul writes to the Colossians) they Cap. 3
in deed are pinched in the mean time, they languish and faint, and
perchance are ready for very weariness to fall under their unwieldy burden.
But if they fall, they shall take no harm: and why? Quia dominus supponit
manum suam: for the Lord puts his hand under them to hold them up. They
have in deed their adversity, but they have it in this world, that they
might learn the more effectually the contempt of the world: without the
which they could never be Gods children. Therefore so God deals with them,
as the nourice that would waine her youngling, whose manner is to lay mustarde
upon her pappe, that the infant tasting it afterward, might refuse to
meddle with it any more. Yea he uses us much like a mother that frayeth her
child with Hodge Goblin, to the intent he might run into her lap. For
God being an earnest lover, (as Chrysostomus In Psalm. 114
writes) or rather more earnest than any lover, suffers us to be brought to
such an extremity, that we should be forced to continual prayer, and to
daily invocation and calling on him, all other things set aparte, only
thincking upon God.

If God suffered us always to have the world at will, then might it be said
of us, as it was objected concerning Job: Does he fear God for naught? Haste
Job. 1.
thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that
he has on every side? Thou haste blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the land: Even as if he should say, Job his fear,
and love that he had to Godward were corrupted, and no true fear or love, but
all utterly for his present gain. But now this can not be said of Gods
elect, who in suffering, and patience, are made like to the image of the son
of God. Whereby this Romans 8.
maliciously disposed world may see evidently, wherefore they be made
Christians: not surely for any worldly commodity, which in comparison they
utterly contemn, but (as S Austine writes ad Honoratum) for the fruition of
life ye is Epist. 12^
everlasting, because we behold, as in a mirror, how that went before in his
example, after whose name we are called Chrystians.

And certainly this is one of the cheifest The afflictioe of the just, be an
argument of the resurrection of our bodies.
arguments that we can have for the resurrection of our bodies. For if God
love justice (as he is most just) no doubt he will epsy a time both to be
revenged of the wicked, that have lived inordinately contrary to his holy will,
and to show mercy and favor toward his elect, that have so srriuen for the
testimony of his name. Which seeing it happens not in this life, wherein (as
we have declared) the wicked prosper, the godly are open to all injuries that
may be laid upon them: therefore it must needs follow of congruence, that the
time is appointed for it in the world to come. Whereunto S. Peter seems to
have a respect, whiles he exhorts the congregation in this manner: Humble 1.
Peter. 5
your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalte you in time
convenient. And S. Paul in many places Romans 8.
calling us to the consideration of the same, tells us that as yet we but
look for the deliverance of our bodies, being now saved only by hope, ye
now we be dead to the world, and until Christ which is our life shall
appear at the Coloss. 3.
last day, we shall not appear in glory. To the which purpose also makes the
Parable of the rich glutton, and the poor Lazarus in the gospel, to leave out
other Luke. 16
proofs a great meiny.

Seeing then the time of our redemption is in an other life, that there is then
an other life, it is a clear case. Whereof, unless there be a resurrection,
that our souls and bodies may again be coupled: how can our souls and
bodies be partakers? And if our souls and bodies be not partakers of life:
how can we receive in our bodies, either the reward of righteousness or
iniquity? But if God after the quality of our woorckes neither in this life,
nor in the life to come do consider us, where then is becomen his justice? Let
this hope then be laid up in our bosom, until such time as we meet our
brydegroome, persuading our selves most assuredly, that God can no more be
unjust, than he can cease any longer to be God. In the mean time we shall
go forward in deed in our vocation, sowing our seeds with tears: but we
Psalm. 125.
shall come back afterward with our hands full, not without great triumphing
and rejoicing.

For (as it is notably written to the Hebrews) no chastising for the present
Cap. 12.
seems to be joyous, but grievous: but afterward it brings the quiet
fruit of righteousness unto the^, which are thereby exercised.

But if God would grant unto Epicure, that which he most desires, that all
chastisement removed from the children of his enheritance, they might pass out
their time here in ye world, with as much ease and prosperity as could be
wished: what great goodness might come of it to Gods chosen, and dearly
beloved people? Are they not of flesh and blood? Have they not their
affections and imperfections to be cut shorter, and strayter to be pulled in?
Yes verily have they even as well as other. Who if they were suffered to raunge
lose at their own will, could not choose but grow to an exceeding security
of conversation. But God preventing this so great enormitie, plucketh them
eftsoon by the ears (as it were) when they are ready to fall into a deadly
sleep, and as they sit beauily nodding by themselves, opens their slumbring
and sleepy eyes with some suddenly raised blast of some terrible tempest that
falls upon them. For every branch (says our savior Christ) that bears
not fruit in me, John. 15.
my father takes away: and every one that bears fruit, he purges it, that
it may bring forth more fruit. What is he then, that is so perfitte upon the
earth, that has not need of the exercise of tribulation, if not to call him
from wickedness, yet to stir him to goodness? if not to stir forward,
yet to keep him from slyding backward? if not to keep him from slyding, yet
to establish him in standing? if not in virtue to establishe him, yet in his
virtues to increase him? if not to increase him, yet to make his valiantness
better known? Thou art a stout champion (says Seneca) but how shall I know De
diuina Prouidentia. cap. 4.
it, if thou have no opportunity to try thy manhood? How shall I know what
courage thou haste against poverty, if thou still wallowe in wealth? How can
I know how constantly thou can wrestle with reproach and slander, and the
hatred ye is borne against thee of the common sort, if thou wax old amongst
them ye be always clapping thee on the back?

Let Epicure go now, and prate of good men's adversity till his heart ache:
yet surely we will be so far of from his Ieudnesse, that rather than in any
point we will yield to him, we will say with the wise Demetrius, whom Seneca
so much Cap. 3. eiusdem libri.
commends, that we think nothing more unfortunate, than him that has been
alvvayes happy. For what should I stand here any longer to heap up more
matter, than I have need, either out of Chrysostomus, who in his first
homily to the people of Antiochia, numbreth at the least ten causes of the
affliction that happens to the godly? Or out of the grave father S. Austine,
who in a number of places does the same? or out of Origene, or any of the rest?

The Conclusion of this second book.
IT now remains in the end, because (my matter so requiring) I have driven
out this part of my discourse into a greater length, than otherwise I would
have gladly done, that I exhort the godly Christian in few words (all
Epicures and Atheistes set aside) to trace out the steps of the Martyrs,
the paths of the Prophets, the high way of the Patriarchs and Apostles, to
give God most hearty thanks for the provident care that he has over us, to
commit the whole state of our life to his government, and to betake our selves
wholly into his hands. This if we do, well may it be that we shall leese the
peace of this world, I say, this earthly and fleshely peace: but truly this
peace of God, which most ought to be regarded, this peace and tranquillity of
the mind, this joy and comfort of our conscience more worth in value than
any gold, shall be ministered to us in more abundance than it was before: the
world in deed will hate us, according to the old manner from the beginning:
but God always will tender us no less than the father does his own
children. So long as we be here, we shall be crossed and ouercrossed many
ways, many greefes shall grype us at the heart, and many pluckes shall be
given at us to pull us down. But at our departing hence a gladsome and joyful
end shall receive us into an other world, with any bloody stripes that can be
laid upon us, with any cruel torments to be boughte out: Then shall our
virtuous and godly works, which so gladly we embraced in our former life, with
cherefull attendance awayte upon us. Then shall that blessed company of those
heavenly wightes, the Archangels and Angels in their order, with their
musical songs of most sweet and melodious harmony, carry us up with
triumph into Abraham's bosom. Where at our coming, as it were at the meeting
of the bride and brydes groom, so lovingly, so amiably, so heartily we shall
be entertained, that all that blessed society that has gone before us, shall
rejoice, and all heaven shall ring of it for very joy.

Tell me now here, my dear brethren, is it reason (think you) we should
enjoy such a portion provided for the elect, and will we disdain yet in our
life time the poor state of the elect? Should we presume to reign with our
Savior Christ? And shall we take scorn to serve with our savior Christ?
would we be in glory with our Lord Jesus Christ, and make we danger to bear
Christ's reproach? would we so feign be partakers of Christ's blessed life, and
will we not bear in our bodies Christ's bitter death? We can not do so, we may
not do so, it will never be. Wherefore (to knit up briefly with a short clause)
in no wise let us be like that unthrifty Csau, who like a dolte made away his
birthrighte, I am ashamed to say, for how small a trifle. I say, let us not
forgo that which is everlasting, for that that lasts but the twinkling of an
eye: that which we may surely trust to, for that which suddenly slideth away,
even then, when we think we have the best hold of it: pure gold for brickle
clay, the treasure of life, for the reward of death.

The third book of Gods Providence.
The first Chapter.
Making a recapitulation of the former book, he shows that Gods Providence
stands still invincible.

GOD always be thanked for his gracious Providence, that he has so well
conducted us, whiles we sailed so dangerously amongst the rocks, that he has
so assisted us, and borne us out, whiles we endured such a continual and cruel
conflicte. For now the swelling seas, that ear while were thought likely to
ouerwhelme us, are well quieted and calmed again, the sturdy rocks be
removed, and our passage, that was so combersome, by reason of our resisting
foes, lies plain and open for us on all sides. With good cause therefore
might I use the words of the 93 Psalm: The floudes have risen, O Lord, the
floudes have lift up their voice, the floods have lift up their waves. The
waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet the Lord that
dwells on high is mightier.

Where now are they become that told us, we have taken away free will? For we
have answered them, that man's chief freedom is to be ruled and ordered by the
will of God. Whose Providence takes not away our free wills, but directs
them: nor withstandeth them, but conducteth them: nor forces them by any
violence, but uses them rather as to his divine Majesty it seems best. Or
where now will they show their face, that affirm we make God the proper
worker and causer of our sin? for contrariwise we have plainly proved by the
assertions of the schole writers them selves, that God pours no malice into
men's hearts, but bewrays it in making it to come to light, nor causes us to
sin and do evil, whereunto we are prone inoughe of our own accord, but so
orders our doings, whiles we sin, that we serve as his instruments, to
that end and purpese which he has ordained. Or who be they that dare say, and
stand to it, that we disanull prayer and aduise-taking, or frustrate any
wholesome provided remedies? For we say rather, they be the ordinary means,
whereby God executes his judgments. Who not only has determined what he
will do, but the very manner also he has foreappoynted, whereby he will bring
us to his purposed end. Or who complayneth any more of the distinction of the
poor and the rich? or finds fault, that all men be not equalles? For we
have showed that no state is so incommodious, which Gods goodness has not
relieved many sundry ways, that no degree or vocation is so wealthy or well at
ease, that has cause to be puffed up wc any vain conceate. Or finally, who
blames the evil that turns to good? or mislyketh prosperity, the pittefall
of the wicked? or affliction and anguishe, the fyle and touchestone of the
godly? Yet these were the weapons which our adversaries chiefly trusted, and
the engines of their artillarie, wherewith we were most assailed. Then maugre
the beardes of all Epicures, Gods providence remains a sure castle and
bulwark of defense, shot at in deed very terribly, but nowhere hit, and very
cruelly threatened, but without taking harm.

The.ij. Chapter.
That Gods Providence is neither Destiny nor Predestination, and what it is.

Seeing then we have proved Gods Providence by diverse and sundry reasons, and
at large have answered their cauillations, that repine and murmr at the same:
it follows that we now perform in due order that parcel of our promise
which is behind. And truly thus far have we prosecuted our discourse, as
god, which willed me to go forward, has chiefly put it into my mind:
Nevertheless what Gods Providence is, whereof I have holden so long a process,
opportunity yet served us not to define. The doing whereof, with other things
needful to be discussed, being reserved of necessity for this place, it
might now be required of us, as of duty, that we should attempt at lestwise
to go through with it.

What is then this Providence which we take in hand? Some odiously burden us
with the name of destiny, other seem to know little difference betwixt
Providence and the doctrine of Predestination. Whose error by a short
conference might be quickly known.

For first, what make they of destiny, wherewith so bitterly we are charged?
Certaynely (as it lyketh Chrysippus, one of the chiefest of the Philosophers
amongst the Stoikes) It is an everlasting Aul. Gellius de noct. Atticis. Lib.
6. cap. 2.
and unavoidable course of the world, and a chain that is fast wrapped and
tangled in it self by euerduring orders of causes, the one following directly
by the force of the other, whereof it is lynked so inuiolably, that by no
means it can be pulled in sunder. Wherewith Homer that ancient Greek Poet,
makes Jupiter so strongly to be withholoe^, that he co^plaineth miserably,
crying out, that when he would, he is not able to go against it. So then as
they fondly set out the matier, not creatures must bow at Gods beck, but god
rather must be subject to his creatures, than the which there can be nothing
imagined more out of course. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy speaking of it,
utterly dasheth and Chrysippus confuted.
disgraceth both Chrysippus, and his definition, saying in the person of God
himself, that we should not learn the manner and way of the heathen, nor be
afraid of the Cap. 10.
signs of heaven, though the heathen be afraid of such. And Gregory
mentioning the same mattier in his Homily made upon the Epiphanie: Be it far
(says he) from the hearts of the faithful to avouch that destiny is any
thing: no doubt meaning Destiny in that sense here before determined by
Chrysippus. For else know I not ye contrary, but that Austine might be well
enough allowed in ye which he writes of it in his fifte book ae Ciuitate,
saying, ye he allows destiny Cap. 8.
so farfoorth, as we submit the very ordering and knitting together of these
causes to the will and providence of God, whom rightly and truly we believe
both to know of al things long before they are done, and to leave nothing that
shall be done, not disposed and ordered as it shall fall. According to this
understanding Boethius opening De con so. phil. Lib. 4. Pros. 6.
to us what is Destiny, defines it thus: Destiny is a disposing and ordering
of those things, which of their own nature might be altered, whereby Gods
providence sets al things together in such sort as they shall come to pass
in their course.

As then by this definition we see Destiny dishonoreth not Gods power,
whereunto it yeldeth and gives place: so also we may perceive, that it
differs from Providence not a little. Which Gods Providence defined.
certaynely is nothing else but an order thought upon from everlasting, and
most steadfastly decreed in Gods counsel, without any alteration to be looked
for, whereby all things in heaven, and under heaven be continually governed
and provided for, according to the state of their own nature. Therefore Gods
providence comprehends al things together (as it were) with Gods Providence
and destiny compared.
one view, be they never so infinite, be they never so diversely dispersed: but
destiny disposes every several thing, and in mouings, in places, in forms
and fashions, in times and seasons does distinguishe them, and divide them the
one from the other. Gods Providence is eternal, Destiny is temporal. Gods
Providence rules, Destiny is ruled. Gods Providence is the cause of all
things that come to pass in the world, Destiny in comparison is but an
effect. Gods Providence works as of it self, Destiny works as it is
set on by God. All thing that is under Destiny, is also under Gods
Providence: all thing that is under Gods Providence, is not likewise ordered by
Destiny. For God, who deals freely in the affairs of the world, as
compelled to nothing that he does, not only uses Destiny in this
administration, but the ministry also of other superior powers, as soon
after (God willing) it shall be more at large uttered and set out.

Howebeit considering well the abuse of this odious term Destiny, with the
same Austine I say again: We affirm De ciuit. lib 5. Cap. 9.
not that ^uery thing comes to pasle by destiny nay we affirm that nothing
comes to pass by destiny, because the name of destiny in those things
wherein it is used to be considered, that is in the constellation of the
stars, at the conception or nativity of any creature borne into the world,
forasmuch as it is vaynely vpholden, we show that it is utterly to no purpose.
But truly an order of causes, where Gods will may do most, we neither deny,
nor yet call by the name of destiny: unless perchance we understood this
word FATV^, that is Destiny, as it is derived a FANDO, which signifies
speking: for we can not say to the contrary but that lt is written in holy
Scripture, God spoke once. For whereas it is said, god spoke once, it is as much
to say, as immovably: ^s who says, he spoke not mynding to alter his
determination, in such sort as he knew without varying how all things would
come to pass, and what also he would do him self By this mean then we may
give Destiny his name of that which god before has spoken, saving that this
word now a days is applied to an other mattier, whereunto we would not
vvishe men's hearts to be so inclined.

Betwixt Providence and Destiny, what odds there be, by this that we have
touched already, I trusie, sufficiently it may appear. So that hereafter I
doubt not but the adversary shall have the less cause to bring this doctrine
into common hatred, by any such ignorant suspicion. They now that imagine,
that this general government, which we speak of, is all one with
Predestination, err in deed in so thinking, but of a certain simplicity,
which is void of malice. Therefore to minishe this their wrong conceate, we
shall not much need to go further, but to tell them what Lib. 1. ad Monymum.
Predestination is. Surely not as Fulgentius too generally defines it, saying,
that it is an everlasting provision and preparation for the bringing of Gods
works, which hereafter shall happen, to effect: (although the same author does
limitte with other circumstances his definition:) but rather (as S. Austine
speaks) a preparing of some men to grace, de Prede. sa^ct. Cap. 10.
and a decree made for their salvation: or (more plainly to speak of it) it is
Gods most wise determination, by the which he has most constantly decreed
before What predestination is.
the world was founded, to call them whom he loved in Christ, to be adopted
into the number of his sons, to be justified from their sins by faith, and
at the last to the bliss of heaven by the way of good works, to the intent
they may be fashioned after the image of Gods son, and that in them may be
made manifest the glory and mercy of the creator. In this then (as it
appears) Gods Wherein Gods providence and Predestination agree, and vvherin
they differ,
Providence and Predestination do both agree, that both of them proceed out
of Gods counsel, and depend of Gods will, and both of the^ respect the time to
come. But in this they differ, that Providence is extended to all creatures in
general. Predestination (as we now speak of it) pertayneth only to Gods and
such as be his chosen vessels. Again by the Providence of God things be
guyded to ends agreeable to their nature. Predestination leads to those
things, which far pass the reach of nature, as namely our newebirth and
adoption in Christ, the inheritance of Gods kingdom, sanctification, with
such other like guyftes of the holy Ghost.

The.iij. Chapter.
Of this, that Gods Providence is an order, what may be gathered.

Having showed how destiny and Predestination differ from the Providence of
God, let us come now to a more exact handling of the essence and nature of
the same. Providence (said we) is an order thought upon from everlasting. If it
be an order, then things must not be brought to pass confusedly, as some
dreme, but ye very manner of doing, yea ye time and place must be observed, ye
means and instruments (as it were) whereby God works, must be considered,
the strength and efficacy whereof depends altogether of Gods Providence.
They therefore reason fondely, who hearing us talk of the end which God
brings us to by the operation and work of his Providence, as health and
preferment in other things like, or contrary to the aforenamed, would
therefore by and by conclude, that God uses not an ordinary way to bring it
to pass.

Truth it is in deed, that sometimes God neglects all outward helps, and
to show his power, sets him self directly against all course of nature, or
common reason, as when he conducted the Israelites through the r^d sea, saved
the three children in the furnace, and Daniell amongst the Lions, or
whenever he does any thing that is prodigious. But neither is it our part to
tempt God, when he enspireth any wholesome counsel into our minds: and we in
our definition have regarded that chiefly which is usual.

The.iiij. Chapter.
That Gods Providence, being an order thought upon from everlasting, is
immutable.

WHen we had said, Gods Providence was an order, we added, thought upon from
everlasting. It is not therefore any rash, or hot brained devise, that we
should have any occasion to mistrust it, but a thing fully determined upon, not
without great deliberation by him that is fountain of all wisdom. And that
which thus far has been spoken, may be grounded upon certain words left
written in the. 14. chapter of the book of Wisdom. But thy Providence, of
father, governs al things from the beginning: for thou have made a way in
the sea, and a sure path among the waves, declaring thereby, that thou haste
power to help in all things, yea though a man should venture himself upon the
sea without a ship. But to the intent the vvorckes of thy vvisdome should not
be vain, therefore do men commit their lives to a a small piece of wood, and
passing over the sea in a ship, are saved.

Yet going forward, and most steadfastly decreed upon (say we) in Gods Cap.
23.
counsel without any alteration to be looked for. This is it which is
uttered somewhat more at large in the book of Numbers by the mouth of the
Prophet Balaam, God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the son of
man, that he should repent: Has he said it, and shall he not do it? and
has he spoken, and shall he not accomplish it? The same also is confirmed by
the Prophets Esaias, speaking in Gods own person: I say the word, and my
counsel stands, Cap. 46.
and I do all things, as I will me self. And king Solomon in his Proverbs,
Many (says he) be the thoughts of man's heart: but the Lords determination
holds on still. Many other like places were easy to be found, if need were.

But very reason might suffice for a confirmation. For seeing Providence is
the will of God, by the which (as Damascene writes) all things in the world be
governed in convenient order: and Gods will is essential to his nature: surely
if Gods will and purpose should be changed, God himself (which were
impossible) should be changed likewise. The second causes in deed being
diverse, no marvel though they hinder themselves now and then: but Gods will
can not be let by any manner of constrainte.

Here peradventure will you say: God once liked well inoughe of the Iewishe
Answer.
ceremonies: yet afterward it pleased him to disanull them. How can you say
then, that Gods Providence is not mutable?

I answer ye God in deed is always Objection.
of one mind, but nevertheless that he always forsawe by his wisdom, that
all things were not agreeable for all times and seasons. S. Austine in his
Epistle ad Marcellinum says, that the husbandman at one time dungeth his
ground, at an other time sows it, and at an other reapeth it: but yet this
makes not ye husbandmans art to be uncertain. And sor a further example he
brings in one Vinditianus a Physician, who with a certain medicine healed a
sickemanne: Who a few years after, having fallen into the same disease again,
without asking counsel of the Physician, used the same Physic that he did
before. But perceiving anon after, that it wrought with him nothing as he
looked it should, but rather that he waxed worse: to the Physician he
retourneth in posthast, and by and by he opens to him all the matter,
beginning to make a great complaint, as though he had not been well used of
him in his Physic. Hereupon Vindicianus, when he had quietly hearoe him out
his tale, very soberly making him answer, as not much amoued with his talk:
No marvel sir (quoth he) for I did not minister it. At these words, when
other that were present, made a wondering, thinking it was his common usage to
minister his Physic with enchantments: No surely (quoth he again) it is no
such matter: he is of an other manner of age, and other kind of humors be in
his body now, then when I first ministered to him any medicine. And that is in
deed ye true cause, that it will not work with him, as it did before. So then
in process of time we see that as natures alter: so must the manner of curing
pacients be varyed and altered in like sort. But shall we therefore say, that
the act of Physic is not sure?

No more (assure your self) is God to be thought wavering, because in times
past he liked well with the Iewishe ceremonies, which now he has abrogated
and put away. For the times, and causes why things be done, must be always
discretely and wisely weighed: which if they differ, and vary from that they
were, then were it not inconstancy, but great wisdom to frame our affections
in like manner.

Why the Iewishe ceremonies were Why the ceremonies of the ^^vves were
ordained.
ordained, it can not be unknown to any body of mean learning. Forsoothe to
this end, that the people being rude and very apt to fall away to idolatry,
might have some such order prescribed unto them, as might both keep them
under for a time from running licentiously to their own idle inventions, and
also nourishe them in the faith of Christ's coming, represented to them in
their sacrifices so many ways. Until such time therefore as Christ came, the
very body of all those shadows that went before, and especially until such
time, as he had made upon the cross a co^summatum est: with his own only
oblation, making perfect for ever them that are sanctified: stood all the
rites of the Jews in full force, as it were handwrytings of our sins not
taken away. Which afterward being cancelled by the death of Christ, the true
Paschal Lamb, whose blood removed from us the wrath of God, and took away
the sins of the world: how could they continue any longer, without
manifest prejudice and derogation to our Lord and savior Jesus Christ? God
then is not a whit the more inconstant for any thing that is objected yet.

Whose Providence to prove variable and uncertain, is there yet any more left
behind? Yes marie (will they say) there be sundry places in the scripture to
that effect, as namely touching ye Ninevites, and the good king Ezechias.

But surely to him that will examine circumstances, it shall well appear, that
God when he decrees any thing to be done, does jointly also at the same time
appoint both the very instant at what time and hour it should be, and also how
long it should continue and hold on. Therefore whereas God commanded Jonas to
preach destruction to the Ninevites for their offenses, and afterward to
proclaim their pardone, being converted from their evil ways: what else
would he mean by that, but that at the first their sins were so great, that
they deserved a downfall, and an overthrow? And that afterward their
amendment was so acceptable and welcome to him, that he thought them worthy
of a pardon? So that ye Ninevites being changed, Gods will was altered
neuerthemore, who well forsaw in the^ both their naughty life and their
conversion. Whereunto to bring them by repentance, he ordained Jonas his
preaching to be a mean, that occasion might not be given him to subvert the^.
The same may be said of king Ezechias, to whom being sore sick, God bad that
he should have warning of his death. And yet when he had prayed to him, after
he prolonged his life for many years. Did not God signify by this, that the
disease, with the which the king was touched, could not be remedied by man's
help, but yet might be relieved by God, who commonly in such a desperate case
is woonte most effectually to show his power? And came not this to pass by
Gods own will, who disposes things in their order, and gives them that
success that it pleases him?

For what need I to say as some do, that God, when he threatens either
death or any such punishment due for sin, has a condition, which he
understands, that is to say, their amendment and reformation whom he so
frayeth? For sure we are of this, whatsoever is done by the preacher, as Gods
outward instrument, whereby he woorketh, whether it be by threatening or fair
promises in the behalf of God, whiles he proceeds according to Gods
reveled will in holy scripture: yet God has his secret judgments, and a
just manner of dealing, which man's measured capacity can not reach.

Nay (say they again) you must not escape us so. For the words of scripture
be a great deal more plain, ascribing unto God repentance of his former
deeds, which without change of his mind could not be.

In deed that such a manner of speech is in scripture I deny not (for we read
that God repented him of the creation of man, of making Saul king, and of
diverse other such like things) but how will they prove therefore, that God in
his providence is mutable? For as repentance seems to be attributed to God,
so anger, zele, and indignation, with other human affections be likewise
given to him in the Bible. Is God therefore subject to any passions? Can he be
inflamed with any choler, or any heat, proceeding of our gross humors? Ca^ he
repent himself of any thing, from whom nothing ca^ be hid, either past,
present, or to come? Nay, let that be holden for a certainty, which Samuel
spoke afterward to king Saul: The strength of Israel will 1. Reg. 15.
not lie, nor repent. For he is not a man, that he should repent.

But how then shall we reconcile the words of the scripture: Out of doubt god
speaking to us men, bears very much with our childishe weakness, and to the
intent we might the better understand him, it pleases him of his goodness to
lispe and stammer with us as it were. Because then, when men change their
minds, they correct that which was amiss, and they that amend their doing,
are sorry for it: therefore by this word Repentance, is noted to us the change
which God makes in his woorckes. And surely of such manner of speeches a very
handesome saying it is that S. Austine Cap. 20.
has in his first book contra aduersarium legis, and prophetarum, Gods
repentance (says he) is not after any thing mistaken, Gods wrath has not the
heat of a stiff stomach, Gods mercy has not the vvretched heart of him
that is moved inwardly with compassion, whence the word M.^ SERICORDIA is
derived, and Gods zele is without the disdain of the mind. But Gods
repentance is said to be a change, which men look not for of those things
which be under his government, Gods wrath is the execution of his vengeance
against sin: his mercy is his goodness, when he helps us: and Gods zele
is his provident care, which makes him not to suffer his people, being in
subjection to him, scot free to love that which he forbids. In the mean
neither Gods will, nor his counsel is turned otherwise than it was before,
nor ye which is altered by God, makes God to be altered. Whose vnuariabilitie
stands in this, that whatsoever God has decreed to bring to effect, the
same shall come to pass infallibly and vnuariably, both in what time, and in
what order, and after what sort, and with so long continuance as God himself
has decreed.

The.v. Chapter.
Gods Providence alvvayes being certain, whether chance and fortune may take
place.

But now whiles we have showed our selves very careful for the avoiding of one
perilous gulf, it stands us upon to take heed, least we be not mischeeued
upon the soden some otherway. We have proved that Gods providence is no fickle
or wavering thing, but a sure stay whereupon we may safely take hold. A good
point of doctrine (I trust) as to God honorable, and to us mortal creatures
no small comfort. But by and by in the neck of it comes a foul stur. If we
make Gods decree so certain in the government of all things in the world:
where then is chance and fortune? and what is becomen of hap? All which, if
they be at once set aside: then how, and which way shall we loase our selves
from that fatal chain of necessity, which before we so much abhorred?

Touching chance and fortune, I could give that counsel ye Basile does,
writing upon the. 32. Psalm. Bevvare thou say not this came to pasle by
chance, and this fell out by course of nature. For there is nothing not
ordained by God, nothing not determined of before, nothing chances without
cause, nothing happens at a venture. Say not any hap was evil, nor call any
hour unlucky. For these be the sayings of unlearned men and such as be
ignorant in the schole of Christ. We know moreover with Lactantius, that
Fortune Lib. 3. de fals^ sap. cap. 29.
is nothing. And I cannot but with Austin find great fault with them, who when
they should say, THVS GOD VVOVLD 1. Retra. cap. 1.
HAVE IT, choose rather to say, THIS WAS MY FORTUNE.

Nevertheless if you demand of me, whether I condemn by all means the
meaning of these words, I will not say that I do, at least wise being rightly
understand. For I agree well to this definition of Austin, who says, Chance is
nothing else but that which has an unknown Ibidem.
reason, and a cause which is privy and hidden from us. And I think that
Boe^ius went nothing out of the way, that said Hap was an vnvvare
betyding of causes coming together in such things as were done for another
end. Yea if Fortune be nothing else but that which does many things unlooked
for, because we see not the causes, that be hidden from us, as Lactantius
defines it out of Tullie: If in the stead of Fortune God had rather ben
placed, I say (ye profane Lib. 3. de falsa sap. cap. 29.
name only excepted) I could find no falt. Therefore in respect of God, who
beholds and works all things, I say nothing is casual, in consideration of
our selves, to whom many things happen not forseene, I say, there be
casualties a great number.

That which I here speak, percha^ce He shows by examples, how that
which seems chance to man before God is not so.
to the reader may seem dark: but being exemplified, I doubt not, it will be
after wards plain enough: If then some Lord send his servant to the shambles,
and command him to be there at six of the clock, and afterward having his
baylie aside, that knows not of it, bid him do the same: without doubt they
will meet both together, I say both the baily and the servant, which to both
of the^ will come to pass by chance, because they were not made privy to
their Lords commandment. But their Lord which knows how it is, will judge
nothing in this case to have come^ by chance. Which same also may be made
manifest by this example. Presuppose I knew of a certain treasure, which should
be hidden in a plot of ground, and bad some body dig in the same place. Now he
ye dug there, when he should find such jewels unlooked for, and such^ a
precious treasure, would forth wc say; he had a great fortune: but I which wist
how the ^atten stood, should have nothing at all which I might justly
attributerto any hap.

To apply mine examples, even so fares it wc God. Who knowing before ye
meeting and conjunction of al causes, which concur in any thing y^ is done, can
have no experience of any fortune. Therefore What necessity we admit in
those things which be don in the world.
w^ say^^ say well, that all things in deed come to pass by necessity, but not
by any absolute and fatal necessity: by the necessity in deed of Godde^ for
fight and Providence, but not by necessity of nature, and all causes else
assembled. For we donot cominge(...), I say, that which is casual, and comes
by hap, the property whereof is such, that although it be done after some
certain forte, yet has it of self and of his own nature, that it might
have been don otherwise: But we Aug. de Gene. ad l^teram, lib. 6. cap. 15.
say with Austine: The will of God is the necessity of all things that come
to pass, For doubtless God has foreseen nothing, which shall no certainly
fall out in such sort as God has ordered it, and foreseen it. But yet does
not this foresight and will of God change the nature of things, but rather
limits every thing within the compass of his own nature. For surely God is
the creator both of things ye have existence, and also of the manner of their
existe^ce, whereof the one manner of being is necessary, the other co^tingent, or
accide^tall. Therefore those things which god has ordered to fall out of
necessary causes god so knows of before, ye they can not but fall out
necessarily in such sort, as he has forseene them: those things which God has
appointed to fall out voluntarily, wcout any forcing antecedents, God so knows
of before, that considered as they be in themselves, and in the principles of
their own kind, when they be, they might not have been: and being not, yet
they might be: wherein stands the nature of that which is called Contingentia.

Now that many things may be, which shall be never, Christ himself is a witness.
Who being taken of the Jews, when he exhorted Peter to put up his sword,
told him that he could obtain of his father twelve legions of Angels in his
defense. And this whereas Christ affirmed that it might be, and yet Scripture
makes no mention that it ever was: God undoubtedly forsaw it, not only touching
the natural possibility that it had to be brought into existence, but also
touching this point, that it should never at any time come to effect. If it be
so then that Gods forknowledge does not take from things possible their
possibility, neither does it make any accidents, that they can not be, as they
are in their own kind.

That which is spoken of Gods foreknowledge, may be applied also to Gods
Providence. For the effect of Gods Providence (as Thomas sayth^. q. 23. a. 4.
ad. 1.) is not only that some things should come to pass after any manner of
sort, but that some things should come to pass, either casually or
necessarily. And therefore that falls out necessarily, that Gods Providence
disposes necessarily to fall out, and that has a casual success that the
order of Gods providence so frames. Of things casual, which also seem to be
taken away by Gods Providence, so speaks the same Thomas of Aquine 1. q. 22.
a. 2. ad.i. After one sort (says he) we must talk of the universal cause,
and after another of the cause particular. For the ordinary course of the
cause particular it is possible that something might escape, but not the order
of the cause universal. And yet nothing is withdrawn notwithstanding from the
order of the cause particular, but by some other particular cause, which is a
let to it. As wodde is let from being burned by the pouring on of water. And
therefore seeing all causes particular be concluded to serve the cause
universal, it is impossible that any thing should be wroughte, which should
avoid the order of the universal cause. As farforth then as any effect or
deed done, escapes the order of some particular cause, we may say, it was
casual, and came by lotte, in respect (I say) of the cause particular: but in
respect of the cause universal, from whose order it can not be withdrawn, we
may say, it was cast and provided for, and therefore not casually, but
necessarily it fell out.

The universal cause meant by this author, no doubt is the Providence of God, or
(that which is alone) God him self, called of some the first moveable, and the
principal cause and agent: of whom all things have both their being and
moving, who has all second and inferior causes, which he calls particular
at commandment. Nevertheless that which Boethius writes in his Topikes (...)
I say of Destiny, namely that it descends (...), because it draws al
things after it, giuing-place (as it were) after a sort, ye nothing might be
much disturbed: the same to Gods Providence might much more justly be asrribed.
Which does nothing by violence and co^pulsion, but rather so uses the se^ruice
of these particular and second causes, that as he has his will by them, so they
have theirs. Therefore after long running abroad, to come again to our
definition, the Decree of Gods Providence (as I said) is eternal, but yet
executed in convenient time, unchangeable of it self, but yet makes not al
creatures without possibility of change: works necessarily, but yet freely:
subdueth all things to obedience, but yet does nothing by constraynt.

The.vj. Chapter.
An answer to them that deny Gods especial Providence to extend to all his
creatures, as well small as great.

HItherto have we thus far proceeded, showing and proving evidently, that
Gods Providence is an order thought upon from everlasting, and most steadfastly
decreed in Gods counsel, without any alteration to be looked for. Whereunto we
adjoined this clause: VVherby all things in heaven and under heaven, be
continually governed and provided for according to the state of their own
nature. Touching Gods administration of things in heaven, I think no man will
resist me in that point, only Epicure excepted. Whose gross fantasy is
such, that he weeneth God does nothing else but walk up and down in heaven
and take his pastime. But for the aunswering of his vain conceates, that which
has been said already might suffice.

That which follows has more controversy, when I ascribe also to God a
continual government of all things, without exception, whatsoever it be that
is under heaven. For the chief captain and ringleader of all the
Peripetickes, in his treatise concerning good Fortune, would prove by two
arguments at the least, that things casual, and such as seem to come by
hap, be exempted utterly from Gods government. And one of his reasons is the
prosperity of the wicked: of whom, that God should have any care, he says it
is an unlikely mattier. His other proof is, that if God meddled with these
mattiers of Fortune (so it pleases him to call the temporal commodities of
this world) he would rathest send them good luck, which were men of wisdom
and discretion, whereas contrariwise we see for the most part, that the veriest
asses and doltes have the best fortune. Nay he is so far off from condiscending
to us, that God should have any thing to do in these variable accidents that
chance in the earth, that (as Laertius Clemens Alexandrinus, Epiphanius,
Augustinus, Eusebius.
the writer of his life says, and S. Ambrose, with other mo) he restrayneth
Gods Providence to the precinct of heaven. A great adversary (I ensure you) in
such a cause, and not altogether of me to be contemned. But this yet touches
me somewhat nigher, that mine old friend Tullie, whom hitherto I have counted
so sure a card, should now deal with me so unkindly, in shrinking from me,
peradventure when I have most need. For having told me so much before of
Gods government of the world, yea and proved the matier too so substancially:
now comes he me in upon the sodayn (I wot not how) with his Magna In fine 2.
lib. de natura Deorum.
dij cura^t, parua negligunt: saying after his heathenish manner, ye Gods care
for great matiers, but these small trisles they will not look to. And in his
oration made in the defense of Roscius Amerinus, If the most gracious and
mighty Jupiter (says he) by whose beck and arbitrament heaven and earth, and
the sea is governed, oftentimes has anoyed men with vehement winds, or
immoderat te^pests, or excessive heat, or intolerable cold, if he have rased
cities, and destroyed corn, whereof me thinks nothing is done by Gods
counsel for any harm, but by the extremity and great violence that has
happened: whereas contrariwise the commodities which we use, and the light which
we enjoy, and the breath which we draw, is bestowed and given to us (as we se)
by him: what should we marvel at L. Sylla, that when he only governed the
public weal, welded the rule of the whole world, and established with laws
the majesty of the Empire, which by his deeds of arms and by his chiualry he
had so well recovered, he could not to al things have a careful eye? Unless
this be taken for a marvel, that man's wit and policy could not compass that
which God with all his power could not atchieue.

But what marvel we at Tullie, being a stark miscreant and a Paynim, seeing
amongst us also that be Christians there want not patrons of this learning?
Surely a certain grave father, writing upon the first chapter of Habacuk,
touching these little seely creatures, as flies, gnattes, worms and such like,
teaches that God does not take of them any several or particular care, but
generally and superficially (as it were) looks over them. For these be his
very words upon the same place of Habacuk, which I have noted: Like as
amongst men Gods Providence runs through every several person: so amongst
other living creatures we can conceive in deed a general disposition, an
order, and a course of the world: as for example, how a great meanie of
fishes breed and live in the water, how creeping and four footed beasts
multiply in the earth, and with what food they be nourished. But it is a fond
toy to bring Gods Majesty so low, that he should know how many gnattes come
into the world, and how many go out, what a number of fulsome worms, and of
fleys, and flees there be on the earth, what great fishes there swim in the
water, and which of the lesser sort of them must be devoured of the greater.
Let us not be such foolish flatterers of God, that whiles we would make his
power to go down to these base things, we should do injury to our selves,
saying, that over reasonable creatures, and unreasonable, Gods provident care
is all alyke. Hitherto this writer.

But both he and the rest of them might be soon answered. For first, as for
Aristotle obiecting the prosperity of these smoothe hypocrites of the world,
and the adversity of godly and wise men, albeit that might well inoughe
suffice, which I have written in my former book, yet this furthermore shall
be added out of Austine De cinitate: These Lib. 1. de ciuit. Cap. 8.
goods and euilles which be temporal, God would have common both to the good
and the evil, to this end and purpose, that neither these goods (as they are
called) should be coueted over greedily, which evil men also are seen to
have: nor these evils of adversity should with shame and dishonor be
eschewed, wherewith good men also many times are touched. Solomon said wisely
in the first chapter of his Proverbs, when fools have prosperity, it is
their undoing. What get they then (I pray you) by the worlds fauning upon them?

On the other side says the Prophet Psalm. 119.
with all the godly afflicted: It is good for me Lord, that thou haste
brought me low, to the intent I might learn thy statutes. What harm then
does the guiltless sustain, that can bear Gods fatherly correction? But
that which Aristotle never knew, no marvel though he never rightly wayed.
Surely if the calmnesse of this deceuable prosperity should always laugh upon
us in this world, never would man's soul desire (as full well says S. Austine
to the widdowe Epistola. 156.
Proba) the haven of true and assured safety. Therefore when Aristotle has
even uttered to us all his fantasy, let us yet, which be Christians, say with
the Prophet, whom we know was the instrument of the holy Ghost, that the
very rod and staff of Gods chastisement, Psalm. 136.
is our comfort.

Tullie though he be likewise an heathen man, yet (as meseemeth) has a godlyer
meaning in some respect. For supposing that all goodness does proceed from
God, whom profanely he names Jupiter, yet the hurt that is done by wyndes
and tempests, or by any other ways and means, comes not (as he thinks)
from the spring and fountain of Gods counsel, but I wotte not of what blind
sway of the world. The like error is mayntayned of a kind of Heretics,
which be called Coluthiani, saying, that God created no evil thing.

And well shot in deed of them both, but (God knows) tootoo far from the
mark. For (alas good men) whiles they would defend Gods innonocencie,
which notwithstanding without their aid is able to supporte it self, they
see not in the mean time how they pull God out of his throne of judgment,
not only despoyling him of his justice, but also by haynouse sacrilege,
depriving him of his almighpower. God creates no evil thing, they say: it is
true, if they mente it so, as though no creature of Gods making were to be
esteemed as evil. But will they say the execution of vengeance against sin,
proceeds not from the scate of God? To whom then shall we flee for refuge,
when might overcomes us in our right? Where then is become the defendour
of forsaken widows, and the shield and buckler of poor orphans? Is there
any evil done in the world, which God is not able to prevent. How then does he
call his God most gracious and most mighty Jupiter? But as for Tullie, let
him go hardly with his God.

Of our God let us believe, as the Ionae. 1. Psalm. 107. Esa. 3. Exodus 19.
Genes. 30. Psalm. 136.
scriptures teach us, that whether it be the destroying of corn and fruit,
or the ransacking and subuerting of towns and cities, or any other mischief
that is done in the world: it comes, every whitte of it of Gods displeasure,
even as we are certaynely assured that the contrary is the benefit of Gods
blessing. Cap. 29. lib. 8 naturalis suae historicae.
Therefore whereas Pliny alegeth ye Varto, tells us of a certain town
undermined by connies in the country of Spain, and of an other thrown down
by mouldiwarpes in Thessalia, and how that frogs drove citizens out of their
houses in a town of France, and of Locustes, that did the like in Africa,
with many other the like terrible examples of Gods wrath, executed by most
lothesome and contemned vermin: we may be well assured that these dumb fily
creatures could never be set on by themselves, but (as it must needs be) they
were stirred up by God him self.

Let us now come to our aforesaid writer upon Habatuk (for Tullies error is
not vnrefuted, if it please you but to call to memory that which has been
elsewhere spoken) first he grants to us of his own accord, that God has a
general disposition, and a confused order (as it were) for the governing and
guyding even of these things that be base. For he will not greatly stick with
us about this, that God is not ignoraunte what a great number of fishes there
be in the sea, after what sort these creeping and four footed beasts do
increase, with what meat they live, and such other like pretty things. But
he takes it to be a debasing of Gods Majesty, and therefore for sooth he can
not take it well, that we should say he has any knowledge concerning gnattes,
lothesome worms, flies, or fleas, or any such other simple creatures.

Is it a derogation then to Gods Majesty to know any thing, which he has
created? if the very knowledge of such things dishonor God, much more
should their creation. But God has created nothing, whereof he has cause to
be ashamed, who testifies of all his works, that they be exceeding good. And
the Prophet David cries out, that God has wroughte all things in Psalm.
140. Psa. 33.
vvysedome, and that the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. Does
not God know his poor seely creatures, says he? how then did he create he
wiste not what? Holy writ records, not only that God knows with what
food and sustenaunce every living thing is nourished, but also that God
opens his own hand, not disdayning himself to feed every one of them.
Has he such a care over any thing which he will not know? The Prophet
making exclamation: Who is Psalm. 113.
like (says he) to the Lord our God, who notwithstanding that he rules
above in heaven, yet humbles himself to behold whatsoever is in heaven, or
in earth^ Does God see all things upon the earth, and yet has he no
understanding what they be? Wherefore then does he behold them? S. Peter
being eftesones demanded of our savior Christ, whether it were so that he
loved him, yea or no, in the end makes answer with these words: Yea Lord
thou know all John. 21.
things, thou know that I love thee. If God be he which knows all things,
as all Christians certaynely believe, and many ways else (if need were) it
might be proved: why then (I pray you) does this author, being otherwise a
godly and learned father, take upon him to make such an exception? But surely
(what so ever he say to the contrary) not only God conceyueth all things by
his infinite and endless knoweledge, no not the meanest things that are
being excluded: But (that which more is) he has over all things an
especial care.

Which truly if it were otherwise, I say, if God withdrewe from any thing the
help and furtheraunce of his dyrection, yea, and though it were but for the
momente of one hour, it would straighte-waye consume and fall to naught. For
at the first (says Gregorious Lib. 16. ca. 16. in. 34. cap. libri lob.
Magnus) was every thing made of nothing, and to nothing again should their
substance come, ne were it not that he that made them, stayed and vvithhelde
them with the hand of his government. All things therefore which God has
made, of themselves are nether able to hold together, nor to move or stir to
or fro: but so farfoorth they have a being, as God has given them that guifte
to be: so far forth they are able to move, as God by his secret working
sets them on.

With consideration whereof, the Apostle is so vehemently enflamed, that no
longer able to stay him self, O the deepenesse (says he crying out with
much woondering and admiration) Rom 11.
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable
are his judgments! and his vvayes how far be they past finding out! For
who has known the mind of the lord? or who was his counselor? or who
has given to him first, and he shall be recompe^sed? FOR OF HIM, AND THROVGH
HIM, AND FOR HIM ARE ALL THINGS. To him be glory for ever. Amen.

If then God be he, who (as it were) under proppeth all things, if he
vouchesafe all things the great benefit of his presence to that end, who out
of no place can be expelled: if he behold all things with a continual watching
eye (as I have elsewhere declared:) if he can utterly be ignorant of nothing:
what then should let him particularly of al things to have a care? Should good
will? But even by the common received sentence of all Christendom, and
heathnesse, he is most gracious. Should pains? As though it were not as easy
for almighty god to govern, as to hold up from falling, to hold up all
things, as with all things to be prese^t^ to be present with all things, as to
know whatsoever is in the world, to know whatsoever is in the world, as to
view all things with ye eye of his Providence. Could he not know this, which
the Prophet Esaias tells him of so plainly, that the everlasting God, the Lord
of all, who created the ends of the earth, does not faint, nor is vvearied
with any pain? and that his knowledge and understanding is unsearchable? Who
surely is so far of from fainting himself, that (as the same Prophet adds)
he gives strength unto him that faints, and unto him that has no strength,
he increases power. But very Tullie, though an Ethnicke and heathen writer,
yet could well have said M. T. Cie de not. Deorum lib. 2.
thus much, that non ea quae agit, molitur Deus cum labor operoso, ac
molesto, not that which God does, he attempteth wc any busy or painful
labor. And his reason is: Von enim venis, et neruis, and ossibus continetur.
etc. For God does not consist of veins, sinnowes, and bones, nor is nourished
with such meats and drinks, that he should gather either too sharp, or too
gross humors: neither is he of such a constitution of body, that he should
dread mischaunces, or any stripes: or stand in fear at any time of being
sick, by occasion of the weariness of his limbs. If Tullie thought so well of
God, being profanely brought up in gentilitie: what else then becomes us,
having in manner su^ked Christianity with our mothers milk, to conceive of
him that made heaven and earth, but that as he himself is most perfitte,
without any blemishe or defecte: so his goodness, so his power, so his
wisdom, and knowledge of his creatures, so his forsight and providence in
welding the government of the word by all means most absolutely is perfitte?
For seeing these his annex^d properties appertain to his very substance: very
reason and nature, forces us not to judge any otherwise of them, than of him
himself.

The.vij. Chapter.
Gods special Providence is proved to extend to small creatures as well as
great, out of the sacred scriptures.

But what needs all this ado? Let this commentatour pass hardly in the name
of God: and let us give ear an other while to the scriptures? What say they?
Do they teach us, that God lightly looks to his poor creatures, or that he
suffers the world at any time to be carried away headlo^g with a blind
raunging course? Nay rather we learns by Gods word, that even those things
which seem most to proceed of fortune, are yet ordered by God.

For what things come more at an aucnture, than lots which be thrown into a
man's lap? Yet these be Salomons Prou. 10
own words: Lottes (says he) be cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is from the Lord.

What can be more soden, than when a body is slain at unawares? yet in Exodus,
if a man (says Moses) has not laid Cap. 21.
wait, but God has offered him into his hand, then I will appoynte thee a
place of refuge: showing that there also, where manslaughter is neither thought
of, nor pretended of either side, yet Gods Providence bears a stroke.

Many call riches and possessions, friends, dignities, and promotions, the goods
of fortune: yet we read in the. 75. Psalm, that promotion comes neither from
the East, nor from the West, nor from the Southe, but that God which is
judge, both humbles and sets up.

And (to use the very words of our savior Christ) are not two sparrovves
sold for a farthing? yet as simple and Mat. 10.
base as they be notwithstanding, not one of them lights upon the ground
without Gods Providence.

Well, but this writer yet upon Abacucke, is of an other mind, framing his
talk far otherwise than our savior Christ. Woormes, flies, and gnattes
(says he) for their homely simplicity may not be looked to: but for all
their sle^der and small value, poor simple sparowes (says our savior
Christ) are not the less regarded of their creatoure. And what have silie
flies, or vermin offended God, that their baseness should hinder them more
than the sparrowes? But this author (God be thancked) brings but one
Doctoures opinion, which is his own.

The.viij. Chapter.
Ancient fathers are alleged to the same purpose.

WHat say other of the ancient writers? Are they also of ye same mind? nothing
less. For Cleme^s Alexandrinus one ye lived before this man's time Clemens
Alexand. lib. 7. (...).
many years, tells us an other lesson: Christ (says he) being the virtue
and power of his father, easlie goes over all things, as he will himself,
not leaving the least thing in the world, vvherof his government does not
take the care. For doutles without the regard of every several part, the
whole could not be wrought in good order. And surely (as I take it) to go
through with a diligente care and ouersighte of all parts of the world,
even till we come to the very least, is a token of an exceeding great
power. S. Basile when he had given us a straighte In Psalm. 36
charge, that we should ascribe nothing to Chance or Fortune, saying, it was
an Heathenishe kind of talk, not fit to be in Christen men's mouths. Thou
see now (says he, concluding) the eye of God, how there is not the
least thing in the world, that can escape it unlooked to, and unregarded.
Chrysostomus also (as me seems) disputes upon the In. 2. sua prefa. in
Psalmos.
matter very substancially: it could not be (says he) that God could make
small and base things to have their being in the world, and yet cast away the
care of the simplest things, neglecting, because of his great honor, to look
to those things, vvherof he disdained not to be the workman. So does Gregory
ye Great very pithily Grego. in 37. cap lobi li. 27 cap. 11.
prove unto us ye same cause: saying ye he which governs the chefest things,
does not also leave the meanest destitute, because the care of his government
is so bestovved upon the greatest things, that nevertheless the same
ouersighte is not kept away from those things which be small. For he that is
every where present, and every where present alike, even in the government of
those things, which be not matches is yet like himself. Therefore
(proporcionably) he regards all things alike, and equally he disposes all
things in their order. See ye not these worthy fathers how plainly and
sensibly they tell their tale? And do they tell it only? Nay they confirm
their assertion with strong reasons. What therefore should we need to go any
whit further in the cause? It is liked well inoughe of our savior Christ,
if a truth be established Math. 18
by two or three witnesses at the most. Not only ye have heard the scriptures
from the which all things commended for any truth, draw their whole puissance
and force: but also (that nothing might be wanting, even by the iudgenient of
the greatest adversary:) ye have heard agreeably to the same the very minds
of interpreters, which have lived before us. But wherefore should I seem to any
man to deal in this case like a niggarde? Or why should I in any wise leave
him out, which is chief captain and maintoiner of this doctrine? Austine I
mean, whom although he be Gregory's far ancient, yet have I reserved him to
utter unto us his profound judgment in this place, is worthy to stand out
for a moderatoure and chief decider of this controversy. Give then, O
reverend father, thy definitive sentence: Let your charity (says he) listen
to me, and take In Psalm. 184
good head: who disposed in such comely order the preatie members of the fleas
and gnattes, so that they have their convenient place, they have their life,
they have their moving. Consider but some one little short beast, as thou vvilt
thy self, of as small a quantity as can be thought of: Thou would
vvoonder if thou mark but his little limbs, how every one of them stands
in order, and the quick nimblenesse of his life, that makes him to bestirre
himself, that in his own defense he may fly from death: he loves life, he
desires pleasure, he shu^neth grefe, he has the use of diverse senses, he is
lively in that moving, that is onuenyent for him. Who gave the gnatte such a
biting sting to suck blood with? how slender a pipe is it, that he supperh
with? who ordered this gear who made them? Art thou stricken with
horroure, when thou thinckest of to little and small matters? Praise then that
great God, which was the authoure. Therefore my brethren keep this well in
mind: Lot no man make you to fall from the says, and from a catholic and
sound doctrine. He made a sille worm in the earth, that made an Angel in
heaven: but an Angel in heaven for a celestial habitation, a sily vvoorme in
the earth for a terrestrial dwelling. Did he make an Angel to crepe in the
mire, or a poor vvoorme to be lodged in heaven? Nay, he appointed the
enhabitantes to their several mansions: he limited incorruption to incorrupt
places, and corruptible things to roumes fit for corruption. Marcke it well
every whit, and praise God for all. Thus says the good father Austine,
determining of Gods Providence, ye see after what manuer.

How skilfully does he epsy out the very steps and trac^s (as ye would
say) where Gods Provident care has set foot? And woondering thereat very
much, not only whiles he considers it in Gods Angels, but no less also,
whiles it shows it self so notoriously in the fashioning of the silie
gnatte, with what words does he lay it before our eyes?

And a right godly consideration is it out of doubt, and well worthy to be
deeply thought of. For if God had such a curious eye in his first framing of
the poor gnattes proportion? What should we think, that he will do
afterward, who is always most constante in all his doings? Surely as he
began his great Providence in the creation, and woorckemanshippe of the
poor beast: so will he hold on with the like favor in preserving a
creature of his own making. But yet here stays not S. Austine. Who truly
is so far of from depriving any thing of Gods government, that the very
hayle, frost, and the snow by his judgment is not priuileged from Gods
subjection. For very sone after examining and scanning these words: Ignis,
grande, nix, and so forth: These things considering (says he) the spirit of
prophecy, when he had said, fire, hail, snow, frost, and the spirit of
tempest, all which things some fools think to be out of order and to be
tosted (as it were) by happes aduenturous, he added thereunto the clause,
WHICH DO HIS COMMAVNDEMENT. Let not those things then seem to thee to be
moved at a venture, which never fall, nor move any way, but to do such
homage and service, as God appoynteth.

The.ix. Chapter.
That Gods especial Providence pertains also to the meanest creatures, he
shows out of Plotine, and Plato himself.

WIth what face then can it be said of Tullie, that the harm and damage which
is done by tempests, falls not out by the woorcke of Gods Providence? How
can he say that God cares not for small things? Iwis if he had hard but his
own sect, the Platonickes, I mean, and Plato himself, the authority of
whose very name he would seem so highly to advance: could he ever have
fallen into such a foul error? Plotine Cited by Austine in the. 14 chapter
of his tenth book de ciuitate.
without question, who esteemed as much of Plato, as ever Tullie did, whiles he
clarkly reasons of Gods Providence, proves by the beauty that is in flowers
and leaves, that proceeding from the high God, whose amiable and lovely grace
might be sooner conceived, than uttered, it goes forward reaching to these
earthly and base things in the world. All which things being in manner as cast
away, and tootoo soon fading and falling down, he makes it plain to us by a
strong argument, that they could never have such a passing feature of their
proportion, ne were it not that from thence they had fetched their shape, where
the intelligible form, that is unalterable, having all graces together in
himself, has his abiding.

Plato himself in his tenth book which he writes of Laws, makes a certain
Dialoge betwixt one Clinia and his host of Athens. The very scope whereof,
directly tends against Tullies Doctrine. Which to this end and purpose,
that it may be the better known, I will bring in the speakers talking with the
very same words that they do in Plato. The host. The Physicion if he look
not to small matters appertaining to his pacients health, shall it go well
with his whole cure? Clinia. Noe, it shall not. The host. No more shall
gouernoures, nor graunde capitaines, nor such as have care of housholdes, nor
any officers or magistrates in common weals, nor none other such, without
a fevve and small things set in order, deal well in many and great affairs For
neither (say the masons) can the great stones be well laid in the building
of an house, without the small stones be well tempered and laid with
mortar. Clinia. That is true. The host. Let us not therefore suppose, that God
is inferioure to these common mortal artificers, but that he is both
vvilling, and able also to have care of small matters asvvell as great.

The.x. Chapter.
He answers an objection made against him out of S. Paul, vvherby it would
seem: that god has no care of oxen.

PLato goes forward (for he debateth ye cause more at large:) But what is
Tullie or any other, ever able to reply against that which Plato has already
spoken? Yes for soothe, there comes now somewhat to remembrance, that
commonly out of the scriptures is objected. For S. Paul writing to the
Corinthians, when he had applied these words of the law to his purpose: Thou
shall not Deuteronomy. 25. 1. Corinthians. 9.
mustell the mouth or the ox, that treads out the corn: he adds, Does
God take care for oxen?

But tooto manifest it is to them, that well weighe the place that S. Paul's
meaning was nothing less, than to debar any Oxen from the tuition of Gods
care. Which if he had done, how should he have agreed with that saying of the
Prophet David? who wondering at the depth of Gods Providence, when he had
said: Thy judgments are like Psalm. 36.
a great deep, straightwayes he joins to it this clause: Thou Lord do
save both man and beast: openly showing and declaring by the very manner of his
words, wherein the depthe of Gods judgments does cheefely stand, namely
in this, that he does not only preserve man, but also that he has a vigilant
and watching eye, in tendering the health and safegarde of the very dumb, and
brute creatures, that can least shifte for themselves. Which also well
appears by this that God said to Jonas, when he murmured, that contrary to
his prediction, god was minded to save the Ninevites: Thou have pitied (quoth
God to Jonas) the gourde, for the which thou Ionae. 4.
haste not labored, neither made i^ grovve, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night: and should not I spare Niniue that great City,
wherein are three score thousand persons, that can not discern between their
right hand and their left, and also MVCHE CATTLE? He then that saved that
great city, not for the men's sake only, but (as he testifies him self)
for the great heardes of cattle that were there about, is it like that he
has no care of Oxen?

Surely this place is so evident, that mine before mentioned interpreter of
Habacuk, commenting upon these words of Paul: Does God take care for Oxen? is
forced to grant unto us of necessity a certain care that God has over
beasts. But yet shifting, as he may, to gloss the text, he adds in deed
that this care comes but (as we say) per accidens, not for the very beasts
sake, but for us that can not live without the^. As though no dumb creature
were considered further, than they be auaylable for our use. Which how
manifest an untruth it is, what need I to declare with many words? The
premises here before may disprove that saying. For this in deed granting of
mine own accord, that God has put all things under the subjection of man
for his necessary and convenient use: yet that God has otherwise no small
care and regard unto brute creatures, if by nothing else, yet surely by this
it is an easy matier for us to learn, that even in those first fruits which
were offered to God him self: God would not yet any young sucking kidde to be
brought into the temple for any sacrifice. The slaughter whereof being now
newely fauned, he calls the seething of a kidde in her mothers milk. Exodus
23. 34. Deuteronomy. 14.
Whereby we are secretly admonished to avoid all superfluous cruelty, that by
any means might be practiced against these seely innocent dumb creatures. Of
whom if God had no further consideration, but only as they serve our use:
what needed then any such precepte? Chrysostomus therefore says better, as do
other also of the fathers, God cares for them in deed, but not that he should
make any such a law, only for them.

That therefore which is liberally spoken of the Ox, may be also rightwell
extended to whatsoever labors in our behalf. Who^ cruelly by false and
wrong dealing, to defraude or defcate of their due reward, how grievous a
thing it is before God, S. James sets it out unto us very well in the fifte
chapter of his epistle, saying: Behold the hyre of the laborers, which have
reaped your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries
of them which have reaped, have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.
Especially they that travel in the word (as S. Paul says) 1. Timoth. 5.
are worthy of double honor. Whereunto without question, the Apostle had a
chief respect, when he brake out in such earnest manner: Does God take care
for Oxen? Either says he it not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no
doubt it is written, that he which eareth should ear in hope, and that he that
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. If we have sowe^ unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we reap your carnal things? And by
and by after: Do ye not know, that they which minister about the holy things,
eat of the things of the temple? and they which wait at the altar, are
partakers with the altar? So also has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

S. Paul therefore denies not absolutely, that God cares for Oxen, whom
according to their measure he esteems, as he does his other creatures: but
in comparison of Gods ministers and preachers of his holy Gospel, he utterly
makes protestation, that God regards them not. The reason now that he
renders, is as well the excellency of their function, as also the manyfolde
commodity that thereby arises to mankind: so far passing all earthly and
carnal ministeries, as heaven and earth are far asunder.

The.xj. Chapter.
He entreats of provision to be made for Ministers, and namely of tithes,
declaring how far forth they depend of Gods word, and what they borrowe
of man's law.

IF then God have ordained, that he that cares, should care in hope, and he
that thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope: how much more then is
it reason to consider him that spares not to travail with us day nor night?
that ceasseth not in time, and out of time, by good counsel, by wholesome
discipline, by the comfortable promises of holy scripture, by the terrible
threatenings of the Prophets, to exhort us to godly life, to revoke us from
sinful conversation, to allure us to come to God, our most merciful and
gracious Lord, to withdraw us and fray us from Satan's slye baytes, whiles we
drive fast forward into the endless pit of perdition?

It is well in deed noted of Aquine expounding this place, quoniam debet in
spe, qui arat, arare, that ye Preacher which opens the hearts to faith, may
well till and plow the ground, in hope of some temporal and worldly meede, but
not for any such hope: as who says, that trusting always to Gods Providence,
that will not see him left destitute of needful things: yet the Preacher
should not make him self any such end. And no strange thing is it (I
ensure you) that in his spiritual ministry he should not seek after the
earth, who should utterly in his heart be so far estranged from such
profane and carnal consideratio^s, that the very hope of that bliss and joy
which is everlasting, should not half so much move him, as his love and
duty toward God.

But yet O unkind world notwithstanding, and most unthankful to God for so
great a benefit: who had rather give their jewels and their earerings to the
erecting of a golden calfe, tha^ to confer any thing at all to the advancement
and furtheraunce of the Gospel. Who now gladly gives care to that sage
prince, king Salomo^, so gravely exhorting us with these Proverb. 3.
words: Honor the Lord with thy ^^ches, and with the first fruits of al
thine increase. And yet what a reward does he propose unto thee? whiles he
sticks not to promise in so doing, that thy barnes shall be filled with
abundaunce, and thy presses shall burst with new wine. Who trembles at the
voice of God him self, complaining, that through heinous sacrilege he is
robbed and spoiled of his own right? And yet not only makes he ample and
large behestes: but (O Jesus) how fearfully also does he thunder (as it were)
with his dreadful manaces and threats? Will a man spoil Mala. 3.
(says he) his Gods? yet have ye spoiled me. But ye say, wherein have we
spoiled thee? in tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
spoiled me, even this whole nation. Bring ye all, the tithes into the
storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now here with,
says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and
pour you out a blessing without mesure. And I will rebuke the deuourer for
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your
vine be bareyn in the field, says the Lord of hosts. And all nations shall
call you blessed: for ye shall be a pleasant land, says the Lord of hosts.

Whiles then we withdraw that that is due to the Elder of the congregation, God
accepts it none otherwise, than as an injury done to his own self, and
that no small injury neither, but (as it likes himself to name it) a plain
robbery, and a spoil. And shall we henceforth make light of it? Shall we
fraudulently with Ananias and Saphira, conueay Acts. 5.
from Gods faithful minister, the just fruit and gain of his deserved
labor? If ye will fully refuse, neglecting good customs and constitutions,
that are made agreably to Gods will, beware I pray you what ye do. For if Gods
heavy curse do not pull you sodaynely all bare, take heed yet to the
caterpiller, and the locusse, and be ye well advised of the privy thief.

But what of this, will some one say? for whatsoever you have said hitherto, it
Objection.
may be al blown away with one blast. The law made for tenthes was
ceremonial. Tho. Aquinas. 2. 2. qu. 87. To ^^olcot lect. 195. in cap 18.
Sapientie.
Why so? For the number of ten (will he say) being the perfitest number,
whiles we keep nine parts to our selves, and give God the tenthe, we protest
by this very act our weakness and imperfection, ascribing al perfitnesse to
God alone.

So the rest of the Sabbath day signifies partly, that we should rest from
sin, that the works of our own corruption being expelled, Gods own
operation and working might take place in us the more effectually: and partly
also it betokens our rest from al worldly miseries, and that quiet haven of
al blessedness, which we shall eniey with God in the world to come. But what
of that will I again say. Should we not therefore come to the Church upon
every Sunday, being the seventh day, forbearing al worldly labors, the better
to apply our selves to Gods service? But it is ceremonial he says: surely al
things signifying, mulle not by and by be so taken as ceremonial And if they
be, shall there no remnaunt of them be remaining? shall they forthwith be
dashed out quite and clean? He means quo ad forma^, and quo ad mate^am, as
the scholemen speak. 1. Cor. 10.
The Israelites had water no doubt, when they were baptized (as Saint
Paul says) in a cloud, and in the sea: shall therefore the elemente of water
be condemned as Iewishe By this it may well appear to the indifferent and
well disposed reader, that as I mean not, that the Sabbath should be
levvishely kept, being abrogated, as it is a ceremony of the law: so neither
would I that tithes should be paid in such manner and form as they were in
the old testamente, by any direct commandment of gods word, notvvith
standing that the law of tithes in all respects is not disanulled, no more
than the law of the Sabbath.
in our Baptism? they had their shewebreade, which signified our Savior
Christ: should we therefore reiecte the use of bread in the reverend
Sacrament of Christ's body? No not so. For the creatures them selves be not
abolished, but the guyse and manner of their obseruaunce: Even so say I, the
seventh day it self we will keep still, and tenthes we will retain for the
use of the church. But yet in the order of our observation, we will not in all
respects follow the trade of the Jews, but we will do as that spirit does guide
us, whereby Christ rules the congregation. Admit they be ceremonial in some
sort, yet doubtless absolutely they be not. For the celebration of the
Sabbath was not only ordained for this end, that it might be a figure of that
spiritual rest before mentioned, but there be two causes beside.

The one was, that there might be a day assigned, wherein the people might
come together to hear the law, and to do other duties there requisite of
Gods servant.

The other was, that servant living under the obedience of their masters,
might have a vacant time from their labor, for their honest and godly
recreation.

Therefore figuratively and Iudaically we will no more observe the Sabbath day:
yet of every seven days in ye weke will we pick out one for our assemblies,
wherein we will meet together to hear Gods word, to join in hearty prayer to
almighty God, and to receive the holy Sacraments, according to our Lords
institution. Yea and we will cause our servant and whole family to do the
same. All this is moral, and appertains to our civil duty. In respect
whereof, we should not without much impiety, let it slip.

That which I speak concerning the The law of keeping the Sabbath, and
observing the tithes are compared.
Sabbath, might be said in like manner of the tenthes, which were given in the
old law. For as they signified our imperfection, the supplying whereof they
looked for by the coming of our Lord and Savior Christ: we will not meddle
nor deal with them in any wise. But surely yet there be other causes, wherefore
they were both admitted by decrees and counsayles at the first, and we that
come now in this latter age could not without great disorder (yea I might
say also, great want of a due and sober consideration) of our own private
authority, cast them off. For truly of their ceremonial meaning, which some
urge in the scriptures of the old and new Testamente, I read utterly
nothing, that they should be instituted of God him self for the relief of
his Priests and Ministers, that even he him self testifies in the place of
Malachie before rehearsed, saying: Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse,
THAT THERE MAY BE MEAT IN MINE HOUSE. Which cause of their institution
remaining still, why tithes, as the effect of the same cause, Tithes therefore
c^ntinue in respect of causes, for the which they were ordained, not as they
are levv^sh and ceremonial.
should not stand likewise in force, I can not see. Sure I am of this, eve by
the doctrine of S. Paul, that God now has as great regard to the good state
of the ministry, as ever he had at any time to the Leuiticall Priesthood: if
not now also therefore the greater, the more excellent our office is above that
of ye Levites.

But the Ministers may now have the We have no express word of God for the
abrogation of tithes.
tenthes no longer. By what scripture prove ye that? Truly our Savior
Christ rebuking very bitterly the Scribes and Pharisees for being so precise
in their tithe-gathering, whereas they passed not upon greater mattiers,
seems to say no such thing. For contrariwise he concludes rather with these
words: These things ought ye to have Math. 23. This doctrine then is no
Paradoxe. Aug de. te^pore sermon. 219.
done and not to have left the other. And S. Austine purposely making a sermond
de ^eddendis decimis, alleges in the defense of tithes the very same places
out of the Proverbs, and the Prophet Malachie, which erewhyle were recited by
me meselfe.

Whereof if the due use should have That is, if tithes should have been
abolished utterly, quo ad f^rmam, and quo ad materiam.
ben abolished and abrogated by Christ's coming, is it like that eure Savior,
having such manifest occasion, would not touch it? No truly is it not. For
whereas our Savior inueyed so earnestly against the greedy avarice of the
Scribes and Pharisees, not for bearing so much as the tithe of minte, annise,
and commine, and yet neglect in the mean time faith, mercy, and judgment: he
might have had good opportunity to have cut them up hard by the skin, and
to have paid them home rather with these words: We be unto you, ye Scribes and
Pharisees, ye covetous and carlishe hypocrites, ye are very busy in deed in
exacting your tithes, whereof ye leave out nothing that may be had: and yet ye
yourselues, what do ye that might deserve but the least part of them? Nay ye
deserve rather on your behalf, that they should be clean pulled away from
you. For ye oppress innocents, ye wink at notorious offenders, and there is
neither truth nor true dealing amongst any of you. But I say unto you, ye
scrapers, ye that polle and pyll to the hard bone: the time will come, and even
now it is at hand, that your tithes, which so couetously ye gather up, shall
be clean taken away from you. This (I say) might our savior Christ have good
opportunity to have spoken, whereas he uttered to that effect not as much as
one half of a word.

Saint Paul him self in like manner (upon whose occasion we are now entered
to entreat of this argument) when he discoursed of the needful
maynteynaunce that he might justly have required of the congregation, makes
no mention at all of the abolishing of tithes, but speaks rather directly to
confirm them. For see (I pray you) his comparison: Do ye not know (says he)
that they which minister about the holy things, eat of the things of the
temple? and they which wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? So
also has the Lord ordened, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of
the Gospel. Says he not plainly, that the Ministers of the new testament
should live of the gospel, as well as the Levites did in the old law? And the
very chief mayntenaunce of them, who (as S. Paul says) were partakers with
the altar, I pray you, what was it? Tithes I trow. Tithes therefore say I, by
the very rule of S. Paul himself, seem necessarily lotted to the Ministry,
and that (as he also adds) by the decree and ordinance of the Lord. Which
decree, where it should be set out in plain words of the new Testament I do
not see, except it be in these words of our savior Christ, which we lately
spoke of: These things ought ye to have done and not to have left the other.

For methinketh by the very manner of the speech, Christ should give them this
signification: I would not have ye to think that I find any fault with you
for your tithes. Which, nature censenting, reason granting, and my fathers
law, which was given you by his servant Moses, commanding, ye do lawfully and
orderly retain. Therefore in requi^ing and chalenging of them, as to you
belonging by good right, ye truly do nothing in that behalf, but as law and
conscience may bear you out, and (as I also, which am come to infringe no good
order) by mine own authority approve. The law of tithes in the old
Testament, is renewed in the new, but not simply, and as they be ceremonial.
But this, this (I say) is it, which both defiles you, and stayneth you with a
foul blemish: shamefully, and to your great reproach, ye leave that your
duty vndischarged, in consideration whereof, your tithes be granted, ye
proceed slackly and neglige^tly and without any upright judgment in your
obseruances required in the temple: ye thin^ke it is enough for you to do
formally your outward ceremonies, but with how little charity and devotion
ye be moved in your inward mind, of that make ye no matter: and (that which
no less condemns you, than all the rest) ye deal not faithfully nor
syncerely in the interpretation of Moses and the Prophets, which ye deprave
and wrest, as ye will your self.

This seems to be the purporte and meaning of Christ's words, and the These
fat idle belhed svvyn she Prelates are touched.
very natural sense of this place: nolesse touching (in my judgment) these
fat idell bellied swynishe Prelates of our time, than it did the Scribes and
Pharisees at that time, when Christ lived himself upon the earth. Who so live
upon their benefices, many of them, without all care had to Christ's flock, I
will not say to feed them bodily (a duty in deed necessarily required, if
they be able, although not their peculiar office:) but to nourishe them with
the food of eternal life, as though they were rather farmers or gentlemen
borne up by their lands, than any such as did service in the Gospel. Which
I think has occasioned some men at the first, not called to ye ministry of
the church, yet to venture with the better courage (like that king Ozias, or
Dathan and Abiron, who being persons not consecrated for that purpose, took
upon them to offer up strange fire) upon livings dedicated to the Church. But
this by the way.

Christ then does not condemn tithes (as some would say) but allows them,
nor denies them, but approves them, nor takes them away, but establishes
them. Which may very well serve us Hereby is appears, that so far forth
astythes are ceremonial and Ievvishe, I do not in any wise maintain the use
of the^.
for a plain proof, that tenthes be not nakedly ceremonial, no less doutlesse
than the end of their institution.

Which partly (as I have declared out of Malachie) is the relefe and sustenance
of Gods ministers: and partly that their minds might not be encombred with
providing for worldly things, but ye they might cheerfully, and (as it were)
with Why tithes vv^ ordained.
a certain liberty of their mind, addicte themselves wholely to Gods
service. A cause, I put you out of doubt, not invented or found out by me,
but given in the second book of the Chronicles by that good king Ezechias.
Who after he 2. Paral. 31.
had overthrown all idolatry, and taken order that God might be truly served,
it follows, that he commanded also the people that dwelled in Jerusalem, to
give a part to the Priests and Levites, THAT THEY MIGHT BE ENCOVRAGED IN THE
LAW OF THE LORD. Now what part that was, that Ezechias commanded to be
given, the effect that ensued might well declare. For straightwayes when the
commandment was spread, the children of Israel (says the text) brought
abundance of first fruits of corn, wine, oil, and honey, and all the
increase of the field, and the tithes of all things brought they abundantly.
And the children of Israel, and Judah, that dvvelte in the cities of Judah,
they also brought the tithes of bullockes and sheep, and the holy tithes,
which were consecrate unto the Lord their God, and laid them upon many
heaps. Tithes they were no doubt, wherewith Ezechias charged the people,
accordingly as he had learned before, not only by the law of Moses, but also
before the law was given, by the examples of the godly Patriarchs in the book
of Genesis.

The thirds may be given out of S. Paul, who not only would have ministers
relieved themselves, but also of sufficient ability to relieve others:
requiring greatly of a bishop, that is to say, of an ouerseer of the
congregation, as a charge which he necessarily lays upon him, that he should
be in any wise a good house keeper.

There is an other fourth cause besides, namely the agnising of gods
sovereign power and dominion over the world, and that not only we be his
subjects, but his tenantes also, holding all that we have of his goodness. In
consideration whereof, whereas we owe to his endless majesty, not our goods
only and our possessions, but (that that more is) our selves, souls and
bodies: reason it is that in token of our due subjection, and in sign of
feaultie and homage, which most justly he looks for at our hands, we render
(as it were) that tribute to him, which he requires to be received in his
behalf by the stewardes of his heavenly and divine mysteries, and by those
ministers, whom he uses betwixt him and us, as his high ambassadors and
these officers of his religion. By whom honored, That honor or contempt,
that is showed to the Ministers of Gods religion, is showed to God.
he thincketh himself honored, by whom despised he reckeneth himself
disgraced, by whom liberally dealt with, he takes himself as it were
enriched, and finally by whom deceived and deprived of that whereunto they
have just title, he accounts him self (as it is in Malachie) despoyled and
robbed of his Cap. 3.
own.

But now what tribute it is that god requires, by me in deed in some part it
is already touched by some other not yet fully defined. For that we are taxed
by our sovereign Emperor, there is none now that can justly move any doubt:
but whether it be the tenthe part of our substance yea or no, there in deed
yet rests the question. What my judgment is, ye have heard already.

Now therefore (if it be your pleasure) Here I refer my self to Thomas of
Aquine for the better understanding of my meaning: whose doctrine what it is,
it may well appear.
let us hear at the last the resolution of some learned and pithie schooleman.
And whom sooner than that great clercke Thomas of Aquine? Whom now truly I
the rather rehearse unto you, because (as to me it seems) he reduces (as you
might say) to a short ha^dsome abridgement, what so ever I have spoken hitherto
concerning so great a matter in a more ample circumstaunce of words: For
writing upon these words of our Savior Christ, by me already handled
more at large: These things ought ye to have done, and not to have left the
other, Methincketh (says he) our Lord makes a necessity of paying tithes.
For in all the nevve Testamente there is not the like express mention made of
them, as there is here. But is this necessity of paying tenthes, retained by
virtue of Moses his law? No, For there be some things contained in the law,
which be moral, some things ceremonial, and some things judicial. The
moral part of the Law at all times, and of all persons must be needs
observed. The ceremonialles were to be kept only of a certain kind of
men, as the Jews, and at certain times, as namely for example,
circumcision. And these were only in a figure. Moreover, there were some
things judicial, as if any had stolen a sheep, he was judged by the law
to pay four fold. Therefore now the question is of the tenthes, whether
they pertain to the moral law. And it seems they do not, because the
moral precepts be of the law of nature: And that only is the law of
nature, vviche natural reason it self does persuade us of. But we are
no more persuaded by natural reason, to give the tenthe, than the ninthe part,
or the eleventh, or so forth. Ergo, we are not bound to the tenthes by the
law of nature. But on the other side if they should not be paid, then
should not they do well that pay them.

Hereunto some have made answer, that lived before we were borne, that there
be some laws only moral, some only ceremonial, some partelye moral, and
partly ceremonial. This law, Thou shall not kill, is only moral. So
likewise is this, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and so forth. If thou
say, Upon such a day, thou shall offer a lamb at the even tide: this only is a
law ceremonial. But if we say, remember to keep holy the Saboth day:
something it has in it, that appertains to the law moral or natural, and
something there is in it that is ceremonial. This point is moral, whereof
also natural reason gives us secret warning, to vvitte, that we should have
some vacant time to serve God: But that this chefely should be done upon the
Saboth day or the Sunday, etc. it is judicial.

Whereupon they say also that the commandment which concerns tithes, is
partly ceremonial, and partly moral. For tithes be for the relefe of pore
men, and such as apply Gods service, or the office of preaching. For he that
serves for a public minister of Gods church, it is good reason he should
live of their public charge where he serves: and this is the law of
nature. But that the tenthe part should be paid, it is ceremonial. But is
the paimente of tenthes kept now? I say that the determining of that
pertains to any prince, that has authority to make a law, and that the
Church has that power and liberty to appoint either the tenth or ninthe
part, or any other such portion. Wherefore the tenths be still holden, not
because the payment of them is necessary by the law of nature, but because the
Church has so ordained. So far have I thought good to recite unto you.
Thomas of Aquine, that his decision of this question might be the fullier and
perfitlier conceived. Ye see then how he groundeth the payment of the tenthe
part, not of the law moral, or natural, but upon an order taken by the
church. Which church nevertheless (as he also declares in his book called
Secunda secunda) in defining Quaest. 87. art. 2.
and rating out an agreeable portion to be paid, proceeded not without the advice
of Gods word. To the which purpose, he brings in, not only that vow of
Jacob, promising with direct words, the tenth of all that God should give him,
but also S. Paul himself, reasoning (as before ye Genes. 28
have heard in this manner: If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we repe your carnal things? 1. Cor. 9.
By occasion whereof the Church (says this said Thomas of Aquine) determined
that tithes should be paid.

Those constitutions likewise, which Constitu. Apostolicaru^, authore Cleme^^e
Papa, and Martyr, lib. 2. cap. 39.
be called the Apostles, and without all controversy be of no small
antiquity in the Church, say, that although God have delivered us from the
expiations, asspersions, and continual washings. etc. used in the old law,
yet has he not delivered us from the oblations which we owe to the priests.
And by and by this conclusion is added: I herefore thou shall do as the Lord
has commanded, and thou shall give the priest He does not say the tenthe
part, but that that is due: for the tenth part is rated out by the order of
the Church, and not expressly by gods word in the nevve Testament. Cap. 14.
Cap. 17.
that that is due. Which same Decree in effect is repeted Constit. Apost. lib.
8. cap. 36. The counsel celebrated in Foro Iulij, ratifieth the same
constitution, confirming it with the place of Malachie before specified. The
Synod named Moguntiacensis, which was holded in the reign of the Emperor
Arnulphus, says: We give warning and commandment, that in no wise there
be used any negligence in paying the tenth part to god, That which the Lord
himself appointed to be given him in the old testament, that is, the tenthe
part, the same now is assigned to Gods Ministers, by the decree of this
counsel in the nevve. Cap. 10
which the lord himself appointed to be given him. For it is to be feared that
god vvil deprive him of his necessaries for his transgression, whosoever he be
that vvithdravveth from God, that which he owes. Which words be so well liked
of yt they be rehearsed even as they stand in order, by ye Synod of Mentze,
assembled under the archbishop Rabanus. The same right of tithes is
established in Concilio Aquense, under Pipine ye Emperor, ca. 32 et. 33, and
proved at large many ways. As for other counsels and Canons, I pass the^ of
mine own accord. For what should I any more go about to employ any further
labor in the confirming of an open and and plain truth?

Seeing then the use of the tithes began first by the Patriarks, was continued
by the law of Moses, was allowed and well liked of by our savior Christ, has been ever holden from the beginning as a law inviolable in ye church: seeing
reason persuadeth them: Scripture wills them, the very causes of their
institution not removed, require them: seeing the counselles, the Apostles
Canous, the grave and learned writers both prove them and approve them: shall
we now wincke at them any more in the hands of them that have no right to
them? and yet dout, whether they be henceforthe lawful for the stewards and
ministers of Gods religion? If reason move us not, shall not Gods word yet
draw us? If Gods comfortable promises do not allure us: shall not yet his
terrible threatenings make us aghast? If no scruple of conscience can drive us
forward to do our duty: shall we not yet be stirred up and enflamed with
gods sorrowful complaints? with his frowning and lowering looks, with the
consuming heat of his indignation?

But I will stay my self, praying God to direct us with his holy hand, and
nothing doubting but that our Debbora will go forward by Gods good help,
zelously to accomplish that, which virtuously and godlily has been begone. Me
truly not all any private consideration, (and Lord thou know it, that
know all things) but the very zele of Gods house has moved to be the more
earnest in prosecuting of this cause.

The.xij. Chapter.
He retourneth thither from whence he digressed, and shows that the
government of Gods Providence is continual.

I Will now thither again have recourse, from whence I have been holden somewhat
long. It is now a clear case I trust, that God neglects not the least fly
that flies, nor ye poorest worm that creeps upon the ground: much less
an ox or a fat bullock, or any such profitable and commodious beast.
Which how little he lotheth or dis^aineth, thereby evidently it is showed, in
ye he vouchsafed in times past to accept and take the^ for a sacrifice. There
is not then the least thing in the world, ye does not feel the benefit of
Gods Providence. Which if it should but withdraw it self for a moment, all
heaven and earth would straightwayes go to wrack, and the universal nature
stand at a stay.

He therefore which in this respect might be well said to have rested the
seventh day, either because (as Chrysostomus Homilia. 10
notes upon Genesis) he ceased from the work of his creation, that is to say,
he no more made afterward any creature of nothing: or else also (as Austine
adds) De Genes. ad litteras. lib. 4, cap. 11. and. 12.
because he did form no new kind of creature not before made: or finally ab
affectis, because in him, and by him, we rest from the works of our own
will, and De Genes. co^tra Manich. lib. 1. ca. 22.
have rest and quietness in our conscience: even he (I say) and the very same
yet never lets his hand be slack, but, according to the saying of our
savior Christ, Ioh. Euang. cap. 5.
from the beginning of ye world until this day is ever woorking, as he also
himself is never idle. For his Providence (assure your self) is not like to
the destiny of the Stoickes, which whippeth the top with a childishe
scourge, that it might afterward go of it self, or only tourneth the
roller down the hill, ye it might drive forward without further help, by
the very force and violence of his own swaye. But continually it is in watch
and ward according to that saying of the Prophet: Behold he that keeps
Israel, Psalm. 121.
will neither slumber nor sleep. And therefore Basile and Chrysostom Basil.
in. 1 cap. Genes. Chrysostom. in 8. cap. Genes.
ascribe unto God (...), that is to say, an eye that never rests. Gods
Providence does not only give the heavens an ordinary course, and when he
has set them on woorcke, leave them to their own direction, but he makes
them in their revolution so to shede their virtue upon the earth, as to his
divine majesty it seems best.

Sometimes therefore for our just deserving, he makes them like iron, or
hard flinte, so that they yield unto us no croppe of comfort: he brideleth
their force and vigoure, and restrains their wholesome influence from the
earth: yea he causes them to send down upon us for wholesome vapoures
poisoned exhalations: for fresh and sweet licoured baumes, blasting thunder
boltes, and lightening out of measure, for temperate and fair weather
excessive heat if it be in the Summer, in the winter intolerable and extreme
cold: breefely, in stead of good juice, pleasante air, moderate and gentle
shoures, dearths, droughts, plagues without ceasing.

Contrariwise, when it pleases him, it falls out with us, as it is in the
107. Psalm: They sovve the fields, and plant vineyardes, which bring forth
fruitful increase. For he blesses them, and they multiply exceedingly.

How untrue therefore is that which the godless Cyclops in Euripides sticks
not to auouche? affirming that the soil, whether it will or no, of a course
inevitable yeldeth her increase?

God does not only put into our mind wholesome counsels, but he furdereth and
brings the^ to effect: not only he gives us strength to go, but he sets
our paths straight. By whom we are raised when we fall, and stand still when
we are up, and recover when we be sick, and live when we are in health, and
reniue when we are dead.

Finally, what one thing ca^ we do wcout him? and what one thing ca^ we not do
by his help? For of him it is ye we have our life, our moving, our natural
existence: as the Apostle preaching to one of the Athenians, alleges out of
one of their own heathen Poets. Which saying being well wayed and scanned,
furthereth not only mine assertion, but the faith also and belief which we
have in God, whereby we are fully persuaded, that he works without ever
leaving of in his creatures, which he has made. For we do not so draw our
life from God, as though we were any parcel of his substance (as the
Maniche^s fondely held) and as one part and member of our natural body is
nourished and relieved by an others aid: but surely being How we have our
being of God.
an other thing by nature, than he is, for none other reason we are said to
have our being of him, but because he works it by his power. And this is the
work of his Providence, whereby he holds all things in him self, mightily
reaching by his wisdom from one end of the world to an other, and sweetly
disposing all things in good order: in respect whereof we may be said to live
in him, or by him, to move in him, and in him to have (as it were) residence.
Whereupon justly and with good cause we might infer this conclusion, that if
God would withdraw from us this strange work of his government, we should
neither live nor move, nor be any thing. Therefore when I defined Gods
Providence amongst other things I placed this in my definition, whereby all
things in heaven and under heaven are continually governed and provided for.

The.xiij. Chapter.
That God governs all things, according to the state of their own nature.

Whereunto I added immediately, according to the state of their own nature. For
this always necessarily presupposed, which surely is an infallible and most
certain truth, that God uses no parcialitie in his welding of the government
of this world, but loves all his creatures (as his creatures) after alike and
an equal manner: yet this also is no less true to be imagined, that he
considers all things, as they either be in the^ selves, or deserve to be. His
government therefore being just, and according to reason, he does not honor
flies and gnattes with such dignity and pre-eminence as he does man, nor man
as Angels, nor one man as another: But (as Boethius says in a place before
mentioned in my second book) looking out of the high prospecte of his
Providence, forseeth what for every thing is most fit: but (as Plato in that
point writes very well in Timaeo) as every things nature is capable of a
blessed state, so far forth he would have every thing dignified, and made
semblable to him self: but (as holy Scripture it self every where ringeth and
fingeth out) he rewards every man according to his works.

He therefore may be answered even with as much ease as he obiecteth, that
charge us so unadvisedly wcout cause, saying: Let us not be such foolish
flatterers of God, that whiles we would make his power to go down to these
base things, we should do wrong to our selves, saying, that over reasonable
creatures and unreasonable Gods provident care is all alyke. For if he mean by
this his word alyke, as though in every respect and condition, and in a like
degree of quantie it were said that Gods Providence stretched alike to these
simple and brute creatures, as it does to us men that have the use of reason:
it might be well asked him again, who ever was so mad to believe that? for
nature, reason, and our common sense, yea our daily experience does reclayme.

Else what more absurdity should He shows a similitude of the Sun, how
gods providence is extended to al his creatures after a like sort, and not
after a like sort.
it be, that Gods Providence should equally after a due rate and proportion
view over with a favorable regard as well the basest things in the earth, as
either men, or Angels, or other heavenly wightes that be above: than it is for
the Sun in the firmament not only to shine over all heaven, and universally
to give light to all the world, pouring down his beams cherefully upon sea,
and land, but to glanse also particularly through every hole, and with his
great glistering and brightness to expel darkness round about in the very
simplest corner that may be found? Which sun although it envy nothing the
use of his light, but extends it of his own part after a like fashion to
all: yet who sees not, that sees any thing, that every thing does not feel
by it the like commodity, nor in every place where it shyneth, it has the
same effect? It gives light in deed, but yet the blind man sees by it
never the more: it warmeth and makes hot, but yet the beast called
Salamandra is cold still: it mollifieth and makes soft, but yet clay and
earth is the harder for it: it reuiueth in the springtime all herbs and
flowers, and in the harvest it ripeneth all corn and fruit: but yet the
grass that is cut down in the field, it altowithereth and dries up. The
Sun dealing so indifferentely, why is all this? Truly not of the behalf of
the Sun, which works according to the mattier that is vnderhande: but
either the capacity of every thing will not receive, or else every nature is
not apt to bear that which so openly and commonly is to be had.

Even so fares it with the Providence of almighty God, which being equally
present in every place: yet in even portio^s does not communicate to every
thing an equal virtue. In even portions I say, not in even proportions. For
else I know well enough that he always keeps that equality, that both reason
and justice would require.

But why does he not so? what is ye mattier, I say, ye he does not endue all
things with like guiftes? Forsooth for all things be not capable, nor apt for
the like.

But he might qualify all things (if it please him to receive the like
benefits at his hands.

He might in deed do many things by his miraculous power, which he will never
do notwithstanding: yea, and that he should do them at any time, things yet
still remaining in their own nature, how could it, I pray you, hang together?
Shall a gnatte be a gnatte still in the essential form of a man? or shall
that which is less inquantitie be bigger than that which is much greater? or
shall not that which is nowhere, be yet still in a place? Or finally, shall one,
and the same nature, at one time and in the same ground (as it were) admit
qualities utterly repugnant? No truly, God would not that, having limited every
thing that is natural within bounds agreeable to themselves. Therefore he has
made an Angels nature far diverse from a man's, a man's from a beasts, a
beasts from a trees, and so forth. Wherein so long as they continue, Gods
ordinance (as reason is) must needs hold. If it please God at any time to
alter them, he may in deed well do so, I deny not: but he will never so alter
them, that there shall be found no diversity in that point: at leastwyse
wherein the alteration is made.

I say this, God may in deed make a gnatte a reasonable creature: but then of
necessity must the gnatte needs go out of his own kind, that is to say, it
can be a gnat no longer.

God may make a human creaturs, without shape, without distinction of
members, without having any visible nature, without place, without bigness,
yea and by no means able to be comprehended D. Smith page 129. of a book of his
against the late worthy Archbishop D. Cranmer, says, Christ's body is
excepted from this rule, if it be hyd out of sight under the fantastical
forms of bread and wine. Epist. 57.
by any natural sense: but this humane creature is not then any more humane,
not any more (I say) of our stamp. Why so? Damascene gives the reason. For
(says he) the distinction of members does so appertain unto the nature of
man's body, that where there is no such distinction, there is no perfect man's
body.

S. Austine ad Dardanum answers likewise: Take roumes and spaces from bodies
(so that there be neither narrow nor strayte place left that may conteyne
them) and then consequently they shall be nowhere, and if they shall be nowhere,
they shall not be. And the same S. Austine ad Enodium, granting well that
Epist. 101.
the reason of diverse changes and transmutations is unknown, whereupon
follows the variety of all miracles that may be seen: Yet nevertheless
(says he) are we therefore ignorant that there be bodies? that we have a
body? that again there is no body, be it never so small or sclender) which
according to the rate of his quantity, does not occupy the compass of a
place? And in that it is holden in such a compass, that it can not be every
where all whole, but that it is less in a part of it, than in all the whole
set together? These points because they are well known, we may conclude
with good cause that which may be gathered of it.

That which Cyrillus says in his second Book de Trinitate, to prove that the
divine nature is not thronged within the circuit of any certain place, may
very aptly in this case serve our turn: If the godhead (says this father
Cyrill) could be divided and parted into pieces, then might it be taken for a
body, and if it were so, then should it needs be in a place, and have bygnesse
and quantity: and being of any mickle or quantity, it could not choose but
be limited within certain bounds.

Vigilius likewise writing against Eutiches the Heretic, in his fourth book,
shows unto us a great cause why the body of an humain creature can not be
visible and invisible, in a place, and yet not in a place, shapelesse, and yet
have a shape, having the proportion of a man's body, and yet without the
limbs and members of a man. etc. all at one moment of time, and at one very
instant. For (says he) one, and the self same nature can not admit at one,
and the self same time, repugnant and contrary qualities in it self. The
Scholemenne them selves teach this, that God may not be said to do those
things which include in them selves a contradiction, that is, such repugnaunt
and contrary affirmations, that the one of them of necessity must overthrow
the other.

Wherefore I can not but maruayle so much the more at the learned scholeman
Lib. 4. contra Martionem. Lib. contra Adimantum cap. 12. Ad Bonifaciu^ Epi. 23.
In his dialogues against Eutiches In Ancorato.
Thomas of Aquine, who affirming the holy sacrament to be Christ's very body
and blood (as in deed in some manner and phrase of speech it may verily and
truly be reported, both because it signifies the true body and blood of
Christ, as Tertullian and Austine full well declare: and for the unspeakable
grace and virtue that to the due use of the same is annexed, as Theodorite and
Epiphanius plainly teach: moreover because this most reverend Sacrament is
to us a sure pledge and instrument, whereby we receive Christ's body and
blood in such manner and fourm, as they be offered to us, that is to say
spiritually, and not carnally, as to let many other pass Cyrill, Austine,
Barnarde, Anathematismo. 11. trac. 26 16 Euang 10. hannis, and tract. 27. In
ser. de S. Martino In lib. de coen^ Domini.
and B^trome tell us:) I can not (I say) but much maruayle at Thomas of
Aquine, who affirming that the consecrated bread and wine is the true,
natural, and humayne body of Christ borne of his holy mother, and now
reygning in heaven, does yet so set it out, as he says, it is exhibited in
the Sacrament, that ye would think it nothing less than such a true natural
man's body, as he speaks of, for thus forsoothe he descrybeth it: Christus
totus est sub qua^ibet part specierum Thomas tertia part sum* q. 76. art.
te^tio.
panis and vini, non solum cum frangitur hostia, sed etia^ cu^ integra manet.
Nec est dista^tia partiu^ ab inuice^, vt oculi ab oculo, aut oculi ab aure, aut
capitis a pedibus, sicut est in alijs corporibus organicis. That is to say,
Christ is whole under every part of the fourmes of the bread and wine:
Organical bodies be those that consiste of the head, arms and legs. etc.
not only when the host is broken, but also when it abides whole. And there
is no distaunce of one part from an other, as of the one eye from the other
eye, or of the eye from the ear, or of the head from the feet, as there is
in other bodies organicall.

And may I not note (trow ye) the great ouersighte of them, who affirming that
our Lord Jesus Christ is of a truth ascended up to heaven, in that very same
substance which he took of the unspotted virgin, that is to say, that he has
lifted it quite away from the earth, and has placed it above in his celestial
palace, there to continue until such time as all things be restored,
accordingly as it is set out in the Acts: would yet bear Cap. 3. Christ's
bodily ascension stands not with his bodily presence upon the earth.
us in hand nathelesse, that the same body is resident here in earth by all
means as verily as he is in heaven?

And shall we not think their tale is scarce coherent, who inueying against
Brentius, and certain other, for saying, Christ's body is in every place: So
does Canisius the Jesuit in the preface of his first book de corruptelis
verbi Dei. Contra Faustu^ lib. 20. cap. 11. in fine.
would yet dispearse it (as it were) them selves, I wotte not into how many
coasts and countries at one time?

Surely Saint Austine writing against the sect of the Manicheis, styeketh
not plainly to say unto them, that Secundum praesentiam spiritualem nullo
modo Christ^s pati posset, secundum vero praesentiam corporalem simul and in
sole, and in luna, and in cruce esse non posset. That is to say, that according
to his spiritual presence, Christ could not suffer: but according to his
bodily presence, he could not be at once both in the Sun and the Moon, and
upon the Cross. Which if it be true (as we may believe him) how much
less may it be said, that he has the very natural substance of his
human body in so infinite pyxes and boxes at one hour? Does that stand with
the true nature of such a body, as (corruption and sin only excepted, with
the properties of his body glorified) is like ours? Which unless we will say
with Eutiches, that it is consumed and swallowed up of the Godhead, must
needs have the same circumscription that it had before.

That which we write of Christ's body, whiles we speak of the true nature of a
man, the like might I exemplify of all other things, whereof if their change
be in their very nature and substance: then algates we must presuppose of
congruence, that they be not that any more, from whence they are changed. If
God then do not indue a gnatte, a worm, a flee, or any such like thing, with
any such plentyfull guyftes, as he does a man, the cause is not Gods less
care and Providence, that he has over them, but because he would not
estraunge them from their own kind, but leave them, as they be already, by
their creation. For he no doubt is willing of his own part, (such is and
has been always his great goodness) to bring al things which he has made,
to a certain kind of perfection, but yet (as good reason is) to such a kind
of perfection, as their own nature requires.

Thus hitherto have I proceeded (as it seemed best) in perusing over my
definition, which I proposed, of Gods Providence in the beginning of this my
third^ book: showing that it is nothing else, but an order thought upon from
everlasting, and most steadfastly decreed in Gods counsel, without any
alteration to be looked for, whereby al things in heaven or under heaven be
continually governed and provided for, according to the state of their own
nature.

The conclusion of this third book.
THus we have proceeded hitherto in shadowing out (as it were) the nature of
Gods Providence. In shadowing it out I say, Christian reader: for that I have
garnished it or adorned it with lively colors, I dare not in any wise
profess. Nay truly I am rather of this mind, that as the Majesty of God is
unsearchable, so the hidden mystery of his Providence is not altogether to be
compassed with man's wit. M. Cicero. li. 1 de natura Deorum.
Therefore ye wise saying of Simonides may very well in this case be applied. Of
who^ the tyrant Hiero, when he had demanded what manner of thing God is: he
required a days respite, that he might take the better deliberation. The next
day after, when the Tyrant asked the same question, Simonides requested ye he
might have two days longer to take aduiseme^t. At the last, when the Tyrant
saw, that the more time he gave him to consulte of the matier, the further of
he was alwais from his answer, still asking double as many days to advise him
self as before had been granted to him: not a little maruelling at his strange
demeanor, he required of him earnestly what he mente, that he should deal
with him so frowardly in such order. Unto whom Simonides making answer: for
surely (quod he) the longer I am thinking of your question, ye harder it
seems to be discussed.

Even so verily say I of Gods Providence, the further I wade in it, and the
more I muse of it in my mind: the more still I find it entangled and beset
with darkness and mistie clouds. But that which we can not understand,
because God has mesured our capacities, would to God at least we would
reverence, and supply that with virtuous and godly life, which otherwise in
knowledge seems wanting. Would to God (I say) when we hear any thing, which
we can not by and by conceive: we would yet at least wise learn this point of
wisdom, to stand in awe, and to tremble at Gods judgments. So did that
godly Psalmist, who after he had spoken of the like matter, brake out into
these words: Such Psalm. 139.
knowledge is too vvonderfull and excellent for me: I can not attain unto it.
The Prophet Jeremy in like manner being amazed at the order of Gods
government, yet uses no uncomely or vnreuerent talk, but confessing rather
his want of skill, Thou art just Lord, (says he) if Ierem. 12
I should dispute with thee. As who should say, Howesoeuer my brain be not
able to search out thine hidden woorckes, yet thou Lord, art able to
justify whatsoever thou do.

For it is very truly and notably said of Paul: Science and skill (as it may
be 1. Corinthians. 8
considered by it self without Gods especial grace) does make a man stand
in his own conceit, and puff him up, but love and charity does edify.
And be it so that any man suppose, he understands any thing, yet he knovveth
nothing in such sort as he ought to know it. But if any body love God, by
him it is that he obtains knowledge.

God grant we may every one of us both know God, and be known of him to our
comfort. Amen.

The fourth book of Gods Providence.
The first Chapter.
Of the ministry of Angels in general, and of the order and manner of Gods
government: wherein a sentence of Gregory and Aristotle is discussed.

Having now sufficiently (as I trust) declared, what Gods Providence is: it
now follows as a needful consequent, that I speak somewhat of the manner of
Gods government: namely whether he him self (as the Poets imagine of their
Atlas that he should bear up heaven with his shoulders, or as the
supersticious do fable of S. Christopher, that he should carry Christ upon his
back, he having the round world in his hand,) whether God (I say) undertake
this government, as immediately welding it by himself, or else also ruling it
by his Angels, appointed either to their general, or especial charge.

In the explication whereof, as well great wits as learned heads have been
somewhat troubled and entangled: and not Christian writers only, that have
been exercised in godly learning, but the Philosophers also, some of them have
scarcely vnwrapped themselves out of the briers. Gregory writing upon the
34. chapter of Job, seems flatly to deny in plain words, that there should
be any such regiment of the Angels: For thus he says upon these words of
Elihu: Whom has he made gouernoure upon the earth besides himself? or whom
else has he set over the round world which he has made? This is spoken
to this purpose, that thou maiste gather by his words, that God has
committed this authority to none but himself. For he that made the world by
himself, by himself also rules it: neither has he need of others help to
govern, that neded not any assistence to create.

Wherein if this be S. Gregory's mind, that God rules the world absolutely,
without the ministry of his Angels: neither does the reason that he makes,
confirm sufficiently his assertion, no nor yet the saying of Elihu. For what
if God wroughte by his own power, the wonderful woorckemanshippe of this
world? Should he not therefore use the service of his creatures? Which no more
is a derogation to his almighty power, than it is a disgracing to a prince, to
have great store of learned and wise men to put in trust wc the affairs of
his realm: or to have valiante and politic men of war a great number,
hable to conduct great armies, and to fight like stouts cha^pions for their
country. Nay moreover this will I say, if it be a great honor to a worldly
prince to have such subjects, a greater glory it must needs be to the guide
and governor of the whole world, to be obeyed and served of such creatures.
For if the subject have any such excellent and passing quality, wherwithal he
may stand his prince instead: to whose commendation is it, next gods, more
than it is to the very subjects? But if the creature have any thing that is
good: who better deserves the praise of it, than God himself, from whose
spring and fountain it is derived?

But he needs not others help in his Objection.
government, no more than he needed their furtherance in his creation.

I grant well that: Neither has he Answer.
need of ought else, that either man or Angel is able to do. Yet it pleases
him to be gloryfied even of us, that be but brickle vessels, and so highly he
accepts our prayers, our thanks, and our virtuous and godly deeds, ye they
be accepted as sacrifices in his sight. The cause why he uses his holy Angels
in this so honorable execution of his judgments, is not assuredly any need,
(for what need could he have of them, whose whole power depends of his
direction?) but the very order and manner of his dispensation. For God only is
he which commands, which authoriseth, which gives strength and virtue to
accomplish, and therefore (as I might well conclude) at whose only beck all
things how, according to that sentence of Elihu. The Angels of their part what
else is it ye they have to do, but to sustain ye burden of their charge?
wherein be it so they do any thing, that is seemly for the worthiness of
their office: the obedience in deed is theirs, but the vvorcke it self that is
done by them (as writes the father Athanasius in his fourth sermon against
the Arrians) is not their^, but Gods.

But we will not take Gregory at the worst, whose judgment in this point is
good enough For he opens himself very well in his foresaid commentary upon
Job, saying: that although the creator of all things, vveldeth the government
of all things by himself. Yet to distinguish the order of this goodly
universal state, he governs things diversely by the ministry of such and
such Angels.

Aristotle in deed is well co^te^t to suffer ye angels to enjoy their office:
but in coming some what nigh the mark, methinketh he shoots clean besides
it. For in a book of his which he wrote de mundo, (be it so that that book be
his) he resembles God to that great king of the Persians, Xerxis, or to
Cambyses, or Darius, or some such like: Whose manner is themselves to deal in
the waightiest and honorablest affairs: but as for smaller and baser matters
to leave them to others disposition.

We of our part, when we speak of Angels administrations, are yet far
inoughe from such meanings. For we know well affine there is no small odds
betwixt God and the king of Persia. Who being but a mortal and frail man, was
never able himself to entermeddle in such manifold and sundry kinds of
matters, as to the welding of his domions appertained: and therefore it is
possible he was forced to undertake and practice such an order. But God, I
say, our God, and our most high and mighty sovereign Lord, in wisdom, and
knowledge without bottom, in place euerywhere, in labor, and pains taking
never weryed, in love, and entier good will toward the most, and least of
all his creatures most excedingly earnest above measure, has utterly none
occasion so to deal.

He rules therefore eftsoons by his instruments, as well Angels, as other
ereatures of his appointment, or rather The difference betwixt Gods
government, and such as be gouernoures under God.
his instruments rule by him: they as several in their places, he as excluded
from no place: they as his especial deputies, he as a gouernoure in general:
they as subjects bounden to obey, he as a Lord that weldeth all things at
commandment: they as limited within their bounds which they may not pass, he
as at his own liberty without any restrainte: and (to be short) they as
directed by his virtue, without which they are able to do nothing, he as
directing them by his own. See ye not the great difference? What is here like
to the king of Persia, Darius, Cambises, or any such, that neglecte in
comparison their safegarde, over whom they constitute and appoynte others? So
then God rules by others, so often as he executes his counselles, that he is
always ready at hand himself: so suffers he others to have jurisdiction,
that the authority of their commission they may not in any wise exceed: so he
gives away his power, that especially he reserueth it to himself: so he
governs by the governed, and by them that be governed, he subdueth all things
to his government.

The ij. Chapter.
The pre-eminence of Angels, and their authority is proved by the circumstance
of reason.

WHat of all this ca^ be disproued? Whereunto first reason it self brings a
credit, the^ the sacred scriptures bear witness, next the consent of grave,
ancient and learned men, last of all the very records and experiences of the
time that is past. For (to begin with that point which I first proposed)
what is an Angel, if we scan the descent of the Greek word, but a
messenger? What is a messenger, but a factor (as it were) in the behalf of his
master from whom he is sent? What is factor or an attorney, but such a one
as serves for an other?

The Angels then being Gods mes^^g^^^ do him service? but what service? Their
very names declare, which be given The names given to Angels in scripture.
them in the sacred scriptures. For Jacob meeting Gods Angels in his way,
as he went forward toward his country, calls them (as it is in Genesis)
Cap. 32
the host of God. Whereby he seems plainly to confess, that they were sent
to save him harmless, and to conducte him safely in his voyage. Luke in Cap 2
his gospel terms them the soldiers of heaven. Whereby he gives us to
understand, that they hold a continual combat, and a daily warfare in our
behalf. The Epistle to the Hebrews, calls Cap. 1
them ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, that shall
be heirs of salvation. Whereby it is easy to conclude, that the charge of
Gods chosen is committed to them. S. Paul calls Cap. 1. ad Colloss.
them sometimes Principalities, Powers, and Dominations. Whereby not now
obscurely, but in plain words, what dominion and rule they have under God,
without all ambiguitie it is expressed. These then, and other names be given
them as very manifest arguments of their power and authority upon the earth.

The same may be gathered of their The nobler creatures have pre-eminence over
the baser.
great excellency and worthiness above mortal creatures, wherewith always
naturally they have been endued. For nature would, and reason requires, that
the nobler over the baser, the stronger over the feebler, the wittier over the
vnwiser, should have the upper hand. For who is better able to sustain toil
and labor than the valiantest and noblest courages? or to govern and guide,
than the wisest counselors? or to defend others from oppression, than the
strongest champions?

But as every one is most able to stand in steed: so reason and justice by
their authority and privilege may command that they should best be esteemed
and placed in their due room.

What sequel might be inferred hereupon, who sees not? For of the passing
and sovereign dignity, of the excellent wisdom, strength, and puissance of
the Angelical natures above mortal creatures (were there no more said than
has been hitherto) no man needs to dout. How much less should we be holden wc
perplexity, when we hear in the sacred The Majesty of Angels.
scriptures with what a glorious and triumphant majesty, they have appeared,
and showed themselves upon the earth? Daniel writes in his prophecy, that at
Cap. 10.
a time when he looked up to heaue^ward, he beheld a man clothed in linen,
whose loins were girded with fine gold of Ophaz: whose body was like the
Chrysolite, and his face to look upon, like the lightning, and his eyes as
lamps of fire, and his feet were like in color to polished brass, and the
voice of his words were like ye voice of a multitude. Whereupon they that were
in Daniels company, notwithstanding that they saw not this dreadful sight,
yet stricken (I wotte not how) with a sudden terroure, they were feign to
run away forthwith, and to hide their heads in corners for very fear.
Daniell himself, that was left post alone, having now fallen flat to the
ground al quaking and trembling like an aspen leaf, when he had been
eftsoons touched after a courteous and gentle manner by the Angel, who to
cheer up his dismaide and agasted spirits, had very lovingly and comfortably
spoken to him, at the length with very much a do, opening his mouth in this
manner: O my Lord, by the vision my sorrows are returned upon me, and I
have received no strength. For how can the servant of this my Lord, talk
with my Lord, being such a one? For as for me, straightevvaye there remained
no strength in me, neither is there breath left in me.

And yet here all this while was but one Angel. What shall we say of that
apparition, that was made to the shepherdes at Christ's birthe? When first at
the coming of an Angel, the glory of the Lord shone round about them, that
(as S. Luke writes of them) they were Luke. 2
cast into an exceeding great fear, and soon after the souldioures of heaven
in a great number being assembled; the Angels were heard in the elemente with
their musical and melodious sweet songs chaunting and lifting up their most
tunable sounding voice for very Math 28
joy, oh how sweetly and cheerefullye?

Likewise at Christ's resurrection, when the stone of his sepulcher was rolled
away by the Angels, with what a fearful earthquake was this appearance
made? Yea how strange and how terrible was the very manner of the appearing?
For even thus Matthew describing it, his countenance (says he) was like
lightning, and his raiment white as snow: And for fear of him, the keepers
were astonished, and became as dead men. To bring in sundry other such places,
it were no hard thing. But who would not be satisfied with this that is
already brought, touching this passing woorthmesse that is in Angels, of whom
Chrysostom writing in his sermon de ieiunijs, Geneseos lectione: Great is
heaven (says he) but not so great as an Angel: comely is the sun, but
higher is an Archangell.

The.iij. Chapter.
The government of Angels, is proved by Scripture.

Whereby, if the light of their souerainetie do not show it self: what then
shall we say to the open scriptures? For besides those names of theirs before
rehearsed in the same tenthe chapter, where this fearful vision was made to
Daniell, there is none (says the Angel) Cap. 12.
that holds with me in these things (meaning the defense of ye church,
whereof under Christ he was appointed governor) but Michael your Prince. Of
whom Daniell speaking in the end of his Prophecy, at that time (says he)
shall Michael stand up, the great Prince, which stands for the children of
thy people. To this scope also as some think tended S. Paul's words, when he
said, that the woman ought therefore to have power on her head, because of the
Angels. Who assisting the congregation wc their presence, might (as they say)
take just occasion of offense, when they should see in them any dissolute and
loose demeanor. And S. John in the book of his Apocalips, whereas he is
eftesones commanded to write to these and those Angels of such and such
congregations, is literally interpreted of learned writers, as directly
shooting at the same mark. Whereunto then we are led by the Scriptures there
is no controversy.

The.iiij. Chapter.
The authority of Angels is made manifest also by the learned fathers.

WHose authority albeit it might suffice the godly: yet the rather to stop
sclaunderous mouths, let us se I pray you, how well we agree with the age
paste, I say, with the ancient Doctors, and catholic fathers of Christ's
Church. Surely Clemens Alexandrinus in his sixte book (...) (to begin first
with one of the auncientest writers next the Apostles, and not inferior
neither to any that wrote in his time) affirms that every Angel has his
several charge ratably enjoined to him, according to the number as well of
cities, as nations: and adding further, that peradventure there be some of them
that be appointed to the ouersighte of every several and especial person. And
within less than a leaf after in the same book: The power of God (says he)
gives good things by the ministry of Angels, whether they be seen, or
not seen.

Dionysius Areopagita in his book de coelesti H^erarchia, entreting very
largely of this mattier, gives a reason of the Angels names, and namely
amongst other things, why they be called Dominationes, Virtutes, and
Potestates, and so forth concluding that they be called Angels rather than
Superioures, because their order that be so called has to do with manifest and
open cases, and for that the affairs of the world be for the most part
ordeered by them.

Lactantius not only speaks of Lib. 2. cap. 17. de origin crtoris.
this government of Angels, but he tells also in what sort they govern,
saying: That GOD rules the world in such sort, as a gouernoure does guide
a Province, whose inferioure Officers which he uses in gouernyng of his
Province, no man would call his fellows, albeit that he weldeth this charge,
using them as his instruments: And yet they may find the means to do
somewhat which their gouernoure commands not, by reason of this ignorance,
which is incidente to man's frail estate. But the Presidente and guide of
the world, which knows all things, from the eyes of whose divine Majesty
nothing is kept closse, has only he and his son all things in his
power, and the Angels have naught else to do, but that they must needs obey.
De Genes. ad literam lib. 8. cap 23.


S. Austine yet somewhat more plainly sets out the order of Gods Providence:
Which (as he says) having every creature at his ordering, as well touching
their natures as their wills, their natures, that they may have existence, their
wills, that they neither be unfruitful being good, nor without punishment
being evil, first puts al things under subjection to him self, next he
makes the bodily creature to be subject to the spiritual, the unreasonable to
the reasonable, the earthly to the heavenly, the female kind to the male, the
weaker to the stronger, the needier to the rycher. By and by, not very many
lines after: Therefore Cap. 24.
(says he) to the high Angels, who as subjects have the fruition of God, and
blessedly do him service, every corporal nature is subdued, so is every
unreasonable life, every will, that is either frail or Iewde, to do that
touching their subjects, or with their subjects, which the order of nature in
all things requires, but at his commandment, and by his commission, unto
whom all things owe their allegeaunce. Tomo 3. ser. de ascentione domini.


Chrysostomus having alleged diverse places of the Scripture to the same
effect, effect, opens his mind afterward by a very pretty similitude, on
this manner: Even as by the provision of a good captain general, all towns,
cities, and castles are defended with a band of harnised men, against the
force of the enemies assault, and all places are diligently made sure with
weapons and engines of attillarie, from being rased and ransacked by the rage
of barbarous and cruel men: so God in like manner, seeing devils in their
furious and mad moodes rudely ranging and rushing in, to the disturbaunce of
peace and common quiet, are busily meddling in every corner: has appointed for
our safegarde whole armies and troops of Angels, that through their presence
the boldness of dyuels might be quayled, and that by their ministry we
might enjoy the commodity and benefit that comes by peace.

Ye see then the consent of these grave fathers (for the mattier not being
called into question, to what purpose should I wade in them any further?) from
whom neither has the age following disioyned them selves. Amongst the rest
(because I will not stand in it to long) Holcote upon the book of wisdom
sets (as it were) a state upon the question, declaring how and by what
means God executes his government by these second causes. God (says he) so
governs all Holcot in lib. Sap. cap. 8. lect. 104
things, that the government of the second causes comes betwixt. Therefore
these gross and corruptible bodies he governs by the heavenly bodies that
are void of corruption, and the celestial bodies he rules by his angels, or
(as otherwise they be called) intelligences. The reason hereof is this, because
this participating is a greater sign of his goodness, if he that governs
and works all things communicate orderly to other that be underneath him, the
virtue of governing and of working, tha^ if he should govern the higher and
lower sort, and all things immediately by him self. And therefore to show his
perfection, by causing and communicating his perfection to creatures, he
communicates to some the rule of other. And hitherto we speak but in a
generality of this regiment and power of Angels.

The.v. Chapter.
The fifth chapter conteyneth a disputation touching a proper Angel, which the
consent of antiquity ascribes to us, and shows that it is a probable
doctrine, and not directly (as some learned think) repugnante to the
authority of holy Scripture.

THere be some (I am well assured) that look to hear more particularely this
case discussed, and namely whither to every body from the beginning be allotted
his proper Angel. That there should be one, al Ecclesiastical writers before
our time, that be of any name or fame do agree. So is it also famously
reported, both of Socrates and Brutns, two heathen men. And Menander the
comicall Poet (as he is cited by Clemens Alexandrinus) says In his 5. book
(...)
these words.

Each body present has at hand
that comen is to the light,
A free and friendly Angels help
his life to guide arighte:
For evil Angel meet it is
that none we should believe
Assigned of God, that good men's life
should enterprise to grieve.
But as for such authors let us way them hardly as light as any man shall
think good. Surely that place of the Acts is not in my simple judgment so
lightly of any man to be esteemed. For when Peter (says Luke) who had been
Acts 12
conducted by the Angel out of prison, had knocked at the gates of that house,
wherein the brethren were met together, they that were there assembled hearing
of it, when it could not once sink into their heads that it should be he him
self, because they knew well enough he was made sure enough to man's reason,
being kept so straytely in close prison: herevppon they concluded with them
selves, and strayghtwayes affirmed without more adoo, that it was his Angel,
and not he, whom the damoysell saw. By the very manner of which conjecture, see
we not plainly, that S. Peter is judged to have a proper Angel? And by whom is
he so judged? Not by any profane men, but by the godly. And by a few of the
godly? Nay (be you right well assured of it) without any that reclaymed
against it, by that holy Christian congregation that was there so godlily
assembled. But they spoke it (says one) according to a general opinion that
was then amongst them, whereby they were all of this belief, that every
faithful Christian had his Angel. Nature then taught it them belyke, or else
also the word of God. If it were naturally engrafte, it had need then
doubtless to be a great cause that should move us to fight against it: if
it be commended to us also by the word of GOD, with so much the more
reverence we should receive it. If it be confirmed and ratified by an
universal and vnifourme consent, how much less occasion have we to doubt
of it?

Certainly (whatsoever we say to the contrary) the words of our Savior
Christ, when speaking of Childrens several Angels, he says they are still
beholding his fathers face, are not so lightly and slenderly be ouerpassed. And
if we make none account of them: what say we to our father Israel? Who
blessing Iosephes two children, God (says he) which has fed me all my life
long until this day, and the Angel also which has defended me from all
evil, prosper and bless these children. Which being spoken purposely of his
proper Angel (as Ecclesiastical authors do agree) shall we say it is but a
sclender proof?

O but in such a Psalm, where the felicity of the godly is described, God
has given (says the text) unto his Angels Psalm. 91.
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. I will not say here that
these words pertayne only to Christ. Let them also be applied (on Gods name)
to his mystical body, which is the Church. But what shall we then conclude?
That GOD has charged either all, or at leastwyse a great number of his
Angels particularely with every especial manne? If all of them should
continually stand bounden with such a private charge: how could that by any
means agree with their diffinitiue and circumscribed nature? For every one of
them (which were a thing impossible) should be still present with their
assistence, in how many far distaunte places at one time? Again if every
one of the faithful should have a great meynie of Angels always to look
to them: yet who sees not, without any necessity, how hugely out of all
measure the number of the Aungelles should be increased? But truly that
sense we need not to force upon the words of the Psalm, saying: God has
given his Angels charge over thee. The word THEE in that place not signifying
any especial person, but generally all faithful people, compacte into one
body under Christ their head. Over whom, being many, that many Angels
should be appointed, it is no maruayle.

Much less is the especial care of one Angel over one taken away by the
general joy that they have all of a converted sinner.

Much less does the defense of many, by an especial privilege, at a need
prejudice ones ordinary protection. The father no less by Gods law, than by
the course of nature, has the chief charge of his own children. And yet that
saying of Ecclesiasticus is notwithstanding Cap. 17.
a certain truth, where it is said, that every body has a charge from God
over his neighbor, whether he be his child, yea or no. And may it not so fall
out I pray you, in this case, ye one Angel having the chief custody of one,
yet so often as need requires, the rest are not altogether discharged?

But I will not too egerly contend, The author does not much contend for the
matier of our private Angel, but leaves it as a mattier disputable rather than
much material to or fro.
for a thing that is not much material. I know some learned of late days
dissent, and yet dare I not condemn by and by the former ages consent. Once
this I am well assured of, that whether many Angels, or one only be
particularly charged with every Christian, we have no cause to think our
selves not very well provided for, and regarded.

The.vj. Chapter.
The aid and furtheraunce that we have by the mynisterie of Angels, is showed
by the examples of the sacred Bible.

FOr if we call to mind the times paste, whither we consider the hystories of
the sacred Bible, or descend down lower to our selves: how ready and willing
have they showed them selves to do good, not only having a universal care of
Gods dear inheritance, his own people, but employing also particularly their
pains, travail, and great study in preserving every godly and faithful man?

First for their general oversight, that they pitche their tents and pauilions
round about those people, that fear God (to speak here by the phrase of holy
Psalm. 34.
Scripture) let the proud king of the Assyrians be a witness. Who outragiously
vaunting of his great power, and against the holy host of Israel, opening
with 4. Reg. 19.
pride intolerable his blasphemous and wicked mouth, how was he daunted
notwithstanding (Gods Angel fighting in their defense) and to what end came
his furious fierce bragges? were not an hundred, four score and five thousand
the same night that he attempted his cruel purpose, stricken down dead in his
own campt? And by whom was this terrible execution in the defense of Gods
people put in practice? was it not the Lords own Angel, that wonderfully
wrought it, and brought it to pass? Whereupon (as Herodotus makes mention)
when he him self was soon after slain in the temple, as he was now
worshipping his false idol, by his own sons: after the manner of princely
pomp his image was sumptuously erected, whervppon were engraued these words:
When thou look upon me, be godly.

The Israelites when they marched through the red sea (O wondrous and strange
work of God) is it not written, that Gods Angel was their guide? Which as
then it was done so notably, that they might sensibly feel it, as it were,
with their hands: so may we right well he persuaded, that now also by
their ministry, for our defense, no less effectually God works.

Whose singular and sovereign aid how many ways it is auaylable to
mankind, let us consider, I beseech you, with our selves. For would a man
desire comfort, when he is oppressed with heaviness and distress? Let him
peruse of Genesis the. 21. chapter, of the 3. book of the kings, the 19. of
the Acts the 28. of Lukes Gospel the. 22. and there shall he see Agar, the
poor fugitive, the seely persecuted Helias, the succourlesse and wretched
Paul, finally Christ him self sweating blood and water for very anguishe,
exceedingly comforted by Angels.

Would a man think it a great mattier to be delivered from a present
mischief, wherewith he is dreadfully beset? Let him behold Joseph admonished
to fly into Egypt, the wise men to escape from the hands of Herod, Abacuck
carried by an Angel to relieve Daniell in his den, S. Peter loased from his
chains, and conveyed miraculously out of prison. Or would he wish his
attemptes to prosper, and to have a good exployte in his affairs? Let him
look upon Abraham's servant, before whom Genes. 24.
God sent his holy Angel, even as Abraham his master had foretold. By whose
means (O Jesus) how happy and blessed was his success? Let him consider Gods
promise, which he makes in Exodus to his people, saying to Cap 33.
his servant Moses, that he would send before him a certain Angel, and
cast out the Cananites, the Amorites, and the Hittites, with other mo of the
Gentiles, whom he there rehearses. Let him call Genes 32.
to remembrance how blessedly Jacob was assisted by the same means, when the
Angels met him on his journey, as he was going toward his brother Esau. And
(to be short) let the holy History of Tobias, so maruelously conducted by the
Angel Raphael, be a manifest argument to prove unto us, what success God
gives us by his Angels.

The.vij. Chapter.
The furtherance that we have by Angels, is declared also by the examples of
our time.

But because these examples might savor of toomuche antiquity, especially
where novelties are more desired, and perchance to some men, they might seem
to have passed many worlds, and now being waxen (as it were) stale, to have
grown tooto long out of use: that ye may know, God is still like himself,
and even now as careful to preserve us by the ministry and office of his
Angels, as ever he was in times past, let us now come down at the last somewhat
lower to see how graciously God has dealte for us, even within the compass
of our own age.

One Manlius in a book of his collections, tells a marvelous history of a
thing that happened in his time, which he avouches in deed by hearesay, but
yet nevertheless upon a very credible report. These be his words: I have
hard of a certain grave man, worthy of credit, of a thing which he affirmed
for a very certainty to have been done. In a certain village nighe to a town
called Cygnea, a certain woman had her son fetch home her bullockes and her
oxen, that were grasing upon an heathe, nighe to a wood. Therefore going
about his mothers business, whiles he tarryed abroad somewhat toolong, there
fell a great snow which covered all the hills there about, and being
benighted, the poor child knew not how to get forth. The day after, the
father and mother of this child, not careful any more for their beasts, but
much fearing least their son should miscarrie, looked very earnestly for
his coming home, and yet were they not able to venture by reason of the
deepenesse of the snow, to go seek, where he was become. But the third day
going forth, they seek him, and at the last they find him in a warm sunnie
place of the wood, sitting where there was no snow, and smiling upon his
parents, as he saw them coming. And being demanded of them, why he hied him
home no faster: he made them answer, that he looked still, when it would draw
toward night, not knowing at all how the time passed, nor feeling himself
anoyed by the snow that fell. Then quoth they again, son, what have you
eaten? could you meet with no meat all this while? yes forsoothe (quoth he)
that I did: for one came unto me, that raughte me a piece of bread and cheese.
This one that relieved the child, Manlius probably coniectureth to have been an
Angel.

The same Manlius tells us of an other history, whereunto I give the more
credit, because he himself (as he says) was both present at the doing of
that that happened, and himself also was a meddler. For (says he) when we
were at a Church in Spira amongste other Christian folks, we heard Faber
preaching of a sermon, wherein certain controversies were touched.

Whereat Grinaeus being present, and hearing all that was said, in the end
comes unto him, and tells him, that forasmuch as he had heard him preach
of the Sacrament, he would very feign have some private conference with him,
touching the same matter. Faber hearing this, with fair words and loving
looks he made him answer, that he was right glad of his part to see the
happy day, wherein he might talk any thing with Grinaeus, and especially of
such a matter, and willed him the next day after to return to him again to
his house.

Grinaeus thincking nothing, but that all had been well, goes his way, and
coming again to us, tells us that to morrow he must dispute with Faber. But
he in the mean time laying wait for Grinaeus, gets himself to a certain
noble man, and gives him full enformation of Grinaeus, and at the laft he
obtains of this honorable personage, that he would charge the Senate with him,
that he might be cast into prison. Hereupon when we were scarce set down to
dinner, comes me in an old man into our inn, and when dinner was done: he
calls me unto him standing before the gates, asking me of Grinaeus, whether
he were within: unto whom I answered, that he was so. Then quod the old man,
there is a great danger hanging over his head, which if he be minded to eschew
let him be gone hence with all speed. Whereof when I had enfourmed Grinaeus,
I persuaded him to fly away with all haste, and he follows my counsel.
Therefore rising from dinner I, master Cruciger, and he, forth we go with our
servants following at our heels, and Grinaeus he went in the midst of us.
We had not yet passed four or five houses, but the sergeantes were in the Inn
to seek Grynaeus. Where seeing that they could not find him, they sought no
further, either because they were commanded to seek him there only, or
because that they knew us not, or finally, because they were otherwise nothing
cruelly disposed. I asked many afterward, whether they knew this man:
minding to have given him thanks for his friendship. But no body could
enfourme me, who he was, nor yet could I set eye upon him ever after. This
man surely I think was an Angel. Thus far goes Manlius with his declaration.

Whose judgment ye see in a case very seldom hard of, to be neither unlikely,
nor far from the truth.

The.viij. Chapter.
Angels notvvithstanding their government) must not be called upon in our
prayers: more than any other creature.

TOuching this matter of Angels, I might here conclude and make an end, ne
were it not, that I doubted supersticious heads might hereby take occasion of
some error. For hearing me perchance so much stand in the praise of Angels,
they will byandby wrongfully misdeme, that therefore they should be honored with
invocation: very injuriously attributing that to creatures, which god only
does challenge by his own right: An old festred error, that has been long in
growing, as it appears by the Apostle Paul, begun by heathen men and Colos. 2
false Prophets, nourished afterward by our evil disposed natures, and at
the length confirmed (as it were, by corrupt custom. Against the vanity
whereof not justified by any godly man's example, not warranded by scripture,
not grounded utterly upon reason, to dispute at large I think it needelesse,
to say much I take it to be nothing meet.

But (to touch that briefly, which makes for our present purpose) they surely
that think honorably (as it becomes them) of the government and
excellency of Angels, do not yet conclude any such thing. Namely that
divine writer Lactantius, is of us doubtless worthy De Origin^ erroris, lib.
^^ cap. 17.
to be well thought of. Who mentioning the dominion that Angels have, when he
had showed, they could go no further than the authority and reach of their
commission, straightwayes he adds this conclusion: The Angels therefore
would have no honor to be done to them, whose honor is all in God. Of the
dignity of Angels, and of their rule: ye have heard also the mind of
Austine. And yet nevertheless in his. 10. book de ciuitale, see (I pray you)
what he writes: Cap. 1^^
Porphyrie (says he) that Philosopher of Platoes sect does also give us
very good counsel, saying that Gods Angels should be follovved in
conversation, and not worshipped with the honor of Invocation. And
Epiphanius which wrote a great while before Austine, speking against the sect
of the Collyridians, when he had said, let nobodie do Marie any godly honor,
I say not, Let no woman do her godly honor, but I say also, Let no man. For
this mystery of adoration is due to God: I say, this worthy writer Epiphanius
when he had said Haeresi. 79. Lib. 3.
those words which we have rehearsed, goes forward, saying in plain terms,
that the Angels themselves would not be glorified in such sort: and
therefore wishing, that such noughtie lessons so evil graven in seducers
hearts, should be blotted out.

Yea marie (will some say) you say true in deed in this point, when you would
not have Angels to be adored: but what proves this against them, which
would only have them called upon in our prayer? As though calling upon them
every where, with a sure confidence in them that they can help us, that they
can always hear us, that they can favor and further us either more, or as
much at least, as did Christ our savior that vouchsafed to die for us, might
not justly be called an invocation? Or as though invocation including (as S.
Paul writes Cap. 10
to the Romans) a belief in him upon whom we call, were not a chief part
belonging to godly honor? Surely Origene both an ancient and learned writer,
betwixt Lib. 8. ad Romanos.
calling upon, and adoring, seems utterly to put no distinction: For even
these that follow, be his flat words: In^^pcare domini nomen et adorare deum,
vnum atque idem est: that is to say, It is al one in effect to call upon the
name of the Lord, and to do service to God with godly honor. Which Ambrose
wisely considering, In Epist. ad Colos. cap. 1
if any body (says he) be of that mind that he thinks that he may have
devotion toward any of the Angels or powers above, let him know that he is
in an error. For he that humbles himself in such sort to them, who
themselves be subjects, he is far vvide, not holding the head which is Christ.

What a sore censure is, ye this S Amb. gives against such as will be devout
to angels, which if I my self should have pronounced wc mine own words:
Jesus, how bitterly in some men's mouths should I have tasted? well, they that
would not abide to hear me, let them not yet think it to much to give ear to
Ambrose, to Lactantius, to Austine, to Epiphanius. Whose grave authority if
they disdain, especially being so agreeable to holy scripture:) why should I
think to prevail with the^ by heaping up other such like places?

And may we not then call upon Gods Angels in our defense? May we do them no
godly honor? No, say these fathers, no also, say they themselves, protesting,
in respect of their subjection to God, y^ they Apoc. 19. 22
are nothing but our fellow servants.

What shall we then say? doubtless, in the judgment of Epiphanius, upon Lib.
3. cont. Collyridianos haeresi. 7 9
this ground as infallible, we may safely and surely thus reason: if God would
not have Angels to be adored: how much more would he not have her to be
adored, which was borne of Anna?

Yea, and yet will I join with a further issue: If the holy virgin, the mother
of our savior Christ may not be adored: much less may any other saint
have such honor. The worshipping of whom being departed, (as it appears by
the said Epiphanius) was both forspoken and forbidden also long ago by S. Paul:
howsoever that text be not now to be found in his Epistles.

The case therefore thus standing, might I not wc good cause, exhort ye reder in
this manner, using S. Augustines own words? Let us not make it a religion to
worship those men that be gone hence. For if they De vera religione, cap.
vltimo.
led here a godly life, they may not be counted for such me^, that they would
seek after such honors. But they would, that God should be honored of us, by
the light of whose influe^ce they are very glad that we also are co^panio^s
with the^ in their well deserving. Therefore saints must be honored by following
of their virtuous steps, and not worshipped with any religious devotion. And
anon after: Let us believe also that the good a^gels would have us so to do, that
we with them might join in the service of one god. And yet more. wherefore
we honor them by love, and not by service. etc. Neither do we build for the^
any temples. For they will not be so honored of us, knovving well that we
our selves, if we be good, be the temples of God. Wherefore it is well
written, that man was forbidden of the angel to worship him, but all only to
vvorshippe one God, under whom the Angel was as well a servant as he.

But nothing ran be so plainly spoken, that might satisfy contentious and
curious wranglers. Therefore as if they had in hand a chief post and pillar
of the Christian faith, so busily they bestirre themselves in the defense of
this creatures Invocation. We deface all religion (say they) yea we open our
mouths wide against heaven it self. As though prayer were not rather defined
to be a lifting up of our hearts to God, than a casting of them down to any
thing, that is but the woorkemanship of Gods creation: As though religion
stood not in the woorshipping of god only, and not in doing service to his
creatures. Nay (say they) but yet our suit is all to God, to whom we use
creatures as a mean only. This miserable excuse was used by some other in
times past, affirming, that they had none otherwise recourse to god, than they
had access to Kings and princes, namely by the intercession of mediatoures.
But it is good to hear the answer, that S. Ambrose makes: we come In
epistolam Pauli ad Romans cap. 1.
(says he) unto the King, by means of Dukes and Earls, because that the
King is a man, and knovveth not to whom he may commit the common weal. But
to procure Gods favor, from whom nothing can be hid (for he knovveth all
men's deseruings) we need no spokesma^, nor mediator, but only a devout mind.

Chrysostomus in like manner as in many places he persuadeth us to fly only to
our savior Christ: so notable is ye which he says, whiles he thus speaks to
the woman of Cananaea: Tell me, O woman, Chrysostomus de muliere Chananaea
homilia. 12. in Tomo. 50
how durst thou being a sinner, and void of righteousness, be so hardy as to
approach to him? whereunto he makes her to answer, I know what I have to do.
And immediately upon these her words, See the wisdom of the woman (says
Chrysostomus) she prays not James, she besecheth not John, neither goes she
to Peter, nor steppeth to the rest of the Apostles, no mediator seeks she:
but instead of all the^ to speak for her, she takes repentance to bear her
company, which supplied the rouine of an advocate, and so she went straight
forvvard to the chief fountain. Therefore (quoth she) Christ descended,
therefore he took flesh, and was made man, that I also might be bold to
speak to him.

And S. Austine is so far of from their mind, that he says plainly, that to
have De ciuitate Dei, Lib. 9. cap. 15
a great many of mediators, it would hinder us even with their great number,
from coming to that only one God, which is the giver of bliss: to whose
presence that we might be brought, we have not need of many, but one only
mediator, and that must be eue^ he himself, by partaking of whom we are
happy, I mean the word of god, not that which was made, but that vvherby
all things were made.

S. Austine ye see here, is at a plain point, who not only stops us the way
from fleing to many mediators, but also paynteth us (as it were) with the
finger to our only Lord and savior Jesus Christ. To whom he also sends us
with very earnest and effectual words in his first treatise upon S. John's
Epistle, and that by none others example, but even ye said Evangelists his
own self: Behold (says he) John himself how he observes humility. No
dout he was a just man, and thereto also of great worthiness, which drank out
of the lords breast, the secrets of Gods mysteries: he he (I say) which by
drinking out of the lords breast, did brethe out Divinity with a full stomach,
saying: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God: he
being such a man said not you have an advocate with the Father, but if any
man sin, we have (says he) an Advocate: he said not ye have, nor he said
not ye have me, neither said he, ye have Christ himself, but both he put in
Christ, and not himself, and also he said we have, and not ye have. He chose
rather put himself amongst the number of sinners, that he might have Christ
his advocate, than put in self in the stead of Christ, and be found amongst
the proud that shall be damned. Brethren we have Jesus Christ the righteous
his own self an advocate with the father, and he it is that is the mean to
obtain pardon for our sins. He that has held this, has committed no
heresy, he that has held this, has made no schism. Thus far Austine.

The.ix. Chapter.
The profit that is to be taken by Gods Providence, as also by all other
things, stands in the due use and application.

WE have now almost satisfied our promise, which we made in the beginniug
of this discourse: not only having proved Gods Providence by diverse and
sundry arguments, but also having answered their obiectio^s that bark and bite
at the same doctrine: not only having declared at large, what Gods Providence
is, but (so farreforthe as Gods word would bear) having disclosed also the
very manner of Gods government.

Now only this remains behind, without the which all that ever we have
said hitherto, is as nothing: which is, that we gather of the wholesome fruits
that are sown in this fruitful garden, that we reap the corn that grows
in these pleasant fields, that we enjoy the commodity of this orcharde,
wherein we may safely without danger (only the apple of curiosity set
aparte) taste of all the trees and graffes that we could desire: I say, that
we apply this that is taught generally concerning the Providence of almighty
God, to our singular and especial comfort.

But how then shall that be brought to pass? Epictetus the Phildsopher said
very well, that every thing has his handle or stouke to hold by, which if we
take in our hand the right way, then can it not otherwise be chose^^, but
that rightely we may use it to our commodity. Else surely the trial of our
own experience does instruct and teach us the flat contrary, to wit, that
nothing is more damageable or noisome. Whereof even in those things that be
most usual, we see daily the examples before our fate.

What more profitable than the water which we use in bathing, seething,
washing, in nourishing of our bodies, in carrying over both our selves, and
our wares beyond ye seas, with many other commodities which it brings
besides? Nevertheless if we use it in our shoes or boots, or bathe our selves
in it out of time, or drink of it immoderately without reason, or fall into it
desperately over both the ears, or wash with it when it is scalding hoate, we
shall truly find by it so little ease, that we shall not fail to repent us
of our meddling.

What more necessary than the fire, which in cold gives heat, in darkness
light, of all cooks, smithes, and coliers, etc. a very needful and
convenient instrument? In his book of the profit that is to be taken of
enemies.
Yet Satyrus (as it is in Plutarche) the first time that he saw fire, when he
would have taken it, and kissed it: Let be (quod Prometheus) thou roughe knave,
if thou take not heed, it will make thy lips smarte. For as it warmeth
being well used, so being disvsed it burns, and as it nourishes and
comfort with his temperate heaie him, that coming out of the cold slandeth
not to nighe, so him that will stand in the midst of it, it consumes.

That which I say of fire and water, the same may I say either of Gods justice,
or his mercy: the same may I also write at this time of Gods Providence.
Wherein if we will raunge at liberty without bridle, and not stay our selves
within that compass that is limited and assigned by God: what do we, but to
our own confusion build Babylon new again? But if moderating our sensual
appetites, we be content to hear no longer than God speaks, and renouncing
our fleshly judgments, we can willingly give place to faith, then lo that
spiritual solace, that no tongue or pen can well express, straight ways
arises in our hearts.

The.x. Chapter.
The comfort which we receive by Gods Providence.

FOr if thou stand in danger of thine enemies, (as it is hard for any man
living to be without a foe) cast not down thy courage for all that, nor be
thou therewith dismayde. For he that gave the Israelites favor in the sight
of the Egyptians, either will stir up the godly in thy defense, yea such
peradventure as thou never yet knew, who of a Christian zele will disdain
at the malice of thy foes: or else so alter their affections, and turn their
hearts that he thine adversaries, that forgetting all rancour of il will, they
will shake hands with thee again, and become thy friends. At least wise if the
heat of their hot passions will not be cooled: yet is he able to deliver thee
diverse ways out of all of thy hunters snares, either casting a myste, as it
were, before their eyes, that seeing thee, they shall not be able to see, or
else pulling away their minds so sharply whette to do vengeance by some
other incident occasions, or bringing them back perforce from their cruel
crooked intentes, with his hook fastened in their nostrelles, and his bridle in
their lips: or finally working other strange ways, that should utterly be
out of the compass of man's wit.

The example whereof both we see in others a great meynie, and very notably in
the good bishop Athanasius. Whose death, when it was once conspired, by
Constantinus the Emperor, son to Constantine the great, who was bewitched
with the Heresy of Arrius, he committed the execution of this heinous and
bloody fact to one Sebastian the marshal of his army. Who afterward, when he
besieged the temple wherein Athanasius Athanasius in Apologia exilij sui.
was at his prayers, and was now presently in a readynesse to murder this man
of God, he escaped maruellously out of his hands. For the Lord guiding his
passage, he went forth through the midst of this capitaynes band, and yet
to no body was known.

Achab in his leude enterprise being set on by false Prophets, who being 3
Reg. 22.
seduced them selves by lying spirits, sent from God for their punishment,
seduced Achab him self, was slain in the field, being stricken between the
joints of his brigandine.

Achitophels counsel against the 2. Reg. 17.
anointed king David, before it could utterly take place, came to naught.

The traiterous rebellion of Arbogastus Ruffious Eccle siastica hesto. lib. 11.
cap. 33.
Francus, and Eugenius, against their worthy Emperor Theodosius Augustus, was
confounded by God him self, that seemed to fight against them from heaven.
For whiles they were exceeding fierce in their outrageous fury, weening to
have prevailed by main force, such a myghtie wind and tempeste was sodaynely
raised in their faces, that their eyes being almost put out with the smoke
of the duste that was stirred up, and their weapons violently driven back,
they were feign to recule backwardes, and to fly.

Surely that which God did then, ye like has been done often times both
before, and since. And let us never be so fond to Esai. 5^.
think that his hand is now shorter than it was before, especially against
our own experience.

But if sometimes the contrary fall out, that we seem in a manner to be
neglected, whiles God suffers our enemies to tread us down: yet let us
never be our own judges in condemning Gods fatherly Providence, and too much
justifying of our selves: let us rather be of this belief, that God suffers
us to be foiled for our own deserts. Whereof if there be no apparaunt cause,
yet nevertheless thinking always the best of Gods doings, let us still
learn patience and humility. Whereunto if we apply our selves (as surely that
we ought to do I am most certain) then even in ye midst of our adversity,
be we never so left naked of worldly aid, we shall recreate our selves with this
sentence: the lord gave, and the lord took away: blessed be the name Job. 1.
cap.
of the lord: then with Mauricius ye emperor seeing his wife led to execution, we
shall be ready to break out into this confession: thou art just lord, and thy
judgment is right. Psalm. 119.
Finally, whatsoever shall become of us, we shall always be thus persuaded, that
God has all the bones of ye righteous in Psalm. 34.
his custody, and not so much as one of the^ shall be broken, that not one
hair of our head shall perish: yea (and that more is) that he will not suffer
our tears to Math. 10. Luke. 21. Psalm. 56.
fall on the ground, but keeping a due reckning of them, that he will put them
up diligently into his bottell.

Oh the wonderful kyndnesse of almighty God, O dear love, O unspeakable
tenderness. We were wont to marvel at the great humanity that was in
Theseus, who disdayned not with his own hands to wash the carcasses of his
soldiers dead bodies, that were slain at the siege of Thebes. But let us now
no more talk of him, whose great courtesy in comparison we may esteem as
nothing. For first let us consider, I beseech you, what he is, that over us
seely worms of the earth shows him self to be so dear and tender. Is he
like Theseus, a mortal creature? No, it is even he that fourmed us of the
slyme of the earth, by whom kings hold their dominions, him self being Lord
of all Lords, and altogether perelesse of his estate. And whose tears be they
that he gathers up? not the tears of Angels, I warrande you, for no such
humor can light on them: but the tears of us sinful creatures, whose
infirmities and imperfections be out of number, whose uncleanness is far more
loathsome than the ordure and filth of any carreyn.

Go too then, ye cruel tyraunts, pour out your furious rage, whiles ye list,
drink ye up the blood of Gods innocente lambs, freyte away your selves till
your hearts ache: the venime of your cursed dealing shall work in the end but
your own woe. Well in deed may ye shoot out your empoysoned boltes: well may
ye storm and stir up strife: but at the last, when ye have scarce touched
their outward garment, I say, the weak vesture of their flesh, ye your
selves shall horribly be plagued for it in the flaming furnace of hell fire.
In the mean time be ye never so insolent in your proud attemptes, yet know
it for a certaynetie, ye have your race appointed which ye must run, and a
compass limited which ye may not pass. Out of the which if ye would wander
and go at large, there is a hook prepared for you, (and never doubt of it)
that very speedily shall make you to retire.

And thou well-beloved of God, that now sighest and gronest for thy deliverance,
Romans 8.
doubt not but thy Lord Jesus will come with speed. Think him not to long, I
Psalm. 27.
pray thee, nor do not faint, especially having this persuasion, that thou
shalt see the Lords goodness in the land of the living. Therefore to go
forward with the words of the Psalm: O tarry thou Psalm. 55.
(dear brother) the Lords leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort thine
heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord. Call now and then to thy
remembrance what comfortable and loving promises God himself has made thee
in holy Scripture, when thou art bidden to cast thy burden upon none but
him, he promising him self, that he will nourish thee, and that he will not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever.

And who would not take unto him a good heart, yea though he were in manner at
deaths door, when he should hear his sovereign and liege Lord so Esai. 49.
amiably speaking unto him in this manner: Can a woman forget her child, and not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Though they should forget, yet will I
not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee upon the palm of mine hands. Hear
ye Esai. 40.
me, O ye house of Jacob, and all that remain of the house of Israel, which
are borne of me from the womb, and brought up of me from the birthe. Therefore
unto old age I the same, even I will bear you until the hoar hairs: I have
made you, I will also bear you, and I will carry you and I will deliver you. If we
feel ye yoke of our affliction so heavily pressing upon our shoulders, that we
are now almost ready to fall under it: The Lord vpholdeth (says the Psalmist)
all that fall, and lifts Psalm. 149.
up all that are ready to fall. Let nothing then make you careful, seeing the
Phil. 4.
Lord so ready at your elbowe.

These and many other such sweet promises God makes us by his Prophets in
his word. And should we doubt, whether we should believe him, yea or no? What
cause have we to discredit him? has he not preserved us hitherto from our
mothers womb, when we were hardly and daungerously beset? Did he ever fail us
at our need, when we called faithfully and unfeignedly upon his name? Has he
not delivered us Collos. 1.
from the power of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of his dear
Son? Has he not justified us, and sanctified us, and made us an holy people
unto him self? Yea what will we more? He has given us his own son, our
Rom 8.
Lord and savior Christ to be our ransom: and will he deny us that which is
much less in value? He has hitherto been our gracious and good Lord: and
will he now shake us of, and give us over? Nay, he has said the word, and
without doubt he will never revoke it: He that touches you, touches the apple
of Zacha. 2.
his eye. So long then as we walk with a good conscience, why should we fear?
For it is better (says the Apostle Peter) if the will of God be so, that well
doing 1. Peter. 3.
we should suffer smarte, than to endure punishment for evil doing.

But it greeueth us to run into slander, when we have well deserved, and to
lose ye credit of a good name, that is painfully purchased by a virtuous life,
that is more bitter to us than death it self. A great temptation I must needs
grant, and surely I think Satan our ancient foe has not a more subtle
practice, than this one only way. Whose manner is (says Austine in an epistle
of his ad Clerum) Epistola. 137.
that whom he can not devour by seducing him to leude conversation, his fame
he assaieth to blemish, that he should faint (if it may be) through men's evil
reports, and through the malice of slanderous and ill favored tongs, and by
this mean fall into his jaws. Wherefore the holy Prophet putting up his
lamentable complaynt, cries out unto God in this manner: Deliver my soul O
Lord, from lying Psalm. 120.
lyps, and from a deceitful tongue. What does thy deceitful tongue bring unto
thee? or what does it avail thee? It is as the sharp arrows of a mighty
man, and as the coals of Juniper. The tongue (S Jacob. 3.
James says) is fire, yea a world of wickedness: so is the tongue set among
our members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, and is set on fire of hell. For the whole nature of beasts, and of
birds, and of creeping things, and things of the sea is tamed, and has been
tamed of the nature of man. But the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly
evil, full of deadly poison.

How then shall we encounter with so great a mischief? See here again dear
brother, what it is to depend upon only God. Take unto thee hardly ye same
weapons, and flee into the same castle that thou did before. Gods Providence
for every sore is a sovereign salve. So did godly David, being railed at, and
ratled wc spiteful words by Semei that malicious man, casting stones at him,
and crying to him as he passed by: Come forth, come forth thou murderer, and
wicked man, with 2 Reg. 16.
such other opprobrious terms. For when Abisai being grieved to hear such
reprochful words, especially against the Lords anointed, said unto the king
his master, why does this dead dog curse my Lord the king? Let me go, I pray
thee, and take away his head. The king answering soberly again, what have I
to do with you (quod he) ye sons of Zeruiah^ For he curses even because the
Lord has bidden him curse David. Who dare then say, wherefore have thou done
so? Behold my son, which came out of mine own bowels seeks my life: then
how much more may now this son of Iemini? Suffer him to curse, for the Lord
has bidden him. It may be that the Lord will look one mine affliction, and do
me good for his cursing this day. Whereof also in the Psalms he makes mention,
saying, I was blanke, and not once opened my Psalm. 39.
mouth, because thou did it.

Thus David the kingly prophet considering Gods just decree, was content to
repress his own grief, which otherwise excessiuely might have broken sorth,
and quietly to put up the injury ye was done unto him. Wherevpo^ what reward
followed his great patience to them that shall read the history it will sone
appear. I beseech you, let this kings worthy example be a pattern and president
for us to follow. Which if we diligently lay before our face, we shall hang
more upon gods judgment, What we may learn by David's example.
and the testimony of that eye, from whom nothing is hid, and less care for
the bibblebabble of the ill disposed: we shall learn patience, quietness, and
sober mood, and not so hotely without cause be incensed against them that be
not always answerable to our humors. Surely in private quarrels thus always the
godly use to deal, knowing that it is God only to who^ vengeance properly
does belong. Which they well weying their own offenses, and how much they
have to answer to the^ selves, dare not in any wise take in hand. So often
therefore as we hear our selves misreported, so often as we be defaced and
disgraced unjustly, let us think God has stirred up these wicked
instruments, whom either he uses to this end, that he may plague us, and
punish us for our sins, or for the better exercise of our spiritual warfare
against satan. This consideration being depely rooted, must needs bread in
Romans 5.
our hart^ a great patience and meekness: this patience and meekness shall
work in us a trial of ourselves, feling se^sibly, as it were the present
assiste^ce of gods help: of this trial, and experience straightways there
arises an assured hope in Gods goodness, that he will certainly accomplish
in us, that good woorcke which he has begun: and this hope being grounded
upon so sure a rock, will never make us to be ashamed, because this love of God
toward us, is now poured utterly into our hearts by the holy ghost, which
is given us.

What occasion have we here to make us glad? What matter of rejoicing in the
living God? Which so cheered up the dismaide courages of the Apostles, that
notwithstanding the bitter checkes, tauntes, scoffs, and rebukes, that they
endured, they departed joyfully from the sight of the counsel, that meant
nothing more earnestly than their subversion. Which same also from time to time
both is, and has been a great stay of refuge to all the afflicted me^bres of
Christ's body.

To this treasure of gladness, and jewel of sovereign joy, let us now add
that which is written. Psalm. 9^. Where the most favorable and gracious aid of
Gods most heavenly protection is so depainted and set out in his colors,
as though it were visibly represented to our bodily sight.

Who so ever (says the Prophet) dwells under the secret corner of the
most high (meaning the safegarde of Gods Providence, the ways and means
whereof be unknown and hidden to our eyes) he shall make his abode under the
shadow of the almighty. As who says, he shall procure himself such a sure
buckler of defense, that he shall not need to fear any violence.

Therefore going forward, I will say unto the Lord (says he) thou art mine
hope, and my strong hold, my God, in him will I trust. For he shall deliver
thee from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence: he shall
defend thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his feathers: his
faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield, and targette. Thou shall not be
afraid for any terroure by night, nor for the arrowe that flies by day, nor
for the plague that walcketh in darkness, nor for the diseases that destroy
at the noone tide. O how comfortable and full of divine solace be these sugared
words, especially to the sorowfully distressed, that look every day for
present danger?

But what shall we say to this, that follows? A thousand shall fall beside
thee, and ten thousand at thy rightehand, but it shall not once touch thee.
Only thou shall behold with thine eyes, and see before thee the reward of the
ungodly. For thou haste said, the Lord is mine hope, making thy tower of refuge
very high. All this (I beseech you) how plainly and effectually is it set out?
Hereafter then whatsoever shall chance amongst us by gods ordinance, whether
it be affliction, anguishe, or persecution, dearthes, wars, plagues, or any
other calamities that may befall: if we but ascend upon high into this
castle, we shall be far out of all gunshot, and no evil shall utterly
ouerreach us. Which the Prophet himself declaring so sensibly, as any man
could wish, see with what a grace he proceeds forward, thus framing his
talk as follows.

There shall none evil happen unto thee, neither shall any plague come nigh
thy tabernacle. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee
in all thy ways. They shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy
foot against a stone. O how careful then is almighty God for our
safegarde and preservation, and how diligently does he watch and ward us?
For what excellent creatures Angels be, and by how many degrees they pass us,
by ye which has been spoken, I trust sufficiently it is confirmed. And yet
see the goodness of almighty God: not only he makes the Sun, Moon, and
the Stars, with all the powers and influences of the heavens, to minister
things needeful for our use: but his very Angels also he procures to become
serviceable unto us. Because therefore we are naturally inclined to err and
wander from the right pathe, least we should go awrye, they are commanded to
direct us in all our ways: because many wily trains, gins, trappes, and
baits be laid for us, which by our own wisdom and forsight, we could never
avoid: they are appointed over us, as watchemen to forsee all dangers that
hang over us: because our nature is so weakened, maimed and lamed, that we can
not stand of our selves, therefore they are charged to bear us up like
infantes in their hands, least blindely being carried and led away through
the error of our conversation, he which was ordained of God to be the rock
and strength of our salvation, should become a stumbling stone to us, and the
matter and occasion of our utter ruin. Our Lord I mean, and only savior
Jesus Christ: of whom it is written by the Prophet Esaias: Behold I lay in Sion
a stone of offense, and a rock of stumbling, and all that believe in it, shall
not be ashamed.

In whom, and by whom, we shall easly atcheeue that which follows: Thou shall
go upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon thou shalt tread
under thy feet. For no brute beast in the world so saluage or furious of
their inclination: no poison or venime so strong or violent: yea moreover no
fury or feende of hell so desperately set to do us mischeeue, that shall
ever at any time prevail against us. Nay contrariwise it shall be so far of,
that (as our Savior himself affirms) these signs, Mark. 16.
and tokens shall follow them, that effectually believe. In the name of
Christ they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they
shall drive away serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not
hurt them Therefore if the viper of briberie should once enterprise Acts. 28
to leap upon their sleeue, they would byandby shake him off into the fire:
if the Adder of Detraction should fearcely set upon them and assail them,
forthwith they have a prepared triacle, that shall expel, and drive away all
the poysone: if the Lion of pride and arrogancy would pull them down, the
Lion of the tribe of Judah shall raise them up: if the Dragon of pining envy,
would mortally sting them and infecte them, a good conscience shall serve them
at all assayes instead of a strong brazen wall: breefely, whatsoever enemy
encounter with them either bodily or ghostly, they have always their safegarde
and their protection.

Why then are we so liberally entreated? and so courteously dealt withal at
Gods hand? Let God himself speak, and tell the cause: Because (says he)
he has set his love upon me, therefore shall I deliver him: I will set him
up because he has known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will hear
him: yea I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and bring him home to
honor: with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. What
ample rewards? what great promises be these? I will give him liberty and
perfitte freedom (says God to his most dear espouse, his faithful people)
I will set him on high, I will hear his suit, I will communicate with him
in his trouble. I will set him free from it, I will promote him to honor:
yea and yet not so staying and taking up, he adds that he will satisfy him
with long life, and in the end show him his salvation: wherein ye very sum
and substance of all blessedness does most fully and perfitly consist. Why
so? Because he has despised, in comparison, all worldly vanities, and has
bestowed al his love on me: because he has known my name, that is to say,
because he has acknowledged me to be his gouernoure, his protectoure,
savior and supporter, upon whose only beck stands all the state of his
whole life: for the same cause making his prayer to me only, that according to
my promise, he may be hard. So far we may pike out lessons of most stable
and assured consolation, having none other root or ground whereon they be
settled and fully stayed, but the foundation and pillar of Gods Providence.

The.xj. Chapter.
What lessons we may pike out of Gods Providence, for the maintenance of
godly life.

LEt us now see breefely in a word or two, what instructions we may hereby
gather for the edification and maintenance of godly life. The son honors
the father (says God by the Prophet Malachie) and the servant his Lord. If
I then be a father, where is mine honor? Malach. 1.
And if I be the Lord: where is my fear? Even as if he should say: if ye
confess me to be your creatoure, that has a fatherly affection toward you:
your Lord, that has you at his commandment, by whom all your doings and
sayings, all the course and countenance of your whole life is disposed,
measured, and set in order: then this of co^gruence must needs follow, that ye
yield me that honor and obeisance, that is convenient and fit for children: that
ye stand in such awe and subjection to me, as for servant and subjects is
most agreeable. Otherwise, ye destroy that by your deeds, which by your
outward profession ye would seem to build: otherwise ye play the hypocrites,
and ye halte and go crokedly with God and man. This then is the charge that is
laid upon us, and the burden which voluntarily we should take in hand, we (I
say) ye will be taken for Gods vessels, and the chickens and birds (as it were)
of his hatching, ye we render to god due honor, and fear his name. And this
christian duty of ours shall be then most reverently performed, if we resign up
our selves wholly into gods hands, if we repose al our trust and affia^ce in
his goodness if we will call upon him heartily so often as we stand in need, and
when we have receued any thing of his bestowing (as no doubt al things flow
from his fountain) beth in word and deed give him thanks. Whereunto we are
moved by nothing more tha^ by a deep examination of Gods Providence. For were
it so that god were of such a nature, that he could neither hear nor see what
is done on ye earth (as the image of Jupiter is set out in Creete wcout either
eyes or ears) or were it so he were restrained of his liberty, through the
fatal necessity of these second causes: the^ in deed in vain should we come
unto him, or have recourse to ye throne of his divine majesty. But seeing al
things depend only upon his blessed pleasure, and seeing he is such a God, that
he is no less willing, than able to do us good: therefore even with boldness
we may have access unto him, as to our dear father and good Lord.

The same cause also should of right stir us up to be thankful, knowing
(as it is in the Acts of the Apostles) that he gives the rain from heaven,
and fruitful Acts. 14.
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. If Satan go about to
choke us with the cares of the world, soliciting us for fear of penury to
use bryberie, symonie, usury, and such other unlawful and ungodly means: what
a godly lesson and heavenly consolation is that, which is proposed to us in ye
Epistle to ye Hebrews? Let thy conversation be far from avarice: for Hebr. 13.
why, it is Gods own saying, I vvil not forsake thee, nor leave thee
destitute. Wherewith being strongly armed, thou will never shrink for any
poverty, to cast all thy care aside, and to lay it (as it were) upon gods
shoulders. Who questio^lesse will not see ye Psalm. 37.
righteous left bare of necessary priuisio^, or suffer their children to go on
begging.

Where against if any body make exception, Acts. 5. 2. Cor. 11. Luke. 16.
bringing in either Peter, ye denied he had gold or silver, or Paul, who
amongst other of his calamities reckneth hunger, and thirst, and nakedness,
wherwithal he was miserably encombred, or wretched Lazarus lying wrapped in his
rags full of sores, almost famished at the rich man's gate, or any other such
like examples: he may be as soon answered, as hard speak. For neither are they
forsaken, whose heart is established with Gods grace, much better than with
any worldly sustenance, (inasmuch as their contented mind is instead of a
continual feast) nor the faithful seed of the righteous ca^ be forced or
driven to any beggary, either because they are traded up in honest sciences, or
else because they are satisfied wc that which God sends, not always craving
and coveting without measure, like insatiable gredie guts, unto whom nothing
can suffice. Such a one was Peter, and such was Lazarus and Paul 2. Cor. 4.
being pressed in deed every way, but yet not oppressed: still nedy (as S. Paul
confesses) but yet not vvanting that that is needful, persecuted
continually, but not forsaken: thrown down, but not perished, alvvayes
carrying about with them, the mortification of the Lord Jesus in their body,
that the life of Jesus might be also made manifest in their body. S. Paul
therefore in ye same Epistle painteth him 2. Cor. 6
self out, and other of his own order, as right as possibly may be devised,
saying: that they were as deceivers, and yet true: as unknown, and yet
famous: as dying and yet living, as chastised, and yet not put to death: as
sorovving, and yet alvvayes rejoicing: as pore, and yet making many rich: as
having nothing, and yet possessing all thing. For what can they want that have
Christ, in whom only is the vain of life? or with what urgent necessity ca^
they be distrained, that have fruition of the ever living God, in whose right
hand there is plentuousnesse for evermore? Truly the Lions may well hunger and
thirst: but they that fear the Lord (says the Prophet David) shall not
miss of any thing that is good. Who so long as they walk in their holy
calling, marching forward to the la^d of promise, that is to say, leading
that kind of life that leads directly to gods kingdom, sooner Manna shall
come down from heaven, and a fresh spring of water shall gushe in the
wilderness out of the hard rock, than any famine or dearth shall apprehend
them.

Which doutlesse is not spoken of mine own brain, but the scriptures ratifying
and approving that which I say. Was 3. Reg. 17.
not Elias ye prophet pinched (trow ye) very nigh in the great scarsitie of
victuals, where wc Samaria the whole country was in manner famyshed in times
past? And yet when he fled for his refuge (as God appointed) to the River of
Carith besides Iordaine: did not the very ravens early and late, bring him
bread and flesh? Soon after through the default of rain this river decayed
and dried up, yet the clear fountain and welspring of Gods grace, and
liberality toward his servant, still flowed as freshely as it did before.
For upon this Elias when he had fled to ye poor widow of Sareptha, (as he was
commanded by God himself) of her poverty miraculously relieved his own want,
that little meal and oil left in her cruse, increasing in ye very use of it
from day to day. The prophet Daniel into what a straight I pray you was he
brought, continuing six days long wcout either meat or drink in the Lions
den? But God sent him by and by his holy Angel, who (by the ministry of the
Prophet Habacucke, whom he hoysed up by the Iu the story of Bell and the
Dragon.
hear of the head from Judea to Babylon, where Daniell was) in a strange
manner refreshed him. Oh but this was done long ago. What then? Is not God the
same God that he was before? Be thou Elias, I say, live as he did, and then
never dout of it, but God will do for thee as he did for him. Be vprighte as
Daniel was, and have a like zeal to promote and further Gods kingdom, and
then even in the midst of ye Lions den, I say, when thou art now destitut of al
worldly aid, the Lord himself which is careful for thee, will send thee his
holy Angel that shall stir up Habacuck. But there is no remedy, God must do al
things for us, even as we will our self, or else we will chafe and murmur, and
take on as we were lords of the earth. Of our own duty in ye mean while we
will scarce have leisure once to think. What reason, I pray you is in this? or
how can we have the face so to dele? God open our hearts I beseech him for his
great mercies, and give us a sound understanding, that we may ye better
conceive of his woorks, and yield unto him more fruit of good life, that we
may taste at length in our selves the delicious sweetness of the Lord. Which
if it come to pass, O how holesomely should our hearts be seasoned with the
licoure of this lively juice? how ready would our tongues always be to break
out into the praise of God? how evil would our ears digest all blasphemons
slanders against God? Whereunto there is utterly nothing ye could possibly more
excite us (as very well says Theodorete in his first oration de Prouidentia)
than ye consideration of Gods loving kindness, and his dominion and
soueraintie over ye world.

Patience likewise and humility those goodly virtues albeit that they may well
be comprised under the argument of comfort in respect of their cause
original, which is joy and solace in the holy ghost, wc out ye which, there is
no christian patience: yet because they pertain also to a christian life, they
may well hither be referred. To them therefore, I say, to both of them what a
spur is the knowledge of Gods Providence? For if the governor of the world
do all things justly, and in good order (as we must needs grant all of
necessity, that will grant at leastwise he is a God) what cause can we
pretend in any wise, why we should not submit our selves willingly to his
yoke? If we think it appertenaunt to our office (as without all controversy
it is) that we should render due homage to a worldly Prince, who
notwithstanding of nature is but duste and ashes, as we be: shall we think
scorn to humble our selves before him, who only is our creatoure, before our
only true Lord, before God him self? Shall we take any thing patiently and
quietly at man's hand: and shall we take scorn when we are touched with Gods?
Nay, if we think it reason to bear the indignation of a mortal man, seeing we
know he is but Gods instrument, of very force we must needs take it well,
whatsoever it is that God does. For man in deed may be tangled and wrapte in
error, either because it is out of his reach to foresee all consequentes that
may happen, or because he is carried away by his affections, whereunto he is
eftesones become thrall. Whereupon he must needs err in his counsayls many
sundry times, and in his practices swerve from justice. So is it not with God,
be ye well assured, who not only sees and forseeth all things, but is
altogether void of passions and perturbations, wherewith creatures of flesh and
blood are oftentimes shaken (as it were) out of ioynte. Wherefore in all his
doings is sobriety and moderation, in him is wisdom and equity, and without
all extremity just dealing, as that kingly prophet David, as ye innocent Job,
as Mauricius the virtuous Emperor in his great anguishe and affliction full
godlily and soberly considered. Whose story, as in a lively mirror, because
it lays forth in effectual manner a very pattern and presidente of a meek
spirit, I pray you, a little while let it not seem tedious to lend our well
disposed and pacient ears.

Mauricius the Emperor in the end of his reign became so exceeding covetous,
that he refused to ransom with a very little sum of money certain thousands
of captives, taken prisoners of Caianus the king of ye Auares, who had offered
for the said little sum to dimisse them al without harm. Whereupon Caianus
seeing he was set at naught, conceived no small indignation, and forthwith
wcout sparing any one of the^, caused them al to be put to the sword. In the
year following, which was ye 19 of Mauricius his empire, a certain religious
man having the spirit of prophecy, running bare headed and bare footed through
the city of Constantinople, prophesied in all men's hearing, that the Emperor
should be slain with ye sword. Hereupon the said Emperor, when he had hardly
escaped with his life, by reason of a sedition which was raised in the city,
conceyuing afterward a remorse, he bethought him self, what a heinous
trespass he committed, in suffering so many thousands to go to wrack for
his covetousness, and being touched inwardly with repentance, he made his
earnest prayer unto God, that he might suffer his deserved punishmente in this
life. Therefore sending his Ambassadors with large guiftes, not only through
all the churches of his Empire, but also to the holy men which lived in the
wilderness, he required them to help him with their hearty prayers, that God
having compassion of him, would voutsafe to give him his punishment in this
world.

When the Emperor with great humility had thus earnestly prayed, the same
night after, by the great mercy of God, an auision was showed unto him to his
comfort. Wherein it seemed, that The Emperors auision.
being solemnly cited to appear, he heard a voice from heaven, as it were of
our Lord Jesus Christ, saying: Bring me hither Mauricius. Upon this the
sergeantes and the catchpoles laying hold of him, bring him before Christ his
judge, who with his own mouth speaking to him: Where would thou (quod he)
that I should recompense thee? here, or in the world to come? The Emperor
hearing this, made answer: O Lord that art a lover of mankind, and a just
judge, here, rather than in an other Albeit that god freely do forgive our
sins, yet oftentimes for discipline sake he enioyneth us temporal punishment
in this life.
world. And forthwith this voice from heaven commanded Mauricius, his wife
Constantina, his sons, and all that were of his blood, to be delivered into the
hands of the warrior Phocas. Mauricius therefore so soon as he was awaked out
of sleep, sent hastily after Philippious his son in law. Of whom at his
coming he first asked forgiveness, because always before that day he had had
him in a suspicion, and a jealousy, as one that sought traitorously and
maliciously, not his death only, but his Empire, and strayghtwais telling him
of his dream, be demanded what manner of man that Phocas was. Who when he had
answered again, that he had the charge of a great band of men, and that he
was a rash young man, but yet in all his doings very timorous. Well (quod the
Emperor) if he be timorous, as you say he is, the^ surely it is to be thought
he is a murderer. And the same night that he thus dreamed, a comete that shone
forth very brighte in the element, confirmed this his auision to be true. Yea
moreover the very same day after, Magistrianus the Ambassador, which had been
sent to the fathers in the wilderness, came back to this said city of
Constantinople, who declared to Mauricius in the name of these fathers of the
deserte, that God accepting his repentance, would save his soul, and place
him and al his household with his saints: but nevertheless ye he should be
thrust from his empire with dishonor and danger of his life. Al which things so
concording and agreeing upon his destruction, Mauricius fell down upon his
knees, and praised God, and committing all that he had to Gods government, he
now looked for nothing else, but when the date of this doleful day should
approach.

Alas good Emperor (for it even pitieth mine heart to remember from what an
high type of honor, yea from what a royal and flourishing estate he is
thrown down sodaynely under the feet) within short time after, when
Mauricius had charged his soldiers to pitche their tents in the enemies
ground, in the hard and roughe season of the winter, a rebellion was stirred
up against him, wherein the same Phocas (into whose hands he heard before in
his dream how he was delivered) was in the field appointed, and proclaimed
Emperor of a great meynie of soldiers that swarmed about him. Who afterward
departing to Constantinople, and there taking the city into his subjection
(which was then brought into a great uproar, through the negligence of them
that should have looked unto it) he was established in the throne of his
Empire, by the consent of the Patriarch and all the people. O hard case:
whyther now flies Mauricius for his refuge? Into a Monastery? But (welaway)
it would stand him but in a little steed. For soon after, when some would
have refused to submit them selves unto Phocas, saying that their former
Emperor was yet alive: this said Phocas was so grieved at it, that he
sought nothing more earnestly than the utter destruction of his Predecessoure.
And therefore sendyng his warrioures in postehaste to fetch him forthwith out
of his cloister, where he and his noble familye would now full gladly have
hid them selves: he caused them, being brought to Calcedon, one after an
other, to be miserably mangled and dismembered.

In the mean time with what a woeful heart was this poor Emperor, trow ye,
the beholder of this terrible execution? But yet (such was his christian
constancy) when he saw his dear wife and children so unmercifully handled of
this bloody Tyraunte, he never murmured, nor repyned against God: but
considering how much more he had deserved by the just rigor of Gods dome,
with hands and heart lift up to heaven, he eftesones repeated this clause of
the Psalm, Iustus es domine, and rectum indicium tuum. That is to say, thou
art Psalm. 119.
just Lord, and thy judgment is right. And what else taught him this great
patience, but his settled persuasion of Gods Providence? Wherewith this godly
and christian Emperor, if he had not stayed and borne up him self, ah, how
would his heart have bled (as it were) with extreme sorrow and heaviness?
what desperate sighs and unquiet words would he have used? But now that this
peace of God has possessed his charitable and mild breast, not only he
bears with a good will the mercylesse butchering of his dearest friends: but
he is ready also and willing his own self to give over his life in the same
torments. Knowing therefore that in Gods sight the death of his saints is
precious, (to make an end of this pitiful and heavy tragedy) like a meek
lamb, he yeldeth up himself into the furious Tyrants bloody hands.

I beseech you now, that which moved you, let it also take place with us,
whatsoever misery we sustain, whatsoever sorrow or calamity light upon us,
let us always arm our selves with this thought, that it is Gods only hand
that is laid upon us. And therwithal so often as we call to mind that broad
eye, that sees and vicweth al things, that dredsul presence that nowhere can
be excluded, that ear that hears every man, speak he never with so soft a
voice, that understanding that pierces to the very thoughts of our heart: Let
us observe in any wise that divine precepte that is given us by the good father
Chrysostomus, in our counsels circumspecte, in our sayings, thrice well
advised, in our enterprises proceeding not without great deliberation, in our
doings fearful to offend, in our thoughts unspotted and tree from blemishe,
in all our life careful how we guide our steps: having our accounte in
readynesse, whenever it shall be called for at that high judgment seat, our
lamps burning with inflamed charity, our eyes still attending upon our
Lord, even as the handmayde awayteth upon her mystresse, until such time as
he have mercy upon us.

O that we were never so stryken blind, but that in the midst of all ill
temptations we might be still loking upon this rule, looking upon it (I say)
that we might well remember it, well remembering it, that we might rightly way
it, rightly weying it, that we might accordingly do after it? We should not
then (as it is said of the foolish oystridge and the wodcock) think all things
were safe with us, and cocksure, when we had blindly hid our heads in a dark
hole: we would not then be so much delited with such ceu^ter^ feite and cloked
holiness, as in effect is naught else but stark hypocrisy: but we would be
in deed as we would seem.

But O Lady virtue, thou that should be the guydresse of man's life on
earth, into what unknown coasts art thou exiled long ago? Thou wast wont
with thine own amiablenesse to allure and draw unto thee thy lovers, yea
though all other considerations were set aparte. Insomuche that if we had Gyges
his ring upon our finger, wherewithal we might walk invisible, and neither
man or God see what we went about: yet nothing would we attempt at any time,
either in deed, or word, or imagination, not seemly for the worthynesse of
man's nature. And is now the world commen at last to this point, that
neither reason can rule us, nor meede provoke us, nor danger fray us, nor
conscience prick us, nor shame reclayme us, nor the terror of Gods wrath pull
us back, nor his presence aghast us, nor the eye of his Providence make us to
look about our selves? Jesus god into what a careless security are we
brought?

The conclusion of this fourth book.
But there is better hope I trust to be conceived, whereof I doubt not but
very shortly we shall see the fruit, especially if we will listen diligently,
and give ear to this wholesome doctrine. Our foundation we have laid already
upon a rock, which will never fail us: if we build not beside it, there is
no doubt but all will be well enough. We have begone very commendably (God
always be praised for it) and why we should not agreably go forward, if the
fault be not in our selves, I see no cause. Only let us shake off
sluggishnesse, as the chief root and occasion of all evil, that our
profession be not stained or disgraced wilfully by our negligence, and with
hands and hearts lift up to the throne of grace, let us jointly with one
consent call to God without ceassing, for the heavenly aid of his protection.

O Lord the buckler of our defense, our strong hold and sanctuary of refuge,
cover us, we beseech thee, under the shadow of thy wings, least Satan our
ancient enemy like a wily kite snatche us up: and seeing thou have translated
us out of the power of darkness into the kingdom of thy dear son: expel
from us from henceforth all myste of error, and cleanse us from al pollution
of the spirit and the flesh, that being made meet for the inheritance of
thy saints in light, we may sing for ever with clear breasts, glory, honor
and praise to thy holy name: confirm we beseech thee, that good work which
thou haste begone in us, and as in our weak childhoode thou have been our
safegarde, so in our further grown years be our supporte and gracious aid,
that being holden up continually by thy goodness, we may never at any time
fall from thee. Grant this, O heavenly father, for thy son our Lord Jesus
Christ's sake. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost be al power and
magnificence, and praise, and thanksgiving ascribed from generation to
generation. Amen.

FINIS.
The Index or Table of the principal mattiers contained in this Book.
A. AChaz his Dyall. 13 Adversity why God sends to godly men. 258. 259.
Afflictions of the just, an argument of our resurrection. 259. 260. 261.
Afflictions necessary why. 263. The names given to Angels in the scripture.
387 The majesty of Angels. 389 Neither Angels nor saints must be honored
with invocation. Read the eight chapter of the fourth book. page 414
B. The brain in the head as an high tower, kept like a treasure. 35
C. The nobler creatures have prehemine^ce over the baser. 388 The co^munitie
of al things disproued, 208 Chrysippus confuted. 273 Why the Ceremonies of the
Jews were ordained. 285 Chance what it is. 287 To us many things fall out by
chance, which to God are certaynely known before. 294 Cities destroyed by
poor seely beasts. 309 Cruelty superfluous toward dumb beasts to be avoided,
330 Godly men's comfort wherein it stands. 34. 428. 429. 430. 431. 432. 433.
and so to the end of the tenth chapter of the fourth book. Christ's bodily
asce^tion stands not with his bodily presence upon the earth. 372
D. Against Destiny. 14 How the defenders of Destiny made their doctrine to
stand with ordinary means. 170. 171 Destiny what it is. 272 Destiny and
Gods Providence compared. 275 A Dove wrought by marvelous art by Architas
Tarentinus. 38
E. The earth our extreme refuge. 24. The commodities taken out of the earth.
25 The eyes placed in the head, as spies and watchmen to forsee evil. 35 Evil
men's deeds how they be Gods good works, 137 he shows by a similitude.
138 In every evil action three things concur. 136 The end makes a good or
evil act. 139 An evil work, and the deformity of an evil work not all one.
143 Evil why it is not taken away by God. 246. 247. 248. 249. 250. 251. 222.
Epicures sweet doctrine whence it flows. 255
F. Our Freewils how far they extend. 116 117. 118. 119. 120. 121. 122. 123.
125. Fortune what it is. 287 How Aristotle proves that God medleth not with
matiers of fortune. 295
G. That there is a God, it is proved. 11. 12 God ca^ not be stained with
ignorance. 18 From Gods power nothing exempted. 19 God is not blotted with
those vices, which he detesteth in his creatures. Ibidem. How God stirs
his creatures by a similitude he declares. 132 God is the orderer and disposer
of evil, but he pours no wickedness into men's hearts. 134 The venime of
our cursed malice is stirred up by God, as it were the fulsome humor of a
carraine drawn up by the sun beams. 136 How God may be just, and man a
trespasser in the same thing. 146. 147 Why God is said to repent, and to be
angry etc. 289. 290. 291 There is no impediment, why God should not care for
the least things. 311 Why God without any tedious irk somnesse, may ouersee
all things. 312 How we have our being of God. 361 God governs not like
the king of Persia. 3^4 The difference betvvixte Gods government, and such as
be gouernoures under God. 385
H. Hypocrites be like a tree, which Alexanders soldiers found in India. 10
The History of Abraham's servant. 73. 74. 75. 76. 77. 78. The History of
loseph set out at large, beginning. 79. and ending. 102 The lamentable
History of Mauricius the Emperor. 458 Hap, what it is. 287
J. Instruments of God evil men how. 133
K The knowledge of our self is commended by an oracle that came from heaven.
30
L. To Labor and toil, all men subject. 233. 234. Without Labor nothing
had. 234
M. The distinction of members, pertains necessarily to man's body. 368 Man,
why made bolte upright. 33 Man's state bevvailed of Epicure, 40. is preferred
before the state of brute creatures. 42. 43 Nevve married folks how they
should behave themselves. 176 Magistrates how they began. 219 The
inconvenience that should follow the want of Magistrates. 220. 221
N. What Necessity we admit in those things which be done in the
world. 295. 296. 297. 298.
O. Obedience to the Prince, was the cause why the kingdom of the Persians
so long continued. 243
P. Gods Providence how comfortable a doctrine. 5 How heathen men have
^rred touching Gods Providence. 8 All that bear name of Christians, believe not
Gods Providence. 9 No vvorthyer action can be ascribed to God, than the
vvoorcke of his Providence. 17 Gods Providence would not only suffice us for
things needful, but furnishe us also with things delectable. 23 Epicure sore
handled of the Philosophers for denying Gods Providence. 64 Gods Providence
defined. 274 Gods Providence is immutable. 282. 283 He shows by a similitude
of the Sun, how Gods Providence is extended to all his creatures. 364
Philosophy, as the light of nature, is not to be despised. 45. 46 The drifte
of the Psalms. 51 The great Patience of one executed for murder upon a
wheel. 72 What Predestinacion is. 278 Wherein it differs from Gods
Providence, and wherein it agrees. An idle permission may not be ascribed to
God. 162 Poverty hinders neither virtue nor knowledge. 184. 185. 186. 187.
188 Poverty is not the cause of robberies, but the desire of riches. 190
Poverty the mother of virtue and sober diet, and health. 191. 194 Wherein the
state of Poor and rich is all one. 196. 197 Poverty and riches compared.
199. 200 Neither Princes nor any other, do in all things as they ought. 240
The end of the Prosperity of the wicked. 256 Prosperity and adversity,
why they happen indifferently to the good and evil. 305
Q. It is one thing to move a Question of infidelity: an other thing to
discuss a Question that is moved, and doubted of by an infidel.
R. Riches not to be condemned. 201 Reuengement not to be sought of sinners.
440
S. Speech and language the seed plotte of societies and common weals. One
Sin punished with an other. 128. 129 Sin the cause of bondage. 218 The
law of the Sabbath, and of Tithes are compared. 338. 339 The law of the
Sabbath why made. 339 The Sacrament of Christ's supper, how it is his very
body and blood. 370. 371 Sinners must not seek to be reue^ged. 440
T. The tongue why it is compassed, as it were with a double wall. 31 To be
Thanckefull, we learn at brute beasts. 106. 107 That Taxes should be paid,
Judas Guacouites denied. 231 Tithes how farreforthe the author defends.
338. 346. 350 Why Tithes were ordained. 346. 347. 348
V. The Virtues of the Stars and Planets, and their commodities. 22. 23
W VVorldly men seek worldly ends. ^ The VVindes why given. 26 Caius Caesar
his wrathful mad mode. 112. 113 How a man may Will the same thing that God
does, sinnefully. There be two distinct manners of VVilling a thing to be done.
151. 156. 157 Against Gods Will be don many things, but not besides his will.
155



FINIS.
Framed printer's device of a woman holding the reins of two horses (McKerrow,
138)

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Wylliam Norton, dwelling in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Queen's arms.


