THE WHITE WOLF OR, A Sermon Preached at PAVLS Cross, Feb. 11. being the last
Sunday in Hillarie Term, Anno 1627. and printed somewhat more largely then
the time would permit at that present to deliver.

Wherein Faction is unmasked, and justly taxed without malice, for the safety
of weak CHRISTIANS.

Especially, the Hetheringtonian Faction grown very impudent in this City of
late years, is here confuted.

By STEPHEN DENISON, Minister of Katherine Cree-Church, London.

1. TIM. 1. 3. As I be sought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonis, that thou might charge some, that they teach no other Doctrine.

HIER. aduers. LVCIFERIAN. Qu^modo destructa sunt Diaboli Civitates, and in
fine, hoc est in seculorum consummatione, idola corruerunt

AT LONDON, Printed by GEORGE MILLER, dwelling in Blacke-Fryers. 1627.

TO THE HIGH And Mighty PRINCE CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
Most Dread Sovereign, etc.
SEneca says, Lib. 1. de Cleme^t^a c. 1.
nullum ex omnibus cleme^tia magis quam Regem aut principem decet; Clemency
becomes no man better then a King or Prince, and being fully persuaded, that
this, together with all other both Princely and saving graces meet in your
Majesty's royal breast, even as the lines of a circumference meet in the
center or middle point: I am encouraged to present this Sermon to your Princely
view. I know indeed it is not with Kings as Eidyl. 15. v. 26.
Theocritus says, it is with persons without employment, (...) which keep
every day holy day: the employments and labors of Princes are far greater
then ordinary Subjects can conceive: yet I hope I may say of your Majesty, as
Lib. 1 c. 1. ad Thrasimund regem.
Fulgentius says of Thrasimund the King unto whom he writes, te numerosis
Regni curis iugiter occupatum, feruenti cognoscendae sapientiae dilectatione
flammari; that howsoever your royal heart be much taken up with manifold cares
concerning the Kingdom, for the common safety of all your Subjects, yet it is
inflamed also with a godly zeal after the best things; your Majesty is a
Defender of the true Christian Faith, in which respect you are highly honored
and sincerely beloved of all your true hearted and truly Religious Subjects:
no doubt they daily pray for you, they bless God for you, they esteem you the
breath of their nostrills, and this love of the Subjects is to be esteemed by
Kings their strongest Defense or Castle in respect of ordinary means; as In
Orat. ad Nicocl. de regno.
Isocrates says to Nicocles the King, in his Greek Oration made before him,
(...): i. e. think the love of the Citizens the safest guard of thy person:
and indeed so it is under God. There has bin discovered of late unto your
Majesty's high Commission-Court, a dangerous familisticall sectarie, one John
Hetherington, by trade a Boxmaker, who has seduced and withdrawn many as well
men as women from the Church of England, in the famous City of London, by his
subtle suggestions, as has bin proved against him. I cannot more fitly
describe him then by the words of my Text; Lupus est ouili pelle tectus: he is
a Woolfe in a Sheepes-skinne: for outwardly if he live amongst Protestants, he
will seem to be a Protestant, if a bare profession ore tenus, will serve the
turn, whilst in the mean time he may gird at them in his writings, and
condemn them as adulterous Congregations in his Conuenticles or otherwise.
Secondly, he will seem to be a conformable man to the Doctrine of the Church,
if subtle equivocations and cunning euasions will pass for conformity.
Thirdly, he will seem an innocent person, if impudent denials or casting of
aspersions upon honest witnesses will go for innocence. And in this, that
honorable quicksighted and Eagle-eyed Court deserves great encouragement; in
that, when they had to deal with one that would deny almost all that was laid
to his charge, yet they discerned aright of him, and accordingly censured him;
and thus the Greek Proverb is verified (...). The Woolfe thinks to run from
the Eagle, and so to escape, but all in vain: and amongst those worthy and
learned Commissioners, he that is the chief, optimo iure primas agit: whose
acumen, whose soundness in the faith, whose singular gravity, whose happy
speech, whose excellent parts every way are the very grace of that venerable
Court: it may be said of him as Orat. 30. in laudem Basil.
Gregory Nazianzen says of S. Basil Archbishop of Caesarea (whom he styles
(...)) that he is like unto Noah, unto whom the Arc of the Church is
committed, and so kept from drowning, whiles it floats in the turbulent waters
amongst Haereticks. And whiles I am speaking of Ecclesiastical worthies, very
duty will not suffer me to be unmindful of him, under whom the Ministers of
London live as children under the care of an indulgent Father: his great
humility will not suffer him to Lord it over the Clergy, nor his peaceable
disposition to yrannize: it may be said of him as Lib. 4. epist. 9
Saint Cyprian Bishop of Carthage says of himself in one of his Epistles;
Humilitatem meam and fratres omnes and gentiles norunt and diligunt. I find
that I have stirred up to wrath against my self the most part of all the
factions in England by this public Sermon, which I made in the defense of Gods
eternal truth, in love to my Country, and in compassion of weak brethren
which are in the most danger of seduction. I remember Saint Paul says, that he
had fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men, and in like sort it
befalls unto me at this time: I have to deal with young Foxes which spoil
the Vine of the Church, and with Wolves, which seek to strangle the Sheep of
Christ: but what then? so long as I stand for that truth, whereof your
excellent Majesty is a defender, I do not doubt of acceptance, and if my
poor endeauours shall be so happy as to find acceptance with your sacred
person as they have found in the learned Court before your Majesty's
Commissioners, and in the audience where the Sermon was preached, even this
acceptance greater then all the rest, shall be all-sufficient to blunt the
edge of all the power of the adversary, and to secure the Author from wrong and
violence; yea, it shall no doubt encourage many able men in the Kingdom to
take pains in the suppressing of faction, both by preaching and writing, so
far as shall be thought fit by authority. Thus craving pardon for my
boldness, I beseech almighty God to bless your Majesty with long life, and
many happy days, with abundance of all gifts and graces in this world, and
with eternal glory in that which is to come.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, STEPHEN DENISON, Minister of Cree-Church,
London.

To the Christian Reader.
THou which have a tender conscience, and desire nothing so much as to know
the right way to heaven, having also many doubts, which cause thee to run up
and down, sometimes to the public Congregations, and other sometimes to
private Conuenticles, for resolution. I have for thy sake and safety undertaken
this pains; whereby I have incensed many factious persons against my self,
exposed my good name to the obloquie of a thousand bad tongues, and made
somewhat to bold with my own Flock whilst I was painefully employed in this
more laborious work, which concerns a more general and public good I have
had no help in this service, save only the good Assistance of Authority, for
the which I hope I shall praise God as long as I live, and the testimonies of
honest witnesses. For howsoever there were many which disliked the
Hetheringtonian Faction, abhorred their opinions, complained of them to
Ministers in secret, and murmured against them which should see these things
reformed, yet for any that would lend their helping hand to set forward this
matter of so great importance for the common safety of the Church: I found
none, unless it were according to the Latin Proverb post bellum suppetiae. I
met also with many discouragements, some in their ignorance would be ready to
say, that though this faction held some absurd points, yet that they held
nothing against the foundation; not understanding how they undermine Religion
at the very root of it: for grant unto them this, that our Church is no true
Church of Christ, that our Ministers are no true Ministers of the Gospel, that
our best Professors are Pharisees, (...)

The WOOLFE in a Sheep Skin.



BUT BEVVARE OF FALSE PROPHETS.
(...). MAT. 7. 15. But beware ye of false Prophets which come unto you in
Sheep cloathings, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.
SECTION 1.
IN this Chapter and the two former we have that famous and learned Sermon of
our Savior, made by him in the Mount, graphically penned and set down by our
holy Evangelist Saint Matthew, one of the blessed penmen of sacred Scripture,
and secretary to the holy Ghost. In the description of which Sermon we have
three maine parts; the Preface, the Narration, and the Conclusion: the Preface
in the first and second Verses of the fifth Chapter, wherein are expressed
diverse necessary circumstances belonging to the Sermon: as first, the Author of
it he. i. e. Jesus Christ. Secondly, the place, a Mountain. Thirdly, the
gesture used by our Savior, fitting down. Fourthly, the persons whom he
taught his Disciples. Fifthly, the manner of expression, when he had opened his
mouth. The narration begins at the third verse of the fifth Chapter, and ends
in the 23. verse of the seventh Chapter, and it is partly consolatory from the
third verse to the end of the 12* and therein our Savior demonstrateth the
procreant causes of true happiness for the comfort of weak Christians. Partly
exhortatory from the 13. verse to the end of the 16. and therein he exhorts
his Disciples to walk worthy of their most holy calling. Partly interpretatory
from the 17. verse to the end of the fifth Chapter: and therein he vindicates
diverse of the Commandments from the false glosses of the Scribes and
Pharisees. Partly dehortatory in all the sixth Chapter and beginning of the
seven. In the sixth he dehorteth his Disciples from two Pharisaicall sins,
viz. vainglory concerning alms deeds, fasting and prayer from the first
verse to the end of the 18. and covetousness expressed by worldly cares from
verse the 19. to the end of the Chapter. This Dehortatory part is also
continued in the beginning of the seventh Chapter from the first verse to the
sixth, and therein he dehorteth from two sins more, to wit, rash judgment,
verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and rash communicating of holy things to unworthy persons,
verse. 6. partly excitatory to the duty of prayer, verse. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
partly declaratory demonstrating the maine thing, the Law and the Prophets aim
at in their doctrine. Partly directory concerning the way to heaven, verse. 13,
14. and partly premonitory, giving warning concerning false Prophets, and other
things depending thereupon, from verse. 15. to the end of the 23. Then in the
last place we have the Epilogue or Conclusion from the 24. verse to the end of
the seventh Chapter, wherein we have Christ his application of his whole
Sermon, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27. expressed by an elegant comparison taken from
builders, and the effect which followed upon this excellent pithie Sermon in
the hearts of the hearers, which was astonishment or admiration in the two last
verses.

By the which Logical Analysis we may conceive, that this Text is a maine part
of the narration or subject matter of the Sermon it self, being the very
premonicion concerning false Prophets, and also upon what occasion it is
brought in, namely immediately upon a direction given concerning the strait way
to heaven in the two verses going before: and it is as if our Savior had said,
I know my dear Disciples that you hearing of the narrow way which leads to
happiness, will be desirous after the manner of travelers to ask all that
you meet but especially those which seem to be Prophets, concerning this way
for your better confirmation and conduction. But let me forewarne you of all
other to beware how you ask direction of false guides: for they instead of
directing you, will set you quite out of the way, as it is the Haeresis enim
recte gradientes ab itinere suo deuiare and ad se diuertere docet. Hier. in 9.
proverb.
manner of Heresy so to do.

In the Text it self we have two parts: First, our Saviors caveat given to
his Church concerning Seducers, in these words; Beware of false Prophets.
Secondly, his lively description of them, in the rest of the Text. In the first
we have two things; a title, False Prophets; and a caution, beware ye. In the
second our Savior gives a double description of seducers: and first he
describes them by their outward habit, or external show; they come unto you
in Sheep clothing. Secondly, by their internal quality or disposition, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves. In the handling of this Text we will observe
this method. First, we will speak of the intent, or of the Text in general.
Secondly, of the extent, or of the particular application thereof.

SECT. 2.
(...).
Of false Prophets.
FAlse Prophets.] Having dispatched the Logical Analysis, and divided the Text
into its several branches, in the former Section: come we now ( Christo duce)
to the particulars as they have bin placed in the Division. And first of the
first: namely the title, false Prophets. The word Prophet is used in two senses
in the Scripture; in a strict sense, and in a large: in a strict, and thus it
is put for a prenunciator or foreteller of things to come, being derived from
the Greek verb (...), which signifies to divine: and of these diuiners there
have bin two sorts: first, such as did divine truly and sincerely, thus Agabus
was a true Prophet, Acts 11. 28. foretelling of a famine, which also came to
pass in the days of Claudius Caesar. Secondly, such as did divine falsely, or
if truly, yet not sincerely: such as did divine falsely, thus those 400. in 1
King. 22. which prophesied that Ahab might go up to Ramoth Gilead and prosper,
were false Prophets, as appeared by the event. And thus the heathen Oracles,
which prophesied (as Lib. 18. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 54.
Saint Augustine has it) that the Christian Religion should continue but 365.
years, were found lying Oracles, our Religion having continued already above
sixteen hundred years. Secondly, such as did prenunciate truly but not
sincerely: thus the Lib. Sibyllin Orac.
nine Sibyls which sprung up amongst the Heathen, and prophesied concerning the
incarnation of Christ, and of his coming to judgment, they were not to be
esteemed true Prophetesses, because howsoever they predicted many truths, yet
they served the devils turn in that which they did: seeking the credit of his
kingdom, and not the glory of God. Much like unto our vnwitching witches,
which do some seeming good in the Commonwealth in helping men sometimes to
their goods, and yet cannot be truly called good members, because what good
they do they do in the devils name, for the crediting of his Kingdom; doing
a thousand times more mischief to men's souls that seek unto them, then good
to their bodies or estates.

Now here a question may be moved, viz. whether the gift of true sincere
prediction in matters divine be utterly ceased or no. Learned In Problem Loc.
de Prophet temerarium est negare in totum Ecclesiae etiam hodiernae hoc donum
Propheticu^.
Aretius says, that it were rashness totally to deny the gift of Prophecy
to the whole Church at these days; but with the peace of that learned and
worthy man, I will be bold to say that the donum Propheticum, or gift of
Prophesying, as it was in the Prophets of old, which did breath new Scripture,
and foretell things to come certainly and infallibly, is finally ceased,
because the Scripture is now so complete, as that nothing must be added
thereunto, Revel. 22. 18.

Secondly, the word Prophet is taken sometimes in a large sense, and thus it is
used for a chief Speaker or Teacher: and in this sense Ministers are called
Prophets in diverse places of the new Testament: and thus also the Heathen
Priests which were Festus apud Stephan. in Thesauro Graeca Linguae.
Antistites fanorum, as one speaks, the Clerks of the Closset in the Idols
Temples, were called Prophets. Thus in like manner Aratus and Epimenides
Heathen Poets are termed Prophets in holy Scripture as being chief speakers
and teachers amongst their Countrymen. Thus the word (...) which is the usual
word in the Hebrew Bible, put for a Prophet, comes of the root (...) as two of
the Jewish Rab. Shelom.
Rabbines which are best Interpreters of the propriety of their own language
have noted, Aben Esra in c. 7. Exodus ver. 1.
and the word (...) or (...) signifies to speak as well as to bud. And herein
appears the usefulness of the Jewish Doctors, in that they go beyond all
the Lexicons in the world for the natural deriuation of the Hebrew words of
the old Testament from the right roots in the right sense: indeed they are mad
Interpreters of the matter of Scripture, therein God has justly cast upon them
the spirit of slumber, but they are acute Interpreters of the words.

Here in my Text the word Prophet is taken in the large sense (...), false
Prophets being put for (...), false Teachers, by a Synecdoche speciei magis
exquisitae, as Alfledius in rhetor.
Rhetoricians speak; a more particular term being used for a more general.
For it is not meant of such Mountebankes, as took upon them to foretell things
to come, which commonly are the objects of scorn and dirision, that we should
beware of them. Although it is true we must take heed of harkning unto such;
but rather of such impostors and seducers as took upon them to be chief
speakers amongst others, pretending either to speak immediately from God by
revelation, as deified or rather diabolized familists, or illuminated or rather
occaecated anabaptists and other enthusiasts make their deluded proselites
believe they do, or else to speak from the Oracle of Gods word by an especial
insight as they suppose, given unto them to interpret Gods meaning in sacred
writ, as the Pope pretends he has.

And lest that any should erroniously judge that by false Prophets here are
meant only erroneous Ministers, and such as are in orders, we are to know
that the word (...), is according to the proper signification as much as falso
Prophetae; that is, such as properly are not prophets, but only pretend
themselves to be so: and in this respect false guides amongst the people are as
well meant here by pseudoprophets, as amongst the Ministers. Thus much for the
title given by our Savior to deceivers of minds, and that by way of
exposition; as for the Use and application, it follows in the next Section
save one.

SECT. 3.
(...).
Beware of false Prophets.
(...), beware ye: (...).
the word (...) signifies properly adhibete, apply ye; as though he had said
apply your mind or heart. This word is taken in two senses: First, in the
sense of attending in 2 Pet. 1. 19. (...), We have a more sure word of the
Prophets, to the which ye do well that you do attend. Secondly, in the sense
of bewaring in Mat. 6. 1. (...), Beware least you give your alms to be seen
of men. In which sense also the Heathen man uses it, (...). Epictet in Enchir.
c. 36.
take heed least thou be as little children, which sometime affect to be a
Philosopher, sometimes to be a Publicane, sometimes to be a Rhetoritian, and
sometimes to be Caesar's Tutor. In my Text the word is taken in the latter
sense, namely for bewaring, as you have it faithfully translated in our last
English translation; unto which also the Syrian translation agrees (...) which
in the form ithpehal signifies, be ye forewarned; and the Arabicke in like
manner (...) ocdshorou, which in the first conjugation in the imperative mood
signifies Cauete, beware ye, or take ye heed. Thus for the meaning of the word
(...).

Beware of false Prophets. Our Savior gives this caveat both to his Disciples
present, and also to all succeeding Christian Churches, to the end of the
world. To his Disciples present, because in their very Test Iosepho lib. 18.
c. 2. antiquit.
days the Church was annoyed with diverse pernicious Sects: with the Pharisees,
which like unto our Papists, held Justification by humane merits: with the
Saduces, which held like unto our Atheists, that the soul perishes with the
body: with the Essens, which thought themselves to be free from all humane
authority: like unto our Anabaptists, whom I term ours, not because they are
of us, but because like unwelcome guests, they will needs live amongst us: for
this cause Christ forewarneth his Disciples here to beware of false Prophets,
that is, to beware of the Pharisees, lest their judgment should be corrupted
in the maine, namely concerning the Doctrine of Justification. Secondly, to
beware of the Saduces, lest by their Atheism they themselves should be weakened
in their faith. Thirdly, to beware of the Essens, lest by their example they
should shake of the yoke of subjection. And in this our blessed Savior should
be a pattern to all the Ministers of the Gospel, to teach them to the
uttermost of their power to endeavor to beat down the Errors that either
spring up, or else are most rise in their times. Tit. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 3,

Secondly, this caveat is also given by our Savior to all succeeding Churches,
because he foresaw by the spirit of Prophecy, that many false Prophets would
arise in after times, Mat. 24. 24. he foresaw Antichrist arising in the West in
the Roman Chair, from the days of Boniface the third, who ambitiously
obtained of Test Platina in vita eiusdem Bonifacij.
Phocas the Emperor, to be called the Aecumenicall or Universal Bishop of the
whole Christian world; and therein approved himself to be praecursorem
Antichristi (as In Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 76.
Gregory the first speaks) the very forerunner of Antichrist; and so by
consequence all the Popes that ever have succeeded him in that sea, to have bin
(...), that great Antichrist.

Secondly, he foresaw many false Prophets arising in the virgin-time of the
Church, in the first 500. years after his ascension, and therefore forewarneth
his Church which were to live in those ages, to beware of false Prophets, as he
fore warns us and all Churches that have lived before us for the space of a
thousand years and upwards in the times of Antichrist, or that ever shall live
hereafter to the end of the world, (...), to beware of the Pope, and his
Antichristian Doctrine. And this must teach weak Christians not to take
scandal, though there be many strangly affected in religion at these days.
Christ told us beforehand that false Prophets would arise, and wished us to
beware of them, but not to be offended or to take offense at the truth because
of them. And to the end we may not think it strange to see so many Sects and
Schisms in our days, I think it not impertinent to name the several sorts
of Sectaries and Haeretickes which have sprung up in the most pure ages of the
Church, viz. in the first 500. years after Christ.

A Catalogue of Sectaries and Haeretickes which sprang up in the Primitive
Church collected by Saint Augustine Lib. de Haeresibus, out of Eusebius and
Epiphanius.
1 SImoniani. 2 Menandriani. 3 Saturniniani. 4 Basilidiani. 5 Nicolaitae. 6
Gnostici. 7 Carpocratiani. 8 Cerinthiani. 9 Nazaraes. 10 Hebiones. 11
Valentiniani. 12 Secundiani. 13 Ptolemai. 14 Marcitae. 15 Colarbasij. 16
Heracleonitae. 17 Orphitae. 18 Caini. 19 Sethani. 20 Archontici. 21 Cerdoniani.
22 Macionitae. 23 Apellitae. 24 Seuereani. 25 Taciani. 26 Cataphryges. 27
Peputiani. 28 Artotyritae. 29 Tessarescaedecatitae. 30 Alogiani. 31 Adamiani.
32 Elcescitae. 33 Theodotiani. 34 Melchesidechitae. 35 Bardesanita. 36
Noetiani. 37 Valesij. 38 Cathari. 39 Angelici. 40 Apostolici. 41 Sabelliani. 42
Oregeniani. 43 Originiastae. 44 Paul^^jta. 45 Ph^tiniani. 46 Manichaei. 47
Hierachitae. 48 Melitiani. 49 Ariani. 50 Vadiani. 51 Semiariani. 52
Macedoniani. 53 Aeriani. 54 Pauliani. 55 Apollinaristae. 56 Antidicomarianitae.
57 Psalliani. 58 Metangismonitae. 59 Seluciani. 60 Proclianitae. 61 Patriciani.
62 Ascitae. 63 Patralorinchitae. 64 Aquarij. 65 Caluthiani. 66 Florimiani. 67
De mundi. statu dissentientes. 68 Nudis pedibus ambulantes. 69 Donatistae. 70
Priscilliani. 71 Cum her^inibus non manducantes. 72 Rhetorani. 73 Christi
diuinitatem passibilem dicentes. 74 Triformem deum putantes. 75 Aquam deo
Coaeternam tenentes. 76 Corpus hominis non animam esse imaginem dei asserentes.
77 Innumerabiles mundos opinantes. 78 Animas conuerti in daemones tenentes. 79
Omnes liberatos fuisse apud inferos Christi discensu putantes. 80 Christi de
patre natiuitati initium a tempore dantes. 81 Leciferiani. 82 Iouinianistae. 83
Arabici. 84 Heluidiani. 85 Paterniani. 86 Tertullianistae. 87 Abeloitae. 88
Pelagiani. unto which may be added Nestoriani, and Euticiani. What all these
Haeretiks held the learned may read August. lib. de hares. Tom. 6.
ibidem.
These I say sprang up in the more pure times of the Church, and therefore it
is no marvel if there be so many Schismatikes and Sectaries in our times.
Neither let Papists or others reproach the Church, or say it is no Church,
because many sects are in it: for as a Cornefield reteines the name of a
Cornefield, though it have many blew-bottles and other stinking weeds growing
up amongst the Corn; even so the Church is a Church, although many
Schismatikes like so many tares are sown in it by the means of the envious
man of hell. And indeed the Papists have little reason of all other to object
against us the multitude of sectaries, considering how faction abounds and
superabounds amongst themselves. Have they not the Thomists against the
Scotists, and the Scotists against the Thomists, and the Occhamists against
them both? have they not the Jesuits against the Friars, and the Friars
against the Jesuits, and the Mass Priests envying both? yea, what are their
several orders of Franciscanes, Dominicans, Augustinians, and such like, but
so many different factions amongst themselves disagreeing, although like
Sampsons Foxes they be tied together by the tails with firebrarnds between,
being ouer-awed by the Pope the Arch-sectarie, and the Inquisition-tortures.

SECT. 4.
(...).
Beware of false Prophets.
(...), beware: where observe, First, that it is not said (...) in the singular
number, as though our Savior had spoken only to some one man, that he should
beware of false Prophets. Secondly, that it is not said (...) in the duall
number, as though he had spoken to some two in the world; but (...) in the
plural number, to intimate that he spoke unto all that ever should take upon
them the title of Christians to the end of the world.

And indeed it is the duty of all Christians, of what rank soever they be,
(...), to beware of false Prophets.

First, Kings and Princes must beware of them, and that both in respect of
themselves, and also in respect of their subjects. In respect of themselves,
they must (...) look to themselves, lest any son of Belial, or any
instrument of Antichrist be so impudent as to press into their royal presence
to seduce them, and this they had need to look unto with infinite
circumspection; because the beloved Disciple Saint John in his Apocalips, c.
16. v. 13, 14. gives them an item, that three unclean spirits like frogs shall
come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet,
being spirits of Devils working miracles, and going forth to the Kings of the
earth, and of the whole world, etc.

Secondly, Princes must (...), beware of false Prophets in respect of their
subjects. They must take the Foxes, the young Foxes which spoil the Vines,
Cant. 2. 15. they must not give any toleration to Idolatry in the Lords Land;
but like good Josias, in their time they must take away all the abominations,
and cause all men to serve the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. Princes are Shepherds of
the people, so the Evangelical Prophet Esaias styles them in his 44. Chapter
verse 28. that says of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, etc. and (...). Dryantem
etiam pastorem populi.
Homer the King of Poets gives them the like title, in the first of his Iliads
tearming Dryas a Shepherd, who was indeed the Prince or C^^ef-taine of the
people. Now as it is the care of Shep^^rds not to suffer noisome Beasts,
Wolves, and the like, (...) have their dens amongst their Sheep: even so it
ought to be the care of all Christian Princes (...) abigere Lupos, not to
suffer Idolaters to set up their abominations in any part of their Kingdom:
the danger that may in any sort accrue unto Princes (whose souls do thou O
Lord always bind up in the bundle of life) comes not by denying unto
Idolaters that which tends to their own hurt, no more then evil unto
indulgent Parents by denying knives and poison to their Children, when they
earnestly cry for such things, but the danger is rather in satisfying their
unlawful and sinful desires, for herein they provoke Gods anger against
themselves, 1 Kin. 11. 9. Revel. 2. 20.

Secondly, Ministers must (...), beware of false Prophets. They must beware of
reading and preferring the erroneous postils of pseudoprophets before the
Orthodox writings of sound Divines: the want of this good take heed is the
cause that many young Ministers come quickly to be corrupted in their
judgments, and instead of teaching, do rather corrupt others. Secondly, they
must beware in respect of their flock ( caueant Ministri) lest while they
sleep the enuibus man sow tares, as it is in the Gospel. Mala est pax* and
concordia quae inter pastores and Lupos est, Che^nitius in harmon. Euangel.
Thirdly, they must beware of entertaining peace with common seducers, that is
an evil peace and a bad concord indeed which is between the Shepherds and
the Wolves, as a learned man speaks. Thirdly, they (and I do not exclude my
self) must beware of being conversant, or familiar; or delighting in the
company of the enemies of Gods truth, and of his servants: it is recorded by
Eusebius concerning John the beloved Disciple of Christ, that when Cerinthus
that damnable haeretick came into the same Bath where John was washing
himself, the Apostle sprang or leapt out of the Bath, as the Author (...):
Eusebius. lib. 4. Eccles. hist. c. 14.
significantly speaks, fearing lest God should have shown a visible
judgment upon him by the fall of the roof of the Bath, if he had remained in
the company of such a wretch. Oh that there were such an abhorring in us
Ministers at these days, for surely then errors would not so thrive as they
do. Fourthly, Ministers, must take diligent notice of the errors that spring
up in their times, as the learned Fathers did in their days, and by their
preaching must beat down to their power the same errors. It is reported
concerning the Mother of Gregory Nazi^nzene, by some (although it be somewhat
otherwise recorded by others in the life of the same reverend Father) That she
dreamed when she was conceived of that worthy light of the Church, that she
had in her womb a white whelpe which by his barking should drive away the
Wolves from the Sheepefold. I stand not upon the History, but I wish that all
the Ministers of England were such white whelps as Gregory Nazianzen was, and
that their preaching were like unto his barking to fear away the wolves from
the sheepfold of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, the people must (...): beware of false Prophets. For first they must
beware of hearing them, either publicly if at any time they intrude
themselves, or privately in their clandestine or secret conuenticles. The
Sheep of Christ will not hear the voice of a stranger, but fly from him,
John 10. 5. It is recorded by Theodorite, that when Lucius an arian Bishop came
and preached amongst the Antiochians broaching his damnable errors, the people
Lib. 4. Eccles. hist. c. 20. in hist. trip.
forsook the Congregations at the least for the present, having indeed bin
soundly taught before by worthy Athanasius. (...).
Oh that the people of this age had their wits thus exercised to judge betwixt
truth and falsehood: but alas at these days, if error come but masked with a
pretense of zeal and a thundering voice, it is readily received for truth by
the common multitude, yea I would there were not many that make a great
profession of religion, and yet are thus silly.

SECT. 5.
(...).
(...), beware: in that our Savior only mentions here a (...), a duty of
bewaring of false Prophets, ergo, it may fitly be demanded and that as a case
of conscience, whether it be lawful for the Church (...), to put false
Prophets to death. In the which question we must carefully note whom we are to
understand by false Prophets. And by false Prophets in this question concerning
life and death, we are not to understand them that differ in opinion from us
in smaller matters, although I wish from my heart that we were all of one
judgment in the least things, as well as in the greatest: neither are we to
understand thereby them which of mere simple ignorance hold some error at the
least for a time against the maine foundation of Christian religion. The
Apostles themselves were ignorant for a time, both of the death, and also of
the resurrection of Christ, and therefore when our Savior spoke of either of
these, they wondered, as being carried away indeed (as men, though not as
Apostles) with the common error of the times, which was this, to wit, that the
Messiah should never dye, and so by consequence should never rise again. But
by false Prophets in this question we are to understand, first such as
obstinately persist in fundamental errors, after sufficient means used for
their conviction, yea not only persist but also endeavor to disperse their
pernicious errors to the perverting of others, seeking withal to supplant and
to blaspheme the contrary truth: according to that description of false
Prophets given by a learned Pseudoprophetae sunt qui docent contra veritatem
fidei. Tostat. Abul. ad loc.
Spaniard; they are false Prophets which teach against the truth of the faith,
Secondly, such also, whose Haeresies are either Blasphemous in the doctrine it
self, as the Arians; or traitorous against Sovereignty, as the Jesuits: and
where both these concur, the persons in whom they meet do certainly deserve a
thousand deaths. First, because they corrupt the faith, and if such as corrupt
and poison the springs of water, at the which men and beasts receive their
drink deserve capital punishment, how much more they, which as much as in
them is, do impoison the fresh springs of Sion. Secondly, because they murder
men's souls, yea as far as possibly they can, they murder Christ in a
Christian man, Quantum in ipsis est Christum in homini occidunt.
as Saint Augustine speaks in his fifth tractate upon Saint John. And therefore
if he that murders a man's body deserves death, how much more he that destroys
a man's soul. Or if they which were murderers of the Lord Jesus in respect of
his body deserved to dye, how much more they which seek to murder his holy
spirit. Thirdly, the Turk himself (as one truly says) cannot so much hurt
or endamage the Church of God as an haereticke may: Nec turca tantumdamni
infer patest Ecclesiae quantum hareticus. Ferus in mat.
and therefore if it be lawful to put to death common enemies of our lives in
war, why is it not lawful for the Magistrate to put to death the enemies of
our souls, of God, and of the State.

Again, we have diverse examples of this lawful seuetitie executed upon
Idolaters in former ages. First, in Eliiah, in 1 King. 18. 40. commanding all
the Prophets of Baal to be slain. Secondly, in Iehu, in 2 King. 10. 24, 25.
giving the like command concerning the worshippers of Baal. Thirdly, in all the
inhabitants of the land of Judah, in 2 King. 11. 18. who destroyed all the
houses of Baal, and slew Mattan the Priest before the Altars.

Furthermore we have examples also in the Ecclesiastical History: First, in
Constantine that famous Christian Emperor, who enacted a statute, as appears
by a Apud Bullinger decad. 2. Sermon. 8.
letter of his written to one Taurus, That if any did offer Sacrifice upon the
Altars: gladio vltore sterneretur: he should be put to death by the sword, and
his goods confiscate. The like was enacted by In Codice Theodosiano tit. 2.
Theodosius, and Valentinianus, by Martianus also, as the same Henry Bullinger
records.

And the ground and warrant of this is the good word of God: for the Lord
himself says, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. that Prophet or dreamer of Dreams shall be put to
death, because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God: and in
verse. 9. thou shall surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put
him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. And again in verse. 10.
thou shall stone him with stones that he dye, because he has sought to thrust
thee away from the Lord thy God. Now if any shall say this was a Judicial Law
given to the Israelites. I answer, say it were so, yet the equity of that
Judicial Law remains still to all Nations. The like proof we have in Zech.
13. 3. it shall come to pass that when any shall yet prophecy, then his
Father and his Mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he
prophesies.

Epistol. 48.
Saint Augustine indeed wauered concerning the like point for a time as he
himself confesses in one of his Epistles, but when he saw that the City
wherein he dwelt was reclaimed from Donatisme by the sword of the Magistrate,
he reuersed his opinion, and confessed that Heretics might lawfully be
enforced and punished by the Magistrate.

But if any shall object, Objection.
that in the new Testament we are exhorted indeed to fly the company of
Heretics, Romans 16. 17. not to receive them into our houses, 2 Epist. John
verse 10. after the first and second admonition to reject them, Tit. 2. 10.

And here in my Text to beware of them, but no where to put any of them to
death, Answer.
I answer, at that time when the New Testament was penned, and also when our
blessed Savior lived upon the earth and preached, the Church of God was under
the tyranny of the Roman Empire: so that it had bin in vain at that time to
have stirred it up to put false Prophets to death, the hands of the Church
being then bound; neither was it absolutely necessary to use any such
excitation, because there was sufficient direction given already in the Old
Testament, what was to be done concerning heretical Seducers: and yet it is to
be observed, that the Church even in the New Testament wished that seducers
were cut off, Gal. 5. 12. upon the which place, one of the S. Ambrose non solum
spiritaliter sed etiam carnaliter hos maledicit.
ancients says, the Apostle in this Text of Scripture does not only wish a
spiritual cutting off to the seducers of his time, but also a corporal
abscission: he desires that as they were a means to put the Galatians to
bodily pain by urging Circumcision upon them, so that they themselves might
be put to bodily pain by utter cutting off their very lives: where that
reverend Father uses an accusative case hos of the person after maledicit
after the manner of the ecclesiastici Scriptores, whose fashion it is, as a
learned Despauterius in Syntax.
Gramarian speaks, to put accusative cases of the person after verbes,
compounded with been or male: but to let the construction pass and to return
to the matter: here we see in Saint Ambrose his judgment, that the Church in
the Apostles time, though it had not present power to put seducers to death,
yet it wished that they were put to death: and if the Church in those days
wished their death, it would as well have put them to death if it had not been
restreined by ouer-ruling tyranny; as it is more then probable.

I might be large in this subject, but I must instar canis aegyptiaci content
my self with a lap or two of this Nilus, for fear of being stung by the
Crocodile of rash censure for my tediousness: therefore for breuity sake I
refer the learned Reader to that learned book De haereticis a civilly
Magistratu puniendis aduersus Martini Bellij farragine^ and nouorum ac
ademicorum sectam.
of Theodore Beza, the title whereof you have in the margent wherein he proves by
impregnable arguments, That heretics may be Lawfully punished by the Civil
Magistrates, yea and if they cannot by any other means be reclaimed, they may
justly be put to death, as Test Caluisio lib opus chron.
Seruetus was at Geneuah, Anno 1553.

Now what I have said in this question concerning the punishment of heretical
seducers may justly be applied also to blasphemers of God. For if they which
deny fundamental truth and oppose it with obstinacy deserve death, how much
more they which blaspheme it and the author of it which is God and Christ: and
therefore if any miscreant Jew or other shall come impudently amongst us
Christians, and like another Goliath shall defy our Savior as he did the host
of the living God: surely our Magistrates upon just proof may lawfully put him
to death: May? Yea ought so to do. God himself makes blasphemy capital, or
death-deseruing in express terms, Leuit. 24. 16. and Nebuchadnezzar in Dan.
3. 29. makes a Decree, that if any of what Tongue or Nation soever, shall
speak any thing amiss (as you have it in the English Translation) against the
God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, he shall be cut in pieces, and his
house shall be made a dunghill: the original words in that Text, namely the
Caldee, show the strictness of that statute: for whereas it is translated
shall speak any thing amiss, (...)
in the Caldee it is shall speak an error: intimating thereby that if any did
speak blasphemy though it might possibly be pretended, that he did so out of
error of judgment: yet by the sentence of Nebuchadnezzar (in that no doubt
directed in the maine by the Spirit of God) he was to die for it: and if a
Heathen King was thus zealous for God against Blasphemers, how much more does
it behoue Christian Princes to be zealous: but I leave this point: and thus I
have done with the first part of my Text, to wit, the Caveat of our Savior
given to his Church concerning False Prophets, in these words, (...): Beware
ye of pseudoprophets.

SECT. 6.
(...).
Which come, etc.
WHich come unto you in sheeps clothing. In this first Description we have
three things to be observed concerning False Prophets. First, their intrusion,
(...) they come unsent. Secondly, their insinuation, (...) they come to Christ's
Disciples, not to the common multitude. Thirdly, their hypocrisy, (...) they
come disguized and not in their own likeness. For the first, that they are
mere intruders into the office of teaching, and have no lawful calling
thereunto, it is apparent in Ier. 23. 21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet
they ran, I have not spoken unto them, yet they prophesied: they have no
calling from God. 1. Because either they are merely ignorant and insufficient
to be guides, as many are which take upon them to be teachers amongst the
Anabaptists and Familists being unlearned men taken out of some trade, or
secondly, because they have not a right ministerial affection, but aim at
their own private ends, to wit, to rob, kill, and to destroy, as our Savior
says of them, Ioh. 10. 10. or thirdly, because they hold and teach
fundamental errors, which plainly argues that they are guided by the spirit
of Satan, and not by Gods Spirit. Furthermore commonly they have no calling
from the Church, yea, they contemn that calling as idle and impertinent, being
like those seducers spoken of, Act. 15. 24. which went out and taught the
Gentiles, the Apostles giving them no such Commandment.

I will not insist upon this point, yet it may serve as a strong motive to
dissuade men and women from hearing these unsent seducers: for if they be not
sent of God, why should any dare to hear them, yea what good can any man
expect to receive by such teachers; and yet such is the folly of many at these
times, that they had rather hear a man without calling in some private
conuenticle, then a true minister sent of God and authorized by the Church in a
lawful assembly.

SECT. 7.
(...).
Unto you.
Unto you, that is unto you my Disciples: whence observe me, what kind of
people heretical teachers desire especially to seduce, namely Qui Lupira paces
nisi spiritus subdoli ad infestandum gregem Christi intrins^cus delitescentes.
Tertul. lib. de praescript.
Christ his Disciples, or such as are living members of the Church. This is
confirmed by that in Mat. 24. 24. where we have false Christ's, and false
Prophets going about to deceive if it were possible the very elect, and by that
in Reu. 2. 20. where we have the Romish Iesabel (for of her I take it, is
typically spoken in that place) seducing Gods servants: we may also see it
daily verified by very experience for whom do Familists, Anabaptists and other
Sectaries commonly labor to pervert and seduce? Not Drunkards, Adulterers,
Sabbath Breakers, Gamsters, Liars, Swearers and such like, but rather such as
seem to be converted, which mourn for their sins and desire to know the right
way to heaven, having bin in some measure wrought upon by the public ministry
of the Church: wherein seducers are like unto kites, which fly up and down to
ceaze upon tender Chickens, or rather like unto their father the Devil, who
loves to come in amongst Gods children, Job 2. 1. not for love of their
persons, much less of the exercises of Religion, but to accomplish his own
ends, which may serve for a Caveat to all tender Christians, to teach them the
more carefully to look to themselves: but I will not further insist upon this
point.

SECT. 8.
(...) in sheeps clothing, that is, (...) in sheep skins: for what is the
clothing of a silly sheep but its skin or fell: in this Description of
False Prophets, our Savior may seem to allude to the Woolfe in the Fable:
concerning the whcih the Mythologist speaks thus: Lupus ^uis pelle indutus
ouium se immiscuit gregi quotidieque aliquam ex eis occidebat quod cum pastor
animadue^tisset illu^ in altissima arbore suspendit, interrogantibus autem
caeteris pastoribus cur ouem suspendisset aiebat peblis quidem (...) videtis
est ouis opera autem Lupi.
a Woolfe on a time putting on a sheep skin immingled himself amongst the
Flock, and so every day strangled some of the sheep, which when the shepherd
perceived, he took the Wolf and hanged him up in an high tree: at the which
when other shepherds ignorant of the cause wondered, and demanded of their
fellow-shepheard what he meant to be so cruel to hang up a silly harmless
sheep; he answered: his skin as you see is the skin of a sheep, but his
works are the works of a Woolse: unto the which it is not altogether
improbable (for I will not be peremptory in allusions) that our Savior in my
Text does in some sort allude, no more then it is improbable that S. Paul does
allude to the olympian games in 1 Cor. 9. 23, 24, 25. where he speaks of
running of a race for a corruptible Crown: neither is it in any sort
impossible for Christ to have this allusion, Aesop the mythologist living
almost 600 years before him as Bucholzerus notes out of Eusebius and Suidas.
two substantial Authors in his index Chronologicus; and the words of the Text
so justly agreeing: Beware of False Prophets which come unto you in sheep
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

In sheep clothing: wherein we may observe that it is not the manner of
seducers ordinarily to appear outwardly what they are within, but if they be
birds of the prey they will seem to be doves, if they be stinging Serpents,
they will seem to be harmless worms, if they be truculent Wolves they will
seem to be innocent sheep, in a word; if they be Introrsum turpes speciosi
pelle de^ ora.
foul within they will be fair without: and the reason of this hypocrisy in
seducers in manifest, because as it is with a Wolf, if he should come howling
to the sheepefold and in his own skin the watchful shepherd would resist
him with his crook and with his dog, but putting on a sheeps skin and
counterfeiting the bleating of a sheep, he finds entertainment, and the
sheep shun him not, but delight to walk with him, until he pluck out
their throats: even so pernicious seducers, if they should come in their own
likeness, they know the Magistrates and Ministers would withstand them, and
the people would shun them, and fly from them: but coming in the name of
zealous Christians, they are less suspected, and less shunned and opposed:
yea, with some they find kind entertainment, and obtain a good report. I
speak this to the shame of many in our times, which have not learned to put
difference (so ignorant are they of the doctrine of Religion) between a
palliated Woolfe, and a true Orthodox sheep of Jesus Christ.

SECT. 9.
In sheep clothing.
Here it may be demanded, what is meant by sheep clothing; or in what
manner, cunning seducers come in that raiment. I answer, Seducers come in
sheep clothing. First, when they come with quotations out of holy Scripture,
to confirm their damnable positions: thus the devil came to our Savior in
sheep clothing, when he came with a sic scriptum est, Mat. 4. for it is
written, he will give his Angels charge over thee, etc. and thus Familists, and
Anabaptists come in sheep clothing, which use to bring Scripture perverted to
prove their tenants, as though the Scripture of truth did in any sort favor
their errors: and thus Arius came in sheep clothing, of whom I have read,
that he brought 42 places out of the Scripture to prove, that Christ was mere
man and not God, against Athanasius that disputed with him in the Nicaean
Council.

Secondly, when they come under a pretense of having all antiquity on their
sides, favoring their heretical opinions, deceiving the world as the
Gibeonites deceived Joshua with old bottels, and old shoes, and moldy bread,
and old garments, as though they had come from far, when as indeed they were
but of the next town. Ios. 9. 11, 12. Thus Bellarmine and other Controuersists
amongst the Papists come as Woolues in sheep clothing, when they impudently
affirm that all antiquity is on their sides, that all the Fathers, and
Councels, and Doctors speak for them and the like; which has been proved
false to their faces by many of our Whitakers. Chamierus, Willet and many
others.
learned Divines, which have taken pains to confute them, and this shows,
that they have brows of brass to boast of antiquity, when as the maine
abominations of Popery were first hatched by the Trent-Councell, or rather the
Trent-Conspiracie, hardly yet an 100 years ago, and were not so much as
known to the Fathers which lived in the first 500 years after Christ. I
pity their souls that are so enthraled to such guides, as that they must
believe whatsoever they tell them without any further disquisition, and so must
content themselves with the colyars faith, to believe as the Church believes,
though they know not what the Church believes. I pity them, I say, because
they are as sheep committing themselves to the keeping of a Woolfe, as it is
in the Apud Terentium ouem Lupo commisisti in Eunucho act. 5. scen. 1.
comaedie, and I will still pray that God would deliver them out the jaws of
these foul-deuouring Woolues; and that he would cause the light of his own
Gospel to shine into their hearts, whereby the dark mists of ignorance and
superstition may be dispelled and abolished, that so they may receive the
truth in the love of it, to their own eternal benefit, and the comfort of
others.

Thirdly, when they come with plausible books, such books as seem to have
many good things in them, but some bad, such books as have some physic and
some poison, Lib. 15. moral. c. 10. habent hoc haretici proprium vt bona malis
punisceant. Sicut qui veneni poculum porrigit, ora poculi dulcedine melius
tangit.
some wheat and some tares: for it is the manner of Heretics as Gregory
notes to mingle some good things amongst their bad, even as a cunning poysoner
when he means to poison another man with some deadly wine, he first annointeth
the lip of the cup with sweet honey: thus the most Heretics and Seducers come
in sheep clothing, by giving seducing books as a great present to such as
they mean to seduce: their bandy books being like the Aenaeads 9.
Troiane horse in Vergil, which was pretended to be the gift of Minerua, but it
wrought the ruin of Troy.

Fourthly, when they come as the Apostle speaks of them, Romans 16. 18. with
good words and flattering speeches pretending to tender our good, and to
counsel us for the best, to wish our salvation, etc. and yet under that
color, labor to seduce us: for as a learned Gregorius magnus lib. 23. moral.
c. 21. haeretici sub specie consulendi agu^t negotium seducendi.
Father speaks: Heretics under a color of giving good counsel do indeed
seduce men: thus likewise all seducers come to the Church of God in sheep
Clothing, for they all pretend to give good and saving Counsel: when as their
breath is as the poison of Aspes, and as it is said of the Basiliske, that he
kills with his look, or with the beams that come from his poysonfull eyes,
even so these kill with their mouths by the poysonfull breath which proceeds
from the same; according to that Adders poison is under their lips, Selah.
Psalm 140. 3.

Fifthly, when they come with the whole superficies or outside of a Christian
profession as Tertullian lib. de praescriptionibus. Superficies Christiani
nomini^ extrinsecus.
one of the ancients speaks, to wit, with an outward expression of holiness,
with a seeming contempt of the world, with prayers, fastings, tears,
almsdeeds, seeming zeal, comely gestures, seeming love, seeming patience,
seeming conformity, seeming humility, seeming harmelesnesse and the like; for
it is not unusual with Seducers to dissemble an honest life, as (...). Theop*
ad loc.
one of the Fathers says: thus the Herodians and Disciples of the Pharisees
came to our Savior in sheep clothing, Luke 20. 20. counterfeiting
themselves to be just men, and thus of all other Sects under the Sun, the
hypocritical Sect of the Familists, together with their Comrades the
Anabaptists come amongst us Christians in sheep clothing: for they will
carry themselves Hypocrisis mentitur curiosa, hypocrisy is spun with a fine
thread. Chrysolog. ser. 7.
smoothly as though they were very zealous and good Christians, when as in the
mean time by their pernicious Doctrine and private Counsel, they cut the very
throat of the Gospel and of the true Church of CHRIST: the Use of this
follows in the next Section.

SECT. 10.
IN sheep clothing: it being so that seducers come as Woolues in sheep
clothing, this may teach us diverse things:

First, to take notice of the woeful condition of such Hypocrites, they are
Christ's sheep only in outward show, not in heart, they are whited Sepulchers,
a mere outside, a painted abomination. The Lord may say of their outward
show, as Jacob said of Joseph's Coat, Genesis 37 33. this Coat is the Coat of my
Son, some enill beast has devoured him. So this outward form of godliness
is the outward form of my sons and daughters, but some evil spirit has
devoured them which use it in Hypocrisy.

Secondly, it serves justly to roproue many of our times, who for want of
judgment being blinded with affection, are ready to justify erroneous persons
for a mere outward hypocritical show, be their doctrines and opinions never
so pernicious and heretical; which is as if a foolish man or woman should
commend a Woolfe to be an innocent and harmless creature, because he has
put on a Sheepes-skinne.

Thirdly, it serves to teach such as make show of Religion, to take notice that
a mere outside in Religion is not sufficient in Gods sight: an Hypocrite, yea
a damnable seducer may have an outside, he may come in a sheep skin as we
have heard: but we must labor for an honest heart: for God above all
respects that.

Fourthly, it serves to teach Christians to be the more wary with whom they do
converse, and whom they hear, especially to beware of private conuenticles,
least whilst they think to converse with true sheep, they meet with Woolues
in sheep clothing.

Fifthly, it serves to teach Governors to be the more wary, when cunning
seducers come before them, for as these Wolves have their sheep clothing to
deceive the people withal, so they have their outward yielding to conformity,
their equivocations, their external submissions and the like, wherewith to
deceive authority and to rid themselves out of trouble. Arius was known to
yield to the Nicaeane Council as appears by a Letter of submission which he
wrote to Constantine the Great: the which Letter is noted by Lib. Sanctionum.
Iouerius in the Description of the Nicaean Council: but his yielding was
merely Hypocritical to rid himself out of trouble, for he retained his
blasphemous opinions still, and dispersed them in private more then before. I
confess the Magistrates cannot do less (I mean the Church-Gouernors) then
receive penitent persons upon their submission into the Church again. I
acknowledge also that the bosom of the Church should be always open to
humbled and contrite persons. But because Hypocritical seducers may make it a
practice to deceive Magistrates by fained submission, therefore the safest
course is (which stands also with justice) to inflict upon them condign
punishment for their former disturbances, and then if after their due
punishment they will submit and desire to be received, to receive them upon
further trial, I say upon further trial, for (...), as it is in the Proverb,
the Woolfe may change his hair, but he will hardly change his mind or nature:
and thus much may suffice for the first Description of False Prophets, which is
by their outward habit or external show, in these words, which come unto you
in sheep Cloathings.

SECT. 11.
(...).
But inwardly they are ravening Woolues.
IN these words we have the second Description of seducers, and as the former
was by their outward show, so this is by their inward quality: Inwardly they
are ravening Wolves: wherein two things are to be observed concerning
heretical seducers: First, that they are Wolves: Secondly, that they are
ravenous.

For the first, that they are Wolves, that is of a lupine or Woluish
disposition, is manifest, not only by the words of the Text, but also by that
in Acts 20 29. where they are called (...) grievous Wolves, or if you will, fat
Wolves, for (...) in Greek comes of (...) in Hebrew, which signifies fat as
some Etymologists have observed, a fit Epithet for seducers, which fat
themselves with the blood of souls.

And heretical Seducers are fitly compared to Wolves in diverse respects:
First, because as Wolves are dull-sighted in the day, but quick-sighted in the
night, as Lupus interdiu obtus^^s nocte clarius videt.
one says of them: even so pernicious Seducers are oftentimes very acute and
sharp-witted for error, Conrad. Gesner lib. 1. de quadruped.
they are able in their fashion, (having their serpentine wits commonly
exercised about nothing else) to dispute for that, yea very idiots (such as the
Familists, and Anabaptists be) will be brabbling against Learned Ministers,
in puluere olympico, so far as the english skill will extend, but they are
dull to apprehend the truth of sound Divinity, yea, they shut their eyes like
Owls against that shining light.

Secondly, as the Woolfe deals Lupus cu^ ouem rapuerit de^tibus eam non laedit
sed super dorsi^m suum eam suauiter iacere facit, vincent in specul, not lib.
19 c. 83.
gently with the sheep at the first, carrying it away unhurt upon his back,
until he have brought it to the place where he means to strangle it. Even so
pernicious seducers use to deal with their Proselytes, at the first drawing
them into lighter errors, but afterward like grievous Wolves, plucking out the
throat of their souls, by leading them into blasphemous and damnable
haeresies: and thus homo homini Lupus est, one man becomes a Woolfe to another.

Thirdly, as a Woolfe begets a Woolfe, according to that rule in nature, Omne
simile generat. sibi simile.
every like begets his like: even so peruicious seducers spiritually beget such
as prove like unto themselves both in opinion and practice, and indeed they
which are converted, or rather perverted by haereticall spirits, whatsoever
high conceits they may have of themselves, they are but of seeming Sheep made
real Wolves.

Fourthly, Voce deseratur is quem prior viderit Lupus Plin. l. 8. not. hist. c.
22.
as the Wolf is said to strike a man dumb, if he spy the man before the man
spy him: even so when seducers prevail, they strike men dumb, in respect of
any true profession of Christianity; yea, they bring them by their seductions
to blaspheme all sound profession.

Fifthly, as the wool of a Woolfe, if it be made into a garment will prove but
an odious garment, (...). c Lib. 2. Sympos. q 9.
breeding vermin upon him that shall wear it instead of ministering any
comfort, as Plutarch speaks: even so the good which poor seduced souls
think they receive by impostors, and deceivers of minds, Lupi toto anno non
amplius qua^ duodecim diebus coeunt. Isid. Hispal. lib. 12. Originum. c. 2.
it will prove corruption in the end.

Sixthly, as the Woolfe makes show of civil virtue, as of chastity and the
like, congressing but only 12. days in a whole year. Even so the most
pernicious seducers commonly make show of much civility and morality, and
thereby they do more harm amongst the ignorant sort then by any other means.
Whereupon one of the Orig hom. 7. in Ez^k. Solicit caueamuus haereticos qui
conuersationis, optima sunt, quorum forte vitam non tam Deus quam diabolus
instruxit.
Fathers says notably; let us be exceeding wary of those heretics which are
of the best conversation, whose lives possibly are directed not of God, but of
the devil. And thus we see for what reasons heretical seducers are fitly
compared pared unto Wolves. I might add another, taken from the rauenousnesse
of Wolves, but that I reserve for the next Section. Come we now to the use of
the point.

And it being demonstrated that haereticall seducers are Wolves, it first
serves not only to justify against all calumniators, but also much to commend
the lawful severity of Courts of Justice against such. Sicut est misericordia
puniens ita est crudelitas parcens Epist. 54.
Saint Augustine says, there is a punishing mercy, and a sparing cruelty.
This may seem to be a paradox to some, but the father knew what he said: for
it is a punishing mercy when worthy Governors do punish dangerous seducers
for the safety of the whole, and it were a sparing cruelty to let them pass
unpunished; for look how much mercy is showed to the Wolf, so much cruelty
is done to the Sheep, yea it is mercy to seducers themselves (if they could
skill of it) that the Governors seek to restrain them from their damnable
ways, by inflicting just punishment upon them, this being the last means that
the Church can use to cure them: according to that of Aristotle, Lib. 2. Ethic.
c. 3. (...).
punishments are kinds of medicines; but howsoever seducers themselves and
their court-flandering adherents do take it, I am sure all good people have
great cause to praise God for the zeal of our Governors, in this respect: our
bodies might as safely live in a roaring wilderness in the midst of Wolves and
Tigers, as our souls in our strongest Cities amongst seducers, if there were
not Courts of Justice to suppress them.

Secondly, it makes for the just reproof of many at these days, who when they
have dangerous Wolves discovered unto them, will not lend their helping hand to
suppress them for the common safety of the Church, but suffer them to walk
up and down in the very Sheepfold without resistance. Gods cause and his truth
for the which they ought to contend, Iud. 3. is little beholding to them, I
pray God it be not one day said to their charge: a bad cause oftentimes finds
much patronage; the wicked will strain their purses, try their friends, put
themselves to great pains for the supporting of it; but the cause of God may
sink or swim (were it not for good Governors) for any help or countenance
that the forward men of our time, for the most part will give unto it. If it
were notoriously known that some devouring Wolf did haunt about this City,
which had destroyed an 100. persons, I suppose every man would lay it to heart,
and use the best means he could to suppress such a noisome creature: are we
thus careful for the common safety of men's lives, and shall there be no care
for the common safety of their souls? Is it so heinous a matter when an
hundred persons are corporally strangled, and is it nothing when many hundreds
are spiritually murdered? But I imagine what you will say; why should we put
our finger in the fire? why should we meddle in a controversy which concerns
us not? I answer, if the controversy indeed were a mere private
controversy, you seem to say some thing; but if it be a public controversy,
and concern the common safety, your objection or plea is little worth.

But many have learned that Greek Proverb in our times, (...), it is good
sleeping in a whole skin: yea some are such valiant champions, that being
engaged in the Lords controversy, will use means and friends to draw their
own heads out of the collar, and leave others to endure the whole brunt of the
battle and danger. Such white-liuerd Soldiers are fit to take the Salmacida
spolia which In officijs,
Cicero speaks of; spoils which are obtained fine sanguine and sudore: if
victory will come of it self without pains or peril it shall be welcome; if
not, they love not to contend for it.

SECT. 12.
(...).
Ravening.
Ravening. Hence observe we, that Seducers are of a ravenous disposition. In
which very respect they are also compared unto Wolves, in the words of my Text.
And it is famously noted by Heathen Philosophers (who had a great gift in
looking far into the natures of the creatures) that the Wolf of all other
beasts is the most ravenous. Ovid. l. 1. trist. Eleg. 1. excussa est auidis
dentibus Agna Lupi.
One says (making it a wonder) the tender Lamb is shaken out of the greedy
teeth of the Woolfe: describing the Woolfe as a greedy creature. Another says
that the Wolf endures wind and weather, Virgil. AEnead. 9. ventos perpessus
and imbres nocte super media.
rain and stormy tempests, and that at midnight, to watch for his prey. Thus
the poets sing concerning the rauenousnesse of the Woolfe: and in like manner
others write in prose: Lib. 11. not. hist. c. 38.
Pliny says of the Wolves called Ceruarij that they are insatiable, they can
never be sufficed or have enough. Lib. 1. de quadrup.
Conradus Gesner says of the Wolf called Circus, that he is semper
famelicus, always hungry. And Aristotle declaring the opinion of all men
concerning the Woolfe has this report (...). Aristot. lib. 8. de histor
animal. c. 5.
They say of Wolves that for hunger some times they will eat the very earth;
yea, the Woolfe bears rauenousnesse in the very forehead of his etymology:
for the word (...), commonly used for a Woolfe: either comes of the Greek
Theme (...), which signifies dilanio, to tear in pieces, or of the Hebrew
root (...) which signifies absorbeo, to swallow down: both importing
greediness.

And heretical seducers are like unto Wolves in this respect: being commonly
such as hunger after worldly gain, according to that in Romans 16. 18. they that
are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies. And such also
as thirst after the blood of souls, compassing Sea and Land to make a
Proselyte, Mat. 23. 15.

Which may serve to teach us: First, that the desire of winning of souls is
not always the mark of a true Minister, a false Prophet may hunger and thirst
to win souls to his own faction, but a sincere desire to gain souls to
Christ, and to his truth: this is a badge of a true Shepherd.

Secondly, this may serve to forewarne Gods children to look to themselves the
more carefully, and to commit themselves the more fervently by prayer daily to
Gods special protection, considering their destruction is so greeded after by
many ravenous seducers.

Thirdly, it must teach us that still remain in the truth vnstrangled by the
ravenous Welues of the time, to bless God for it: and to say of our spiritual
deliverance as the Church says of her corporal, in Psalm 124. if it had not
been the Lord who was on our side: now may Israel say, if it had not been the
Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us; -- then they had
swallowed us up quick; but blessed be the Lord who has not given us as a prey
to their teeth.

Thus much for the intent of the Text, or of the Text in general. The Extent
follows.

The occasion of all which follows.
THis which follows was added because an order of submission or recantation
was enjoined by the most reverend Father in God, the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his grace, and other his Majesty's Commissioners Ecclesiastical
unto one John Hetherington, late of the City of Westminster, and now of Putney
in the County of Surrie, to be performed by him the same day this Sermon was
preached at Paul's Cross, being the eleanenth day of February, Anno 1627. when
it was ordered that the said Hetherington upon Sunday the 11. day of February
should before the beginning of the Sermon at Paul's Cross come within the wall
there just before the Pulpit, and there stand before the Preacher, barefaced
and bare-headed in some eminent place, where he might be best seen and heard
of the Congregation assembled during the whole time of the Sermon, having a
paper on his breast expressing his offense in these words; for scandalizing the
whole Church of England, in saying it is no true Church of Christ, and
publishing other erroneous opinions, proceeding from that ill ground: for the
which cause he was enjoined this acknowledgement.

Whereas I John Hetherington stand by the depositions of sundry witnesses
iudicially convicted before the Kings Majesty's Commissioners appointed for
Causes Ecclesiastical, for that since the 20. of December 1623. I have
maintained and published, that the Church of England as it is now by the Law
established, is no true Church of Christ, and that it teaches false Doctrine,
that the Sabbath day or Sunday, which we commonly call the Lords day, since the
Apostles time was of no force, and that every day is a Sabbath as much as that
which we call the Sabbath day, the Lords day or Sunday: that the Books of
Esdras are and ought to be esteemed part of the Canonical Scripture: as also
to have used reproachful words to and of the Ministers of the Church of
England, and of their calling. And further, whereas it stands proved against
me, that being by trade a Boxmaker about five or six years since I gave over
my said trade, and frequented private Conuenticles, by the Laws of this Realm
prohibited, taking upon me within the time articulated to be the chief Speaker
and to instruct others, not being of mine own family in points of Doctrine,
and matters of faith, giving expositions contrary to the received opinions of
this our Church of England, and in defense of such Conuenticles have said or
writ that Caesar may command a place in public, so as he forbid none in
private. As also that i have bin of opinion with the Familists touching the
perfect purity of the foul, with some other erroneous opinions mentioned in
the proofs. For the which I have bin imprisoned by the order of his Majesty's
Commissioners Ecclesiastical, and have been enjoined to make this my public
Recantation or submission here this day. I do therefore before you all here
present from my heart renounce, abjure, and disclaim all the said opinions as
erroneous and schismatic, and do promise from henceforth not to entermeddle
in the keeping or frequenting of any private Conuenticles or exercises of
Religion by the Laws of this Realm prohibited: but to conform my self in
all things to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, as a member
of that Church without disturbing the peace and unity thereof, and do bless
and praise God, that as a member of the said Church I may freely join with the
Parochial Congregations, where I shall reside in the hearing of Divine Service
said, Gods word Preached, and in the participation of the holy and blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper rightly and duly administered, and in all other
religious duties. For the due performance whereof I do here give my faithful
promise: and that I may so do, I desire you all here present to join with me
in saying the Lords prayer; Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

The WOOLFE in his. own Skin.

The Several kinds of Mystical Wolves breeding in ENGLAND. (*)
YOu have heard in the general handling of the Text, Segnius irritant animes
demissa per aurem quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus.
of disguised and palliated Wolves: but because, as a Horat de art Poet.
Poet says truly, things heard with the ear, oftentimes leave less
impression behind them then things seen with the eye. Therefore I will now
endeavor in the more particular Application of that which has been spoken; to
show you, or to present before your eyes, such a very Woolfe as our Savior
speaks of in my Text. I confess a Sebast. Munster lib. 2. de insul B. yt.
learned Writer says, which might seem a Paradox, Nulli sunt Lupi in Anglia,
that we have no Wolves in England: but for the true understanding of that
Author, we must necessarily distinguish of Wolves: there be natural Wolves and
mystical Wolves: concerning natural Wolves (and of them he speaks) he
reports truly to the world of our Nation, that we have none of them
ordinarily breeding amongst us: but concerning mystical Wolves, it is quite
otherwise: in that sense, multi sunt Lupi in Anglia, we have many Wolves in
England, we have Popish Wolves which have sought by all possible means both by
force and flattery, to reduce all to blindness and superstition again, as
appears by th hellish Gunpowder-plot never to be forgotten, in the year 1605.
and other designs of theirs: we have Arminian Wolves, which make a bridge
between us and Popery, endeavoring in some points to reconcile the Wolves and
the Lambs: which the very Heathen Horat epod. 15. dum pecor^ Lupus insestus
erit, being put for semper.
Poets being reasonable men, have judged an impossible task: we have
Anabaptisticall Wolves, which iumpe with the Arminians in conditional election
upon foreseen faith or works, in denying the doctrine of reprobation in the
true sense thereof, in maintaining universal redemption of all of all sorts,
in maintaining the doctrine of free will, in defending and pleading for falling
from grace, or the total Apostasy of Saints, etc.

Fourthly, I would we had not Rosey-crosse-Wolues which turn Divinity into
phansies, and idle speculations of their own brain esteeming text-men, or such
as endeavor to keep to the natural sense of Scripture (not daring to make an
allegory in a Text where the spirit of God desires to be understood without an
allegory) to be vulgar Divines, Vulgares theologos.
as they inculcate in some of their phansifull books; boasting also of their
ability to work such miracles as I should tremble to name: but because they
do this more privately; being either ashamed, or afraid it should come to
light, I pass it by for the present; there may be further occasion hereafter
given unto some to lay them open, that others may beware of them: Lastly, I
would we had not Familisticall Wolves, and that of diverse sorts, as first,
Familists of the Castalian order which dissent from our doctrine, and oppose it
in every syllable thereof, and yet like notorious Hypocrites, if they be never
so little questioned, will make show by outward seeming conformity, as though
they did highly approve the doctrine of our Church, and were ready-prest to
defend the same: which hold also that the Law of God may be perfectly
fulfilled by men in this world, which term themselves Eagles, Angels, and
Archangels: which hope in a short time to be inspired with light and
illumination, as far as ever Paul or any of the Prophets were: which
allegorize the places of Scripture concerning Christ, dreaming only of a
sactifying Christ, and abhorring a justifying Savior; expecting salvation
indeed by their own works: holding that Turks and Pagans may be saved as well
as any other if they live well, though they had never heard of Christ: if their
be any of this faction still remaining, I wish them speedily to repent, for
otherwise God no doubt will in time discover them, notwithstanding all their
shifts and hypocrisies.

Secondly, I would we had not Gringltonian Familists in the North parts of
England, which hold:

First, that the Scripture is but for nouices.

Secondly, that the Sabbath is to be observed but as a Lecture day.

Thirdly, that to pray for pardon of sin, after one is assured of Gods love,
is to offer Christ again.

Fourthly, that their spirit is not to be tried by the Scripture, but the
Scripture by their spirit.

Fifthly, that we must not now go by motives but by motions.

Sixthly, that when God comes to dwell in a man, he so fills the soul, that
there is no more lusting.

Seventhly, that they see no reason why Ministers should speak against the
sins of the wicked, seeing the wicked man can do nothing but sin.

Eighthly, which boast and thank God, that they have cast off praying in their
Families, repeating of Sermons and such like long ago.

Ninthly, which scoff at such as make Conscience of words, with many other
pernicious points.

Thirdly, I would we had not Familists in the Mountains, which say, that they
have quite vanquished the devil, that they are pure from all sin, and that
they are never so much as tempted to doubt of their spiritual estate.
Fourthly, I would we had not Familists of the Vallyes which bring in their
damnable doctrine with fair pretenses of weeping, of sighing, of lifting up
the eyes to heaven, of patience, of a smooth carryage and the like. I would we
had not Familists of the scattered flock, which seduce by pretending
themselves to be of them which fear the Lord when they are nothing less. I
would we had not Familists of Caps his order and of other ranks: but amongst
the rest of these mystical Wolves, there has been discovered of late to his
Majesty's High Commission-Court, a notable close-deuouring Woolfe, one John
Hetherington a Boxe-maker, whom I may justly term a Woolfe (according to the
title given to seducers in my Text) in respect of his pernicious doctrine,
being the Teacher to a great number of Factious persons about this City: and he
may fitly be compared to the Woolfe Glanos, Aristol. lib. 8. de Hist. animal.
c. 5.
(...) which seeks to prey upon men: or to the Woolfe Circus, which in the
cold time, when the Mountains are covered with snow, will impudently enter
into the very City to seek for his prey, as In vrbem per famem impude^tissimus
accedit.
Gesner records: even so this mystical Woolfe uses to prey upon men, as
appears by the multitude of Schismatic persons whom he has seduced; yea,
he is grown so impudent, that he is entered into this famous City, to ceaze
upon his prey there, although he know there be vigilant Pastors in it, able to
resist him.

But that I may proceed methodically in that which I have further to write, I
will confine the remainder to three heads: viz.

1. Matter of Discovery. 2. Matter of Confutation. 3. Matter of Admonition.
Concerning Matter of Discovery; I confess I have an hard task, for who
shall make men believe they see a Woolfe, when outwardly in the skin, there
appears only the resemblance of a silly innocent sheep: but I hope I have to
deal with a prudent age of men ( qui ex vngue Leonem) which have learned to
know a Lion, if they see but one of his paws: now I will endeavor to discover
this close Sectary four ways:

1. By the Oaths of honest Witnesses. 2. By his own erroneous Books. 3. By
comparing him with ancient Heretics. 4. By applying unto him the words of my
Text.
The first Discovery of John Hetherington, which is by the oaths is honest
Witnesses.
This man (...) being metamorphosed or changed from a man to a Woolfe, as Lib.
8. de repub.
Plato speaks of a Tyrant, was discovered to the forenamed Honorable Court,
and testified against upon the oaths, not of Knights of the Post, but of many
honest conscionable men, against whose persons or sayings, Hetherington
himself the party defendant did propound no manner of exceptions;
notwithstanding he had sufficient time allowed him by the Court, nor ever so
much as offered to except against them in any Legal course: by the testimonies
of these untainted Witnesses, which were not a few, and whereof two were
Ministers of good note, it appeared and was proved.

First, that the said Hetherington having been by trade a Boxe-maker, cast off
his trade, and betook himself to be an interpreter of the Scripture to many
persons, not of his own Family, keeping private Conuenticles by the Laws of
this Realm prohibited, in the which Conuenticles: he took upon him to be
the chief speaker, and instructor in points of doctrine, and matters of Faith,
giving many interpretations contrary to the received Tenets taught and held in
the Church of England.

Secondly, that he has maintained and published, that the Church of England is
no true Church of Christ; that it teaches false doctrine, having used also
many reproachful speeches to, and of the Reverend Ministers of our Church,
whereby he has withdrawn many from the Church of England to his own Faction.

Thirdly, that he is a man disaffected to the government and discipline of the
Church of England now by law established, and agrees in opinion with the Sect
of the Familists and other Sectaries: holding with the Familists the perfect
purity of the soul.

Fourthly, that since the twentieth of December, 1623. he has maintained, and
published, that the Sabbath since the Apostles time was of no force; and that
every day is a Sabbath, as much as that which we call the Lords day, or Sunday.

Fifthly, that he holds and maintains, that the books of Esdras are part of
the Canonical Scripture, and that they ought so to be esteemed.

For the which his erroneous opinions and Schismatic carriage tending to the
disturbance of the peace of the Church, and to the seducing of many silly
souls, the Court adjudged him to be a dangerous Sectary, and one that was well
worthy to be restrained and punished, and amongst the rest of the punishments
laid upon him, this was one; that he should publicly recant his errors at
Paul's Cross; wherein the sentence of that Honorable Court, is like to the
censure of the Church upon Schismatickes in the days of Athanasius, in the
which time, as appears by Epist. Athanas. ad Antioch.
one of his Epistles, if any did fall or revolt from the Church to Arianisme,
and afterward repenting himself of his revolt desired to be reconciled to the
Church again, amongst the rest of his punishments, enjoined him by the Church
for his Apostacle, this was one: that he should publicly (...) renounce, or
make a Recantation of his Arian heresy. For this worthy Sentence, all Gods
servants in this City, have great cause to glorify God; yea, I hope also his
Majesty will take special notice of it for the encouragement of his worthy
Commissioners in well-doing.

The second Discovery of John Hetherington, which is by his Books.
Come we now to the second Discovery, Hetheringtons Books put amongst the
Discoueries, because they are unworthy of confutation.
which is by his Books. The said Hetherington and his Factious company, have
certain Books wherewith they do usually seduce and withdraw men and women
from the Church of England: and these seducing Books are of two sorts, either
such as were made by Hetherington himself (for it is true which Horace says,
scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim, Hodie quidam omnium bonaru^
literarum prorsus rudes and (...) pauculis sophismatibus vt male deguflata
Aristoletis philosophia freti pedibus ac manibus illotis irruant in theolagia
professionem. Erasmus de vita Hieronymi.
ignorant idiots in our days will be writing Books as well as the Learned)
or such as were made by his predecessor, T. L. who was as it seems the
ringleader of this factious company before Hetherington: for let us take notice
of this, for certainety that when any Sectmaster dies, or leaves a place,
either amongst Anabaptists, or Familists, another ordinarily succeeds him in
the ministration to uphold the faction.

The first Book written by Hetherington himself, is that against one Smith an
Anabaptist, wherein under a color of writing against Anabaptists, he broacheth
(but very cunningly) his own familisticall errors.

In this Book against Smith, printed in the year, 1610. he cunningly coucheth
many dangerous errors: to name but some of them for breuity sake.

At page 1. he acknowledges no other Church but that which consists of living
stones, meaning by his Church of living stones, his own factious Company, as
all Schismatickes understand none but themselves, whenever they speak of the
true Church of Christ.

Secondly, unto this fansied Church he appropriateth the power of the keys,
page 2. 65. falsely interpreting that in Mat. 18. 17. tell the Church, that is,
says he, at page 74. tell it to those little ones borne of God: whereas it is
meant, that we should tell the Governors of the Church which are in place and
authority, wether they be regenerate or unregenerate.

Thirdly, at page 7. 8. he arrogateth to his Church the knowledge of
infallibility in judging concerning the members of the same.

Fourthly, at page 81. 82. he says, that Caesar may command a place in
public, so he do forbid none in private: wherein he speaks cunningly for
the liberty of Conuenticles, as I think any which know him will easily
discern.

Fifthly, at page 86. he says, the Pope has his power from God, and that he
must be obeyed; wherein he discovers his notorious Hypocrisy: as being
ready if occasion were offered to submit outwardly to Antichrist himself.

Sixthly, at page 88. 89. For mine own part I will not be peremptory in the
interpreting of his meaning, but let wise men read the words and give sentence.
he seems cunningly to teach his Proselytes not to scruple at outward
circumcision if occasion be offered, nor at sitting in the Idols Temple (he
would say possibly, if he durst, at going to the Mass) abusing that in 2
Kings 5. 19. where the Prophet bids Naaman the Syrian go in peace, as though
he had bid him go in peace to the house of Rimmon: whereby it may appear,
what this man and his Proselytes would do if Circumcision were urged upon them
by the Turk, or going to the Mass by the Pope: and indeed some of his
Proselytes have been observed to say, that if he were at Rome he would join
with them there as soon as with us here: many other pernicious errors are
couched in this Book against Smith, by cunning intimations which none shall
ordinarily understand (though they read the Book) but only his seduced
Proselytes, which are secretly acquainted with his mystery: it is observed by
In prompt, con. 2. c. 8. dux peripateticorum se ea lege, sua naturalia
instituta tradidisse dixit vt nemo intelligeret, nisi ipso qui tradidit inter
pretante.
Franciscus Venetus a very learned Writer concerning Aristotle, that he wrote
his natural Philosophy with that art, that none should understand the precepts
thereof, save only they which were his Scholars, and unto whom he himself
would vouchsafe to interpret them. John Hetherington is like Aristotle in this
respect, not for learning, but for cunning: none shall fully understand all his
errors but such idiots as are his Proselytes.

The second Book written by Hetherington (as he himself says) is that which
was set forth in the name of one Edmund Iesop, called the discovery of the
errors of the Anabaptists. Wherein by the way) Iesop deserves no small rebuke,
for whereas at that time he made a show of turning from the Anabaptists to the
Church of England, he turned not to us but to Hetheringtons faction, and
conspired with him about the making of this erroneous Book; howbeit by his
hypocritical seeming to turn, he reaped no small gain to himself, as it is
well known. But to let him pass, and to come to the errors of the Book.

In this Book at page 3. he confounds Reprobation and Damnation, making the
foresight of man's folly and wickedness to be the cause why God preordaines any
to condemnation.

Secondly, at page 18. he affirms that the Gospel has bin declared to the
Gentiles in former times, and is declared at this present in diverse parts of
the world, only by the works of creation, wherein he teaches cunningly that
pernicious point, Nota est Historia.
expressly maintained by him and his followers in their private Conuenticles,
viz. that a man may be saved without Christ revealed in the word, by the mere
contemplation of the creatures: abusing that in Romans 10. 18. which speaks of
such a preaching by the creatures which leaves men without excuse, not which is
sufficient to salvation.

Thirdly, at Page 48. he cunningly coucheth a point which is maintained by him
and his factious company; to wit, that the soul of man comes ex traduce, that
is, that it is traduced from Adam as well as the body, and that it is not
immediately infused of God into this or that particular body.

Fourthly, at Page 61 he speaks dishonorably of Baptism; for he says, What
can men have less then Baptism, which can give to no man more then an outward
name of a Christian, as Circumcision did the outward name of a Jew, it does
neither confer nor confirm grace to the heart of any, no more then
Circumcision did. And in his former Book at page 13. he speaks
contemptuously of Baptism, tearming it elementish baptism. And indeed it is
apparent to them which know and are acquainted with his opinions, that he
holds no other Baptism to be of any virtue, but that which he calls the
Baptizing in a thousand tears, in his former Book at page 14. allegorizing
the Sacrament, as the rest of the familists do. And herein appears the
hypocrisy of this faction, they will submit to use our Sacraments, and to come
to our Churches, and yet have them in plain contempt.

Fifthly, whereas at page 89. he condemns the Familists of H. N. his order as
the most blasphemous and erroneous Sect this day in the world. I answer, all
this he may do and yet remain a notorious Familist himself of another order:
for as it is amongst the Anabaptists, so it is also amongst the Familists:
there be diverse orders of them, and they do mutually hate and oppose one
another. The Familists of the Castalion order despise them of Caps his order,
accounting them simple men; and they of Caps his order favor not them of
Hetheringtons order, and they of Hertheringtons order gnash their teeth against
all but their own faction.

Sixty, at page 101. he delivers a strange paradox, viz. that Satan himself
with all his Angels and spirits of wickedness, by force of their torments
shall be compelled with all powers, people and kings whatsoever, to confess
and bow before Christ, to serve and obey him, to praise and magnify him, his
Justice and Mercy for ever, abusing that place in Philip. 2. 10, 11. which
proves not that ever hell shall be made a Chapel to praise God in. Thus
foolish and ignorant men will take upon them to be teachers of Divinity, being
unseen in the very grounds thereof: much like to presumptuous Quacksaluers,
Verum penitus absurdum est vt discipulus ad magistrum vadens, ante sit artisex
quam doceatur, Hier. aduers. Luciferian.
which take upon them to be great Chirurgians and Physicians, being ungrounded
in the art of Surgerie and Physic: and so instead of curing men, do indeed
kill them.

There be moreover other Books whereby this Sect do seduce, written by T. L.
Hetheringtons predecessor; to wit, First, the Epistle to the Church of Rome.
Secondly, the tree of regeneration. Thirdly, an Exposition upon the 11, 12, 13.
Chapters of the Revelation. Fourthly, the Key of David, and some other.

Concerning the Epistle pretended to be written to the Church of Rome. It is
said in the Preface of it; that this Book deserves as well to be regarded, as
the best news that ever thou have heard: now the best news that ever we have
heard as we know is the Gospel; and I appeal to the consciences of this
factious company, whether they have not in contempt all writings since the
Apostles time in comparison of T. L. his writings; yea, whether they do not
equalize them to the very Scripture it self, accounting T. L. a great Prophet.

In this Book of his, at page 16. the Author solemnly protests that he knew
not any one after the flesh that takes part with him, wherein he shows
himself a notorious factionist, in thinking himself alone, in the days of
the liberty of the Gospel. Secondly, although this railing Epistle be
pretended only to be written to the Church of Rome, yet it is intended also
against our Church, as it does manifestly appear by his girding at Hussites,
Lutherans, Caluinists, Evangelists, Protestants, and Precisians, at page 108.
and by his girding at false reformed Prophets at page 69. wherein he cunningly
inueigheth against all reformed Churches whom he terms in the tree of
regeneration, at page 20. foolish and irreformed Hetherington and his company
are well known to despise all Churches in the world reformed and unreformed,
and to acknowledge no other converted Church but their own faction.
reformers. Thirdly, in this Epistle to the Church of Rome, at page 113. The
Author says when he wrote this Epistle, that he was in Babylon, and yet he
lived in England in Queen Elizabeth's time, yea he was so impudent, as to
dedicate one of his Books to that Queen of famous memory, expressing his name
only by two letters T. L. lest the Purseuant should find him out. I think I
do not guess amiss at his meaning: and what was this, but to call our Church
Babylon, in the very times of the Gospel. Fourthly, at page 86. he says come
forth ye thieves and murderers out of your dens and palaces: if he were now
alive, I would demand of him whom he means by his thieves and murderers in
palaces.

As for his second Book called the Tree of Regeneration: the scope of it is as
his aim is in the rest of his Books. First, to intimate himself to be a
Prophet, at page 2. Secondly, to revile the public meetings of the Church or
the Congregations, and by this means to withdraw men from them, at page 18.
19. Thirdly, to reproach the Ministers which come to preferment in the Church
by the favor of Princes, tearming them the Sons of Beor, at page 26.
Fourthly, cunningly to gird at the prerogative of Kings, with the which he
says, some are drunken: at page 23.

I will not further insist upon any more of his Books, but considering how
many have bin already seduced by them; hundreds by report, I cannot do less
then wish (tendering the safety of the Church) that they were devoted to the
fire, like those books of witchcraft or of curious arts spoken of in Act. 19.
19.

The third Discovery of John Hetherington, which is by comparing him with
ancient Sectaries.
I find by that which Saint Augustine has concerning ancient Heretics or
Sectaries, Lib de Hares.
that Hetherington agrees in opinion with diverse of them: as First, with the
Gnostickes in an high conceit of his own knowledge, for as they did glory in
that name, as though they had been the only Ginoskites or knowing men in the
world, even so this man is the Elias left alone, the Ministers of England in
comparison of him are blind guides, not able to interpret one place of
Scripture aright, if we may believe his Proselytes which so boast of him, as
was deposed against some of them in Court, or his own practice in taking upon
him (as was also proved) to deliver in his Conuenticles many contrary things to
the received opinions in the Church of England, opposing his own private
conceits against the judgment of the whole Church.

Secondly, with the Catharists and Iouinianists which held, that a man cannot
sin ( Lauacro regenerationis accepto) after he be once Regenerated, even so
this man holds the perfect purity of the soul as was proved against him.

Thirdly, with the Manicheans, which held baptismu^ in aqua nihil cuiquam
salutis afferre, even so this man holds, that Baptism neither confers, nor
confirms grace to the heart of any as has been demonstrated before out of
his book, set out in the name of Iesop one of his factious Proselytes, at page
61.

Fourthly, with the Mathematici, which received the Apocrypha as well as the
Canonical Scripture, but allegorized and perverted both for their own turns,
even so this man makes show to receive the Scripture, yea, to receive also some
of the Apocrypha for Canonical, as has been proved against him: but how he
peruerteth both for the maintenance of his own factious opinions, is manifest
in his erroneous books or Pamphlets.

Fifthly, with the Vadiani culpa^tes episcopos diuites, save only that he and
his factious company are more censorious then they: for they only blamed rich
Bishops, envying their prosperity, but these both Bishops and Curates,
affirming as has been deposed against them, that Bishops and Ministers as
they are consecrated in the Church of England, are not so much as members of
the Church.

Sixthly, with the Elceseitae, which held fidem in perscutione esse negandam
and in cord seruandam, that a man, if he were persecuted for his Faith, might
lawfully deny it, provided that he kept it still in his heart: and does not
the Hetherigtonian faction agree unto this? Did not Hetherington call God to
witness, that he was sree from such opinions as were laid to his charge. I
wish him to remember what he has written, or said to this purpose, and
especially his letter which he wrote to a great man in this Kingdom for his
enlargement: indeed it is true, he will seem to maintain some of his
erroneous opinions to this day, but I wish for his own good, that it were not
rather to enrich himself in the Prison by drawing money from his numerous
multitude of Proselytes, as some other besides himself have been known to
do. then for any conscience he makes of denying what he holds: I might compare
this man with many other Sectaries, mentioned by Irenaeus, Eusebius,
Epiphanius, and other Fathers which write of Heretics: but I study breuity.

The fourth Discovery of John Hetherington, which is by the Application of the
Text.
In the last place, this man may be much discovered by the right Application of
my Text. For first he is a Woolfe in the sense of my Text. Secondly, he comes
in sheep clothing: that he is a Woolfe in the sense of my Text, is manifest
to all that know him intus and in cute: for First, he deals gently with his
Proselytes at the first drawing them into lighter errors (although I must needs
say, I know no one error that he holds which is simply light) but afterward
like a ravening Woolfe, he tears their souls in pieces by bringing them by
his spiritual enchantments, to despise the Church, to reject the public
Ministry, or at the least to cease to esteem and believe it, to have the
Lords Day in contempt, to cast off holy duties in private Families and the
like; all this is very well known in the City, to such as do but know his
followers.

Secondly, he is very dull to understand the truth, for who is more blockish
then he which is ignorant, and yet scorns to be taught: but he is very
quick-sighted to find out cunning euasions and subtle equivocations to hide
his pernicious errors if possibly he may from the eye of authority; this I am
persuaded prudent men before whom he has been conuented, do partly discern,
besides others which have conuersed with him and his factious company.

Thirdly, as a Woolfe begets a Woolfe, so this sectary where he preuailes with
any man or woman, to make them his Proselytes, he makes them like unto
himself: will he equivocate? so will they: will he traduce good Ministers and
good people terming them puritans though they be conformable? so will they:
will he seek to seduce? so will they: I may well speak this by experience,
considering that many tender-conscienced Christians in my Parish have been
tampered with by these seducing fellows, and solicited to Hetheringtons
Conuenticles: wherefore, as it was once feined concerning Jupiter, (...), that
he begat new Gods as Eurip in (...)
one of the Greek Poets has it. So it may be said concerning Hetherington
without fiction, (...), he begets new Proselytes, which quickly turn traducers
of the Church, if not worse then so.

Secondly, he comes in sheep clothing: for First he comes with quotations
of Scripture to maintain pernicious errors, witness his books. Secondly, he
comes with flattering words, pretending to tender men's souls and the like;
witness many which have been assaulted by him or by his followers. Thirdly,
he comes with lincywoolsie books, such as savor of some seeming devotion, but
containing dangerous errors closely couched. Fourthly, he comes in the whole
outside of a Christian; there is nothing a true Christian has indeed, but
these fellows to serve their own turn can have it in show, they can sigh,
and weep and humble themselves, and make show of some civil virtues, etc. but
all this is joined with pernicious errors of judgment and schism. Fifthly, he
has his sheep clothing also, wherewith to deceive authority, viz. his false
recriminations, his feined submissions, his hypocritical equivocations, his
shameless denyals, with many such: if any shall desire to be further satisfied
concerning Hetherington and his factious company, let him but enquire amongst
honest Religious Citizens, and he shall not only find this little which I
say true of them, but much more.

And thus I have endeavored to show you this Woolfe in his own skin. I pray
God discover him further for the safety of his Church: and thus also I have
done with the first thing propounded; namely, the Discovery. Wherein,
howsoever I may seem to use sharpness in Zeal for the Church, yet I am sure
I have mingled no malice, for I never had any particular quarrel against him
in all my life as he well knows: and having dispatched the Discovery, it
remains now according to our Method propounded, that we come to matter of
Confutation; and herein I do not mean to insist upon the refutation of every
dotage which he is known to hold, for so I might be infinite. I will not
stand to prove against him, that the Church of England is a true Church, for
this were to hold a candle to see the Sun by, which is seen sufficiently by
its own light: a chaste Spouse remains an honest woman, though never so many
varlots reproach her as an harlot, even so the Church of England, my dear
Mother shall remain I hope for the future, and is for the present a true
Church, when all peevish Schismatickes, Brownists, Anabaptists, Familists and
such like, have said or rayled what they can against her: neither will I insist
upon his dotage concerning the perfect purity of the soul: that in 1 Ioh. 1.
8. If we say we have not sin, we deceive our selves: is sufficient to
confound whatsoever he or his Proselytes are able to produce to the contrary.

But that which we will stand upon shall be 1. The Sabbath. 2. The Books of
Esdras.


The Sabbath day, or that which we call the Lords day, is no more a Sabbath in
Hetheringtons opinion then any other day, as was proved by the oaths of honest
men against him: wherein like unto Faux, he would blow up all Religion at one
blast by the Gunpowder of Familisticall Doctrine, and open a window to all
Atheism and prophannesse: for take away the Sabbath, and farrewell all
Religion: neither let this equiuocator say, that he does not utterly deny the
morality of the Sabbath, but only that he holds it is not to be so strictly
kept as it was amongst the Jews, etc. for it is perfectly known to many in
the City, which I hope may easily be produced if need should require, that
neither Hetherington nor his followers make any conscience of working in their
ordinary trades upon that day, or of buying and selling and the like: yea, the
truth is, as appears by some that have been intimate with them, and by some
other that have been converted from them, that where their pernicious doctrine
does prevail, it brings men or women to a plain contempt of the Sabbath, to
work upon that day to despite others, yea, to Tearming them superstitious
persons.
nickname others which make conscience to keep it as was also deposed against
them: to come therefore to that which this dangerous Sectary makes a
controversy, viz. to prove the Morality of the Sabbath.

The Morality of the Sabbath proved against the Sect of the Familists, against
Hetherington and other Antisabbatareans.
THe true Morality of the Sabbath consisting not in a mystical resting from
sin as the Familists pretend, but in celebrating of an appointed day in seven
in the worship and service of God, may be demonstrated and proved by the
arguments following.

First, from the time when it was first instituted and celebrated and that was
in the time of man's innocence before any Mosaicall Ceremony was in use, Genesis
2. 3. indeed in the state of innocence, God had given unto Adam the Law
concerning the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, yet that tree was no
Mosaicall Ceremony, but a Sacrament.

Secondly, from the manner of writing of the fourth Commandment at the first,
for it was not written in paper or parchment, or upon leaves of trees, but in
Tables of stone, as the rest of the ten Commadements were, Deuteronomie 10.
1. to signify the perpetuity thereof.

Thirdly, from Gods own placing of it: for the Law of the Sabbath, to wit, the
fourth Commandment is not placed amongst the Ceremonial or Judicial Laws,
as though it had been Ceremonial, or had concerned only the Nation of the
Jews, or them especially: but amongst the Moral Laws, yea it is made one of
the ten, so that if it were abrogated, there would remain but nine
Commandments, and so the Law of God were imperfect, which were blasphemy to
affirm: neither let Familists think to euade by saying the morality of the
fourth Commandment still remains in resting from sin every day; for the
morality of that Commandment consists not in that, but in celebrating one
day of seven in Gods service, as we noted before, and as may appear by the
very words of the Commandment pressing only the observation of a seventh day.

Fourthly, from the reasons wherewith the fourth Commandment is enforced,
which are all of them moral, and do as strongly bind the Gentiles, as the
Jews: for if the Jews were bound in conscience to celebrate the seventh day
in Gods service to his glory, because the Lord had given them six days for
their own lawful occasions, are not we Gentiles by the same reason bound,
unto whom God in like manner has granted six days for our own labors
requiring but the seventh for his public worship. Secondly, if the Jews were
bound to celebrate the seventh day, because it was the Lords due, or because
it was the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: are not the Gentiles bound in like
manner to give God his right. Thirdly, shall the example of God in resting upon
the seventh day from all his works of Creation bind the Jews and not us
Gentiles? are not we bound to be imitators of God as dear children, as well
as they, or any other? Ephesians. 5. 1. Fourthly, shall it be an argument to
persuade the Jews to keep the Sabbath, because God has blessed and
sanctified it; that is, has ordained it to be a day of blessing to the
conscionable obseruers of it, and has set it apart from common labor to holy
use? and shall it not be an argument to persuade us? have not we as much need
of Gods blessing as the Jews? have not we cause to fear to devour that
which is sanctified as well as the Jews? Thus we see all the reasons in the
fourth Commandment are moral, which do plainly demonstrate the Commandment
it self to be moral.

Now if any shall object that in Deuteronomy. 5. 15. where God presses the
observation of the Sabbath, with a reason seeming to be peculiar to the
Hebrews; namely, because he had brought them out of Egypt. I answer, that
does no more infringe the morality of the fourth Commandment, then the
general Praeface praefixed before the ten Commandments, I am the Lord thy
God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of the house of
servants, does infringe the morality of the rest of the moral Law. Secondly,
there was something also signified in this reason, I brought thee out of the
land of Egypt; to wit, the great benefit of redemption, which binds the
Gentiles as well as the Jews, in way of thankfulness to celebrate the Sabbath
day to Gods glory.

Reasons proving against Hetherington and other Familists, that the Lords day
ought to be kept for the Christian Sabbath.
THat the Lords day ought to be celebrated for the Christians Sabbath; and that
by virtue of the morality of the fourth Commandment: it is apparent by diverse
Arguments.

First, because the moral Law is not abrogated by the Gospel, but
established, Rom 3. 31. which proves that tenet of Hetherington to be false; to
wit, that the Lords day since the Apostles time was of no force.

Secondly, because it is written in the very hearts of men, that they ought to
celebrate that day, as appears by the secret checkes that they find in their
consciences when they do profane it, and by the sweet comforts which they
feel when they keep it in an holy manner,

Thirdly, this blessed day has bin observed by all Christian Churches: it was
kept at Jerusalem, Act. 2. 1. it was kept at Troas Act. 20. 7. it was kept in
Patmos, Revel. 1. 10. it was kept in the regions of Galatia, 1 Cor, 16. 1. 2.

Fourthly, the ancient Fathers have pressed the observation of the Lords day
upon the Church in their several ages. Epist. ad magnesi^s.
Ignatius says, let every one which loves Christ celebrate the Lords day,
Ser. 251. de tempor.
Saint Augustine does greatly press the strict observation of the Lords day
that men should upon that day be separated from worldly businesses, and that
they should attend upon Gods public worship: that they should not sit idling
at home when others go to Church; that they should not give themselves to
hunting upon that day, or to loud laughters, etc.

In 1. cap. Isaiae.
Saint Basil says, when as almost all days prescribed by the Law are
abolished, yet there remains one great day of the Lord which shall never be
abolished, but shall remain to the end of the world. Lib. 7. de divine. offic.
Rupertus says, the Lord has made this day to be the solemnity of
Solemnities, because the nobleness of this solemnity excels all other
solemnities. Lib. 4. aduers. Marcion.
Tertullian says, that Christ has made the Sabbath more holy by his
benefaction, it being holy from the beginning by his fathers benediction. Hom.
7. in 15. c. exodus
Saint Origin does in like manner not only equalize, but also far prefer
the Christians Lords day before the Jews Sabbath. Enchir.
Luther blesses God for setting apart a peculiar day for the use of his
ordinances: yea Lib. 2. instit. c. 8. Sect. 32.
Calvin himself says, unless a certain time were set apart for the worship
of God, all would run to ruin and confusion speedily and ineuitably. Here I
am, as the learned know, in a large field, I might be very copious in
quotations, both out of the ancient Fathers and modern writers, but I must be
brief for diverse reasons.

Fifthly, the Homily of the place and time of prayer.
Church of England has these words in one of the Homilies; God has given
express charge to all men that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday,
they cease from all weekly and work-day labor, to the intent that like as God
himself wrought six days and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified
it; and consecrated it to quietness and rest from labor; even so Gods
obedient people should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their common and
daily business, and also give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods
true religion and service. So that God does not only command the observation
of this holy day, but also by his own example does stir and provoke to
diligent keeping of the same. The which I have noted, first, because the
Hetheringtonians hold, as it is well known, that the Christians Sabbath is
grounded upon no precept in all Gods word, whereas the Homily says that God
has commanded the observation of this holy day. Secondly, because some not
well affected would cry down all stricktnesse in observing this day as Jewish,
wherein they do not symphonize with their mother; for what observation of the
Sabbath can be more holily strict, then that which is prescribed in the Homily;
to wit, that we should cease from all weekly labor, and give our selves
wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and service. We are prone by
corruption of nature to take liberty of our selves, Si non satis insa^iat
instiges eum apud Terent.
we need not be taught it: non opus est calcaribus sed frano.

Sixthly, God has showed fearful judgments upon prophaners of the Lords day,
as you may read in the Practice of Piety: a certain husbandman grinding Corn
upon the Lords day, had all his meal burned to ashes* another carrying Corn
upon the same day, had his Barn and all his Corn the next night burned. A
covetous Flaxwoman at Kingstat in France in the year 1559. using with her
maidens to work in her trade upon the Lords day, her flax in an extraordinary
manner took fire the same day, burnt her house, and so scorched her self and
two of her children that they all of them dyed the next day. Stratford upon
Auon was twice almost consumed with fire in one year; and the like judgment
was showed upon Teuerton in Devonshire: both which towns were known to suffer
much profanation of the Sabbath. In the year 1582. Ian. 13. being the Lords
day, the scaffolds in Parisgarden fell under the people at a Bearebaiting, so
that eight were suddenly slain, and many others hurt and maimed. Also a
certain Nobleman usually profaning the Sabbath by hunting, had a child by his
Lady, which had an head like a dogs head with ears and jaws answerable,
making also a noise when it cried like an Hound. In like manner a woman, as I
am informed, preparing a pair of stockings for the market upon the Lords day
with a pan of coals at Parshore in the County of Worcester, her house was
burnt and two and twenty more upon the same day. It is certain there were so
many houses burnt, and that upon the Lords day, for that appears by the Brief
which was gathered at the Churches. And that the fire came by this means, some
that then dwelt in the town, said unto me, that they would be deposed of the
truth of it.

All which may be fair warnings to forewarne not only prophaners of the
Sabbath, but also all such as by their pernicious doctrine teach men to
profane it.

Seauenthly, there is infinite necessity of a Lords day or Sabbath. First, for
the rest of poor Servants and Cattle, which otherwise might sink under the
burden of incessant labor. Secondly, for the sanctification of every one of
us: how worldly minded should the best of us grow, if we had not the Sabbath to
take of our hearts from the world? Thirdly, for the instruction of the
ignorant: what instruction have many thousands in this Kingdom and elsewhere,
but only that which they receive upon the Sabbath day. Fourthly, for Gods
worship and public service, when is God publicly worshipped in the Country
ordinarily, but upon the Sabbath.

Objections against the Sabbath answered.
Having thus proved the Morality of the Sabbath, come we now to answer the
Objections which the Familists and their adherents bring to infringe the same.
First, 1. Objection.
you keep not, say they, the same day which the Jews kept, and therefore you
grant by your own practice, that the Law of the Sabbath is not Moral. I
answer, they might as truly say our practice in receiving the Lords Supper in
the morning, does prove that that blessed Sacrament is abolished, because we
observe not the same circumstance of time. We keep not indeed the Jewish
Saturday as the Thraskites, but we celebrate the Lords day; the Sabbath being
not abolished, but altered from the Saturday to the Sunday, and that by order
from Christ himself, who immediately before his ascension instructed his
Apostles in things belonging to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1. 3. and the Sabbath
I hope is one special thing belonging to Gods kingdom; yea, our Savior
taught us by his own example to celebrate this day, appearing to his Disciples
after his resurrection, especially upon it, John 20. 19. 26. Moreover, the
example of the Apostles themselves which celebrated this day, John 20. 19. 26.
should be a forcible motive unto us to do the like, for we are bound to
follow them as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. and the occasion of the
alteration of the Sabbath was extraordinary, namely the resurrection of our
Lord, which fell out not upon the Jewish Saturday, but upon our Sunday, Mat. 28.
1. an occasion which may very well deserve the honor of the day before that of
Gods resting from the works of creation, although both the occasions are very
renowned.

Secondly, 2. Objection.
whereas they object that in Exodus 31. 13, 14, 15, 16. and Ezekiel 20. 12. where
the Sabbath is termed a sign. I answer, every caeremonie is a sign, but
every sign is not a caeremonie. The Sacraments are signs, Romans 4. 11. and yet
not fading caeremonies.

Thirdly, whereas they object that in Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in
respect of Sabbaths: 3. Object.
and that in Gal. 4. 10, 11. Ye observe days and times, and months, and
years, I am in fear of you. I answer, by Sabbaths in those places are meant
certain caeremoniall days amongst the Jews; viz. their feast of Tabernacles,
their new Moons, and the like: for these are termed Sabbaths, Leuit. 23. 24.
and the Apostle does sufficiently express himself to intend such days, and
not the moral Sabbath, naming new Moons, and other caeremoniall times. The
like may be answered unto that in Romans 14. 5. one man esteems one day above
another; another man esteems every day alike, etc. It is not meant that the
Church made no difference in those times between the Lords day and any other
day, as the Familists would pervert it; but that they which were better
informed then others, made no difference between the ancient Caeremoniall
days, which were now abolished, and other common days.

Fourthly, 4. Object.
whereas they allege that in Mat. 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and Mar. 2. 23.
as though our Savior had defended the breach of the Sabbath, and so by
consequence had abrogated it. I answer, it is the scope of our Savior in those
places to defend the lawfulness of works of mercy and works of necessity, and
not in any sort to plead for the abrogation of the Sabbath, much less of the
Lords day.

Fifthly, 5. Object.
whereas they object that in John 5. 8. where our Savior commands a manifest
servile work to be done upon the Sabbath; namely, the carrying of a Bed. I
answer, the carrying of the Bed in that place is not commanded as a servile
work, but to confirm the truth of a Miracle tending greatly to Gods glory:
even as our Savior commanded to give meat to the Damsel whom he raised from
death, Luke 8. 55. not so much for necessity, as for the confirmation of the
truth of the Miracle wrought upon her.

Sixthly, 6. Object.
whereas they object that in Heb. 4. 3. 9. we that have believed do enter into
rest; whereby it might seem that the Sabbath of Christians, or their rest is
merely mystical. I answer, that place of Scripture does not treat of the
moral Sabbath as though that were mystical, but of our eternal rest in heaven
whereinto we enter at our death by faith in Christ Jesus.

Seauenthly, 7. Object.
whereas they object that in Luke 24. 13. 23. 33. where Cleophas and the other
Disciple went to Emmaus, which was sixty surlongs from Jerusalem, that is,
about seven miles (a mile consisting of eight furlongs) and returned again
the same day, which was upon that day which we call the Lords day, and
therefore that they made no such scruple of working or traveling upon the
Lords day as we do. I answer, it was not known to all the Disciples (this
being the very day of Christ his resurrection) that they ought to celebrate the
first day of the week; and therefore it was no marvel if they traveled upon
that day. The good women which made scruple to anoint the body of Christ upon
the Sabbath, made no scruple to come to do it upon the first day of the week,
because as yet they were ignorant that they ought to celebrate that day.

Eighthly, 8. Object.
whereas they object that the day which we observe is termed the first day of
the week, Luke 24. 1. and therefore that it is a week day, not a Sabbath day.
I answer, this is a mere cavil. For it is termed the first day of the week,
not simply, but in respect of the Jewish Saturday; in which regard also it is
called the eight day in diverse places. But when the Spirit in Scripture
speaks positiuely and simply of it, he terms it the Lords day, Revel. 1.
10. which is indeed the most proper name of it, although we use a latitude of
words in expressing one and the same thing by diverse names.

Ninthly, 9. Object.
whereas they object that they keep every day a Sabbath, and therefore that
they are unjustly taxed for Sabbath Breakers; yea, that they come to the Church
upon the Lords day as well as others, and hear Sermons, and receive the
Sacraments, etc. that they hold the morality of the fourth Commandment, and
the like. I answer, if to trade, to labor in their particular callings, and to
esteem every day alike, be to keep every day a Sabbath, then they keep every
day a Sabbath; but what is this but under color of keeping every day, to keep
no day at all as it ought to be kept. Secondly, we deny not but they may come
to the Church as well as others upon the Lords day, and hear the Word, and
receive the Sacrament; but in the mean time how do they demean themselves
when they have heard? is it not famously known how they meet together to
censure the Ministers, to contradict the Doctrine, etc. do not hundreds in the
City know this to be true, and was it not deposed against them: again though
they may receive the Sacrament to keep them from trouble, yet what reverent
opinion have they of the Sacraments, especially of Baptism, affirming that it
neither conferres not confirms grace to the heart of any: as appears in
Iesops book, at page 61. Thirdly, they do merely equivocate when they say
they hold the morality of the fourth Commandment: for the morality of that
Commandment is that one day of seven should be set apart for Gods worship,
and kept for conscience sake in obedience to Gods Commandment: but this they
are notoriously known to deny that any such day should be now celebrated in
conscience of Gods Law: and therefore they do deny the morality of the
fourth Commandment in the right sense thereof.

Tenthly, 10. Object.
whereas they object out of Master Tyndals Works, or some other bound up with
his, that the Ancient Fathers have been of their opinion concerning the
Sabbath. I answer, that is as true as the vain boast of Popish Champions which
pretend that all the Fathers are on their sides.

Indeed the Fathers and Doctors of the Church must be read carefully and warily
in this point concerning the Sabbath, or else men may easily mistake their
meaning and abuse their judgment. They speak of diverse kinds of Sabbaths:
First, of a Sabbath of the August. live. de spirit and lit.
letter, whereby is meant the Jewish or Traskite Sabbath. Secondly, of a
August. lib. 13. confession.
mystical Sabbath, which is a resting upon God. Thirdly, of a Hier. in 56.
Isaia edit pla^t. 1578. Dedicata Sab. bata, an other Edition has it: but I
conceive DELICATA is the truer reading, quasi Sabbata summa iucunditatis and
dulcedinis.
delicate Sabbath, when a Christian is made one spirit with Christ, as one of
the ancients speaks. Fourthly, of a spiritual Sabbath, when we depart from
inquity, and become practisers of sanctification as Cyrill Alexand. lib. 7 de
adorat in spirit and verit.
another of the ancients speaks, if that work by the cunning of some be not
wrongfully ascribed unto him. Fifthly, of an Hier. in 58. Isaiae.
eternal Sabbath in heaven, which is an eternal rest in that most blisfull
place. Sixthly, of a Tertul. lib. aduers. Iudaeos.
mortal Sabbath, which is a day set apart by God himself in the fourth
Commandment for his own service. Seventhly, of an Bern. Ser. 11. in Cantic.
idle Sabbath, when men will rest from the works of their particular callings
upon the Sabbath day, but will not employ themselves in Gods Service: now these
Ignoramus-ses when they hear that the Fathers speak of a mystical Sabbath,
presently they conceive as though the morrall Sabbath were merely mystical;
and when they hear that the Farhers speak of an ildle Sabbath, they presently
censure the moral Sabbath to be in the judgment of the ancients an idle day:
and thus they pervert the judgment of antiquity many times. I speak not this
to justify all the Fathers in every particular sentence of theirs concerning
the Sabbath, quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, as Lib. de art Poet.
Horace says of Homer: Et Bernhardus non vidit omnia, as it is in the
Proverb: the Fathers have had their Naeuos or failings in their writings as a
Abrahamus Sculictus in medulla.
learned man has affirmed: and so in like manner, some of our modern Writers
have given more power to the Church to dispose of the Sabbath, and to alter it
again concerning the day, so she observe one day in seven: then I hope any
Church under the Sun, dare to arrogate unto her self upon their
affirmations, not being sufficiently aware how their meanings might be abused
and perverted by Familists and other Antisabbatareans: but what I speak, I
speak it for the just reproof of Familists and such like, which are glad if
they can catch any thing, if it be but in sound only, from the Writings of
Famous men, to patronize at the least in show their own heretical and
schismatic opinions, like unto spiders sucking poison from those writings;
from the which a more judicious Reader would derive sound edification and
instruction.

Thus for Confutation concerning the Sabbath.

Hetheringtons opinion confuted concerning the Books of Esdras.
THe second thing which we propounded concerning matter of Confutation, is
touching the Books of Esdras: the which books Hetherington holds (as has
been proved against him by witnesses) to be canonical Scripture, and that
they ought so to be esteemed: wherein may appear the pride and insolency of
this man, who being altogether unlearned ( vt pote qui nullam linguam nouit
praeter suam maternam) yet will take upon him in opposition to the whole Church
both reformed and unreformed, to canonize new Scripture: in which particular he
shows himself to be worse then the very Papists: the Bellar. lib. 1. de
verbo dei.
Papists though they have received some other Apochryphall Books into the
Canon; yet they have rejected, or at the least not received the Books of
Esdras: but let him and his Proselytes know tutissimum esse, that it is the
safest course as Saint Lib. 2. de doct. Christian c. 8.
Augustine says, to receive only for Canonical Scripture, such books as all
Catholic Churches receive. And indeed it concerns authority to take this to
heart; for if it were at every private man's choice what books he would receive
to be Canonical, what would become of the true Christian Faith, or what
swarms of errors and corruption of faith would not immediately invade the
Church as we see in Popery, whilst they have received pretended Apostolical
Traditions, intruded into the Canon diverse Apocryphal books, and entertained
the Bellar. lib. 3. de eccles. c. 14.
sentences of the Pope and the Court of Rome as inertant truth, and have
Trident council. 1. decret. Sess. 4.
equalized traditions to the Canonical Scripture, what is become of the
Orthodoxe faith amongst them? It is either far to seek, or else miserably
corrupted.

And the Reasons to prove the books of Esdras not to be Canonical Scripture
against this Sectary, are these following. First, because they were written at
the first, not in Hebrew, as the books of the Old Testament were but in
Latin: and In prolog. Galeat. ad Paulinum.
Saint Hierome is very confident in this, that whatsoever Books of the old
Testament were not written in Hebrew, Vide etiam praesat. in lib. regum. Tom. 3.
they are not canonical.

Secondly, because the Church in former times has not received them for
canonical; receiving only the 22 books of the Old Testament as they were
anciently divided: and what these 22 books were may be gathered out of Lib.
3. eccles. hist. cap. 10.
Eusebius and Lib. 1. contra Appion. gramat.
Josephus: but especially out of Hierom, who does more clearly reject the
Apocryphal books in the forenamed place then some other of the Fathers do. I
will not insist upon further testimonies out of Lib. de mensur and p^nd.
Epiphanius, out of In Synopsi.
Athanasius, out of Catech. 4.
Cyrill Bishop of Jerusalem, out of Lib 4, Orthod. fid. c. 18.
Damascene and others: because I hasten to a conclusion? I know we are not any
further bound to agree to former Churches in judgment, then so far as they
agreed to the truth especially in matters of Faith: but yet to depart from the
ancient Churches in that wherein they are sound and Orthodoxe, is horrible
presumption and be wrayeth very much pride.

Thirdly, a learned man of our Church says of all other Apocryphal books,
the books of Esdras are worthy of the least credit being stuffed full of vain
fables, Dr Willet in his Synopsis.
fitter to feed curious ears, then tending to edification.

Fourthly, those books are not to be esteemed Canonical, in the which there
be errors, but in the books of Esdras there be errors, Ergo.

That there be errors in the third Books of Esdras, I refer the learned to
the annotacions of Iunius upon it; and that there be errors in the fourth
Book, I might easily prove by instance. For first, in the fourth Chapter, the
Author says that souls are kept in the womb of the earth. In the sixth
Chapter, there is a tail of two great fishes, Henoch, and Leuiathan, which no
waters could hold. In the fourteenth Chapter he reports, that the Books of
Scripture being lost in the Captivity, were restored by him, and how he had
drunk of a cup of water as fire in color given by an Angel, and so spoke 40
days together and ceased not; in the which space, five Scribes wrote from his
mouth 204 Books; these and such like tales that Book is full of, as our
Learned Country man speaks, whom I quoated before. I do not deny but in
these books of Esdras there may be many truths, especially the three last
Chapters of the third book, which are almost a mere transcript out of the
canonical Esra and Nehemiah: but yet I must say of them, as Saint Lib. 15. de
ciuit. c. 23.
Augustine says of them, and of all the rest of the Apocrypha: in his autem
Apocryphis, etsi inuenitur aliqua veritas, tame^ propter multa falsa nulla est
canonica authoritas, in these Apocryphal books, although there be found some
truth, yet in respect of many false things found in them they have no
canonical authority.

And thus I have done with the second thing propounded; namely, the Consutation.

An exhortation to Christian people remaining sound in the Faith.
Having dispatched the two former branches concerning Discovery and
Confutation, come we now to the third, which concerns matter of Exhortation,
and to begin with Exhortation to the Christian brethren, which still by the
mercy of God remain sound in the Faith.

Good people, you have heard in all the foregoing discourse of false teachers,
and also how many such at these days remain amongst us, seducing many in
their private conuenticles: give me leave in the next place, by way of
introduction, to show you the reasons wherefore the Lord suffers such in his
Church, and then to propound some preservatives against seduction, which may
serve for matter of Exhortation. For the first of these; The Lord suffers
Seducers in his Church with long patience, and does not presently root them
out, for diverse reasons.

First, that the goodness of truth might the more appear, who could know the
benefit of light unless sometimes we were sensible of the darkness of the
night, as Quis sciret bonam esse lucem nisi noctis tenebras sentiremus. hom. 9.
in c. 16. and 17. numer.
Saint Origin says; even so who can know the benefit of health but by the
smart of sickness, or the benefit of liberty but by restraint or imprisonment.

Secondly, that the word might be the more deeply sought into. The mystery of
the Trinity had never been so exactly handled by many of the Fathers in De
Triait.
whole Tractates had not diverse damnable Heretics sprung up to oppose the
same: wherein the Lord showed his singular wisdom (as he did also in the
first Creation) bringing light out of darkness, truth out of error, good out
of evil, contraries out of contraries.

Thirdly, to try the Governors of the Church, whether like unto the Church of
Pergamus, Magistratus indicat virum.
they will tolerate such as hold the doctrine of Balaam, Reu. 2. 12. or with
the Church of Thyatyra, suffer the woman Iesabel that calls her self a
prophetess to teach, and to seduce Gods servants, Reu. 2. 20.

Fourthly, he does it for the punishment of such as have itching ears and
unconstant minds, which are never satisfied with any true teachers, especial
in public, but have a lusting after the onyons and garlike of private errors,
preferring any thing done in a private Conuenticle (though it be never so
unwholesome) before that which is done in the public Congregation: Nolunt
doctores probos and fidos, quid ergo restat? veniant adulatores. Calvin in
Mich. c. 2. v. 11.
it is just with God to leave such curious persons to be seduced by false
Prophets to their own eternal destruction, Micha 2. 11.

Fifthly, God does it that they which are approved may be known, 1 Cor. 11.
19. a sound Christian is never better discerned, then when he is compared with
some erroneous and heretical person, hence it is that Saint Augustine says in
one of his Epist. 50.
Epistles, haeresis enim and scandala futura praedicta sunt vt inter mimicos
erudiamur ac sic and fides and dilectio nostra possit esse probatior. We
learn instruction amongst Haereticall enemies, thereby our faith and love are
better tried.

Thus for the Reasons wherefore God suffers Haeretickes in his Church.

Now that you may be preserved from Seducers on every side, which I heartily
wish. Let me commend unto you these Antidotes against seduction by way of
exhortation.

First, labor to be well instructed in the grounds and principles of true
religion, how easily is an house ouerturned which has no foundation: even so
how soon is a man removed from that truth wherein he was never grounded and
rooted? for the which cause in the primitive Church, as Antequam daretur
baptismus adultis, instituebantur in fidei rudimentis. Aug. lib. de fid. and
oper.
Saint Augustine says, Baptism was administered to no Heathen turning
Christian, but unto such as were first instructed in points of Catechism: and
this indeed was an excellent means to prevent inconstancy and apostasy.

Secondly, receive the truth in the love of it; men are hardly drawn from Tu
licet vsque ad Tanaim fugias, vsque sequctur amor. propert. Eleg. lib. 2. ad
Cyn^h. verse. 1160
that they love: David loved the Law better then Gold and Silver; and hence it
was that he could never be drawn from it by any Idolatrous seducer, Psalm.
119. There is no greater cause, why many become Apostates from the truth, then
want of sound love unto it.

Thirdly, labor that your knowledge in Religion may be experimental: a man is
hardly persuaded by any art against his own experience: tell a man of mean
understanding, that the Crow is white, and the Snow blake, yea use all the
logic you can to prove it, you shall never persuade him: and why? because he
knows the contrary by experience: even so, if we knew by experience what it
were to deny our selves, and to depend upon Christ alone for justification, no
Papist should ever be able to persuade us to trust to humane merits: and if we
knew by experience the infinite benefit of Gods Sabbath, no Familist should
ever prevail with us to have it in contempt: (...).
experience makes men resolute.

Fourthly, beware of reading schismatical books, Socrates was more resolute in
his old age to under go danger then the young men, because he had experience.
Plat. in Euthydem.
though they be offered unto you as a friendly gift; beware of frequenting the
company and conuenticles of seducers, though you Be never so kindly invited by
false friends; seeming friendly gifts tending to seduction, are like the Trojan
horse, which was pretended to be the Pars stupet innupta adnum exitiale
mineruae. Virgil AEnead. lib. 2.
gift of Minerua, but it proved The destruction of Troy. In the Romish Church
the common people are not permitted to meddle with our books. I would they
were not in this particular more provident for Antichrist, then we are for
Christ.

Fifthly, be practical in Religion: be doers of the will of God, and then ye
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether the teacher
speaks of himself, as our Savior in effect speaks, John 7. 16. if it be
well observed what kind of Professors they be ordinarily which fall of from
the Church to sects and schisms. I do not doubt but it will easily appear,
that for the most part they are such, as had a form of godliness, but denied
the power, as Saint Paul speaks of the hypocrites of his time, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
(...)
whereupon Theophilact says most truly in his Annotations upon Matthew. 7.
whosoever shall build his soul upon the practice of Christ's Commandments, no
temptations shall ever be able to cast him down.

Sixthly, when you have any scruple in your consciences, repair not to seducers
for resolution, but according to Gods ordinance, ask the Priests concerning
the Law, Agg. 2. 11. and seek the Law at their mouths, Malach. 2. 7. go to
your faithful Ministers, and let them resolve you; and if you be tempted by
seducers, acquaint them with your temptations, that they may strengthen you.
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

An exhortation for Hetherington and all other Sect-masters about the City of
London or elsewhere.
YOu which have been the means to seduce many silly souls from the truth, I
beseech you, if you be not come to that height of wickedness, as to sit down
in the chair of scorners; (...)
or as the Septuagints render it (...), in the chair of pestilence: let my
counsel be available with you, and break of your ungodly course of seducing
Gods servants. I know you rage against me for going about to reclaim you, and
for endeavoring to preserve my flock from your seducements: but may it not
justly be said of you in this respect, as Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
Saint Cyprian says of some in his time; Sacerdotibus sacrilegus irasc^tur,
atque o tuam nimiam furiose dimentiam, irasceris ei qui abs te auertere iram
dei nititur, ei minaris, qui pro te domini misericordia^^ deprecatur: qui
vulnus tuum sentit, quod ipse non sentis. O Furious man, is not this too much
madness in thee; thou art angry with him which endeavors to auert Gods
wrath from thee; thou threatnest him which imploreth mercy for thee at the
hands of God, which feels thy wound which thou thy self do not feel. But
to pass by your fury with compassion, I will endeavor to cure you of your
frenzy, and that two ways. First, by showing you the causes of your disease
as a necessary preface: and secondly by applying some coraziues by way of
exhortation.

And the causes of your diseases are diverse. First, ignorance of the true sense
of Scripture, according to that in Mat. 22. 29. Do ye not therefore err, not
knowing the Scriptures: whereupon (...) in praefat in Epist. ad romans in edit
Co^^elin.
Saint Chrysostom says, much heresy has first sprung from ignorance of
Scripture: you think, as appears by your practice, that you are the only
knowers of Gods mind in his word; but alas your own hearts do deceive you:
many of you are ignorant of the original tongues wherein the Scriptures were
written, and so do want one especial help for the understanding of them.

Secondly, you are known to despise all Orthodox writers, whose Commentaries
might help you. And thirdly, that you are not guided by the spirit of truth,
appears by your gross errors peeuishly maintained by you: the which three may
well convince you of ignorance.

2. The second cause of your disease is pride: you magnify your own wisdom;
some of you maintain that you cannot err in giving deliberate sentence in
points of Divinity; you disable the Ministers of the Church, as though they
knew nothing in comparison of you; and this knowledge of yours, or rather this
proud conceit of your own supposed knowledge causes you to err, according to
that of Matter omnium hareticorum superbia. Aug. de Genes. contra Manich.
Saint Augustine; pride is the mother which breeds and brings forth the
whole brood of Haereticks. Wherefore lay down your own vain conceits of your
pretended skill, and desire of God that you may see your own nothing-nesse and
inability, that so you may be healed: think it not an honor to be the head
of an erroneous and factious company, or to be reverenced by them, as the
Pierius in hicroglyph.
Athenians in former times worshipped the Woolfe: despise that honor which
comes not of God: think it a disgrace to be commended by evil men.

3. The third cause of your disease is covetousness, according to that which
is spoken of Sectaries in Romans 16. 18. they that are such serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly. How many time-seruers be there which will
sooth great men in their errors, and seem to maintain the errors of the time
for their own advantage? and how many wavering tradesmen which will readily
embrace that faction whereby they may most advance their own gain: which gave
occasion in like manner to Haereticus est vt mea resert opinio, qui alicuius
temporalis commodi and maxim gloriae principatusque sui gratia falsas ac nouas
opiniones vel gignit vel sequitur. Aug. li. de vtilit. credend.
Saint Augustine in his time to describe an Haereticke by his covetousness and
vainglory, as you have it in the margent. Wherefore if ever you mean to be
cured of your factiousnesse, despise the base gain of it: do not think it so
excellent a matter to get by your sufferings, going poor into the prison, but
coming rich out: account it not a privilege to have your proselytes to boast
up and down, that you shall want neither Gold nor Silver: remember that of
Solomon, the treasures of wickedness profit nothing, Pro. 10. 2. and that of
our Savior in Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited if he should gain the
whole world, and loose his own soul.

And thus having showed you the maine causes of your disease, I come now to
give or to apply unto you some coraziues, to eat out the dead flesh of error or
Haeresie: Haeresie being one of the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20. Consider
therefore and lay to heart, what dreadful judgments have befallen your
predecessors for their factious carriage in the Church of God: remember what
befell unto Theudas, Acts 5. 36, 37. who boasted himself to be some body, as
you also do, to whom a number of men about 400. joined themselves, who was
slain, and all as many as obeyed him were scattered abroad and brought to
naught: and after this man rose up Judas of Galile in the days of taxing, and
drew away much people after him, he also perished, and all as many as obeyed
him, were dispersed. Of the which two seducers also Lib. 18 c. 1. and
Josephus makes mention in his Lib. 20. c. 2.
Antiquities. Secondly, remember what befell unto Elymas for going about to
turn away the Deputy from the faith, how he was immediately smitten with
blindness, Act. 13. 11. remember what befell unto Arius, whose damnable
Haeresie for a time much prevailed, how he died in a Iakes, where he voided his
very bowels with his excrements, as Lib. 1. Eccles. hist c. 14.
Theodoret records.

Thirdly, remember what befell unto Anastasius an Emperor of Rome, and a great
defender of Eutichian Haeretickes, how he was found dead, being smitten as it
was commonly thought with a thunderbolt from heaven, as Melanct lib. 3. Chron.
Philip Melancton has it in his Chronicle. Fourthly, remember what befell
Nestorius, another ringleader of saction in the Church of God, how before his
death his tongue (which he had abused in broaching errors) was consumed with
worms, as Lib. 14. c. 36.
Nicephorus Callistus has left it upon record. Fifthly, remember what befell
the City of Antioch, which was a great nourisher of faction, as Amsterdam is
at this day, how it was shaken with an earthquake a whole year together, and
afterward destroyed with fire from heaven, as Lib. 15.
Paulus Diaconus storieth of it: and as in like manner Socrates seems to
accord in the Lib 4. c. 10.
tripartite History.

Sixthly, remember what befell the Papists here in London not Anno. 1623. October.
26. being Sunday.
long since, how that when they were met together in an house in Blacke-friers,
in an upper room to hear a The Sermon of one Mr Drurie a Priest and Jesuit.
Popish Sermon, the room wherein they were, fell, and some other parts of the
house, and suddenly destroyed a Above 90. persons.
multitude of them, and maimed others, which hardly escaped with their lives. I
will not insist upon more examples of Paulus Samosatenus, of Manes, of
Montanus, and other Haeretickes who are reported also to have come to fearful
ends. These which have been named may be sufficient, to forewarne any which
have any spark of grace remaining in them, to beware of faction: and a
thousand more will not be sufficient to them which are hardened in their hearts.
O think with your selves all ye which misleade others, that the like
judgments may befall you. God is a mighty God, and of infinite wisdom; he is
able to discern your meanings, and what you hold, notwithstanding all your
equivocations, subtle distinctions, cunning euasions, and fearful
abiurations which you use, thereby to cover your errors from the sight of
authority: yea, he is able to reach you with his judgments whethersoeuer you
fly. Or suppose the Lord inflict not upon you corporal punishment in this
world, yet know for certain, Non mayor est pana quam peccare: he punishes you
most severely in this, in that he delivers you up to a blinded mind; yea,
unless you repent, you have just cause to expect to have part with the beast
and the false Prophet in hell torments, Revel. 19. 20. which I pray God to
auert from you. Thus I have endeavored as a friend (although you esteem me an
enemy, because I tell you the truth) to turn you from your errors: if my
pains shall prevail with you, I shall rejoice with the Angels of God for your
conversion; I shall for the time to come esteem you dear brethren; Et gaudebo
sane me tot habere fratres. I will not once mention your calumnies and
reproaches wherewith you have loaded me for taking part with Gods truth, I pray
God forgive you: it is a rule in Phylosophie, quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad
modum recipientis: which I will english thus; good counsel is as it is taken
by them to whom it is given: but take not that with the left hand which I offer
with the right. I desire to pull you out of the fire, to preserve you from
falling into the pit of eternal perdition; to pluck you out of the jaws of
the devouring Lion: let it not be said of me (as In panulo, Act. 3. scen. 4.
Plautus says of them, Lupo agnam eripere postulant, nugas agunt) that I loose
my labor; that I would have cured you, but vee would not be cured; that I
would have saved you Ministerially, 1 Timothy 4. 16. but ye would not be saved:
but suppose I prevail not with you, because you are settled upon your Lees, yet
I hope to persuade some that formerly have been seduced by you, to be more
jealous of your opinions for the time to come, and not to receive every point
which you erroniously hold, as an everlasting Gospel. And say I should
persuade neither you nor them, but you will still remain Wolves in the Church
of God, and they stray sheep wandering in the desolate valleys, as a prey
ready to be devoured by you: then I must needs tell you, both you and your
spightfull proselytes (spightfull I mean to the Church of Christ) that if you
delight to swim together in the deluge of fundamental error, you shall also,
volen tes nolentes, swim together in the deluge of Gods judgments; and so that
shall be verified of you: Ovid. lib. 1. Metamor.
Not Lupus inter oues, fuluos vehit vnda Leones. But as for me, I will say with
the Evangelical Prophet Esaias c. 49. 4. surely my judgment is with the Lord,
and my work with my God. Now O God almighty grant, that what has been
delivered at this time, may work effectually for thy glory, for the conversion
or for the conviction of the enemies of thine eternal truth, and for the
confirmation of us thy servants, and that for thy blessed Son his sake Jesus
Christ the just, to whom with thee O Father, and the holy Ghost, three persons
most glorious, but one only wise God, be ascribed as is most due, all the
honor, praise, and glory now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 16. seven for seventh. page. 6. (...) for (...). p. 15. in homini
for in homine. p. 24 punisceant for permisceant p. 24. melius for mellis. p.
50. perscutione for persecu^ione. p. 66. tail for tale.


