GODS PROMISE TO HIS PLANTATION.

2 Samuel 7.10. Moreover J will appoint a place for my people Israel, and I will
plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more. As
it was delivered in a Sermon, By JOHN COTTON, B. D. and Preacher of Gods word
in Boston.

PSALM 22.27.30.31. All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto
the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee.

A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.

They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall
be borne, that he has done this.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at the
three Golden Lions by the (...).

To the Christian Reader:
ALTHOUGH no good Christian, or indeed ingenuous man, can do any thing less,
than approove of such endeavors, as aim at the glory of God, and a Common
good, especially when they are managed by a clear warrant from Gods word. Yet
for aims and ends that men put to their actions being hidden in their hearts,
there is no way to declare them, but by an honest profession of them, which is
sufficient where we are entertained but with that common charity one man is
bound to yield another; But for the grounds and rule an action is wrought by,
and the praise of it in that respect, there is another judgment than that of
charity to guide us by, namely, by proving it by the touchstone of Gods word.

Now because many may either not know, or do not consider upon how full a
ground and warrant out of the word of God that undertaking (which was the
occasion of this Sermon) has hitherto proceeded, J thought good (Courteous
Reader) leave being with some difficulty obtained of the Reverend Author) to
present unto thy view and consideration, that which may in part give thee
satisfaction in this particular.

Ere long (if God will) thou shall see a larger declaration of the first rise
and ends of this enterprise, and so clear and full a justification of this
design, both in respect of that warrant it has from Gods word, and also in
respect of any other ground and circumstance of weight, that is considerable in
the warrant of such a work, as (J hope) there will easily be removed any
scruple of moment, which hitherto has been moved about it.

If thou have any doubts yet unresolved, rather be entreated to understand from
us, what may be the answer of them, than to discourage any man by them: so
shall thou be a helper and a friend, whereas otherwise (it may be against thy
will) thou ma^st be an enemy to a work (for ought thou yet know) God is
the Author of.

It is hoped; there is none but will find cause to approve of the work, and
of them that engage themselves in it; But especially they who any way, at least
by silence (a seeming applause) approved the Plantations of Virginia, St.
Christophers, Bermudas, this having ends inferior to none of them, and men
(not to compare but to give due honor to all employed in such noble
enterprises) promising as much by their usefulness, industry, love to their
Country, piety, and other qualifications as those did.

It is enough they adventure, that hazard their persons, families and estates,
for that work, which it may appear to thee ere long thou art bound as well as
they to further.

Now it were injurious, if not impious, not only to deny the right and
benefit of thy prayers to such, but also to load them with causeless
aspersions (though but in thy thoughts) for that, for which thou have great
cause to praise God for the^, who has stirred up their spirits to that which
has been a maine mean of peopling the world, and is likely to be of
propagating the Gospel. For the furtherance of which work in the hands of
those that sincerely intend it, let as fervent prayers pass from thee to the
throne of grace for them, as J am confident, (thy occasions being made known
unto them) would be put up from them in thy behalf.

Thine I. H.

2 Samuel 7.10. Moreover J will appoint a place for my people Israel, and I will
plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more.
IN the beginning of this chapter, we read of David's purpose to build God an
house, who thereupon consulted with Nathan about it, one Prophet standing in
need of another help in such weighty matters. Nathan incourageth the King
unto this work, verse 3. God the same night meets Nathan and tells him a
contrary purpose of his: Wherein God refuses David's offer, with some kind of
earnest and vehement dislike, verse 4.5. Secondly, he refuses the reason of
David's offer, from his long silence. For four hundred years together he spoke
of no such thing, unto any of the Tribes of Israel, saying, Why build you not
me an house? in 6.7. verses.

Now lest David should be discouraged with this answer, the Lord bids Nathan to
shut up his speech with words of encouragement, and so he remoues his
discouragement two ways.

First, by recounting his former favors dispensed unto David. Secondly, by
promising the continuance of the like or greater: and the rather, because of
this purpose of his. And five blessings God promises unto David, and his, for
his sake.

The first is in the 10. verse: I will appoint a place for my people Israel.

Secondly, seeing it was in his heart to build him an house, God would
therefore, build him an house renowned for ever. verse 11.

Thirdly, that he would accept an of house from Solomon, verse 12.

Fourthly, he will be a Father to his son, verse. 14.15.

Fifthly, that he will establish the Throne of his house for ever.

In this 10. verse is a double blessing promised:

First, the designment of a place for his people.

Secondly, a plantation of them in that place, from whence is promised a
threefold blessing.

First, they shall dwell there like Freeholders in a place of their own.

Secondly, he promises them firm and durable possession, they shall move no
more.

Thirdly, they shall have peaceable and quiet resting there, The sons of
wickedness shall afflict them no more: which is amplified by their former
troubles, as before time.

From the appointment of a place for them, which is the first blessing, you may
observe this note: The placeing of a people in this or that Country is from the
appointment of the Lord.

This is evident in the Text, and the Apostle speaks of it as grounded in
nature, Acts 17.26. God has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of our habitation. Deuteronomy. 2 chap. 5.9. God would not have the Israelites
meddle with the Edomites, or the Moabites, because he had given them their
land for a possession. God assigned out such a land for such a posterity, and
for such a time.

Wherein does this work of God stand in appointing a place for a people?

First, Ezekiel. 20.6. he brought them into a land that he had espied for them:
And that is, when either he gives them to discover it themselves, or hear of
it discovered by others, and fitting them.

Secondly, after he has espied it, when he carries them along to it, so that
they plainly see a providence of God leading them from one Country to another:
As in Exodus 19.4. You have seen how I have borne you as on Eagles wings, and
brought you unto my self. So that though they met with many difficulties, yet
he carried them high above them all, like an eagle, flying over seas and
rocks, and all hindrances.

Thirdly, when he makes room for a people to dwell there, as in Psalm. 80.9.
Thou preparedst room for them. When Isaac sojourned among the Philestines, he
dug one well, and the Philistines strove for it, and he called it Esek: and
he dug another well, and for that they strove also, therefore he called it
Sitnah: and he removed thence, and dug an other well, and for that they
strove not, and he called it Rehoboth, and said, For now the Lord has made
room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the Land. Now no Esek, no Sitnah, no
quarrel or contention, but now he sits down in Rehoboth, in a peaceable room.

Now God makes room for a people 3 ways:

First, when he casts out the enemies of a people before them by lawful war
with the inhabitants, which God calls them unto: as in Ps. 44.2 Thou did
drive out the Heathen before them. But this course of warring against others,
and driving them out without provocation, depends upon special Commission from
God, or else it is not imitable.

Secondly, when he gives a foreign people favor in the eyes of any native
people to come and sit down with them either by way of purchase, as Abraham
did obtain the field of Machpelah; or else when they give it in courtesy, as
Pharaol. did the land of Goshen unto the sons of Jacob.

Thirdly, when he makes a Country though not altogether void of Inhabitants,
yet void in that place where they reside. Where there is a vacant place, there
is liberty for the sons of Adam or Noah to come and inhabit, though they
neither buy it, nor ask their leaves. Abraham and Isaac, when they This
soiourning was a constantresidence there, as in a possession of their own;
although it be called soiourning or dwelling as strangers, because they
neither had the sovereign government of the whole Country in their own hand,
nor yet did incorporate them selves into the Commonwealth of the Natives, to
submit themselves unto their government.
sojourned amongst the Philistims, they did not buy that land to feed their
cattle, because they said There is room enough. And so did Iacoh pitch his
Tent by Sechem, Genesis 34.21. There was room enough, as Hamor said, Let them sit
down amongst us. And in this case if the people who were former Inhabitants
did disturb them in their possessions, they complained to the King, as of
wrong done unto them: As Abraham did because they took away his well, in Genesis
21.25. For his right whereto he pleaded not his immediate calling from God,
(for that would have seemed frivolous amongst the Heathen) but his own
industry and culture in digging the well, verse 30. Nor does the King reject
his plea, with what had he to do to dig wells in their soil? but admits
it as a Principle in Nature, That in a vacant soil, he that takes possession
of it, and bestows culture and husbandry upon it, his Right it is. And the
ground of this is from the grand Charter gi^^^ to Adam and his posterity in
Paradise, Genesis 1.28. Multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it. If
therefore any son of Adam come and find a place empty, he has liberty to
come, and fill, and subdue the earth there. This Charter was renewed to Noah,
Genesis 9.1. Fulfill the earth and multiply: So that it is free from that common
Grant, for any to take possession of vacant Countries. Indeed no Nation is to
drive out another without special Commission from heaven, such as the
Israelites had, unless the Natives do unjustly wrong them, and will not
recompense the wrongs done in peaceable sort, and then they may right
themselves by lawful war, and subdue the Country unto themselves.

This placeing of people in this or that Country, is from Gods sovereignty over
all the earth, and the inhabitants thereof: as in Psalm. 24.1. The earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof. And in Ier. 10.7. God is there called, The
King of Nations: and in Deuteronomy. 10.14. Therefore it is meet he should provide a
place for all Nations to inhabit, and have all the earth replenished. Only in
the Text here is meant some more special appointment, because God tells them
it by his own mouth; he does not so with other people, he does not tell the
children of Seir, that he has appointed a place for them: that is, He gives
them the land by promise; others take the land by his providence, but Gods
people take the land by promise: And therefore the land of Canaan is called a
land of promise. Which they discern, first, by discerning themselves to be in
Christ, in whom all the promises are yea, and amen.

Secondly, by finding his holy presence with them, to wit, when he plants them
in the holy Mountain of his Inheritance: Exodus 15.17. And that is when he
gives them the liberty and purity of his Ordinances. It is a land of promise,
where they have provision for soul as well as for body. Ruth dwelt well for
outward respects while she dwelt in Moab, but when she comes to dwell in
Israel, she is said to come under the wings of God: Ruth 2.12. When God
wrappes us in with his Ordinances, and warmes us with the life and power of
them as with wings, there is a land of promise.

This may teach us all where we do now dwell, or where after we may dwell,
be sure you look at every place appointed to you, from the hand of God: we
may not rush into any place, and never say to God, By your leave; but we must
discern how God appoints us this place. There is poor comfort in sitting
down in any place, that you cannot say, This place is appointed me of God.
Can thou say that God spied out this place for thee, and there has settled
thee above all hindrances? did thou find that God made room for thee either
by lawful descent, or purchase, or gift, or other warrantable right? Why then
this is the place God has appointed thee; here he has made room for thee,
he has placed thee in Rehoboth, in a peaceable place: This we must discern,
or else we are but intruders upon God. And when we do withal discern, that
God gives us these outward blessings from his love in Christ, and makes
comfortable provision as well for our soul as for our bodies, by the means of
grace, then do we enjoy our present possession as well by gracious promise, as
by the common, and just, and bountiful providence of the Lord. Or if a man do
remove, he must see that God has espied out such a Country for him.

Secondly, though there be many difficulties, yet he has given us hearts to
overlooke them all, as if we were carried upon eagles wings.

And thirdly, see God making room for us by some lawful means.

But how shall I know whether God has appointed me such a place,

There be four or five good things,

First, Solomon: Matthew. 12.42. And surely with him she might have continued for
the same end, if her personal calling had not recalled her home.

Secondly, some remove and travail for merchandise and gaine-sake; Daily bread
may be sought from far, Prove. 31.14. Yea our Savior approves travail for
Merchants, Matthew. 13.45, 46. when he compares a Christian to a Merchantman
seeking pearls: For he never fetches a comparison from any unlawful thing
to illustrate a thing lawful. The comparison from the unjust Steward, and from
the Thief in the night, is not taken from the injustice of the one, or the
theft of the other; but from the wisdom of the one, and the sodainnesse of
the other; which in themselves are not unlawful.

Thirdly, to plant a Colony, that is, a company that agree together to remove
out of their own Country, and settle a City or Commonwealth elsewhere. Of
such a Colony we read in Acts 16.12. which God blessed and prospered
exceedingly, and made it a glorious Church. Nature teaches Bees to do so,
when as the hive is too full, they seek abroad for new dwellings: So when the
hive of the Commonwealth is so full, that Tradesmen cannot live one by
another, but eat up one another, in this case it is lawful to remove.

Fourthly, God allows a man to remove, when he may employ his Talents and
gifts better elsewhere, especially when where he is, he is not bound by any
special engagement. Thus God sent Joseph before to preserve the Church:
Joseph's wisdom and spirit was not fit for a shepherd, but for a Counselor
of State; and therefore God sent him into Egypt. To whom much it given, of him
God will require the more: Luke 12.48.

Fifthly, for the liberty of the Ordinances. 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15. When
Jeroboam made a desertion from Judah, and set up golden Calves to worship, all
that were well affected, both Priests and people, sold their possessions, and
came to Jerusalem for the Ordinances sake. This case was of seasonable use to
our fathers in the days of Queen Mary; who removed to France and Germany in
the beginning of her Reign, upon Proclamation of alteration of religion, before
any persecution began.

Secondly, Mic. 2.6. to 11 verse: When the people say to them that prophecy,
Prophecy not; then verse 10. Arise then, this is not your rest. Which words
though they be a threatening, not a commandment; yet as in a threatening a wise
man foreseeth the plague, so in the threatening he sees a commandment, to hide
himself from it. This case might have been of seasonable use unto them of the
Palatinate, when they saw their Orthodoxe Ministers banished, although
themselves might for a while enjoy liberty of conscience.

Secondly, if men be overburdened with debts and miseries, as David's followers
were; they may then retire out of the way (as they retired to David for safety)
not to defraud their Creditors, (for God is an avenger of such things, 1 Thessalonians:
4.6.) but to gain further opportunity to discharge their debts, and to
satisfy their Creditors. 1 Samuel 22.1, 2.

Thirdly, in case of persecution, so did the Apostles in Acts 13.46, 47.

Thirdly, particular cases which may give warrant unto such or such a person to
transplant himself, and which apply the former general grounds to particular
persons.

First, if sovereign Authority command and encourage such Plantations by
giving way to subjects to transplant themselves, and set up a new Commonwealth.
This is a lawful and expedient case for such particular persons as be designed
and sent: Matthew. 8.9. and for such as they, who are sent, have power to command.

Secondly, when some special providence of God leads a man unto such a
course. This may also single out particulars. Psalm. 32.8. I will instruct, and
guide thee with mine eye. As the child knows the pleasure of his father in
his eye, so does the child of God see Gods pleasure in the eye of his heavenly
Fathers providence. And this is done three ways.

First, if God give a man an inclination to this or that course, for that is
the spirit of man; and God is the Father of spirits: Heb. 12.9. Romans 1.12. 1
Cor. 16.12. Paul discerned his calling to go to Rome, by his (...), his ready
inclination to that voyage; and Apollos his loathnesse to go to Corinth, Paul
accepted as a just reason of his refusal of a calling to go thither. And this
holds, when in a man's inclination to travail, his heart is set on no
by-respects, as to see fashions, to deceive his Creditours, to fight Duels, or
to live idly, these are vain inclinations; but if his heart be inclined upon
right judgment to advance the Gospel, to maintain his family, to use his
Talents fruitfully, or the like good end, this inclination is from God. As the
beams of the Moon darting into the Sea leads it to and fro, so does a secret
inclination darted by God into our hearts lead and bow (as a byas) our whole
course.

Secondly, when God gives other men hearts to call us, as the men of Macedon
did Paul, Come to us into Macedonia, and help us. When we are invited by
others who have a good calling to reside there, we may go with them, unless
we be detained by waightier occasions. One member has interest in another, to
call to it for help, when it is not diverted by greater employment.

Thirdly, there is another providence of God concurring in both these, that is,
when a man's calling and person is free, and not tied by parents, or
Magistrates, or other people that have interest in him. Or when abroad he may
do himself and others more good than he can do at home. Here is then an eye
of God that opens a door there, and sets him loose here, inclines his heart
that way, and outlookes all difficulties. When God makes room for us, no
binding here, and an open way there, in such a case God tells them, he will
appoint a place for them.

Secondly, makes this use of it amongst the Athenians, Acts 17.26, 27. He has
appointed the times, and places of our habitation, that we might seek, and
grope after the Lord. There is a threefold use that we are to make of it, as it
appears there; Let us seek after the Lord, why? Because if thou come into
an house, thou will ask for the owner of it: And so if thou come into a
foreign land, and there find an house and land provided for thee, will thou not enquire, where is the Landlord? where is that God that gave me this
house and land? He is missing, and therefore seek after him.

Secondly, thou must feel after him, grope after him by such sensible things,
strive to attain the favor of your Landlord, and labor to be obedient to him
that has given you such a place.

Thirdly, you must labor to find him in his Ordinances, in prayer and in
Christian communion. These things I owe him as my Landlord, and by these I
find and enjoy him. This use the very Pagans were to make of their several
Plantations: And if you knew him before, seek him yet more, and feel after
him till you sinde him in his Ordinances, and in your consciences.

Thirdly, that has appointed you and them the place of your habitation.

Observation. A people of Gods Plantation shall enjoy their own place with
safety and peace.

This is manifest in the Text: I will plant them; and what follows from
thence? They shall dwell in their own place: But how? Peaceably, they shall
not be moved any more. Then they shall dwell safely, then they shall live in
peace. The like promise you read of in Psalm. 89.21, 22. The enemy shall not
exact upon them any more. And in Psalm. 92.13. Those that be planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. Gods plantation is
a flourishing plantation, Amos 9.15.

What is it for God to plant a people?

It is a Metaphor taken from young Impes;

Secondly, When he causes them to grow as plants do, in Psalm. 80.8, 9, 10,
11. When a man grows like a tree in tallnesse and strength, to more firmness
and eminency, then he may be said to be planted.

Thirdly, When God causes them to fructify, Psalm. 1.4.

Fourthly, When he establishes them there, then he plants, and roots not up.

But here is something more especial in this planting; for they were planted
before in this land, and yet he promises here again, that he will plant them
in their own land: which does imply, first, That what ever former good estate
they had already, he would prosper it, and increase it.

Secondly, God is said to plant a people more especially, when they become
Trees of righteousness, Isay 61.3. That they may be called trees of
righteousness, the planting of the Lord. So that there is employed not only a
continuance of their former good estate, but that he would make them a good
people, a choice generation: which he did, first, by planting the Ordinances of
God amongst them in a more glorious manner, as he did in Salomons time.

2. He would give his people a nail, and a place in his Tabernacle, Isay 56.5.
And that is to give us part in Christ: for so the Temple typified. So then he
plants us when he gives us root in Christ.

Thirdly, When he gives us to grow up in him as Calves in the stall: Mal. 4.2,
3.

Fourthly, and to bring forth much fruit, Ioh. 15.1.2

Fifthly, and to continue and abide in the state of grace. This is to plant us
in his holy Sanctuary, he not rooting us up.

This is taken from the kind acceptance of David's purpose to build God an
house,

Secondly, it is taken from the office God takes upon him, when he is our
planter, he becomes our husbandman; and if he plant us, who shall pluck us
up? Isay 27.1, 2. Job 34.29. When he gives quiet, who can make trouble? If God
be the Gardener, who shall pluck up what he sets down? Every plantation that
he has not planted shall be plucked up, and what he has planted shall surely
be established.

Thirdly, from the nature of the blessing he conferres upon us: When he
promises to plant a people, their days shall be as the days of a Tree, Isay
65.22. As the Oak is said to be an hundred years in growing, and an hundred
years in full strength, and an hundred years in decaying.

But it may be demanded, Jeroboam was a son of wickedness, and so was Ahab,
and Ahaz, and diverse others.

Because after David's time they had more setlednesse than before.

Secondly, to the godly these promises were fulfilled in Christ.

Thirdly, though this promise was made that others should not wrong them, yet
it follows not but that they might wrong themselves by trespassing against
God, and so expose themselves to affliction. Whilst they continued Gods
plantation, they were a noble Vine, a right seed, but if Israel will destroy
themselves, the fault is in themselves. And yet even in their captivity the
good amongst them God graciously provided for: The Basket of good sigges God
sent into the land of Chaldea for their good: Ier. 24.5. But if you rebel
against God, the same God that planted you will also root you out again, for
all the evil which you shall do against your selves: Ier. 11.17. When the
Israelites liked not the soil, grew weary of the Ordinances, and forsook the
worship of God, and said, What part have we in David? after this they never got
so good a King, nor any settled rest in the good land wherein God had planted
them. As they waxed weary of God, so he waxed weary of them, and cast them
out of his sight.

To exhort all that are planted at home,

What course would you have us take?

Have special care that you ever have the Ordinances planted amongst you, Isay
4.5.6: Upon all their glory there shall be a defense; that is, upon all Gods
Ordinances: for so was the Arc called the Glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4.22.

Secondly, Isay 27.2.3. that no sons of violence shall destroy you. Look
into all the stories whether divine or humane, and you shall never find that
God ever rooted out a people that had the Ordinances planted amongst them, and
themselves planted into the Ordinances: never did God suffer such plants to be
plucked up; on all their glory shall be a defense.

Thirdly, Jerusalem at home, whether you leave us, or stay at home with us. Oh
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love her, Psalm. 122.6.
They shall all be confounded and turned back that hate Sion, Psalm. 129.5. As
God continues his presence with us (blessed be his name) so be ye present in
spirit with us, though absent in body: Forget not the womb that bare you, and
the breasts that gave you suck. Even ducklings hatched under an hen, though
they take the water, yet will still have recourse to the wing that hatched
them: how much more should chickens of the same feather, and yolke? In the
amity and unity of brethren, the Lord has not only promised, but commanded a
blessing, even life for evermore: Psalm. 133.1.2.

Fourthly, go forth, every man that goes, Phil. 2.4. This care of universal
helpfulnesse was the prosperity of the first Plantation of the Primitive
Church: Acts 4.32.

Fifthly, Ier. 2.21. I planted them a noble Vine; holy, a right seed, how then
art thou degenerate into a strange Vine before me? Your Ancestors were of a
noble divine spirit, but if they suffer their children to degenerate, to take
loose courses, then God will surely pluck you up: Otherwise if men have a care
to propagate the Ordinances and Religion to their children after them, God will
plant them, and not root them up. For want of this, the seed of the repenting
Ninivites was rooted out.

Sixthly, and lastly, reared this whole Plantation for such an end?

Secondly, Amen.

FINIS.

