VVILIE BEGVILE YE, OR THE WORLDLINGS GAIN: showing how they hazard their
precious souls for the attaining of these vain and transitory things, and
withal Teaching how to obtain and enjoy the benefits of this life: That so we
may lay up a good foundation thereby against the life to come: Expressed in
some sauoury and effectual Meditations and observations hereupon.

By THOMAS COOPER.

Imprinted at LONDON, 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR FRANCIS JONES Lord Mayor of this
famous City, together with the grave Senators and Sherifes his brethren, and
the Sage Council thereof, all things pertaining to life and godliness.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful.
TT is not in vain that our blessed Savior gives such a fearful Item to such
as enjoy most of earthly things, that it is easier for a Camel to enter
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven: not inferring thereby an impossibility that any rich man should be
saved, because we hear of poor Lazarus in rich Abraham's bosom; and riches
are such blessings, as God bestows on his children, and by his grace prove
furtherances to lay up a good foundation against the life come: But rather
implying some difficulty and adventure hereof, and that arising rather from our
abuse thereof, then the things themselves: For so he expounds himself else
where, concerning trust and confidence in riches, and not of the simple
enjoying of them. And so the blessed Apostle comments upon this text charging
rich men that they be not high minded, though they enjoy much above others,
that they trust not in riches, because they are uncertain, and so will deceive
our trust reposed on them, teaching us that it is not the use but the love of
money, which is the root of all evil; and therefore because some (not al) do
lust after the^ they have erred from the faith, and so do pierce themselves
through with many sorrows. And therein also wisely discovering unto us, two
main and principal causes of our endangering by these blessings, and so by
the contrary, instructing us in such a sober estimate and use of them, that so
they may prove furtherances to eternal life. The causes of our abuse of
worldly blessings, is our ouer-rating them in our vain conceits; as if they
were special favors of God, and undoubted pledges of true happiness, so that
whosoever enioyes them above others, is more highly in Gods esteem, and so
more truly and perfitly happy. And this produces those dangerous effects of
insatiable desires and strong confidence in them, as if we could never have
enough of happiness, as if such strong holds could never deceive us. Which
though it be a most erroneous and perverse conceit, and the effects more
desperate, as arising from a deceived heart blinded by the god of this world,
that it cannot look up higher to things to come, but only doats one these
present shadows, because the very nature and transitory condition of these
things will not bear it, besides daily experience to the contrary which might
lesson even fools: yet it is most fearful to observe how the minds of many
are bewitched therewith, and sing a Requiem to their souls, as that fool did
in this slippery estate which on the sudden may be taken away from them, or
they from it. And yet such is the power of this delusion, that notwithstanding
they daily see rich men dye as well as the foolish and ignorant, and leave
their riches to others; yet many think that their houses and habitations shall
continue for ever, and therefore thee bless their souls in this vain
happiness, and that the rather because they are applauded of others, as the
only happy men, even because they make much of themselves, and take their fill
in these broken Cysternes. And this is another maine cause of their ensnaring
by these things, even because they ouer-valew themselves in regard of them, and
so being puffed up with their fleshly minds, are desperately carried to the
abuse of them, either by encroaching and scraping still to themselves, as if
none were worthy of them but they: that so they may live peerless and
vncontrowlable of any, or else by lauishing and excess of riot they wallow
like swine in the filth and puddle thereof, and so drown themselves in
everlasting perdition. Behold the way of worldlings and greedy earth-wormes.
And does not this way utter their folly, howsoever their posterity delight in
their talk, and counts themselves happy in the misery of their ancestors. And
does not this their happiness prove their greater unhappiness, that ill gotten
goods molter like snow against the Sun, what is so lightly come by, is as
vainly parted with: the third heir seldom knows the place of his breeding,
or enioyes a foot thereof. A meditation as too too experimental in this city,
so the rather to be laid to heart by the wise and prudent, that he may see the
plague and hide himself, and reap some durable fruit of these mome^tany trees.
And this is the sum of that which follows: which I do in all humility tender
unto your honor and worships, as knowing your slippery states, and fearing what
may follow, that you would learn yet more and more to be faithful in your
steward ships, that so you may be ready to give up a comfortable account for
the same. I doubt not but you are wise to discern the face of the sky, and see
that the element is full of storms abroad, and may not the wind turn and
blow the^ hither. The Lord also make you wiser to discern the time of your
visitation: and so I heartily commend your honor and worships to the grace of
God, that in mercy he would clear the air again, and scatter the black
tempest that our sins have gathered, and daily threate^s on our heads as
terrible lightnining to break the sword, though it spare the scabbard, to
endanger the soul by depriving us of what glorious liberty we have abused,
though our outward man may less feel the blow, as being senseless thereof, or
giving way thereto: And that even for his son Christ Jesus sake, in whom I
rest

At your Honors and Worships service Thomas Cooper.

The Contents.
THe Coherence and sense of the words, with the division thereof. P. 1. 2. The
ground of the Bargain: Man's insatiable desire, with the reasons and use
thereof. how to prevent and remedy the same. page 2.3.4. Insatiable desire make
Way for subjection to Satan. Reasons thereof. 1. To justify God, seeing our
condemnation is of our selves. p. 5. 2 Directions hoW to use abundance. p.
11.12. 3 How to prevent Satan herein. p. 13. 4 How to behave our selves in a
mean estate. ibid. 10.
18. Reasons hereof. page 19.20. Ground and manner of the Bargain. page 22.
with the ends propounded thereof, wherein worldlings are painted out in the
gathering and use of riches. page 23.24. page 26. Use hereof, 1. For conuictio^
of Worldlings. p. 27. 2 For trial of our estates hereby. page 28. 3 Vizars
whereby this Bargain is concealed. page 31.32.33.34. 1 That they are Gods
blessings. page 35. 2 That our Callings require them. p. 34.35.36. 3 Pretense
of doing good hereby. page 37.

These discovered and rejected, with the remedy against them. page 38.39.
Obser. 4. It is an unprofitable Bargain, to loose the soul for the world.
page 39. Reasons hereof, 1. Because we pay too dear for them. 2 Our loss is
irrecouerable. page 40.40.41. Use diverse collusions detected, which flatter us
in the goodness of the Bargain. page 41.42. 3 Reason Satan performs not the
Bargain on his part, though he will be sure of our payment. page 43.44. 1
Because he cannot perform what is not his to give. page 45. 2 Neither We are
capable of what he promises. 45. 3 Neither would he perform if he could. p
45. Use hereof, 1. To forecast before hand. page 46. 2 To prevent Satan's
treachery. page 47,


Conclusion to the Reader, where these Cases are resolved. page 51. 1 What use
of our civil callings and other accidents thereto are allowed on the Lords day.
p. 52.53 2 Whether we may employ more time, and exercise our thoughts more upon
worldly* then heavenly things, seeing we are allowed six days for our civil
Callings, and but one for our general. p. 56.57 3 Whether it be not lawful to
desire riches, and abundance. page 61.62. 4 Whether we may desire such means
for the gathering of riches, as man's law does allow: As, 1 Usury. 63. 2
Monopolies, and engrossing of wares. 64^ 3 Letters of ^ar^. 65. 4 Trading with
Infidels and Idolaters. 65. 5 Tentering, pressing and such like. page 66. 6
Keeping in of wares. page 67, 7 Changing of Callings. page 68. 8 Whether one
may have diverse Callings. 68.

As the Minister may be also a Magistrate, one tradesman may exercise diverse
Civil Callings Whether a man may thrive with a good conscience. 69.70^
Math. 16.26. For What shall it profit a man though he should win the whole
world, and lose his own soul?


IN these words, the holy Ghost lays down a reason, why we should not for
the saving of this present and momentany life, decline afflictions; namely,
because the saving of life present in this regard, is the next way to endanget
the life eternal: and if so, then no profit will redound thereby, no though we
might live to enjoy the whole world. For having in the 21 verse, Coherence.
adjoined the doctrine of his particular suffering to the former doctrine of
his Kingly office in governing and preserving his Church, that so the wise
temper of these seeming contraries might confound carnal wisdom, and exercise
the faith of his disciples, because the harsh news of his suffering gave
occasion of offense to Peter; as dreaming in his carnal reach, of a temporal
Kingdom; he thereby takes occasion, from the particular doctrine of his own
suffering, to gather a general conclusion: That whosoever will be his
disciple, must also deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow him; which
bitter pill that it might be the better digested, he wisely remoues the maine
bar and hinderance of enduring afflictions; namely, the love of life, and that
by a strange paradox to the confounding of reason, and trial of faith:
affirming that the saving of life for a time, by avoiding the Cross, was the
next way to lose it eternally: and so to encourage the rather to the undergoing
of afflictions, he affirms contrarily, that the enduring of afflictions for
his sake, though it were to the loss of life temporal, was the means to
procure the life eternal, if not also for the preservation of this present
life. Now because life were not desirable of the carnal man, but for those
pleasures and profits sake which the world supplies thereto; for otherwise
these failing, life is but a burden, and death a most desired haven: therefore
the spirit of God proceeds in this verse to root out of our hearts this love
of the world; and that by propounding the danger that accompanies the same;
namely, that hereby the precious soul is fearfully ensnared; and endangered.
And concludes the folly of such a match, when we pay so dear for worldly
things, namely, that they profit nothing.

So that in these words we have a discovery of an ordinary Bargain usually
made by men of this world, and that as they conceive, 2 Sum hereof.
to great advantage; namely, that they be contented for gayning of the world,
to lose their souls. Their souls is an ordinary price, to compass the
pleasures and profits of the world.

In which Bargain there are couched these particulars First, 3 Parts of the
Text.
the ground or occasion of the bargain; namely, their greedy and insatiable
desire of earthly things, employed in these words of extent: Though he should
gain the whole world. As if the holy Ghost had therein discovered that Root
of al mischief; namely, a covetous and unreasonable desire to compass all, to
be satisfied with nothing, but the whole world.

Secondly, we have here the driving of the Bargain; namely, this covetous
desire is that which gives way to Satan, to fetch over the soul.

Thirdly, here is the Bargain it self; namely, that the soul is lost for
the gaining of the world.

Lastly, here is the Judgment and censure of the bargain; namely, that their
is no profit in it. Of these in their places.

And first, of the ground or occasion of the bargain. This the holy Ghost
discouers to be an insatiable desire of earthly things, teaching us thereby,
that naturally the mind of man, as it is immortal and not to be fadomed; so
it is restles and never satisfied.

1 Observation insatiable in earthly desires.
And therefore affects vnmeasurably the things of the world: gladly would
engrosse and appropriate all things to it self. It cannot brook a share in it
happiness, it endures not to be stinted, and measured therein. So says the
spirit. Eccles. 1.9.
The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, and therefore
much less the mind. So is the practice hereof discovered: Isa. 5.8.
They join houses to houses; and land to land, till there be no place; and the
reason hereof is added, that they may live alone upon the earth: And the
general conditions of all estates discouers no less; no man is contented with
the place and calling wherein God has placed him, every one aims at the
highest; Caine be cast out of Gods presence, Genes. 4.14.15.
he must eternize his name in building of Cities, and compassing the world. Who
would not enjoy the most of all those things, that he may have greatest
happiness?

To conince natures corruption and desperate estate.
and therein to take notice of the power of corruption. Are we sick of the
world, and never satisfied therewith? How does this discover our barrennes of
grace, how does it convince our bondage unto sin? Where grace has taken
root, we dye unto the world; where God is preferred, there Mammo^ has no
place. How does this discover an impossibility in nature, to obtain grace by
it own power, seeing the glory and wisdom of nature is enmity against God:
exalting the world and it shadows, above the true substance of everlasting
happiness; making the wedge of gold it hope, and it belly it God? Why do
worldings engrosse and compass the earth, but that they have no hope of
heaven? but that their maine happiness is to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: and that they may enjoy them more freely, they plot for greatness, that
none may control them, they heap up abundance of treasures, that they may
have continual matter to nourish and increase sin. Does not affliction bridle
sin, and withdraw many encouragments therefrom? does not troubles awake the
conscence, and at least breed some remorse and outward abstinence from evil?
Then well fare fullness to fat the heart in sin, that it may be senseless
thereof, and so commit it more greedily; well fare prosperity to drown the heart
with a vain conceit of Gods favor, as if he loved us, because he bestows
such a large portion upon us: that so though the mind be sensible of sin,
yet it may swell with presumption, and profaneness; that though we live so, yet
God approues thereof, we prosper and grow in greatness, therefore all is well.
And does not this make way at length to desperate atheism, that because we are
spared, nay we prosper, and thrive in sin, therefore the Lord is like unto
us, Psa. 50.19.
he likes of our sin? And so the conclusion hereupon follows by degrees,
Psa. 41.1. Tit. 1.15.16.
that the fool says in his heart, as he has proved it by his ways; that
there is no God at all, but to prosper in the world, to do what we list: nay
hence it follows in the end, that seeing we do what we list, therefore we
are gods, knowing good and evil. This was the ground of that gross idolatry
in deifying others and this not unwillingly induced great ones to assume this
divine power unto themselves, Ground of idolatry.
by there transcendent power and privileges, not only to co^troule their own
laws, but even to encroach upon and iustle out the law of God, and so to seat
them selves in the place of the most Highest. Means of Antichrists rising.
Thus Antichrist arose by degrees from earthly happiness, to a concept of divine
power, exalting himself above all that is called God, because having taken a
surfeit of worldly pomp and fullness, he thereby established a visible
monarchy, not only above Emperors and the potentates of the world, but even
above heaven, and over hell it self, encroaching into the prerogative of the
most Highest: and making and changing the eternal decrees at his pleasure,
presuming with his fained, and usurped keys, to shut and open heaven and hell
at his will, and by his deceiuable miracles and presumed perfection exalting
himself in the hearts of all believers above all that was called God. And the
maine ground hereof was the just judgment of God upon the Whore, whom as he
had appointed from all eternity to everlasting perdition, so to his end for the
more righteous execution of his decree, he gave her favor with the great ones
of the earth, by whom being cherrished and advanced to be Queen and Empress
of the world, hereby she was drowned in security, and said she fate as a
Queen, and should see no evil, and so by security was hardened in her sins
and thereby committed the same more greedily; and so being deceived by sin,
grew to deceive others, that she might the better excuse her self, and make
prey of the blinded world: whereby as she executed the wrath of God upon the
utter Court, and reprobates of the visible Church; so by her oppression and
horrible wickedness, by her insatiable ambition, and covetousness, by her
devilish treacheries and bloody cruelties, she is now grown hateful to those
that were her own, being envied for her greatness, hated for her wickedness,
and detested for her treacheries; so that her own greatness has begun, and
will certainly accomplish her just overthrow, and fatal destruction: her own
Lovers that formerly advanced her, being bewitched with the Cup of her
fornications, as they have hitherto, so still they shall leave her, for her
odious wickedness: yea, they shall not cease to spoil, and utterly root her
out, that so her destruction may be their safety; and the Lord may be
glorified in his righteous judgments. Even so, O Lord, hasten thy work, for
the comfort of thy Church, and glory of thy great Name. And let this in the
mean time admonish the wise, that they be not partakers with her of her sins,
lest they partake with her of her plagues. Above all: let it advise us,
especially to take heed of these two capital sins, of pride, and
covetousness, the one being the means to nourish the other, and yet
covetousness being the means to confound pride, in that it cannot be
satisfied, cannot attain it desire. Ierem. 45.6.
Let Ieremies counsel to Baruch, be seasonable in these days; Seek not after
great things. If our hearts be right, we have an higher aim; and if they be
not, we cannot wish a greater plague, still to be desiring what we cannot
have; and when we have the most, making our burden the greater, and our
account more heavy, at that great day. Let this teach us to labor
contentedness in our estates, by acknowledging our unworthiness of the best,
and the sufficiency of the least, with the blessing of God, by daily resigning
our selves into the hands of our God:

And employing our talents faithfully to his glory, not considering so much
what we are short in of others, above us; but how many there are, that are
short of our measure laboring to supply what is wanting in out-ward things, by
storing up inward graces, which the more we heap up, the less we shall desire
and esteem the others; and the more we have, the more we shall receive*
considering still of the shortness of our lives, and suddenness of our
account, that so still we may be rather careful how to use well, and so to
account comfortably for what we have, because we know not how soon we may
leave it: then to be desiring and caring for to morrow, because we know not
what to morrow may bring. Coloss. 3.1
if our affections be set upon things that are above, and not on things below;
and the less care we have of earthly things, the more are our hearts enflamed
with the Law of God: the more enliued with the hope of a better life.

Thus an insatiable desire of earthly things, possesses every man naturally:
this conuinceth the obliquity and desperate state of Nature; this as i^ argues
it subject to Satan, who is the Prince of this world, so by this bait of the
world he easily ensnareth us to inevitable destruction; for so it follows in
the second place, had nor Satan matter to work upon from us, he could never
prevail to our destruction; were we not as Tinder, apt to receive the fire;
nay, had we not an whorish corruption in us, alluring him ^o attempt ^s, though
he were never so instant, yet should he be disappointed. But behold now, the
Driving of the Bargain; what is it, that encourages and enableth Satan to
prevail for our destructions there is a traitor within the city, to open the
gates to him; our insatiable desires of these things is that which he works
upon.

Where these are, Observation. An insatiable mind, lies open to Satan's snares.
he easily fetches over the soul. The mind that is always heauing after
earthly things, is an easy and sure prey to Satan's malice. The desire of
riches is the root of all evil, exposing to tentation and snare of Satan.

And no marvel. Psa. 52.
and so being justly forsaken of God, Matt. 19.
is thereby left to the malice of Satan. as making the delusion effectual, and
so smiting the hand, for the confirmation of the bargain. If happiness
consist in enjoying the world, then what need we fear to venture the soul;
Genes. 3 4.
unless we envy our own happiness? Thus did Satan fetched over our first
Parents, abusing first their judgments with a conceit of happiness, in which
(indeed) was their baine: suggesting, that if they did eat of the forbidden
tree, they should be so far from death, as that they should be as gods;
knowing good and evil: and so by this slight easily brought them to his lure.
Lastly, if we consider what follows thereupon: Namely, that though Worldlings
conceit of happiness in these earthly things, yet they are confounded in their
hopes, and fall short of their compass; though they desire all, yet many times
they attain not any such measure, as may satisfy their desires. How can this
choose but breed despair, and fearful confusion? And is not this now Satan's
time to make prey of the soul? Now curse God and die, Job 2.11.
because we cannot have our will. I cannot be worse (says the desperate soul)
and therefore the fool rages and is careless; nay, Satan is not so ready to
make prey of the soul, as he is to hasten the work: Achitophel now has no
help, but to hang himself; 2. Sam. 16.
I cannot endure this disgrace, my credit is gone, and therefore I am weary of
my life; and heere-upon I will be courageous, to let it out my self. Behold
the issue of worldly desires, they first puff up with pride, and then sink in
despair, and so expose to Satan's butchery.



If wretched man does make the wedge of gold his hope, and sets light by his
soul for the obtaining of this trash, renouncing the happiness of the life to
come, for the enjoying of this present; is he not then the executioner of Gods
righteous judgment upon him; does he not subscribe to his own condemnation?
The ways of God are equal and righteous altogether, but our wicked ways and
desires do justly light upon our own pates, and our own wisdom is our
confusion.

Take notice therefore in the fear of God, of this evil sickness reigning in
thee naturally: and be thou wise to discern the power and growth thereof, that
so thou may prevent the malice of Satan.

The regenerate themselves have not been without some spice of this disease:
Directions how to use bargaining
the Apostles dream of an earthly Kingdom, and Peter would feign have
tabernacles built on earth, Luke 24. Act. 1. Luke 17.3. Psa. 37.
to enjoy some constant happiness here. The Saints have fretted at the
prosperity of the wicked, because they have conceited it belonged unto them,
Ierem. 12.
and who should rather have it then they, who can best tell how to use it? And
yet all this but tentation, arising either from ignorance of better things, or
ouer-prising these present. Blessed be God, the Saints have acknowledged their
folly herein, Psa. 73.22.
and justified the providence of God disposing at his pleasure these earthly
things. And therefore if any such desire overtake thee, conceive it to be a
tentation against the power and wisdom and providence of God; Psa. 73.
and thy future good: and so enter into the Sanctuary of the Lord; for
resolution herein pray with holy David? Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies,
Psa. 119.
and not unto covetousness.





so shall thy bloody issue be stanched, thy thirst satisfied of earthly things;
now thou have drunk of that fountain, thou shall never thirst again, at least
thou shall so thirst, as that thou shall be satisfied, Math. 5.7.

Psalm. 62.10. And that thou may not be bewitched by them; Psa. 73.17.18.19:
consider that they are common blessings; which the wicked for the most are
partakers of in greater measure; and therefore in these thou may be no
otherwise happy, then that the vilest may exceed thee herein.

Remember their condition, that they are slipperie and mutable, and therefore
no fit matter to place thy eternal happiness on: if they will not avail thee
in the day of wrath, Pro. 11.8. much less will they secure that of constant
happiness.

They are burdens at the best, and snares if thou close with them* and
therefore when thou have most thou cariest thy clogge with thee, and if thou
watchest not warily, they will prove snares to entangle thee.

They are only good to these that are sanctified, Tim. 6.
and therefore labor first for the meat that shall endure for ever; Ioh.
4.34. Math. 6.33.
and be careful to sanctify them daily unto thee by the word, and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. that so the blessing of thy God may make them useful unto thee.

And seeing at the best they are but burdens unto thee, Luke 16. 1 Timothy 6.18.
Gal. 6.10.
and thou but a steward of them; ease thy self wisely of this burden, by a
bountiful communicating unto others; especially to the household of faith: and
prepare thy soul to a daily reckoning, either by some change in this life, or
the day of refreshing, when thou must give up a final account.

Thus shall thou so enjoy these things as not only to prevent the snares of
Satan, but to lay up a good foundation thereby against the day of Christ. 1.
Tim 6.19.

Directions in a mean estate
If the Lord has yet kept thee short of that portion which he has given wisely
to others: That thou may herein also be master of thy desires, learn first:

Math. 21.
To submit thy will to the will of the Lord, who may do with his own what he
will. Is thine eye evil because his is good? Genes. 32.
and say with holy Jacob, Oh Lord, I am not worthy of the least of thy mercies;
and this shall provoke to thankefulnes for what thou have, and teach thee to
wait upon thy God in the blessing thereof.

world, and therefore having food and raiment, therewith be thou content. 1 Timothy 6.7.8.

Psa. 37.9.

Phil. 4.13.
as well to be abased and emptied of what thou have, as to abound in seeking
more; oh, how shall thou thus master thy greedy desires? how may thou
prepare thy self to everlasting fulness?

Thus may thou captiuate thy carnal affections, especially if with thy
small measure of outward things, thou shall compare thy portion of grace; which
if it be less, thou have more need to raise thy affections higher: if it be
more: why art thou troubled for this outward want? 2. Cor. 12.8.
This grace shall be sufficient, and so Satan shall be excluded.

But alas, he will not be shut out so: his triumphs are too apparent, his
delusions too forcible: how many are content for these things to trade with him
to the loss of their souls? how ordinarily do men transgress for morsels of
bread? how willingly is the soul made a prey for the gaining of earthly things?



Ordinary to exchange the soul for the world.
How commonly do men prostitute their souls for the love of the world? Shall
we discover the delusions which prevail hereunto?

2 Petr. 9.
and cannot see a far off, 1. Peter 1.9. and therefore no marvel if they
dote upon the present: and so not long able to live by faith in the special
providence of God, and hope of better things, no marvel if they make a
contradiction between these things which are indeed only subordinate,
concluding that they must live; and therefore they must deceive, break Saboth,
what not? As if conscience to God, and care of this life, were contradictions;
we could not thrive and live in the world; and thrive to heaven also: whereas
indeed if we could trust God, and wait upon him, 1 Timothy 6.
we might find that godliness has the promise of this life as well as of that
which is to come. Indeed if we could trust in God, and wait upon him, in well
doing, we should verily be saved: we should want nothing that is good. Psa. 34.2
As worldlings want faith, so they want patience: and therefore seeing they
cannot tarry the Lords leisure for the blessing of their labors, therefore they
will take what is at hand, what soever it cost them: what is this birthright
unto them, seeing they dye for hunger? Esau. Genesis 25.
tell me not of my soul, I must not sterue, and be discredited; I must be
received when I am put out of my stewardship, Luke 16.
and therefore I see no way but to deceive and so to provide for my self. Thus
want of patience breeds resolved wickedness, and this exposes the soul as a
prey unto Satan.

either lull the conscience asleep, or flatter it on the other side: if prosper
in the world, either they have no sense of danger; or else all is well, because
they prosper. Osea 12.8.
Ephraim says, I am rich and increased in substance, and therefore they shall
find no iniquity in me, that were wickedness; either I am senceles of evil,
because my heart is fatted up with prosperty, or if I am privy of my self of
any, yet God is at peace with me: I have more then my heart can desire. Is it
any marvel if now hands be stricken, the bargain is made up; either I have no
leisure to think on my soul, because the world comes so fast upon me; or my
soul is safe enough, seeing I have my desire: or, which is common with
worldlings to wish in this case, so I may enjoy this happiness, let them take
heaven who list, Psa. 17.14.
I have my portion already, and therefore I look for no other.

Psa. 7 3.
The justice of God is admirable herein, who giving the wicked now their hearts
desire; nay, more indeed then they would desire: does not this increase the
delusion by lulling them in security, and flattering them in a vain conceit,
of present happiness, that they may willingly renounce the happiness of the
life to come? that so they may not repent of their bargain, but even stick
unto it, and so harden their necks against all contrary blasts.

which may befall them in the world; or some reckonings of conscience within,
to confound the sin: yet herein also are they supplied with means to make them
stick to their bargain. Either they have been too scrupulous in their
dealings with men; which may arise from the light of common equity and self
love, because they expect like dealing themselves: and therefore now they must
mend the matter, by letting loose the conscience to greater evils of
oppression, and such like gross wickedness; that so they may quiet the
conscience, by deading the sense: or else, they have been crossed in the
world, to see whether they will be daunted with a little, to try their homage
thereto; or because they have not been careful enough: and therefore now they
must redouble their cares, and more intend the main; they must now be more
industrious to recover their losses, more abject and slavish to make up their
mouths. Oh, how common are these courses with Worldlings! How fearfully
hereby do they enthrall themselves to destruction?

To conclude this point, that God may be justified, and Satan excusable in
comparison of our selves, that our destruction may appear principally to be
contrived by our selves: May we not observe in worldly men, as an insatiable
desire in these things, excluding all heavenly objects, and so drawing on Satan
to chaffer with them, so many such desperate fetches, both in the compassing of
these things, as also in the enjoying of them, which do necessarily avouch the
making up of this bargain.

Means and Marks of this Bargain.
Consider, I pray you with me, their ground, and means in compassing these
things; observe now wisely their end, in laboring for the same.

Touching their ground; is it not plain Idolizing and deifying of these
things, by putting their confidence in them, as if these were the God that they
only must adore; as if happiness, did only consist in these? Job 31.

And does not hence follow another fearful ground; that as these are counted
the true happiness, so they are able to make them perfectly happy, that enjoy
them: and therefore he that enioyes them most, has most happiness; and so as
God, may rule and do what he list. And what need he then take care for any
other happiness? What need he fear whatsoever Bug-beares of heaven or hell,
that simple men are feared withal? Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall die, (...). Chryso.
Give me the present, take the future who list.

Such are the grounds to compass these things, and are not the means
suitable? yea surely. How can we expect Grapes of thorns, or Figs of
thistles? As these are persuaded, so they practice.

No God in comparison of these, and therefore no god to the compassings of them.
The conscience is too nice a rule to guide the^ herein. The Word too precise,
and envious against their happiness. And yet that they may have some color to
deceive, and be deceived, here the Law of man, nay the abuse rather of the
Law, and custom of the time, comes in to be their warrant. Thus it has
passed, and therefore it is current. Nay, is not the present Event usually a
warrant herein? it has sorted well; and therefore it is well: what should I
say? A deceived heart has seduced them, and a deceitful world has bewitched
them; they must not be like No body, they shall lose their custom, if they
will not buy and sell on the Sabbath; they shall be deceived, if they study
not to deceive: Conscience goes a begging, and craft is the way to thrive; if
man see not, God will forgive: and that man may not see, we will have dark
lights, and false waights; the Epha shall be made great, and the shekle small;
we will be at a word when we deal with Professors, that we may deceive the
sooner.

And we will have three words to the bargain, rating our Wares at treble the
value; that we may fetch off the Ideo^, if not at the first, yet at the second
or third rebound. Is not every Trade a Mystery forsooth? and is not this
Mystery abused commonly to deceive, and be deceived? My skill fails me to
diue into this Mystery; only I desire, that into their secrets my soul may
not enter; my glory may not be joined with their assemblies. Let this suffice,
happy man that so touches Pitch, as not to be defiled with it; that so seeks
these things, as that he hazardeth not his precious soul. Too manifest it is,
that the most take this liberty, and which is most fearful, they sin even
by license. The Usurer has his warrant, the devils Factor (I mean) the
Stage Player, his color to own him to his Master. The best calling not
without it snare to enthrall the soul. This shall appear the better, if we
now consider the end of compassing these things: which what is it usually
else, but either that we may live uncontrolled, that the soul may take it
ease, and eternize it name over the earth, that it may outface and dare
heaven, that it may fat up it self to the day of slaughter? Where Church
maintenance for our faithful labor, must discharge the same, as if it were
only a-preferment of learning, and not an encouragement to painfulness;
where Simon Magus must enter in, and poor Simon Peter live upon alms; where
Diotrephes that loves the preeminence must engrosse all, and Gallio cares not
for these things: whose God is their belly, there end must needs be damnation;
who thus sow to the flesh, shalll they not of the flesh reap corruption? Thus
the end of Worldlings in heaping up riches, discouers their deceit, and so
their desperate case.

And can we look for a better harvest of such fearful seedings? Consider we a
little, how they use these things: are they not usually in extremes and so
bode extremity? Either the love of these so besotte them, that for fear of
parting with them, they cannot afford themselves any comfortable part thereof:
it more comforts them to behold them, that they may have the credit and
possession thereof, then to take their part of them cheerfully for their
maintenance: Who so poor in this case, as they that are usually most rich? who
less enjoy that they have, then they that have most? so righteous is God to
make them Purueyers for others, Job 27.
They shall hoord up silver as the dust, but the righteous shall divide it: so
shall the rust of what they have hoorded up, be a witness against them, and
consume them with fire: James 5.1, 2.
so shall the cry of the poor whom they have oppressed in scraping, and
defrauded in detaining from them, pull down vengeance upon their heads and
hasten their own comfort, in their just confusion. Do they not in distrust of
Gods providence, usually make Idols of these things, and so are given up to
make Idols of themselves? having mouths and yet dare not taste, having
bellies, and yet pine themselves? As they use their goods as Babies, only to
gaze and play withal; so they make babies and sots of themselves, fit only to
be gazed at, and scorned of the world. Lo, this is the man that boasted of his
riches, and put his confidence in the multitude of his treasures. Psa. 52.6.
Thus they which have oppressed others in gathering goods, are justly left to
oppress and defraude themselves of the lawful use of them, feeding themselves
chiefly with the wind of credit, and vain estimation, and so they justly
reap the whirle-winde of Gods righteous vengeance. And thus are many carried
with this extreme; others that think to hit it, by taking their portion, yet
do they not as fools fall into the other extreme, by prodigality and
excess? Witness their fat paunches, and lean souls; their whorish attire,
and barren possessions, where a pair of slippers shall devour a whole
Lordship and a cast at dice, cast the Master out of all he has; when the
Harlot shall bring another to a morsel of bread, when the contentious spirit
of some, shall make them foote-stooles to set the Lawyer aloft: and the idle
brain of many shall make my gentleman a Beggar; when the Broker shall fleece
him, and the Usurer flea my young Master, for his filthiness and gaudery: who
will not say that this wealth was disposed for the owners destruction? that
plenty has brought forth vanity, and the daughter has devoured the mother?
Thus by the gathering and abusing of these earthly things, it is more manifest
that Worldlings engage their souls for them, and so following and honoring
Satan, herein do bewray themselves to be his, to whom they do homage.

Mammon, no heaven but worldly happiness? Tell a Worldling that he is ruled by
the god of this World, that his love of money argues him to be his slave, and
he will boldly reply; That he defies the devil, he hopes to bless himself
from him as well as the best. And yet his way vtters his folly and desperate
estate; Psa. 49.12.
he has made the wedge of gold his hope: and therefore his hope and foundation
is built upon the sands, his wisdom is worldly, and therefore sensual, and
so consequently devilish. Deceive not therefore thy self in the fear of God;
thou may be received into an outward covenant with God, and yet make a
secret compact with Satan, for the undoing of thy soul. Oh, how many
Demi-asses may be found among us, that howsoever they have given their names
unto Christ, yet they have given their hearts to the devil; and all by
embracing this present world. Shall we for our better informing take a view of
some of them? Does Cain build Cities, and seek to nestle himself surely on
the earth, to avoid the storm of heaven? This plainly does avouch his
reiection from God. If Balaam for promotion, will bring God to his wicked bent:
does he not love the wages of iniquity, and expose his soul to the rage of
Satan? If Saul to cloak his sin, will be hindered of the people, shall he
not be rejected of God, and hasten his own confusion? Does Judas sell his
Master for the wages of unrighteousness, and does he not set his soul to
sale to the devil? As by these, and the like examples of Diotrephes, Hymeneus,
Alexander etc, we may take some scantling of our estates, whether we have
made this bargain, or no: so yet to make a more particular search hereof, let
us examine our hearts by these Rules; Rules of faith.
Do we first seek the world, and not the Kingdom of heaven? Will we make sure
of thriuing first, before we labor for knowledge, and the fear of God? And
if it come to the iumpe, that either we must strain our conscience, or lose
our profit; because we cannot be contented with a mean, we cannot wait upon
the blessing of God in the way he has commanded, we will venture a joint
whatsoever come of it. Is the Sabbath no bar to hinder our insatiable
desires, but either we wish it were gone, that we may return to our vomit, or
we cannot stay so long but even on the Lords day we will serve our lusts in
buying and selling, in tossing and tumbling up and down, making that day of
rest restless, by our worldly thoughts and carnal pursuites, by our profane
pleasures and pretended liberty? Have we begun in the spirit, and have quickly
enough thereof? and so we can easily limite our selves in heavenly things, we
have knowledge enough; nay, we may be too zealous, too holy, more precise then
wise, too much learning may make us mad, or fools: to leave a bird in hand
for that in the bush, that so we may enlarge our desires with hell, and still
cry with the daughters of the horseleech, Give, give. And have we no leisure
for religion, our thrift comes in so fast, al time is too little, either to
husband well that we have, or to better our estate? Lastly, for the better
justifying our selves in our temporising and hypocrisy: do we now labor to
stint others to our measure, both by traducing such as are before us in grace,
as unreasonable and mad fellows, that know no compass, as by alluring them
with our glorious shows, to curse where they will bless* to call light
darkness, and darkness light? Surely these are more then probable conjectures,
that our fowls are engaged to the world, that our heaven is on earth, and our
happiness in hell. In a word, where credit is the guide and bridle of
conscience, and profit the touchstone and square of religion; where conscience
is the Broker to color deceit, and religion the factor and handmaide for
profit; where civil honesty goes current for substantial righteousness, and
bodily service is a sufficient covering for secret wickedness; where the fruit
of the body must satisfy for the sin of the soul, and the mercy of God must
be the cloak to cruelty against our selves and others; will the Lord be
merciful to presumptuous sinners, can there be hope of mercy without the bonds
thereof, Psa. 130.7.
seeing there is mercy only with him that he may be feared?

And is there any fear of God, where profaneness is justified, and that by
abusing and perverting the straight ways of God? and can these be but abused
where credit is made the head, and conscience the tail? can the conscience be
free where profit limits religion, and ciuility is the judge thereof? and can
we admit of any Judge then civil honesty? must we not make the best of what
we have, seeing we will have no better? This serves the turn for the present,
and what need we any more? And is not now bodily service made an Idol, and
will worship set in the seat of the scorners? We despise all others that make
conscience of their ways, they are but a base and beggarly multitude, Ioh. 7^
that know not the law; if they cannot live by their religion, they have a bad
master* And therefore welfare worldly wisdom, that has two strings to it bow;
if God will not help, yet well fare Mammon to help at a pinch. And seeing
Mammon serves our present turn, Job. 21.15.
what more profit shall we have in the service of God? nay, may not our
preciseness hinder our profit? And therefore religion must be cast off as an
enemy to our own profit, or else submitted to the compass thereof.

Behold the power of delusion prevailing with worldlings, and let us wisely
try our selves hereby. To conclude this point: seeing this bargain is a
mystery rather performed in deeds then in words, not without it glorious
pretenses to ensnare us more easily, and accompanied with dangerous sophistry,
whereby we hope to come out thereof* learn we then in the fear of God, first
what these vizers and pretenses are, and how we may disclaim them. Pretenses
to color the Bargain, with their delusion and confusion.


The vizers under which this fearful bargain is concealed; are f^^st* that
the blessing of God makes rich, to thrive and increase in the world is the
gift of God, and recompense of our labors, and therefore who would not labor
for abundance, seeing the Lord gives time thereto what need we fear danger
in that which is a blessing* Which though it be true to those that be
sanctified, That riches are the blessing of God, how and to whom*
yet neither ^y child of God must look for this blessing, because it seems
good to our God to give some more, that they may be stewards for others, so
also to give some less, All have them ^utwardly.
that there may be a maintenance of the holy fellowship, by this mutual
communication of each others gifts? May be a means to exercise spiritual
graces.
And so this diversity of outward gifts, that the rich may ease the poor of
their burden of want by communicating of their store unto them, and the poor
may also ease the rich of their burden of riches, and further their reckoning
against the day of the Lord by their thankfulness and prayers; thus the rich and
the poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them both.

And the Lord may have the only glory of his wise providence, though in giving
to each as pleases him, yea in satisfying each in this different measure here
with thankfulness and contentment. And so either of them may be provoked to
hunger after durable riches, the rich in that they are but tennants at will,
and stewards for others, and therefore must give up their account: and the poor
also hereby provoked to hunger after heavenly treasures, in that they are
wisely stinted and dieted of the present. And therefore as neither the Saints
must reckon of these blessings, so neither must they measure the worth of their
labors hereby, as if they did not serve God aright if they were not
recompensed with abundance; because as our service of God deserves not the
least, so to serve God for these things, is to serve our selves above him: and
so though we have our reward here, yet we may miss of it in a better life.
And therefore that Job may not be justly challenged to serve God for these
things, Job. 1.9.
they shall be taken from him, that his secret corruption may be purged out, and
sincerity approved. And on the contrary, many an hypocrite and earthworme shall
have his portion in this life, Wicked how they have them.
and be glutted in these things more then his heart can desire, that so he may
be justly deceived, in what he desires to be flattered, namely, an opinion of
goodness; and may also deceive others hereby, that measure righteousness by
outward prosperity; and yet most fearfully also deceive himself, not only
in finding no contentment in this his supposed happiness, but on the contrary,
being given up by one delusion to another. That as he accounts it a seal of
his vprightnes to be crowned with abundance, so he shall esteem this his
happiness; either on the one side, to abuse these things by putting them to no
use but usury, and so defrauding himself and others of the comfort of them; or
else on the other side, How they vseman.
imagining this his happiness to crown his head with roses, and fare
deliciously every day, he shall be given up to the abuse of these things by
riot and excess: not only to the just shame and confusion of all his civil
honesty, and conceited goodness; but to the just overthrow of his conceited
happiness in them; as by his riot and superfluity, bringing himself ofttimes to
a morsel of bread, and yet cannot have so much as the husks which the Swine
fed on, to satisfy his necessity; and so hereby plunging himself into
fearful shifts, and woeful despair. Behold here the power of his delusion.
And conclude we justly hence, that the abundance of outward things, as they
are but common blessings, so they are often given to the wicked as curses, to
hasten their destruction. And they are often denied to the godly in mercy, to
try their sincerity, their faith, and patience; and also to provoke their
appetite to more heavenly treasures. Not the having, but the right use makes
the Blessing.
So that, it is not the having of abundance, but the right use thereof, which
is the blessing of God, 1. Tim. 6.18, 19. whereby we shall lay up a good
Foundation against the life to come.



How these prove curses to the wicked.
And so upon this sandy foundation, raising up this Tower of Babell by diverse
stones: As first, to take up our hearts especially, to the compassing hereof,
and so to prevent them of the true riches: Next to plunge us into any base and
carnal courses for the enjoying of the same, and so harden the conscience in
sin. And lastly, to exclude repentance ever, by the enjoying hereof; as if
this were our happiness, to be secure of our Estates: and why may we not be
secure, seeing we sit as a Queen, and shall see no evil? we say in our
prosperity, we shall never be removed; we have feathered our neasts on high,
and our habitations shall continue for ever. And so security makes way to
sudden destruction; Thou fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul:
even when thou say unto thy soul; Take thine ease, thou have goods laid up
for many years. Learn we hence therefore in the fear of God, to discern this
dangerous color, and so be we wise to prevent the same, as heretofore has
been directed. 2. Colors of worldlings.
The second color whereby Satan draws us on to this desperate Bargain, is the
pretense of our Callings: some whereof are such, as cannot be managed without
abundance; and herein the delusion is more forcible, for the enthralling of
the soul; both in that abundance, being an inseparable companion to
greatness, does hereby puff up the heart, and so exalts it against the Lord,
Danger of High Callings.
as if this great Babel were attained by our own wit and industry, but usually
that we come to that fulness without our own labor and endeauours. Hereupon we
grow careless in the use of what we came so lightly by, and either upon vain
pretense of Munificence, we lavish out on such as we purpose to honor, that
so we may be as Gods; in bestowing where we will: or, we supply prodigality,
by oppression of others; and so affect a kind of deity, in taking from whom
we list; and so on either side, do willingly endanger our precious souls,
either by putting confidence in that which daily we confound in our abuse; or
else by abusing the trust that is committed unto us, as being but Stewards for
others, and servants to the common good. Behold here then the delusion in high
callings; and learn we thus in the fear of God, to avoid the snare thereof.

How to remedy this evil.
Consider we that high callings, though they require necessary supply of
abundance, yet it is not so much for their own, as the public good: so to
keep their own estate therewith, as that withal they remember, that they are
subordinate to the Highest; who as he gave them these things, so he will
require an account of the^. And secondly, that they are also herein but
servants to the public; so to carry their state, as the Commonwealth may
thereby flourish. And therefore they must ever bate of their fullness, to
comfort the empty souls: As good Nehemias did not take their set allowance of
the Governor, Nehe. 5.13.
for the relief of the distressed. And in this most absolute liberty, they
must be confined within the bounds of best deserving.

For the casting of courtesies upon a person, that is otherwise meritorious, is
as seed that is cast into good ground: which commonly yields return with much
comfort; so that our care and pains is so far from being cast away, as that
we rejoice therein. Especially, be they careful to honor God with their
fullness, in emptying of themselves, for the good of the Church and common
benefit; that so they may give up their account with joy. This concerning high
Callings.

As for the other ordinary, and inferior condition, though each through pride
and discontent be aiming at the highest; yet let him here observe the rules
before set down; and so shall he avoid the snare which lies therein. And thus
of the second Color, drawing on to this Bargain.

A third Color there yet remains hereto; 3. Color, pretense of doing good.
Namely, the conceit of doing the most good: which seeing we then can lest do,
when we have most; therefore each desires abundance, upon pretense hereof:
and so, either upon pretense of doing good, swalloweth up many evils in the
gayning of these things, and so commits evil that good may come thereof,
The snare herein.
whose damnation is just; or else, which is worse, and yet a common case,
though he has got much wickedly, yet by doing of good therewith, he hops to
make amends; Worldly charity decyphered.
and so is justly met withal by divine vengeance: either he is taken away in
his evil getting, and so deprived of his hope of doing good, or making amends
thereby; or else, if he be spared to try his charity, is it usually any
other, then either to give somewhat at his death, when he can keep his Mammon
no longer? and so it is not thankes-worthy; or if any come from him while he
lives, what is it else, but either to grease a fat Sow, and cast water into the
Sea? or else, he parts with a Godgin to catch a Pike, his table is a snare, and
his wealth a net to make him friends therewith, or bridle his enemies: either
he must have a trumpet to bring him in present reward, and deprive him of the
future; or he gives with one hand, and kills with the other; the body must be
relieved to enthrall the soul, or the soul is neglected; so the poor
carkesse may be refreshed, and that rather sparingly to kill it often with a
lingering consumption; or glutted once a year, to fat it up to the slaughter.
Behold the ordinary charity of Worldlings, and judge whether they prove good
to themselves or others.

Remedy hereof.
Learn we therefore in the name of God; thus to prevent this delusion. As
first, by considering, that as the holy God has appointed lawful means for
the obtaining of his own blessings, Evil not to be done that good may come
thereof.
so that we may not do evil that good may come thereof; so he requires no
more of us, then accordingly as he gives: the widows mite is accepted, when we
have no more; and the pound of the Vain glorious is rejected, where less will
serve the turn. Neither the fruit of the body will procure any satisfaction
for the sin of the soul, but to do righteously and walk with God, Matt.
6.7, 8.
this is acceptable with him. No other sacrifice of distributing to others, is
so pleasing unto God, True charity, the Marks.
but what is especially to the Household of Faith; what may further our own and
others salvation. Above all know we that God loves a cheerful giver: and
therefore while we live, and have time, let us be doing of good, lest to morrow
be too late; and let us send our goods before us to make us friends of them,
not leave them behind us, lest we lose the comfort of them: and whatsoever we
do, let us aim at the glory of God, and do it for his sake, who thought not
his life to be dear for us: that so casting our bread upon the waters we may
find it again. And thus of these delusions, which draw men to this Bargain.

There follows another sort of deceits, Discovery of deceits, flattering
the hope of undoing the Bargain.
which gives us hope that though we have ventured on the Bargain, yet we may
be free again; of which we shall have fitter occasion to speak in the last
place. And so we come to the last place of observation; namely the judgment of
the Bargain, which if our Savor may be judge, will profit us nothing; for so
his words imply:

What shall it profit a man? that it as much to say, he shall profit nothing
thereby. Observation 4 The judgment of the bargain, no profit.


It is a very hard match to hazard the soul, though it were for the gaining of
the whole world. Reasons.


The reasons hereof lie couched in the words themselves, which do imply two
things. First, a comparison of the price with the thing bought; the price is
amplified, first by the matter thereof, which is the soul. Secondly, by the
appropriation, it is our own, as being our best part, yea indeed al in all;
that which is the life of our life, that which must continue for ever with us,
when these things perish with the body; that which eternally shall rue this
bargain, when we have no other benefit thereof. Out of which two circumstances,
the holy Ghost does infer the iniquity of the bargain: 1 Price too dear.
as that first the immortal and divine soul being made a price for these
fading and earthly things, this argues that we have paid more for them then
they are worth; and so withal have made a bad market.

Secondly, that when as in other bargains though we have lost at one time, 2
No hope of recovery.
yet we may help our selves in another, yet this loss is irrecouerable,
because our souls once thus lost can never be recovered again; if Satan have
once got hold on us by this bond, we are like never to get out again: Because
the soul thus lost cannot be recovered.
because it is a bargain made willingly, and with great advice and wisdom:
abusing religion and conscience to the driving thereof, and rejecting all sense
of religion and common honesty for the enjoying thereof: what sacrifice now is
left for sin, to such that have thus made a mock of the Son of God, and
esteemed basely of his blood, in comparison of the world. And therefore let no
man deceive himself with vain conceits, as if hell would be satisfied, or God
mocked. Answer to deceits.
Does he think to wind out of the bargain by deceiving the Devil with this
trick, that his soul was not his own, and therefore he could not sell that
which was none of his? The holy Ghost here contradicts him: It is his own
soul. It is not our own. how.
Indeed it is not his own to save the same, he must be bought with a price,
and so is not his own; but yet with this condition, that not as his own, he
may glorify God therewith in body and spirit. To destroy and undo the same,
so it is his own, he has this by inheritance, to be his own destruction; our
destruction is of our selves, and that it may appear so, what God has
decreed, we willingly execute in our conuersing with the world: we will have
present payment whatsoever it cost us, and so that we may enjoy the pleasures
of sin for a season; we have no respect to that great recompense of the
reward. Heb. 11.26. 1 Deceit. hope of doing good with these things.
Oh but we hope to undo the Bargain by doing of good herewith. So indeed we
may do good to others hereby, and happily to our selves for a season.

But yet withal more confirm the Bargain, This rejected.
in that our doing good to our selves, does but harden the heart the more in
sin, and lull it in security, to expose it thereby to sudden vengance: and
our well doing to others may be the undoing of their souls* or though they
fare the better every way hereby, yet this does not hinder, but that we may
still fare the worse: as enjoying more at their thriuing under us, or boasting
and contenting our selves with others thriuing, as hoping to make them our
trumpes, or sponges in time of need: howsoever, for good to other we may look
for indulgence, yet in the mean time we are cruel to our own souls; and so
for this cruelty shall be condemned and judged of our selves.

Deceit: Hope of repentance.
Oh but thou will say, though none of these things will serve the turn, yet I
may repent of the bargain, and so it may be broken. So did Judas of betraying
his Master, and yet he found no mercy: so Esau wept bitterly, and yet he
found no place of repentance. Deceive not thy self, This dilated.
God will not be merciful to presumptuous sinners. It is impossible that if we
thus sin willingly in the pride of our wisdom, that we shall find mercy
though we seek the same. And alas, how do we seek for mercy in this case,
but for fear of vengance? and what remains there unto us but a fearful
expectation thereof? Is it with purpose to be rid of our sins, or rather
for hope we may return to our vomit again? or rather do we not dream of
mercy, and yet when we are awake we are an hungry? hanging in hell oftentimes
without pardon about our necks, because we have not pleaded it in the
acceptable time. Oh take heed to try such conclusions with thy soul; it is
thine own, and these things are but lent thee; and therefore take heed how
thou part with an everlasting inheritance, for a te^nant at will* It is thine
own, and must ever fare well or ill with thee: and therefore be wise not to
part with it, for that which when thou have most need of, will part with thee,
and return thy price again, as the Jews did unto Judas, to begin and
increase thine everlasting torments. Oh how gladly now would worldlings wish
that they had parted with their souls, never to think of them again! But
alas; herein they are miserably deceived; they part with the happiness of their
souls, which was none of theirs to give, and all the good they gain hereby,
is, to have their souls returned upon them, and stick to them in their
confusion, to the most desperate continuance thereof for ever.

And yet in the mean time there were some miserable comfort unto worldly men,
2 Reasons: that the bargain is naught, but not performed.
if they could for the present enjoy their bargain. But mark I pray you how
the holy Ghost sets down herein, the subtlety of Satan, and so discouers in
the 2 place, the treachery of the bargain; Satan will be sure of his; how.
Satan will be sure of his part to fetch over their souls, though he neither
can or would perform the bargain unto them. First I say, he makes sure work
with them: he binds them by their thoughts, they do dream of no other heaven:
sleeping and waking this is their compass, to be rich, to live in pleasure;
nay they cannot sleep for this, they cannot wake but to this. Psalm. 73.56.
2. He binds them by their words, all their talk is of the world, and how to
compass the same: the Saboath is no other ways sanctified, but to confer
thereof, either abroad as occasion serves, or at home in their closet.

Here they bless their souls in what they have, or may compass: every day
too little to fetch in profit by lying or flattery, by detraction or wispering;
their very tongues are set on fire of hell, to own them to their Master.

Especially, their way utters their foolishness, and slavery to Satan; he
is not so ready to offer, as they to execute: what by deceit in Bargaining,
and fraud in selling; what by cruelty in oppressing, and cunning in
undermining; what by engrossing to themselves, and encroaching upon others. He
is not wise, that has not a trick to deceive the Law, and so his own soul.

Their purpose is well known to Satan by their words and actions, and so
hereby he surely binds them to performance of the Bargain. But now on the
other side, Satan performs not with us.
does he perform with them? Nothing less. The holy Ghost sets out his
performance, which he cannot; yet if, or though, supposing what may be, and so
implying it cannot be. And indeed how can it be, that Satan should perform
with them? Alas, the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and he gives
it to whom he please. But Satan is the god of this world, Object.
and Prince that rules in the Air. True, but so only reputed of the wicked,
that adore no other thing; Answ.
so only deputed under God, to deceive and plague them therewith. He offers
to Christ; Matthew. 4.6, 7.
All these will I give thee: Alas, they were none of his to give; he cannot so
much as take an hair of our head from us, without the dispensation of the most
High; much less can he give us the least crumbe, but by leave from God. And
see herein also his notable treachery, he offers these of gift freely, which
are none of his to give: and yet we must exchange our souls for them, which
are infinitely inualuable.

Thus is not Satan able to give us these things, 2. We not capable of them.
neither indeed are we capable of what he so largely offers. What should we
do with a whole world, whereof nothing is our due, and the least may serve the
turn? Is it not at the least as Saul's Armor, too heavy a burden for us? And
when we have the most thereof at the best, will it not prove too heavy a
reckoning without the blessing of God? Behold here then, the conclusion in the
Bargain. Neither can Satan give what he proffers, neither can we receive the
same: and indeed, 3. Satan would not perform if he could.
neither would Satan, if he could, perform with us, to keep our desires
afoote, and so thereby our subjection to him, to any base courses for the
attayning thereof. He enuies our present happiness: and were he not bridled by
the wise and mighty Lord, so unquenchable is his malice against the power and
government of our God; that if there were no other reason but to disgrace the
providence of God, he would daily breed combustions, and desolations among men.
No man should enjoy a day of present happiness, he would be tormenting before
his time, and make hell even with the earth by contnuall butcheries and
Massacres. But he is wisely restrained by the Lord, for the honor of his
general providence, and for the execution of his righteous judgments against
the wicked who serve him; they shall not obtain what they desire, to the just
confusion of their hellish homage, and yet to the hastening of their final
vengeance, by this disappointme^t of their hopes; which either breed more
griedinesse in sin to compass the same, or else bring forth fearful despair,
to thrust them violently upon damnation: and all this, as righteously by the
Lord, upon these that forsake him, so willing, by Satan and themselves: who
have made faslhood their refuge, and are hid under vanity, and so no marvel
if they reap what they have sown; Use hereof, casting before hand.
even of the flesh corruption, and utter confusion. Observe here wisely, the
treachery of the Bargain, and sit down before hand, and cast up thy
peny-worths. Is it no profit to adventure thy soul for the world? Is the price
too dear? and yet thou shall be deceived too: If thou have Naamans Talents,
thou must have a Leprosy also to the Bargain: If thou have thy desire, thou
shall have leannes in thy soul; or though thou part with thy soul, yet shall
thou still be fed with the wind: either thou shall not have what is promised,
or be better without it; so to be given up to the abuse thereof, as thereby
only to ripen thy sin, and so hasten thy vengeance; or else to part with it
then, when thou most depends thereon. Will Satan play thus false with thee, and
cheat thee in thy Bargain?

Oh then, be wise in the fear of God, How to prevent him.
to prevent his treachery. Admire not these Gallants that reauell in these
things, neither envy their happiness that have paid so dear for them, lest
this doting admiration, dazzle and corrupt the eye of thy judgment, that so
thou may wish to be like unto them; and envy of their happiness leave thee
to Satan's malice, to be ensnared in such ways which have set them aloft. Look
into the Sanctuary of thy God, to the end of these men, that their present
luster may not bewitch thee: and be always thinking of that life which is
without end; that so thy heart may be satisfied with the hope thereof. Build
thy foundation by Faith, upon the Rock, that no storms may split thee; and
let the load-starre of hope guide thee through the surges, that the billows
may carry thee over safely, to thy desired Haven: let patience sit at the
Helm, to keep thee in a settled course, and so shall experience be thy
Steere-man, to stablish thee in present storms. So experience shall give
contentment, whatsoever does befall thee, and contentment shall provoke
thankfulness, for what thou have undeservedly. Thankfulness shall prove an
holy venture, to return thee with Usury; either with a greater measure of
these things, as shall be fittest for thee, or with what shall be far better:
even a supply of spiritual poverty, to hunger after durable riches; happy
poverty, that will make thee rich for ever, and blessed hunger that shall be
thus satisfied. Oh, that we were wise thus to deceive Satan! What room could
there be for him, if the heart were so employed? What hope of prevailing,
where the soul is thus armed? Oh, that we could be thus wise for our latter
end! If we could daily renew our repentance, how should we prevent, or reject
Satan's assaults? If we could be humbled daily in the sense of our
unworthiness, how should we be thankful for the least? How could we envy
and fret at the prosperity of others? We should now find too much to do at
home, to have any leisure to look abroad; or if we look abroad wisely, it
will return us home again, either to examine our selves whether we are such,
or else to be careful and circumspect over our selves that we may not be such.
What can we see abroad which may not more humble us under the hand of God? and
shall not our abasing in the presence of God, be the means of our exalting and
acceptance with him. And what need we desire the wine and the corn, when our
God is at peace with us? Is not he our sufficient portion, and shall we not
with him have all things else? Oh, let us then make still sure of him, by
seeking all from him, by renouncing all for him, and using all to him; resting
in him only, and not our selves, when we are at greatest worldly ease, and
making him our refuge when we find no rest elsewhere. How shall this trial of
our Faith perfect the work by patience, that we may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing, enjoying all things, even when we have nothing, 2. Cor. 6, 7.
and being rich in content, though we are base and contemned of the world?
Happy contempt, to keep us from the love thereof, and make us long the more
after heaven; yea most happy abasing of man, that casts us upon our God, to
have experience of his favor, and everlasting compassions. Let them make the
wedge of gold their hope, that have no repose in God; and let their glory be
their shame, whose belly is their God.

Let them take their fill of dalliance, till a dart be struck through their
Liver; and let them be contented with the leprosy, that will needs run after
the talents of deceit. Miserable fool, that will be thus led to the stocks,
and as an Ox to the shambles; wretched Gehezi that to receive that which his
Master refused, partakes of that plague which his Master cured.

To conclude all, a Bargain you see is a bruing; and our insatiable hearts
drive the same. A match is made up, and we see the danger of it: we are
deceived therein, and yet cannot help our selves. Let us therefore be wise to
set bounds to our restless desires, and let us turn the current contrary,
that so we may wade safely and enjoy our endeauours; unhappy they, that so
desire, as that they can be sooner wearied, then satisfied with their labors.
Miserable men that seek for happiness in sinful vanity and changeableness,
and can find this their only content to be restless in the pursuit of what
they cannot compass; or what they compass, increases their misery: most
desperate their estate that have no hope but in this life, wherein
(notwithstanding) they are justly deceived and confounded. Oh then, happy they
that have the God of gods for their refuge, who sweetens unto them all their
bitter pills, and hereby preuents surfaiting of worldly excess: happy they
that have their affections set upon heavenly things, which can neither be taken
from them, though they are from them; and so being from them do increase their
spiritual appetite, that so they may never cease longing, till they be
satisfied with him. Oh happy are they that can be contented with their estates!
because what the Lord disposes is best and fittest for them; and yet by faith
can still be restless after what is promised: that so God may fulfill the
desires of them that fear him. Yea they are happy, and ever more blessed are
they that use the world as strangers and as strangers are entertained thereof;
that so they may approve themselves to belong to another country, and may
hasten to that Country and City which is above. This happiness of the way,
he which is the Way grant unto us, even for his truth sake; that so by him we
may be conducted to the happiness of our Country. To whom with God the
Father, and the blessed Spirit, three glorious Persons and one God in unity,
might and majesty be ascribed of us and all Saints, as it is most due; all
glory, power, dominion, and thanksgiving, with all fear and obedience, both
now and for ever. Amen.

Conclusion to the Reader: Resolving certain Cases of Conscience incident
hereunto.
THus have thou gentle Reader a Brief of such Meditations, which by
observation of worldly courses I have conceived, concerning the desperate
estate of Worldlings, endangering their souls for the gayning of worldly
commodities. And for thy further satisfaction herein, that thou may prevent
deceit in thy Christian liberty, lest it be an occasion to the flesh; and
follow thy earthly plough so that the better Plough still go forward, I have
thought it necessary to adioyne hereunto certain Cases of Conscience, whereby
thou may be resolved in such difficulties, and seeming contradictions as
appear between thy general and civil calling; that so thou may wisely
subordinate the one unto the other: and make thy civil calling, a furtherance
to the perfection of thy general. To this end, seeing, as the keeping of the
Sabboath is a special trial and furtherance of synceritie in all other
occasion; so the maine quarrel of Worldlings is against the same: either they
would utterly abolish the same that it may not be kept at all, or else they
would delude and frustrate the power thereof under pretense of Christian
liberty.

What use of our civil callings, and other accedents thereto, may be allowed
upon the Lords day.

To which we answer briefly, that such liberty hereto is only allowed herein,
as the word and equity thereof does confine unto us. Namely.

1. That in case of necessity for the preservation of life, so that without
present help it may be certainly endangered, we may lawfully exercise our
civil callings, but neither in the same manner as at other times, or to the
same ends. First, I say,

Not in the same manner, that is; not with the same intention of the mind,
which on this day must be more abstracted from earthly affections, then another
day: not so much our love to the person, as our love unto God, must now bear
sway in doing the thing with an entire respect to God commanding the same, that
he may have the glory of our simple obedience; the^, that man may receive
benefit thereby: which though I acknowledge is to guide us at all times, yet
specially the Saboth requires this retired obedience. And in our releeuing the
person, though his body or state be in present danger, yet our principal aim
must be the relief of the soul by exhortation, reproof, etc. as occasion
serves: and that without any respect of refreshing the mind of body by any
such labor, which is lawful at other times.

Thus is the different manner in regard of the mind; and so also there must be
a difference in the use of the body: as so to exercise the body as specially to
humble and abase it by the manner of our labor; whereas at other times we may
more respect the ease thereof.

And yet so far only to exercise it as not to tire and weary it, if urgent
occasion do not require, lest wearisomenesse require some such recreation
thereof as is nor meet.

And if any urgent occasion may bring wearisomenes, yet now in steed of such
bodily recreation, the mind may be enlarged to heavenly meditations and
thanksgiving, thereby to refresh the wearied carcass.

Whence it follows that all bodily recreations that do not further us to
divine worship, are unlawful on the Lords day: Because they serve only to
refresh the body after labor; which is restrained therefro^; otherwise I say,
the^ they shall make us fitter to serve God, when we have any liberty to labor
upon case of necessity, though we may use that liberty to wearisomnes, yet this
is to be relieved specially with spiritual recreation.

2 This infers that the use of our Civil callings on this day, is not as
they are Civil, but rather as they are abstracted from all Civil respects.

And this shall appear the better, if we consider the different Ends of
employment on this day from the other.

Our End on ordinary days, may be benefit to our selves, for the increase of
our outward means and maintenance in the world; so may we not do on the Lords
day. Here we must labor freely without hire or fee, our pains must be a free
will offering without respect of recompense, to approve the sincerity of our
obedience, wholly for Gods sake, and not our own.

And that our labor must now be severed from al respect or co^tentment of the
body, but rather to the humiliation both of soul and body. The like must be
resolved concerning such other works as are allowed this day. As.

2. Works of Charity, which though they may now be performed, (as relieuing
the poor, visiting the sick and afflicted) yet here they must be limited by
the former circumstances, as after a diverse Nature and to diverse Ends then at
other times.

1. Now they are to be performed more liberally then at other times, in regard
of the matter we give; because this day requires a restrayning of our selves
herein, that we may be more enlarged to others; both in that our less bodily
labor has need thereof; and the greater labor of the mind, requires the
less, lest it be hindered and dulled hereby. And yet in regard of the manner,
they are to be performed more sparingly: less time bestowed thereon, less
wearying of the body; and all this that both body and soul may be more free
and ready in the worship of God.

The like may be concluded of that other bodily work allowed on the Sabboath;
namely, the view of the creature: Now the mind must be abstracted from all
delight in them, as they serve for present use, which may be allowed at other
times; and only inflamed hereby to glorify God, in the wonderful variety
and use of them, for the advancement of his power and providence in their
creation and government, without any respect of right or use of them to our
selves.

Whence it follows?

1. That all liberal use of the Creatures in prodigal Feasting, etc, is now
forbidden, but only such as may serve necessity, and be agreeable unto good
reason.

2. Generally no other bodily labor is now admitted, but what is confined
within the former bounds of necessity and charity, and the like, together
with such other circumstances of different manner and end, as before are laid
down.

And thus of the first Case and Resolution thereof.



The Resolution hereof consists, First, in the Consideration of the right use
and intent of the Sabboath, which is principally to confine and employ our
thoughts wholly upon heavenly things and such occasions, as that day are
publicly offered to further the same, and that for two ends. One, that this
heavenly employment of our thoughts on this day, and so of our words and
actions suitable thereto, may be both a resemblance of our pure and perfect
estate in heaven, when all our thoughts, words and actions shall be thus wholly
exercised, and also on evidence of our right in that happiness, and withal
may provoke us to sigh and hasten to that perfect estate; by how much our
experience of failing in these things on this day argues our shortness and
aberration from that perfection.

And hereupon follows another use and intent of the Sabboath; Namely, that by
restrayning and setting our thoughts now only upon heaven, he objects we may
at all other times keep them better in order, that though they may have
liberty on the other days to worldly occasions: yet by the former employment
of them on the Sabboath, they may now be so bridled and seasoned with holy
grounds and Spiritual ends: as that we may so use the world as if we used it
not, our hearts may not be set upon the same, though we must converse
therewith: but both lifted up to God for the sanctifying of our business, and
kept still ever with God in the prosecuting thereof, and so return unto God
for the blessing of the same, and rely again upon God in waiting on his
providence, and meditating of the heavenly riches: making still these worldly
occasions daily matter to humble us hereby, in that we cannot be without what
in some sort hinders our entire fellowship with God: to exercise our Faith and
patience; in that our labor is nothing without the blessing of God: to try our
synceritie, that we can spare time for heavenly occasions, and season our
earthly affairs with Spiritual Meditations. And so to prepare us by a daily
viewing of our reckonings, and making even with God, to our great account; and
so hereby to sit us the better to the next Sabboath, and so to provoke us to
hunger after the eternal Sabboath.

Thus does the right use and intent of the Sabboath extend to the holy ordering
of our civil Callings.

And surely if we consider rightly in the second place, the right use and end
of our civil Callings. Which is not so much for present maintenance of life,
or to thrive thereby, as to humble us under the mighty hand of God, in that we
have need of such means, which, had not sin entered into the world, we should
not have had; and so daily to renew repentance and thereby to provoke to love
and compassion toward others; that so we may lay up a good foundation against
the life to come* The wise consideration and comparing of both these together;
both the right use and end of the Sabboath and our civil Callings, will
happily further the resolution of these doubts, and satisfy the Conscience, in
any scruples that may arise therefrom.

For out of this comparison will arise these conclusions. First though the Lord
has allowed us six days for our civil Callings, and but one for the
general, yet from this: proportion it does not follow, that though more time
be allowed for our worldly occasions then for our spiritual, therefore we may
enlarge our thoughts so much the more after worldly things* then after those of
a better life: seeing as our civil Callings are ordained, not so much for the
maintenance of this present, as that life which is to come; so our managing of
them must be Spiritual, with thoughts and actions derived from that
Fountain, guided by the same Rule, and aiming at the same End.

And therefore as the Sabboath does restrain us altogether from these carnal
worldly thoughts, as being simply evil on that day: so neither do the other
days otherwise allow them, then as they proceed from a spiritual intent to
glorify God in obedience to him in our Calling, rather then to enrich our
selves, and so aim at a Spiritual end, even the furthering of us to a better
life.

The Sum of all is:

1. Our civil Callings one the Lords day must wholly cease, but upon the
former occasions.

2. On the week days they must be followed, not with worldly but with
heavenly minds. They must be begun with Prayer, both private, and if it may be,
with the Family: they must be continued with spiritual Meditations, tending
to weane us from the love of them; by experience of the manifold distractions,
the baseness, and corruption incident thereto, and so provoking to raise up the
mind to heavenly objects; and they must be ended with contentment, and
thankfulness, with prayer, and humbly submitting to the will of God, and
waiting by Faith his glorious Blessing.

Thus if we do, our thoughts (though conversant with the world, yet) shall
have sweet commerce with heaven; our time, though more days spent in our civil
Callings, yet now thus employed, shall sanctify them unto us, and sanctify us
more and more by them, and so make every day a spiritual Sabboath. Thus we
shall walk with God, while we have dealing in the world, and have our
conversation in heaven, while we are thus strangers on the earth: Our thoughts
though employed upon the world, yet shall not rest thereon, but retire again
to their true Center of heaven; and our ways, though travailing in the world,
yet shall still be aiming and hastening to our country which is above. So that,
though we live in the flesh, we shall not live after the flesh: and though we
may take care for the flesh, yet we shall not care to satisfy the same, nor
use our liberty as occasion thereto. In a word, we shall hereby so use the
world, as that we may not love it; we shall so desire to live, and seek means
for the maintenance thereof; as that still we shall be ready to die, and to
leave all for Christ.

And this may serve for answer to the second Question.

Hence arises a third scruple: Whether it be not lawful to desire riches and
abundance.

To which we answer: 1. By a distinction of riches, which may be considered:
As they are necessary and sufficient, and so a small thing may be counted
riches, as contenting Nature and being sufficient for us. 2. They may be
considered as they are in the estimation of the world, and in their own Nature,
and so abundance is to be deemed riches, and so they are unnecessary.

A 2. Difference, now to be considered, is of the persons which may desire
them, which are of two sorts. First* public* such whose Callings cannot be
well executed without abundance, as that of the Magistrate, and such other
public Callings. Secondly, some persons are private, and these also in regard
of their charge and such like occasions, may lawfully desire more or less.

A 3. Difference is in respect of our desires, which are either absolute, such
as require simply the performance of what we desire; such as are all desires
for Spiritual graces, which for the grace simply must be absolute, though for
the measure thereof they may be conditional:

2. Our desires are conditional, with subjection to Gods will, as may make
most for his glory and our good; and so ought all our desires be for earthly
things: because that God has so only promised them, as they shall be for our
good. And so must we only desire them. Out of these distinctions arise these
conclusions.

1 First we may generally desire riches, as they are in the first sense
necessary and sufficient, not as they are less necessary and abundant. Genes.
28. Deuter. 17.16.17. 1. Tim. 6.8.

2 Secondly, we may desire what may as well fit our callings as persons; though
this may be satisfied with less, yet the calling may desire more, and so such
callings as require state and majesty, may require abou^dance: yet so as that,

3 All our desires for these things must be conditional, submitting to Gods
pleasure, both for the thing, as also for the means to obtain the same; and
so for the measure and continuance thereof unto us, and so not enlarged by our
own covetous mind, but confined to the judgment and example of the most
sober and frugall persons. And therefore,

4 All our desires for these things must be accompanied with prayers unto God,
both for the thing we desire, as also for the measure and blessing thereon.

Thus may we lawfully desire Riches.

with Infidels and Idolaters; tentering and burnishing our wares, by pressing,
sliking, and keeping in and storing our commodities; changing of our callings,
etc.





Fenton, who has very profitably waded herein. Only my conclusion is, that
though covetousness is usually the ground and Bro^er hereto, yet there may be
some use thereof, upon some necessary occasions and extreamities in these barren
times, wherein so few will lend freely, and few make conscience to repay what
they borrow; as may tolerate the same, and that rather for the borrowers sake,
then the lenders: so that oppression be hereby avoided, and the rules of
equity be observed: which, because each man's upright conscience must be the
judge, therefore I leave the discussing and ordering thereof to that sovereign
arbiterment touching Monopolies, and engrossing of commodities though they be
somewhat of diverse nature, and being abused, may tend to the oppression of the
subject, enriching of priuatemen: yet seeing the Prince has his prorogatiue,
and may lawfully advance whom it please him, seeing hereby there may be a
speedier vent for the inning of commodities from abroad, if few buy up the
same, that they may not lie upon the Merchants hands, and so he hindered from
his seasons and occasions of venture; and hereby also there may be a speedier
communicating of them to the subject, that is to retaile them: I see not but
that these courses may be lawful, so that,

1 Private gain eat not out the Public.

2 The subject be not oppressed.

3 The Magistrate defrauded, and scandalized.

4 And so the peace and welfare of the commonwealth preserved concerning
Letters of mart. These howsoever in time of peace with foreign nations, I hold
them utterly unlawful, because they tend to the violation of leagues: yet in
time of hostility, I imagine they may have some use, especially with the
enemies of God and true religion; because we are commanded to root them out,
and hereby we may both discover their designs against us, and also wisely
curb, and defeat the same, by weakening their forces, and ouertaking them in
their mischievous intents. And therefore,

1 So that private gain be not principally aimed at.

2 Cruelty and extremity herein be avoided.

3 Neighborhood be not infringed.

4 And only the ruin of Gods enemies be intended: I hold also that these may
in some measure be tolerated.

As for trading with Infidels and Idolaters, 2. Chro. 20.37 Judge. 1.24 Genesis
14.13.21, 27.26.31.31.44.
this howsoever it be generally forbidden in the word, as leagues and
confederacies with them, 1. Cor. 6.9. Deuter. 12. Os. 12.1.

Yet seeing we have presidents in the word of commerce with Infidels: as of
Abraham with Escol and Aner; and Abraham and Isaac with Abimelec, of Jacob with
Laban, Joshua with the Gibeonits: These in some Cases, with some special bounds,
may warrant this liberty,

As when we have no other to commerce withal, and without commercing with
them, we cannot be supplied with necessaries, because life must be maintained:
and what is theirs, by all peaceable means, we may partake of. Provided that we
be not drawn hereby, to any more the necessary dealing with them for
commodities, avoiding further familiarity and nearer communion, lest we be
drawn hereby, by degrees to communion in Religion, and so forsake the living
God.

But rather labor hereby our constancy and wisdom, to win them to the true
keeping of that golden Rule: Let them return to us, but return not we unto
them, Ierem. 15.19.

Tentering, Pressing.
1. Touching those ordinary sleights of tentering, pressing, sliking, garbeling,
washing, etc. of our wares; though there be much deceit in them: yet there may
be also some lawful use thereof, with these conditions.

2. That hereby only our Wares may be made more saleable, and yet so as the
gloss and stretching of them, diminish not the substance, and goodness
thereof.

3. Be not a means to enhance the price, above the worth thereof: by making
them seem hereby finer and sounder then they are indeed.

4. That we propound the common rule of Equity; to do to others, as we would
be done to our selves.

The like may be said, concerning our keeping in, Keeping in of wares.
and storing up our Wares; wherein though we may aim at a private gain, to
raise the present prises, or else to expect a deerer rate, etc: to defraud the
Common wealth of it present necessity: yet herein also there may be some
allowance, both in times of plenty, and in time of scarcity, especially for
all kind of victuals. In time of plenty, that so excess may be prevented for
the present; and extremity may be relieved in time of distress: and to this
end our Garners and Storehouses in the City and elsewhere have special use,
to pluck down the prises in time of dearth, and so to refresh the hearts of
the poor; as also to provide, if supply should not come in abroad. And so also
in times of penury, that never there may be no extreme want. Genes. 42.
So Joseph by divine warrant stored up, that the Church might be relieved in
extremity. So have we relieved our neighbors, and they us.

Otherwise, for those tending only to ornament and superfluity, I hold, that
we may not keep in our Commodities, especially if it tend to the spoiling and
corrupting of them; unless we cannot sell them, that we may be sauers
thereby: and yet in case of returning the price, or for the common good, we
must utter them though it be to our loss, because in such cases we are bound
to give freely, rather then our Commodity should be lost, or the poor lost
for want of them; and so to depend upon the Providence of God. As for changing
of our Callings, Changing of Callings.
though this may serve to argue discontent and want of Faith, in depending on
the providence of God; yet seeing some Callings depend upon the custom and
fashion of the time, which is alterable, Cappes, Miniuer, Hoods.
as of kinds of apparel: some depend upon casualties which may overthrow the
same: many things have been used in Popery, which now are antiquated; many
things may be current occasions of commerce with such and such foreign
Nations, where the cause being taken away, the effect must cease. And the Lord
furnishing his children with wisdom and insight into all necessary
occasions, necessity may force and enable them, if one will not serve for
maintenance, that another may be followed: yea, it may so fall out, that our
aptness to one may be more then to another, to which notwithstanding we have
been bound. Especially, seeing it falls out that some Callings may have for the
most their ground from custom and vanity, and not from conscience; as
generally of tyring, and such like, and tend to the satisfying of the flesh; I
see not but in such Cases, it is not only lawful but necessary even to change
our Callings, lest otherwise we make ship-wracke of good conscience, and
defraud our selves of that liberty which God and Nature allows, and limit the
providence of God to our means, which extends it self to all lawful.
Provided that still we keep the distinction between Authority and
subjection; remembering that we may so change our Callings, as still to keep
our selves within the compass of our general bounds, which are, still to be
subject to government, and so only unto them, as to serve them in the Lord.
Not encroaching upon the Calling of the Magistrate; nor by our liberty,
advancing the Magistrate above what is meet; but still serving one another in
love, and all studying to serve the Lord Christ.

Whether one man may have diverse Callings?

As, the Minister may be also a Magistrate?

One Tradesman may exercise diverse civil Callings?

To the former we answer generally, that where Callings are subordinate to each
other, there in case of necessity, one may supply diverse Callings, as his
ability is thereto: so the Minister may in some Cases and degrees, execute the
office of a Magistrate.

2. Magistrates are of two sorts: 1. supreme, and sovereign, as the King: and
2. Inferior and subordinate, as such as are appointed under him, for the easing
of his burden, and better serving the public good: so a Minister may be a
Magistrate, though he may not encroach upon the supreme authority. I say he
may not usurp sovereign Government; because this is a mark of Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. This is contrary to the Word, which commands all both Priests
and people, to be subject to the higher Powers. Romans 13.1. This cannot be for
the preservation of the common Peace, which is by Unity, and Reformation of
all abuses which tend to the disturbance thereof. And how shall the faults of
Ministers be corrected but by the supreme Magistrate? how shall their wrongs
be righted but by him?

Yet I hold that a Minister may be an inferior Governor; because it is
lawful for the Magistrate to bestow honor and authority, as it pleases him
for the public good.

And this authority given to the Ministry, may tend to the public good; and
the glory of God, as hereby,

1. Their Persons may be better accepted, and preserved from contempt.

2. Their Callings be executed more currantly, when they have some power to
restrain open and gross evils, and compel the Outward man to conformation in
Religion.

3. Their constancy and courage herein, as it may ease of a burden, so it may
confirm and encourage the supreme Magistrate in the love and maintenance of
the Truth: so that still the holy Order of subjection be kept, that all this
be done with direction from the supreme Power, and return thereto: and
confusion be avoided; that we so execute these several Callings, as that still
we reserve a distinction between them, and oppose not those things, which are
wisely to be subordinated, which we may do.

1. If we consider that there are some special actions particular to each
Callings, which on either side may not be encroached upon. As, the Magistrate
may not preach, minister the Sacraments, etc, because this is peculiar to the
Minister. So the Minister (I mean as a Minister) may not prescribe Laws,
execute the Penalties of them, Determine of the persons, and goods of the
subject, etc, because these are the Magistrates Prerogative.

2. That all things be done with direction from the royal Canon, and aim at
Gods glory.

3. So is it in the reformed Churches, where the Consistory does as well meddle
in Civil, as Ecclesiastical occasions. And is it any other in our Honorable
Court of the High Commission, and in other Consistories of our Clergy?

As for the other; That one man may exercise diverse civil Callings: As this is
apparent by the practice of our Land, where some Merchants ever use other
Trades: Mercers abroad sell things belonging to many Trades; so I see not but
that it may be warrantable by the word, which so enioyneth us to be contented
with the Calling that God has placed us in; as the servant, while he is a
servant, is not to encroach upon the Calling of the Master; as that it denies
not, but when we are for our selves, we may follow what Calling we please,
though we be not bound thereto; so we have skill therein, and respect the
public good, hinder not ou^ Spiritual Calling: and observe the Sacred Laws
and Customs of the Country wherein we live because one Calling will not serve
to redeem the time, and maintain our charge and therefore in these respects
we may lawfully employ our selves in diverse.

To conclude this point, and resolve all in one Case, which is mainely stood
upon:



The contrary hereof be, Vox populi, The voice of the people: That conscience
is dead, or goes a begging; meaning that the world admits not the rule of
conscience, or if it do, it cannot thrive: yet,

That we may live and thrive with a good conscience is manifest, 1. Because it
is promised as a blessing and fruit of godliness, Psa. 112: so that, 1. Tim.
6.8.

2 Our civil Callings in the world are subordinate, not contrary to our
Christian Callings; and so,

3 We cannot keep a good conscience if we live not in a calling, and perhaps
thrive not thereby: Except in case of trial, when God will exercise our Faith
and patience, in keeping us from hand to mouth; or exercise our sincerity in
not answering our endeavors for the present, lest we should seem to serve God,
that we may thrive* or finally, by some casualtie.

Or our Calling may be mean, such as yield only so much exercise daily, as may
serve necessity, and so cannot promise abundance, but only yield competency
and sufficiency, for necessary maintenance, which may be accounted thriuing,
though we attain not to great riches; and yet even in these the blessing of
God is admirable, where Religious wisdom teaches parsimony and diligence to
better our estates.

Or our callings may be upon adventure, such as depend upon divine providence,
in blessing our going out, and coming home: which seeing it is arbitrary as
may make most for Gods glory, and our chiefest good; therefore if hereby we
attain not to great matters, yet herein shall appear the blessing of
godliness, that we shall be content with whatsoever our wife and gracious God
shall dispose, and whether it be much or little, it shall be but sufficient. He
that gathered more Manna had but to serve his turn, and he that gathered less
had no want* Exodus 16.19.20. To conclude all,

1 Labor we first for grace, and these things shall be cast upon us. Math. 6.33.

2 If not in abundance, yet in what shall be best for us, to further to a better
life.

3 It is good that still we should find some want in these things, that we may
not set our hearts upon the^, but hunger after durable riches.

4 And therefore let us live by Faith, and not by sense, waiting upon the
blessing of God in what we have, that it may be sanctified unto us, and waiting
upon the power and providence of God in what we have not, that we may be
suffised in the needful and fittest occasion: or recompensed with what shall be
better for us. And when we have canuased and studied all, remember we that some
corruption must fall out in these things, to humble the flesh, and cast us upon
Christ our sufficient riches. And that a good conscience, as it shall guide us
through each particular occasion, that we make not shipwreck thereof, so it
shall also abase us in our greatest sincerity, that though we know nothing by
our selves, yet herein we may not be justified, but still labor to be found
in Christ, not having our own righteousness, and endeavor to be found of him
in peace, at his glorious appearance.

And if this shall not sufficiently satisfy thee in whatsoever scruples may
fall out herein: I advise thee to commend thee particular doubts in humble
prayers unto thy God, who will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, and
satisfy thy careful soul that waits upon him. And so I heartily commend thee
to the word of his grace, whereby thou shall be informed sufficiently in
whatsoever may hinder the piece of thy conscience, and build it up further in
all wisdom and spirutuall understanding, that thou may be able to discern
of things that differ, and so trying all things, may hold that which is
good, and grow up thereby in all power and conscience of sincerity and
righteousness, that so thou may be perfect and entire wanting nothing, unto
the full measure of the age of Jesus Christ,

In whom I rest thine and the Churches servant Thomas Couper.


