MISCELLANIA OR A TREATISE Containing Two Hundred Controuersiall
Animaduersions, conducing to the study of English Controversies in Faith, and
Religion.

Written by N. N. P.

And dedicated to the younger sort of Catholic Priests, and other students in
the English Seminaries beyond the Seas. With a Pareneticall Conclusion unto the
said Men.

Praedica Verbum: insta opportune, importune: argue, obsecra, increpa, in omni
patientia and doctrina 2. Tim. 4. Printed Anno M.DC.XL.

To the younger sort of Reverend and Virtuous Cath. Priests, and Students in
the English Seminaries.
REVEREND and Virtuous men, though I hope, that this ensuing Treatise will
become profitable to diverse of the Catholic Laity; yet ingenuously I confess,
that it was chiefly and princip^lly vnde^taken for the advancement of your
Studies in C^ntrouersies of Faith: I mean, on^^ such of you, who have spent
your last years in ^umane learning, and points of School-Diuinity, and are
therefore in regard of such your want of ri^^rage, as yet little conversant in
Controversies of faith, ventilated at this day between the Catholic and the
Protestant. To those others of your own function, which are of full, and great
years, this Discourse (I confess) is less serviceable; since themselves
through their own reading are (no doubt) well acquainted with most of the
Animaduersions ^ere set down; and therefore I would not have any such grave
and learned men think, that I adresse this Work unto them for their further
benefit: for I willingly grant, that though my self be of their own course of
life, I shall be ever ready rather to be instructed by them, then undertake to
instruct any of them.

Touching the Subject of this Treatise, it contains certain Controuersiall
Animaduersions (for so I here call them about Matte^s of Religion. These
Animaduersions are of most different and several points and in regard of such
their diuersi^y they can hardly be reduced to any certain Heads (...) can be
set down in any praecise Method, with m^tuall dependency one to the other. And
therefore i^ regard of the want of such Method, I have entitled the whole
Work Miscellania, as being a mixture of things in themselves heterogeniou^,
and of different natures. And although some of them might (as touching the same
point) be ranged and set down together (and this chiefly in those which do
concern the Real Presence;) yet I have purposely, for the most part,
marshalled them in different places, the better to observe the (...), required
in the t^a^ Method of Miscellania; that so no one part of (...) Book shall
differ in fo^me from the rest, or fr^^ the whole: imitating herein the usual
Order of E^grams, whose Method in setting them down co^sists in not observing
of Method. There except ce^taine Animaduersions in defense and proof of (...)
Deity, and of the Immortality of the Soul, i^ the end of the Book, which I
have thought ex^^dient to amasse together, against such Men, w^^ m^^ke their
Infidelity under the ^ecture of Protestancy. And as these Animaduersions (being
promiscuously delivered, without any punctual order) do in part resemble a
great plot of ground (not divided into any certain beds or quarters) wherein
confusedly and scatteringly grow many flowers of different kinds and odours: So
here you shall find sparsedly Observations of so many points in number, and of
such different Natures, as that I hold it more convenient to refer the Reader
immediately to the pe^using of them, then to particularize but any few ^eads, in
this Dedicatory Epistle.

Let no man muse at this unexpected Method: We see, the world in most things is
extrauagant; the Method here used is also (through a kind of necessity)
extrauagant; and thus I am forced at this present to humor the World. And I
add hereto that ^^e vncertanity contained in this Method, may beget (...) the
Reader (as often it does in Books of this na^^re and form) an inquisitiue
desire to see what ^lloweth in each ensuing Animaduersion; as pres^ming them to
be of different Subjects; and so may ^ore easily draw on the Reader, to the
perusal of the whole Treatise.

This Rapsody of Obseruaions (if it be lawful so far to impropriate the word)
is taken partly out of that most Eminent Cardinal Bellarmine, of ^orthy
memory; partly out of the most paynefull and l^^rned work of the Protestants
Apology; and ^^t of other of the said Authors writings, (out of which, many
choice Observations are now fully published, which (before, and till now) did
ly^ much hidden and concealed in Marginall references; partly also out of all
the chief Books written by the Catholics, during these last thirty, or
forty years and partly out of the diligent perusal of the chief Protestant
Writers.

And as we observe, that a man coming into (...) curious Garden, lays not
hold of every flower, which first presents it self to his sight, but will
gather here and there such, as are most pleasing to the eye, and smell; So I
hope, I may here boldly say, I have forborne all vulgar and obuious
Observations (as presuming them to be known to you already) resting only (and
this with the judgment of other grave me^ of my Coat, already acquainted with
this Work) in such, as are choice, selected, and full of matter; the which
(Virtuous Men) you may use, as so many sho^^ Prolegomena, or brief
instructions, cond^cing to your future more full, and exact study of
Controversies. Here now you have in these fe^ sheets, a full Synopsis, or view
of the most weighty Observations; which being made familiar an^ known to you
aforehand, may much facilitate a^^ make easy your otherwise more painful
search an^ study hereafter in those matters, and may furni^^ you with
extemporall and present discourse touchi^^ most Controversies: all which
several Observations being (as it were) a formlesse materia prim^ of
Controversies, or to speak in the Poets Dialect -- rudis, indigestaque moles,
would require no small labor, toil, and disquisition in any of you to collect
out of the Authors themselves.

The Animaduersions in this Treatise set down, are in number, only two
hundred. Many ^ore (I grant) might be added for the increase of ^he Number: But
these I hold to be most forcing; and (...) am loath, that this work through
any affected pro^^xity, should become fastidious, or wearisome unto you. And
whereas you shall find some acknowledgments of Protestants, to be oftener set
down, then ^^nce, you may conceive the reason thereof to be, in regard of the
several or different Illations, or Inferences, drawn from the said
acknowledgments, in several Animaduersions.

If any of you reap profit by this my Labor (as ^ hope diverse of you may, and
will) my humble re^uest then in recompense of my pains taken herein, (...)
that you w^ld vouchsafe your remembrance of me in ^^ur prayers, at the chiefest
times of your Devotions. (...) know many, of Custom and Use, in Dedicating
^^eir Books to Catholics, do entreat of them this ^^nd of favor; But as for
my self, my desire and ^^irituall need of your good prayers is so vehem^^^ ^^d
unaffected, as that I earnestly beseech you, even (...) the most precious
Passion of our Lord and ^auiour, suffered for the cancelling of our sins, by
^ur own charitable Disposition toward others, for ^resume those words of the
Apostle to be imprinted (...) your souls Romans 5.
: Charitas Dei diffusa est in ^^ordibus vestris.

Finally by what is most sacred and holy, that yo^ would vouchsafe (now and
then) your particular remembrance of me (either yet alive, or hereafter dead in
that your most retired and Religious Memento (used in the celebration of the
most Blessed and Reverend Sacrifice of the Mass) for the expiating of my
manyfold sins. This I humbly beseech; this in all prostration of soul I
implore, and beg a^ your hands; and in such your performance, each of yo^
justly may comfort your selves in those words of ou^ Savior: Beati Matt. 5.
misericordes, quoniam ipsi misericordiam consequentur. And thus in the good
hope thereof I cease, referring you to the perusal of the Treatise it self.

Yours in our Lord Jesus, N. N. P.

MISCELLANIA. Containing certain Controuersiall Animaduersions.
Animaduersion I.
I WILL begin with the approuall, or rejecting what is, or has been accounted
the Scripture, or the written Word of God, which point concerns the Books of
Ecclesiasticus, Toby, Judith, Hester, Machabees etc. Where we are to
understand, that the Canonical Scriptures are to us at this day discerned and
made known, not by that which either the Jews for a time, or certain Fathers
do omit, deny, or doubt of, in their Canon of Scripture; but by that, which
many Fathers do constantly affirm. Since otherwise, and upon the contrary
ground, we might deny with the Lutherans the Epistle of James, Jude, the second
of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Apocalypse;
seeing all these books Ofiand in Epic. Cent. 4. p. 299.
are denied by the Lutherans. Now the reason of this Thesis, or Proposition is,
because in the Primitive Church the Canonical Scriptures were not generally
all at once received; but in so great a variety of pretended Scriptures, great
care and search was requisite, whereby to determine which Scriptures were
Canonical, and which not: whereby it came to pass, that sundry books were for
the time misdoubted, o^ by some Fathers or Counsels omitted, o^ not received,
which yet afterward were upon greater search and consideration generally
acknowledged. And according herto D. Bilson Bishop In his survey of ^hrists
suffering printed 1604. page 664.
of Winchester thus truly says: The Scriptures were not received in all places
(at once) no not in Eusebius his ^yme.

Animaduersion II.
D. Whitakers, In his answ. to M. Reynolds ^efut. p. 2^ and 23.
and other of our Adversaries do reject the former books of the Old Testament)
to wit Ecclesiasticus, Toby etc.) because they were not first written in
Hebrew, and in that they had not for their known Authors, those whom God had
declared to be his Prophets.

This Argument is weak. For it is a rash assertion, so to measure the
Scriptures by the tongue wherein they are written, as to restrain the Spirit
of God to one only language. The ^anity of which said assertion is sufficiently
disproued by Example of Daniel; a great part whereof (to wit, from cap. 2.
verse. 4. v^que ad ^^em cap. 7.) though not written in Hebrew, is yet by our
Adversaries acknowledged for Canonical. And touching the second point of this
Argument; it cannot be proved, that God would direct by his holy Spirit, no
Authors in their Writings, but such as were known, and also further declared
by certain testimonies, to be Prophets. For our Adversaries cannot yet tell,
who writ the several books of Judges, the third, and fourth of the Kings, the
two of Chronicles, the book of Ruth, and Job, all which books nevertheless
they admit for true and Canonical Scripture: And hereupon it is, that D.
Whitakers (though crossing his former assertion) thus writes L. de sacra
Script. ^ag. 603.
: Multorum librorum authors ignorantur etc. The authors of many books of
Scripture are unknown; as of Iosue, Ruth, Paralipomenon, Hester etc. Thus he.
To whose judgment D. Willet subscribeth, saying: We In his Synops p. 4.
receive many books in the Old Testament, the Authors whereof are not
perfectly known.

Animaduersion III.
AGainst the writings of the Ancient Fathers, the Protestants pretend several
difficultyes. For example D. Contra Duraeum. l. 5. p. 300. and K^mpu. in his
Exam. part. 1. p. ^4.
Whitakers and others, object against the Epistles of Ignatius, that Dial. ^
Theodore^, and Dial. 3. contra P^lag.
Jerome do allege certain testimonies (from Ignatius his Epistle ad
Smirnenses,) which are not found in that, or any other of Ignatius his
Epistles. Whereto I answer: First, that the Ancient By Austin in Psalm. 95. by
Tertull. lib. adu. Iudaeos versus finem. By Justin in Triphon. circa medium.
Fathers have in like manner cited this sentence: reguauit a ligno Deus, as the
saying of David in his Psalms; which yet is at this day wanting in them. And in
like manner some Sentences are alleged from Tully and Plato; and the same are
not to be found in their wrytings now extant. Therefore this former Objection
only argues, that certain parts of Ignatius his Epistles may be lost; but
makes nothing against those now remaining. In like sort our Adversaries do
reject (as counterfeyte) the writings of Dionysius Arcopagita, (as confessed to
make for our Catholic Doctrine) their chief argument is, in that these his
writings are never mentioned by Eusebius and Jerome. To this may be answered,
that Eusebius. hist l. 5. c. 29. Ierom. in Catal. prope init.
Eusebius and Jerome do confess, that there are many books and Authors, which
never came to their knowledge. A thing not unlike, if we but remember, as
incident to those precedent times, the known want of printing, and great
difficulty of Manuscripts, through the violent persecutions, which then
reigned. Finally touching the Lyturgies of Chrysostom, they urge (it making
altogether for several points of our Catholic and Roman faith) that, as M.
Jewel obiecteth Jewel in his rep^y, page 10.
Chrysostomes Mass prays for Pope Nicolas, who was Pope several hundred
years after Chrysostom: that also it prays for the Emperor Alexius, who
lived in like manner many ages after Chrysostom. These are but frivolous
Cauils. For in all old Lyturgies, or Books of Common prayer, prayer is
specially appointed to be made for Princes and Bishops for the names of whom
are certain places reserved, which are subject to alteration, according to the
change of succeeding times and persons. The like course whereof, for Princes we
may discern in the English Communion Book, composed in K. Edwards time, where
according to the change of succeeding government, are inserted the names of
Queen Elizabeth in some Copyes, and of King James in other Copyes; and yet
both of them reigned long after K. Edward.

Animaduersion IV.
WE ought not to reject the Authority of ancient and approved Authors, because
there appear some seeming repugnances in their wrytings. For upon this ground
an unbelieving Atheist might bring the Holy Scriptures into question. For
example, in Matthew. 27. words are alleged under the name of Jeremy, which are
not found in Jeremy, but in Zachary c. 11. In like sort in Mark our Savior is
said to be crucified in the third hour; whereas in John 19. we read that
Pilate sat in judgment upon him about the sixth hour. Therefore, whereas our
Adversaries upon the former ground of incertainty of Men's writings, do in like
sort seek to impugn S. Peter's being at Rome, because diverse Historiographers
do not agree of the time of his coming to Rome, and his stay there; we must
content our selves in sobriety with acknowledging that received Axiom among
the learned: That is: Saep^ constat de re, quando non constat de modo rei*
Since otherwise we should not acknowledge that Hester had any husband, or that
at any time Judith did live; For the opinions of the Jews are various, both
touching the persons, and the time herein; and yet we all acknowledge that
Hester had a husband, and that there was such a woman as Judith. The like
uncertainty of the times, wherein actions were performed (though the thing it
self be most certain) is made evident even from our own Cronicles: for
example, touching King John his death, whereof see the several opinions in
Holinshead in his last Edition, 3. volume, page 1^4.

Animaduersion V.
IT is worthy consideration to observe: First, how the Protestants in several
points make the same Arguments against some articles of our Religion, which the
Jews were accustomed to make against the same. Secondly, how the Protestants
sometimes use the same answers to our Arguments, which the Jews did. For
example, touching the Real Presence, and our receiving of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, the Protestants chief Argument is taken from the impossibility
thereof; to wit, that God cannot perform all those points above nature, which
are found therein. And is not this objection borrowed from the Jews, against
Christ, giving his body to eat, in these words: Quomodo John 6.
potest hic nobis carnem suam dare ad manducandum? Again: The Puritans
(especially) condemn the confession of Sins to Man, upon this ground, that
only God can remit sin. And do they not compart with the Jews herein,
demanding: Quis Marc. 1.
potest dimittere peccata, nisi solus Deus? And where it is vulgarly objected
by the ignorant, that man cannot remember all his sins to man; therefore his
Confession of them is imperfect, and maimed: I say by this reason, we should
not confess them to God, since we cannot number them to God; no more then to
man. Now to show, how our Adversaries in like manner borrow from the Jews
their Answers to our Catholic Arguments, one instance in place of many shall
serve. We Catholics in proof of our Religion do urge one chief Argument,
drawn from Miracles, exhibited by God in warrant of the same. All which
testimonies taken from the patration of infinite Miracles, recorded by both
Ancient and Modern Authors, our Adversaries do euade, by stiling them:
Antichristian Ofiand cens. 10.11 1^. and Cent. 4. col. 1445. and Cent. 5. col.
1486.
wonders, and lying signs, and as wrought by the assistance of the Devil: how
conspiring is this answer w^^ the Answer of the Jews, against the Mi^cles of
Christ: Hie Mat. 11.
non eijcit Daemonia, (...) in Beelzebub Principe Daemoniorum.

Animaduersion VI.
AS here above we have showed, how o^ Adversaries conspire with the Iewe^ both
in obiecting and answering; so I ho^ it will not be impertinent to discover in
line or two, how that the Protestants (...) agree with the Ancient and condemn^
Heretics in obiecting the arguments again us, objected long since by the said
Heretics, in impugning our said Catholi^ points; as also how our Adversaries do
co^sociate with the very Gentills, or Heathen^ against the Catholics, yea
against our belie^^ in Christ. For touching the first, we (...) find, that
place to be objected by Fau^^^ the old Heretic, against Abstinence a^^ single
life, and so recorded by Austin: In Austin. l. 30. c. 4. contra Faust. Manich.
the later days, 1. Ti. c. 4.
there shall come some forb^ding to Marry, and to abstain from certai^ Meats.
A passage of Scripture, wherein t^ Protestants chiefly insist against single
l^^ and Absti^ence. Again (to omit many ^ther such like instances) Justinius
Just. Dial. cum Triphon. and Eusebius. l. hist. 5. c. 1.
Mar^^ records, that the Heretics of his day did (as in respect of the
Sacrament) char^^ the true Christians, with the gross and c^^nall eating of
human: flesh; with which ve^^ point the Protestants do at this present (...)
^^aid us Catholics. Now concerning the Heathens; it is clear, that the
Heathens and ^ur Adversaries do mutually agree in denying many points,
maintained and affirmed by the Catholic Roman Church. For both the Heathens
and the Protestants do promiscuously deny Freewill, Purgatory, Jnuocation of
Saints, universality of Grace, Evangelical Counsels, Merit of works,
Sacrifice of the Mass, and many other Catholic and ^ffirmatiue articles,
taught by the present Church of Rome. But to come to the Se^ond point, to wit
the denial of the necessity of Christian Religion, do we not find Swinglius
himself thus to ge^tilize with the Heathens: Ethnicus Zuin. in Epist. Zuingli^.
and Oecolamp l. 1. page 30.
si piam mentem domi foueat, Christianus est, etiamsi Christum ignoret; and
hereupon Zwinglius particularly auerreth, that Zuin gl^tom. 1. in exposit.
fide^ Christ. fol. 150.
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Aristides, (all Heathens) are now in Heaven:
which said Blasphemy is in like sort taught by Gualter. in Apol pro Zuing.
Gualter, ^ullinger, as is re^orded by Simlerus a Protestant, in vita
Bullingeri.
Bullinger, and other Protestants. Thus far for this present of the strict
association and commerce of the Protestants with the Jews, the ancient
stigmatized Heretics, and the Heathens or Pagans, touching matter of Religion.

Animaduersion VII.
THe doctrine of the Real Presence to the mouth of Faith, is maintained
against ^he Puritans, by Doctor Whitaker, D. Whi^ak. contra Duraum page 168.
Bucer in Script. Angl. p. 548. etc.
and di^ers other learned Protestants; all which men do hold our Catholic
Doctrine far more probable, then the doctrine of the others, who only
acknowledge a typical presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Again many
moderate and learned Protestants In his book of Eccles. policy. page 188. D.
Cou^^ in his defense of ^^^er p. 77.
do teach the Church of Rome to be the true Church of God and that men dying in
it may be sau^d: Put against the P^^itans they thus writ^ The M. ^ow^^ in his
considerat.
Puritans are notorious, and manifest Schismatiks cut of from the Church of
God. And again: The Puritans M. F^^ks in his Epist. dedi^ p. 3.
seek to undermine the foundation of faith. Now in requital of this
^roceeding, the Purita^s prefer the Roman Religion, before the Religion of the
moderate Protestant; for thus with a joint consent diverse of them do affirm in
a Intitu^e^, A Christian and modest off r etc. p. 11.
book by them written: Jf we be in Error, and the Prelation the contrary side
have the truth, we protest to a^l the world that the Pope and the Church of
Rome (and in them God and Christ Jesus) have great wrong and indignity offered
unto them, in that they are rejected. Thus they. Now what other deduction from
these their several censures can be drawn, then that the Catholic Religion,
is the only true Religion, and the Relgi^on both of the Moderate Protestants,
and the Puritans is false. For in that each of them prefers his own Re^igion
before any other, this may be presumed to proceed from partiallity, and
prejudice of judgment in their own behalf; But where they hold the Catholic
faith and Church, rather to be embraced, then their Adversaries faith and
Church, this rises from a clear and im^artiall judgment and from the force of
all probable credibility. And thus in this business that most warrantable and
received sentence tak^th place: Cui caeterae parts vel Sectae secundas
vnanimiter deferunt cum singulae sibi principatum vendicent) melior reliquis
videtur.

Animaduersion VIII.
IT is a point of great judgment to urge a passage of Scripture by way of
illation in that sort in which the illation is of force and not in any other
only seeming inference. I will exemplity my meaning in texts urged both by
Protestants, and us Catholics. And first the Protestants do insist in those
words of our Savior, against the real Presence: Palpate Luc. 14.
and videte, quia spiritus carnem and ossa non habent, sicut me videtis habere;
Handle and see for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me to have. To
argue thus: It is felt and seen, Ergo, it is a body, is a good consequence,
and this is the force of our Saviors words: But ^t is no good sequel to argue
thus Negatiuely (as our Adversaries from this text do) it is not felt, nor
scene; Ergo, it is no body. For it may be, that a true hody may be present, and
yet neither seen, nor felt; because God may hinder, that it shall not transmit
any Species sensibiles to the sense of sight. Besides, it may be effected by
divine power, that a body may exist indiuisibly after the manner of a S^irit
(as we Catholics do hold in a sober co^struction, that the body of Christ does
in the blessed Eucharist) and yet we teach, that it is impossible, that a
Spirit should ex^st after the manner of a true and natural body; or be
extended in place. And the r^as^n hereof is this; To wit, because a Spirit has
no extension of parts at all, and therefore it is indivisible. For seeing, to
be extended in place, ^s a formal effect, proceeding from its formal Cause of
extension in it self; if therefore a Spirit should be extended in place, we
should admit the formal effect without the formal cause, which cannot be;
since the formal effect is later in Nature, then the formal Cause, and cannot
be without the Cause.

To instance in our urging of some passages of Scripture: In prooffe of
temporal punishment after this life, we produce that passage: Math. ^. Luc. 1^.
Non exies inde, donec reddas vltitau^ quadrantem; Thou sha^t not go from
thence, till thou repay the last farthing. From which words we do not thus
immediately infer (as our Adversaries would seem to have us) donec etc.
until thou pay^t the last farthing; Therefore after thou shall go from thence:
which inference we grant is not necessary; seeing by so arguing we might
endeavor to prove, that Christ should sit at the right hand of his Father, only
until (and no longer) he make his enemies his footstool, according to that
text: Psalm. 109.
^ede a dext ris meis, donec ponam inimicos scabellum pedu^ tuorum; which words
only prove, that a^ the length the Enemies of Christ shall be under his feet: So
here we only thus immediately infer: Thou shall not go from thence, till
thou payest the last farthing; Therefore the last farthing may be paid; and
consequently, that then thou shall go from thence. This kind of vicious
arguing might be instanced in diverse other passages of Scripture, impertinently
urged by our Adversaries, and falsely ob^ruded upon Catholics.

Animaduersion IX.
WHen we Catholics complain of the great Persecutions against the Catholics
only for their Religion in Q. Elizab^ths reign; our Adversaries seek to
choke us herein by way of recrimination, in auerring that as great, or greater
was practiced in Queen Mary^s time against the Protestants of those days. But
admit for the time so much; yet there is great disparity herein, and there are
diverse reasons more warranting the ^rocedings of Q. Mary in that kind, then of
Q. Elizabeth. Among which reasons these following may seem to be the chief.
First, touching Q Maryes time, the Laws, whereby Sectaryes were punished for
their Religion, were instituted some Eleven or Twelve hundred years since;
those times not having any foreknowledge, that Protestancy should sway rather
in these days, then any other erroneous Faith. In Q. Elizabeth's time the
statutes against Catholics were made at the beginning of her coming to the
Crown, which is fresh yet in the memory of many hundreds of Men in England yet
living. Those Laws, whereby Q. Mary punished the Protestants, were enacted by
Popes, and General Council. Laodicens. can. 31. and 32. Council Carthag. Can. 16.
Councels (to whos^ charge and incumbency the burden of Religion is p^culiar^y
by God committed) seconded otherwise by the secular authority of Emperou^s, and
particularly of Valentinian and Marcian; of which their secon^ing herein peru^e
the Council of Calcedon Act. 7.
. Th^se other Laws, were first invented by a Woman, and a Parliament of Lay
Persons, the incompetent Judges of Faith and Religion. Lastly by the former
Decre^s, a Religion confessed by the chief Professors of it, to be never
heard of, at least for fourteen hundred years together (and therefore to be an
annihilation of faith, which is held by Catholics to be a destruction of faith
necessary to Salvation) is interdicted and prohibited. And according hereto D.
Fulke thus confesses: Fulke in his answ. to a counterfeyte Cath. p. 35
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times, By these later
Decrees a Religion confessed by its greatest Enemies and particularly M. Napper
thus confesses, in his Treatise upon the Revelation p. 68. Between the years
of Christ three hundred and 316. the Antichristian and Papisticall reign
began, reigning universally without any debatable contradiction, one thouand
two hundred and sixty years.
M. Napper) practiced universally throughout all Christendom, almost the space
of the foresaid fourteen hundred years, and by the learneder sort of
Protestants, granted to be sufficient That the Catholic says is suffi^ient to
salvation, is confessed by Cartwright in his reply to D. Whitgifts defense. pa.
82. by D. Field, of the Church. l. 36. 46. by D. Couell in his defense of M.
Hooker p. 77. and by many others
to Salvation, was punished with loss of goods, inprisonment, and often loss
of life. And thus far in an eau^n libration of the Laws, by which Sectaryes
were punished in Q Maryes days, and of the Statutes, by which the Catholics
were persecuted in Q. Elizabeth her reign. Only ^ad hereto, that it according
to M. Nappers confession, our Catholic Religion did reign universally, from
the years of Christ, 316. years, then it evidently follows, that it did not
first then begin, but was undoubtedly in being long before it could possibly
become so confessedly vniuers^ll which said ti^e (so long before) co^d not be
short of the Apostle times.

Animaduersion X.
Diverse of our Adversaries being pressed to show, when any change of the Roman
Religion came in, as an innovation, and not being able to instance in any one
dogmaticall Point so introduced, the more easily to cast dust in the eyes of
the ignorant, do Thus answers D Whitaker contra Camp. rat. 7. saying; Pilinon
subito omnes canescunt. And again. In E^clesia Romana accidit, quem^dmodum
magno aedificio videmus enenire, quod ^^mes al^quo loco incipit agere etc. Ita
Romana E^clesia temporum successione etc.
answer, that the changes of Faith in the Church of Rome, vnespiedly did com^
in; even as hayres of a Man's head inse^sibly do grow gray, and as houses and
edifices (...) without any observation of the time become ru^nous and decaying;
and yet certain it is, that the hayres change their former color to gray, an^
that Houses become ruinous. To examine these resemblances, as mere impostures,
and desperate Euasions, I first say, that the first decay in building, and the
first show of whitnes in hair is imperceptible, and not to be discerned;
whereas every change in faith (though but in one point or Article) is most
markable, and subject to observation. Secondly, the whitnes of the hayres of
the head, and the ruins of a house do not happen, but by degrees, and therefore
at the first cannot be discerned; Whereas every Opinion in Doctrine is at the
first either true or false; and therefore is for such at the First to be
apprehended by the understanding. Thirdly, not any have the charge or care
imposed upon them, to observe the changes in these petty Matters, But in the
Church of Christ, there are ever appointed Pastors and Doctors, whose office
is to mark the first beginning of any innovation in Doctrine, and accordingly
to labor to suppress the same. Lastly these deceytfull resemblances (being
truly weighed) do recoyle back with disadvantage to the Protestants; For
although we cannot show, when the first hair began to be white, or the first
slifter in a house began to be a slifter; yet any notable degrees of the said
whytnes in the hayres, or of the slifters in a house are easily discerned: And
therefore the Protestants are obliged even from the nature of these their own
similitudes, to tell us at what time some sensible degrees and increase of this
supposed change did happen. And the manifestation of the degrees is to be made
by naming the time, and the Persons, when, and by whom, such or such a
particular point of the Roman Religion was first sensibly introduced into the
Church of Rome; The which not any Protestant hitherto has been able to show.

Animaduersion XI.
IT is Evident, that in the ancient times diverse Innouatours did rise, denying
this or that Catholic Article; as for example: The Doctrine of the real
presence was first denied by certain Heretics in As witneseth Theod. Dial. 3.
Ignatius his days, which Ignatius was scholar to the Apostles: The denial
of freewill taught by the Manichees, as Auctin l. de Haeres. cap. 46.
Austin witnesses, and therein condemns them; The like may be said of more
then twenty articles of our Catholic Religion, denied by the ancient
Heretics, as else where in this Treatise is showed. Now from hence I
demonstratiuely conclude, that this denial of the said Ca^h^^ike points in
those ancient times does necessarily imply, that the said Catholic points were
affirmatively believed generally taught, both in, and before the times. And
thus through the old Heret^ denying and impugning of our said poi^^ of faith,
is necessarily presupposed a pre^stency of those said affirmative doctrine the
Real presence, Freewill, and of the r^^ whereof those ancient Heretics Tenets
are m^rely Negatiues: I mean they preadmit a former more ancient belief of
our said C^tholike doctrines. For why should any S^ctaries in those days rise
up to deny (a^ this by writing) any of the said doctrine^ if those doctrines
had not been then, a^^ before believed?

Animaduersion XII.
SVch frontlesse Protestants, as will maintain the Visibility of their Church
for a ages, undertaking to give Examples of several Protestants in such ages,
do commonly use this Height and imposture; That is they begin to instance in
Luther, and so upwards to Waldo, who lived about 400. years since. And then
they arriving to that time (though all those Examples be merely false, and
impertinent) shift off the instancing from that 400. years to the Apostles
days (which contains above twelve hundred years) by saying: We shall So
answeareth the Author of a Treatise entitled: of the perpetual visibility and
succession of the true Church in all ages. pa. 89. printed anno 1614.
not need to ascend any higher then to Waldo, which otherwise is easy to make
plain: thus leaving a thousand and one hundred years, without giving any one
Example of Protestants, during all that long period of Ages. Now ^ere I say,
the Protestants imposture is this; To begin with Luther upward (and not
downward toward Luther thereby the better to conceal from a vulgar eye the
small number of those ages or Centuries, for which they endeavor to prove the
imaginary Visibility of the Protestant Church: For if they had begun in
instancing with Waldo, who (as is said) lived but some 400. years since; then
every simple man might have discerned at the first, that they had passed over
eleven or twelve hundred years at the least (to wit from the Apostles days to
waldo) without pretending so much as one Example of Protestancy, during all
that large circuit of time; and so might have justly challenged them, for
their pretermitting of so many Ages. In some sort answerably hereto, Card.
Bellarmine charge Calvin with an accustomed sl ight in this manner. When
Calvin undertakes to answer many texts of Scripture urged in proof of some
Catholic Article or point; Calvin begins to answer two or three of such
texts, as may seem in an ignorant eye to be best capab^e of some show of
answer; and for the other passages of Scripture, which are most conuincing for
the point urged, and in which we Catholics chiefly insist, and whereunto Calvin
cannot pretend any answer, he passes them over commonly in these words; The
chiefest passages J have ^wered, as for the other texts of Scripture wr^^ by
the Papists to the same end, they are so im^^tinently alleged, as that it were
but time lo^^ answer them, therefore I pass them over as (...) worthy of
answer. Here is Serpentiue craft (...) the Card. calls it.) For Calvin thought
it b^^ter policy not to conceal the chief (...) by us urged (for that might
argue a gu^nes in Calvin) but to take particular no^ of them, and so by
sl^ighting the force all such passages to make the ignorant ^^der b^lieue, that
they nothing conduce the Catholic point, for which they pretended: Dolus, an
virtus, quis in host quirat?

Animaduersion XIII.
THe Protestants do set down the (...) preaching of the Word, and the true
A^^^nistration of the Sacraments to be the Ma^^ of the Church. The reason of
this the proceeding, is double; First herby to re^^ the Catho^ikes Notes of the
Church (...) mean Antiquity, Visibility, Succession, V^ etc.) seeing they are
not able to iust^ these Notes in their own Church. S^co^dly because by
erecting their own Not^ of preaching the Word, and administering (...)
Sacraments, they reduce to their own Ce^sure only (rejecting all other
Authorities which is the true Church; For they will acknowledge the word to be
truly preached at the Sacraments rightly administered, on^ such places and after
such manner, and ^els where, or otherwise) as themselves (...) to think and
determine: And yet by their proceeding they are mightily ^^nded; And here I
will briefly recur to ^t D. Whitaker says of these Notes. These Whitak. contia
Ca^p. rat. 3.
Notes being present, do constitute a Church; ^eing absent, do subvert it. Now
the Prote^ants during many Centuries have wanted ^hese Notes, therefore during
all that time, (...) Church has been wholly extinct, and ^nihilated. That the
Protestant Church ^uring many ages has been deprived of ^hese Notes (I mean,
of preaching the word, and administering the Sacraments) is euicted ^ut of the
confessed Inuisibility of the Pro^estant Church for many Ages; for thus
ac^ordingly Sebastianus E^. de abrogand. in vniuersum omnibus statut.
Ecclesiast.
Francus (a great ^rotestant) writes: For certain, through the ^^orke of
Antichrist, the external Church together with the faith and Sacrament vanished
a^ay presently after the Apostles. With whom ^greeth Calvin, thus
acknowledging: Factum Inst. 4. c. 1. sect. 11.
est, vt per aliquot secula etc. It was brought ^o pass, that the true
preaching of the word of ^od did vanish away, for the space of certain ^ges.

Animaduersion XIV.
A Weak and confused Judgment may suggest or conceive difficulties; but it is
a clear ^dgment, that must resolve them. The reason of the disparity herein is
this. To (...) one thing for another, or to err in the p^^per nature and
essence of things, is the so^ of doubts, and questions; but to be able range
and marshall together things of (...) nature, and to divide and sever things
sunder, which carry a great likeness one^ another (for such resemblance of
partic^lars ever begets mistaking) as also to kn^ what essentially is agreeing
to the na^^ of any thing, and what but accidentally: companieth the same, is a
work of the l^dicious. This I write, that unlearned (...) may learn Humility
in belief, and (...) seek to apprehend with their weak iu^ments the high
Mysteries of Christian R^gion, especially the Articles of the B. ^r^^^ the
Jncarnation, and of the Real presence: Christ's body in the holy Eucharist.

Animaduersion XV.
IT sometimes may fall out, that the (...) Inuentour of a false Opinion may be
(...) Heretic, as mantayning it before it be c^demned by the Church; whereas
the Professors of it after its condemnation, b^come Heretics, according to
that senten^ of Vincentius L. de Haeresib.
Lyrinensis: O admira^ change of things! The Authors of one and (...) same
Opinion are esteemed Catholics, and the followers Heretics. Thus we see, that
it is co^tumacy against the Definitions and Decree of the Church of Christ,
which consummate an Heresy.

Animaduersion XVI.
WE are to call to mind, that the Ceremonies in the celebration of the Mass,
were successively, and at several times added, and first brought in by
several Popes; And accordingly we find, that the The Relics of Rome, or, the
Anatomy of the Mass by ^ntony de Ada^o. prin^ed 1^56. Hospin^^n Histor
Sa^^am^nt. ^. ^. c. 4. 5. 6. 7.
Adversaries of the Church of Rome, as willing to discover our Innouations
(though in the smallest Matters and but in points of Indifferency,) have most
dilligently, and painefully recorded them in their several books, written of
this very subject, with all due circumstances both of the Popes introducing
them, and the times, wherein they were introduced.

Here now I urge: if the Enemies of the present Church of Rome, we^e thus
diligent and solicitous in noting the beginning of each Ceremony of the Mass,
all such Ceremonies being merely accidental to the Mass, and without which
it may as truly and effectually be celebrated, as with them: If they (I say)
could have discovered any Innovation in the maine doctrine of the Mass (as the
doctrine of the Real Presence, the Sacrifice of Christ's Body there offered up
etc.) would they have been silent therein? Or rather would they not have loaded
their Books with relation of all such Innouations, they consisting not in
small Ceremonies, but in most sublime and high points of Christian Religion?

Animaduersion XVII.
THe Protestants are so various, or rath^ contrary in their Positions and
writings as that a man may borrow from their ^^uerall Confessions, both the
propositions (...) premises, out of which the Conclusion she rise, wholly making
against their Religion For example: D. Humfrey thus writes: D. Humf^. I^ s^^s.
in part. 2. c. 3.
Oportet Ecclesiam esse Conspicuam, Conclu^ est Clarissima: It is an evident
Conclusion the the Church of God ought to be conspicuous, (...) visible. And M.
Hooker; God has, and ca^ shall have some visible Church upon the eart^ But of
the confessed visibility of the Church of God, more fully I will show hereafte^
Now touching the Inuisibility of the Protestants Church, we read M. Napper the
to confess V. p^^ the Reue^^t. in c 11 and 12.
: God has with drawn his v^sible Church from op^n assemblies to the hart^^
particular godly men. And D. Fulke confesset^ thus D. Fu^ke in his answer to a
counterfeyt Cach. p. 16.
: The Church in the time of Boniface the third (which was anno 607.) was
invisible and fled into wilderness, there to remain a long season. Now to
reduce all these Confession^ into an Argument: Thus then I dispute.

D. Humfrey, M. Hooker, and diverse others here omitted, do generally teach,
that the Church of Christ must necessarily ever be visible.

But D. Fulke, M. Napper, and many other Protestants (for breuity here passed
oue) r^^ ingenuously confess, that the Protestant Church has for many ages
been wholly Invisible; Therefore even in the Judgment of the Protestants
themselves, the Protestant Church is not the Church of Christ. This kind of
arguing in many other Questions may become familiar to him, who is conversant
in the Pro^esta^ts books, or in that Catholic Book, called The Protestants
Apology; wherein a man may see even thousands of Protestants Confessions
against themselves. Now to this I annex this following; that whereas the
Scripture teaches the necessary visibility of the true Church of God, as also
whereas diverse learned Protestants do truly acknowledge, that the Protestant
Church has for many ages been wholly invisible; Therefore diverse other learned
Protestants through their inueterate malice to our Catholic Religion, and as
confessing the predictions in Scripture of the ever visibility and enlargment
of the true Church of God, not to have been accomplished in the Protestants
Church, have flatly renounced their Christianity, charging Christ our Savior,
as a seducer, themselves so becoming Jews and Turks. I will exemplify this
point (to omit some others) in these men following, all before their Apostasy,
most eminent Protestants. First then David See the hi^ ory of David George
printed at Antwerp. 1568. published by the Deuines of Basil.
George (once Professor at Basil) became a blasphemous Apostata: Ochinus, Of
Ochinus his Apost^^y, Zanchius witnesses in his book de Tribus Elohim.
who with Peter Martyr; first planced Protestancy in England, in like sort
denied Christ, and taught circumcision, as Zanchius the Protestant confesses.
Of Neuserus his Denial of Christ, Osiander the Protestant witnesses, Cent.
16. part. 2. page 8^8.
Neuserus (once Superintendent of Heidelburge) turned Turk, an^ was circumcised
at Constantinople, as Osiander the Protestant affirms. Touching Alamannus,
see Beza in E^ist. 65. page 308.
Alama^nus (a Swinglian, and once dear to Beza became a Jew, as Beza himself
says. Laeli^ The Books of Laelius Socinus against the Trinity are yet extant.
Socinus (a scholar in the school of Geneua) did write whole Books against
the B. Trinity. Finally, (to omit many other eminent Protestants) Georgius That
Georgius Paulus denied the Trinity with the Turks is witnessed by Stancarus the
Protest. lib. de Mediat. fol. 38.
Paul (minister of Cracouia) denied the Trini^^ with the Turks. Thus of
Instances for the point.

Animaduersion XVIII.
A Man cannot avoid the force of the former kind of Dispute, consisting (...)
the Confessions of the Protestants) by replying, that other learned Protestants
d^ maintain the contrary in the same poin^ to the Protestan^s, above by me
alleged. This answer is most weak; the reason thereof being, in that there
is great disparity between learned Protestant confessing some points, which do
aduantag^ the Catholic faith, and others (thoug^ as learned Protestants)
maintaining the contrary; seeing the first sort of men speak against themselves
and their cause; who being judicious and learned men, would never do, but as
being convinced with the Euidency of the truth therein; Whereas the^^ second
kind of men do not admit the confessions of their brethren, but speak only in
behalf of their own Religion; and so such their denyalls are to be reputed
more partial. And this Animaduersion is to be remembered in many other points,
confessed by some Protestants, and denied by other Protestants. Now of what
force the Argument from the authority, or confession of ^n Adversary is,
appears both from the testimony of the ancient Fathers, and the Protestants
themselves. First then Irenaeus thus writes hereof: It is L. 4. c. 14.
an unanswerable proof, which brings attestation from the Adversaries
themselves: with whom conspireth Nazianzene, saying: It Orat. de S. Basil.
is the greatest cunning and wisdom of speech, to bynd the Adversary, with his
own words. Now touching the Protestants acknowledging the same, we find
Osiander the Protestant, thus to write: The In Ep. Eucharist.
confession and testimony of an Adversary is of greatest authority. And Peter
Martyr: Among Loc. tit. ce Iudaeis fol. 300.
other testimonies, that is of the greatest weight, which is given by the
Ene^ies. Finally D. Whitaker; The Contra Bellar. l. de Eccles. controu. 2. q 5.
Argument ^ust needs be strong and efficacions, which is ^^ken from the
Confession of the Adversaries; And I do freely acknowledge, that truth it self
is able to extort testimonies even from its enemies. Thus much hereof;
Therefore I here only conclude, that as a testimony of a friend against a
friend, so of an Adversary in behalf of an Adversary is of great force, and
most conuincing: So certain are those words of Tertullian: In Apolog.
Magis fides prona est in aduersus semetipsos confitentes, quam pro semetips^
negantes.

Animaduersion XIX.
THere is great difference to be made between Protestants speaking against
themselves (and yet believing the Protestant doctrine, and Conclusion) touching
some circumstances whereof the Confessions are and between some others, who
before were Catholics, and after do defend some one or other point of
Protestancy; Since their later men do not speak against themselves but in
defense of some such Protestant doctrine, then newly entertained by them; and
consequently in defense of their own^ opinions: And therefore such their
authorities are not to balance equally with the Confessions of the former
Protestants. Th^^ Animaduersion is given, with reference to Erasmus, Cassander,
Cornelius Agrippa, Polide^ Virgill, Nilus, and some others, every on^ of which
embraced some one Protestan^ Tenet or other; though diverse of them after
reconciled themselves before their death to the Catholic Church, by abandonin^
their former received Innouations.

Animaduersion XX.
CHoose rather to dispute with a Protestant touching matter of Fact (in which
may be proved the falsehood of the Protestant Religion) then touching any
Dogmaticall point of faith or Doctrine, as receiving its proof from the
Scripture. This I speak not, but that the Scripture makes most clearly for
the Catholics, and against the Protestants; but because your Adversary in
dispute will ever cavil at your exposition of Scripture, reducing it in the
end (against all Antiquity of the Fathers, and tradition of the Church) to the
interpretation of his own private and revealing Spirit. Now, in matter of fact
your Adversary is forced to stand to the Authorities deduced from
Ecclesiastical History, and other humane proofs; And therefore he must either
shape a probable (if not a sufficient) answer to them, which he cannot do,
they wholly making against him even by his own learned Brethrens Confessions,
or else he must rest silent. And this is the reason, why the Protestants are so
loath to dispute of the Church; Since this Question comprehe^deth in it self,
diverse points of fact: as of its continual Visibility, Antiquity, Succession,
Ordination, and Mission of Pastors etc. All which Questions receive their
proofs from particular Instances (warranted from History,) by showing the
particular Times, Persons, and other circumstances, concerning matter of Fact.

Animaduersion XXI.
WE Catholics charge the Protestants with a vicious Circle of dispute between
the Scripture, and the spirit; and in requital hereof the Protestants do
reciprocally insimulate us Catholics within the said vicious circular
argumentation, between the Scripture, and the Church. Now let us see, whether
of us stand truly chargeable herewith. That the Catholics are free from this
kind of arguing, I thus prove: The Catholics, touching the Scripture, and the
Church, do ever make their proofs in several kinds of Causes, and by a
partial manner of proof; and thereby do still prove one thing by another, more
known to those persons, to whom it is to be proved. The actual assent and
belief it self is wrought, whereby we infallibly believe the Mysteries
revealed; though we believe the verity of the Scriptures revelation by the
authority of the Church propounding, and the Churches proposition, for the
authority of the Scriptures revealing; whereby the Scripture revealing, does
give us testimony of the Church propounding; and again the Church propounding,
of the Scriptures revealing. Nevertheless this reciprocal testimony and
proof is not any proper vicious circle. First because, it is in diuerso genere
causae, in diverse kinds of causes: for the testimonies of the Scriptures
revelation to the infallibility of the Churches proposition, is causa formalis,
the formal cause, by the which we assent to the Churches proposition; But the
Churches proposition is only Causa conditionalis, or (as we use to speak)
Conditio fine qua non; to know the Scriptures Revelation; and so they are
reciprocal in a different manner of proof; the one (that is Scripture) a
Priori, as including divine revelation; the other (that is the Church) a
Posteriori, required only as a condition: The former, as a formal precedent
Cause; the later, as a subsequent annexed condition. Secondly, this reciprocal
proof is not adomnino idem (as Aristotle requires to a Circle) that is, the
one is not the total, and sole cause of knowing the other, for the Churches
proposition is not known only by the Scriptures revelation, and not otherwise;
but also by other proofs, signs, and testimo^ies (to wit Miracles, Consent,
Sanctity etc.) all which convince, that the Churches authority is necessary and
infallible to distinguish the true sense of the Scripture from false, and to
end Controversies about Scripture. But now to cast our eye upon the Protestants
Circle, proving the Scripture by the private Spirit, and the private Spirit from
the Scripture; it is evident, that they prove the Scripture by the Spirit, and
Spirit by the Scripture, in one and the same kind of Cause, and by one sole and
whole manner of proof: For demand of a Protestant, how, and by what means he
understands the Scripture? He answers, by the Spirit (and so knows the
Scripture by the Spirit.) And ask him, by what means, he knows, he has the
true spirit? he answers, the Scripture assures himself thereof, since he is
one of the Elect. And thus this his proof is truly Circular and vicious, as
being delivered in eodem genere Causae, and omnino ad idem.

Animaduersion XXII.
IT is most certain, that Protestants deny all Authorities of all affirmative
heads, making their last refuge to their own priua^ Spirit and Judgment. For
example, if we insist in the affirmative Notes and Marks of the Church, to wit,
universality, visibility, unity etc. ou^ adversaries (as is above said) discard
the testimonies of all these heads, by erecting for Notes, the preaching of the
word, and administration of the Sacraments; so reducing to their own judgment
only, when the word is truly preached, and the Sacram^nts rightly administered.

If in matters of fact we recurre to History (I mean, concerning visibility,
Succession, vocation etc.) they reject this authority by saying: Sufficit
Whitak. contra Duraeum l. 7 p. 478.
nobis etc. To us it is sufficient, by comparing the Popish opinions with the
Scr^pture, to discover the disparity of faith between them and us. And as for
Historiographers, we give them liberty to write, what they will. If we produce
the testimonies of particular Fathers of the Primitive Church, mark how Luther
depresseth them: Luth. de seruo arbis. 1551. page 434.
The Fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in the
Scriptures; they have erred all their life time; and unless they were amended
before their death, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church. If
we produce General Councels, they answer saying: Pet^^ Martyr l. de votis.
pa. 476.
As long as we insist in General Councels, so long we shall continue in the
Popish Errors. If we pass to Apostolical Traditions, Cartwright in depressing
Traditions maintained by S. Austin, thus writes: To S^^ Cartwright in
whitgifts defense. p. 103.
allow S. Austins saying (touching Traditions) is to bring in popery.

If we allege diverse passages of Scripture (as out of Toby, Ecclesiasticus,
the Machabees,) the Protestants with full voice deny them to be Canonical, and
style them only Apocriphal. If we take our authorityes out of such books of
Scripture, as are acknoledged for Scripture on both sides; the Protestants deny
the Translation of the Scripture to be true and sincere; which point appears,
both from the Protestants mutual condemning one another translation of
Scripture, as also from the most bitter censure given by our English Puritans,
against our English Translaiion; whereof several books written by them are yet
exta^t.

If we Catholics proceed further in insisting in the Original of both the
Testaments; the Protestants deny, that the Originalis are at this present true.
Thus for example in Math, c. 10. we read (...) the first Peter; Beza Beza in
Annotat. noui Testam 1556
denies the Original herein, mantayning, that the word (...) was inserted
into the text by some one favoring the Popes Primacy: In like sort Beza v^i
supra
Beza denies that the Greek Original in Math. 22. is at this present the
same, as it was penned by the Evangelist; mantayning that it is corrupted in
favor of the Real^ presence. If we yet ascending further, entrench our self
in such books of Scripture, whose Originals and Translations are accepted on
each party, as true and incorrupted, and tell our Adversaries, that the whole
Church of God in her primitive and purest times interpreted the passages of
Scripture in that sense, in which they are at this present by the Catholics
alleged; the Protestants So does D. Whit. l. de Eccles. Bellar. Contro. 2. q.
4. page ^23. Jewel in his Apolog. of the Church of England. act. 4. cap. 4.
absolutely deny that infallible Authority of the Church of God in interpreting
the holy Scripture; and disclayming from it, appeal to their own Private
Spirit for the true interpretation of the same. Finally, in the last place, if
the Catholics confirm their Religion with the Authority of Miracles; the
Protestants in answer thereto absolutely reject the force of Miracles,
tearming them So the Conturists ^all them. Cent. 4. col. 1445. and Osi^^^^^
Cent. 10. 11. 12.
but Antichristian wonders, and lying signs, as above is showed. Thus we see,
how our Adversaries disclayming from all heads of proofs, do finally reduce
all to their own private Judgment or Spirit. And is not this (I demand) the
foresaid vicious Circulation, from the first to the last answer, which above
is disalowed in the ^rotestants impugning, or disputing.

Animaduersion XXIII.
THat the words of Christ at his last Supper are to be taken literally and not
Figurati^ly, is proved by these Reasons following; in that Christ saying, this
is my Body; Math. ^6. Marc. 14. etc.
This is my blood, did adioyne thereto: Quod pro nobis datur, qui pro nobis
effundetur; which later words are conformable to the literal acceptance of the
former words. The same verity is proved from the several circumstances of the
foresaid place of the Scripture. The first circumstance may be taken from
Object. Here the matter, or subject of the former words contains the
Institution of a Sacrament, the foundation of a supreme point of Christian
Religion, A will, or Compact, contracted with the Church. But it is most
improbable to affirm, that a Sacrament, a supreme Article of belief, or a
Compact, or last Will made by Christ with the Church, should be delivered in
figurative words. The Second Circumstance we may take from the person of Christ
speaking; in the Hearers, and of perpetual Id^latry in the mynds, and wills of
the suc^^ding Christians, during the continuance (...) the world.

Evangelists, and the Apostles, repeating and relating this speac^ of Christ,
Hoc est corpus meum etc. A^ which men, whereas they did write in seu^rall
times, when some of them were present at the Institution; others received
relation thereof from them that were present thereat; whereas also they had
seen the practice of the Apostles about this Sacrament; whe^^ as lastly they
had the spirit of true understanding; notwithstanding all this, they a^^ did
unanimously conspire in delivering (...) plain and literal construction of
our Saviors words. Which reason is more preuayling, by observing the contrary
course, which they took in explicating other obscure sentences of our Savior;
for thos^ words, Soluite templum hoc, and in tribus di^bus reaedificabo illud,
the Evangelist did interpret of Christ's Body saying: ille John cap. 1.
a^tem dicebat de templo corporis sui; to prevent that the Jews should not
think, that ou^ Savior spoke of the Temple of Salomo^. In like manner the
said Evangelist is foun^ to have expounded other of our Saviors doubtful
sayings, though in themselves of much less importance, as Christ's Cap. 11.
exaltation from the earth, The sleeping of Lazarus ^^e Cap. 11.
girding of Peter, and stretching forth his ^^ndes etc. And yet never expounded
the ^o^ds of the Institution otherwise, then in their plain, direct, and
literal sense.

Another from the Persons of the Apostles, Christ instituting the Sacrament!
Now, ^f there were any figurative speech in ^he words of Christ (especially
concerning ^o great a matter) the Apostles then pre^ent would never have
omitted to have as^ed Christ, what had been the meaning of those strange
words, being uttered a little before his death; As they did touching other
dark speeches spoken by Christ; and ^hus we read them to have said: Edissere
Math. 13. and 15.5.
^obis parabolam Zizaniorum. And again: Edis^ere nobis hanc Parabolam. Again
from ^he persons of the Capharnaits, who did take our Saviors words in that
sense, as he did properly speak of his flesh to be truly and really eaten, and
at such their construction they rested much scandalized: Nevertheless Christ
did not therefore explane his former speech, nor excuse it by any Tropes or
figurative phrase of words; but more vehemently affirmed his sentence in the
same words, and with earnest asseueration repeated the same.

Another Circumstance may be taken place of his last supper, which Christ did
choose to be very secret, admitting thereto only his Apostles, to whom it was
given to know, and to have the Intelligence of the divine Mysteries: Therefo^
in this most secret and reserved school (...) the Apostles, wherein a supreme
mystery (...) faith was delivered, he did speak sincere simply, plainly, and
not by figures.

Pronouncing of the sacred words of the J^sti^^tion; the washing of the
Apostles seet; Christ's ^^sire of performing this Mystery; his casting up (...)
his eyes toward Heaven; his application of t^ words to the matter; his
separated and disioyn^ blessing of both the Elements; his fraction, (...)
giving, and inuiting to a new supper; his ow^ eating, and after commanding the
eating of it t^ others; and lastly his most holy speech deli^er^ thereof, in
John 14.15. etc. Here now I conclude, that all these reasons with the forme^
observations, are most sufficient to persuade any man of judgment, that our
Savior did not speak Figuratively in so serious a matter.

Animaduersion XXIV.
THe various interpretation of the words of the Jnstitution (made by
Protestants) does sufficiently discover their Error in the doctrine thereof.
Carolostadius Carolostad. in lib. ^di^o Basil. 1524.
teaches, that by the Pronoune, Hoc, the Aduerb, Hic, is to be understood; so
as the meaning of the words he says is, Hic (that is, in this place) staet
corpus meum. Bucer In retract.
affirms, that by the Pronoune, Hoc, is understood the whole action of the
Supper; so (...) the sense should be; Hoc etc. This action ^^th represent the
body of Christ. Swinglius Swingl. l de vera and falsa relig. cap. de Eucharist.
^aintayneth, that the figure is not in, Hoc; ^ut in the verb, est, which here
ought to be ^^ken figuratively, for significat. Boquinus Boquinus in exam. lib
Heshufij.
teaches) that the bread is truly called ^he body of Christ, propter
communicationem ^^omatum; as by the same we truly say of christ, This man is
God. Oecolampadius, L. de genuina explicat. V^rb.
^cknowledgeth not any Trope either in the ^ronoune Hoc, or in the Verb Est,
but in ^orpus, thus interpreting the words by the ^gure Metonymia; Hoc est
corpus meum; id est, ^ic panis est figura corporis mei. Finally (to ^mit
others) Calvin C^l^. l 4. Inst. c 17.. ^^.
admits with ^ecolampadius the figure to be in the word ^orpus, but withal
he adds, that the bread of the Eucharist is not a naked sign of the body of
Christ; but it is a sign or fi^ure, which does truly exhibit the thing it
self, to wit the body of Christ. Thus we see what diverse interpretations (and
all false) our Adversaries do give of the words of the Jnstitution: And thus,
as they all reject our Catholic interpretation of them; so ^ot any one of the
former Protestants does (...) holy embrace the exposition of another.

Animaduersion XXV.
DO not admit this Inference as good: Some Fathers do interpret this, or that
text of Scripture figuratively: Therefore, the said Fathers do teach, that such
Texts are not to be expounded literally. This is a mere Sophis^ for seeing
diverse texts of Scripture (beside the literal) are capable of allegorical
sense (as all learned men both Catholics, an^ Protestants do teach) therefore
the figurative sense does not exclude, but rather often presuppose, and admit
of the literal According hereto S. Austin passing over (a presumed and
granted) the literal sense (...) those words: Qui John. ^.
bibit meum sanguine^ etc. allegorically expounds them in the sort: Bibere
sanguinem Christi, est credere (...) Christum: to drink the blood of Christ,
is to believe in Christ. In like sort also do not approve this kind of
disputing (for it is a mere Schiomachia, or fighting with a shadow:) The
Scriptures speak honorably o^ Marriage, (which all we Catholics do willingly
acknowledge) therefore vowed virginity is not to be allowed; our Adversaries
here laboring to disualew the worth of Virginity, by the acknowledged dignity
of Marriage its opposite. For the worth of both these may stand together, the one
not crossing the other; and in things, that are good, we must acknowledge there
are degrees of goodness; and accordingly we here say, Marriage is good, but yet
vowed virginity is better. In like sort, our Adversaries use another fraudulent
kind of reasoning called Logomachia; where leaving the sense, childishly
contend with the naked word for example: find, say they) the word, Purgatory,
or Mass (...) the Scripture, if you can: But what ^lloweth from hence? for are
the words, ^rinity, Person, Consubstantiality etc. in the ^cripture? they are
not; must we therefore ^^iect the doctrine of them? To proceed; ^^other
captious arguing of our aduersa^es, is taking hold of the very letter, con^^ary
to the approved mind of the Church: ^r example: the word, Presbyter in Greek
(...) nothing but a Seniour, therefore in the church of the new Testament,
there are no ^riests so truly called: But S. Thomas in 1. ^art. quaest. 13.
shall salve this Argument, ^ying; we are to observe in words, non tam a ^o,
quam ad quid, not so much from whence ^hey are derived, as to what, by a
warranta^e custom they are applied.

Animaduersion XXVI.
THe peruersity of our Adversaries is such, who lighting upon some few straying
^assages in the Fathers writings, where the ^ucharist is called bread, they
mainely c^y ^ut, that in the Fathers Judgment, it is nothing but material
bread; And yet when in ^uery leaf, or page of the Fathers works upon this
matter, they find it termed, The body and blood of Christ; all such places (or
else we wrong them) must be interpreted figuratively: Thus they, insisting much
in those ^phrazes, which are but rare in the Fathers, and passing over with a
censuring neglect such form of speeches, as most frequently occur in their
Books. Now the Eucharist may be called bread by the Fathers afte^ consecration
(without any prejudice to our Catholic doctrine) for several reasons; the
Fathers borrowing this kind o^ phraze from the Scripture: Panis 1. Cor. 10.
que^ frangimus etc. First, because it is an accustomed Dialect of the
Scripture to call a thing by that name, which before it was. Thus it Genes. 3.
Eua is called the bone of Adam, because she was made thereof; and the Serpents
of Moses (in Exodus 7.) are termed wandes, because the wandes were turned into
serpents: so for this very reason the Eucharist is sometimes termed bread by the
Fathers. Another reason, why the Eucharist may be called bread by the
Scriptures (and consequently by the Fathers) is in regard of the similitude,
which it has with bread; I mean in nourishing the soul, as bread does
nourish the body. A third reason in that the Scripture (and in like manner the
Fathers) do often call things as they do externally appear to the Eye; so the
Scripture calls Angels who appeared in humane shape, Men; and the Brazen
serpent, a serpent, etc. Therefore the Eucharist may be termed bread and Wine,
either by the Scripture, or the Fathers, in that to the eye it seems only
Bread and Wine.

Animaduersion XXVII.
IF it be not lawful to pray to Saints, the reason hereof must be, either
because they will not hear us praying to them. But this cannot be, seeing they
are now endued with more Charity, then when they here conuersed upon earth; and
being secure of their own felicity are more sollicitous of our spiritual good
and health: Or else, because the Saints cannot help us. But neither this: For
if they could help us with their prayers while they were pilgrims in this
world, much more are they now able, being arrived to their own Country: Or
because they do not know what we pray. But not this; because from what ground
the Angels do know the conversion of sinners, for which conversion they so
much rejoice (as is said in Luke 15.) from the same ground the Saints do know
our prayers: Or lastly (which is the most ordinary reason given by our
Adversaries) because an Jniury is committed against God, if any other be prayed
and inuoked unto then he. But not this; for then it were unlawful to invoke
and pray to the living; and consequently S. Paul sinned and offended God, when
he writ thus to the (f) Romans: Brethren I beseech you, that you would help me
in your prayers for me to God. Which kind of prayer the Apostle uses in his
Epistle to the Ephesians, c. 6. in the first to the Thessalonians, c. 5. in his
Epistle to the Colossians, c. 4. finally in his Epistle to the Hebrews, c. 13.

Animaduersion XXVIII.
TOuching Communion under one kind, o^ under both; the true state of this
Question is not, whether Christ did institute the Eucharist under both kinds;
or whethe^ himself and the Apostles at the first Insti^ution of it, received
^t under both kind^ or whether the Apo^^les and the Father afterward at sundry
times did minister (...) unto the Laity under both kinds (for a^^ this is
confessed for true) but the touch o^ the Question is, whether Christ our
Savior did give an absolute command, unto his Apostles and Successors, of
administering the sai^ Sacrament under both kinds (to wit of brea^ and wine) so
as the delivering of it to the Laity under one kind only, should be a breach of
o^^ Lords precept therein. The Protestants affirm it to be an absolute
transgression The Catholics deny it, and maintain tha^ their Adversaries do
ignorantly confoun^ a Precept with an Jnstitution, between which two there is
great difference: For example, God did institute and ordain Marriage, but gave
no precept thereof; for if he had, then all men were bound under sin to
marry: therefore those words, Crescite Genesis 8.
and multiplicamius, though they be delivered i^ the imper^^ine mood,
nevertheless they contain not any Precept; neither by the same reason do
those other words, Bibite Mat. 26.
ex hoc omnes. In which sentence the word Omnes, is to be restrained (contrary
to our Adversaries urging of it) only to all the Apostles, then present; for if
it were to be extended to all men universally without restraint, then should
the Sacrament of the Cup be given to the Jews, Infidels, and Children; all
which notwithstanding are exempted from it, even by the confession of the
Protestants.

Animaduersion XXIX.
TOuching the true doctrine of Justification, and merit of works; we Catholics
do ^each: That we are not to ascribe our first ^ustification to our works at
all (though we be wrongfully traduced so to do) for we willingly acknowledge
those words of the Apostle: It is Romans 9.
not of the willer, or of the runner; but of God, who shows Mercy. Now
^ouching Merit of works, we may deliver ^he Catholic doctrine in these
Ensuing Propositions.

That works may merit, it is required, that the party, who works, be in state
of Grace, and out of mortal sin.

That works do merit, a free and liberal pro^ise and Covenant of God is
necessary; by which ^is promise of reward made unto good works. God ^n a manner
obliges himself to reward good ^orkes, according to his promise.

That works do merit, they must take their worth and dignity from our Saviors
passion; and from thence receive (as it were) a new tincture, and dye.

We are further to understand, that the passages and texts of Scripture proving
merit of works, are of five sorts (so plentiful is the Scripture in proof
thereof.) First, from those places, where eternal life is called Merces, a
wage, or reward, as in Math. 5. and 20. etc. Secondly, from those place^
wherein a heavenly reward is promised to Men, according to the measure and
proportion of their works, as in Luke 6. Romans 8. Cor. 3. etc. Thirdly, from
those testimonies of Scripture, which express the reasons, that works are the
cause, that eternal life is given, as in Math. 25. Apocalyp. 2. etc. in all
which places the particles, Enim, quia, Ideo, are used, and are Causalls, that
is, implying and showing the reason and cause of a thing. Fourthly, from those
places, in which a reward is promised to good works, even by force of Justice,
Hebrews 6.2. These. 1. etc. Lastly, from those passages, wherein mention is
made of the Dignity of good works, as in Luc. 10.2. These. 1. Apocal. 3. And
here we are to note, that touching Euangelical Councels; true it is, that we
are so obliged to God, that if we consider Gods benefits bestowed upon us, we
willingly acknowledge, that man cannot do more good, then he ought to do; no
not the thousand part thereof, he ought to do; in that man cannot render any
thing of equal value and worth to Gods benefits. Nevertheless, if we consider
the Law and Command imposed by God upon us, then man may be said to do more,
then indeed he is obliged by Gods Law to do. For although man cannot exceed,
or equal Gods benefits with his own works; yet he is not become guilty
hereby, seeing man is not obliged to perform more, then God commands.

Animaduersion XXX.
THe Catholics are charged by their Adversaries, that they do expunge out of
^he Decalogue those words: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image
etc. But ^his is a meare Imposture of the Protestants. For the truth is, these
words here recited, to make but one and the same commandment with those first
words, Thou shall have ^o other God before me; these later being but (...) more
full explication of the first words, and consequently may be omitted somtymes
in ^hort numbering, or setting down of the Commandments. This is thus proved:
Every Jmage is not prohibited in the Decalogue, or ten Commandments, but only
that, which may be truly called an Idol; that is, an Image, which is taken for
God; or which represents God, to be that thing, which God is not. Now that
Images were not absolutely forbidden in the old Law, appears in that God
commanded the Image^ of the Cherubims, 3. Reg. c. 6.
Lions, and Oxen to b^ made, as also the brazen Serpent Numbers c. 11.
. From hence then we may conclude, that the making of Images is not absolutely
forbidden by God; as a distinct precept from the first but only so far forth,
as Images be taken for God; and consequently that (as about is said) these
words forbidding the making of Images do but make one and the same Commandment
with the first words, Tho^ shall not have any other Gods before me.

Animaduersion XXXI.
WE are to observe, that a thing may be pictured to three several ends. One way
to express the perfect similitude of the form and nature of the thing
pictured: And after this manner only corporeal things ar^ painted, which are
endued with lineamen^ and colors. And if one should attempt to picture or
paint God after this manner, be should make the picture, a true Idol. The
second end of picturing, is to exhibit some history to the eye: as if a man
would paynt the expulsion of Adam out of paradise, he ought to paynt God in
form of a Man walking, and Adam, and Eve naked, byding themselves among the
trees; and lastly an Angel in man's shape holding a sword, and expelling Adam
with his wife. Now, who should thus draw this History, does not intend to
represent the nature either of God, or the Angel; but only to exhibit by
means of the picture, that to the eyes, which another by reciting the
Scripture, does exhibit to the ears.. And after this manner God may be painted.

The third end to paynt a thing (without reference to History) is to explicate
the nature of a thing, not by any immediate and proper similitude, but by
Metaphorical and mystical signification. After this manner we paynt Angels,
in form of young men, winged, fair, naked of feet etc. so to signify, that
they excel in strength, are most swiftly moved from place to place, are endued
with splendor of Grace and virtue etc. After this manner also Virtues are
painted, as Justice, fortitude etc And it is not prohibited to paynt or picture
God after this third manner (notwithstanding our Adversaries great dislyke
thereof.) For if Dan. c. 7.
Daniel does describe God sitting in a throne, and describes there also his
head, his gray hayres, his white garments, thereby to express his Majesty,
power, and his Antiquity from all ages, his purity, and brightness etc. why may
not then God be so pictured to the Eye, as the Holy Scripture by reciting of
it, does express him in words to the Ear?

Animaduersion XXXII.
IT is a peculiar sleight of Calvin and other our more learned Adversaries,
that whereas they deny a Conclusion or Proposition of faith, affirmatively
mantayned by the Catholics; after we have brought authority either out of
Scripture, or from for^ of Reason, proving the same denied point^ then in
answer thereto they grant the conclusion of that point, but then they render a
cause or reason, why in such a Case, our Conclusion may be admitted: so they
subtly obtruding a reason of the Conclusion granted in such, or such a case,
for a sufficie^^ answer in denial of the Conclusion. B^^ this is most
exorbitant, and in no sort satisfying the Catholics arguments. For the more
clear explicating of my self herein (...) will instance this their imposture
in an example or two. We affirm, that the Angels, and consequently God (though
all incorporeall) may be pictured. The Protestants absolutely deny this
Proposition. We in proof, that the Angels may be pictured, produce our
authorityes out of the book of Exodus, c. 25 and out of the third of Kings c.
6. in which places, we read that Angels were pictured. L. 5. Instit. cap. 11.
etc.
Calvin (n) answers hereto saying, that that was done in favor of the
Pedagogy, and more facill instruction of Men in the Old Law; which time is now
past. Now here I say, this answer is merely impertinent; for the Question is
not in this place, why, or to what end things incorporeall might be pictured
(let the cause be what it will) but only whether it be lawful to picture
things incorporeall, or not, which conclusion this answer of Calvin ^mitteth
for true.

In like manner, to prove Freewill, we urge ^^ose words; Si Math 19.
vis ad vitam ingredi serua ^^ndata: if thou will enter into life, keep the
^^mmandments; where we urge, that promise ^f Heaven is made under condition:
and that God will not command any thing under an impossible condition; and that
therefore ^e have Freewill to keep Gods Commandments. Calvin answers hereto,
that it is not absurd to maintain, that God sometimes for some reasons known
to himself, ^^omiseth to men things under impossible ^onditions, to wit, to the
wicked he makes such promises, thereby to manifest how unworthy they are of
his divine goodness. But ^ere we reply; We demand not why, or to what end, God
does make his promises either to the wicked, or to the pious; but we only
maintain, that a thing cannot rightly be promised under condition, but only to
him, who has the use of Freewill. This imposture is most familiar with Calvin
and his followers, and therefore I could wish the serious reader to be
obseruant thereof.

Animaduersion XXXIII.
IN my judgment the Question of Images in a point to be discussed chiefly by
Philosophy, as taking its warrant and ground from thence; so far forth as there
be no abuse of the Images. My reason is this; what thing soever man
understands, the same he understands by the help of a Species or Ima^^
thereof, first wrought in the Phantasy, according to that Axiom in Philosophy
Quicquid intelligitur, intelligitur per mo^^^ Phantasmatis. And thus we cannot
apprehend or worship God, but by the help and mediation of an Image of God,
which w^ frame in our Imagination and phantasy* Again, if a picture be capable
of disgrace and injury, in regard of the person therein represented; then by
the same reason a picture may be capable of honor, and reverence (I mean that
kind of honor and reverence, which is due to inanimate things.) No^ that a
picture is capable of disgrace or contumely, is evident: For example, if a
subject disloyally affected to his Prince, should deface, break, or otherwise
indecently handle the picture of his Prince, by stabbing it with his dagger, or
otherwise; or if some Athe^^ (denying the Scripture) should be trample under
his feet (through scorn and malice) the Bible it self; would not these
Actions be severely punished? and might not the picture of the Prince, and the
Bible be said to have suffered disgrace and indignity thereby, with reference
to the wrong and indignity committed against the Prince, and the sacred
Scriptures? Then by the same reason may the Picture of Christ, and the Saints
be affected with due religious respect above other things, in regard of Christ,
and his Saints represented in them, of whom they are pictures.

Animaduersion XXXIV.
TO vindicate our selfs from the calumny of our Adversaries, touching the
wor^hip, which we exhibit to Saints and Images, ^hey are for their instruction
to take no^^ze, that Adoration contains three dif^^rent S. Thom. in 3. sent.
did. 9.
Acts; the first is of the vnderstan^ing, by the which we apprehend the
excel^^ncy of any thing: The Act of the Will, by the which we are inwardly
moved to manifest and protest our worship, by some exterior, or interior Act:
The third is an Exterior Act, by the which we move our hat, or bow our leg, or
show some other external sign, in manifestation of our inward worship given.
Of which three Acts the second (which is of the will) is most essential;
seeing the first may be without adoration, and the third with irrision and
scorn, as the Jews worshipped our Savior upon the Cross. Here further we
are to note, that that worship, which is given to God is a chief and supreme
prostration and inclination of the will, with the apprehension of God, as the
beginning and last end of all things, and therefore as our chief good; and it
is called by Deuines, Latria, and cannot be communicated without Idolatry to
any creature. Worship given to Creatures is distinguished according to the
different degrees of excelle^cies in the Creatures; and so according to the
different degrees of the worth of Creatures, the worship exhibited is severally
called, as Du^^^ hyperdulia, cultus religiosus, and cultus ciuilis. Lastly it
is further to be observed, that by the exterior Act, it is not easy to
distinguis^ the several kinds of worship: for almo^^ all exterior Acts of
worship ( Sacrifice only excepted) are common to every kind o^ worship. For
according hereto we read, th^^ Abraham with the same Act of bowing h^^ body to
the ground, did adore God, Genes 17. did worship Angels, Genes. 18. and di^
worship Men, Genes. 23. In like sort all me^ do use to kneel to God in their
prayers, t^ their Princes or kings, and to their own^ Parents; yet with
disparity of honor t^ each of these. And here is the source o^ fountain of
the Protestants mistaking who hearing, that Catholics do somtim^ exhibit part
of that external worship t^ Creatures, which is given to God, do instantly
exclame forth, that Papists do commit Idolatry to Creatures. Poor men! (...)
commiserate their ignorance, who so much mistake the true meaning of Catholic
practice herein.

Animaduersion XXXV.
THe several, and different times of the fir^^ coming of Antichrist, assigned
by ou^ Adversaries, do evidently prove that Ant^christ is not yet come, and
consequently that ^he Pope is not Antichrist, as they in the ^oame of their
malice do teach. For Upon the revel. in c. 20.
Iuni^^ (the eminent Protestant) affirms, that ^ildebrand, who was Pope anno
Domini ^^4. was the first Antichrist. With whom ^nspireth D. Downeham In his
Treatise concerning Antichrist. ca. 110.
Bullinger Upon the Apo. s^rm. 16. p. 198.
af^rmeth, that Antichrist came in the year: ^63. he therefore tearming that
year, The ^all year. D In his answ. to a Counterfeyt Cath. pa. 30.
Fulke, and D. In his Synops. page 100.
Willet do ^ace his coming in the year 607. and ^ake Boniface the third to be
the first Anti^^rist. D. Whytaker thus writes of this ^oynt, saying: De
Eccles. cont. ^eilar^. contr. 9^ qu. a. p. (...) 2.
Gregory the great was the ^^t true and holy Bishop of the Church; and ther^^
because our Adversaries demand of us the ^me, when he first came in, we
design, and set ^wne to them the very time of his coming. ^za Confess.
General. cap. 7. sect. 12.
teaches, that he came in anno ^40 thus writing of Leo, who lived in that ^^e
Leo did clearly breath forth the arrogan^^ of the Antichristian Sea. M. Napper
Upon the Reuelat. ^g. 66.
as^^ding higher, iustifyes Antichrist his com^ng to have been in the year
313. so ma^ing Siluester the Pope, the first Antichrist. But Sebastianus
Francus (a remarkable Protestant) not content therewith thus auer^eth: In
Epist. de abrogo^ l. in vniuer. omnibus statut. ^cclesiast.
For certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church together
with the says and Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles
departure. Now, mere diametrically, and cross to all the former Protestants,
teaching that the Pope is An^ichrist, Melancthon So is Melancthon alleged by
M. Haruey in his Theol. discourse. p. 102.
, Bucer, and M. Fox Act. Mon. of the year 1676. pa. 53^.
do teach that the Turk is Antichrist; and according hereto Buc^r styles the
Turk Bucer in his lib. Psalm. quinque. Psalm. 22. fol. 146. 147.
ipfissimus Antichristus. Thus much touching the disagreement of our
Adversaries in this point.

Animaduersion XXXVI.
THe planting of the Christian Religion is England by Joseph of Arimathia, does
afford an unanswerable demonstration of the truth of our Catholic and Roman
Religion. Of this point we first find, that not only S. Bid, (who did write
the History thereof.) but M. Cambden also rec^r^et^, that the Brittans of
Wales, were first converted to Christianity by Joseph of Arimathia, M. Cambden
thus speaking thereof: Certum In his Brit. pa. 40. and 57.
est Britannos in ipsa Ecclesiae infantia Christianam Religionem imbibisse; he
thus further writing: Hie floruit Monasterium Glastenburtense etc. Here
flourished the Monastery of Glastenbury, which takes its ancient beginning of
Joseph of Arimathia. Thus M. Cambden. The same verity is acknowledged by D.
Jewel, In his Pageant of Popes.
and D. Fulke In his book against Hiskins, Sanders, page 561.
Secondly, we find, that D. Jewel confesses thus; the Britans In his Pageant
of Popes.
being converted by Joseph of Arimathia, held that faith at Austins coming; he
meaning that Austin, who was sent by Pope Gregory to plant his religion among
us English. In like manner D. Fulke thus writes hereof; The Catholic Britans,
Against the Rhemish Testam. in 2. Cor. 12.
with whom Christian Religion had continued in succession from the Apostles
times, would not receive Austin. From which several Testimonies we gather,
that till Austins coming into England, the Religion planted by Joseph of
A^imathia among the Brittans, continued unchangeable and without alteration.
Thirdly, we read, that the greatest differences of faith and Religion, which at
that time were found between the Britan Bishops and Augustine, are recorded to
be these following: for S. Bid Beda, l. 2. ca. 2.
relates, how Austin and the Britan Bishops did meet at a place called in his
time, Augustin^zat, for conferring of their Religions together: the mention of
which meeting is in like manner auerred by Holinshead In his great Chronicle of
the last E^ttou. l. 5. c. 22.
, and M. Fox Act Mon. printed. 1576. page 120.
, who sets down S. Austins Answer to the Britan Bishops in these words: Si
in tribus his obtemperare mihi vultis, vt Pascha suo tempore celebre^is; vt
ministerium Baptizandi iuxta morem Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae
compleatis; vt Genti Anglorum vna nobiscum praedicetis verbum Domini, caetera,
quae agitis, aequanimiter cuncta tolerabimus; That is, if you (Britan Bishops)
will obey me in these three things; to wit, in celebrating Easter day in due
time; in conferring of Baptism according to the rites of the Roman and
Apostolical Church; and in helping us to preach to the English; all other
matters, which you (...) contrary to our manners, we will tolerate ^^suster.
Thus far S. Bid. Fourthly and lastly it is confessed by D. Humfrey what
Religion Austin brought into England, in these words: Jn Ecclesiam Humfred, in
Jesuit. part. 2. ras. 5. pa. 5. and 627.
vero quid inuexerna Gregorius and Augustinu? Onus caeremoniar^^ etc.
intulerunt pattium Episcopale ad sola missarum solemnta, Purgatorium etc.
Oblatione^ salutaris Hostiae, and preces pro demortuis etc. reliquias etc.
^ransubstantiationem etc. Nou^ templorum conscerationes etc. Ex quibus omnibus
quid aliud quaesitum est, quam vt Indulgentiae Monachatus, Papatus, reliquumque
Pontificiae Chaos extruatur? Haec Augustinus magnus Monachus a Gregorio Monacho
edoct^ importauit Anglis. Thus far D. Humfrey, with whom conspi^e herein the In
the Alphabeticall table of the 6 Century in the first Edition, at the word,
Gregory
Centurists, and Epit. hist. Ecclel. cent. 6 p. 289.
Osiander.

Now from all these premises I thus collect; First, that the true Christian
Religion was planted in Britany by Joseph of Arimathia, who lived in our
Saviors time. Secondly, that the same Religion remained pure and uncorrupted,
at Austins conue^ting of England. Thirdly, that the differences between Austin
and the Britans were but about two or three small points, or Ceremonies.
Lastly, that Austin did teach in England all the supreme points, which the
Roman Church at this day teaches. Now, from all this I infer, that the
Church of Rome in Austins time teaching papistry (as our Adversaries style it)
was holy agreeable (the two former points of ^^eping Easter day, and Baptizing
with the ^^tes of Rome, only excepted) with the faith and religion, which was
planted among the Britans by Joseph of Arimathia in the Apostles days. For it
is certain, that if the Britans had not yealded their full consent to those
supreme points of our Catholic religion, mentioned above by D. Humfrey; S.
Bid would have been most ready to record their stifnes and reluctation
therein, seeing he does not omit to relate their coldness only in the two former
points of ceremonies: So certain it is, that S. Bid had just reason to
conclude this passage with these words Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
: Brieones quidem confitentur intellexisse se veram esse viam Justitiae quam
praedicaret Augustinus; and therefore not without evident cause D. Fulke
affirms that In his confuta^tion of Purgatory pa. 335.
Austin did obtain the aid of the Britan Bishops, to the Conversion of the
Saxons. Thus far of this argument, in unfolding whereof I have been more
long, in that it is an vnswerable and most conuincing Demonstation, in proof
of the truth of our Catholic Religion.

Animaduersion XXXVII.
IT is a dissolute kind of arguing thus to conclude: In such, or such text of
Scripture, it is certain that one parcel of the said text is to be taken
figuratively: Ergo, all that text or sentence is to be taken figuratively; For
example, we Catholics do urge those words, in our warrant to bow at the name of
Jesus: vt Phil. 2.
in nomine Jesus omne genu flectatur, Caelestium, Terrestrium, and Jnfernorum;
That in the name of Jesus every knee bow, of things in Heaven, things in earth,
and things under the earth. Now, to this our Adversaries reply, that seeing the
Spirits infernal, or under the earth (meaning the damned Spirits in Hell) have
no knees, wherewith they can bow, and that the word knee is ascribed to them
figuratively; therefore this whole sentence is to be taken figuratively only,
and not literally; and consequently that this text proves no^ that we ought to
bow at the name of Jesus. To this we reply, that so farforth, as any text will
bear a literal sense (it not bei^^ impugned by any other text more literal,
or by any article of faith) so far it ought to be taken literally; and what
follows in the same text, which necessarily is to be expounded figuratively,
the same we are to expound figuratively. The weakness of our Adversaries former
answer, is otherwise discovered, seeing acording to our Adversaries former
answer, we could not alledg that Text in the Apocalypse, These Apoc. c. 7.
are they who have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb, to prove, that
Martyrs and other Saints of God are saved by the blood of Christ; because
seeing in this Sentence there are two Metaphores, to wit, the word Robes,
(whereby are signified the bodies of the Saints) and the word Lamb, (meaning
thereby Christ,) that therefore it should follow upon the former ground of
answer, that the word, Blood, should also be here Metaphorically taken; not
signifying blood indeed (and so excluding the blood of Christ from our
Salvation,) but some other thing shadowed thereby. Yea which is more, if this
kind of answer were solid, we could scarce produce any one Sentence of the
Psalms literally to be expounded of Christ or the Church, since that part of
Scripture is most luxuriant of Tropes, Schemes, and other figurative speeches:
And yet we see, it is most incongruous to maintain, that any whole Psalm is
to be taken allegorically, because we find some figures in certain passages
thereof. Now to conclude this point, I add this annotation, that it is the
judgment of all chief Deuines, that the Scripture touching matter of faith, is
ever to be understood literally, except the literal construction do impugn
some other received article of faith, or may be explicated figuratively by some
other more express and evident passage of Scripture; or lastly, that words be
so evident for a figurative Sense, as that in no sort they can be capable of a
literal construction.

Animaduersion XXXVIII.
Oftentimes the Decrees of the Pope, or a Council are fraudulently urged by
the Protestants for the first Institution of a thing, when indeed the Decree or
Council only teaches the better execution of some Catholic point, before
partly neglected (as for example touching confession, the unmarried life (...)
the Clergy, or keeping set times of fasting;) th^^ our Adversaries he^eby
suggesting a more reformed execution of the practice of the Doctrine for the
first institution of it. According hereto, we find D. Whitaker Whi tak. cont.
Duraeum l. 7. page 490.
to allege Innocentius the third Pope of tha^ name, saying: Innocentius was
the first, tha^ instituted auricular Confession; whereas Innocentius only
decreed, that Confession should be more strictly observed. Now that Confession
was generally taught and believed before Innocentius his time, is evident, sin^
the Centurists do charge Tertullian and Cyp^^ (both which lived eleven or
twelve hu^dreds of years, before this Innocentius t^^ third) with teaching the
doctrine of A^^cular Confession.

Animaduersion XXXIX.
When our Adversaries do produce eith^^ Popes Decrees, or general Councels,
for the impugning of some Catholic point, be ^^refull to observe: First, that
particu^^^ Counsels, or Counsels Schismatic (the is, such as are not
confirmed by the Popes authority) be not obtruded upon you, for true general
Counsels. For thus they urge the Council of Constantinople, against Images,
consisting indeed of many Prelates; but neither celebrated, or confirmed by the
Popes Authority. Secondly note, that the point urged, does concern Doctrine of
faith, and not matter of fact; touching which ^^ter point, it is granted that a
Council may alter its Decrees, upon better and later Information. Thirdly,
that the Canon produced out of the Council does immediately concern the
Doctrine it self of some Arti^le of faith (then supposed to be brought in) and
not the name only to be imposed upon the same doctrine before believed, as it
happened in the Council of Lateran touching the word, Transubstantiation: The
doctrine thereof being confessedly believed many ages before; for this Council
of Lateran was ^n the year 1060. whereas (as is above said) D. Humfrey
charge S. Gregory and S. Austin, who lived several ages before this
Council) for bringing into England the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Yea In
the Treatise attributed to Visinus, entitled, Commone, factio (...) asdam
Theologi. de S. Caena. page 211. and 228.
Vrsinus the Protestant insimulates Theophilact and Damascene (more ancient
then the former Fathers) within the same doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Animaduersion XL.
WHen we produce the ancient Fathers against the Protestants, their accustomed
thiffe is to make an Opposition betwee^ the Scripture and the Fathers;
maintaining that to follow the judgment of the Father is to reject and abandon
Scripture; and th^^ themselves are to be pardoned for prefe^ring the Scripture
before the Fathers. B^ to this you may answer, that seeing t^ Fathers do urge,
admit, and reverence t^ Scripture in as high a degree, as the Prot^stants do;
the main question and dou^^ here, is not whether the Scripture is to (...)
advanced above the Authority of the F^thers (which we all Catholics do fu^^
acknowledge should be) but only, Wheth^^ the Fathers or the Protestants do more
truly expound the Scripture?

Animaduersion XLI.
THe Fathers have many advantages a^^ privileges for interpreting of Scriptu^^
and for true or perfect faith, of which t^ Fathers lived near to Christ, some
co^uersing with his Apostles, others in succe^ding ages; and therefore more
easy it w^^ for them to know, what exposition w^^ then delivered of the
Scriptures, and wh^^ faith was first preached. Add hereto, th^^ the very
practice of their Religion then (...) ^^d (the Church then remaining, by the
^cknowledgment of our Adversaries, in her ^^rity of faith) served as a Comment
to them of the Scriptures.

Secondly, diverse of these Fathers even Scripture was written; And therefore
they were ^uch aduantaged for picking out the true ^eaning thereof; whereas our
Adversaries ^nowledg of the said tongues is gotten on^y by Art and Industry,
which ever subscribes to Nature.

Thirdly, the Fathers delivered their sen^ence Scriptures many ^ges before the
points of faith and Doctrine (...) for which they were urged) were ever brought
in question or doubt, and therefore what they writ, was free from all
partiality of judgment, they not knowing, what Innouations were to rise in
these our days: Our Protestant Ministers (their ^emporall states being wholly
interessed ^herein must now of necessity shape the construction of the
Scriptures, to the maintenance of the Religion now introduced.

The Fathers, though writing in several non est Deus dissensionis, sed pacis;
and if any one by chance did vary from the rest, he was reprehended by them:
But the Protestants are so contrary in their writings, in maintayning mere
contradictory and opposite doctrines, as is most wonderful to observe; of
which point who seeeketh further to be satisfied, let him peruse such books,
as are lately written upon that subject.

Fathers did cut of all lets and impediments, which might hinder either
Devotion or study; Hence it is, that they embraced perpetual Chastity,
contemned all riches and Honors, chastized their bodies with fasting, prayer
and other spiritual disciplines. How far different our Protestant Doctors are
from such courses, I leave to the world to judge.

Fathers (I mean diverse of them) did work many true and stupendous Vide
Cyprian. sermon. de lapsis. Ambr. de obitu Satyr. c. 7. Optat, l. cont. Donat.
Aug. de Ciuit. l. 22. Chrysostom. cont. Gentiles. Eusebius l. 7. c. 14.
Miracles, which gift of exhibiting Miracles, God bestows only upon them, who
are gracious in his sight, and who truly serve him; (But no man can serve God
truly, with a false faith): The Protestant Doctors never yet wrought any one
Miracle in confirmation of their Faith; the euidency of which point appears
from the liberal Confession of the Protestants themselves: For D. Fulke thus
acknowledges; It is Against the Rhemish Testam. in Apoc. c. 13.
known, that Calvin, and the rest, whom the Papists call Arch-Heretiks, do
work no miracles: to whose confession D. Sutcliffe subscribeth; saying: We do
In his Examen of D. Kellisons Survey, printed 1606. p. 8.
not practice Miracles, nor do we teach, that the truth of Doctrine is to be
confirmed with miracles.

The Fathers (I speak of diverse As Ignatius, Polycarpus, Cyprian and others.
of Paradisi clauis sanguis Martyris. Our Sectarie Doctors (excepting some
Mechanical and ignorant fellows, burned for their obstinacy in Queen Mary's
time) are so far from suffering any pressures for professing their faith, as
that most of them have made their Religion, a ladder to clyme up to worldly
preferments; they by it only enjoying (as through want of its losing) riches,
honors, and other such temporal aduancements.

The Fathers of the Primitive Church, Christ in those times; For of necessity
it must be granted, that all the several members of the Church of God, did
believe, and practice the same Religion, which Gregory, Theodores, Austin,
Jerome, Chrysostom, Epiphanius, the Gregory's, the Cyrills, Basil, Ambrose,
Hilary, Optatus, Cyprian, Irenaeus, Ignatius, and the like, did teach; since in
them according to the several ages, wherein they lived, those words of the
Apostle were fulfilled: Ephesians. 4.
Christ has placed i^ his Church Pastors, and Doctors etc. Now all this
granted, it does ineuitably follow, that if the Fathers of those several ages
did jointly err in their interpretation of Scripture, and doctrine of faith
and belief resulting from thence; that then the whole visible Church of Christ
did damnably err in faith, during all those ages: but this mainly crosses
both the command, as also the promises of Christ; the first in those words, Dic
Ecclesiae Math. 18.
; the second in that sentence, Behold I am with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world; for neither would Christ ever send men to a false
Church; nor can he be said, to be ever with his Church, if he suffer it to
profess for many ages a false and erroneous faith; nor upon such a supposall
could the Church be truly styled, Columna 1. Timoth. 3.9.
and firmamentum veritatis.

Lastly, the more learned Protestants do ascribe all Excellency to the
Primitive Church, for purity of faith (and consequently to the Fathers and
Pastors of the Church of those times;) for thus we find them to write:
Kempnitius thus says: We Exa. Council. Trid. part. 1. page 74.
doubt not, but that the Primitive Church received from the Apostles, and
Apostolical men, not only the Text of Scripture, but also the right and native
sense thereof. D. Jewel: The primitive In his defense of the Apology.
Church, which was under the Apostles and Martyrs, has ever been accounted
the purest of all others, without exception. Finally to contract this point, D.
Bancroft heretofore the Archbishop of Canterbury, thus writes touching Calvin
and Beza: For M. Calvin In his Survey of the pretended discipline.
and M. Beza, J do think of them, as their writings do deserve; but yet I
think better of the ancient Fathers. And with this I end touching the
libration, or ballancing of the Fathers of the primative Church, with our
Protestant Doctors.

Animaduersion XLII.
THere is one slight used by our Adversaries, which deserves Annotation. It is
this: They are unwilling openly to break with the Fathers, so long as they can
pretend any show of conjunction and agreement with them. Therefore when they
find any of our Catholic points to be mantayned by the Fathers, they gently
term them, Naeuos, Nenia, and at most, Errores, blemishes, and errors. Thus
favorably they depresse in the Fathers our Catholic Doctrines, because they
would seem to continue members of the same Church, whereof the Fathers were:
But now, they style the same Opinions and Doctrines, as they are believed by
us, no less then Heresies, blasphemies, Jdolatry etc. thereby to show, that
the Members of the Church of Rome are not members of Christ's Church. This
deceitful and different appellation is precisely kept and practiced by the
Centuryes, Jllyricus, Doctor Whytaker, and diverse other Protestant Writers.

Animaduersion XLIII.
Our Adversaries deportment toward the Fathers, is most full of imposture and
deceyte: And they use certain stepps, or gradatious therein. For first they
labor to euade the authority or testimony of a Father, by shaping some seeming
answer to it; yet still admitting the authority produced. Next, if the
testimony objected by us out of any Father, be for its perspicuity not capable
of any euading answer; then they labor to weaken the authority of the said
Father, by making him seem to contradict himself in some other place of the
same point, or else to be contradicted therein by other Fathers. After this
manner does D. Whitaker, in question of Traditions say of D. Whit. l. de Sacr.
Script. page 670.
Basil: Basilius secum pugnat; as also charge S. Austin D. Whit. vbi supra
^8^.
with the like contrariety in judgment, touching the same doctrine of
Traditions. But when they are told, that it is most improbable, that the
Fathers (being such learned men, as they were) should without any acknoledged
retractation of their former writings cross themselves in their later
wrytings; our Adversaries then unmask themselves, plainly calling the Fathers,
Superstitious, blind, and open mantayners of Papistry, which point sha^ be made
evident by these testimonies of the Protestants passed upon them.

And to begin with Luther, he thus writes of the Fathers in general: The
Luth. de seruo arbitrio. printed anno 15^1. page 4^4.
Fathers of so many ages have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in the
Scriptures; They have erred all their life time; and unless they were amended
before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor pertaining to the Church.
Melancthon joins hands with Luther herein, Melancth. in 1. Cor. cap 31.
in these words: Presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient
Fathers obscured the doctrine concerning Justification by faith, increased
Ceremonies, and devised peculiar worships. With both whom (to omit the like
condemning speeches of others, passed upon the Fathers) conspires D. Whitaker,
thus scurrilously writing: Ex patrum Contra ^u^aeum p. 4^3.
erroribus ille Pontificiae religionis Cento consutus est, The religion of the
Papists is a patched Cloth of the Fat^ers ^rrours sowed together. Thus ^ar of
the several peculiar deliueries of our Adversaries against the Fathers.

Animaduersion XLIV.
TOuching the Controversy, whether the Blessed Virgin was conceived in
Original sin, such Catholics, as deny the same, hold the denial thereof
only as a probable and pious Opinion, and not as matter of faith; we therefore
are to conceive, that the Sin of the first Parent is communicated to his
Sons and posterity, three manner of ways. First then, the Sons of Adam are
said to have sinned in Adam himself, in that Adam did transgress the precept
of God in Paradise: And because the Sons of Adam were not then in actu, but
in potentia only, therefore that sin they contracted not in actu, but only in
potentia, And in this sense it may be said, that the B. Virgin sinned in Adam.
Secondly, all the Children of Adam are said to be conceived in Sin, as soon
as the child begins to exist in the Mothers Womb, although it be then
unformed and without life; because a Man then begins truly to exist, in
respect of one of his parts; and that part has its beginning from a corrupt
Nature, and may be said to be truly vitiated by force of its generation: And in
this sense also we acknowledge, that the Blessed Virgin had her beginning from a
corrupt Nature, and that by force of such generation, it was due, that Sin
should be contracted, as soon as her Rational soul was joined to her Body.
The third, and last manner, whereby men are said to be conceived in Sin is,
when their Souls are inspired into their bodies; since at that time they
begin properly and really to become Men, and to have their W^^ naked of
Original Justice, and consequently auerted from God, and in it self deformed.
Now touching this third and last kind, we hold it most probable, that the
Soul of the Blessed Virgin (even at the first instant of its creation, and
infusion into the Body) was so without spot of Original Sin, as that person
of hers actually existing had never any Sin; she herein differing from all
others, in that she was freed from Original Sin, even in the very instant of
her Animation. Now here it is to be noted, that the texts of Scripture, urged
by the Protestants to prove, that the Blessed Virgin was conceived in Original
Sin, have respect and reference only to one, or other of the first two kinds
touching the propagation of Original Sin in Man; but they have not any true
reference to this last kind.

Animaduersion XLV.
IT is most wonderful to observe the great contempt, and little respect our
Adversaries give to our Blessed Lady. Diverse of the^ speaking of Calvin and
Beza (two Sodomits even by the Protestants See Schlusselburge l ^. fol. 121.
and l. 1 fol. 93.
Confessions) with great obseruancy style them So D Ban^r^ss styles Calvin and
Beza, in his Survey of the pretended dis^ipline.
M. Calvin, M. Beza. In like manner, speaking of Luther (that wicked Monk)
they fear not to call him the Elias Fox Act. Mon. pa. 416.
, Conductour, and Chariot of Jsrael. But when they come to name our Blessed
Lady; who is an int^merate Virgin, the Queen of Heaven, an instrument of man's
Redemption, the Mother of God, and Savior of the world, most of them bluntly
and rudely style her without any addition of Honor) only Mary. O contempt,
most sacrilegious, and insufferable!

Animaduersion XLVI.
IN the Hymn of our Ladies office, thus beginning, Aue Mari^ stella etc. two
passages much distaste our Adversaries: The first (...) this: Solue vincula
reis, profer lume^ caecis etc which acts (say they are peculiar to Christ. And
again in the same Hymn, they object those words: Monstra te esse Matrem as
implying a mother, and awful authority over Christ. In explication of the
first, we dema^d, that our Lady would loose our Sins, and bring light to the
blind, only by her imp^tration and praying to her blessed Son, and not
otherwise, and therefore in most of our set p^ayers to her, we adioyne these
words following; Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum. Touching the second
sentence: We do not wish her to impose any command or Motherly authority over
her Some; But we only understand hereby: show thy self a Mother, by appeasing
thy son in our behalf; and this by the remembrance of all thy Motherly
tender care and love toward him in his Infancy, and, through the whole course
of his life; that by thee he may receive our prayers; and therefore it
immediately follows in the same Hymn, sumat per te preces. But now if these
words be such an eyesore to the Protestants, what will they say to those words
of S. Paul: Omnibus 1. Cor. 9.
omnia factus sum, vt omnes facerem saluos: J am become to all men all things,
that I may save all? Where the Apostle in words assumeth to himself the
Salvation of others. In like manner, in that Antiphone in our Ladies office,
beginning: Salve Regina etc. Our Apuersaries insist in those words: Et Iesum
benedictum fructum ventris tui, nobis post hoc exilium ostende; And show to us
after this our exile, Jesus etc. To which I answer; That it is less to say:
To show the Savior unto men, then to say: To save men: And yet we read the
Apostle thus to say: Et teipsum 1. Tim. 4.
saluam facies, and eos quite au^iunt: Thou shall ^^ue thy self and them, that
do hear thee. Moreover it is objected out of that Antiphone, that the B.
Virgin is styled, Spes nostra, Our Hope. To this I say, that these words are
used, because next after our Lord Jesus Christ (being God and Man) we chiefly
place our confidence in the mediation of the Bl^s^^d Virgin; Since our Hope is
not to be placed only in the Authors of our Good, but also in the
Intercessours and ministers thereof. And according hereto when our Lo^d said to
the Jews: It John 5.
is Moses, who accus^s you, in quo speratis, in whom you hop^; Our Savior did
not reprehend the Jews, in that they hoped in Moses, but because they did not
believe Moses. Finally our Adversaries cannot brook our Lady to be called,
Matter misericordiae, because (say they) God is the Father of Mercy, therefore
the B. Virgin cannot, nor ought to be called so. But this is no good
consequence; for we read, that Christ is called, Lux John 9.
mundi, and yet Christ says of his Apostles: Vos Math. 5.
estis lux mundi. Thus such titles may be given to God, and men in a different
relation, without any dishonor to God.

Animaduersion XLVII.
THe puritans do most maliciously pervert several texts of Scripture in
dishonor of our B. Lady For example, First they object (as seeming at least to
rest doubtful of the continuance of our B. Ladies Virginity) that Text: Et non
Math 1.
cognoscebat eam, donec peperit filium primogenitum; which words (say they)
seem to afford a double Argument: The first is taken from the word, Donec,
inferring from thence, that after the birth of her Son, she should carnally
know Joseph. The second from the words following, Filium primogenitum; seeing
Primogenitus properly signifies that son, which is first borne, in reference
to those Sons or children which are after borne. I answer, first touching
the word, Donec, which word (as also the word, vsque) does not ever signify an
affirmation after the time expressed, if a Negation did go before; neither
always do they signify a Negation, when an affirmation did precede. For
example, Sede a Psalm. 109.
dextris m^is, donec ponam inimicos tuos scabellum pectum tuorum: Sit at my
right hand, until J make thy Enemies, thy footestoole. Now these words do not
import, that after, he shall not fit at the right hand of his Father; The like
sentences to these, are these following: Donec Math 5.
transeat Caelum and Terra, iota vnum, aut vnus apex non praeteribit a lege.
And again, Ego Math. 28.
vobiscum sum vsque ad consummationem mundi: In all which locutions and
sentences of Scripture, that which is doubtful is expressed; but that which is
certain, is not expressed, or spoken of. Now touching the word, Primogenitus;
Epiphanius Haeres. 78.
denies, that Christ was called Primogenitus Mariae, the first borne of Mary:
for the Evangelist says not, Primogenitum suum, but he says Fitium suum,
primogenitum; signifying thereby, that he was the Son of the B Virgin, but
withal, the first begotten Son of God: Seeing accordingly we thus read: Ipse
Coloss 1.
namque est primogenitus omnis Creaturae; He (to wit Christ) was the first
borne of all Creatures. S. Jerome says, that Christ was called, Adue^s Heluid.
Primogenitus Mariae, not because she brought forth any other Son after him;
but because before him, she brought forth no other Son. For it is the phrase
of Scripture, that those who are Vnigeniti, are called Primogeniti; So S Paul
calls Christ, Primogenitus Heb. 6.
Dei, for the only-begotten son of God. Lastly they urge that sentence: Jnter
Math. 11.
natos mulicrum non surrexit mayor Iohanne Baptista, There has not risen among
the borne of women a greater then John the Baptist; intimating hereby, that the
Blessed Virgin is inferior in dignity to S. John Baptist. This is easily
answered; First if the words as they lie, be literally taken (as our
Adversaries pretend) then should John Baptist be greater then Christ; Secondly,
because S. John Baptist in those words spoken by Christ, is compared only with
the Holy men of the old Testament; but Christ, and his Mother, as also the
Apostles, belong to the new Testament.

Animaduersion XLVIII.
Diverse Protestants (as above is showed) do hold such books to be Scripture,
which other Protestants reject as Apocryphal; therefore it follows, that the
Scripture it self cannot show, at least to us (which is the point
controuerted) which is Scripture; which doubt is only to be referred to the
Authority of the Church. And therefore M. Hooker truly says: Of things Eccles.
Pol. l^^ 1 Sect. 14. p. 8^.
necess^ry, the very chiefest is to know, what Books we are to esteem Holy;
which point is confessed impossible, for the Scripture it self to teach. And
again: It is Ibidem. l. 2. Sect. 4. p. 102 and ^4^ and D. Couell in defense of
M. Hooker, art. 4. page 31.
not the word of God, which does, or possibly can assure us we do well to
think it is his word. N^w if the Scriptures be confessedly unable to afford us
certain proof of themselves; then in all true consequence of Reason, much
less are they able to direct and exempt us in case of doubt and question
infallibly from Error; and the rather (as D. Reynolds truly confesses) in
Confer. c. 2. Diuis. 2. page 68.
that it is not the show, but the sense of the Scripture, that must decide
Controversies. Now from this I infer, that if according to the learned The
Author of the Treatise of the Scripture and the Church, cap. 16. fol. 75.
Whita. con Staplet. l. 2. c. 4. p. 203. Kempn. in Exam. part. 1. page 69. and
diverse others.
Protestants here cited, it is to be determined to us, which is Scripture, by
the judgment of the Church, which confessedly has the assistance of the Holy
Ghost in infallibly discerning to us, which Books of Scripture are sacred, and
which not; then necessarily follows the Churches no less needful assistance
of the same Spirit, in her like discerning unto us, the sense of the said
Scripture: for what avails it us to be made certain of the Books, and least
uncertain of the Sense? Or what reason can our Adversaries alledg, whereby to
acknowledge the Churches priuiledg in the one, and deny it (where it is no
less needful) in the other? This inference being granted, utterly
overthrows the Private spirit, in its interpretation of Scripture.

Animaduersion XLIX.
IT is a demonstration, in confutation of the Private spirit interpreting the
Scrippture, to observe the different, or rather contrary constructions, which
Luther, and Calvin, and others give of that short sentence: Hoc est Corpus meum
etc. Hic est sanguit meus; And yet they all do vant of their enjoying the said
Spirit. And therefore it is the less wonder, that S. Austin Austin. cont.
Maximum Arian. l. 1.
affirms, that it has ever been the custom of all Heretics to fly to
Scripture alone, as it is interpreted by this Private Spirit. The absurdity of
which opinion more evidently appears; since it is certain, that among diverse
mere contrary or co^tradictory point^ of faith, the Scripture condemns the
on^ And yet both the maintainers of the said contrary doctrines do fly to the
Scripture as Judge. Now what madness is it for (...) man willingly to covet to
appeal to that Judge, by whom it is certain his cause shall be condemned?
Neither can either of the Litigants put any confidence in the means of truly
interpreting the Scripture, to wit. Prayer, Conference of places of Scripture
knowledge in the Tongues etc. since all these meane^ are most uncertain, even
by the Confession of D. Whitaker, thus writing Whitak. l. 2. de Eccles. cont.
Bellar. contr. 1. quaest. 4
: Med^^ interpretandi ^oca scripturae sunt incerta etc. The means of
interpreting the obscure places o^ Scripture are uncertain, doubtfu^l, and
ambiguous; Therefore it cannot be otherwise, but the interpretation it self
must be uncertain; Si incerta, tum potest ess^ falsa if the interpretation be
uncertain, then may it be false. Thus far the said Doctor.

Animaduersion L.
TOuching the depressing of General Counsels, Peter Martyr thus writes: As
long L. de votis. page 476.
as we insist in General Counsels, so long we shall continue in the Papists
Errors; with whom D. Whitaker conspires in these words General Lib. de
Council. cont. Bellar. q. 6.
Counsels may err. Now let us see the great and many disparities, whereby a
General Council is infinitely aduantaged (in respect of not erring) above the
Private Spirit of any one man. First then a Council (I here only speak of
General Counsels) is in S. Austins So does S. Austin term a General
Council, Ep. 161.
judgment, The supreme Tribunal in the Church of God. The Private Spirit has
but his own brains, for the Seat of his Judicature. A Counsel receaues its
promise from Where two or three are gathered together in my name etc. Math. 18.
Christ, that his assisting presence shall not be wanting thereto. The private
Spirit, even by Gods No prophesy is of any private interpretation. 2. Per. c. 1.
own sentence, wants the certainty of expounding the Word truly. A Council
is much reverenced by the ancient Ierom. l. cont. Lucifer. Ambr. Ep. 32. Athan
Epist. ad Epicterum.
Fathers, and acknowledged by diverse of our learned D. Couel in his modest
Exam. p. 110. etc.
Adversaries to be the only certain means of determining Controversies. The
Private Spirit it that, of which we are Dearly beloved, believe not every
Spirit; etc.
commanded to doubt: and of whose seducing These things I have written to you,
concerning those, who de^eaue you. John 1. c. 2.
, God himself in Scripture premonisheth us: And which is much condemned even
by the more moderate D. Couell in his defense of Hooker, p. 86. D. Sarauia
contra Respons. Bezae. page 306. and others.
Protestant. A Council consists of many hundred venerable Doctors and
Pastors, gathered from the most remote nations of Christendom (and therefore
the less subject upon such their meeting, jointly, and with mutual consent,
(...) stamp any Nouelismes in Doctrine) presenting that only to be believed in
the^^ Canons, which is decreed by the mutua^ consent of all, or the greatest
number of them. The private Spirit is but its own only weening, oftentimes
dissenting from others of his Brethren in diverse points of faith. To conclude,
A Council (as being composed of several hundreds of Bishops and Doctors)
has many members of it, most eminent for virtue, readiness of the Scriptures,
skill in the Tongues; they all besieging the ears of God with their daily
prayers, accompanied with many corporal austerities; and all to the end, that
God would be pleased so to guide their tongues and pens, as that they may
decree only such doctrines, as are agreeable to Gods holy Word. The Private
spirit, (as being but one man) does want for the most part not only Virtue, but
also those other gifts of the Understanding above specified, as Learning,
knowledge in the Scriptures etc. And as for Prayer, and other means of pleasing
God, it rejects all this, as superstitious and Papisticall, relying (in lieu
thereof) upon his own Enthusiasmes and illuminations from the Lord. And thus
much touching the balancing of a General Council, with the Protestanticall
Private Spirit.

Animaduersion LI.
IF you attempt to charge a Protestant-writer with Corruptions, or lies in
their wrytings (of which Impostures their books are most luxuriant) rather
insist in a few (and those manifest, and unanswerable) then in a great number;
seeing, if your Adversary can make show to salve but three or four of a greater
number (the which he may the more easily do, by how much the number of his
falsifications is greater) the supposed answering of those few (chosen and
picked out by him) must serve, through the partiality of judgment in his
followers, to disgrace all the rest of the Corruptions, or falsifications,
urged by you.

Animaduersion LII.
THe Protestants in falsely alleging the authorityes of Authors, do abuse
their Readers chiefly four several ways. First, (which is the most usual)
by concealing some part of the alleged authority; Secondly, by adding some
words of his own, to make the produced Author or Father, to speak like a
Protestant; Thirdly by transposing the words of an authority, thereby to make
the sense different from the Authors true meaning; Fourthly, by a wilful
mistaking, or confusion of times. I will exemplify these four sorts in the
writing of D. White (a great Impostour in his Scripts) in his book called: The
way to the true Church Well then the said Protestant in p. 119. o^ his said
Book, produces a place out of the Rhemists, to prove that the Church of Rom^
can make that Scripture which is not, an^ unmake that to be Scripture which is
Scripture. To prove this, he produces the Rh^mists Gaelat, 1.
thus saying: The Scriptures are (...) known to be true, neither are
Christians bon^^ to receive them, without the attestation of the Church. Now
here mark the true word^ of the Rhemists, and therein observe his impurity of
dealing, committed by concealing part of the Sentence, just crossing his
intended drift of urging that authority. Their true words are these: The
Scriptures, which are indeed of the Holy Ghosts inditing, being p^^ into the
Churches trial, are found, proved, an^ testified unto the World to be such,
and not ma^^ true, altered, or amended by the same; Since the Holy Scriptures
in themselves were always true before, but not so known to be, to all
Christians. All these are the words of the Rhemists; where you see the wilful
concealment of this Parcel, The Scriptures are n^^ made true, altered, or
amended by the Church, as also that other: the Holy Scripturs in themselves
were always true, meaning without the attestation of the Church. Now all that
can truly be gathered out of this authority, is that the Scriptures (though
most sacred and true in themselves) cannot be so made known to us (in which
words lies the touch of the point) without the Churches attestation. But how
far off, is this from M. Whytes urging of this place?

Touching his imposture, committed in ^dding of words, this one place shall
serve: Thus then the said D. White produces Bellarmine in contempt of the
Churches authority, saying: Other means may deceive me; but nothing is more
known, nothing more certain, then the Scriptures. That it were the greatest
madness in the world not te believe the^ etc. Now in this sentence, these words;
viz. Other means may deceive me, are not in Bellarmine, but most subtily added
to the beginning of Bellarmines words, and caused to be printed in the same kind
of Character or letter, wherein the other words of Bellarmine are printed,
thereby to make the Reader believe, that they are words of Bellarmine, whereas
they are added (as I about insinuated) for the more depressing of the Churches
Authority. Now the whole sentence of Bellarmine was directed against the
Swinkseldians, who absolutely denied Scripture; and against whom Bellarmine in
that place disputes.

Touching the fraud consisting in a cunning transposition of words, without
adding any words to the authority alleged, or concealing any parcel thereof:
this example of the foresaid M. White may serve. In page 344. of his way to the
true Church, he produces for the overthrow of the religious use of Images, the
Council of Eliberis, thus saying: No Can. 36.
Picture is to be made in the Church, lest that be adored, which is painted on
the walls. But the true words of the Canon are these: Plac^^^ picturas in
Ecclesia non habere, ne quod coli^^ and adoretur, in parietibus depingatur; It
pleases the Council, that pictures should not be in the Church, lest that,
which is worshipped, an^ adored, be painted on the Walls: The nyce difference
in words rests thus; Lest that which is worshipped, be painted; and as M^
White translateth: Lest that, which is painted be worshipped. Where the words
of the Council acknowledging the worship of Images, makes the worship due to
them, to be the cause, why they are not painted on the walls (to wit because
they were subject to be defaced, either by invasion of Enemies, or rain etc.)
Now M. Whites translation, only by a subtle transposition of the words,
imports that Pictures are not to be worshipped at all.

Lastly, concerning the Calumny resting in a wilful confusion of times, The
said Protestant in page 61. for proof of Priests lawful marriage, produces a
Testimony from Sinesius, Bishop of Ptolemais, thus writing of himself to a
friend: The sacred hand of Theophilus has given me a wife, and hereupon
Justify to all men, that J will neither forsake her, nor privily as an
adulterer, keep her Company, but I will pray to God, to send me by her, many
and good children. This Epistle is at large set down in Eccl. hist. l. 14. c.
55.
Nicephorus. Now here the fraud lies, that at the time, when this Epistle was
written, Sinesius was but a Layman, but eminent for learning, Now after he made
himself priest, and was created Bishop of Ptolemais, he ever lived separated
from the company of his wife, as fully appears out of Nicephorus, in the
place above alleged. Here then the Ministers deceit lies in applying that to
him, as if he had been then Bishop, which was spoken by him, being a Layman;
and so M. White most fraudulently confounds those two different times
together, as if all had happened at one, and the same time.

Animaduersion LIII.
IF your Adversary will vant, that he will prove all by Scripture only (as most
of them give it out they will) then force him to draw both his Premises (I
mean, both his Propositions, if so they should be reduced to a form of
Argument) from the Scripture alone; of which Method within two Arguments at
least, he is certain to fail; For if he take either of his Propositions from
humane Authority, or from natural Reason, you may tell him he leaves his
undertaken of proving by Scripture alone; and consequently you may deny his
force of Argument, though Logical in form. Here I further aduertize, that if
your Adversary undertake the part of an Opponent, tie him precisely ever to
Oppose; which Scene perhaps he (being brought to a Nonplus) would flyely
transfer upon you. In like sort, if he takes upon him to answer, suffer him
not to oppose, thought he labor so to do, to free himself from answering:
Thus be sure, that each of you keep your chosen Station.

Animaduersion LIVE.
IF the Protestant should seek to expound by way of conference of places,
those words of our Savior: This is my body, this is my Blood, figuratively, by
those other words of his: J am a vine, I am the Door etc. both which Texts,
all grant, that they are to be taken figuratively; you may here first answer;
that in these and such like Sentences, ever Praedicatur disparatum de
disparato, and therefore the words in their own nature do enforce a figurative
construction; but in the words of the Institution, there is no such kind of
unusual Predication, at least in the appearance of the words themselves.
Secondly you may demand of your Minister, if he can allege any passage of
Scripture, which affirms that these words, This is my body etc. ought to be
interpreted by those words, I am the Vine, I am the Door: If he say he can
allege any such passage, will him co show it; if the Scripture says not so
(as indeed it does not) then force him to confess, that it is not the
Scripture, but himself, that warranteth such Conference of places of Scripture.

Animaduersion LV.
THe Protestant undertaking to prove every point by Scripture, is obliged to
prove his Negative Articles by Scripture, admitting them for points of faith;
as that there is no Purgatory; that we ought not to pray to the Saints etc. and
this not from the silence only of the Scripture, not speaking of such points;
but from it, as the Scripture particularly condemns them. Add hereto that
though the Scripture by not speaking of Purgatory, disp^oueth the being of it,
yet does not the Scripture therefore prove, as an Article of faith (which is a
point here to be insisted upon) that there is no Purgatory: Even as the
Scripture speaks nothing in a prophetical Spirit, That Mahomet was a false
Prophet, and yet though the Scripture by not speaking of him, should condemn
him for such; i^ nevertheless follows not, that we ought to believe from the
Scripture, as an Article of faith, that Mahomet was a false Prophet; since it
is one to say, that the Scripture by silence and not speaking of a point,
proves the thing not to be; another thing to affirm, that the Scripture
proves the not belief of the said point, to be an Article of faith.

Animaduersion LVI.
DEmand of your Adversary, if he can allege any place of Scripture warranting
his Infallibility of expounding the Scripture? And if he detort any text of
Scripture to that end or purpose; tell him that if such a text seem to make
for his not erring in expounding the Scripture, then much more makes it for
the not erring of the whole Church of Christ therein; Now if the whole Church of
Christ has erred in interpreting Gods written W^rd, (as many Protestants do
teach) then ask the Minister, with what face can he, being but one member of
the Church, (and perhaps Whitak. de Eccles. cont. Bellar. ontrou. 2. q 4. p.
223. Luther. Ep. ad Argen Parkins in his Exposition of the Creed. p. 40^.
unlearned) assume to himself a freedom of not erring, when he interprets
the Scripture?

Animaduersion LVII.
It is much worth the observation, to bala^ce the Spirit of Luther (being
Catholic) touching his carriage in manners, with that his Spirit, when he
became a Protestant. During his being a Catholic in Religion, he thus writes
of himself; I living in the Luther ad Galat. c. 1. ofter the English
Translation
Monastery punished my body with fasting watching, and prayer. J honored Luther
vbi supra.
the Pope of mere Conscience, kept chastity, poverty, and obedience; And
whatsoever I did, I did it with a single heart, of good zeal, and for the glory
of God; fearing grievously the last day and desirous to be saved from the
bottom of my heart. Thus he, during his continuance in the papacy. But now upon
his change of Religion, and his becoming a Protestant, he turns his style,
and thus writes of himself: Quam Luth. tom. 5. Wittenberg. sermon. de
matrimonio. fol. 119.
non est in meis viribus etc. As it is not in my power, that J should be no
Man; so it is not in my power, that I should be without a Woman. It is not in
our prwer, that it should be either stayed, or stopped; But it is as necessary,
as J should be a Man, and more necessary, then to eat, drink, purge make
clean the nose etc. And further Luther thus confesses in an other place:
Luther in Colioq. Mensal. f^^. c. ^6.
I am almost mad through the rage of lust, and desire of Women. And yet more:
Luther com. ^. Epist. latin. fol. ^, 4. ad Philip^um.
I am burned with the great flame of my untamed flesh I, who ought to be
fervent in the Spirit, am fervent in the flesh, in lust, ^ath, etc. Eight days
are now past, wherein J neither writ, prayed, nor studied, being vexed partly
with the temptations of the flesh, partly with other trouble. This ^is change
of manners was such from his former course, as that Sl^y^an. Comm^nt. in
English. lib. 3. anno. 21. fol. 29.
Sleydam the Protestant says: Luthers Profession was not of life or manners
but of Doctrine; further saying that Sl^ydan vbi supra fol. 2^.
Luther wished, that he were removed from the office of preaching, because his
manners, and life did not answer to his Profession. And hereupon (as the
world knows) he persuaded Catharine Bore to leave her Monastery, whom he
after married. Now I refer to any man of sincere and impartial judgment,
whether the Profession of Chastity, prayer, Humility, and desire of saving ones
soul (for such was Luthers Life in the Papacy) be the effects of a false
religion; and contrariwise, insatiablenes of lust, and rage toward Women, with
contempt of prayer etc. can be a Character of a true Religion: O no. Non Luc. 6.
est arbor ^ona, quae facit fructus malos.

Animaduersion LVIII.
THat Luther changed his Doctrine touching saying of Mass as being persuaded
by the Devil, is evident out of his own ^ords; for Luther thu^ writes
hereof: Upon a Luther. to. 7. Wittenberg
time I was suddenly awaked about midnight; Then Sat^n began this disputation
with me, saying: Harken right learned Doctor Luther, thou have ce^ebrated
Mass^ by the space of fyfteene years etc. And so Luther himself i^ the book
hear alleged in the marget sets down the Arguments at large, which the
Devil used to diswade him from saying of Mass; to which Arguments Luther
giving assent, did for bear after to say Mass. Now that Luther had not this
Apparition from any good Angel, appears, First, in that Luther terms him
that appeared, Satan; Secondly, because Luther thus in another place
confesses, saying: J have Luther in loc. Com. Class 4. p. 59.
no apparition of Angels; J have made a covenant with the Lord, that he should
not send me visions. Now that this cannot be only any Spiritual fight or
conference in mind with the Devil, as M. Chark, and D. Fulke do answer,
appears, in that Luther says: The Devil spoke Luth. tom. 7. Wittenberg.
to him in a base and great voice, so as he made Luther to sweat, and his heart
to tremble; again the same apppeareth in that Luther says (as is set down
above) that he was first awake; and that then after the Disputation begun;
But howsoever admit it were but a spiritual fight or Disputation, yet in
either case the persuasions and arguments, whereunto Luther here yealdeth, came
confessedly from the Devil; and what difference then is there, whether the
Devil made them to Luther by sensible conference, or by inward suggestion?

Animaduersion LIX.
AS Luther was instructed by the Devil to impugn the Mass; so were
Carolostadius and Swinglius (two great introducers of Protestancy in those
former times) in like manner indoctrinated by the Devil against the Mass.
Touching Carolostadius, (whom Luther calls a Man Luth. in loc. com. Class. 5.
page 47.
given over unto a reprobate sense.) This man impugned the Mass under pretense
of Visions and pretended conferences with God, of whom the Book entitled:
Conspiracy for pretended reformation, thus writes: Carolostadius Luth, tom. 3.
Penens. fol. 68.
a preacher professing the Gospel, etc. attributed much to Cabinet teachers,
and pretended conference with God; And yet his pretended visions were but mere
Illusions of the Devil, of whom even Luther thus says: Carolostadius In
Theol. Calu in Pr^^em.
had his expositions from the Devil. As concerning Swinglius (whom Conradus
Schlusse^burg the Protestant) calls a man of unfortunate memory) This man
disputed publikly at Zurick for the abolishing of the Mass, and received
confessedly his nightly Instruction by D^eame from an Admonisher, So writes
Swinglius of himself herein. tom. 1. l. de sub. fid. Eucharist. fol. 249.
whether Black or White (says he) I remember not. Which Instruction is
acknowledged by Protestants themselves to be a mere Imposture of Satan. For
thus has Conradus Schlusselburg left recorded: Sole In Theol. Caluinist. in
^roaem.
meridiano clartus est, non Deum verum, sed Diabolum ipsissimum etc. It is more
clear then the Sun, that not the true God, but the Devil himself did
inspire the Sacramentary Heresy into Swinglius by Dream. Thus far of these
three former main Impostours, (I mean Luther, Carolostadius, and Swinglius)
all of them receiving their instruction from the Devil, for their abolishing
and impugning of the Mass.

Animaduersion LX.
Diverse A^liaphorists, or Neutralls in Religion, do maintain, that whosoever
belieueth the Apostles Creed, and living a good life may be saved. Now that the
Creed cannot be the Boundary, or limit of Christian faith is thus proved:
First, because though the Protestant and the Catholic do indifferently repeat
the Creed, yet they understand every Article thereof in a different sense,
th^one from the other. For example, I believe 1. in God. The Catholic
belieues, that his God no way cooperateth, or works sin in man. The
Protestant belieues, that God does; and therefore Beza says, that God In his
Display of Popish practices. p. 102.
exciteth the wicked will of one thief to kill another. And in Jesus 2.
Christ, his only Son. The Catholic belieues in Christ, who is God of God,
and equal to his Father, who suffered Death (quoad sufficientiam) for all
mankind; A Savior, who died only in Bo^y, and not in Soul; Finally a Savior,
who from his first Conception was endued with all knowledge wisdom, and
providence; and exempt from all ignorance, passion, and perturbation: The
Protestant beli^ueth in Christ, as his Savior, yet in all these circumstances
touching Christ, differently from the Catholic. Descended 3. into Hell. The
Catholic, by Hell, in this place understands Limbus Patrum, from whence our
Savior did deliver the souls of the lust, there detayned till his coming:
But the greatest part of Protestants do understand in this article, the grave,
by the word, Hell. He 4. ascended into Heaven; both the Catholics and the
Protestants do teach, that Christ truly in body ascended up into Heaven;
whereas the Lutherans Luther. bib. de sacra Caena Domini, tom. 2. fol 11^.
do teach, that Christ's Body is in all places, with the Divinity; And that
therefore it did not after his passion really ascend up into Heaven, it being
there both before and after his passion. To judge 5. the quick and the Dead;
The Catholic belieues, that Christ shall so judge man, as that his good works
(receiving all their force from our Saviors Passion) shall be rewarded. The
Protestant belieueth that Christ shall reward only a ba^e, and special faith.
The like disparity of the belief of the Articles of the Creed by the Catholic
and the Protestant, might be exemplifyed in the other following Articles of the
Creed here omitted for breuity. Only I conclude, that seeing it is the sense,
and not the words only, which makes the Creed, which Christians ought
necessarily to believe; and seeing the Catholic and the Protestant b^lieue the
words thereof in different, or rather contrary senses; therefore it follows,
that it is not sufficient for a Christian, in respect of faith, only nakedly to
believe the words of the Creed; but he is obliged (if so he expects
salvation) to believe the Articles thereof in that sense (and in no other)
wherein the Apostles did dictate them.

Animaduersion LXI.
ADmitting, that both Protestant and Catholic did believe the Creed in a true
sense; yet follows it not, that this belief (I mean in respect of belief
only) were a sufficient belief or faith, for the salvation of Man. The reason
hereof is this; because it is most certain, that there are diverse points of
Christian Religion, houlden necessarily to be believed in the judgment both of
the Protestant and Catholic, and yet the same points are not contained or
expressed in the Creed. And to insist in these following: 1. That there are
certain Divine writings of infallible authority, penned by the Holy Ghost;
which w^ commonly call the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. 2. That
there are spiritual substances, which we call Angels, and that many thousands
of them did fall after their Creation, and are become those malignant spirits,
which we call Devils. 3. That there is any material place of Hell for the
wicked, of which we find nothing in the judgment of the Protestants, seeing
they understand the grave, by the word, Hell, in the Creed. 4. That the pains
of the damned shall be for all Eternity. 5. That Adam presently upon his Creation
did fall from the Grace of God; and thereby transferred Original sin upon
all mankind. 6. That the world was once drowned for sin, which inundation is
commonly called, Noes flood. 7. That our Savior, whilst he conuersed here
upon earth, did work any miracles. 8. That S. John Baptist was our Saviors
precursour, or forerunner. 9. That our Savior did choose to him certain Men
for his Apostles, who first did preach and plant the Christian faith throughout
the whole world. 10. That Circumcision is now forbidden, as a thing ungodly.
11. That there are any Sacraments of the New Testament, instituted by Christ
for the good of man's Soul. Lastly, (to omit some others) 12. That before the
ending of the world, Antichrist shall come; who shall be a designed Enemy of
Christ, and shall labor to subvert and overthrow all Christian Religion. All
these points both Protestant and Catholic do believe, and hold, that the
belief of them is necessary to Salvation; And yet not any of these Articles
are expressed or set down in the Creed: Whence I conclude, that the Apostles
Creed cannot be a sufficient boundary, to contain and limit an auayleable
Faith.

Animaduersion LXII.
THe bitter Inuectiues of the Protestants (one against another) are of
sufficient force to discover their dissentions in doctrine; as where Luther
says: We Luther in These. Cont. Louaniens. These. 21.
seriously iu^ge the Swinglians and Sacramentaries to be Heretics, and Aliens
from the Church of God. And to confront this, Swinglius thus retorteth upon
Luther: Luther Swingl. tom. 2. in resp. ad Luther. fol 458.
is guilty of high blasphemy, against the nature, and essence of God etc. To
descend to the Puritans and Protestants in England, we find, that the book
entitled, Constitutions, and Canons Ecclesiastical, printed anno ^604. does
ipso facto, excommunicate the Puritans for their maintaining of these positions
following, as they are there set down in the Book: The worship of the Church
of England, is corrupt, superstitions, unlawful, repugnant to the Scriptures;
The Articles of the Bishops Religion are Erroneous, their Rites Antichristian
etc. Now, the Protestants do thus r^quite the Puritans, saying: The M. Powell
in h^s consi^erations.
Puritans are notorious and manifest Schismatics cut of from the Church: And
again: The M. Pa^ks in his Ep. De^ic.
Puritans seek to undermine the foundation of faith. Now add hereto, that
although infinite other passages might be brought to show the great discord in
faith among the foreign Protestants; yet there is no one more short Argument
to convince this point, then to recur to the four Catalogues of Protestant
Books, set down in the later end of the Book called. The Protestants Apology
of the Roman Church. In which 4. Catalogues, one may find about three hundred
Books, written in great acerbity of style, by one Protestant, against another.
The names of all which books are taken out of Coccius his Thesaurus, or from
Hospinian; both which Authou^s dyed many years since. Now if so m^^y Books of
disagreements in faith, among the Protestants, were made within so sport a
Time; how many hundred more might be alleged, if one did know all other Books
written by the Protestant against the Protestant, since the death of those two
former men?

Animaduersion LXIII.
MAny vulgar and unlearned Protestants (and especially the Caluinists, and
Puritans) do condemn the Catholic Roman Religion, because it defends and
practizeth diverse Ceremonies; they ignorantly tearming such Ceremonies,
Idolatrous and superstitious. And there is no one argument more preuayling with
such men to auert them from our Catholic Religion, the^ this: Now, to take a
way this scandal o^ stumbling block, I say, that if it were God good pleasure,
to have his Faith and Religion of the old Testament (which for the time was the
true Religion) to consis^ much in Ceremonies, as we see it did fa^^ out in the
several Sacrifices appointed by God: In the Tabernacle, with the
appurtenances, and of what matter, number, and qualityes all things should be,
as also with proui^ion of Oil and Lamps; The Arc, The propitiatory, the
Consecration of priests, the Institution of all vestures, vessels, and other
holy things then belonging to the service of God; and all these to be made,
performed, and done after a strange and different manner, as we read in
Exodus: As also the Institution of Circumcision (consisting in paring away a
piece of flesh, which served for freeing Man in that time) from Origin^ Sin:
the preparing and eating of the Paschall Lamb; sprinkling the doors with the
blood thereof, and infinite other Ceremonies recorded in the foresaid book of
Exodus; I say, if this was Gods unsearchable Will to ordain these things,
during the time of the Old Law, wherein he would have the Honor, Service, and
worship exhibited to ^im partly to consist: why then may not our Savior
institute the Religion and faith of Christians believing in him, to be attended
on with diverse Ceremonies; and yet this without any Superstition or Idolatry?
Now our Adversaries common evasion to this our Argument, is to say; that God
instituted Ceremonies in the Old Law, to serve as figures, or Types of things,
which were after to fall out in the New Law; which Ceremonies were the^ to end,
upon the promulgation of the faith of Christ. This answer is most
impertinent. First, because not all the Ceremonies in the Old Law, (but only
some) did serve, as figures or Adumbrations of things to happen in the New
Testament. Secondly, because the Question here is not, why, or to what end the
Ceremonies of the Old Law, were instituted; but only whether Ceremonies tending
to the worship of God be pious, and lawful? Therefore I conclude, that seeing
the Ceremonies in the Old Law were instituted by Gods direction for the worship
of him, as we read in Exodus c. 8 Ostendas populo Caeremonias, and ritus
colendi, (let the other secondary end of them be what it will) that therefore,
and by force of Gods proceeding in the Old Law, we Christians may not think
strange, that our Savior (being God and Man) would now in the New Law
institute (and give to his Church the like power) some Ceremonies and p^blike
Rites, wherewith he will be worshipped, and wherein part of Christian religion
shall consist Now therefore let our Adu^^saries (if they can) give any true
reason why the Cerem^nies of the Old Law (b^ing incomparably more in number)
shall be accounted lawful, and yet the Ceremonies of the New Law, or Testament
(as long as they are reputed, but Ceremonies) must be r^puted superstitions a^
Idolatrous.

Animaduersion LXIV.
WE Catholics charge the Protesta^^^ with ancient Heresies. For example, w^
show, how the Manichees according to S Austin deprived Man L. de Haeres. cap.
4^.
of Freewill; Ho^ ^ouinian Ier. l 1. cont. I^^in and Aug l. Haeres. cap.
taught that Fasting was not m^ritorious, and Virginity was no better, the^
wedlock or marriage. How Aerius Austin l. de Haeres. c. 33.
taug^ it to be most unlawful to pray, or offer^^ Sacrifice for the Dead How
the Arians L. 1. cont. Marin. cap. ^.
rejected all unwritten Traditions: who a^^^ Athanas. in Apolog. pro fuga.
perpetrated Sacrilege against the Sacraments, Altars, Priests, and Religious
person. How the Austin l. ^ Vnitate. cap. 12.
Donatists taught the Church of Christ to be Jnuisible. How the Denial (...)
the Real Presence was condemned by certain ancient Heretics of Theodoret
Dial. 3.
Jgnatius h^^ time. How Zenaias Niceph. l. 16. ca. 17^
Persa impugned all worship, due to the Images of Christ, and his Saints.
Finally (to pass over many other Protestant Doctrines, first introduced by the
old Heretics:) how the Ierom, in Explic. Symbol. ad Damas. and Aus^. de Temp.
sermon 91.
Possibility of the Commandments was condemned in certain ancient Heretics.
In the condemnation of all which points we are to observe, that the Heretics
of those ancient times and our Protestants did, without any difference or
disparity at all, believe the same Heresies, or Negative Conclusions, as being
in no sort varied through any Circumstances, or other Collateral respects. Now
by way of recrimination the Protestants seek to inuolue us Catholics within
in the said fault of teaching ancient Heresies; But observe the difference
between, what the Catholics do teach, and those old Heretics touching the
objected and alleged points, and thou will wonder good Reader, at our
Adversaries for their so charging of us. I will exemplify this for breuity in
this one point, and so ex vno discite omnes. D. Fulke insulteth against the
Catholics, thus saying: Of the D. Fulke in his answe^e to a Counterfeyte
Catholic. p. 22.
Heretics Caiani, you have learned to call upon the Angels: he producing
Epiphanius in proof hereof: Now Epiphanius his true words of this point are
these: Non Epiph. Haeres. 38.
posse aiunt aliquos saluari etc. The Heretics Catani taught, that not any
could be saved, till they had gone throughout all sin; and committing
thereupon wicked things and actions; they called upon the name of such, as were
true Angels, and of such as were by them untruly termed Angels, referring to
this Angel, or that Angel (proprian actionem) their peculiar action; saying,
when they committed their wickedness: O tu Angele, vtor tuo opere: O Angel, I
now use or perform: thy work etc. Now who can with any show of truth charge us
Catholics with the Heresy of the Catani herein? since it is the vnvariable
Jdentity of an Heresy conspiring in all circumstances, which must insimulate
several men within the belief thereof: But do we Catholics teach or believe
touching praying to the Angels, such beastly points as these Caiani are here
charged by Epiphanius to have done?

Animaduersion LXV.
IT is a main point to observe, whether Protestancy, or our Catholic Religion
do more enclyne, by force of their doctrine, their different professors to
Vice and Turpitude of manners, or to Virtue and Piety in conversation. Since we
read: Luc. 6.
Vnaquaeque arbor de fructu suo cognoscitur: Let us then take into our
consideration diverse positions of both the Religions. First then touching the
Protestants principles: Luther Sermon. de Moyse.
says, that the Ten Commandments appertain not to Christians; with whom Fox
conspireth in these words: The ten Fox. Act. Mon. pa. ^335.
Commandments were given us, not to do them. This being supposed as true, why
should a man be punished, for breaking any, or all of them? The Protestants
doctrine of Justification by faith only, much encourages a Man to sin; since
thereby neither Good works are necessary, nor sin can any way endanger our
Salvation. For we find Luther thus to teach: It Luth. upon the Galathians
Englished. c. ^.
is impiety to affirm, that faith without Charity, justifies not. And
Conradus Schlusselburg In Catal. Haeret. in Epist. Dedicat.
will not admit good works to be necessary to Salvation, only Necessitate
praesentiae. Now that committing of sin is not prejudicial to Man's
Salvation, is auerred by D. Whitaker, thus writing: Si quis Contra Bellar.
controuers. 2. q 5. p. ^0.
actum fidei habet, ei peccata non nocent: Sins are not hurtful to him, who
has an Act of faith. Again D. Whitaker thus further teaches: Christiani
Whitak contra Camp. rat. 8. p. 153.
execratione legis liberantur: if so, why may not a Christian without fear
break the ten Commandments? And according hereto Fulke thus teaches: David
In his Tower disput. with Edmund Camp. the second days Conference.
even when he committed adultery, was, and remained the Child of God. To be
short: Luther thus encourages Man to sin, saying: A Luth tom. 2. wittenb. de
captiuit. Ba^il. fol. 74. and Luth. in loc. Com. Class ^ c. 27.
Christian baptized is so rich, that though he would, he cannot loose his
Salvation, by any sin (how great soever) unless he will not believe; and
again; as nothing iustifyeth but belief, so nothing sins, but misbeliefe.
To proceed, the Protestants doctrine of Reprobation, which teaches, that some
Men are condemned to Hell, even from their Mothers Wombes, though they labor
never so much in exercise of Virtue, tends to the same effect: according
hereto Calvin (Instit. l. 3. c. 23. paragr. 6.) says: God by his Counsel and
Appointment, does so ordain, that among men some be borne destined to certain
Death, from their Mothers womb, who by their perdition may glorify his Name.
In like manner the infallible Certainety of Salvation of others, works the
same effect; since it teaches that he, that is predestined to be saved, is
assured of his Salvation, notwithstanding the greatest facinorous Sins
whatsoever, which he shall at any time perpetrate. Which Certainty of Salvation
by our Adversaries Doctrine, is most infallible even during the committing of
Sin; Since otherwise if upon the new committing of any Sin, the party
should begin to be uncertain of his salvation, then follows it, that his
former certainty was no true certainty at all. But now to turn our eye upon
some of our Catholic Theoremes, and to observe, whether they intend either to
the increase of Vice, or Virtue. We teach, that works (accompanied with a true
faith) as they receive their price and virtue from the promise of Christ, and
from the dignity of his Pashon, do justify; which Doctrine therefore must needs
greatly encourage the belieuers thereof, to the exercise of Good works. We
further reach restitution for wrongs committed. We teach Confession of sins
(an Act otherwise most ungrateful to Man's Nature) and this not to be
efficacious, except it be attended on with Repentance; and with a full
Resolution, not hereafter to commit the like Sins confessed. We maintain the
doctrine of Purgatory, which much curbeth a Man from committing of Sin, since
this Doctrine teaches, that a sinner (if so he make not satisfaction in this
world before his death) must suffer temporal torments, after his Death. We in
lik^ manner teach, and allow Fasting, and yet D. Wills says: Neither is
Willet in Synops. pa. 243 Wittenberg. in Ex^g. Po^^d cap. 7.
God better worshipped by eating, or not eating. We also approve the Doctrine
of Single life and Chastity; to which doctrine Luther Luth. tom 5 1. Cor. fol.
107.
is so adverse, as that ht thus writes: Marriage is as gold, and Spiritual or
single life, as dung. We further teach and commend Voluntary Poverty; the
contrary to which doctrine D. Willet teaches in these words: He Willet in
Synops. page 245.
is an Enemy to the glory of God, who changes his rich estate, wherein he may
serve God, for a poor. So just reason had S. Edwin Sands (a most forward
Protestant) thus to write even out of his own experience in Travel: Let the
In his relation of Re^igi^ns.
Protestants look with the eye of Charity upon those of the Papacy, and they
shall find some excellent Orders of Government, some singular helps for
increase of Godliness and Devotion, for the Conquering of sin, for the
profitting in Virtue. Thus far for a taste, whether the Catholic Religion, or
the Protestants do more enclyne a Man to Virtue or Vice?

Animaduersion LXVI.
IT is granted by our Adversaries, that Austin, Jerome, Epiphanius etc. and the
rest of the Fathers of those ages were maintayners of Papistry (as they call
it.) And according hereto we find Luther to say: I Luth tom. 2. contra Regem
Angliae. fol. 344.
regard not, if a thousand Austins stood against me, of Jerome he thus writes:
Jn the In Colloq. Mensal. de Patrib. and lib. de seruo arbitrio.
writings of Jerome there is not one word of true faith in Christ, and perfect
Religion; Finally he thus concludes: The Luther vbi supra.
Apology of Philip Melancthon does far exceed all the Doctors of the Church,
yea even Austin himself. Well, I no^ infer from all this, that all the Articles
of our Catholic Religion were believed in the days of Tertullian, Origin, and
Cyprian; all which three Fathers lived presently after the Second Age. Thus I
dispute: Austin, Austin against Origin in Haeres. 43. against Tertull in
Haeres. 86. against Cyprian, in tom. 3. lib. de Baptism. 2. cap. 7. See also
Jerome in lib. contra Iouinian. and Vigilanm. Epipha. l. de Haeres.
Jerome, Epiphanius, and others, did write against Origin for his teaching,
that the Devils in the end should be saved; against Tertulli^n for denying
second marriages; against Cyprian, for his maintayning Rebaptization. Now here I
insist. If Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian, had dissented from Austin, Jerome,
Epiphanius, and other Fathers, in those Catholic Articles, wherewith they are
truly charged by the Protestants, then without all doubt Austin, Jerome, and
the rest would in their Catalogues of Heresies, and other their writings, have
as well registered other their opinions for Heresies, in which Origin,
Tertullian, and Cyprian had dissented from them, as they did register the three
foresaid Heresies. But no such condemnation is extant in their writings; from
which consideration we ineuitably conclude, that what Articles of our Roman
Religion were taught by Austin, Jerome, and the rest of those ages, writing of
the Heresies of those times, all the same Catholic points were also
indifferently taught, and maintained by the foresaid most ancient Fathers,
Origin, Tertullian and Cyprian.

Animaduersion LXVII.
WHereas some of our Adversaries labor (what they can) to keep intercourse
with the ancient Fathers; knowing that it is a foul blemish to their
Religion, absolutely to break with them; and that thereupon they endeavor to
detort diverse of their authorityes against our Catholic faith; therefore for
the better preventing in general of all such misaplyed testimonies, I have
thought good to set down these ensuing Premonitions.

The first, that seeing the Fathers could not foresee what Opinions of faith
would rise in these times, that therefore they could not write of all things
now questioned, so distintly and clearly, as now could be wished. And touching
the Fathers impossibility hereof; It is acknowledged by Beza in Epist. Theolog.
Epist. 82. p. 382. Kempnitius Exa part. 1. fol 80. D. White in his way to the
true Church Preface to the Read. Sect. 7.
Beza Kempnitius, D. White, and other Protestants. Now therefore it cannot be
expected with any show of Reason, that the Fathers should condemn most
articulately, fully, punctually, or ex professo, every point mantayned by the
Protestants at this day.

The second Observation; That we are to understand any obscure saying of a
Father, agreably to his more many plain and more clear sayings; And much more
then that we ought not to insist upon any seeming doubtful saying, against
many more, which are plain, and for such confessed. And therefore Snecanus
(the Protestant) says well herein in these words, touching the authorityes
alleged out of Tertullian: It is Snecanus, Method. descript. page 424.
fitting, that the fewer be understood by the more, and lest one speec^ should
overthrow many, that one is to be expounded according to all rather then
against a^ Which assertion is most true, and grounded even upon force of Reason.

The third Observation; That we ought to understand the Fathers doubtful
Saying, according to the then common receaded Opinion of the other Fathers.
This caution is observed precisely by S. Austin: For whereas Iulianus (the
Heretic) to prove, that Children were without Original Sin, objected this
sentence out of Saint Chrysostom: We baptize Jnfants, though they have no
sins: S. Austin teaches how to understand this obscure sentence saying:
Jntellige Austin, com. 7. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. ^ c. 6.
propria, understand it of sins of their own (or actual) and there is no
contention; But thou will say, why did not Chrysostom add this word: Propria?
The reason was, because Chrysostom disputing in a Catholic Church, he thought
he should not be otherwise understood; No body was then troubled with such a
Question; you not as then wrangling, he spoke securely. Thus far S. Austin.

The fourth observation; We ought (according to our Adversaries own rule) to
distinguish, when a Father writes Doctrinally and Dogmatically, or
sententially, and ex professo; from that which the same Father writes
Antagonisti^e, and in heat of dispute: For that in this later kind, the
Fathers speaking ad personam, and being more attent and busied, how to convince
and overcome their Adversaries, then always precisely obseruant or circumspect
of their manner of speaking, (which they never doubted would be understood
otherwise, then according to the Catholic received sense) their meaning may
the more colourably be mistaken. According hereto some of the ancient Fathers
writing against Pelagius and his Sect, who ascribed overmuch to Freewill, did
not perhaps so fully dispute in the defense of the Catholic Doctrine of
Freewill, as they might have done. This course the Fathers did sometimes take
(of which the Kemp nit. Exa. part. 1. fol. 80. D. Humfrey in Iesuitism. part.
2. rat. 5.
Protestants make advantage) that thereby they might the more easily convince
their Adversaries Heresy, resting so much on the contrary side.

The fifth observation (which in part conspireth with the former:) The Fathers
somtymes in a Rhetorical and amplifying manner do use certain transcendent
speeches (as also some more moderate Catholics have done) in praise of our
Blessed Lady, or in honor of the Cross, or the like, then being taken
literally, can well be justified: But they were more bold so to write, because
they (as then having no Adversaries to their Catholic doctrine in those
points) might rest assured, that their words would be taken in that pious
sense, wherein they delivered them. Of which kind of their writing our
Adversaries take hold, against the said Fathers.

The last observation here shall be, that when the Catholics do alledg the
Fathers, the Protestants seek to charge the said Fathers so alleged, with some
one Error, or other, and therefore say they, his authority is to be rejected
in any other point; which especially happens in Tertullian, Origin, and
Cyprian, as is above intimated. But to this you may answer, that you produce
the Fathers only in such Catholic points, touching the which they were not
written against by any other Father; and therefore their authority therein is
of force; since it is presumed hereby, that all the other Fathers (and
consequently all the Church of God) agreed with them therein.

Animaduersion LXVIII.
IF your Adversaries pretend, that all the wrytings and memory of Protestants
in former ages were extinguished by the Popes of the said, and after succeeding
ages, you may show how absurd this Assertion is; And the reason hereof is, in
that the Popes of those times could not presage, that Protestancy should in
these our times sway more, then any other Heresies condemned in their very
times; which other Heresies remain yet registered to this very day, by the
acknowledgment of the Protestants. Again, the personal Benedictus the third,
was written against by the Council of Constance. Gregory the s^auenth by
Benno. Eugeniu^ (the Pope) was written against by the Council of Basil.
vices and faults of some Popes are recorded in histories, yet to be read. Is
it then probable, that the Popes were so solicitous to extinguish all
remembrance of the Protestant faith, and yet content to suffer their own less
justifiable lives of themselves and their predecessors to be registered, for
all ages after to peruse? Lastly, in the Canons of each age, there is made
mention of all particular Heresies of those times condemned by the said
Counsels; Stands it then with any show of Reason, that the Pope, and the
Counsels should be so void of judgment, as carefully to register all other
impugned Heresies, and on the other side, as carefully to suppress all arising
opinions of Protestancy?

Animaduersion LXIX.
IF you intend to bring and object any foul and wicked sayings (especially out
of Luther, against the Blessed Trinity, or about his acknowledged Lust, and
sensuality) be careful to note the Edition of the Book, wherein such sayings
are to be found; For in some later Editions of his works, many such sentences
are for very shame left out, and unprinted: And thereupon there are diverse
Protestants, who utterly deny, that ever any such wicked, or sensual words
were written by him.

Animaduersion LXX.
Our Adversaries labor by several ways to depresse the force of Miracles,
exhibited in proof of the Roman Religion: For first, some of them do deny the
working of all Miracles; and to fortify this their denial, they think it
sufficient, if they can produce but any one or two strange relations, supposed
to be Miracles, and yet after discovered to be but forgeryes, to the disgracing
of all true Miracles; but this evasion is weak, seeing by force thereof we
should deny all the books of Scripture, because some false wrytings were in
the Primitive Church obtruded under the names of the Apostles, as Cont Aduers.
log. and prophet. l. 1. c. 20.
Austin, and Hist. l. 3. c 19.
Eusebius do record. Again if they will deny all Miracles, they may also by
the same reason, deny all History, either profane or Ecclesiastical.
Therefore if we will ascribe so much confidence to the wrytings of Eusebius,
Zozomene, Austin, Jerome, and others, as we do to the lives of Liuy, or
Commentaryes of Caesar, or to Speeds Cronicle, we cannot reject all Miracles for
forgeryes and untruths. Other of our Adversaries confess the doing of many
Miracles urged by the Catholykes, but then they ascribe them to the power of
the Devil, and do commonly style them: Antichristian So do the Cent. call them
Cent. 4. col. 1445. and Cent. 5 1486. In like manner Osiand. also styles them
Cent. 10. 11. 12.
wounders, and lying signs. But against this subterfugion; I say, it cannot be
applied to the Miracles wrought in the primitive Church, and eecorded by
Zozomene, Austin, Jerome, and others long before the coming of Antichrist,
since most of our Adversaries do place Antichrists first coming, in So does D.
Willet teach in his Synop. p. 160. D. Fulke in his answer to a counterf. Cath.
p. 36. D. Downenam in but his Treatise of Antichrist. lib. 2. page 4.
Boniface who was Pope in the year 1006. long after the days of the former
Fathers: Secondly I say, that our Adversaries in ascribing the Miracles to the
working of Antichrist and (consequently of the Devil) do over near interleage
with the Jews condemning the Miracles of Christ in these words: This man
Math. 1.
casts not out Devils, but by Belsebub the Prince of Devils. Agai^^ I say,
that the Protestant Vrsinus trul^ says, that the In Comment Catech. 21.
Power of the Miracles o^ Antichrist are not true Miracles, but such, a^ the
Order of Nature observed, may be effected by the deceyte of men, or Devils:
But diverse miracles are recorded, which transcend the power of the Devil; as
to stay the flux and reflux of the sea, or to cure incurable diseases, without
applying any secondary means, and such like etc. Of which there are many
miracles recorded by the former Fathers. Thirdly, I aver that the Miracles of
the Devil are ever done to some vain and pernicious end, and not for the good
of the particular person, upon whom they are wrought. Fourthly, if the Devil
could effect such stupendous works, how chances it, that he would never
concur with condemned, and on all sides acknowledged miscreants, to
strenghthen and countenance thereby those men's misbeliefe, and Heresies, I
mean with Simon Magus, Porphiry, Julian the Apostata, Mahomet etc. and other
Sects condemned, even by the Protestants for most erroneous? Lastly I conclude,
that our Adversaries in condemning all Miracles, either but as forgeries, or as
the Works of the Devil, do charge diverse Princes, Commonwealths,
Ecclesiastical persons, and infinite multitudes of people both of former and
later times, with extreme simplicity (yea Lunacy) in suffering such forgeries
and delusions to be obtruded upon them. I will adioyne hereto the miraculous
preservation for many hundred years of certain Relics: I will pass over the
uncorrupted bodies of many Saints even till this day, and will insist in the
miraculous preservation of the Eucharist, stabbed with knyfes by the Jews many
scores of years since (if not some hundreds) and yet remaining to be yearly
seen, even with spots of blood, at the chief Church in Brussells in the low
Countries. What can our Adversaries answer herero? If they grant the miracle,
they withal grant the truth of the Doctrine of the Real Presence: To deny it,
by saying, that when one host is corrupted through time, another is secretly
thrust in the former place, is more then absurd: For would the Princes of those
Countries, the Lords, Bishops, Prelates, other Religious persons, and the whole
Communalty suffer themselves to be thus abused from time to time with such
impostures, but that they would be most desirous to find out and discry all
such wicked stratagemes and devises? Truly I do not see, what answer in full
weight of Reason can be given hereto, to convince the judgment of any
sufficient Man.

Animaduersion LXXI.
THat Catholic Religion affords Salvation to the Professors thereof, is
proved several ways even from our Adversaries own pens: And first: Because
o^^ Adversaries do reach, that the Church o^ Rome (notwithstanding her presumed
E^rours) is the true Church of Christ; and consequently her Professors capable
of Sa^uation. According hereto thus writes D. Field L. of the Church. c. 46.
: We doubt not, but that Church, ^t which the Bishop of Rome with more then
Lu^^ferlike pride exalted himself, was notwithstanding the true Church of God;
and that it held a saving profession of the truth in Christ. D. S^^^ auerreth
the same verity in these words: In his Defense against Penry. page 176.
you think, that all the Popish sort, whe^^ dyed in the popish Church, are
damned, y^^ think absurdly, and do dissent from the judgment of all learned
Protestants. With the^^ conspireth (to omit others) D. Couell th^^ writing: We
In his Defense of M. Hoo^er. page 77.
affirm them of the Church^ Rome to be a part of the true Church of Christ and
that those, that live and dye in that Church may be saved. Another Reason may
be taken from the lawfulnes (even in the judgment of the learned Protestants)
of Chi^dren of Papists (as we are styled) whether they be Baptized by Catholic
Priests, (...) Protestant Ministers: And the cause of the lawfulnes thereof is
delivered by the Protestants in these words: Because So teach the Deuines of
Geneua, in their propositions and principles disputed at Genesis p. 178. the same
is taught by D. Whitg^^fe in (...) Defense, pa. ^23. by M. Hooker. Eccles po^.
l. 3. p. 131. and by other
we affirm, that those Children are comprehen^ within the Covenant of eternal
life, by means of the faith of their Parents. A third Reason of the
Protestants true judgment herein concerns the Fathers of the Primitive Church
in general; who that they lived and dyed Papists is most evident, by what has
been confessed above by our Adversaries. Now, of them Cartwrigh^ thus writes:
I Cartwright, in his Reply, and in D. Whitguifts Defense. p. 82
doubt not, but that diverse Fathers of the Greek Church, who were patrones of
Freewill, are saved. The like charitable opinion of the Fathers (though Papists
both living and dying) is delivered by Contra Ra^. Camp. page 78.
D. Whitaker, notwithstanding the Fathers Doctrine, touching Satisfaction and
Merit of Works. Finally the Protestants judgment is also herein manifested in
their commonly giving, in their writings and speeches, to Austin, Jerome,
Ambrose, and the rest (whom they acknowledge to Profess and dye in our
Catholic faith and Religion (the name and title of Saint, as S. Austin, S.
Jerome, etc.

Animaduersion LXXII.
IF it be urged, that the Denial of Freewill (for example) was taught by
Manicheus; and consequently that the Protestant faith therein is as ancient, as
those Primitive times; It may be replied, that this particular Heretic, or
that particular Heretic, did teach but one or other Protestant Article in
those days, and were sustantly written against for such their Innouations; the
said Innouatours being Catholic in all other points. And therefore you may
tru^^ infer, that the urging of such examples is merely impertinent, either for
the proof of the Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, or for the Visibility
of the Protestant Church in those days.

Animaduersion LXXIII.
IF you dispute with any Protestant by writing, or enterchange of letters,
write nothing, but Matter with as much compendiousne^, as the Subject will
bear, without any Verbal Excursions, or digressions: For this proceeding will
force your Adversary to reply (if he will reply) to the Ma^ter; For otherwise
leaving the material^ point, which is chiefly issuable, and to be handled, he
will shape a reply to other less necessary stuff delivered by you; And then
his Reply must pass abroad (by the help of many partial tongues) for a full
answer to your whole Discourse.

Animaduersion LXXIV.
WHereas you may allege diverse acknowledged Heresies (both in the judgment of
Protestants, and Catholics) out of the Books concerning diverse persons, who
believed some few points of Protestancy, recorded in the said Books; here I
speak of W^^ldo, Wiclife etc. Now if here your Adversary Disputant does avouch
(as many Protestants do) that these Heresies were falsely obtruded and fathered
upon the said presumed Protestants by their Enemies: you may here reply, that
to affirm this is against the force of all Reason; For seeing the same Books
do make indifferent mention both of the Protestant opinions, and of the other
Heresies, defended by the same Men; either the said Books are to be believed
in both, or to be rejected concerning both: If the first, then it is certain,
that those men did believe those acknowledged Heresies: If the later, then the
said Books are not of sufficient authority to prove, that there were any
Protestants in those ages.

Animaduersion LXXV.
IN your proofs drawn from Scripture, labor to be much practiced in the
Protestant Translation of it; of which infinite places make for the Catholic
Cause, even as the Scripture is translated by the Protestant; For this Course
gauleth them far more, then if you insisted only in the Catholic Translation.

Animaduersion LXXVI.
I Will here set down certain Observations, which will easily solue all
difficulties or Argument whatsoever, rising from Scripture or Fathers, against
Communion under one kind only.

1. First, whereas sundry places of Scripture and Fathers do speak
indifferently, o^ only make mention of Communion under both kinds, or do
affirm the use thereof to be lawful; yet from hence (which is the point
issuable) cannot be inferred any precept of Christ as necessary to Salvation.

2. Secondly, when such places are urged, which contain in them a Precept, the
same places are either understood of Priests (who do sacrifice) whose bond is
different from theirs of the Laity: Or else they concern only the time, and
place, when (...) where, that custom of both kinds was observed; for the
custom of the Church, whether it be general in the whole Church, or
particular in some notable place thereof, a^ in one Country, Kingdom, Province
etc. has the bynding force of a Law, or Precept: And yet the same custom once
ceasing, the bond of all authority produced in defense of the said custom,
does also cease.

3. Thirdly, In the allegation of any authority for Communion under both kinds,
we are diligently to observe, whether the same makes mention of Forms, or
kinds (to wit, of bread and wine) or only of the things contained under the
said kinds, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ. For in the examples of the
first we shall seldom or never find any one, which imports a Precept, or
Necessity: And though of the later innumerable authorities may be brought; yet
they are all impertinent; seeing the Body and Blood of Christ are as truly
received under either kind alone, as under both: And the Precept in that Case
determines only the thing, and not the Kind.

4. Fourthly, diverse authorities alleged for Laicall Communion under both
kinds, are understood only of Spiritual (not Sacramental) receiving.

5. Fifthly, though the Fathers sometimes signify the Communion to be most
complete and perfect, when it is administered and received under both kinds, in
regard that the effects thereof are more lively expressed; yet this perfection
is but only accidental; and therefore from hence cannot be inferred a Precept,
or Necessity: For (for example) innumerable things there are, which
accidentally would conduce to Grace and Salvation, which yet do not fall under
any bond or Command.

6. Sixthly, the Fathers sometimes reproving such as abstayned from the Chalice,
do only speak against the Manichees, and some other Heretics, who upon a
certain superstition abhorred Wine, as foolishly thinking it to be the gaul
of the Devil, as S. Austin Austin de ^aeres. cap. 46.
relates; and withal denied Christ our Savior to have had true blood; which
nothing concerns this our Catholic Doctrine.

7. Seauently, (which is greatly to be noted) that whereas the only point i^
Controversy is, whether Christ our Savior gave absolute command, not only to
Priests but also to the Laity, to receive under both kinds; As also whether the
Primitive Church did (universally for time and place, and as matter of
necessity) observe the same; yet no one testimony of Scripture or Doctor can
be produced either expressly, or by necessary consequence, affirming the same.

8. Eighthly and lastly, admit any authority could be produced, from a Doctor
mo^^ ancient and learned, which expressly and i^ direct terms should
contradict our Catholic Doctrine; yet the same with any man of judgment and
virtue, could bear (...) force against the infallible Decrees of Oec^menicall,
and General Counsels of God^ Church. Seeing not the Church unto the Doctors,
but the Doctors and their wr^tings ought, and are to be submitted to the
Church. And this observation has i^ weight and force in many other points
(...) Controversies. Thus far touching the seu^rall observations concerning
Communi^ under both, or one kind only.

Animaduersion LXXVII.
THat sentence of Chrysostom is most tru^ Prout Homil. 33. in act. Apost
Haeresiarchae nomen, ita Secta v^catur. To whose judgment herein D. F^^
subscribes in these words: Surely Of the Church. l. 2. c. 9.
it is (...) ^o be denied, but that the naming after the name of Men, was in
the time of the primitive Church, peculiar and proper to Heretics, and
Schismatiks. Which sentences do deadly wound the Innouatours of these times,
who take their Denomination from Luther, Swinglius, Calvin etc. And so for
distinction sake, they are termed, Lutherans, Swinglians, Caluinists etc. as
signifying thereby, that they take their doctrine and faith from those
particular men. Neither can our Adversaries retort upon us this Argument, by
saying that the Word, Papist, is imposed upon us. This proves nothing; seeing
as in those ancient Heretics, (I mean the Arians, Entichians, Manichees) so in
our Sectaries (to wit the Lutherans, Swinglians, Caluinists etc.) these names
are given only out of necessity, and to distinguish their doctrines from all
other doctrines. But now the name, Papist, was ^oyned but lately by Luther, and
this not out of necessity, but of reproach: our faith and Doctrine being
acknowledged to have ^eene in the world many hundred years, before Luthers
time. Again the word, Papist, is not restrained to any one Pope, or to any
peculiar Doctrine taught by the present Church of Rome; but it is indifferently
extended to all Popes, and to all the Doctrines taught by the said Popes: And
(...) for the names of Franciscans, Bernardins etc. in the Catholic Church, it
is clear, that these Names are not imposed for change of Faith; but only for
Institution of several Degrees of a Virtuous, and Religious Life.

Animaduersion LXXVIII.
IN any notable change of Religion, these things following are to be
demonstrated or pointed out. First, the Author of such a change (as above is
intimated.) Secondly, the New Opinion or Doctrine. Thirdly, the time, in which
this new Doctrine was broached. Fourthly, the place, in which it was taught,
Fifthly, and lastly the Persons, who did oppugn and resist this New Doctrine at
its first appearance. None of all which circumstances can be showed concerning
our Catholic Religion, since the times of Christ and his Apostles; But all
these Circumstances can be made plain, and discovered in the Protestant
Religion; therefore it demonstratiuely follows, that the Catholic Religion is
the sole ancient Religion, first unchangeably proceeding from the Institution
of our Savior, and that Protestancy is but Innovation and Nouelty, as but
lately receiving its being, from some other particular Innouatours.

Animaduersion LXXIX.
NO Protestant has more labored to search into the change of our Catholic
Religion, then D. Whitaker has done, who insisteth in diverse particular
Catholic Doctrines; undertaking to show by whom (as Innouations) they were
first brought in: Therefore I will touch all his Instances, showing them to be
more ancient (even by the Confession of other learned Protesta^^s) then the
persons, or times, to whom they be ascribed by the said D. Whitaker. Only for
greater breuity I will content my self with one only acknowledgment (instead
of many) of one learned Protestant in each example. To begin. D. Whitaker says:
1. It is D. Whitak. Cont. Duraeum l. 7. page 480.
manifest, that who first delivered Purgatory for a certain Doctrine, was
Gregory the Great. But against this bare testimony, I oppose the acknowledgment
of D. Fu^ke, thus writing; In his Confutation of Purgatory. p. 36^. and page
303. and 303.
Tertullian, Austin, Cyprian, Jerome, (all more ancient then Gregory the Great)
and a great many more, do witness, that Sacrifice for the Dead (and consequently
the doctrine of Purgatory) is the Tradition of the Apostles. Whitak contra
Duraeum. p. 490.


Secondly, D. Whitaker says: Innocentius the third, was the first, that
instituted auricular Confession for Necessary. This Jnnocentius lived in the
year 1200. To free this Pope, the Centurists. Cent. 3. c. 6. col. 127
Centurists speaking of the ancient Churches usage, do charge Cyprian, and
Tertullian (who lived in the second and third age) For their teaching private
Confession even of thoughts, and lesser sins.

Thirdly, D. Whitaker D. Whita. l. contra Du^aeum pa. 480.
affirms that Pope Siricius was the first, that annexed perpetual Chastity
to the Clergy men, or Ministers of the word: This Instance is overthrown by
the Confession of Kempnitius Kemp nit. in Exam. Council. Trid. p. 50. and 601.
who does reprehend Jerome, Epiphanius, Origin, Ambrose, (all far more ancient,
then this Siricius) for their impugning the supposed lawfulnes of Priests
Marriage.

Fourthly, D. Whit^ker says: Qui D. Whit. vbi supra pa. 480.
Transubstantiationem primus excogitauit, it fuit Innocentius tertius in
Concilio Lateranensi; who first invented Transubstantiation, was Innocentius
the third in the Council of Lateran, which Council was houlden in the year
1215. But I take this objection away by the authority of D. Iesuitism. part. 2.
rat. 5 pa. 628.
Humfrey (as else where I have showed) who writes that Gregory the Great, and
Austin (both which lived a thousand years since) at their first plantation of
Christian Religion here in England, to use the Doctors own words, Jnuexerunt
Transubstantiationem.

Fifthly, the D. further proceeds, saying; Who Contra Duraeum. l. 7. c. 480.
first invented to say, that the body of Christ, frangitur, sensibiliter
tractatur, and dentibus atteritur, was Nicolaus the Second. To this I answer,
saying: it is but a verbal objection, and quarreleth at certain phrases and
words; which words are to be understood in a sober and restrained construction;
and therefore we find the like Phrases to be used by S. Chrysostom (far more
ancient then Nicolaus the second) saying: Christus non Chrysostom in Joan. Homil.
45.
se tantum videri permittit defiderantibus, sed and tangi, and manducari, and
dentes ^arni suae infigi: Christ does not only permit himself to be seen of
those who desire to see him, but also to be touched, and eaten by them, and
their teeth to be fastened in his flesh. A point so true, that Jacobus Andraeas
(a famous Protestant, but a Lutheran) answers this very objection of
Nicolaus, saying; Andraeat in confutat. Ioannis G^inaei p. 274. 275.
Nicolaus nihil continet, quod in scriptis Orthodoxorum Patrum (Chrysostomi
inprimis) non continetur.

Sixthly, D. Whitaker D. Whitak. vbi supra pa. 480.
instanceth in Pope Calixtus, for introducing the Fast of Lent, and of Quatuor
Temporum. But Kempnitius thus writes hereof: Ambrose, Kempnit. in Exam.
Council. Trid. part. 2. page 8^.
Maximus, Taurinensis, Theophilus, Jerome, and others, do affirm the fast of
Lent to be an Apostolical Tradition; and thus they make it more ancient (by
the Confession of Kempnitius) then the times of Calixtus.

Seauenthly, and lastly, D. Whitaker thus writes: Boniface D. Whita. vbi supra
page 480.
the third, was the first, that entitled the Roman Church to be Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum, The Head of all Churches. But this is refuted by D. Whitaker
himself, who affirms, that D. Whitak. vbi supra page 480.
Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus did challenge superiority over other
Bishops, by forging a Canon of the Nicene Council: so inconstant is this
Doctor in his Instances; which later assertion of his touching Zozimus,
Bonifacius, and Celestine, (though it be most false, so far as concerns any
forging of a Canon, and only invented by our Adversaries) yet it frees Boniface
the third, from this supposed Innovation.

Thus far now of D. Whitakers Instances: where we are to understand, that some
of the former Popes did command a more strict observation in some points; as in
not Marrying of Priests, touching Auricular Confession, touching the Fast of
Lent, then before was observed: Now D. Whitakers calumny here lies, in a
wilful confounding of the First Institution of a thing, with a Renouation, or
practice of the same thing: which imposture is above noted.

Animaduersion LXXX.
I Will here draw a Porisma, or Resultancy out of this last Animaduersion. It
is this: Whereas we see such Protestant Doctors (and those of the greatest
Rank) who labor by all reading and means whatsoever, to show the beginning of
our Catholic points; and after all their disquisition and search they cannot
find any color or pretext to insist in more, then Five or sixth points to be
innouated; and yet such their Instances evidently discovered to be of no force,
but most falsely alleged: Therefore the Reader may here justly presume, that
no instances of Innovation can be but suggested, or imagined to be given of the
Change of the Church of Rome, touching the doctrines here following: To wit, 1.
Visibility of the Church, 2 Praying to Saints. 3. Freewill, 4. Merit of Works,
5. Works of Supererogation, 6. Indulgences, 7. Monachism, 8. Limbus Patrum, 9.
Images, the 10. Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, 11. Communion under one
kind. 12. Universality of Grace, 13. The Necessity and virtue of the Sacrament,
14. Inherent Justice, 15. the knowledge of Christ, as Man; 16. His being God of
God, and diverse others. Here I say, no color (how little soever) can be given
of Innovation, or change in any of these our Catholic Articles. For if any
pretext or shadow could be afforded of any change of these, or of any other
doctrines here not specified, D. Whitaker, or some other of our learned
Adversaries would not have been altogether silent therein.

Animaduersion LXXXI.
THe Catholic Doctrine touching Praing to Saints, is chiefly delivered in
these ensuing propositions. The first: It is not lawful to pray to Saints (as
Authors, or principal dispensers of Divine Benefits) to obtain from them
either Grace or Glory, or the means of obtaining eternal felicity; since so
to pray to them, were to make them Gods. And therefore when it is said: Our
Lady help me etc. we are not to insist in the naked words, but in the sense;
which is; Our Lady help me by her intercession, and prayers to her Son; no
otherwise then S. Paul says of himself: To 1. Cor. 9. vt omnes fac^rem saluos.
all men I am become all things, that I may save all; meaning, by his
preaching, and prayers for them.

The second. Saints are not our immedia^^ Mediators by way of Jntercession to
God; b^^ whatsoever they demand, or obtain for us, they demand and obtain it
through Christ, and his Merits: and according hereto we find, tha^ all prayers
of the Church made to Saints, end with this clause: Per Christum Dominu^
nostrum.

The third. The Saints, which reign with God, do pray for us, not only in
general, but it particular. This is proved from those words in Jeremy: If
Moses Jeremy c. 15.
and Samuel tha^ stand before me, my soul is not toward th^^ people. From
whence it is inferred, that Moses and Samuel (then being dead) might and were
accustomed to pray for the people of Israel. I will conclude this passage with
refuting the chief Argument of our Adversaries touching praying to Saints,
which is taken, in that the Saints in their judgment do not hear us. Now the
weakness of this Reason is discovered, in that damned Spirits, and Devils,
being far absent from their Witches and Coniurers, do nevertheless heart their
Jnuocations and Coniurations, as is warranted by all experience. Shall any man
think then, that the B. Saints of Heaven are deprived of hearing the Prayers
made unto them? Since otherwise it would follow, that spiritual Substances by
loosing of Heaven (I mean the Devils by their fall) did obtain greater
prerogatives and excellencyes, then the Souls of the Saints do by gayning and
ascending up to Heaven. An absurdity incompatible with the Goodness, wisdom,
and Charity of God.

Animaduersion LXXXII.
WHen a Catholic signeth himself with the sign of the Cross, he but only
implicitly desires that, by this sign, which explicitly, and by mediation of
words he desires by prayer; For seeing the sign of the Cross does figure out
to the eye our Saviors Passion: and seeing the secret desires of the heart are
manifested and made known, as well by signs of the body (as dumb men, and
such as cannot speak, are accustomed to make) as by Prayers, and words of the
tongue: Therefore if it be lawful for me with the tongue to pray, that God
will forgive my Sins through the merits of Christ his Death and Passion; it
must needs then be consequently lawful form to pray to him to the same end,
without words, by making the sign of the Cross: seeing the making of this
sign with an intention of inward Prayer (the Cross being the badg and
remembrance of our Saviors death and Passion) is all one, as to pray in words,
by virtue and force of the same death and Passion: Since the hand in this case
by making the sign of the Cross, does supply the place and office of the
tongue.

That many Miracles have been wrought by the sign of the Cross (forbearing
the testimonies of the ancient Vide Tertul. in init. Scorpiaci. Epiph. Haeres.
30. Nazianz. orat. in Julian. Nyssen. in vita Gregorij Thauma turg. Athan. in
vita Antonij. Jerome in vita Pauli primi Heremitae. Austin in l. 22. de Ciuit.
Dei.
Fathers) I will here content my self with the acknowledgment of D. Couell,
thus writing: No D. Couell in his answer to M. Burg.
man can deny, but that God (after the Death of hi^ Son) manifested his power
to the amazement of the World, in this contemptible sign, as being the
instrument of many miracles.

Animaduersion LXXXIII.
ALl men know, that praying upon bea^^^ is but the repetition of the same
praye^^ several times; the beads serving only b^^ to number, or count the
times. This c^stome is warranted by the Example of our Savior; who being in
the Garden, did ^^peate one and the same prayer (to wit, I^ (...) be Math. c.
2^.
possible, let this Cup pass from me) three several times. Again if it be
lawful to say the Lords prayer seven times a week, as I presume many
Protestants will confe^se that they do; why not then is it lawful to repeat
it seven times or more every day? Lastly, once granting the Prayer to be good,
the goodness of it does warrant the often repetition of it. The precise number
of repeating one and the same prayer (among Catholics) has a Mystical
reference; either to the number of David's Psalms; or to the number of the
years that our B. Lady lived here upon earth, or to the number of our Saviors
wounds; or to the number of the persons of the most Blessed Trinity; or to some
other such Mystery.

The antiquity of praying upon Beads is confessed by the Centurists Cent. 4.
col. ^329.
, and Osiander Epit. Cent. 4. p. 454.
, to have been twelve hundred years since. In further antiquity of praying
upon beads, Zozomene thus relates of Paul the Monk: Jn dies Hist. l. 6. c. 20.
singulos trecentas orationes Deo, velut tributum quoddam reddidit, etc. Paul
every day did say three hundred prayers to God, as a certain tribute; and lest
through forgetfullnes he might err in number, he kept three hundred little
stones in his bosom, and at ending of every Prayer he cast away a stone; and
when he had cast away all his stones, then it was evident to him, that he had
performed his said number of three hundred Prayers.

Animaduersion LXXXIV.
THe benediction of Creatures to spiritual ends (and particularly of Holy
water) is most ancient: according here to we find that L. 8. Apost. Constit. c.
35.
Clemens, De Ec^^es. Hierarc. cap. de ^aptis.
Dionysius (both which lived in the Apostles days) as also Cyrill Cate. chapter 3.
, Cyprian L. 1. Ep. 12.
, Ambrose Lib. 4. de Sacram. c. 5.
, Austin L. 6. in Iulianum.
etc. do make frequent mention of holy water.

Cyprians words in the place cited are these. Oportet mundari and sanctificari
prius aquas a Sacerdote. The lawfulnes of Blessing of Creatures is warranted by
the Example of Christ, who intending to multiply the Bread, did look up
toward Heaven, and Luc. 9.
Blessed the loaves. Now that the Church has authority to bless Creatures to
spiritual ends (and this for the furthering of devotion) is proved from her
greater authority, practiced in changing the Sabbath day; and now being changed
is inalterable: One chief end of blessing of Creatures, is to signify
spiritual Effects. Thus sprinkling of Ashes signifies Penance, Palms
signify Victory etc.

Animaduersion LXXXV.
THere is a great disparity between urging Protestants against themselves, and
against the faith by them then maintained, (which in this small Treatise is in
several places showed) and by urging such, as were reputed sometimes
Catholics, speaking and writing against any point of the Catholic Religion;
seeing it is evident, that all such testimonies of this second kind, are not
the impartial conuincing Confession of the learned Adversary against himself,
but the unequal Assertions of the parties themselves, in behalf of their
later conceived Innouations, for the time by them held, though (in diverse of
them) after retracted, by their final submitting of themselves, and their
writings to the Catholic Church. This Animaduersion I give with reference to
the writings of these men following; Laure^tius Valla, Erasmus, Cassander,
Cornelius Agrippa, Polidore Virgill, Nilus, Aeneas Siluius, and some others, of
which diverse of them finally retracted their former received Nouelismes, and
reincorporated themselves (before their death) into the Catholic Church. This
Animaduersion (though above intimated) I thought good to set down, in that it
is observed, that Doctor Morton in his Apologia Catholica, does chiefly, and
maynely rely upon urging the impertinent and defective testimonies of the
foresaid men (and some others, such like, for breuity here omitted) for the
impugning of our Catholic faith and Religion.

Animaduersion LXXXVI.
Strive to be more conversant and ready (if opportunity will not suffer you to
be ready in all) in such Controversies, which consist in practice; as about
Praying to Saints, Jndulgences, worshipping of Images, Adoration of the most B.
Sacrament, Communion under one kind etc. then in others, which test only in
belief and Speculation; seeing the vulgar Protestant soonest takes exception
against these former, and will expect greater satisfaction from you in them;
Because these being subject to their sense (in regard of the daily practice of
them) come nee^est within the compass of their narrow Cap^city, and are by
them often charged (through the calumny of their chief Masters, abusing their
Credulity) with many supposed abuses; Whereas other points of Faith, which
consist chiefly in Theory and speculation, are further removed from their
apprehensio^s, and consequently they are least entangled with the doubts
thereof.

Animaduersion LXXXVII.
TOuching those Articles, or Controversies, which chiefly rest in speculation,
be well traualled in the Question touchi^^ the Jnfallibility of Gods Church, as
also (...) that other Question, That the Scriptu^^ (without the Churches
attestation* cannot pro^^ it self to be Scripture, and that all points of
belief do not receive their proof from Scriptu^^ alone: seeing these two
Controversies potentially include most of all other Controversies within
themselves. Also be most re^dy in the Question touching the continu^ Visibility
of the Protestant Church, seeing t^^ Protestants must seek to prove th^^
Church ever to have been Visible, if the will aver it to be the true Church of
Christ Whereas indeed you shall find even by t^^ Confession of his own
Brethren (as is e^^^ where in this Treatise made clear) that t^ Protestant is
not able to instance for man Centuries and Ages together, so much a the being
but of one Protestant.

Animaduersion LXXXVIII.
THere is scarsly any one Argument o^ Credibility, which more strongly and
irr^pliably proves the Antiquity (and there^^ the truth) of the Roman
Religion, and the Nouelty and latenes of Protestancy (and consequently the
falsehood thereof) then this following. There cannot be alleged any one
Protestant, (speaking of such Protestants, as are out of Controversy, and
acknowledged for such, both by the Catholics and Protestants) who was not
either in himself, or in his forefathers, first a Catholic, and who by
dogmatizing some Protestant Opinions, before never generally taught, did
separate himself, and depart from the Catholic Church, before then in Being; Of
which sort of men those words in S. John are understood: Exierunt 1. Joan. 1.
ex nobis, the very stamp or signature of Innouatours in doctrine. This
Assertion is most true. And to exemplify it in the chiefest Protestants, or
maintayners but of some points of Protestancy. I mean, Luther, Swinglius,
Ochinus, Jerome of Prage, Waldo, Wicleffe, Albigenses, Berengarius; and to rise
to the Heretics of higher times, as Acrius, Iouinian, Manicheu^, and the rest;
it is certain that all these were Originally Catholics, and by introduci^g of
some Nouelismes, did depart from the Catholic Church. That all these (and all
such others, as might be alleged) were originally Catholics, is
demonstratiuely proved from the implicit Confessions of the learned
Protestants themselves, acknowledging the Inuisibility of their own Church for
so many ages together. Thus for example writes Sebastianus Francus, the
Protestant (as above is s^ewed:) For In Ep. de abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus
Statut. Eccles.
certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church together with
the faith and Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure;
and that for these fourteen hundred years, the Church (he meaning his own
Protestant Church) has not been external and visible; with whom agrees D.
Fu^ke, saying: The Fulke in his answer to a Cou^terfeyte Cathol. p. ^i.
Church dec^yed immediately after the Apostles days. Furthermore to enlarge my
self in the Protestants Confession herein, M. Perkins (the Protestant) says
thus: Before Perkins in his Exposition of the Creed. p. 400.
the days of Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an universal
Apostasy ouerspread the whole face of the earth and that our Church was not
then visible to the world. M. Napper in like manner thus writes: God Napper
upon Revel in c. 11. and 12. l. 2. c. 2. p. 25.
has withdrawn his visible Church from open assemb ies to the hearts of
particular godly men etc. during the space of (...) hundred, and sixty years;
the true Church abiding ^^t^nt and invisible. But M. Brocard con^esseth further
in these words: During Broc. upon the Revel. p. 1^0.
even the second and third age (meaning after Christ) the true Church of God,
and light of the Gospel was obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself. I ^ill
here conclude with D. Downam, thus aue^ring: The D. Down. lib. de Antichrist.
General defection of the Visib^e Church (foretold 2. Thessal. 2.) begun to
work in the Apostles times. So luxuriant are the Protestants in confessing the
Inuisibility of their own Church for many ages together. So as we see, that by
the Confession of these learned Protestants, it is clear, that all the former
alleged Protestants, or any others, which could be (though falsely) suggested
for such, were Original Catholics. Now I hence conclude, that if on the one
side it be proved, that every Protestant did Originally come out, and depart
(by venting of some Protestanticall Positions) from our Catholic Church, before
enjoying a Priority of Being; and that on the othersyde, our Adversaries cannot
show any visible Society of men, professing the true Christian faith, from
which, as more ancient, the present Roman Religion departed (as it is
impossible for them to do:) I say, I hence conclude; that our Catholic faith
is most ancient (and therefore true) and Protestancy (in respect thereof) but
late Innouations, and therefore false.

Animaduersion LXXXIX.
I Will here rest in some Animaduersions touching the Doctrine of the Real
Presence: And touching the saluing of the Difficulties thereof, we are to recur
to Gods Power, which may in part be explicated in these ensuing Propositions.

The first Proposition. God is able to do every thing, which Man's understanding
is able to conceive. The Reason hereof being, in that Ens and Verum in general
are the Objects of our mind; and therefore what may be conceived or understood,
may really exist, and consequently be performed.

The second proposition. All Christian Philosophers affirm, that not only
things, which man is able to apprehend in his mind, but also many other things
incomprehensib^e in man's understanding, God can effect: forseing (say they)
that Totum Ens is Intelligible, and to be conceived, and that which is not Ens,
cannot be conceived, and that the imbecility of Man's understanding is such,
that it supposes many things cannot exist or be (and consequently cannot be
apprehended by the understanding) which may indeed exist, and so may be
performed by God: Therefore say they, that things incomprehensible in Man's
Understanding, God can effect.

The 3. proposition. God has in All things so much an Active power, by how
much they have in themselves a passive power: And which is more, we Christians
do believe, that the Active power of God can extend beyond the Passive power of
things; and agreably hereto we believe, that God created the world of Nothing:
Now to make a thing of Nothing, is not to depend or rely of the Passive power
of the Subject; seeing in this kind of producing there was no preexistent
Subject at all, much less any Passive power thereof.

The fourth. Every thing is possible to God to be done, which implies not a
Contradiction. Now what implies a Contradiction, is impossible to be done;
Because what implies a Contradiction, supposes a Being, and a Nothing of a
thing; and all this at one time, and in one manner of circumstance: And
therefore if such a thing could be, then could a thing be, whose being (a thing
most absurd) should consist in a Not being.

The fifth. It rises partly from out the former propositions, that what
faculty, or Operation God does impart to any thing created, the same he also
ominenter (as the Schoolmen speak) retayneth to himself, and is able to
perform it, without the help of any Secondary cause, This must be assumed as
true in force of Reason, since otherwise, the Creature should transcend in
might the Creator; which Axiom being applied to diverse difficulties in the
Question of the Eucharist, demonstrateth that God can preserve an Accident
without its Subject, and that he can keep a Body without any circumscription of
Place, since otherwise it would follow, that in these Examples, A Subject and
Place, should be able to perform more, then God could perform; which were
great blasphemy to maintain.

Animaduersion LXXXX.
THe Philosophers do assign three things to concur to Magnitude. The first of
these is, that every Magnitude should have an extension in it self, and have
Partem extra partem; That is, that one part should not be confounded in it
self with another part; and consequently an intrinsicall site, and disposition
of parts. And this is of the very essence of Every Magnitude, and cannot be
separated from it.

The Second thing, agreeing to every Magnitude, is to have a commensuration and
coextension with Place that is, an intrinsecall disposition, and order of parts
according to place. This second arises from the first; and consequently as
being later in Nature then the first, may by Gods power be separated from the
same; yea it is actually separated from the first in the highest Sphere, the
parts whereof are in no place.

The third, and last property of Magnitude is, to extrude and drive away all
other Magnituds from that place, which is made equal and commensurable to it
self; that is, not to suffer another Magnitude to be in the same place with
it. Now, as the second was later then the first, so this third resulteth out of
the second, and is later then the same in Nature, and therefore may be
separated from it. Now according to this doctrine, we Catholics hold, that
Christ's Body in the Sacrament has the true and whole Magnitude of his Body;
But this Magnitude has there only the first Condi^ion, which is essential to
every Magnitude (to wit, to be extended in it self, and by reason of that
intrinsicall extension, to have partem extra partem (but it has not the second
Condition of Magnitude (much less the third,) for it is not coextended with
any place, but existeth whole (in respect of all external place) in every part.

Animaduersion LXXXXI.
THe two supreme Mysteries of the Trinity, and the Incarnation, do afford a
strong Argument, that a Body may at once be in several places (and
consequently Christ's Body). Thus I dispute: In the Trinity we find an Unity, or
(as I may term it) an Indiuiduality of Nature, and a Diversity of persons,
sortable to the Unity of a Body, and multiplicity of places. Now here every one
of these three Persons is identifyed really and formally with this Nature,
whereas the Body is only externally conjoined with the Place. Now touching the
Jncarnation, we are taught, that one Hypostasis, or Person is in two Natures;
which two Natures are far more different in themselves, then several Places
c^n be. Again the Union here between the Person and the Nature is far greater
(as being intrinsicall and substantial) then the Union of the Body and the
Place can be, which is only accidentary and extrinsicall: and which is more (a
circumstance wanting in the Union of the Body, and Place,) here the Person or
Hypostasis is identifyed, and made the same Really, and formally, with its
Divine Nature. Here then to recapitulate, If in the Trinity one Nature be i^
three several persons, without any confusion of the Persons, or distraction of
the Nat^^^ And if in the Incarnation one Hypostasis, or Person be in two
different Natures; and yet neither the Natures confounded, nor the Hypostasis
distracted or multiplied: much more easily then may Christ's Body by divine
power be in several places at one and the same time.

Animaduersion LXXXXII.
THe like Argument to the former we may draw from Gods Vbiquity. God being
(...) one, and an indivisible thing, is in all place^ and things whatsoever,
(for if he were not so, then would it follow, that God should be
circumscriptible, and consequently not i^finite.) It cannot be here answered,
that h^ replenisheth all places, as one; since we m^^^ grant, that he is able
to create another world, far remote from this, and so should be present in the
same world, and consequently in several and far distant places. Neither is
this doubt salued by saying, th^^ God is only a spiritual Substance, and no^ a
Body; since this point aduantageth nothing: for the main reason, why it shou^^
seem, that a Body cannot be in diverse places, is not taken so much, a mole
corpori^ quam ab vnitate corporis; which Unity, as it i^ more perfect in God,
then it can be in a Body, so it should seem, it should be no less divided and
distracted in it self in God, then in a Body, through his being in diversity
of Places.

Animaduersion LXXXXIII.
TO these two former Arguments (in proof that a Body may be in two places) I
will adioyne this following taken from the Nature of Eternity, It is this:
Eternity is defined to be, Instans durationis, non flucus, that is, an Jnstant
of Duration, which is ever present, and never passes away. Now the difficulty
(and such, which in the like touch of the doubt is greater, then the former
confessed difficulty of a Body being in several places at once) consists in
this, To wit, That this Jnstant of Duration, being but one Jnstant, yet is, and
coexisteth in several times, both Past and to Come: and yet neither is this
Instant divided, or multiplied, nor these se^erall Times confounded. And here
a circumstance, much agrauating the difficulty i^, that diverse Places, wherein
we may suppose a body to be, do still remain at one time, though far remote
one from another; whereas these Precedent, and future times (in both which one
and the same Jnstant of Duration, or Eternity is) are ever in a flowing and
departing Motion, and consequently cannot by any possibility remain together.
For we see, that the time past does ever give place to the time to come. Thus
far of these former Animaduersions in this place, to show, that it is possible,
that Christ's Bo^^ may be in several places, at one, and the same time.

Animaduersion LXXXXIV.
IN all Positive and Affirmative Points o^ faith, the Protestants do agree with
the Catholics; the Protestants borrowing the said Affirmative points from the
Church of Rome. According hereto we find Luth^^ thus to write: We Luther lib.
Contra Ana. baptist.
confess, that there is under the Papacy most of the Christian Good, y^^
rather all the Christian Good, and that from thence it came to us. We confess,
that there is i^ the Papacy true Scripture, true Baptism, the true Sacrament
of the Altar, the true keys to the remission of sins, the true office of
preaching, true Catechism etc. I say further there is in the Papacy true
Christianity, or rather the tru^ kernel of Christianity. Thus Luther.

To the former position I adioyne this following: In such points of faith,
wherein Protestancy dissenteth from the Roman Church; all the said points are
merrely Negations to the contrary Affirmative Articles, believed by the Church
of Rome. As for example, Denial of Real Presence, Denial of praying to
Saints, Denial of Freewill, and so of the rest. Now from these two
propositions do result these Inferences or Conclusions following: The first,
that the Protestant, as he belieueth any affirmative Articles with the Church
of Rome, in that respect he is not a Protestant, but rather a Catholic, as
^king the belief of them from the Ca^^olike Church, as is above said. The
se^ond Inference: That Protestancy (as Pro^stancy) consists in Denial of
such Affir^atiue points, which the Church of Rome ^ffirmes to be true; and not
in believing ^ith the said Church, certain chief points ^f Christianity. The
third Inference; Seeing ^he reduplicatiue formality of Protestancy re^teth in
Negations, or priuations of an Affirmative faith; and seeing Negations or
pri^^tions have no Entity, subsistence, or real being; that therefore,
Protestancy (as Protestancy) has no reality of Being, but is in it self a
mere Nonentity, or nothing; and consequently it follows, that Protestancy
cannot proceed from God, who is the Author of things, and of that which is,
but not of that which is not, or is Nothing. The last Inference shall be; That
Protestants by their Denial of so many Affirmative Articles of Christianity,
may seem to bear great Reference to Antichrist; who at his coming shall by
his Denial of all points of Christian Religion, seek (what in him lies) to
annihilate, and overthrow all Christian Religion; And for such his proceeding
some ancient Fathers do conjecture, that his name shall be (...), signifying,
Nego; as Hyppolitus Martyr writes in Oratione de consummatione mundi. And this
both by reason that this Greek Word makes up the number, to wit, 666. which
is ascribed peculiarly to Antichrist in the Apocalypse cap. 13. as also in that
Antichrist, and his Ministers at his coming both in their D^nialls and works,
shall labor mightily to euert Christian Religion.

Animaduersion LXXXXV.
THough Protestancy seem to maintain some Affirmative Positions, as Parity of
Ministers, Marriage of Priests, and other Votaries, Reprobation, Christ's only
Mediatorship by way of Jntercession, Christ suffering in Soul; yet it is
evident that these poutions are only Affirmative in words, but merely Negative
in sense; since they are Negatiues to the Monarchy of the Churches Gouerment^,
to vowed Chastity, to universality of Grace, to the Intercession of Saints,
and to the all sufficiency of Christ's Corporal Death: All which our Catholic
points are Affirmative. Such is the subtility of Innovation in Doctrine as (for
the greater honor) to inuest their Negative Tenets, in Affirmative Titles.

Animaduersion LXXXXVI.
THough in show of words, Falsehood (as is above showed) may be delivered in
Affirmatiues; so I here say, that Truth sometimes is delivered in Negative
Words, notwithstanding Truth is ever Affirmative, and Falsehood Negative; and
therefore the Schoolmen truly teach: Intellectus S. Thomas part. 1. q. 17.
decipitu^ non circa quid est; sed circa, quid non est. To exemplify this
Animaduersion: To say, God is cruel, or Man is blind, though these sayings be
delivered in Affirmative terms, and false; yet they are in sense and
understanding merely Negative, since Cruelty is exclusive to Mercy, and
blindness to sight: so on the contrary to say; God is not Cruel, and Man is not
blind, though they be in terms Negative, and true; yet they are in sense
Affirmative; only as denying the Negation of Mercy in God and of Blindness in
Man.

Animaduersion LXXXXVII.
Our Adversaries cannot agree among themselves, what Doctrines be Protestancy,
and who ought to be truly termed Protestants: Can their Religion then be true,
and descend from Heaven?

Here then I will first show, within what narrow Limits our Adversaries do
confine Protestancy, and the members of the Protestant Church: Next then I will
discover, (such is the fluctuating and wavering judgment of them herein) how
they are content at other times, to extend and enlarge those bounds, by
affording Protestanc^ and the members thereof, a greater space or compass (as I
may say) to expatiate and walk in.

And to begin. D. Whitaker thus says of the Papists: J will L. 2. contra
Duraum Sect. 1.
not allow the very name of a lawful Church unto the Roman Church, because it
has nothing, which a true Chu^^^ ought to have. The Confession of Ausburg
excludes the Anabaptists in these words; we Cap. ^.
condemn the Anabaptists, who disallow the Baptism of Infants, and think
them to be sa^^^ without Baptism; to which sentence the Confession of
Switzerland Cap. 20.
subscribeth. The Arians are excluded from being Protestants by the foresaid
Confession of Ausburg in these terms: We Act. 1.
condemn all Heresies rising against this Article (meaning the Article of the
Trinity,) as the Manichees, Arians, Eunomians etc. All Heretics are excluded
out of the number of Protestants; for thus D. Su^cliffe teaches: Heretics In
his first Book of the Church. c. 1.
are not of the Church; meaning of the true Church, (and consequently in his
judgment, of the Protestant Church.) With whom agrees D. White saying: All In
his way to the Church. page 10.
Heretics teach the truth in some things, yet we deny them to be of the Church
of God. That Schismatikes are not of the Protestant Church, is taught, for thus
writes D. Fulke: Of the succession of the Church.
What skilleth it, whether one, being drawn by Heresy or Schism from the body
of Christ be subject to eternal Damnation And D. Whitaker thus auerreth: It
Controuers. 2. q. 5. cap. 9.
is false, that Heretical and Schismatic Churches are true Churches. Thus
far of our Adversaries excluding Papists, Anabaptists, Arians, Heretics, and
Schismatiks from the Protestant Church, and not acknowledging them to be
members thereof, nor their Doctrines, Protestancy. Now we will observe, what
change and mutability of judgment herein our Adversaries show at other times,
in willingly embracing all these former sort of men (and some others also) as
good Protestants, and in state of Salvation. And first of the Papists, Luther
says: In In Ep. contra Anabapt.
the Popery there is true Christianity yea the Kernel of Christianity, and
many pious and great Saints. M. Hooker: L. Eccles. Pol. 3. c. 1^8.
we gladly acknowledge them of Rome, to be of the family of Jesus Christ: and M.
Bunny: we In his Treatise of pacification, sect. 18.
are no several Church from the Papists, nor they from us. The Anabaptists are
admitted for good Protestants by Oecolampadius; saying: L. 2. Ep. p. 63.
Baptism is an external thing, which by Law of Charity may be dispensed with.
And D. In his answer to the Protest. Apol. l. 4 cap. 3. sect. 10.
Morton: we Protestants judge the state of the Anabaptists, not to be utterly
desperate. The Arians are acknowledged by M. Morton, to be of the same Church
of which the Protestants are, and he gives his reason in these words: Because
In his book of the kingdom of Is^ael, and the Church. page ^4.
the Arians hold the foundation of the Gospel. And M. Hooker seems to
intimate the same in these words: The Eccles. Pol. lib. 4 p. 181.
Arians in the reformed Churches of Poland etc. hereby insinuating, that those
Protestant Churches of Poland did acknowledge the Arians, to be members of their
Church.

Of Idolaters, M. Hooker thus favorably writes: Christians Eccles. Pol. l. 3
page 1^0.
by external profession they are all, whose mark of recognizance has in it
those things, which we have mentioned yea although they be impious Idolaters,
wicked H^tikes etc. Infide^ls are also in our Aduersa^^^ judgments, m^mbers of
a saving Church^ faith: for thus writes Swinglius: Eth^^^ Swingl. Ep and
Oecolam l. 1. p 39
si piam mentem domi fouerit, Christianus (...) etiamsi hristum ignoret. And
hereupon S^^glius conclu^eth, that Swing^ tom 2. fol. 118. and 559.
Hercules, Socrates, ^ristides are now in Heaven, as is in anoth^^ place
showed. Finally the Protestants are (...) courteous, as that they are content
to ^^corporate Antichrist within their Church (...) state of Salvation. This I
thus prove; I^ (...) overmuch known and diuulged, that many Protestants do
teach with full mout^, that the Pope is Antichrist; Now then let (...) see how
at other times they write of hi^, whom they hold to be Antichrist. and (...)
Religion Antichristianity. Here then we f^^^ D. Whitaker thus to acknowledge: I
will D White. in his answer to the first Demonstration of D. Sanders.
not say, that from the time, that Papistry beg^^ to be Antichristianity, the
Popes themse^^^ have been all damned. And yet D. Whitaker (...) where
confidently auerreth the Pope to be Antichrist. In like sort, M. Powell has
the like sentence, saying: I will In his answer to the last Demonstration of
D. Sanders.
in no wise say, that all the Popes from the time, that papistry was first
revealed to be Antichristianity, a^^ damned. Thus much of this point; whereby
we may discern the wounderfull and unheard mutability of our Adversaries
Judgments, touching who are Protestants, and Professors of that Church,
wherein a man may be saved. A demonstration vnans^erab^e ^^le and irrepliable
to prove, that the Pro^^^^ant Church and faith, such as these for^^r men do
restrain, or enlarge it, is (...) capable of Salvation. And how then can
Christian know, if he will rely upon the ^^gments of Protestants herein, to
what (...) of Protestants, or within what Church (...) may range himself, for
the Salvation of (...) Soul?

Animaduersion LXXXXVIII.
^N that there are many Catholic Articles, the which the Jews before the
com^ing of Christ did believe; therefore it fol^^weth evidently, that the said
Articles cannot be reputed to be Innouations, or lately ^^uented Doctrines, but
as ancient as the ^ymes before our Saviors Incarnation: I ^ill exemplify in
some. The Book Eccle^^asticus, admit for the time it be not Scripture,
speaks directly of our Saviors ^^scending into Hell in those words, where it
^s said in his person: I Eccles. 24.
will pierce through ^^e sower parts of the Earth; J will look upon all such
as be a sleep, and will lighten all them, that ^^ust in the Lord: A saying so
pertinent for proof of Limbus Patrum, that D. Whitaker Contra Duraeum. l. 8
page 5^7.
acknowledging the true sense thereof, auoydeth it, by saying the Book is not
Canonical; which at this present is imperti^ent, since here I seek only to
prove the ^^uth of diverse of our Catholic points, as being believed by the
Ancient Jews, before our Saviors time, in their writings; whether Canonical,
or not Canonical.

Touching Prayer for the Dead, It is warranted by the example of Judas Machab.
2.
Machabaeus, the true servant of God; as also is taught by Rabbi Simeon (who
lived before Christ) and diverse other ancient Rabbyes; Rabbi Simeon thus
writing of such, as are temporally punished after this life: After In lib.
Zoar. in cap 13. Genesis.
they are purged; from the filth of their sins, then does God cause them to
ascend out of that place.

Touching Gods Induration, or hardening of Pharaos heart, the Jewish Rabins so
conspire in affirming with us, the same to be by Gods permission only, and not
by his working, that Peter Peter Martyr. in Epist. ad Roman. c. 9.
Martyr, and Munster Munster, in Annot. in Exodus c. 7.
do accordingly acknowledge this Exposition.

Concerning Freewill, that place in Ecc^esiasticus, Ecclesiast. 1^
to wit: Say not thou, he has c^^sed me to err; If thou will, thou shall
observe the Commandments: He has set water and fire before thee, stretch out
thy hand to which thou will: Before man is life and death Good and Eu^^^ what
lyketh him, shall be given him. This testimony (I say) is so evident for
Freewill, that D. Whitaker in answer thereto rejects the authority, saying:
De loco In resp ad ras. Camp. rat. 1 p. 25.
Ecclesiasticiparum laboro etc. J make small account of Ecclesiasticus. Philo
the learned Jew, who lived in Christ his time, thus writes: Man Philo, in lib.
quod Deus fit immutabelis.
has Freewill, to which purpose is extant the Oracle in Deuteronomy: I have
placed before thee Life and Death, Good and Evil; choose Life.

Concerning Angels and Saints, the Book of Tobias, written before Christ, is
so plain Tob. 5.
with us, touching Patronage and intercession of Angels, that therefore D.
Whitaker does accordingly confess and say thereof: Jllum Whitak. in respons.
ad rat. Camp. rat. 1. p. 15.
vero Tobiae Raphaelem etc. Little do we regard the Example of Raphaell the
Angel, mentioned in Toby etc. All this is different from the Canonical
Scriptures etc.

Concerning the force of Merit of Alms, and other good works, proceeding from
true faith in the Messiah; The Doctrine of the Ancient Jews is delivered in
the Book of Toby^ Alms Tob. 1^.
does deliver from Death, and does purge all sin; and in the foresaid book
of Ecclesiasticus: As water Eccles. 3.
quenceth burning fire, So Alms expiateth sin.

Touching unwritten Traditions, Orig. hom. 5. in Numer. Hilar. in Psalm. 2.
Origin and Hilary do affirm, that Moses did leave many things unwritten, the
knowledge whereof was continued by tradition: And Rabby Judas affirms the
same of Moses: a thing so evident, that the doctrine of the Tradition of the
Jews is confessed by writing upon the Book in Capitulis patrum.
Paulus Phagius the Protestant.

That Monastical Life was not altogether wanting, but in some sort professed
among the ancient Jews, is witnessed by Josephus, thus writing: The Joseph.
antiquita^um Iudaicarum l. 18. c. ^.
righteousness of the Essenes is meruaylous etc. They enjoy their riches in
Common etc. And in this course above four thousand men do live, having neither
wyfes nor servants etc. And in another place. Trial Joseph. l. de bello
Iudaito. l. 2. cap. 7.
is had of a man's continency; and his other manners are for two years tried,
and then he is taken into the Company.

Lastly, to omit (for greater breuity) the Doctrine of Vows the doctrine of
one Visible high Priest, head of the Church in those Jewish times; the Doctrine
of the Jews in remitting the ending of Controuersyes, not to the Scripture,
but to a certain visible and lively Judge; the doctrine of the Jews
concerning Confession of sin, all these being related by Gala. in areanis
Cathol. veritatis. l. 10 v. 3.
Galatinus; I will close this passage with Melchisedech his offering of bread
and Wine in sacrifice, and the prefiguration thereby of our Sacrifice of the
New Testament. Of this point Rabby Phinees thus says: Jn Phinees in cap. 28.
Numer.
the time of the Messiah, all Sacrifice shall cease, but the Sacrifice of bread
and Wine shall not cease, etc. as it is said Psalm. 100. Thou art a Priest for
ever, according to the Order of Melchisedech. Rabby Hasardan, in Bereschit
Rabbi, ad cap. 14. Genesis
Hasardan, and Rabby Samuel in Bereschit Rabbi ad cap. 14. Genes.
Samuel say the like of Melchisedech his offering up of bread and wine, in
figure of the Sacrifice now in the time of the New Testament; a point so
evident, that Bibliander. de SS. Trinitote l. 2. page 89.
Bibliander, the remarkable Protestant, does not doubt to confess the same of
the old Jewish Rabins. Thus far of the doctrines of the ancient Jews before
Christ his Incarnation: which doctrines we Catholics at this day hold. All
which doctrines are merely Dogmaticall points, without any Type or reference
to Christ his coming, that only of Melchisedech excepted; and therefore it
cannot be answered, that the said doctrines should now cease upon our Saviors
coming in flesh into the world, as some ignorant men would suggest; but it
must needs be that the said Doctrines, if they were true then they must be also
true now. By which so many foresaid Examples of our Catholic faith, thus
affirmed by the ancient Jews, it is made most certain, that our Religion ^s
not New, or lately invented, but most ancient and undoubtedly Apostolic.

Animaduersion LXXXXIX.
IT is a most impudent assertion of D. Field, who thus writes: We D. F^^ld in
his Book of the Church. l. 3. c 8. p. 76.
firmly believe, that all the Churches of the world, wherein our Fathers lived
and dyed, to have been the true (Protestant) Churches of God etc. and that
they, which taught, embraced, and believed those damnable Errors, which the
Romanist do defend against us, were only a faction. But see now this most vast
Lie is controuled. First then D. Jewel thus acknowledges: The Jewel in his
Apology of the Church. part. 4. c. 4.
Truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther, and
Hulderick Swinglius first came unto the knowledge, and preaching of the Gospel;
And therefore Bu^ter. in Ep. anno 36. ad Episc. Hereford.
Bucer styles Luther: The first Apostle to us of the reformed Doctrine. And
Schlusselburg, the great Protestant, thus contesteth the same: It In Theolog.
Calu. l. 2. fol. 130.
is impudency to affirm, that many le^ned men in Germany before Luther, did
hold t^^ Doctrine of the Gospel. Yea Luther himself thus vaunteth of himself:
Christum Luther Ep. ad Argentinens.
a nobis, primo vulgatum, audemus gloriari. And truly the force of reason
assures us, that there were no Protestants at, or immediately before the
breaking out of Luther. For if any were, why did they lie hid, and unknown at
Luthers Rising? No other pretext can be alleged, but fear of persecution; But
this cannot be alleged; For the Protestants (if any then were) might securely
step out, and join themselves with Luther; considering that then diverse
Magistrates and Commonwealths had openly undertaken the Patronage of Luthers
Doctrine, and Religion.

Animaduersion C.
IN all points of faith the Authority of the Private Spirit is to be contemned,
as begetting nothing but Noueltyes, and Innovation; And let each good Catholic
anchor his judgment upon the authority of Christ's visible Church, and the
chief Head thereof; assuring himself, that although Simon the fisher was not
able to determine Matters of faith; yet that Simon Peter, and his Successors
(assisted with competency of means) have ever an impeacheable Sovereignty
granted to them, and a delegated authority from Christ himself, for the
absolute discussing and deciding of all Controuersyes in Religion: Tu Math. 16.
es Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae Jnferi
non praeualabunt aduersus eum. And truly if the visible Church of Christ, and
the Supreme Judge thereof could err in matter of faith; how could God be excused
from Cruelty, by threatening to all Men eternal Perdition, if we be not
obedient to the Church of God? Dic Math 18.
Ecclesiae, and si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus.
Furthermore as the Apostle says: Hebr. 8.
Our Testament is established in better Promises etc. meaning then the
Testament of the Jews: But if it was said in the time of the Old Law, that he,
who Deuteron. 17.
presumptuously refuses to obey the Commandment of the Pryest, that by Decree
of the Judge that man should dye; what punishment the^ is he to undergo, who
in Matters of faith and Religion, contemns the authority of the High Pryest
of Christ his Church, advancing his own private judgment above the said
Authority?

Animaduersion CI.
IT is most certain that Luther himself was not a perfect and entire
Protestant (such I mean, as the present Church of England acknowledges for a
true Protestant) my Reasons are these: First, because Luther after his rising,
and ever unto his death, retained and believed diverse of our Catholic
Doctrines, disclaymed from by the Protestants of England. Secondly, because
Luther taught and maintained several Heresies, I mean, Heresies even in the
iudgme^^ of our now Protestants. To begin with the first branch: Luther ever
maintained to h^s death the Real Presence, as the whole wor^^ knows; and
therefore his followers in th^^ doctrine are called, for distinction lake
Lutherans, by Swinglius and Calvin.

Luther taught the Doctrine of Luther. l. de Assertionibus Art. 30.
Eua^gelicall Counsels; to wit, that a man may do more, then that he is
commanded.

Luther taught the Doctrine of Purgatory, of which point see Tom. 1. Wittenberg
(...) Jndulgentijs: And answerably to this ground he is confessed by Vrbanus
Regius in 1 part. Operum formulae caute loquendi, de sanct. cultu.
Vrbanus Regi^s, a Protestant, to defend Prayer for the Dead.

Luther defended Prayer to Saints, of which point he thus writes: De Luther,
in purgat. quorundam Articulorum, in Epist. ad Gregorium. Spalat.
intercissione Dinorum, cum tota Ecclesia Christiana sentio, and iudico Sanctos
a nobis honorandos esse atque indicandos.

Luther taught and approved the use of Jmages, as is witnessed by Beza Beza, in
resp. ad Colloq Montisbelg part altera, in praef
.

Touching the making the sign of the Cross upon our forehead, Johannes
Creucli^^ a Lutheran thus writes: Cum Creuelius in hi^ refut. Caeremoni^rum
missae, printed Magdeburg. 163. page 118.
imus cu^^tum, fine surgimus e Lecto, cruce nos iuxta L^theri, and altorum
piorum institutionc^^, signamus.

Finally, to omit some other points, wherein Luther never dissented from the
Church of Rome, Luther ever mantained, that the government of the Church is
Monarchiall, and neither Aristocraticall, nor Popular; as appears out of his
own Vide Luther. in loc. Com. Class. 1. c. 3. 7. page 107.
words.

Now to come to relate Luthers Heresies (and such as are reputed for Heresies,
and some of them for blasphemies, both by Catholics and Protestants, which he
ever maintained without any after retraction) I first alledg his impious
Doctrine touching the most Blessed Trinity, concerning which he thus speaks:
So relates Swinglius of Luther so speaking. to. 2. ad respons. and Confut.
Luther. fol. 474.
The Divinity is threefold, as the three Persons be etc. And according to this
he expungeth out of the Litany this sentence: Holy Luth. in Euchir precum anno
1543.
Trinity, one very God, have mercy upon us; and he further says: Anima Luth
contra Iacobum Laetomum, tom. 1. wittemberg. Latin edit. anno 1551.
mea odit Homousion, or Consubstantialis. Briefly Luthers Blasphemy was so
odious and execrable against the B. Trinity, that Swinglius Swinglius, tom 2.
in respons. ad Confutat. Lutheri
did purposely write against Luther, touching this very point.

Touching the Event of things, Luther holds (contrary to all Christian faith)
that all things come to pass, through a certain Stoicall and fatal
Necessity, thus writing hereof: Nullius Luther. in Assert. damnat. per Leonem
Decimum, Art. 30.
est in manu etc. It is in no man's power to think Good or Evil; but all
things (as Wicleffs Article condemned at Constance did rightly teach) proceed
from absolute Necessity. Luther taught an Heresy, whereby the propagation of
Christian Religion is much hindered; to wit, that it was not lawful to wage war
against the Turk. His words are: Praeliari Luth. in tom. 2. Wittenberg. and in
Assert. Damnat per Leonem decimum. Assert. 34.
contra Turcas, est repugnare Deo, visitanti iniquitates nostras per illos.

Luther denied all temporal Magistrates, thus teaching hereof: Among Luther,
de saeculari potestate, in ^^. 6, Germ.
Christians no man can or ought to be a Magistrate; but every one is to another
equally subject.

Touching faith and good works, Luther thus endoctrinateth his followers. Fides
Luther. to. 1 propos. 3.
nisi sit sine etc. Except faith be without good works, it does not justify,
nay it is not faith. And further: No Luther in his Sermons Englished, page ^76.
work is disalowed by God, except the Author thereof be disalowed before.

Luther further taught, as D. Couell witnesses, that These be D. Couells words
in defense of M. Hooker, Art. 15. p. 101.
the Sacraments were effectual, though they were administered by Satan himself.
Of which point Hospinian (the Protestant) thus also writes: Lutherus In hist.
Sacr. part. altera. fol. 14.
co^sque progreditur etc. Luther proceeds so far herein, that he maintains
the Sacrament, to be a true Sacrament, etiamsi e Diabolo conficeretur, though
it were to be consecrated by the Devil.

To conclude, Luther so disualewed the sufficiency of Christ suffering in body
for us, as that he most blasphemously teaches, that Christ did not suffer only
in body, but also his Divinity suffered for us: His words hereof are these: Cum
Luther in Confess. Maiore in Caena Domini.
credo, quod sola humana Natura pro me passa est, Christus vilis, nec magni
praetij Saluator est etc. If J believe, that only the humane Nature suffered
for me, then is Christ a Savior but of a base and small worth and himself
needs a Savior. Thus far now in Demonstration, that Luther was not an entyre
Protestant, and such as is allowed by the present Church of England.

Animaduersion CII.
TWo things, among others, concur (as is in this last Animaduersion exemplifyed
in Luther) to make a perfect Protestant; to wit, That he does maintain all
chief points of Protestancy: Thus he is not to hold only some few points of
Prorestancy, and in the rest (being more in number, and of greater importance)
to partake with the Catholics. The second thing necessary to a Protestant,
that he does not hold per^inaciously any main Heresy or Paradoxe, wholly
impugned and contradicted both by Catholics and Protestants; For this man in
this respect is rather to be styled an open Heretic, then a Protestant, even
in the Censure of the Protestants themselves. Here now I aver, that this
Animaduersion clearly euicteth, that Husse, Waldo Wicliffe, and the rest, so
much urged for Protestants for the proof of the visibility of the Protestant
Church in those ages; were no Protestants at all, and consequently, that the
Protestant Church cannot be said to be truly in them.

To begin with John Husse, who lived anno 1400. The Articles, wherein Husse and
the Bohemians his followers, did believe, are related by M. Fox to be these
following, saying: The Act. Mon. p. 260.
only propositions were these four Articles; The first, Communion under both
kinds; The second, that all Civil Dominion was forbidden to the Clergy; The
third, that the preaching of the Word was free for all men and in all places;
The Fourth, that open Crimes are in no wise to be suffered, for avoiding of
greater Evil. Now, that Husse himself was Catholic in all other points,
appears from the Testimony of Luther, who thus speaks of Husse: The In
Colloq. Ge^man. cap. de Antichristo.
Papists burned Husse, when he parted not a fingars breadth from the Papacy:
for he taught the same, which the Papists do; Only he did find fault with their
vices, and wicked Life; Against the Pope he did nothing. Thus ^uther of Hus^e.
Now to the foresaid Heresies of Husse, this is in like manner confessed and set
down by M. Fox, Fox Act. Mon. 230
to wit, that there are no Princes, Priests, or Bishops, while they are are in
mortal Sin. Of which his Heresy Osiander thus discourses: Nullus In Epitom.
Cent. 15. page 465.
est Dominus Ciuilis, nullus est Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in
mortali peccato; Haec propositio non potest approbari etc.

To come to Wicleffe, (who was first a Catholic Priest) Io. Stow thus
relates: Wicleffe Stow in his Annall^ of England printed an. 1591. p. 425.
first inueighed against the Church of Rome, because he had been deprived by
the Archbishop of Canterbury from a certain Benefice. Touching the Catholic
opinions ever houlden by Wicleffe (among others) I allege these following: He
maintained (besides Baptism and the Eucharist) the Sacraments of Order, and of
Penance: in like sort the Sacraments of Confirmation and Extreme Unction. For
in Postilla in c. 15. Marci, Wicleffe mentions all the seven Sacraments. He
also believed the Rites and As appears in his book, de Apostasia c 18.
Ceremonies of the Mass. He was feruerous in praying to our B. Lady thus
writing of this point: Hic Wicl^ff ser. de As^^mpt. Mariae.
videtur mihi, quod impossible est praemta^i sine Mariae suffragio. H^
acknowle^ged the ^orship of Relikes and Images, saying hereof: Conceditur, quod
Jmagines cum prudentia Mariae. sunt adorandae. Wic of de Eucharistia c. 8.
Finally Wicl^ff so admitted the doctrine of Merit of Works, and Works of
Supererogation, as that Stow thus writes of him: Wicleff Stow in his Annals,
printed 1992. pa. 426.
and his Disciples went in Course rustet garments down to the heel; seemed to
contemn all temporal goods for the love of eternal riches; adjoined himself
to the begging friars, approving their poverty, and extolling their Perfection.

The gross Heresies maintained by Wicleffe, were these following: He taught,
that all things came to p^sse by an absolute and Stoicall Necessity; he
condemned lawful Oaths, savoring herein (as Osiander Osiander Cent. 15. page
4^7. and 459.
says) of Anabaptisme: He further taught, that there is no Civil Magistrate,
whiles he is in mortal Sin, as Melancthon Melancthon in Ep. ad Pr^dericum
Micon. in Epist. Swinglij and Oecolamp.
charge him; Of whom Melancthon in the place alleged further says: J have
found in Wicleff many Errors, whereby a man may judge of his Spirit. Finally to
omit some other of his Heresies, M. Fox thus speaks of him: Wicleffe Act.
Mon. page 95.
used soften for fear of persecution and danger, to dissemble his Religion.

Animaduersion CIII.
IN this next Animaduersion I will discourse upon the former grounds, of these
Innouarours following: And to begin with Waldo, from whom are sprung the
Waldenses: Waldo was a Layman of Lions in France; a rich man, and gave Money
for the translating of the Scripture into his own tongue. Now that neither
Waldo, nor the Waldenses were Protestants, is thus proved: First they still did
hold many Catholic points, as the Real presence in the B. Sacrament, as
Calvin Calvin. Ep. 144.
confesses. They also mantayned Seven Sacraments the Doctrine of vows of
single Life, and of Purgatory, as Benedictus In Tract. de Eccles. page 1^4.
Morgenstrensis, a Lutheran, relates. Finally they were so full in defending
the Doctrine of Merit of Works, as that D. Humfrey In Iesuitism. part. 2. rat.
3. p. 270.
thus writes of Waldo: Waldo did forsake all things, that being poor, he
might follow Christ, and the Evangelical Perfections.

The Heresies of the Waldenses were many: First they taught, that Married
Persons sinned in doing the Act of Matrimony, without hope of Jssue, as
witnesses Illyricus Illyri^us in Catadestium veritatis. p. 743.
: They did hold all imbracements, and all things Illyr. vbi supr.
done above the Girdle, as kissing, touching, words, Compression of the Papps
etc. to be done in Charity. They further taught that neither Illyrius ibid. p.
760.
Pryests, nor Civil Magistrates being guily of mortal Sin, were to be
obeyed. That Laymen Ibid. p 711 and p. 745.
and Women might Consecrate and preach. That Clergy Ibidem page 7^9.
men ought to have no Possessions. They Il^yr. ibidem, p. 734.
went to Catholic Churches dissemblingly and Confessed and Communicated
dissemblingly. Finally Illyr. ibidem, page 735. and 7^5.
they condemned all Princes and Judges. The Albigenses are also prostituted by
some of our Adversaries, for Protestants: But it appears by the te^timonyes
of D. Abbots, that the Albigenses, were of the same S^ct of the Waldenses, or
rather the same Men; for thus the said Doctor writes: These In his bo^ke
against D H^^^ his Reasons, page 57.
Leonists or poor Men of Lions, and Waldenses, and A^bigenses, were the same
Men, but diversely, and upon diverse occasions termed by the Romish Synagogue.

Now these A^bigenses (whether they were the same with the Waldenses or not) as
they mantayned some Points of Protestancy; so withal by the testimony of
Osiander (the Protestant) they taught diverse execrable Heresies: Osian^er his
words are thief Ofiander in Cent. 1. l. 1. c 4. p. ^^9.
Albigensibus dogmata haec tribuntur: Duo esse Princip^a, Deum ^z. bonum, and
Deum malum, hoc est Diabolum etc. These opinions are ascribed to the
Albigenses; That there are two principles, to wit, a good God, and a bad God,
which is the Devil, who created all Bodies as the good God did all Souls etc.
They do reject Baptism, and they say, to go to Churches, and to pray ^^ them,
is not profitable etc. They condemn Marriage, and do allow, as holy, promiscuos
concubitus, all promiscuous lying together, how wicked soever: They deny the
Resurrection of the Body, and that Christ was true Man. Thus far Osiander of
the Albigenses in the place cited in the margent. I will conclude with
Berengarius, who lived anno 1051. who is challenged for a Act. Mon. pa. 23.
Protestant for his denial of Transubstantiation, though he after recanted
this his Heresy. Now Berengarius did hold diverse Heresies, so as the
Protestant O^eolampadius In Oecolam. and Swinglij Epistolis, l. 3. page 710.
thus writes of him: Berengarius nonnulla affirmat aduersus Baptismum
parnulorum, and Coniugium. Again, Damnata est Berengarij opinio, Sacerdotio
Christiano parum nimis tribuen^. Thus far of all these former Heretykes, to
wit, Hus, Wicleff, Waldo, and the rest, whereby the indifferent Reader may rest
assured, that they cannot with any just show of Reason and judgment be
alleged for Protestants, as our Adversaries are accustomed to allege them,
for the proving of the visibility of the Protetestant Church in former Ages.

Animaduersion CIV.
ADmitting for the time; that all these former Innouatours were entyre
Protestants in all Points, not comparting with the Catholics in any point of
the Roman Religion: Admitting also, that not any of them did hold any one
explorate Heresy, and by all sides condemned; yet are the examples of them most
insufficient for the supporting of the Protestants Churches visibility. My
Reasons are these. First: The Scriptures Esaias. 60. and 40.1. Timoth. Ephesians. 4.
besides many other.
do prove, that the Church of Christ must not at one only time or other, but in
all times, and in all ages, without the least interruption or discontinuance
(much less without interruption of many hundred; years together) be most
visible and conspicuous. This being granted, I then demand, what Protestants
can be alleged living between Anno six hundred and seven, and anno 1220.
Here are about six hundred years between these two times during all which
period, as also for every year thereof, our Adversaries stand obliged to
allege Protestants, for the Continuance of the visibility of the Protestant
Church. But this they are not able to effect; And therefore D. Fulke with just
cause thus complayneth of the Inuisibility of the Protestant Church: D. Fu^ke
in his answer to a Counterfeyt Catholik^. page ^0.
The Church in the time of Boniface the third (which was anno 607.) was
invisible, and fled into the wilderness, there to remain a long season.
Secondly: All the former men, I mean Husse, Wicleffe, Waldo etc. were
originally Catholics; and after by forging of new Doctrine, they divided
themselves from the Church then in Being; and so thereby they justified in
themselves those words of S. John: Joan. 9.
They went out of us. Now this departure or going out of the Church implies
(in lieu of the continuance and visibility of their Church) an interruption,
discontinuance, and defection of their Church, (and consequently a want of the
visibility of the said Church: Since it infallibly proves, that the Doctrines
taught by these Men after their departure, were not taught by the Church before
in being: For if they had been taught by it, these Men needed not to leave the
then known Church, for their defending and teaching of the said Doctrines.
Thirdly: The Protestants will say no doubt, that Husse, Wicleffe etc. did
preach the word of God, and administer the Sacraments. Hear then I demand,
seeing no man takes to himself the honor of priesthood, but he that is called
Heb^, 5.
of God, as Aaron was; Who then did call Husse, Wicleff, Berengarius, the
Waldenses etc. to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments, or by whom
were they sent? But here our Adversaries are at a stand, flying to an immediate,
imaginary, and aerie Calling: For thus does Calvin seek to salve this
difficulty: Quia Lascit. (the Protestant) recites this saying of Calvin. lib.
de Russor. Muscouit. etc. religione. c. 23.
Papae tyrannide etc. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, true succession
of ordination was broken of; therefore we stand in need of a new Course herein;
And this function or calling was altogether extraordinary. With whom agrees M.
Perkins saying: The M. Perkins in his works, printed. 1605. fol. 916.
calling of Wicliffe, Husse, Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr etc. was
extraordinary. An exorbitant, and fantastical Conceit.

Animaduersion CV.
THere are two Reasons (among others) which evidently prove, that our
Adversaries are conscious, and guilty of their own Churches Inuisibility. One,
in that, they discover a wounderfull reluctation and backwardnes, when they are
pressed by the Catholics to name the Protestants living in such and such ages;
sortably hereto we find D. Fulke thus to complain: Proferre Fulke, de succes.
Eccles. p. 89.
me iubes toto Orb latitantes, and vah quam iniquum postulas? Thou willest we
to produce and name those men, who did lie hidd throghout the World. How unjust
a thing do thou here demand? And D. Wotton complaining in the like manner,
thus concludes: Prove In his answer to a Popish Pamphlet. p. 11.
you, that our Religion was no where helds This stands upon you to disprove,
which when you do by particular Records, you shall have particular Answer.
Then which what can be first more absurdly spoken, as expecting record of
things which never were in being. He furthermore transferring the part of
proving upon Catholics, to which himself and his fellows only stand obliged.
The second Reason discovering their tergiuersation herein, is in that, when
they are pressed to instance in Protestants for several ages, they in lieu of
Instancing fly to the Scripture; then disputing, the true Church of Christ
must ever be Visible; but theirs is the true Church, as is proved out of the
Scriptures; Therefore their Church was ever visible. A most strange, and
despayring Circulation.

Animaduersion CVI.
THe like guiltines of our Adversaries is showed touching the supposed change
of the Faith of the Church of Rome. For though this (if any such change were)
be to be proved (as being matter of fact) from History; yet our Adversaries
disclame from all History herein. For D. Whitaker thus writes: It is not
Whitak. contra Duraeum p. 177.
needful to search out of Histories the beginning of this change. And again:
It is Whitak. contra Duraeum. p. 478.
sufficient, by comparing the Popish opinions with the Scripture, to discover
the disparity of faith between them and us; And as for Historiographers, we
give them liberty to write what they will. Thus bringing the Question as they
did above touching the visibility of the Protestant Church, to the Scriptures,
and their own interpretation of the said Scriptures. Which disclaming of
theirs from History herein, is most unusual and unaccustomed; since it has
been ever the Office of Historiographers and general Counsels, to register
and record any new arising Heresy, or change in Faith and Religion.

Animaduersion CVII.
IT cannot be denied, but that a Catholic may commonly become sooner
Superstitious, then a Protestant; And a Protestant sooner become an Atheist,
then a Catholic. The Reason of both is evident: And first, whereas the
Catholic Religion (besides the belief of many dogmaticall points of faith)
retayneth the practice of many Ceremonies; the true use of which Ceremonies, as
being first instituted by the primitive Church, are most lawful; but now if
the ignorant Catholic (through want of due instruction) do ascribe more to
them, then is due, or do put greater confidence in them, then he ought, (as
forgetting them to be but Ceremonies) then perhaps he may have a superstitious
conceit of them; as it happened in the Brazen Serpent, though (otherwise
serving, as the figure of Christ:) To which the Jews (through abuse thereof,
and in ascribing more worship to it, then they ought) at length bare a
Superstitions respect. But now touching the Protestants greater propension to
Atheism; the reason is, in that Protestancy ever refynes it self by
Negatiues. Thus for example; The Caluinist or Puritan denies more, then
Lutheran, or the moderate Protestant; The Anabaptist, more then the Puritan;
The Anti-trinitarians more then the Anabaptists; the Jew or Turks, more then
the Anti-trinitarians; and for the last sublimation through denial of all,
Iudaisme and Turcisme resolves into Atheism. And hereupon we find, that
whereas many Protestants by their often refyning of their Religion (and all by
Negatiues) do in the end become Atheists denying even the being of a Deity;
that few, or no Catholics, immediately from Catholic Religion, ever fall into
the open Blasphemy of Atheism.

Animaduersion CVIII.
THe preaching of the Word and Sacraments (supposing them to be Notes of the
Church, as our Adversaries do suggest) prove only the Place, where the Church
is, but not which is the Church; For the Church consists of men, and we
cannot tell, who they are, that receive the Word truly preached, or the
Sacraments truly administered. Again, whereas (as Lubbertus L. 4. de Eccles.
cap. 1.
a Protestant truly teaches) Notius est duplex; vnum Naturae, alterum nobis.
Now here the Question is only of such Notes, as are Notes in respect of us, for
our better informing which is the true Church, and not as they are Notes in
respect of Nature; For here we are instructed a posteriori, and according to
the measure of that knowledge, which God vouchsafes to afford to us. Now in
reference hereto we freely grant, that the true preaching of the word, and
Administration of the Sacraments may be termed Notes of the Church, but not
Notes to us, (which is only the point here stood upon): For though they be
Notes (in Nature) of the truth of the Church, yet what does this avail us,
since they are not Notes to us for our direction, to find which is the true
Church? Again, the true preaching of the word, and the Administration of the
Sacraments cannot be Notes to us, which is the true Church; seeing the
Scripture it self cannot be made known to us for Scripture, but only by the
attestation of the Church, as M. Hooker testifies in these words. Of Hooker in
Eccles. Pol. saec. 14. l. 1. page 86.
things necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what Books we are to esteem
holy, which is confessed impossible for the Scripture it self to teach. And
again: We Vbi supra. l. 3. p. 146.
all know, the first outward Motive to esteem of the Scripture, is the
authority of the Church. Thus he. Now this being granted, it ineuitably
follows, that first we must know, which is the true Church to give this
approbation of the Scripture, before we can know, which is the Scripture; and
much more then before we can be assured of the true preaching of the Word, and
which is the true construction of the Scripture. To these former Arguments I
adioyne this pertinent observation; It is this: When the Catholics demand to
set down the true Notes of the Church, and our Adversaries answering, That is
the true Church, which enjoys a true preaching of the Word, and an auayleable
administration of the Sacraments; Now I here affirm, that this description of
Notes is but our own Question returned us back in other terms, and
consequently but a Sophisme, consisting in an idle circulation of the same
point; invested with a new form of words: For when I demand, which is the true
Church? I vertually, implicitly, and according to the immediate meaning of my
words, demand which Church is that, which enjoys the true preaching of the
word, and the true use of the Sacraments? since only the true Church is honored
with this kind of preaching, and distribution of the Sacraments. Thus far
touching the Notes prostituted by our Adversaries, as the true Notes of Christ
his Church.

Animaduersion CIX.
SVch Protestants, as do mantayne, that there were Protestants in all ages
before Luther, give the reason, that the fear of Persecution, was the cause,
why the said Protestants did then lie latent, and became not visible to the
world. But this is a mere ae^ry suggestion: For thus I argue: The Church of
God under persecution, either communicates openly with a false visible Church,
in participation of Sacraments and external profession of faith, Or else she
does refrain from all such external Communion: if she do communicate with a
false Idolatrous Church (as diverse of our Adversaries repute the Church of Rome
to be) then is she not the true Church; since the true Church cannot brook any
such dissimulation: For we read; With the heart a Romans 10.
Man belieueth unto Justice, and with the mouth confesses unto Salvation. If
she does not communicate with it, then by such her forbearing, she is made
known, and consequently is become thereby visible: for who are persecuted, but
Men, that are known? Or how can one lying secretly and hiddenly, be said to be
persecuted? The truth of this point is further warrantable from the examples of
the persecution in the primitive Church; which of all other pressures of the
Church, was incomparably the greatest. And yet we find, that the particular
Bishops, Confessors, and Martyrs are even to this day made known, who they
were, and what false Opinions, and Heresies they impugned. And the like may be
said of the English Catholics, persecuted in Queen Elizabeth's reign; since
the names and memoryes of those reverend Pryests, and others of the Laity (to
speak nothing of many worthy Confessors and other suffering great losses and
disgraces) who lost their lives in her days only for Religion, are even to
this day fresh and recorded. Therefore I hear demand, that if the Catholics
in this our Country (being but a small part of Christendom) could not but for
some few numbers of years in comparison, escape the search and hands of their
persecutours, and become thereby most visible and known; How could then the
Protestants (being supposed to be dispersed thtoughout many Nations) lie hid,
and avoid for so many ages together (as is pretended) the force of that
persecution, which is affirmed by our Adversaries, to have been more grievous,
then ever this of England was.

Animaduersion CX.
WHereas our Adversaries do further urge in behalf of the being of Protestants
in former Ages, that it is often observed, that a little quantity of Copper is
in a cou^terfeyte Coin of Gold, and chafe is mingled with Corn; and yet
neither is the Copper, Gold; nor the Chafe, Corn; so say they, the Protestant
Church, was in former ages in the Papacy; The Papacy was in the Protestant
Church, and yet the Protestant Church was not in the Papacy. According hereto
M. Perkins says: The In his reformed Catholic. page 328. and 329.
Church of Rome may be said to be in the Church of God, and the Church of God
in the Church of Rome; with whom agrees Beza thus writing. Voluit In Epist.
Theol. Epist. 1. page 15.
Deus in Papatu seruare Ecclesiam, etsi Papatus non est Ecclesia. And D.
Whitaker: Whi^ak. l. de Eccles. page 165.
Ecclesia vera fuit in papatu, sed papatus non fuit Ecclesia. To this I reply,
and say, it is but a froath of words artificially put together. Howsoever many
of our Adversaries much please themselves with this conceited Answer. Therefore
for the better examining thereof, we are here to conceive, that the sense and
meaning of these words, is not, that the Protestant Church had in those times a
latent and hidden being in Catholic Countries, without having intercourse and
communion with the then known and visible Church in the Sacraments: for so the
true Church could not be said to be in the papacy, no more then at this day in
respect of its like abode in Turkish Countries, it can be said to be in
Turcisme. Therefore the particular manner of this strange mixture (as it
appears in show of words) is thus truly expressed by Osiander the Protestant
in this manner: In Epitom. Cent. 16. part. altera p. 1070. and 1072.
Quod semper sub Papatu, aliqui pij homines fuerint etc. No man denies but
that there were under the papacy some holy men, who disliked the Errors of the
Popes, although they durst not openly profess so much; nisi ardere, aut ad
minimum exulare velint, except they would burn for their Religion, or at least
suffer banishment. Thus we see, the last sublimated sense of the former quaynt
sentence resolves to this point; To wit, that the Protestant Church in those
former times, (being in, or under the Papacy) did through fear of burning or
banishment, dissemble their Religion, and communicate in all external right
with the Church of Rome.

Animaduersion CXI.
THe Confessed Inuisibility of the Protestant Church (above set down) during
so many former ages, does potentially and vertually include the proof of the
visibility of the Roman Church, during all the said ages: Seeing the
Jnuisibility of the Protestant Church for so long a time, is ascribed by the
Protestants themselves to the work of Antichrist (they meaning thereby the
Pope, and the Church of Rome) as appears by several testimonies of our
Adversaries else where in this Treatise expressed; and particularly of M. Napper
thus saying: Between Napper in his Treatise upon the Reuelat. page 68.
the years of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian, and Papisticall reign
began, reigning universally without any debatable contradiction 1260. years.
And accordingly the Centurists See this in Cent. 4. and so successively in
Every Century.
charge all the ages from Constantine till Luther, with Papistry. Thus an
acknoledged defection of the Protestant Church for many Centuryes, does (by our
Adversaries own Confession) necessarily include and imply a Continual
visibility of the Catholic Roman Church during all the said Centuryes.

Animaduersion CXII.
TOuching the supposed change of the faith of Rome, I will deuyde in these
three next Animaduersions all the Ages from the Apostles even to Luthers days
into three several Stations, or Periods of times: First then, we will see how
long it is granted by the Protestants, that Rome did persevere without any
alteration of her Primitive faith. Secondly, we will set down the acknowledged
continuance of that time, during all which season the now present faith of Rome
has continued; that is, how long Papistry (as our Adversaries term it) has
been publikly professed throughout all Christendom. Thirdly, and lastly, we
will then take a view of the times, between these two former several times:
For these two times being once acknowledged on all sides (to wit, the time,
during which the Church of Rome confessedly kept her first faith taught by the
Apostles; and the time, during which the present Roman faith has continued
from this day upward) it ineuitably follows, that this supposed change in
Religion, did either happen in the Jnterstitium, and mean time, between these
two former Periods of times, or else that there happened no such change of
Religion in the Church of Rome at all. Now, concerning the first of these
times, it is granted by the Protestants, that Rome retained her purity of faith
without any alteration from the Apostles times, till after the death of
Optatus, Epiphanius, and Austin, which is during the space of four hundred and
forty years after Christ: This I thus prove. Whereas our Catholic writers
have much insisted for proof of their Religion in the succession of the Bishop
of Rome even until Austins days, by the Example of Jrenaus, Cyprian, Optatus,
Jerome, Vincentius Lyrinensis, and Austin, D. Fulke answers in behalf of
these Fathers in this sort; That Fulke in his confutation of Purgatory. p. 372.
these Fathers especially named the Church of Rome, it was because the Church
of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the
Doctrine of the Apostles; which Doctor in another place thus further writes:
The D. Fulke, in his Retentiue. page 85.
Pop^^^ Church etc. departed from the universal Church of Christ long after
Austins departure out of this Life. Thus he, granting that till after Austins
death the Church of Rome remained the true Church. In like manner, D. Jewel
accords with D. Fulke herein touching the Argument drawn by those foresaid
Fathers, from succession of the Bishops of Rome saying: As D. Jewel in his
reply to D. Harding page 246.
well Austin, as also other godly Fathers rightly yielded Reverence to the Sea
of Rome, etc. For the purity of Religion, which was there preserved a long time
without spot. To conclude, Calvin himself makes good the foresaid Argument,
taken from the Succession of the Bishops of Rome insisted upon by Jrenaeus,
Pertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Austin, and Epiphanius, in these words: Cum
Instit. l. 4. cap. 2. Sect. 3.
extra controuersiam erat, nihil a principio vsque ad aetatem illam mutatum
fuisse in Doctrina etc. Seeing it was a point out of Controversy, that nothing
in Doctrine from the beginning to that very age was changed; these holy fathers
did take, which they thought sufficient for the destroying of all new Errors;
to wit, the Doctrine constantly and with an vanimous consent, retained even
from the Apostles days till their times. Thus far Calvin. And so far now
concerning the durance of the times (even by the Protestants frequent
Confessions) that no chauge of faith was made in the Church of Rome.

Animaduersion CXIII.
IN this next Animaduersion, we will take into our consideration the number of
those ages, during the length of all which from this day upward, the present
Roman faith has (by the like Confessions of the learned Protestants) been
generally taught; since how long the Protestants do grant, that the Church of
Rome has from this day continued in her present faith; so long it follows by
their own implicit (but necessary) censures, that the Church of Rome never
altered her faith. Now, this point appears from the wrytings of D. Humfrey
(above alleged) who showing what Religion Austin the Monk, sent by Gregory
the Great (who lived in the year 590) planted in England, thus confesses: Jn
Ecclesiam D. Humfrey, in Iesuitism. ^art. 2. Rat. 5. page ^27.
quid inuexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus? Onus Caeremon^arum etc. What did
Gregory and Austin bring into the Church? Aburden of Ceremonies. They did bring
in the Archiepiscopall Pall, for the Solemnization of the Mass; They did bring
in Purgatory etc. or the Oblation of the healtfull Host, and prayer for the
Dead etc. Relics, Transubstantiation etc. a new Consecration of Temples etc.
from all which what other thing is effected, then the introducing of
Indulgences, Monachisme, Papisme, and the rest of the Chaos of Popish
superstitions? All this did Austin, she greater Monk, being instructed herein
by Gregory the Monk, bring unto English men. Thus D. Humfrey. Now from hence
it appears, that at S. Gregory his sending of Austin into England (which was
about a thousand years since) our present Roman Religion was then wholly, and
publicly practiced in Rome; and that if the Church of Rome had suffered any
change in faith from that, first taught by the Apostles, that this change
should have been made, not since, but before Gregoryes time, and before he had
sent Austin to plant in England the faith of Christ. In further confirmation of
D. Humfreys judgment herein, I may allege the Centurists, who in their Index,
or Alphabeticall Table of the sixth Century, at the word, Gregory, do set down
with particular figures of references, where every such mentioned Opinion may
be found, as follows. Eiusdem error de bonis operi^ut. de Confessione, de
Co^iugio, de Ecclesia, de sanctorum inuocatione, de Inferno, de libero
arbitrio, de Iustificatione, de purgatorio, de paenitentia, de satisfactione
etc. Briefly, with all other particular points, mantayned by the now present
Church of Rome. The less wonder therefore, that Danaeus (resting upon his own
false principles) thus writes of our Conversion: Purgatio Danaeus in respons.
ad disputat. Bellarm. part. r. page 780.
illa quam Gregorius primus fecit etc. suit inebriatio Meretricis mu^do facta,
de qua est Apocalyp. c. 17. and 18. thus referring our Conversion to
Christianity, to the work of Antichrist. Now from these former acknoledgme^ts
of the learned Protestants we may infallibly conclude, that from this day, till
we arrive at least to the age of the foresaid S. Gregory (who lived about a
thousand years since) the present Roman and Catholic Religion was taught
(besides in our Country) in diverse other Countries; and consequently seeing
those Countries did receive their Instructions in faith from Rome, it
inauoydably follows, that during all this time not any innovation or change
in faith was introduced into the Church of Rome.

Animaduersion CXIV.
NOw in this third place, we are to take into our Consideration, the number of
years, which passed between the first four hundred and forty years from
Christ, and these last thousand years from us; which number, seeing it is
sixteen hundred years and more from Christ to us, amounts to about one
hundred, and sixty years. Well then, if here we can prove, that no change of
faith was made in the Church of Rome, within the compass of this 160. years,
then follows it inauoydably, that the Church of Rome never to this day, has
suffered any alteration in faith and Religion, since it first embraced the
Christian faith. This point I then first prove from the doctrine, which was
believed and generally taught, at such time as Constantine (who was our first
Christian Emperor) was converted to Christianity, which was about the year,
three hundred and twenty after Christ, and therefore before the foresaid one
hundred and sixty years. Now that the faith in Constantins time was the same,
that the Church of Rome professes at this present, appears from the frequent
testimonies of the Centurists, who most elaborately and punctually do record
all the particular Articles of the present Roman faith, to be believed most
constantly by the said Constantine, and by the age, wherein he lived. Touching
the faith of Constantine, and that age, the Centurists spend several Columns
of the fourth Century; to wit from Column 452. to Column 497. and D. Whitaker
affirms, that Leo (who was Pope anno 440.) was a great D. Whitak. contra
B^llar. page ^7.
Architect of the Antichristian Kingdom. Now from all this I necessarily
euict, that no change of the faith of Rome was made in the compass of the said
one hundred sixty years; which time was set down between the confessed
period of the Churches purity, and the acknowledged general Doctrine of the
Church of Rome.

But now to recapitulate the Contents of these three last Animaduersions (which
bear a necessary dependency and reference one to another; I thus make my
deduction. First, if the Church of Rome remained in her purity of faith without
any change, for the first four hundred and forty years; Secondly, if it be
confessed that for this last thousand years the Church of Rome ever professed
the same faith, without any change, which at this day it professes; Thirdly,
if it be made clear, that during the Interstitium of time between the first
440. years, and this last thousand years, which is but 160. years, no change
in faith was made, as appears from the faith of Constantine our first
Christian Emperor, and the Fathers of that age: What demonstration more
certain and infallible, then that the present Church of Rome never made any
change of faith and Religion since the Apostles times, but that she ever
preserved as pure and incorrupt, the very same faith and Religion, which S.
Peter, S. Paul, and other the Apostles first planted in her? And this
Demonstration (for I can term it no less) I present to the mature and
diligent perusal of the Judicious Reader; assuring him, that all the learned
Protestants of Christendom cannot give any satisfactory answer thereto; which
demonstration I willingly acknowledge that I decerped out of that Book
heretofore mentioned, commonly called, The Protestants Apology of the Roman
Church.

Animaduersion CXV.
IF any man should yet rest unsatisfied, and be persuaded that this imaginary
change of faith in the Roman Church should happen within the Interstitium of
the four hundred forty years, and the last thousand years, which mid-tyme
only contains one hundred and sixty years, as is in the three former
Animaduersions above showed; then for the greater satisfaction of such a Man I
present to him (as an Appendix to the three last Animaduersions) this
observation and point following. It is this: If we consider either the
plurality of our Catholic Articles; or the incompatibility which diverse of
them bear partly to our outward sense, and partly to man's natural propension;
or the diversity of Countries and Nations in Christendom, most remote one from
another; all which our said Catholic Religion is acknowledged wholly to
possess at the later end of the sixth Age or Century: I say, if we consider all
these different circumstances, the time of the said one hundred sixty years
(within which most Protestants do teach this change did happen) is infinitely
too little, and wholly disproportionable; so as that within the compass thereof,
so great a change and alteration should be wrought; especially in such an
admirable manner, that whereas in the beginning of the said 160. years, it is
auerred by the Protestants, that not any one point of our Catholic Religion
was then taught (as is above mantayned by them in acknowledging the purity of
the faith of Rome to continue unto the beginning of the said 160. years) yet
that at the end of the said 160. years it should so ouerflow all Christendom
with such a violent stream, as that no spark of Protestancy (supposing it
were before professed) or any other religion did remain in any one Country or
other, but that all was wholly extinct: Such an Imaginary change, and alteration
in Religion (I say) as this, is more then stupendous and wonderful; and such
as since the creation of the world never before happened. I further add hereto,
that since the Heresies of the Nestorians, Pelagians, Donatists, Monothelites,
(all which did spring up within the compass of this foresaid 160. years) are
particulatly recorded by S. Austin, Austin. l. de Haeres. Haeres. 88. 89.
yea also by the Centurists, Cent. 16. Col. 312.
Centurists; how then can we dream, that any points of our Roman Religion were
first introduced as Innouations, and yet no record of them to remain in any
History whatsoever? Furthermore, for the close of all, I add, that in, or
(which is more strange) next before the beginning of the said 160. diverse
Articles of Protestancy were condemned for Innouations; as the denial of
prayer, and offering up sacrifice for the Dead, and of appointed fasts, as
singular Noueltyes in Aerius, as Austin witnesses Haeres. 53. In like sort the
Denial of Praying to Saints, and worshipping of Saints Relics was condemned
in Vigilantius, as Jerome records l. contra Vigilant. c. 2. and 3. The
denial of Priests power in remitting of Sin, condemned for Nouelty, as the
Centurists confess, Cent. 4. col. 254. The like may be said of most other
points of Protestancy, condemned as Noueltyes, either a little before, or within
the compass of the foresaid 160. So evident it is, that no articles of our
Catholic faith, were brought in as Innouations, during the said period of 160.
years.

Animaduersion CXVI.
WHereas the Protestants do affirm a beginning (though most ancient) of diverse
points of our Roman Catholic Religion; and that we Catholics take advantage
of such their acknowledgments; yet cannot they with true reason thus reply
against us: You admit the authorities of the Protestants, granting (for so many
ages) the antiquity of the present Roman Religion, in such and such points of
faith: Therefore you are by force of reason, to admit their like authorities in
saying, that at such a time, (and not before) those your Popish Articles were
first taught; for seeing both these points are delivered by the Protestants in
one, and the same testimony, or sentence; why should the one part be urged by
you for true, and the other rejected as false? To this I answer, that our
Adversaries expect herein from us, more then in equity can be demanded. My
reason is this; In the authorities of this Nature, produced from our
Adversaries writings, we are to distinguish and sever that, which the
Adversaries grant in behalf of us, from that, which they affirm to their own
advantage, what they grant for us, and against themselves: so far we are to
embrace their authority, seeing it may be presumed, as is in this Treatise
elsewhere intimated, that ordinarily no learned man would confess any thing
against himself, but what the euidency of truth enforces him thereto. But
what our Adversaries affirm in favor of their own cause, and against us,
there we are not to stand to their authority; since no man is to be a witness
in his own behalf; and it may be well and probably presumed, that such their
Sentence proceeds out of their own partiality of their cause, and judgment.

Animaduersion CXVII.
THe Apostle foretells us, that Pastors Ephesians. 4.
and Doctors are to be in the Church to the Consummation of Saints, till we
all meet in unity of faith; that is, as D. Fulke Fulke against the Rhemish
Testam. in Ephesians. 4.
truly interprets, for ever; which Pasto^rs and Doctors prophesied by the
Apostle, shall (as the said D. Fulke further auerreth) always Fulke in his
answer to a Counterfeyte Catholic. page 11.
resist all false Opinions with open reprehension. With whom conspires D.
Whitaker herein saying: The Whitak. contra Duraeum. l. 3. page 240.
preaching of the word (within which is necessarily included the impugning of
all false Doctrines) does co^stitute the Church; the want thereof does sub^erit
it. According hereto we also thus read in Esaias: Esaias. ^^.
Upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem, I ha^^ appointed watch men all the day, and all the
nigh^ for ever; They shall not hold their peace. Now hear I thus urge: Can any
reasonable man think, that whereas the Protestants teach that the Papists
Religion came in by degrees, and at several times, that all the Pastors,
Doctors, and Fathers of those several times were a sleep, when the said
Doctrines were first broached; or that they observing their entrance, yet not
any of them would vouchsafe to make resistance, or at least some mention of any
such Innovation in Doctrine; especially if we consider the nature of our
Catholic Doctrines, auerred by the Protestants to be introduced, as Noueltyes?
Since they are, as above is intimated, many in number, diverse of them of the
greatest consequence, that may be: As the virtue of the Sacraments; the manner
of our Justification (to wit, whether by works, or by faith only:) Others of
them most repugnant to Man's sense and common Reason; as the Real presence:
Some adverse to Man's natural propension, as the Doctrines of Virginity,
Poverty, and Obedience: most of them consisting not only in an internal
belief, but even in an external action and operation; and therefore the first
entrance of them are become thereby most discernable: Such are the Doctrines of
praying to the Saints, of praying upon beads, Pilgrimage, single life in the
Clergy, and (to omit diverse others) all Monachisme; And lastly some (supposing
their doctrine to be false) subject to external Idolatry, as the worshipping
of Christ with supreme honor in the Eucharist. Here then I conclude, that if
any man shall affirm, that these Doctrines could stealingly creep into Gods
Church, without all resistance of its Pastous, Doctors, and Fathers, and
without any mention recorded of their first entrance; that Man not only gives
the lie openly to the Holy Scripture in several place^ witnessing the
contrary; but that withal he cease to be a man, by loosing wholly the
natural light of all humane discourse and Reason.

Animaduersion CXVIII.
IT is most clear, that the Heresies rising in the beginning of the primitive
Church, as the Heresies of the Valentinians, Tationists, Manichees, Arians, and
diverse others, as also the Heresies of the foresaid Heretics before S.
Gregory's time, are records both by the ancient Fathers, and even by the
Centurists our Adversaries. In like sort the Heresies of Berengarius, Waldo,
Wicleffe etc. are also registered. That this is most true, I prove from the
Centurists, who in the fifth Chapter of every several Century, from Osiander in
his Centuries, from Pantaleon (the Protestant) in his Cronology, have recorded
all the said ancient Heresies. And as for Berengarius, Lanfrancus, Guitmundus,
and Algeru^ make mention of his Heresy. Waldo is recorded by In his Catalog.
testium veritatis.
Illiricus, as also by Osiander In Epitom. histor. Eccles.
, Wicleff by M. Fox, as also by Stow, and by Wicleffs own writings, as is
above showed.

This then being most true and indeniable, I thus infer: Seeing it is manifest,
that the Heresies, rising within the first four hundred years; the Heresies
budding up the next two hundred years; the Heresies hatched in every age
during the last thousand years, are most largly recorded, partly in the
wrytings of the ancient Fathers in particular, and set Tracts against them;
partly in the Canons of General Counsels condemning them; partly by the
observing diligence of Ecclesiastical Historiographers (whose designed labor
is to transmit, and commend over to after ages the true state of Christ's Church
in former ages) and partly by the Protestants like endeauours, who have written
several Volumes of this very subject; Seeing (I say) all this is manifest, can
it then enter into any brain, but to ween, that so many Articles of the
present Roman Religion, being in number far more, then all the above rehearsed;
in weight and consequence greatly exceeding them; for diversity of Countries
and Nations, far further diuulged and spread then all, or any of the former
Heresies ever were (most of these others being restrained only to one Country,
or Nation) could ever so vnespiedly infect the whole Church of Christ with
their Contagion, and work a more notorious change therein, then ever yet was
wrought by all the Heretics since Christ's time put together; And yet not one
Father, Pastor, or Doctor of those times, either to take notice of any of
those supposed Heresies; or knowing them, not to impugn the first assaults, by
preaching or writing; neither any one Ecclesiastical History but to mention in
their Histories any one of the said Articles, or Innouations in faith: Can this
I say, be imagined? or can it be in the power of man thus to create a new
Religion at his pleasure, without control or discovery? To mantaine this, is
to maintain an assertion against all probability, against all reason, against
all possibility.

Animaduersion CXIX.
THe Greek Church has been for many ages emulous of the Church of Rome; and
therefore if the present Church of Rome had ancie^tly made any division, or
Schism from the true Church of Christ, the Grecian (no doubt) would have been
most apt to reco^mend the memory of such a change in our Church to all after
ages in their Historyes. But no such records we find in any of their writings.
Yea the Grecians are so far from that, as that (on the contrary side) the
present Church of Rome is able to specify and note (out of most ancient and
approved Authors) the very times, when the Grecians introduced those
particular Opinions, wherein at this day they dissent from our Roman and
Catholic Church. For example (to insist in some few;) The Grecians denial of
their Obedience to the Church of Rome, was first begun by John of
Constantinople, and was written against by Gregory Greg. l. 4. Ep. 34. and 36
the Great, and Pelagius Pelag. in his Epistle vniuersis Episcopis.
. Their denial of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the
Son, took it beginning about the year 764. and was gainsaid and
contradicted at its first rising, as In System. Theol. p. 68.
Kekermanus (a Protestant) witnesses. Their Denial of Prayer for the Dead,
was begun by Aerius, and impugned by Epiphanius Epiph Haeres. 75
and Austin Aug. Haeres. 53
.

Finally their bringing in of Leauenes Bread by the Grecians, in the
celebration of the Eucharist, was first begun about the year 1053. as
appears out of the wrytings of Leo In Epist. ad Michael. Episcopum, Constan.
cap. 5.
the Nynth, and the Cent. 11. cap. 8.
Centurists, Now here I demand; Can it be imagined, that these Innouations of
the Grecians, being few in number, could be so precisely contradicted,
gainsaid, and left registered to all Posterity; and yet this supposed change of
the Church of Rome, consisting in bringing in of far more Articles in number,
and as of great consequence, should never be noted, nor impugned by any one
Doctor or Father, nor recorded, nor observed by any one Historiographer; the
said Fathers and Historiographers living in the very same Ages, wherein this
supposed alteration is said to have happened?

Animaduersion CXX.
IT is certain, that what general propension Nature, or rather God himself
by Nature, as by his Instrument, has ingrafted in all me^, the same is in it
self most true, certain; and warrantable; since otherwise it would follow,
that God should insert in the Soul of Man, idly, vainly, and as directed to no
end, certain natural impressio^s, and instinctions: which to affirm is most
derogatory to his divine majesty and wisdom, and repugnant to that ancient
received Axiom, God and Nature work nothing in vain. Now to apply this
against our Neutralists in Religion, who think a Man may be saved in any
Religion: We find according hereto, both by History and experience, that diverse
zealous and fervent professors of all Religions whatsoever, both true and
false, have been most ready to expose their lives, in defense of any impugned
part or branch of their Religion; From which undaunted resolution of theirs, we
certainly collect, that this their constant determination of defending the
least point of their Religion, proceeds partly from a general instinct of
God, impressed in man's soul, teaching each man, that death it self is rather
to be suffered, then we are to deny any part of faith and Religion in general.
And thus according hereto we find, that the Athenians, who were Heathens,
(though they did err touching the particular Object therein, as worshipping
false Gods) were most cautelous, that no one point should be infringed or
violated touching the worshipping of their Gods. The like religious severity
was practiced by the Jews, as Josephus Joseph. contra Apion.
witnesses. Now from these Premises we deduce, against our Adiaphorists, or
Neutralls in Religion, either Catholic, or Protestant; that no points of true
Religion are of that cold Indifferency, as that they are not to be much
regarded either in belief, or in profession; but that they are of that Nature,
worth, and dignity, as a man is obliged to undergo all torments, yea death it
self, before he yeald, or suffer the least relaps in denying any of the said
verities, or in any external Profession contrary thereto.

Animaduersion CXXI.
FOr the further impugning of the indifferency of several Religions, and to
show that every religion among Christians is not capable of Salvation. I will
draw one demonstration out of Scripture. The text is this: In the 1. Timoth.
cap. 4.
larer times, certain shall depart from the faith, attending to spirits of
Error, and Doctrine of Devils; forbidding to Marry, and to abstain from
Meats. Here the Apostle prophesyeth according to the judgment of S.
Chrysestome, Hom. 12. in Timoth.
Ambrose, In hunc locum.
Jerome, L. contra Iouinian, c. 7.
and Haer. 25. and 40.
Austin, of the Heretykes Encratites, Marcionists, Ebionites, and such like,
who denied Matrimony, as a thing altogether unlawful, and prohibited
absolutely at all times; and the eating of certain Meats, as Creatures
impure. Now these Heretykes believed in the Trinity, the Incarnation, and other
Supreme points of Christian Religion; And yet eue^ for these two former
Heresies, touching Marriage, and eating of Meats (and not for their misbeleife
in the Trinity, Incarnation etc.) they are said by the Apostle to depart from
the faith of Christ, and to attend to the Doctrine of Devils; But such as leave
the faith of Christ, and attend to the doctrine of the Devils, are not in state
of Salvation. Now these Errors here mentioned by the Apostle, are of as
little, or lesser consequence, then the Controuersyes between the Catholics,
and the Protestants; therefore it stands upon each Christian, (if so he expect
to save his soul) to profess entirely, and wholly the true Religion.

Animaduersion CXXII.
TOuching the Doctrine of Transubstantiation in the B. Sacrament of the
Eucharist, the ancient Fathers are most full therein, even by the
acknoledgement of the Protestants themselves. First then Gregory the great is
confessed by D. Humfrey In Iesuitism. part. 2. rat. 5.
to have brought in Transubstantiation into England, at his first planting of
Christianity in this Country, as is above showed. Chrysostom is reprehended by
the Centurists, to use their own words: Cent. 5. col. 517.
Quia parum commode de Transubstantiatione dixit. Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
S. Ambrose is affirmed by the Centurists (in the book ascribed to Ambrose) to
confirm the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which Father for the said Doctrine
is also taxed by L Ep. Oecolampad. and Swinglij. l. 3.
Oecolampadius. S. Cyrill is reprehended by Peter Ep. ad Bezam, annexed to his
Common places.
Martyr in these words: I will not easily subscribe to Cyrill, who affirmed
such a Communion, as thereby even the flesh and blood of Christ is joined to
the Blessings; for so he calls the holy bread etc. S. Cyprian is charged, in
the book ascribed to Vrsinus (the Protestant) entitled: Co^monefactio
cuiusdam Theologi de sancta Caen^, who there thus writes: Page 111. and ^18.
In Cyprian are many things, which seem to affirm Transubstantiation. Lastly
Ignatius is acknoledged by Ke^pnitius Exa. part. 1. p. 94.
to have confirmed the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in that eminent place of
his: Ep. ad Smirnenses.
Eucharistias and oblationes no^ admittu^t, quod non confiteantur eucharistiam
esse carnem saluatoris, quae pro peccatis nostris passa est etc.

The truth of the Fathers judgment touching the Real presence is so fully
confessed by our Adversaries, as that Antony de Adamo (a markable Protestant)
thus acknoledgeth hereof. In his Anatomy of the Mass. p. 236.
J have not hitherto been able to know, when this Opinion of the Real and
bodily being of Christ in the Eucharist did first begin. With whom
conspireth Adamus Francisci another Pro estant) saying: Commentum In Margarita
Theol. page 156.
Papistarum etc. The Papists invention touching Transubstantiation, crept
early into the Church. Thu^ far of the Protestants Confessions in this
point; whereunto we may add, that these Fathers here above charged, with the
rest of the Fathers of those Ages, were the chief Pastors and Doctors of the
Primitive Church, which Church believed herein according as it was taught by
the said Fathers: If then these Fathers should err in the Doctrine of
Tra^substantiation, then should it follow, that the primitive Church, yea and
the universal Church of Christ (contrary ^o Christ's Math 1^.
promise) therein should err.

Animaduersion CXXIII.
IF we do take into due consideration (...) several chief heads and points,
when unto the sentences, and authorities of (...) ancient Fathers, touching the
Eucharist (...) be reduced; we cannot otherwise be per^^ded, but that the
Fathers taught vna^^mously the Doctrine of the Real Presence and
Transubstantiation: seeing those Heads (...) the Fathers sentences are so
agreeable a^^fortable to Christ's Real being in the Sacrament, and so
incompetent and disproportionable to a bare Typical Presence, or being of him
therein.

To begin then. The First Head of the Fathers authorityes may be the Appellat^^
or Names, which the Fathers give to the Blessed Sacrament, far differently from
the Sacramentaryes; which is an argument, that Sacramentaryes differ from the
Fathers i^ belief therein. Thus the Fathers call the Sacrament, The body and
blood of our Lord; The precious body; tremenda Mysteria, the fearefu^^
Mysteries, the pledge of our Salvation; Our pri^^* whereas the Sacramentaryes
usual phra^^ is to call the Eucharist, the Symboll, or sign^ of the body and
blood of the Lord.

The second Class or Head is taken from the Comparison of this Sacrament, with
other things; for they compare it with the Manna, Paschall Lamb, with Panis
Propositionis, and the like; saying, The Eucharist does differ from all these
things, as the Truth differs from ^^gures, the body from a shadow, a celestial
Divine, and inconsumptible thing, from a terrene and consumptible. They, in
like manner compare the Eucharist with the mysteryes of the Incarnation; They
compare Christ, as he is upon the Altar in the Eucharist, with Christ as he was
in the Cribbe or Manger: They in like manner compare Christ in the Eucharist
with Angels appearing in corporal forms. Finally, they compare those men, who
unworthily do handle, or receive the Eucharist, with those men who killed
Christ.

The th^rd is taken from the change of bread; which mutation the Fathers
several ways prove to be Real. First they say, the bread does not remain
after Consecration. Secondly, that the Sense is deceived herein. Thirdly, they
compare the change here made with the real mutations of Water into Wine, and
of the wandes of Moses, into Serpents Fourthly, the Fathers affirm, that the
Omnipotency of God is necessarily required, to perform this mutation.

The fourth Head, is taken from the most high Mystery which the Fathers did
acknowledge to be in the Eucharist; For first, they say it cannot be apprehended
without faith. Secondly they did exhort Christians to an infallible constancy
in belief of the truth of this mystery. Thirdly, they taught that the miracle
therein exceeded man's capacity and apprehension. Fourthly the Fathers did
forbear (in reverence thereof) to speak of the Eucharist before Heathens, or
those which were only Catechumeni, except covertly in these words, Norunt
fideles. Fifthly, they b^ing demanded, how the mystery of the Eucharist could be
performed, their answer was to refer it to the Omnipotency of God.

The fifth Branch is taken from the Veneration and worship given to the
Eucharist; For first they did adore the Eucharist. Secondly, they did Jnnoke
it, or did say, that it was to be inuoked. Thirdly, they were most cautelous,
that no part thereof should fall upon the Earth. Fourthly, they would not
suffer it to be seen of Heathens, or Catechumeni. Fifthly, they auerred, that
Angels did stand near unto the Altar, whilst this Sacrifice is performed; yea
Chrysostom plainly says, that Angels did stand in the presence of the
Eucharist, capite inclinato, with bowing down their Heads.

The sixth Class is taken from the Effects, which the Fathers ascribe to the
Eucharist. For first they teach, that by it we are corporally united with
Christ. Secondly, they affirm, that our bodies are to suffer Resurrection,
because they are united with the body of Christ. Thirdly Chrysostom says,
that Christ does give himself in the Eucharist, that we may have him truly
within our selves: Even as men do covet (yet cannot) give themselves to those,
whom they love. Fourthly, the Fathers say, that when we receive Christ in the
Eucharist, Christ is joined with us, not only by Faith and Charity, but also
reipsa, in very deed. Fifthly, they teach, that by the perception or receiving
of this Sacrament, we are made Consortes diuinae naturae: partakers of the
Divine Nature. Now if the Reader do desire to see the Fathers in particular,
who affirm such and such points set down in this Animaduersion, I refer him
to the 39. Chapter of the second book de Eucharistia, in Bellarmine; from
which place I do acknowledge, I have taken this Animaduersion. Now what can be
replied against the Fathers Sentences herein? It cannot be said, that they
delivered these Encomia and lauds of the Blessed Sacrament, by way of
Rhetorical amplification, exaggeration, or Hyperbolicall speeches; First,
because not any one Father (among so many) does but intimate any such manner of
writing in their works; Secondly, in that some of them, do write to the
contrary, affirming that the sense of the words touching the B. Sacrament are
literally to be taken as they are written; for thus does Hilarious (by way of
prevention, touching the Fathers meaning) write hereof: Non est Hilarious cap.
8. de Trinitate.
humano aut saeculi sensu in Dei rebus loquendum: neque per violentam and
impudentem praedicationem caelestium dictorum sanitati alienae, atqus impiae
intelligentiae extorquenda peruersitas est. Quae scripta sunt legamus, and quae
legi^^s intelligamus, and tunc perfectae fidei officio fungemur: de naturali
enim in nobis Christi veritate quae dicimus, nisi ab eo discimus stulte atque
impie dicimus; ipse enim ait, Caro mea vere est esca etc. And thus much,
touching this Father censuring of his own writings, and of other Fathers also,
concerning the Blessed Sacrament; and that the Sentences delivered of it, ought
to be taken literally, and plainly, and not Hyperbolically, or figuratively,
and as amplifications.

Animaduersion CXXIV.
AS above is showed, that the ancient Fathers even by the Confession of the
Protestants, taught the Doctrine of Transubsta^tiation in the Eucharist; so
also in this Animaduersion I hold it convenient, to discover the like judgment
of the Fathers, that the Eucharist is a true and Real Sacrifice, offered up to
God and this from the penns of our Adversaries.

First the^, Symmachus was Bishop of Rome, of whom the Centurists thus write
Cent. 6 cap. 10. col. 664.
: Notas Antichristi etc. ^ymmachus had the Notes of Antichrist, for he brought
the Mass into a form.

Of Ambrose the Certurists thus confess: Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
Ambrosius locutionibus vtitur, quibus ante cum ex patri^us nemo vsus est; vt
Missam facere, offerre Sacrificium: Ambrose does use certain speeches, the
which no other Father before him did use; as to say Mass, to offer up
Sacrifice etc.

The Council of Carthage (whereat S. Austin was present) is in these words
depressed by Pelargus, a Protestant: In his Scho^la fidei, tract. de Council.
page 13.
Haec Synodus Carthaginensis Intercessionem and Missa^ pro defuuctis iniunxit:
This Synod of Carthage ^id ordain intercession of prayers, and Mass for the
Dead.

Cyrill of Jerusalem is thus taxed by Hospi^ian the Protestant: Hospinian hist.
Sacrament. page 167.
Quoad Cyrilium Hicrosolymitanum attinet etc. Cyrill of Jerusalem says indeed
(according to the use of his time,) that the Sacrifice of the Altar is a great
help to souls.

Gregory Nyssene is thus charged by Crasto^ius a Protes^ant: Nyssenus L. de
opificio missae. 164.
ille ait, Cum ^ederit Christus discipulis suis corpus suum ad comedendum etc.
tam latenter, and in^ffa^^^^ter, and inuisibiliter Corpus immolatum erat etc.
When Christ gave to his disciples his body to ^^te etc. that then his body was
immolated and offered up latently, ineffably, and inuisibly.

Cyprian, who lived an. 240. the Centurists do thus reprehend: Sacerdotem Cent.
3. c. 4. col. 33.
Cyprianus inquit, vice Christi fungi, and Deo patri Sacrificium offerri, and
from hence they charge Cyprian with Centurists in the Alphabeticall Table of
the third Century under the letter. S.
Superstition.

Tertullian, who lived anno 220. Osiander thus accuses: Tertullianus Ofl. and.
Cent. 33. c. 9.
approbauit oblationem pro ^^junctis: Tertullian approved of Oblation for the
D^ad; Osiander here meaning the oblation of the Sacrifice of the Mass. In
further confirmation whereof we find D. Fulke thus to write: Tertullian, D.
^ulk. in his confutation of Purgatory. page 361. vide pa. 103. and 3^3.
Cyprian, Austin, Jerome, and a great many more do witness, that Sacrifice for
the Dead, it a Tradition of the Apostles.

Jrenaeus in like manner, who lived anno 170. is charged by the Centurists, who
thus write of him: De Cent. 2. cap. 4. col. 63.
oblatione Irenaus (l. 4. c. 23.) satis videtur loqui incommode, etc. Jrenaeus
in l. 4. c. 23. seems to speak inconueniently enough of Oblation, or
Sacrifice, when he says: That Christ had taught a new oblation of the new
Testament; the which the Church receiving from the Apostles, offered to God
throughout the whole world; Thus far the Centurists of this father.

Jgnatius (the Apostles scholar) who lived anno 90. is thus censured by the
Centurists: Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 63.
Quaedam ambigna, and incommode dicta in quibusdam occurrunt, vt in Epistola
Ignatij ad Smirnenses: Non licet (inquit Jgnatius) sine Episcopo neque offerre,
neque Sacrificium immolare. There are certain doubtful and inconue^ient
sayings, which do occure in diverse place, as in Ignatius his Epistle ad
Smirnenses: where Jgnatius says: It is not lawful without a Bishop to
immolate, or offer up Sacrifice; Which very words of Ignatius the Centurists in
another place affirm to be, Cent. 2. c. 10. col. 107.
periculosa, and quasi errorum Semina. Thus far of the Fathers Doctrine
touching the Sacrifice of the Mass; a Point so evident, that Calvin
infimulateth all the Fathers within this reprehension: saying, The fathers did
Calu. in omnes Pauli Ep. in Hebr. ^. 7. page ^^4.
adulterate the supper of our Lord, by adding Sacrifice unto it. With whom (to
omit some others) Sebastianus Francus thus records: In Epist. de abrogandis
in vniuersum omnibus sta^utis Ecclesiasi.
Statim, post Apostolos omnia inuersa sunt etc. Caena Domini in Sacrificium
transformata est. To the Antiquity of the Doctrine of the Mass and Sacrifice,
I will subnect the consideration of the Universality of the Doctrine thereof,
practiced both in former times, and at this present day, by all the Christians
of the whole world (our Adversaries only excepted.) For the Christians in Asia,
Affrike, Europe, yea the Grecians, Armeniant, the far distant Ethiopians, and
the remotest Oriental Jndians (of whom many never heard of the Roman Church)
in their daly recourse of Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, do ever conspire and agree
together (as it has been, and is observed by Travelers) in the Doctrine of
the Real Presence, and daily practice of saying, and offering up the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, notwithstanding their known diversity of opinions in
other matters.

Animaduersion CXXV.
THe Greek text in Luke 22. viz. (...): Hic calix nouum testamentum in
sanguine meo, qui (viz. Calix) pro vobis effunditur. This Text (I say) by force
of the Greek, in regard, that the Relatine in the Greek, agrees with Calix,
and not with: Sanguine, shows that Calix was shed for us. Now seeing that
Calix (taken Materially) could not be shed for us; therefore that, which was
contained in the Calix, was shed for us: But wine could not be shed for man's
redemption; therefore it inauoydably follows, that the blood of Christ was in
the Calix. This testimony (by reason of the greek words so expressed) is so
forcible and conuincing to prove, that blood was in the Cup, that Beza Beza in
Luc. 22.
seeing it could be no ways otherwise answered, said: these greek words were
surreptitious, creeping by n^gligence out of the Margent into the Text; though
it has ever been read (as now we read it) in all ancient Greek Manuscripts.

Animaduersion CXXVI.
WHereas our Adversaries to prove, that the verb Est, in the words of
Consegration, should be taken for significat, (so excluding thereby all real
Presence) do urge many Texts of Scripture, in which they say, the said word
Est, must of necessity be taken for significat: as Agnus est Pascha, Exodus; 12.
Septem bones sunt septem anni, Genes. 14. Ego sum Ostium, Joan. 20. and some
others. To this I answer, First, that in Parables and similitudes, the verb
Est is taken for significat, and yet without any Trope; The reason hereof
being, because the whole essence of all such things is placed in signification.
Secondly, I answer, that in the examples alleged by our Adversaries, there
immediately follows an explication of the Trope, and figure; but of the words
of the Jnstitution there follows no explication. Thirdly, in most of the
examples alleged by our Adversaries, ever praedicatur disparatum de disparato,
as Christus est Ostium, my meaning is, that, that which is of a most different
Nature is said of another thing of the like different Nature; which kind of
propositions, seeing they cannot be by any means properly and literally true,
we are forced to expound the same by Tropes and figures: But in the words Hoc
est Corpus meum, there is no such kind of strange and unusual predication, at
least in the appearance of the words themselves.

Animaduersion CXXVII.
I do much wonder, that any of our learned Adversaries (as often they do)
insist in those words against the Real presence, Spiritus est, qui vinificat;
Caro non prodest. Joan. 6. It is the spirit which quickneth, the flesh
profits not. For here the literal sense of these words only is, that a
Carnal understanding of spiritual things, does not profit, as Sermon. de Cau^
Domini.
Cyprian, Chrysostom Upon this place.
, and Origin L. 3. in Epist. ad Rome. no^.
do expound. But admit that Christ did speak of his flesh; yet it proves
nothing against his being in the Eucharist; both because by the same Reason, we
may conclude, that the bread is not in the Sacrament for if the body of Christ
profits us nothing much less can a little piece of wheaten bread profit us.
Again if our Lord had spoken of his flesh, he would not have understood it
absolutely; but only that the flesh without the Spirit profits nothing; Since
otherwise our Lord should have crossed himself, who said: Qui manducat carne^
meam, habet vitam aeternam. Lastly, it is no less, then a great impiety to
deny, tha^ the flesh of Christ (being united with his Divinity) profits us
nothing; Seeing S. Paul, Coloss. 1. attributes all our Salvation to the flesh
of Christ; for he says, that we are reconciled to God by the said flesh.

Animaduersion CXXVIII.
WHereas our Adversaries in further impugning of the real Presence do object,
first the Indignity proffered by us to Christ his body, in mantayning it to be
really in the Eucharist, since by this reason, say they, it may become rotten
and moldy, and be eaten by myce, and should pass to the belly, and so to the
common passage. To this I answer, that these supposed indignityes do not
touch the body of Christ, but only affect the species, and form of the
Eucharist, which is joined with the body. Again, seeing our Christian faith
teaches us, that Christ was included for a long time within the Womb of the
Blessed Virgin, being a Woman; that he was swadled, and lapped in Clothes, that
then he might fall upon the earth, and might also have been eaten with beasts,
or burnt (if so by miracle he were not preserved from such mischances) if rhe^
he was truly, and in his own person subject to all these difficultyes, without
any dishonor; what dishonor is it to him, if he did undergo (in another
form) the former supposed Indecencyes, urged by our Adversaries? Again, the
former Indignityes do no more truly, and properly touch the body of Christ,
then the Divinity; which (being in all places) can be said to be burnt, it
being in the fire, or being rotten, it being in bodies that are rotten etc.

Animaduersion CXXIX.
Our Adversaries draw another argument, taken from the unprofitableness of the
Real Presence in the Eucharist. Thus they dispute; The real being of Christ's
body in the Eucharist, is needles, in that seeing the end and fruit of the
Eucharist is to nourish the Soul; and this nourishment consisting in faith and
Charity, may as auayleably be performed by apprehending Christ by faith, as he
is only in Heaven; it therefore follows, that no profit aryseth from the
Catholic doctrine herein, which is not by other means as well effected. To
this I answer, first, that it is false to say, that the same fruit is reaped
by Christ in Heaven, as by receiving him really into our bodies; since
Experience does witness, that by this receiving him in the Eucharist, our
Faith, Charity, Devotion, and Reverence are more increased. Besides, our real
conjunction with Christ affords many benefits to the soul, which Christ
gives not without this Conjunction; no otherwise, then he cured all such, who
touched the Hemme of his garment, whom he would not have cured (though
otherwise he could) if they had not touched it. Secondly, I affirm; It is a
false ^^^ation to conclude, It was not convenient, that Christ should be really
in the Eucharist, because the fruit reaped thereby, may be obtained by other
means; For that is profitable, which does confer any Good, though the same
good may be obtained otherwise. For one drop of Christ's blood, or any other
laborious work vndertak^n by him for our good, had been sufficient for our
Redemption; yet it follows not, that all his pains, labors, effusion of
blood, yea death it self, were unprofitably and bootelesly performed. Yea God
could have redeemed the world without the Incarnation of Christ^ shall we
therefore say, that the Incarnation of Christ was needles, inconvenient, and
unprofitable?

Animaduersion CXXX.
WHereas above there have been alleged diverse testimonies out of the Jews
and ancient Rabins, in proof of diverse Articles of our Roman Catholic faith,
and particularly of the Sacrifice, which the Rabins say, the Messiah shall make
at his coming; our Adversaries seek to euade the force of all the Jewish
Rabins authorities, by saying, that those testimonies of the Rabins were first
forged by Galatinus, and fathered upon the Jews for their greater credit. And
according hereto we find D. Whitaker thus to answer Dureus, who urged some
Jewish sentences out of Galatinus, for proof of the Real Presence, and
Sacrifice: Tuum Whitak contra Duraeum. page 818.
in hac causa Petrum Galatinum minime profecto desideramus, nec Haebreorum
testimonijs illis indigemus. Now to free Galatinus from suspicion of forging
all such sentences of the Rabins in favor of Christianity, and of Articles of
our Roman Religion; I answer hereto, and say, that one Hieronymus de Sancta
fide, being a Jew, and converted to Christianity in the time before Galatinus
(whose Physician he was) did write a book entituling it: Hebraeo-mastrix, or
vindex impietatis, and perfidiae Iudaicae, wherein he proves diverse points of
Christianity from the there all^dged ^estimonies and sentences of the said
form^r Jews, mentioned by Galatinus. This book of his was printed at
Franckford anno 1602.

Animaduersion CXXXI.
IT is much observed, how our Adversaries in answering to Catholic Books,
often give slip to the argument, or authority produced; and in lieu thereof
either by degrees fly to the state of the Question (as though before it were
not acknowledged) or to the Scripture (themselves only interpreting the same)
where they may range up and down ar large; or to some by circumstance, merely
accessory to the Question and difficulty disputed of; or do use deceytefull
resemblance, and exchange of matter, subtly conveyed, and brought in by
tedious entertainment of prolonged discourse; and all this to hold the Reader
therewith, that so vnespiedly they may divert the Readers eye and memory (being
thus fixed upon their digressions) from the authority and reason alleged. Here
also may allege their accustomed practice in printing the Catholics Books at
large, and their answer conjoined thereto in the same bulk or volume; Their
usual imposture then is, to cause the Catholic authors words to be set down
in a most little, obscure, and dark letter or Character, thereby to withdraw
the Readers eye from perusing and reading it at large; whereas their answer
thereto, they procure to be printed in a fair and great Character or letter,
that so they may more easily inuit the Reader to the full perusing of it. And
this slight is particularly (besides in others) manifested in D. Whitakers
Answer to B. Father C^^pian his ten Reasons, in his Challenge to the two
Universities; also in D. White his Book against his Adversaries entitled: The
way to the true Church.

Animaduersion CXXXII.
IF many miracles were wrought concerning Christ's body, before, and whiles he
here conuersed upon earth; may not then a man be more easily induced to believe
the great Miracle of his body in the Institution of the Eucharist? A little
before the Nativity thereof, we read: ( Co^ceptus est de Spiritis Sancto; At
the very instant of his birth: Natus est ex Maria Virgin: some small time
after his death Tertia die resurrexit; upon his last departure from us:
Ascendit ad Caelos; In all which passages Nature herself was (if not
dissolved) at least suspended: yea whi es he here conuersed upon earth, the
sam^ sacred body of Christ was sometimes nourished without To wit, during
Christ's fast of forty days.
eating, at other times did eat without When he did eat with his Apostles
after his Resurrection.
any nourishment thereby: furthermore, the same body remaining Visible,
According to Luc. 4. Ipse transient pe^ medium illorum ibat.
became Jnuisible: To conclude, christ blessed body did walk Mat. 14.
most firmly upon the liquid Element, so as the unstable Water did then
support him who supports the Heavens: If then Nature did so often subject and
humble herself to this sacred body, how can we Christians doubt of the
infallible certainty of those words of Christ concerning his body, Hoc est
corpus meum, proceeding from our true and powerful Lord; since Truth
acknowledges not Falsehood, nor Omnipotency Deficiency?

Animaduersion CXXXIII.
TOuching the doctrine of Freewill, I have thought good to set down these f^^
Animaduersions following, especially for the use of such as are scollars. Here
then we are to know, that liberum arbitrium, or Freew^^, is not only a passive
power, neither partly passive; nor partly active, but is simply and on^^ an
Active power. Secondly, by Freewill n^^ things Evil, but only things Good, are
des^red. For the proper object of the Will is that which is good, or at least
that, which is apprehended under the show of God (...) No^ that which is evil
does not belong to the object of the will, but only secondarily, an^ per
accidens, so far forth, as we will (...) that, which is Evil; and therefore we
w^^ not, because Evil, is contrary to the go^^ which properly we will.
Thirdly, Freew^^ has reference as well to things Present, a to things to come.
The truth of which Thesis is thus proved: If Freewill could no^ consist
touching things that are present then would it follow, that God should (...) be
in his Actions truly free; the reason is because to God nothing is past, nor
nothing to come, but all things are present. Fo^^thly, the object of Freewill,
is not the (...) but only the means to the End. Here (...) speak of the
chief Act of the Will, whi^^ is Election, where the Freedom of the Will does
respect only the Media, but not the Finis. And it may be said to respect the
End, only, as the End may inducre rationem medij, undergo the show or form of
the means. Fifthly, the Subject of Freewill cannot be any thing, but an
Intelligent Nature, that is, nothing is endued with Freewil, which has not
intelligency and understanding. And hence it is, that Beasts cannot be said to
have freewill, because they have their judgment determined by Nature, against
the which they cannot reluctari, or strive; and they cannot confer one thing
with another, which is the foundation of freewill: And thereupon it rises,
that all Beasts of the same kind do ever work after one and the same manner.
Sixthly, it is to be observed, that there is a double fredome of Nature, for
there is a freedom, which is opposed to a simple coaction, and constraint; and
those things are said to be freely done, from this simple constraint, the
which though necessarily they be done, and cannot be but done, yet they are
freely and voluntarily done; according hereto we all will, and wish ^o be
happy, and cannot in any sort will to ^e unhappy. There is also a freedom or
li^erty of the will, to the which not only co^ction, but also necessity is
repugnant: And those actions are said to be free from neces^ity, the which we
can will, or not will: as when we do walk, or speak, we might notwithstanding
have not walked, or have been silent. Now the freedom of will, which the
Catholic doctrine requires, it a freedom from necessity, and not only a
freedom from coaction, or constraint.

Animaduersion CXXXIV.
Our Adversaries h^uld it impossible, that Liberum Arbitrium can stand with the
Divine Operation; affirming, that the Cooperation of God does take away, and
destroy the Freedom of will. But the Catholic School Deuynes Gregorius
Ariminensis. Scotus, Gabriel, and others, in secund. Sencent. distinct. 37.
do mantayne, that they both may stand together, and they explicate it in this
sort: They teach, that the Cooperation of God in any work performed by Man
with Freedom of will, bears it self with reference to the Effect, not with
reference to the Cause; that is, that the concourse of God does not determinate
our Will, neither does work, or imprint any thing upon it, but that it
immediately flows into the Effect, and does produce the same in the very same
moment, in the which it is produced by the Will. And hence say they, it
follows, that God does neither determinate, or necessitate the Will, nor the
Will God, since both give freely their concourse, and if the one will not
concur, the Action will not be done: Even as (say they) when two men do bear
a great stone, the which the one of them is not able to bear, nether of these
men do add force to the other, or impell the one the other, and it is in the
liberty of either of them to leave the burden: Although God (except he would
extraordinarily work some miracle) does ever concur, when our Will does
concur, because he has in a certain manner bound himself thereto, when he did
create man's Freewill. From which it follows, that though God, and Man's will,
even in the same moment of time do begin to work; yet God works, because the
Will works, not contrariwise.

Animaduersion CXXXV.
Our Adversaries for the impugning of Freewill say, that it destroys Gods
prescience, or foreknowledg, seeing both these, I mean man's Freewill, and Gods
foreknowledge cannot stand together: for God does foreknow all future things
necessarily, and it cannot possibly b^, that God should be deceived; therefore
all things have their event out of a certain Necessity. I answer hereto, that
the Prescience of God is most certain, yet does it not impose any necessity to
things future. This is thus proved, according to the judgment of S. Austin
Austin. l. 3. de libero Arbitrio.
and others: If the foreknowledg of God does impose a Necessity to future
things, the reason hereof should be taken from Prescience or foreknowledg, as
it is considered in it self; or else from Prescience, as it is the Prescience
of God; But neither of these are true. For first if Prescience of God (because
it is Prescience) should impose a necessity to future things, then it would
follow, that not only the Prescience of God, but also the Prescience of Man,
should in like manner impose a necessity to future things. But this is false:
for the foreknowledge of man is not the cause of things, neither does it work
any things that are future. For example, if by divine revelation I should know,
that it will rain to morrow; nevertheless I should not be the cause of the
rain, and yet without doubt it would rain, but no less contingently, then if
I had known nothing thereof. Now, why those things which certainly are
foreknowne, do ever have their Event, when as notwithstanding they come to
pass contingently, and in respect hereof may not come to pass; the cause
hereof is; Because who foreseeth a thing to come, does in his understanding
anticipate, and prevent the effecting and doing of the same thing, and so
behouldeth the thing already done, before it be done, but that which is done,
cannot be undone, though it be done freely, and contingently. Therefore it may
be concluded, that the Prescience of God imposes not a necessity to things, as
foresight, or foreknowledg is considered in it self; neither as it is
considered to be the Prescience of God. This is proved, for as God does foresee
what men will do, so he also foreseeth, what himself will do; but the
Prescience of God does not force God, that he will work, or do any thing;
therefore by the same reason his Prescience does not force men. In like manner
the Protestants object, that Gratia efficax (which we Catholics do grant, that
it is given to diverse men) does destroy Freewill. To this I answer with S.
Austin, that this Gratia efficax has indeed an infallible certitude, but yet
has no necessitude, but only ex hypothesi; and in this respect, it does not
hinder the Freedom of man's Will: for though certain it is, that this Gratia
efficax will not be rejected; yet it is as certain, that it may be rejected.
And therefore this efficacious grace, where it is given, does no more induce a
necessity, or hinder the Freedom of the will, then the Prescience, or
foreknowledg of God does.

Animaduersion CXXXVI.
SOme of our Adversaries (and particularly Luther, as is above said) do thus
write: The ten Luther. ser. de Moyse.
Commandments appertain not to Christians: And again: The ten Fox. Act. Mon.
p. 1335.
Commandments were given us, not to do them, but to know our Damnation, and to
call for Mercy. And yet more plainly D. Willet writes: The Law remains still
impossible to be kept by us, through the weakness of our flesh; Neither Willet
in Synops. Papism. pa. 564.
does God give us ability to keep it, but Christ has fulfilled it for us.
Thus these men seek to free us from keeping the Commandments, because (say
they) Christ has kept them for us. And may not any man conclude from the same
ground, that we Christians are not bound to pray at any time, or to practice
Virtue and Piety, because Christ has prayed for us all, and lived a most holy
life, for us all? Such incentiues to all vice, and turpitude in conversation
does this doctrine beget in the belieuers thereof; and therefore the less
wonder, that we find Luther thus to write: A Luth. tom. 1. wittenberg, de
captiuit. Babylon. fol. 74.
Christian man is so rich, that although ^e would, he cannot loose his
Salvation, by any s^nne, how great soever, unless he will not believe.

Animaduersion CXXXVII.
IN setting down the necessity of the ever Visibility of Christ's Church, I
will not so much insist in the Scriptures, or in the authority of the Fathers
confirming the same, as in the true and ingenious acknowledgment of the learned
Protestants thereof, which being here once expressed, then I will draw a most
dangerous and irrepliable inference, to the main overthrow of the Protestants
Church. Well then to begin^ We find Calvin thus to write: Nan: Inst. l. 4. c.
1. Sect. 4.
is visibili Ecclesia etc. Extra cuius gremium non est speranda peccator^m
remissio: Out of whose besome we cannot expect any remission of sinne^. H^nnius
gives his sentence in these words: God In his Treatise of E^^^will. pa. ^1.
in all times has placed his Church is a high place, and has exalted it in
the sight of a^l people and Nations. Iacobus Andraeas, that famous Protestant:
We In his book against Hosius, page 210.
are not ignorant that the Church must be a visible Company of teachers, and
hearers. Melancthou is most luxuriant in his Sentences of this point, who thus
writes: Necesse Melanct. in Council. Theologi ^art. 2.
est fateri esse visibilem Eccles^am etc. It is necessary to confess the
Church to be visible. Whither tends then, haec portentosa Oration, this
monstrous Opinion, which denies the Church to be visible? And in another place
this Protestant thus further discourses: Whenever In loc. com. ^dit. 15^^ c
d^ Eccl^s.
we think of the Church, let us b^hould the Company of such men, as are
gathered together, which is the visible Church: neither let us dream, that the
Elect of God are to be found in any other place, then in this visible Society
etc. Neither let us imagine of any other in^isible Church. Briefly the said
Melancthon, urging several texts of Scripture in proof of the Churches
visibility, says: Melanct. vbi supra.
Hi and sim^^s loci etc. these and such like places of Scripture Non de idaea
Platonica, sed de Ecclesia visibili loquuntur.

D. Field thus writes: The Lib. 1. of the Church. c. ^0. page 19.
Persons, of who^ the Church consists, are visible, their profession known
even unto the profane etc. I will conclude with D. Humfrey, thus teaching: Cur
D. Humfrey in his Iesuitis. part. 2. cap. 3.
anxie and curiose probant, quod est a nobis numquam negatum? Why do the
Papists so painfully seek to prove that, which we never denied? And then after
he says: Non enim cluncul^rij sec^stus, and connocationes s^nt Christianae:
The Society of Christians are not secret meetings. And then there speaking of
the Church militant he further thus says: Oportet Ecclesiam ess^ conspicuam,
Conclusio est clarissima: It is a manifest Conclusion, that the Church is to be
conspicuous, and visible. Thus far of the learned Protestants confessing the
truth, touching the ever necessary and uninterrupted visibility of the Church
of Christ. Now the Deduction, which I draw from the premises is this: That
seeing the Church of Christ must ever be conspicuous and visible; And further,
seeing that the Protestant Church has been wholly latent and invisible
(according to the judgment of some Protestants) for the space of this last
thousand years; but by the acknowledgment of other learned Protestants during
these last thirteen or fourteen hundred years, as above I have set down in
our Adversaries literal authorities and sentences, acknowledging so much; what
other thing then can result out of our Adversaries own positions, but that the
Protestant Church, through want of a necessary, and uninterrupted visibility,
is not the true Church of Christ?

Animaduersion CXXXVIII.
THat Luther was an Enemy to the Divinity of Christ, and the Blessed Trinity,
is above showed. In this Animaduersion, Calvin shall be charged with the like
impiety. This I prove, in that Calvin labors to avoid and detort all such
chief places of sacred writ, as the Ancient Fathers were accustomed to allege
in proof of Christ's Divinity. Now first, I will set down his own words
against the B. Trinity, whereof he thus says: Haec In Ep. 2. ad Polonos in
tract. Theolog. p 796.
precatio, Sancta Trinitas, vnus Deus, miserere nostri, mihi non placet, and
barbariem ^mnino sapit, This prayer, Holy Trinity, one God, ^aue mercy upon us,
does not please me, for it tastes of Barbarism. Now to come to the text
impoysoned by his Constructions: and first that markable passage, J, and Joan.
10.
the Father are vnum, vz. one thing ever mainly insisted upon by the Ancient
Chrysostom. in hunc locum. Austin in hunc locum, and many others.
Fathers, against the Arians, for proof of the Divinity of Christ, is thus
avoided by Calvin: Calvin in Joan. ca. 10.
Abusi sunt hoc ^xo Veteres, vt probarent Christum esse Patri Homousion; neque
enim Christus de vnitate substantiae disputat, sed de consensu: The ancient
Fathers have abused this place, to prove, that Christ is Consubstantiall to his
Father; For Christ here disputes not of the unity of Essence, but of the unity
of Consent and will. Again, that passage: There 1. Joan 5.
be three, that give testimony in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost; and these three be one: Which text the ancient Fathers ever expounded of
the Trinity, Calvin thus answers: Quod Calvin in hunc locum.
dicitur tres esse vnum, ad essen^iam non refertur, sed ad consensum potius:
That is; where it is said, these three are One, these words are not to be
referred to One, in respect of Essence, but rather of Consent. In like manner
that place: Thou Psalm. 2.
art my Son (body) this day I have begotten thee, Cal^i^ In Psalm. 2.
interprets with the Arians against the Divinity of Christ. This point, I
mean of Caluins interpreting the chief passages of Scripture (ever urged by
the Ancient Fathers for proof of Christ's Divinity) with the Arians to impugn
Christ's Divinity, is so c^eere and confessed, as that Aegidius Hunnius (a most
markable and learned Protestant) writes a book against Calvin of this
subject, thus entituling it: Caluinus Indaizans; hoc est, Iudaicae glossae and
corruptelae, quibus Joannes Caluinus illustrissima scriptura sacra loca, and
testimonia de gloriosa Trinitate etc. detestandum in mo^um corrumpere non
exhorrait. With this blasphe^y against the Blessed Trinity, Calvin is further
charged by Conradus In Theolog. Caluinist. l 2. fol. 38. 39. and sequent.
Sclusselburg, by In his Admonit. de Arianis.
Pelargus, by Stancarus, Sc^nkarus contra ministros Geneuens. and Tyguri^o^.
and lastly by Ioannes Mathaeus all eminent Protestants; which Mathaeus did
write a book against Calvin, for teaching Arianisme stiling it: de Cauendo
Caluinistarum fermento etc.

Animaduersion CXXXIX.
FRom the confessed Inuisibility of the Protestant Church, during so many ages
above granted, it is proved, that the Protestant Church is not the true Church
of Christ by this Medium following: The Prophesyes do fore show, that the
Church of Christ in the time of the New testament, shall convert to its faith,
the Gentiles, their Nations, and kingdoms; thus accordingly we read Esaias to
fortell of the Church: Esaias c. 60. vide etiam cap. 54.
The Isles shall wait for thee (meaning the Church:) Their kings shall minister
unto thee; and thy Gates shall be continually open; neither day nor night shall
they be shut, that men may bring to thee the riches of the Gentiles; with whom
accords the Royal Prophet speaking in the person of the Church: Psalm. 2.
I will give thee the Heathens for thy inheritance and the ends of the earth
for thy possession. That these places of Scripture (besides diverse others) are
understood of the enlargement of Christ's Church, and the conversion of
kingdoms and nations unto it, is warranted by the acknowledgement of O^colamp.
upon Jeremy.
Occolampadius In his def^nce p. 400.
, D. Whitguist, D. Whitaker In his answer to M. William Reyno^^^
and others, as also by the Annotations of the Protestants own English Printed
in the year 1576.
Bibles. Now for proof that the Protestant Church, never yet converted any
Gentiles, or Heathen Kingdoms and Nations to its faith, we will begin first
from Luthers time, and so ascend by degrees up to the Apostles. And first from
Luthers days to Gregory the Great, or Boniface the third, (which contains a
thousand years) it is evident, that during all this time the Protestant Church
remained wholly Jnuisible (as is above demonstrated, from the acknowledgments of
Protestants) and therefore could not convert any Countries or Kingdoms to its
religion. Again touching all these Countries here expressed, to wit, The
Danes, Cant. 8.9, 10.11.12.13.14.15.
Morauians, Polonians, Slauonians, Bulgars, Hunnes, Normans, Bohemians,
Noruegians, Saxons, Germans, and diverse others here omitted; the Conuersions of
all these happened within this last thousand years, and therefore were
converted by the Church of Rome, and to the present Roman faith, even by free
acknowledgment of the Magdeburgians, or Centurists, according as the Bishops of
Rome lived within those several ages. Neither can our Adversaries name any one
Heathen Country in Christendom, converted to Christianity by the Protestant
Church. And hence it ryseth, that D. Whitaker does style the Conversion of all
the former Countries, (as granting them to be converted to our present Roman
faith) impure, Whitak. l de Eccles. contra Bellarm. 336.
and corrupt Conuersions. Now to ascend from these last thousand years upwards
to the other next three hundred years; I mean to the days or the first
Christian Emperor; during the space of which three hundred years, no
Countries or Kingdoms were converted at all to Christian Religion, either by
Catholics, or any others; for it is evident that in those days there were no
Kings professing the Christian Religion, the Emperors of the East only
excepted; among whom some were false As Valens, Constantius, constans.
Christians, as being defiled with Arianisme, others Iulia^.
Apostates. Now concerning the time it self of Constantine, it is so certain,
that neither himself, nor any Country by his means was converted to the
Protestant Religion, as that the Magdeburgenses (all Protestants) recording the
state of the Church in Constantynes time, do charge Constantine with all our
Catholic points, at this day professed by the Church of Rome, styling them:
The Cent. 4.
Errors of Constantine; and of his Age.

Now to rise higher in times, to wit, from the times of Constantine to that of
Christ our Savior, it is witnessed by all Historiographers, that the Church of
God was in such violent Persecutions, as that it had no means to enlarge it
self by converting to it Kings, or Kingdoms; and if it had at that time
converted any, yet the Question would then follow, whether such a Conversion
had been made to the Protestant, or to the Roman Church: But the euidency of
this point appears both from the writings of the Protestant Deuines of
Wittenb^rg, In the book, Disputationes etc.
as also from the testimony of D. Barlow, who thus discourses hereof: Barlow
in his defense of the Articles of the Prot^stant Religion. page 24.
the Primitive Nonage of the Church, this promise of Kings allegiance
thereunto, was not so fully accomplished; because in those days, that prophesy
of our Savior was rather verified: You shall be brought before Kings for my name
sake by them to be persecuted even unto death.

Now to reflect upon this argument deduced from the prophesyes, that the true
Church of Christ shall convert to it, the Gentills, their Kings, and Kingdoms;
he^^ above we see even from the pens of our Adversaries, that many Countries,
Kings, and Kingdoms have been converted to Christianity by the Roman
Catholic Church, but not any one Heathen king or Coun^ry by the Protestant
Church: whether then o^ these two Churches, is the true Church (...) Christ?
Here to reply, and say, that these prophesyes are to be fulfilled, not before,
b^^ after the preaching of Luthers Gospel, (...) controuled by the judgment of
all learne^ men, and by Experience it self, and therefore D. Whitaker had just
reason thus to confess of this point: Whatsoever Whitak. l. 7. contra Duraeum
pa. 472.
the a^cient Prophets have foretold of the enlargement, amplitude, and glory
of the Church; The same to have been already performed is most evident out of
Histories. Thus far of this Demonstration, to prove, that the Protestant Church
is not that Church, to which the former prophesyes of converting Gentills,
Kings, and Nations do truly appertain.

Animaduersion CXL.
GOod Reader, in this one Animaduersion (...) entreat thy peculiar lattention:
This then I say; Luther thus charge Moses: De Luth. tom. 3. Wittin. in Psalm.
46. fol. 423.
you collect together all the Wisdom of Moses, and of Heathen Philosophers,
and you shall find them to be before God, either Idolatry, or Hypocritical
wisdom etc. Away therefore with Moses. Of S. Paul the Magdeburgians thus
speak: Paul Magdeb. Cent. 1. l. 2. ca. 10.
does turn to James the Apo^^^^, and a Synod of Presbyters being called
to^^her, he is persuaded by James and the rest, ^t for the offended Jews he
should purify him^fe in the Temple; whereunto Paul yields, ^^ich certainly
was no small slyding of so great a Doctor, as not having sufficient reason
thereof, Moses Law being abrogated. In the like condemnation of some other
Apostles we ^d Brentius (the great Protestant) thus to ^each: Brentius in
Apolog. Confess. c. de Concilijs. page 900.
S. Peter chief of the Apostles, and also Barnabas, after the Holy Ghost
received, ^^gether with the Church of Jerusalem, er^^d. That the whole Church
of Christ may ^tre, D. Fulke thus literally auerreth: The D. Fu ke, in his
answer to a Counterfeyt Catholic. page 86.
^hole Church militant, as every part thereof, ^^y altogether err. Touching
general Coun^l^, Peter Martyr thus speaks: As Lib. de vocis.
long (...) we insist in General Counsels, so long we shall ^sist in the
Papists errors. Of particular Fa^^ers D. Whitaker thus censureth: Papistarum
Contra Duraeum. l. 6 p. 421.
religio est Cento etc. The popish Religion is ^patched Couerlet of the Fathers
Errors sowed ^gether. Finally Christ himself (both God and Man, and Redeemer
of the world) is ^harged with ignorance by the Protestants; ^r thus Calvin
writes: Insanus Calvin in ca 14. Math.
foret, qui ^grauatim ignorantiae subijceret, quam ne ipse ^idem Dei filius
nostra causa subire abnuit etc. that man were mad, who with discontent should
^knowledg himself to be subject to ignorance; ^nce the Son of God himself
for our sake, ^ould not refuse to be ignorant. And further, Calvin speaking of
Christ his prayer in t^^ Garden, thus charge our Savior: Chri^ Calu. in 26.
Math.
oration in horto fuit abruptum votum, and s^bito elapsum, quod castigauit and
reuocauit; (...) prayer of Christ in the Garden was abrupt, and not
premeditated, which vow at unawares ^^^ping from our Savior, he after revoked
anan^ called. Thus now I wind up my Premises; Y^ particular Fathers, If
General Counsels, Y^ the whole Church militant of Christ, ^f the Blessed
Apostles (and this after the desce^ding down of the Holy Ghost,) If Moy^
finally if Christ himself may err (as a^ this is above (though falsely) taught
by o^ Adversaries;) what indiscretion then, wh^^ weakness of judgment, what
motley foolishnes; or rather Lunacy is it, to ascribe a^ infallibility of
judgment to Luther an incestuous Monk, to Swinglius an Apostat^ Priest, to
Calvin and Beza two Sodomits even by the acknowledgment of their own Calvin
and Beza are charged with Sodomy by Conradus Schlusselb. (a great Protestant)
in Theolog. Calvin. printed. 1504. l. 2. fol. 72. and l. 1. ol. 91.
Brethren, to any other Sectary whosoever, or finally to the private revealing
Spir^^ of each illiterate man, who holds himself (through his own pride and
ignorance) to be afflatus, or possessed with the Holy Ghost? or what Reason had
D. Whitaker th^^ ambitiously to paint out this Private Spirit^ these words, An
Whitak. in Controu. q. 5. ca. 3. and 1^.
inward persuasion of the Holy Ghost, wrought in the closet of the belieue^^
heart?

Animaduersion CXLI.
WHen we Charge the Protestants with diverse Innouations of the ancient
He^^tykes, they in Recrimination thereof la^our to insimulate us with the
Doctrines of ^he Gentiles, or Heathens, as appears from Reinolds lib. de Romans
Idolatria p. 168. 248. and 381. The same is objected by Kempnitius, Examen.
part. 3. page 83.
D. Reynolds pen: And here they chie^^y insist in two points, to wit in the
Do^ryne of Sacrifice, and of vows; both which Doctrynes were ever believed and
practiced (and are even at this present) by the Gen^^^ and Heathens. Here I
thus wype away ^^is aspersion, and yet withal I freely grant, that we mantayne
both Sacrifice, and vows; (...) do withal acknoledge, that the Heathens ^d
the like; but now to the point. To have ^acrifice, and to have Vows, is
derived to ^en from the light of Nature; since even (...) the Law of Nature,
Men (as Men endued ^ith reason, not as Heathens) ever belie^ed the doctrine
hereof, and practiced the ^me. In like manner the Heathens, only by ^e light of
Nature believed, that there was God (as the Apostle shows;) shall we
Ca^olykes therefore dissent from the Hea^ens in the belief thereof? Now that
the ^eathens erred in the Object of their Sa^ifices and Vows, to wit, in
sacrifizing of men, and making improfitable and foolish ^owes, this proceeded
from the Nature of man, corrupted by Original Sin, and not repaired in them
by Christ; Even as they erred in the immediate Object of God; as no^ believing
in one only true God, but rep^ting the Sun and Moon, as Gods. No^ here I
say, it is lawful to agree with the Heathens in the generalityes of the two
former doctrines (since the Instinct of Nature impressed by God in Man teaches
so much but not in the particularityes of the^; seeing they are most erroneous
in the immedia^ Object.

Animaduersion CXLII.
WHen the Catholics do allege certai^^ Notes of the Church, as Antiquity,
Universality, Succession, Conversion of Heath^^ etc. our Adversaries seek to
avoid the force of some of these Notes, and particularly of Succession, and
Conversion of Gentiles* since, they say, these two Notes are claym^^ by
confessedly false Churches; seeing the Greek Church houldeth Succession, and
the Arians have converted the Goths an^ Vandals. To answer hereto, I first
say, these two Instances are false; for the Greek Church has its Succession,
as interrupted, and begun from those Intruders, who began their own
separation from the Roman Church, about the Holy Ghosts proceeding And as
concerning the supposed Conuers^ons of the Goths and Vandals by the Arians it
is only pretended; Seeing the Goths we^^ not at the first converted by the
Arians, bu^ being converted before, were after by them perverted, as appears
out of Zozomen, l. 6. c. 37. and Theodoret, l. 4. cap. vlt. Secondly, I reply
to the former Evasion, That the Catholics (rather to prevent the impostures of
our Adversaries obiecting hereto, the^ out of any absolute necessity of the
said Notes) do propound the foresaid Marks or notes, not as proper alone to the
true Church but only as marks inseparable (though not conuertible) from it; so
they undertaking thereby not to set down in the affirmative, that where any
such of these in separably marks be, there the true Church certainly is: but
rather in the Negative, that where these be wanting, there the true Church is
not: But certain it is, that these Notes are wanting in the Protestant Church.

Animaduersion CXLIII.
I grant, that the Catholic Religion is inuolued with far more difficultyes
(as may be exemplifyed in the doctrine of the Real presence) then the
Protestant Religion; the reason thereof being, in that our Religion consists
of Affirmative Articles, the Protestants faith (so far forth as it differs
from the Catholic) of Negatiues. Yet to recompense this, we find that the
Protestant faith is attended on (contrary to the Catholic faith herein) with
diverse gross absurdityes, necessarily, and immediately flowing from the
Protestants Tenets, or Assertions. I here pass over, how Luth. l. de capt.
Babil. c. de Baptism.
Luther houldeth, that Infants at the time of their Baptizing have an
articulate and actual faith of all the chief Misteryes of Christianity; That
our Adversaries (howsoever they disclayme from it in words) teach, Luther in
Assert. damuat. per Leonem, Art. 36. Beza in his display of Popish practices,
page 202. Sumglius to. 1. de Prodentia fol. 366.
that God is the Author of sin: These and many other such like absurd
Doctrines I here pass over; only I will a little insist, how Luther in
Assert. art. 32. says, That all good works (God judging them) are mortal
sin.
Luther and the rest do mantayne, that all the good works of just Men are
Sins. Now the absurdity of this doctrine how transparent is it? Since from it
would follow, that the work of faith, by which we are justified, should be
Sin; as also that prayer, wherein we pray Dimitte nobis debita nostra, should
be a sin. But is it not most absurd, that man should be justified by Sin,
and that he should seek by Sin, to obtain the remission of sin? Again
from this fountain we might thus truly Syllogize and reason: All good works
are to be done; but some mortal sins are good Works; Therefore some mortal
sins are to be done. Again: No mortal sin is to be committed; but all
good works are mortal sins; Therefore no good Work is to be done. These
(Lo) are the inferences of the former absurdity, to wit, that all good works
are mortal Sins; that some mortal Sins are to be committed, and that no
good work is to be done. Now whereas by way of retortion our Adversaries, and
particularly Kempnitius in his Examen Concilij ^rident. vpbraid us, that we
teach a more blasphemous doctrine in maintayning, that we are justified by our
own works, and not by Christ his Passion. To this I reply, thar in obiecting
of this appears either extreme malice in our Adversaries, or at least most
wilful ignorance; Therefore to remove this stumbling block we say, that we are
justified by an inherent Justice, or Renouation of life in us, as by the
formal Cause; but we are also justified by the merits of Christ his Passion,
as by the meritoriour Cause; both which different causes may stand together,
without any derogation of the one to the other* contrary to the intended fraud
of our Adversaries herein, in seeking to confound these two different Causes.

Animaduersion CXLIV.
IF it be demanded, how Luther first, being instructed of the Devil concerning
his doctrine, as also being of a vicious life (as ^n this Treatise is in part
elsewhere showed) should for his doctrine be so much applau^ed, and repaired
unto by the broken mem^ers of the Catholic Church? To this may ^e answered,
that Luther his select and choice ^reparing of his doctrine, to entertayne and
^t the then several affected humors of ^ch peculiar declining estate and
degree (and ^his being accompanied with the Visitation ^f Gods heavy judgments,
hanging over ^he preuayling Sins of those degenerate ^^mes) was the chief
Allectiue, for the more easy embracing of Luthers Doctrine. No^ the choycnes of
Luthers doctrine consisted (to insist in some particulars) in mantayning
liberty of pretended Marriage in Clergy men; in his exposing of Monasteries, and
other rich spoils of the Church, to the greedy appetite of the temporal
Magistrate; and finally in deluding of the simple, and sinful Laity with his
other licentious doctrines of Salvation by only faith, and disclayming from the
necessity of Good Work^, as houlding them needles (as above out of his own
particular sayings we have proved:) In the several embracing of all which (as
S. Jerome Jerome contra Vigilantium.
in like manner said of Vigilantius his followers) Luthers followers favored
not so much him, as their own V^^^ These are the fatal steps of Luthers
sudda^^^ rising greatness: And this is the less to (...) wondered at, seeing we
see, that the like (c^ rather far greater) progress was made (...) this kind
by Mahomet, through his absurd and licentious Doctrines, wherewith so many
Nations are even at this day infected.

Animaduersion CXLV.
IF in retaliation of what is said in th^^ last above Animaduersion, our
Adversaries shall labor to distract their Disciple^ with unequal obiecting
(instead of answer) the supposed wicked lives of certain Popes; I reply
hereto, that admitting for the time, the said wicked lives of the Popes to be
true, and not forged, yet the disparity here rests, in that those Popes were
not the first Restorers of our Religion to light; since they lived many ages
after our Catholic Religion was universally professed, as appears above from
the confessed antiquity of the Catholic Roman Faith. Again I say, the
Question here is not, whether the high Priests of the Old Law, or the High
Priests now, have after the establishment of Religion been sometimes wicked
Men or not; but the touch of the Question here issuable is, whether the truth
of Religion, having been extinct (as is supposed) or to the World latent, and
invisible for so many hundred years (as is in this Treatise confessed by our
Adversaries, to have been extinct and invisible) may with any probability be
thought to be revealed or restored to the world, by men of flagitious and
wicked Lives; I mean by Luther, Swinglius, Calvin, Calvin charged with Sodomy
by the public records of the City of Noyon in France, yet extant, and by
Conradus Schlusselburg, (a Protestant) in Theolog. Caluinist. printed, 1594. l.
Law, 1. fol. 72.
and Beza Beza charged with Sodomy by the fore said Schlusseiburg vbi supra,
and l. 1. fol. 9^. Hessbusius (a Protestant) in his book entitled, Verae and
san^ Confessionis etc.
both which last two are condemned of the execrable Sin of Sodomy, even by
other Protestants their brethren? And here the doubt or Question rests.

Animaduersion CXLVI.
THe Prophet speaking with difference of the Synagogue of the Jews, in the Old
Law, and of the Church of Christ in the Ne^, thus writes: The glory Aggeus. ^.
of this last hou^^ (meaning the Church of Christ) shall be greater then the
first; with whom conspireth the Apostle, saying: (with reference to the Jewish
Law, and the Law of Christ; Hebr. 8.
Christ is a mediator of a better Testament, which is established upon better
promises. Now from these passages of Scripture I demonstratiuely deduce, that
the Protestant Church is not the true Church of Christ; since touching its
visibility, it is much inferior to the Synagogue of the Jews; I mean (which
is a Circumstance here chiefly to be observed) even since the coming of the
Messiah, which was the appointed time of the Synagogues Decay, and the
Christian Churches increase. For it is fully confessed heretofore, that for the
thousand years last before Luther (or rather some several ages more, before
the said thousand years) the Protestant Church has continued unknown,
latent, and invisible. Whereas on the other part, it appears by sufficient
authority of Histories in all times, that the Jews during all those ages, and
ever since Christ's time, have had their Synagogue (though under some kind of
restraint) yet dispersed, known, and Visible in the most notable Provinces of
the world, as Greece, Italy, Spain, France, Germany, England etc. And thus we
see, that the scandal, or scruple hence arysing, has been an argument for
some Protestants, to apostatate from Christian Religion, and to become Jews;
as Bernardine Ochine, Neuserus chief Pastor of Heidelburg, and others, (as I
have showed elsewhere) since these men (altogether rejecting the Catholic
Church, as false and Idolatrous) did well observe, that the former Prophesy of
the Visibility of the Church of God, was not fullfilled in their Protestant
Church.

Animaduersion CXLVII.
IF we might rest upon the several judgments of the Protestants, it would
follow, that most of the chiefest Controversies, between us and them, should
be but points of Jndifferency; and the contrary houlding them off either side,
should not be prejudicial to Man's Salvation; which course is indeed to
introduce a Neutrality of Religion, or rather a contempt of all Religion. I
will exemp^ify in diverse particulars: And (1) first, concerning satisfaction,
and merit of works, D. Whitaker thus writes: The Whitak. contra Rat. Camp. p.
78. and in his answer to M. William Reynolds cap. 6. page 135.
ancient Fathers thought by their external discipline of life to pay the
pains due for sin etc. Which though it be an err^ur, yet were they
notwithstanding good Men, and holy Fathers; Therefore I conclude their belief
and practice of the said points, were no hindrance to their Salvation. 2.
Touching the Popes primacy, thus favorably Melancthon writes thereof: The In
his Ep extant in the Book entitled, Centuria Epistol. Theolog. Epist. 74
Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome is profitable to this end, that consent (...)
be retained; Wherefore an agreement might eas^ly be established in this Article
of the Popes Pr^macy, if other Articles could be agreed upon. Touching our
Lady, being preserved from Original Sin, and worshipping of Jmage^ M. Bunny
thus writes: In these Bunny in his pacification. sect. 17. page 104.
or su^^ like whosoever will condemn all those to be no^ of the Church, that
are not fully persuaded therein, as we are etc. commits an vncharitab^^ part
toward his brethren. 4. Concerning receiving under one or both kinds, Luther
thus teaches: Si Luth. de vtraque specie Sacramenti.
veneris ad locum, vbi tantu^ vna species ministratur, cum alijs vna tantu^
specie vtere etc. 5. Concerning the Doctrine of the Real Presence, D. Reynolds
says: The Reynolds in his fifth Conclusion annexed to his Conference. page 722.
Doctrine of the Real Presence is but (as it were) the grudging of a little
ague, if otherwise the party hold the Christian faith, 6. Of Invocation of
Saints, D. Goad, In their Disputation had in the Tower wi^h F. Campian, the 1.
days Conference Arg. 8. Rat. 11. and 111.
and D. Fulke affirm, that it does not exclude from being members of the
Church etc. 7. of Honoring Saints Relikes, and Prayer for the dead, M. Spark
thus discourses: We are Spark in his answer to M. John d' Albines. page 382.
not so hasty to pronounce condemnation of any such Errors; for you know well
enough, that we make not these matters such, as that either we think, that all
must be saved, that hold the one way, or all condemned, that hold the other.
8. Of Freewill, and prayer for the Dead, and some other points, M. Cartwright
thus censureth: The Indifferency Cartwright in his Reply, p. 14. Sect. 1. ^.
of the Doctrines of Free^^^l, prayer for the Dead, and a number of others,
necessary Doctrines, is such, wherein men being ^^sted, have notwithstanding
been saved. 9. Lastly concerning Mass, Luther thus writes: Private Mass
Luther, in Colloq. Germanicis, ca. de Missa.
has deceived many S^incts, and earryed them away into Error, from the time
of Gregory, for 800. years. Thus far for a taste touching many points even of
greatest consequence between the Church of Rome, and the Protestants, houlden
by the Protestants to be of that Adiaphorous and indifferent Nature, as that
the believing of them, or denial of them is no hinderance to the Salvation of
the Soul: So ready we find even the most learned Protestants (against the
Nature of true faith, and of the practice of the primitive Church) to dog^etize
a Neutrality of Christian Religion.

Animaduersion CXLVIII.
THe Antimoni, who denied the Law of Moses, and the Libertines who teach all
sensualicy (all most impure, and wicked Heretics) may in a true judgment, be
rightly said, to be descended from the loins of Luther. Of the Antimoni (so
called, by reason of their impugning the Law of the Old Testament) the
Protestant Deuines of Mansfield thus report them to teach: Lex diuina ^igna non
est, quae verbum Dei appelletur etc. Omnes, In Confessione Mansfeld.
Ministrorum. tit. de Antinomis. fol. 89. and ^0.
qui circa Moysem, hoc est december pr^cepta, versantur, ad Diabolum pertinent; Ad
patibulum cum Moyse. Thus these Deuines relate the Doctrine of the Antinomi.
And do not the Antinomi suck this their blasphemous doctrine from Luther, who
thus writes of Moses: Moses Luth. tom. 3. Wittenberg. in Psalm. 45.
has his lips unpleasant, stopped, angry etc. Do you collect all the wisdom
of Moses etc. and you shall find it to be either Jdolatry or hypocritical
wisdom, or (if it be politic) the wisdom of wrath etc. away therefore with
Moses. Now that the Libertines do in like manner spring originally from
Luther, is no less evident. Their doctrine Calvin delivers in th^se words:
Persuadent Calvin. in Tract. Theol. page 542.
nihil mali esse in stupris and adulterijs, cum a Deo omnia fieri cognoscimus.
The Libertines persuade themselves, that there is no evil in fornic^tion and
adulteries; Seeing (say they) we all know, that all things proceed from God. And
from this their Doctrine are so many writings published by the Libertines,
wherein is defended all Epicurisme, and Of these see Calvin vbi supra. page
527. and 543.
impurity of life. Now that Luther lays the ground of the Libertines
Doctrine, observe what follows: God Luth. in assert. ar^. damnat. per L^cnem,
art. 36.
works the wicked work in the wicked etc. And again: It is not in man's
power to think Good or Evil, but a^l things proceed from absolute necessity.
And as for extenuating of vice, as not hurtful to Man, and depressing of
virtue (in both which points the Libertines agree with Luther) I refer the
Reader to what is above set down out of Luthers own words: Only I will here
repeat one or two of his speeches. Touching good works (equally disclaymed
both by Luther, and the Libertines) Luther thus writes: No work is disalowed
Luth. in his sermons Englished p 147.
of God, unless the author thereof ^e disalowed before. And concerning Sin,
Luther thus teaches: Luth. to. 2. wittemb. de capt. Babil. fol. 74.
A Christian bap^ized is so rich, that though he would, he cannot ^oose his
Salvation by any sin how great soe^er, unless he will not believe. Which two
Doctrines of Luther are the very source, from ^hence spring the Libertines
Heresies.

Animaduersion CXLIX.
TO forbear the testimonies of Divine Scripture, of general Counsels,
Council. 3. Carthag. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. c. 60. ^^orent. sess. vlt.
and of the ancient Fathers Gregor. Nazianz. in Orat. in Cesarium Cyril.
Catech. 5. mystag. Epiph. in (...) Operis contra Haer haer 75. Chrysostom hom. 41.
in 1. ad Cor. Ter^ll l. de corona milit. Cyprian l 1. Epist. 9. Ambr. l. 2.
Epist. 8. (...) Faustinum, Hieron Epist. ad Pamma^h. August. de cura pro
^^rtuis, c. 1. and in Enchirid. cap. 110.
in proof of Pur^atory; I will here content my self with arguments two or
three, drawn from Reason, which are in my judgment of sufficient ^orce, for
the belief of this dogmaticall ^oint. The first Argument then may be this:
There are ceraaine Venial Sins (as is pro^ed out of S. James c. 1. and 1.
Cor. 3. which ^^e worthy only of temporal punishment; But it may so fortune,
that a Man may depart out of this life with such Sins not expiated: But it is
not intelligible, how an idle lord (for example) should out of its own Nature
deserve the perpetual hate of God, and sempiternall flames. The second Reason;
When Sinners are reconciled to God, the whole temporal punishment is not ever
remitted with the Sin; Thus though God remitted to David his Sin (in 2.
Reg. 12.) yet for temporal castigation he punished him with the death of his
Son. But it may so fall out, that a man has not fully satisfied at the hour
of his death for his temporal punishment; therefore it necessarily follows,
that there is a place of Purgatory, wherein all temporal punishment is to be
suffered. The third reason. We see that of those, who depart this life, some
are very good and virtuous; others very evil and wicked; others again are
reasonably good, and reasonably evil. Now, from hence, even by the force of
Reason, we may conclude, that there is after this Life eternal punishments for
those which be extremely wicked, and eternal rewards for the very good and
pious; and then by proportion and analogy temporal punishments (and by them a
passage to Eternal rewards) for those, who are but reasonably good, and
reasonably evil. Neither stands it with Gods justice, and goodness, that a
most virtuous man through his whole life, dying, and also another man dying,
who has committed many venial Sins unsatisfied, or has only the guilt and
eternal punishment of many great mortal Sins forgiven, without any temporal
satisfaction at all for them made, should both indifferently enjoy immediately
after their departure out of this life, the same reward of Glory and Eternity.
The last reason may be this: That opinion which takes away Purgatory, is most
pernicious, and therefore it cannot be true: For it makes men slothful in
avoiding Sin, and doing of good works (as elsewhere is intimated.) For who is
persuaded, that there is no Purgatory, but that all sins are presently
abolished by death in those who dye with true faith, may thus reason with
himself; To what end do I labor in fasting, Prayer, Continency, Almesdeeds?
Why do I deprive my self of pleasures, seeing at my ^eath all my Sins,
whether they be many or few, shall at once be cancelled? But who belieueth that
besides Hell, there is a most horrible fyar of Purgatory; and that what in this
^^fe is not washed away by due works of Penance, shall in that fyar be purged;
will be far more diligent, and cautelous in leading of his life.

Animaduersion CL.
TOuching the Induration, or Hardening of Pharaos Heart, so much urged by our
Adversaries, to prove that God is the Author of Sin, we are to note; that
whereas our very Adversaries, and particularly Melancthon Melancthon confesses
the same, in loc. Com cap. de causa peccati and contingentia.
confess, that the Hebrew word here used, signifies only Permission, the
Jewish Rabins are accordingly so plain in affirming with us the same to be
only by Gods permission, and not by his working, tha^ Peter In Epist. Romans cap.
9.
Martyr, and Munster Annotat. in Exodus cap. 7.
do accordingly acknowledge this the Jews foresaid exposition. Melancthons
words (confessing that the Hebrew word signifies i^ this place, only
Permission) are these: Nec ^^gurae illae verborum offendunt. Jndurabo Co^
Pharaonis, and similes; Certum ect enim Hebra^^phrazi significare Permissionem,
non voluntatem efficacem: That is, these forms of words (...) not offend us,
for it is certain, that in the Hebrew phraze they signify only permission, and
n^^ any efficacious will. Add hereto, how repugnant our Adversaries exposition
of this, (...) diverse other such Texts, is to the words of God, delivered by
Ezechiell cap. 33. which words may serve, as a Syntax, or Comment to paraphraze
all the threatening passages, set down in Scripture against Sinners, and against
the doctrine of Reprobation; showing that all such comminations are only
Con^^tional. Thus then Ezechiel in the Person of God: Si dixero impio etc. If J
shall say to the wicked, Thou shall dye the death; and he do p^^nance for his
Sin, and do Judgment and I^stice, living he shall live, and shall not dye.

Animaduersion CLI.
THe example of Elias is much prostituted by our Adversaries, for the
warranting of their own Churches Inuisibility for so many ages; but how
impertinently it is urged, observe what follows: First I say, this example
makes wholly against the Protestants, seeing the words of Elias, Relictus sum
Reg. 1.
solus, were not spoken generally of all the Jewish people, but only in regard
of the Country of Israel; and accordingly God answered the complaint of Elias,
with restraint to that only Country, the Scripture saying immediately after: I
have left to me in Jsraell seven thousand, which have not bowed unto Baal. Add
hereto that in those very times the Church did greatly flourish in the adjoining
Countries of Judah, as was to Elias then known, and visible, under the reign
of Asa and Iosaphat. And thus is this objection (so much prized by diverse of
our Adversaries) answered by In corpore Doctrinae, page 530.
Melancthon, and Enoch In his Sovereign remedy. page 17.
Clappam. Again, admitting these seven thousand were unknown to Elias, yet
follows it not, that they were unknown to all others at that time: Much
less then, is this example of force to prove, that the Church of God may be
latent and invisible for many hundred years together, not to one Elias only,
but to the whole World. But for a further discovering of the weakness of this
Example, let us grant for the time, that the Jewish Synagogue was in the days
of Elias wholly invisible, yet is this example most defectiuely alleged, as
applied to the Church of Christ: Since the predictions and promises made to
the Church of Christ, whose Hebr. cap. 8.
testament is established in better promises, are far greater, and more worthy,
then those of the Jewish Synagogue. Again the foresaid Example does not extend
to the whole Church of God before Christ; but only to the Jewish Synagogue, as
being a part or member thereof; for besides the Jews, there were diverse others
faithful, as Melchisedech, Cornelius, the Eunuch of the Queen of Candace,
etc. Thus far in solution of this objection.

Animaduersion CLII.
Our Adversaries do first teach, that concerning Matter of faith, they are to
believe nothing for certain, but only the holy Scripture. Secondly they teach,
that So writes D. Reynolds in his Conference with M. Heart. pa. 68.
it is not the show, but the sense of the wor^^ of Scripture, that must decide
Controversies. And that herein the Scripture does not instruct them of it self,
but by certain means, as M. Hooker In Eccles. Policy, l. 2 pa. 116.
affirms. Thirdly, these Means are affirmed to be, the reading These means
are set down by D. Reynolds in his Conference, p. 83. 84. and sequentib. and
by D. Whitaker de sacra scriptura p. 521 522. 523.
thereof, the Conference of places, the weighing of the circumstances of the
Text, skill i^ tongues, diligence, and prayer. Fourthly they affirm, that
these being Actions on their behalf, are but humane Endeauours, and such,
wherein every man without extraordinary privilege from God, is subject to
Error. Fifthly, they teach, that these means, according to the Nature of
themselves afford a necessary doubtfulnes and uncertainty of opinion; and
therefore D. Whitaker thus writes hereof: Qualia D. Whitak. de Eccles. contra
Bellarm. Controu. 2. q. 4. p. 227.
illa media sunt, talem ipsam interpretationem esse necesse est: at media
interpretandi loca obscura sunt incerta, dubia, and ambigua: Ergo fieri non
potest, quin ipsa etiam interpretatio incerta sit; Si incerta, tunc esse potest
falsa; Thus D. Whitaker discourses of the foresaid means of interpreting the
Scripture. Now these being the confessed grounds and principles of our
Adversaries Doctrine, they do appear to be no other, but as it were linked
chains, or naked connexions of unavoidable uncertainty; which point appears
more fully from the example of Luther, Swinglius, and Calvin; all who vanted,
that they did use the foresaid means in interpreting these few words, Hoc est
corpus meum; and yet the end was, that they delivered mere contrary
constructions of the said words; so as supposing one of their constructions to
be true, it follows necessarily, that the other Construction is false.

Animaduersion CLIII.
THe Absurdities necessarily accompaning the doctrine of the Pope being
Antichrist, are many and great. For the more clear understanding whereof, we
are here to repeat, what was above delivered upon other occasions. First then
Luther thus writes: We Luth. lib. contra Anabaptist.
Confess, that there is under the Papacy most of the Christian good, yea
rather all the Christian Good, and that from thence it came to us. Verily we
confess, that in the Papacy th^^^ is true Scripture, true baptism, the true
Sacrament of the Altar, the true K^yes of Remission of sins etc. Yea further
that there is in the Papacy true Christianity, or rather the true Kern^^ of
Christianity. Thu^ f^r Luther: with whom (to omit diverse other Protestants) D.
Do^^ conspireth, saying: D Dove in his persuasion to English Recusants. page 23.
We hold the Creed of the Apostles of Athanasius, of Nice, of Ephesus, of
Constantinople, and the same Bible, which (...) received from them. Now mark
the inevitable absurdity, rising from the premises: If the Pope (being the
head of the Papacy) (...) Antichrist (as our Adversaries do dream) does it not
then inauoydably follow, that with Antichrist there is all the Christian Good;
that from Antichrist the Protestants receive the true Scripture, true Baptism,
and the true use of other Sacraments (to wit, of the Altar, and Absolution of
our sins?) Finally, that from Antichrist they receive the Apostles Creed, and
the other Creeds above specifyed? What impossibilityes are these? and is not
this potentially and implicitly to turn Christ into Antichrist?

Again, the Scripture prophesyeth, that the Church of Christ (as I have showed
above) shall convert Kings, and Kingdoms of the Gentills unto it, according to
those words of Esaias speaking of the Church of Christ; Thou Esaias. c. ^0.
shall suck the milk of the Gentills, and the breasts of Kings; And again it
is prophesied of the Church by the Kingly Prophet: J Psalm. ^.
will give thee the Heathens (...) thy inheritance, and the End of the Earth
for s^^ thy possession. Now two things are clear: the first, that many Heathen
Kingdoms h^^e been converted to Christianity by the Pope, and his ministers;
This is proved from the confession of D. Whitaker, who acknowledging the
conversion of many Countries made by the Church of Rome, thus debaseth them:
The Whitak. l. de Eccles. page 336.
Conversion of so many Nations after the time of Gregory have not been pure,
but corrupt. Now that the Protestant Church never converted any Gentill, King,
or Nation to the faith of Christ, appears from its confessed Inuisibility for
so many ages till Luthers time, above set down. Thus then I here a^gue: The
predictions of converting Kings, and Kingdoms to the faith of Christ, were
performed by the Pope only, and his Substituts, and not by the Protestants:
Therefore the predictions for the enlarging of Christ his Church by converting
Gentills unto it, were performed by Antichrist, Christ's designed Enemy. How do
these stand together? and yet do these incompatibilityes necessarily result out
of the former Assertions.

Animaduersion CLIV.
THe example of Paphnutius his standing in the Nicene Council, in defense of
Priests marriage (so much insisted upon by so many eminent Protestants) is
misapplied, and withal, in all likely hood, most false; It is misapplyed,
because where it is urged in proof of Priests Marriage, it proves the
contrary; For though perhaps Paphnutius might be persuaded, that Priesthood did
not dissolve Marriage before contracted; yet he says plainly: Those, So relates
Socrates, l. 1. ca. 8.
who are made Priests before they are married, cannot after marry: And this
Paphnutius calls, Veterem Ecclesiae traditionem: The ancient tradition of the
Church. So far was Paphnutius from ascribing the doctrine of Priests not
marrying after the Order of Priesthood taken, to the Council of Nice. Now,
that this example of Paphnutius, is untrue, many probabilities may be urged;
First, because there is not so much as any Mention of this matter concerning
Paphnutius made by any, who did write of the Nicene Council, before Socrates
time (who first relates the words of Paphnutius.) For neither did Eusebius,
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Theodoret, nor yet Ruffinus himself, (who writ many
things of Paphnutius, and of the Nicene Council) all being more ancient then
Socrates, make any mention of this matter. Now I here dema^d, could all these
be silent in so great a business, and so earnestly debated in the Nicene
Council? Secondly, this example of Paphnutius seems to be against the third
Canon of the said Nycene Council, which altogether forbids Priests to have
dwelling with them any Woman, other then their Mother, Sister, their Fathers
sister, their Mothers sister etc. Now if, as Socrates reports in the example
of Paphnutius, the Council had left liberty for married Laymen afterward made
Priests, to have kept still their former Wynes, why then was not the wise first
placed here in the exception, but altogether omitted? This example of
Paphnutius is so much suspected to be false, that Frigeuilleus In his palm^
Christiana, p. 103.
Ganuius (a Protestant) does plainly ascribe it to the forgery of Socrates.

Animaduersion CLV.
IT will not be amiss to observe the Protestants Method, in disputing with the
Catholics, touching the Real Presence, as it is taught by the Church of Rome.
For the Question of the Real Presence being but propounded, they quickly tell
us, that Christ never intended, or willed it; which answer is made (to omit
all other Protestants) by In his Decads in English; sermon. 8. p. 971.
Bullinger. And when to declare Christ's Will therein, we allege his words;
they make then a new question of his power, as denying such to be his will, or
sense of words, under pretense, that it is So answers whitak. in his answ. to
M. William Reynolds. pa 179.
contradictory to the truth and Nature of his humane body, now in Heaven; and
so is thereby impossible. And when in reply thereto we prove to them directly,
that it is not impossible, then returning per circuitum to their firster
Evasion, they answer, that the Question So answers D. Whitak. in his answer
to M. Reynolds refutation page 192.
is not of his power, but only of his Will; and so dancing in a round, they
triffle and delude us, by a subtle escape of an endless Circulation.

Animaduersion CLVI.
IT is most certain, that the doctrine of many of our Adversaries touching the
Real Presence, is inuolued with greater show of Impossibility, then our
Catholic doctrine thereof is: for whereas they teach, that Christ's real body,
is really So teach (besides many others) M. Perkins in his reformed Catholic.
page 187. and D. Fulke against the Rh^mish Testam. in 1. Cor. 15.
and truly present, and yet not bodily and corporally, but only Spiritually
present; By which word (Spiritually) they do not exclude the true and real
presence of his body. Now, how this should be free from repugnancy, and mere
contradiction (and therefore impossible) I cannot discern; For to affirm, that
Christ's very body, (and not only a figure, or efficacy thereof) should be truly
and really present, and yet not bodily, but spiritually present, is in it self
inexplicable, and as Swinglius Swimglius co. 2. de vera and falsa religion^.
fol. ^06.
in confutation thereof truly observes, is upon the matter no other thing, then
to turn his body into a Spirit. For as the true substance of Christ's Spirit
cannot be said to be present to us only corporally or bodily, and not
spiritually, because it is a spirit, and no Body; so neither may the substance
it self of Christ's very body, be said to be present to us, not bodily, but
only Spiritually (nor at all spiritually, unless we do, which is impertinent
to the matter in hand) understand the word Spiritual, as the Apostle does 1.
Cor. 15. because it is a true and real body, and no Spirit.

Animaduersion CLVII.
Universality of our Catholic Doctrine in all chiefest points, dispersed
througout all Nations, even by the acknowledgment of our Adversaries (as
appears from their confessed Inuisibility of their own Church and Religion
for so many ages) is a most strong Argument of the truth of our Catholic
Religion. My reason hereof is, in that the doctrine of the Roman Church could
not by any pretended corruption be derived from that Church to so many Nations,
so far remote and distant each from other; Sundry of which Nations were unknown
to the Latin Church, and many of them at variance therewith, in some small
points. Therefore from hence I conclude, that our Catholic faith was the
Primitive faith, first taught by the Apostles, in all those far different
Nations, wherein no less then in some other principal points of faith,
embraced both by the Catholic and the Protestant, (such as is the Trinity, the
Baptism of Infants, and such like) the foresaid Nations did, and yet do agree,
notwithstanding their disagreement in lesser Matters.

Animaduersion CLVIII.
Diverse of the Jewish Ceremonies may be still maintained, though (as contrary
in judgment hereto) D. Reynolds D. Reynolds in his Conference with M. Heart, pa.
570. and 571.
is not abashed to object against us many Ceremonies of the Jews, as if we did
offend and sin in our Ceremonies; bearing some resemblance to the said Jewish
Ceremonies. But against this error of his and other Protestants, I allege
first, that (as D. Gardener, D. Gardener in his Dialogue between Irenaeus and
Antimachus, of the rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, printed at
London. 1605. fol. b. 3.
though our Adversary truly teaches) the Jewish Ceremonies, which have ceased,
and may not now be retained, are most properly those, which were ordained to
signify some thing, as being Future, and to be accomplished in Christ, as for
example, the Paschall Lamb, which signified his Passion to come; But as
concerning Ceremonies of other kind, that in the ancient Fathers judgment they
might be lawfully retained, or used, and so accordingly were by them used in
the celebration of the public Liturgy; is confessed by Calvin de Caena Domini,
in tract. Theol. printed. 2597. page 7.
Calvin. Secondly, we give instance of sundry Ceremonies, used in the Old
Testament, and yet now retained; as paying of Tithes, Our Churches with
reference to their Temples, Pentecost, Holidays, Elevation of hands, and
genuflection in time of prayer, Jmposition of hands, and diverse others.
Thirdly, that the Church of Christ might, and did in the Apostles times borrow
Rytes from the Old Testament, is confessed by Calvin, l. 4. In^tit. c. 3. sect,
16.
Calvin, and others; yea Peter Martyr thus plainly writes hereof: Many Peter
Martyr in his Epistles annexed to his Common places in English. p. 118.
things the Church has borrowed from the Decrees of Moses, yea and that from
the first times. Now these Ceremonies (as also others) are used chiefly to stir
up in us devotion; and that how forcible they are thereto, I will content my
self with the Authority of S. Austin herein, who thus writes: There Austin.
Epist. 5. ad Marcellum post initium.
are certain signs (he meaning Ceremonies) by the celebration, and use
thereof (not to God, but to us) profitable offices of Piety are exercised.
Again: Austin to. 4 de cura ^ro Mortuis c. 5.
When we kneel down when we stretch out our hands, when we lie prostrate upon
the ground etc. a man by these does better stir up himself to pray. Thus Austin.

Animaduersion CLIX.
THough the doctrine of the Mass has been briefly discoursed of before in
some Animaduersions; yet I hold it convenient here to relate the Antiquity of
the word Mass, still retained by us. First then, Peter Martyr thus writes:
Austin Peter Martyr, in his Common places Englished. par. 4 p. 515.
makes mention of the word Mass in his 237. sermon de Tempore, as also in his
91. sermon. de Tempore. In like manner the Century writers Cent. 4. col 295
reprove S. Ambrose, for mentioning the word Mass. D. Fulke Fulk in his
Retentiue. p. 60.
acknowledges, that Victor (who lived within the first five hundred years)
does in his History use the term of Mass, by which (says D. Fulke) was meant
the celebration of the Communion, and memory of the Sacrifice of Christ. Now if
ou^ Adversaries will reply to all this, saying the Word Mass, is not found in
the Scripture, therefore it avails not, that the Fathers did use it; let them
(as is above touched) in full answer of this condemned Sophisme, remember,
that although both we and they do profess to believe the Trinity, or Person^,
yet themselves cannot find the word Tr^nity, mentioned in the Scriptures,
neither the word, Person, according to the foresa^ sense.

Animaduersion CLX.
IT is evident by all observation and examples of former times, that the lives
(...) those men were evermore austere and sa^ctifyed, whom God did choose to be
the fi^^^ publishers or Restorers of Religion, or reformers of his Church. This
is verifyed (...) the Example of Moses in the Old Law, and of the Apostles in
the first preaching of the Evangelical Law, (all of them being me^ most pious,
most religious, and most seven to themselves in their manners and
Conversation.) This then being as a presume^ ground and principle; we are to
call to mind what above is granted by our Aduersari^^ to wit, that Luther, and
his scholars aft^^ following, were the first restorers of the Protestants
faith; their Church for so manages before being latent and invisible. He (...)
further we are to call to mind, that next (...) ^r Luther, the chiefest
Protestants for en^^ging of Protestancy, and spreading of their supposed
Gospel, were these follow^g, Swinglius, Melancthon, Carolostadius, Ia^^bus
Andr^^as Bucer Ochinus, Calvin and (...) Now in this next place we are to weigh
(...) nether these men were licentious, disso^^te and wicked in their
Conversation; or vertu^us and religious in their Courses: but it is more then
evident, that Luther, and all the rest of these were of most flagitious and
dissolute manners. The truth of which point (through the largenes of the
subject) here in express words to set down, this ^lace is not capable of;
Since in these my Animaduersions I affect all breuity: There^^re, I most
earnestly entreat the s^udious Reader to peruse the book entitled, Luthers
Life, written by the Author of the Protestants Apology. The Subject of that
^ooke is to lay open the enormous, and bad ^es particularly of Luther,
Swinglius, ^el^n^con, Carolostadius, Jacobus Andraeas, Bucer, ^chinus, Calvin,
and Beza. And what is there ^^liuered, is not delivered from the pens and
^^sertions of the Catholics (for that Course would be held suspected, and
par^^all) but from the pens and Relations of the Protestants themselves. I
assure the Rea^^r, that in that book he shall find some (...) those former men
to be charged with Fornication, Adultery; others with Sodomy; others again
charged with Epicurism, broaching of blasphemous doctrines; and others again
apostating from Christianity, and making themselves by Circumcision, open
Turk^^, Jews; and all this (as above said) there produced from the Protestants
own accusations of them: they thus profanely living after their beginning to
preach their Gospel. Now here I refer to any Man careful of his Salvation,
whether he can be persuaded, that God would ever out of his goodness and
providence choose such facinorous, impious, and detestable men to be the
Reuealers, or restorers of the truth of Religion, supposing it were till that
time abolished and extinct; and the rather, Since men do Mat. 7.
not gather grappes of thorns, nor figs of thisles. Once more I exhort the
Reader to the perusing of the foresaid Book.

Animaduersion CLXI.
Grammatical and literal construction of the words of Scripture is ever
houlden the best and securest, even in the judgment of our learned Adversaries;
for thus D. Whitaker writes of this point: Qui Whitak. de sacra scriptura
co^tra Bellarm. controu. 1. q. 4 pa. 381.
potest Grammaticum sensum Scripturae vbique assequi, is optime proculdubio
Scripturas explanabit, atque interpretabitur. And Melancthon accords
thereunto saying: Melancth. l. 1. Epist. Iusto Ionae, page 455.
Multas magnat res antea inuolutas Syntaxis profert and expouit. The syntax
does explayne many things, before inuolued with difficulties. Lastly to omit
others, Zanchius. de sacra scriptura p. 388.
Zanchius (the great Protestant) much relyeth upon the Grammatical and
Literal sense of the Scripture. Now, this principle and ground being granted
(as in reason it ought to be) how great is our Advantage herein against our
Adversaries; who rejecting the Grammatical and literal Sense of the passages
of Scripture by us insisted upon, do ever seek to interpret them figuratively
or allegorically? For Example; we rest in the Grammatical sense and
construction of that passage, This is Mat. 16.
my body etc. This is my blood etc. In like sort for the Primacy of Peter, we
urge the literal sense of that passage: Thou Mat. 16.
art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. Also for remission of Sins by man: Whose
sins Joan. 20.
you shall forgive, they are forgiven them, and whose sins you shall retain,
they are retained. And more touching works: Do you not see, that Luc. 3.
man is justified by Works, and not by faith only. Finally (to omit infinite
other testimonies) that perspicuous place for remitting of Original sin by
Baptism: Except a man Joan. 3.
be borne again of Water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. In all which places we do urge the Grammatical, plain, and literal
sense; whereas our Adversaries seek to expound all the said divine Authorities
by figures and Tropes. Add hereto, that the Protestants in their urging of
Scripture against us, do for the most part allege it, not in its literal or
immediate Grammatical sense, but in some secondary sense, seconded by
Inferences and deductions, at most but probable, though often absurd and false.

Animaduersion CLXII.
THe praises given to S. Austin by the Protestants are most great; For first
Luther thus speaks of him: Since Luther in tom. 7. wittenb. fol. 405.
the Apostles times the Church never had a better Doctor, then S. Austin. And
again: After the Luth. loc. com. class. p. 45.
sacred Scriptures, there is no Doctor in the Church, who is to be compared to
Austin. D. Fyeld thus extolleth him: Austin the Of the Church. l. 3 fol. 170.
greatest of all the Fathers, and worthiest Divine, the Church of God ever had
since the Apostles times. D. Couell: Austin D. Couell in his answer to John
Burges. p. 3.
was a man far beyond all that ever went before him, or shall in lik^lyhood
follow after him, both for Divine and humane learning. M. Forrester (a
Protestant) styleth Austin: That ^orrester in Monas Tessagraphica etc (...)
proaemio. par. 3.
Monarch of the Fathers, S. Austin. Gomarus (another Protestant) thus
celebrateth S. Austin: Gomarus in his spec. verae Ecclesia. p. 96.
Austin of all the Fathers is houlden most pure in the opinion of all. Finally
Calvin thus writes Austin Calu. Inst^^, l. 3 cap. 3. sect. 10.
only is sufficient, to show the judgment of the ancient Church.

Now in this next place let us take a view of what Religion S. Austin was, I
mean^ whether a Papist (as we are termed) or a Protestant; and this even from
the writing^ and Confessions of the Protestants themselves.

And first, in proof that Gods foreknowledge does not necessitate or restrain
the (...) in her actions (contrary to the Iudg^ent of most Protestants) Saint
Austin is so ^^ll therein, that Polanus Pol. in his Symphonia. c. 2. p. 114.
(the Prote^^ant) alleges several authorities out of Austin in defense
thereof.

2. Touching the induration of Pharoes heart ^y God; S. Austin teaches, that
this was ^nly through Permission, and not through ^y Positive actual working
of God; and ^^erefore this Father is reprehended by Cal^^s, saying, Calvin.
Inst. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 3.
Austin was not free from that ^^erstition, where he says, that Induration and
^i^^ration pertain not to the working of God, ^^to his foreknowledg.

^. S. Austin is so express and evident, that Gods Commandments are not
impossible, that ^elancthon forbeareth not to confess and ^prehend (to use his
own words.) Imagi^^tionem Melancthon. l. 1. Ep. p. 290.
Augustini de impletione legis.

4. S. Austin taught, that Christ from his ^atiuity was free from Ignorance;
This is ^^nfessed by Danaeus (the great Protestant) (...) these words: Danaeus
respons. ad Bellarm. ad 2. Controu. c. 1. p. 145.
Austin. l. 2. c. 29. de pec. (...). denies Christ to have taken Childrens
in^^nities and ignorance, which to be false (with ^^ue of so great a man) J
have showed before.

5. That Christ after his Death descended in^ Hell, Doctor Bilson in his
Survey of Christ's suffering. page 616. and 598. 599.
Bilson produces te^^monies out of S. Austin in proof thereof,

6. That Christ penetrated the Doors, when (...) came to his disciples; so as
his body at ^ut time was without all circumscription, Ru^gius in disput. 11 ex
Epist. ad Cor. 1. fol. 83.
Rungius (the Protestant) affirms it to be the doctrine of S. Austin.

7. That the Blessed Virgin Mary was assumpted up into Heaven, according to the
judgment of Austin, is confessed by the Centurists, who professing to set down
a Catalogue of Books written by S. Austin, do number, and place among his
other Books, Centur. 5. c. 10. col. 1122.
one book thus entitled: De Assumptione Vi^ginis Mariae l. 1.

8. In like sort, the Centurists do allege and confess out of S. Austin,
touching the Blessed Virgin being free from Original sin, in this manner: As
Centur. 5. c. 4. col. 499.
touching Original sin, forasmuch as concerns Mary, Austin writes:
Excepting the holy Virgin Mary of whom in honor of our Lord, when we treat of
sins, J will have no question at all etc. This therefore Virgin Mary excepted
etc. Thus much do the Centurists allege out of S. Austin.

9. That Austin taught, that the Blessed Virgin vowed Chastity, is confessed by
D. Fulke, who most scornfully charge S. Austin therein, with a Non Fulk
against the Rhemish Testament. in Luc c 1.
sequitur; saying, although S. Austin gathered, she vowed Virginity, yet it
follows not etc.

10. That the Scriptures are to be discerned (so far as co^cerns our taking
notice of the^) by the authority of the Church, Austin most fully teaches; and
is therefore condemned by Swinglius in these words: Here Swingl. tom. 1. fol.
135.
J entreat your indifferent Judgments, that you freely speak, whether this
saying of Austin (meaning about the discerning of Scripture by the authority of
the Church) be thought more audacious, then fitting; or to have been uttered
imprudently.

11. Touching the Books of Toby, Judith, Hester, Machabees, S. Austin does
admit them all for true divine and Canonical Scripture, and for such his doing,
is reprehended by Hospinian, Hospinian. hist. Sacr. part. 1. p. 160. Za^chius
de sacra scriptura, page 32. and 33. D. Fyeld of the Church. l. 4. c. 23. p.
246. D. Reynolds in his conclusions annexed to his Conference. conclus. 2 p.
699. and 700.
Zanchius, D. Fyeld, and Doctor Reynolds.

12. S. Austin is so full for the Doctrine of Traditions, that they are to be
received, as that M. Cartwright speaking of one Tradition, which Austin
defended, thus bursteth out: To allow Cartwrights in M. Whitguiftt Defense. p.
^6^.
S. Austins saying, is to bring in Popery again; and further he thus speaking
of S. Austin herein: If In Cartwright his second Reply, part. 1. page 84. 85.
86.
S. Austins judgment be a good judgment, then there be some things Commanded of
God, which are not in the Scriptures; and thereupon no sufficient Doctrine
contained in the Scripture.

13. Touching the Sacraments conferring Grace to the worthy Receauer, S. Austin
for teaching our Catholic Doctrine therein, is reprehended by Luth. l. contra
Coelaeum. and Calvin lib. Instit. 4. c. 14 sect. vlt.
Luther and Calvin.

14. That Children could not be saved without being baptized, Cartwright thus
speaks of S, Austin herein: Austin Cartwright in whitguifts defense, page 5^1.
was of mind, that Children could not be saved without baptism: And hereupon
then Cartwright charge S. Austin with Absurdity Vbi supra, p 516.
. Now in regard of this absolute N^ce^sity of Baptism to Children, B z^ Beza
in respons. ad Act. Colloq. Montisbelg. par. 2. p. 143.
confesses, that Austin taught, that in case of necessity, it is lawful for
the Layty to ba^^ize.

15. Touching the Real Presence, taught by S. Austin, Hospinian Hist.
Sacramen. par. 1. l. 4. pa. 292. and 293.
the Protestant, charge and repreh^ndeth S. Austin therefore; and
particularly for these words of S. Austin: When Austin. tom. 8. in Psalm. 33.
Christ said, This is my body, then that his body was carried in his hands.

16. That Austin taught, that the wicked (contrary to the Doctrine of the
Protestants) did receive the body of Christ, is confessed, and reprehended by
Bucer, in these words: How Script. Anglic. page 619.
often does Austin write, tha^ even Judas received the very body, and blood of
our Lord? Now further, that Austin taught, that the Sacrament ought to be taken
f^sting, is confessed by Hospinian in Hist. Sacram part. 1. page 48 In like
manner, that Austin taught, that Holy bread was to be given to the Catechumeni,
D. Fulke confesses thus answering thereto, terming i^: A superstitio^^ bread,
given in S. Austins time to those tes^ were Catechumeni, instead of the
Sacrament. Fulke against Heskins etc. l. 3 c. 23. page 377. To pass further;
that the body of Christ, in respect of his being in the Sacrament, is to be
adored in the Sacrament, D. Bilson reprehendeth S. Austin for such his
Doctrine. Bils^^ in his true difference. par. 4. page 536. To conclude,
touching the B. Sacrament of the Eucharist, whereas S. Austin teaches in tom.
3. in Enchirid. cap. 110. saying; The Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood is
propitious, or available for the souls in Purgatory; this sentence being
confessed by Hutterus (the Protestant) and in lieu of full answer thereto, he
says: Jn aeternum defendi non potest: This saying of Austin can never be
defended. Hutterus l. de sacrificio Missatico l 2. c. 7. p. 525.

17. S. Austin was so earnest in defense of Freewill, and Universal Grace,
that he is therefore acknowledged, and dislyked by the Century Cent. 5. c. 4.
col. 900. and 501.
writers. The Centurists Centur. 5. ca. 10. col. 113^. and whitak. ad Rat.
Camp. rat. 1. pa. 12.
and D. Whitaker do acknowledge, that Justification by works, is in like manner
taught by S. Austin.

18. Touching the doctrine of merit of works, thus writes Osiander of S.
Austin: Austin sometimes in the Article of Justification, seems to attribute
overmuch to the merit of works etc. Cent. 4. l. 4. cap. 23.

19. Touching Prayer for the Dead, thus D. Fulke avouches: Austin D. Fulk, in
confut. of Purg. pa. 349.
defended prayer for the dead. And that S. Austin did hold Purgatory, is in
like manner confessed by Fulk ib. pa. 78.
D. Fulke.

20. Touching Invocation of Saints, S. Austin is so fully Catholic, that
himself doubts not to pray to S. Cyprian, being long before martyred: which
action Kempnitius thus reprehe^deth: Exa. par. 3. pa. 211.
Austin did this without Scripture, yielding to the time and custom.

21. In proof, that Images may be worshipped, Hospinian Sacram. part. ^. l. 5.
c. 8.
though a Protestant, yet agreeing with S. Austin herein, alleges him in
proof hereof.

22. Touching the fast of Lent, and other fasts, S. Austin is reprehended by
the Centurist, Cent. 5. c. 6. col. 686. 687.

23. Touching vowing of Monastical life, the Centurists Cent. 5. col. 710
charge S. Austin with the Doctrine thereof, and Hospinian thus writes of
Austin herein: Austin Hosp. de origin Monach. fol. 33.
was a great lover of Monastical profession, according to the custom of that
age.

To conclude this long Animaduersion, Austin taught, that Antichrist should be
but one only man (and that therefore the Popes being many, cannot be truly
accounted Antichrist) this is confessed and dislyked by the Cent. 1. l. ^. col.
435
Centurists. Thus far now of this passage; from whence we may conclude, that
that Father, to whom so many learned Protestants did above give so high
commendation and praise, was in all points of our Catholic Roman Religion
(even by the acknowledgment of the Protestants) an entyre Roman Catholic, or
Papist: and hereupon I refer to the judgment of any man, careful of his
salvation; whether it be not more secure, for one to range himself in faith
and Religion, with so worthy a member of Christ's Church, as Austin was (even in
the confession of our Adversaries, who notwithstanding their Diversity of
Religion from him, even in relating of his Catholic Doctrynes, for the most
part do give him the title of Saint) then to dissent from him in faith, and to
join himself in Religion with the Innouatours of these times.

Animaduersion CLXIII.
I Grant, that certain Fathers forbearing somtymes upon just reasons, though
at other times they are most clear therein, do not speak so plainly of the
Real Presence; but that some of their sayings might stand subject to
mistaking, to such as conceive not the true reason of their affected obscurity
in writing: Yet cannot the Protestants with any show of integrity, insist in
such dark Sayings. My reason is this: For upon the same ground I bouldly
affirm, that we may with better reason insist in the sayings of the
Protestants delivered in show, in defense of the Real Presence; seeing many
more, and more plain seeming sayings may be alleged out of Calvin, Beza, and
their followers in pretended proof of our Catholic Docteine of the Real
Presence, then our Adversaries can allege against it, out of all the Fathers.
For Example; Calvin thus says: Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect. 10.
Etsi autem incredibile videtur etc. Although it may seem incredible, that in
so great a distance of places (as of Heaven, and earth) the flesh of Christ
should penetrate unto us, that it may be meat for us; we must yet remember,
how much above all our senses, the secret power of the holy Ghost can show it
self. Beza says: So says Beza with other Deuines of Geneua, in their
Apologia modesta, ad Acta Conuentus, 15. printed Geneuae. 1575.
Our manner of the presence of Christ's body is a more admirable and evident
testimony of the Divine Omnipotency, then that real, and orall manducation of
the Papists. Finally to omit many other such sayings of our Adversaries, D.
Fulke thus has left written: The Creatures, or Elements are blessed or
consecrated, that by the working of Gods spirit, they should be changed into
the Body and Blood of Christ, after a divine and spiritual manner to the
worthy receauer. Now here I demand, will our Adversaries insist in some dark
sayings of the Fathers, for the impugning of Christ's real and true body and
blood in the Eucharist? Then I aver, we may (with more show of color) urge the
Protestants Testimonies, even in defense and proof of the Real Presence. I
add to this former Animaduersion (a thing most worthy of observation) that all
such Sectaries, as denied the Real presence before Luthers days, did
maintain diverse Heresies (for such confessed both by Catholics, and
Protestants:) Now the men impugning the Real Presence were these following,
Berengarius, Waldenses, Albigenses, Henry Bruts, Peter Abaylardus, Almericus,
and lastly Wicleff, all maintayners of diverse Heretical positions and
opinions, in the censure both of our Adversaries, and our selves.

Animaduersion CLXIV.
BOth the Caluinists, as D. Couell, in his defense of M. Hooker, art. 24. p 96.
D. Bilson in his true difference etc. par. 4. pa. 539. and 592. and 368. D.
Whitak, contra Ca^^. rat. 9. besides other Caluinists.
Caluinists and Lutherans Lutherans, as Kempnitins in his exam. part. 2. p. 17.
and p. 53 Lobecchius in his disputat. Theol. p. ^31. 3^2. and diverse others.
teach, that the Godhead, Christ Passion, and the Sacraments concur in their
degrees in working of Grace; The Godhead, as being the Principal Agent, and
without dishonor to Christ Passion; Christ Passion, as being the Instrument
conjoined to the Godhead, and working without dishonor thereto. Lastly, the
Sacraments, as being the separated Jnstruments, conferring Grace truly, and in
their kind, by power and virtue from the Godhead and Christ Passion, and this
without dishonor to either. Now then I here urge, that if our Adversaries do
truly, and according to the Scriptures acknowledge thus much due to the
Sacraments, and without injury to Christ's Passion; why then should not the
doctrine of the Mass, and Sacrifice, (being grounded upon evident Scriptures)
be holden freed from all imputation of being dishonorable unto Christ, or his
Passion? and yet this is one main objection urged by our Adversaries, against
the B. Sacrifice of the Mass. Therefore I conclude, that as the Sacrifices
Exodus 29.36. Leuit. 7. Number. 28. etc.
for sin, and other Sacrifices of the Old Testament received their force from
Christ's death, and Sacrifice of the Cross then to come, and without all
dishonor thereto; So likewise in the New Testament, (which is Hebr. 8.
established in b^tter promises) our now Sacrifice of the Mas^e does (without
any dishonor to Christ) confer more abundant efficacy and virtue, from his
said death and Passion, now past.

Animaduersion CLXV.
WHen the Fathers jointly teach, that the Sacrament of the Eucharist is a true
Sacrifice, our Adversaries labor to auoyd^ their authorities several ways,
but all in vain. First they say, it may be termed a Sacrifice, in that the
prayers, and the exercise of Faith, Hope, and Charity, being used in the
celebration of this Sacram^nt, are spiritual Sacrifices to God. But this
answer avails nothing; in that the ancient Fathers plainly teach, that the
body and blood of Christ is the Sacrifice, which is offered up in the Church.
As for example, Ambrose says: Etsi Ambro. in Psalm. 38
Christus nunc non videtur offerre, tamen ipse offertus in terris cum corpus
eius offertur. Again, the Fathers teach, See hereof the Council of Nice,
Jerome Epist. ad Euagrium, Tertull. l. de velandis virg.
that only Priests (and no others) can offer up this Sacrifice; but it is
manifest, that Prayers, Lauds, Exercise or faith, hope, and charity may (as
spiritual Sacrifices) be offered up by any Man, or Woman. Our Adversaries
further reply, and say, that the Eucharist may be called a Sacrifice, because
it includes in it self a certain commemoration, or representation of a true
Sacrifice, to wit, of the death of Christ: We heereto say, that it is true,
that the Action of the Eucharist is a similitude or memorial of the Sacrifice
of the Cross; yet hence it follows not, that the Fathers thought not, that a
true and proper sacrifice was offered up in the celebration of the Eucharist;
First because Baptism is a sacrament, representing the death of Christ (as the
Apostle Romans 6. teaches) and yet no one Father does term Baptism, a
Sacrifice. Secondly, The Fathers do often adioyne certain Epithets, peculiar
only to a true Sacrifice: as Chrysostom calls it, Sacrificium verum, and
plenum horroris. But these Adjuncts are fondly given to a mere representiue
Sacrifice. Thirdly, the Fathers do often use the words, Victima So Cyprian.
lib. 1. Ep. 1. and l. 2. Epist. 3. etc.
and Sacrificium, in the p urall number; But this phraze of speech is most
improper, if it should be understood of the Eucharist, as it is only a
commemoration of the death of Christ; For since only one thing is here
represented, therefore the name thereof is to be delivered only in the singular
number.

Animaduersion CXLVI.
IN like manner where we read, that the Fathers do ascribe great reverence to
the Eucharist; to wit, either of Adoration, or Jnuocation, or in any other
sort: To this Peter Peter Martyr. lib. contra Gardin. part. 1. object. 150.
Martyr and others do answer: that if any such reverence was exhibited by the
Fathers to the Eucharist, this reverence was not terminated in the Eucharist it
self, but directed to Christ, signified therein, and so by the mediation of
those earthly elements transferred unto him: No otherwise t^^ when the Papists
(for thus do they part^c^larly instance) praying before Jmages, (...) not their
prayers to the Images, but to Christ, (...) the Saint represented therein. But
against t^ Evasion I first ask, what secret intellig^ have our Adversaries
with the Fathers ^tention herein, since the Fathers words g^ not the least
intimation thereof? Secon^ I say, that L de Hierarch Eccles. c. 3. part. 3.
saying. O Diuinissimum and Sacrosanctum Sacram. etc.
Dionysius does inuoke (...) Sacrament it self, and not Christ only ^fore the
Sacrament. Thirdly, this their ^sweare (admitting it for true) does wa^ even,
in their judgments, the Cathol^^ praying before Images, and the reuere^^ given
to them; which Doctrine the Pro^stants do so much inueigh against.

Animaduersion CLXVII.
THe Scripture is most difficult for three ^spects; First, in regard of its
multiplie^ of the Senses of one and the same passage Scripture. Secondly, in
respect of the phr^^ wherein the Scripture is delivered. Third^ by reason of
the height of the subject, when the Scripture entreats. To touch all t^^
briefly: First concerning the Sense; T^^ are in diverse passages of Scripture,
three ^uerall senses besides the literal, all i^^ded by the Holy Ghost. The
senses are ^led, Allegoricus, Tropologicus, and Anagog^ Now how shall an
ignorant man know, (...) texts of Scripture be capable of all these, (...) of
them? The Style of the Scripture is ^^de difficult, as being stored with
figures, (...) Allegoryes, and full of Hebrew phrazes (...) Dialects, as
appears in perusing the ^^lms, and the Apocalypse. The subject of the
^^^ipture is most high, as discoursing of the ^^eation of the world of Nothing,
of the ^ysteryes of the Trinity, and the Incarnati^^ besides many other
Dogmatical points; (...) transcending the light of man's natural ^^prehension:
And therefore S. Ambrose had ^^od cause thus to pronounce of the holy
^^^ipture: Mare Ambros. Ep. 44. ad Constantium.
est scriptura Diuina, ha^^s in se sensus profundos. Ad hereto that the
^^^ipture has to an ignorant eye diverse see^ng contrarietyes, though in
themselves they are most true, and reconcilable. For example, these two texts
Ezec. 18.
: Filius non portabit i^quitatem patris; anima, quae peccauerit, ipsa ^^rietur:
And this other: Visitans Exodus 10.
ini^^tatem patrum in filios, in tertiam and quarta^ ^^nerationem; how can an
ignorant man, or ^o man reconcile these passages? And what ^^ity then may one
discern in a Mechani^^l fellow, or silly woman (who can only ^t read)
carrying the bible under their ^^me to the Church, and vaunting of the ^ines of
the Scripture; and auerring, that ^^emselues are able to unfold and expound ^e
most abstrusest passages there? O pride, ^^d ignorance! Ad finally, that in the
Scrip^^e the plural number is sometimes used for ^^e singular number; as Marc.
15. we read, they that were crucified with him, rayled at hi^, and yet we know,
it was but only one of the thieves that did so, the good thief honoring our
Savior. See the like hereto touching this kind of phraze of the Scripture
(besides other places) in Hebr. 7. Again the Scripture in diverse texts does
vndersta^^ by the word, Omnis, only quidam. For example in Math. 27. we read:
dicunt omn^ vt crucifigatur, and yet the B. Virgin, S. Man magdelen, the
Apostles, and diverse others d^ not so cry out against our Savior. The li^
phraze is in those words: Omnes, quae s^ sunt, querunt, Philip. 2. and yet the
Apostles and many other good Christians were e^empted out of this sentence. But
now he^^ I demand, how can an unlearned man r^concile these, and the like
sentences w^^ the true meaning of the Holy Ghost in t^ Scripture?

Animaduersion CLXVIII.
THe Catholic Church delivers c^taine Rules, for the more perfect kno^ledg
of true Traditions. The first. When (...) universal Church does embrace any
doctri^ as a point of faith, the which is not found in (...) holy Scriptures,
it is necessary to say, that these point proceeds from the Tradition of the
A^^stles. The reason hereof is, in that the vniu^^sall Church, as being the 1.
Timoth. 3.
pillar and foundation of truth cannot err: And theref^ what the Church
belieueth to be of fay^ ^e same doubtlesly is of faith: But no ^int or Article
is of faith, but what God ^th revealed either by the Apostles, or Pro^ts; since
at this present the Church is not ^ouerned with new Revelations.

The second. When the universal Church ^h observe any thing, which not any,
but only ^d had power to institute, and yet which is not and written in the
Scripture; the same we are ^resume to be delivered from Christ and his ^ostles;
the reason hereof is like to the rea^n of the former Rule; to wit, in that the
^iuersall Church cannot err either in belie^g, or in working; especially if
the wor^g does concern any rite of divine wor^^. And such is the Baptism of
Infants.

The third. That, which is observed through^ the universal Church, and cannot
find any (...) institution thereof in the most ancient times, same we are to
believe, that it was first ord^y^^ by the Apostles; though it be of that
nature, that the Church had power firct to ordain it: ^is is the rule of Lib.
4 contra Donat. cap. 24.
S. Austin. The fast of ^t may be an example hereof: For this fast ^ght have
been instituted by the Church, Christ, or his Apostles had not before insti^ed
it; Yet we maintain, that it was insti^ed by Christ, or his Apostles; because
as^ding up to higher times, and seeking af^ the first Origin thereof, we find no
be^ning thereof, but only in the time of Apostles.

The fourth. When all the Doctors of the Church (being gathered together,
either in a general Council, or in their several writings and books) do
teach with a common consent, that such, or such a point, descends from
Apostolical Tradition, we are to believe, that it is an Apostolical
Tradition. The reason of this rule is, because if all the Doctors of the Church
should err, then follows it, that the whole Church should err, since she is
obliged to follow her Pastors and Doctors. Now where we speak of the
Fathers, touching any point in their several writings; here we are to
understand, that we hold it not necessary, that all the Fathers should write
thereof, but it is sufficient, if some Fathers of the chiefest note and eminency
do expressly affirm the point in writing; and that other Fathers do not
contradict them therein, taking notize of such their writings: Here we say, it
is most probable, that such is the common judgment of all the Fathers therein;
since it has been ever observed, that when any one of the ancient Fathers
has erred, in a matter of weight and importance, that the same Father was ever
contradicted by diverse others.

The fifth. That doubtlesly is to be believed to descend from Apostolical
Tradition, which has been houlden for such in those Churches, in which
Churches there has been an entyre and continual succession from the
Apostles: This rule is delivered by Irenaeus. l. 3. cap. 3.
Jrenaeus, and Tertull. lib. de praescript.
Tertullian. The reason of this rule is, because the Apostles did deliver to
their Successors (with the Episcopal government) the true doctrine also of
Religion. Thus far touching the Rules for the better discerning of Apostolical
Traditions.

Animaduersion CLXIX.
TOuching Prayer in a strange tongue, Calvin and other Sectaries wholly dislike
it, because that Prayer being not understood by the Ignorant people, no profit
(say they) comes thereby to the people. But this is false; seeing the Prayer of
the Church is not made to the people, but to God for the people; Therefore it
is not necessarily conducing to the Spiritual profit of the people, that they
understand the prayer, but it is sufficient, if God understand it: Even as if
one should petition to the king in the Latin tongue, in behalf of some rustic
and ignorant man; doubtlesly this ignorant man might receive profit thereby,
although he did not understand the petition, or Prayer of his Advocate.

Furthermore, the Church prays not in rain for the faithful being absent,
and for other Sinners; How much more then does not the Church pray in vain for
the faithful being present, and desiring, that they may be prayed for in their
Necessities?

But to proceed: The ignorant people may not only receive profit from the
Prayer of another, though they do not understand it; but also even from that
Prayer, wh^ themselves do power out to God, tho^ they do not understand it.
This poin^ thus proved: The Jews (according to (...) opinion of L 3. Doctrine
Christian ca. 9.
S. Austin) did not in vay^ worship God in Figures, and diverse Cere^^nies;
although diverse of the Jews did (...) understand the signification and mean^
of the said Figures, and ^eremonies, then (...) ignorant people do understand
Latin Pray^^ Again, it it be necessary for all those, w^ pray to G^d, or
praise and honor him (...) Hymns, to understand what they say, the very few,
or none at all would be fou^ who should without sin recite or sing^^ Psalms
of David, and the Prophets, or sho^ read the Apostles in divine prayer; Since
the man cannot be named, who vnderstande^ the true intended sense of the Psalm^
Prophets, and the Apostles: Neither are the two places of Scripture (so much
urged (...) our Adversaries) repugnant to what is he^ said: Populus Mat. 15.
hic labijs me honorat etc And again: Yff pray 1. Cor. 14.
with the tongue, (...) spirit prays, but my understanding is with^^ fruit.
Since the first of these texts is not v^derstood of Prayer, or of reading
divine Service, but it is meant of those, who profe^^^ piety with their tongue,
and in words; saying they love God, but yet do the contrary in their Actions,
as Jerome in c. 29. Isa.
Jerome and Austin in lib. 22. contra Faustum cap. 25.
A^stin do expound. But admitting the wor^^ of this text to be understood of
Men praying the^ may we answer that those are here ^rehended, who praying in a
known and ^gar tongue, bear (during the time of ^r praying) no intention to
what they (...), but suffer at that present great distra^n, and euagation of
thoughts. Concer^g this later passage of Scripture, I ans^re, that that Prayer
is not reprehended, ^ich is not understood; but only that ^ayer is preferred
before it, which is vnder^od. For the Apostle says not, that the ^ayer is
without fruit; but that the mind (...) understanding is without fruit, in
that (...) is not instructed thereby. Now that this and of Praying is not
reprehended by the ^postle, as Evil, or altogether fruitles and ^nprofitable,
appears from those words a ^tle after following: For thou indeed give
^hanks well etc.

Animaduersion CLXX.
IF Christ and his Apostles had determined to restrain the word of God, only
to ^he Scripture; then it follows, that Christ would openly have commanded a
thing of so great moment, and the Apostles would in some one place, or other of
Scripture have testified, that they did write by the commandment of our Lord,
as they taught throughout the world (as is recorded in Scripture) by the
commandment of our Lord; But this commandment of writing, to be imposed by
Christ upon his Apostles, we read not in any place of Sc^^pture. Furthermore
the Apostles did not ^^pect, or stay for any proffered occasion (...) preach
the Gospel viua voce; but they (...) undertake the charge of preaching the wa^
freely and of their own accord and disp^sition; 2Whereas to write the
Scripture the were moved thereto through a certa^^ kind of Necessity, and
urging occurrence Thus S. Matthew (as Eusebius Lib. 3 hist. c. 24.
reco^deth) did write upon occasion; becau^ when he had preached to the Jews,
and d^termined to go to the Gentills he deemed (...) to be convenient and
profitable, to lea^ behind him to those, some memorial (...) his doctrine and
preaching, from whom (...) body and corporal presence he had depa^ted. S.
Mark (as the same Eusebius L. 2. histor. cap. 15.
re^^teth) did write his Gospel, neither of (...) own accord, nor by the
commandeme^ of S. Peter (whose disciple he was) but on^ through the forcible
persuasion of the R^mans. S. Luke (as also Eusebius. l. 3. hist. c. 14.
Eusebius shewet^ was only moved to write his Gospel, because he saw many
other men rashly pres^ming to write the life and actions of Christ which
themselves did not perfectly kno^ And therefore S. Luke did write, thereby
(...) withdraw us from the uncertain relation of others.

S. John (as Eusebius Eusebius. vbi supra.
affirms) d^ preach the Gospel without committing (...) to writing, even to
his old and decrepit ag^ Jerome, l. de Scrip^. Eccles.
S. Jerome says, that at length he was ^pelled (as it were) by the Bishops of
^a to write his Gospel, by reason of Heresy of the Ebionites then beginning.
^erefore except the Heresy of the Ebionits (...) not then begun to spring up,
perhaps (...) should not at all have had the Gospel of ^ohn; neither perhaps
the other three ^ospels, but in regard of the foresaid oc^ions in those times
occuring. Now from this it is is evident, that the main in^tion of the
Apostles was not to write (...) Gospel, but to preach it. Furthermore ^x
professo they had determined to commit ^eir doctrine to writing, they would
have ^^de some Catechism thereof, or some such ^e book; But they did write
either a ^^tory (as the Evangelists did) or Epistles ^on some special
occasion, as Peter, Paul, ^^es, Judas, John; and in the same did dis^te, or
discourse of dogmaticall points of ^yth, only obiter, and as circumstances
in^eed them.

Animaduersion CLXXI.
^He first Proposition touching Indulgences. The foundation and groundworke of
^he Doctrine of Indulgences is, that there re^ayneth in the Church of Christ, a
certain ^pirituall Treasury of the satisfactions of christ and his Saints,
which may be applied ^o those, who stand subject to temporal pu^ishment, after
the guilt of eternal punishment is remitted in the Sacrament of Penance; for
the better explicating of which doctrine, these following propositions are to
be delivered.

The first proposition. In one and the sam^ good action or work of a just man,
a double price or value is assigned to it: the one of Merit, the other of
Satisfaction. For example; the one and same act of giving of Alms, is
Satisfactory, in that it is a laborious, or penal^ work. It is also
Meritorious; because it is a good work, proceeding from Charity. Now the
giving of Alms proceeding from charity, is not less good, because it is
laborious and penal; upon the same reason the^ it follows, that the same
prayer may be both impetratory, and meritorious.

The second Proposition. A good work, in that respect, as it is meritorious,
cannot be applied to another; but it may be applied, as it i^ Satisfactory. The
first part of this proposition is proved, because it cannot come to pass, that
in respect that one does work well, another should be said to work well in
the said Action. The second part is proved, because satisfaction is a
compensation of the punishment, or paying of what i^ due; but it is evident,
that one man may make compensation of punishment for another man, or pay the
debt of another man.

The third Proposition. There remains in the Church an infinite Treasury of
Christ's satisfactions, which can never be exhausted or dried up. This is
evident, since the passion of Christ (...) of an infinite worth, price, and
dignity; ^or it was the Passion of an infinite Person (...) wit, of the Word
Incarnated; for he was (...), who shed his blood for the Church, ^ut did sheed
it in Man's flesh Hypostatical^ assumpted. Now the dignity of satisfa^ion
receaues its measure from the dignity (...) the person satisfying; even as the
great^es of the offense takes its proportion ^om the dignity of the person
offended. therefore from hence it is inferred, that ^^ere is yet remaining a
great part of the ^orth and price of the Passion of Christ, ^^ich may always
be applied to Man.

The fourth proposition. To this supera^^dant Treasury of the satisfactions of
Christ, ^^ng the passions or sufferings of the B. Virgin, ^as a such other
Saints who have suffered more (...) this world then their sins have deserved.
For (...) is evident (not to speak of other Saints) ^^t the Blessed Virgin
never committed any ^^tuall Sin; and yet it is said, that the sword (...)
grief pierced her soul, Luc. 2. In like sort, (...) John Baptist (being
sanctified in his mo^ers womb) did lead a most innocent life, ^^d stood
obnoxious to most few, and most ^ght or small Sins; and yet in defense of ^^e
truth he was beheaded. Therefore it ^^nnot be doubted, but that a great heap
^f passions and sufferings of the B. Virgin, and (...) S. John Baptist were
upon their deaths re^ayning, of which themselves did not stand in need, for the
satisfying for any temporal punishment. All which superabundan^^ of
satisfactio^s were laid up in the Treas^^ house of the Church. Thus far of
the point; only I add, that so the person m^^ be capable of Jndulgences two
things are required. The first, that he be in state of Grace the second, that
he perform all that, which is enjoined to him, for the obtaining of the
Jndulgence.

Animaduersion CLXXII.
WHen it is said: Indulgences do profit the souls of the departed, only per
modu^ suffragij, the meaning hereof is, because Jndulgences do not profit the
departed by way of Iuridicall absolution, but by way of solution or payment;
that is, by way of Satisfaction. Thus when a Man gives Alms, or fasteth, or
goes on pilgrimage to holy places, for the relief of a soul departed, he
does not absolve that soul from the guilt of punishment; but he only offers
up that satisfaction, that God accepting thereof, would free and deliver it
from the due punishment, which otherwise it were to suffer: Even so the Pope
does not absolve the departed soul, but out of the Treasury of satisfactions
remaining in the Church, offers up so much to God, as is needful to free and
deliver the soul. For the close of these Animaduersions, touching the Doctrine
of Indulgences, the Reader is to take particular notice (and the rather through
the wlilfull and malicious mistaking of our Adversaries, ^ho do mightily
calumniate us in this question of Jndulgences,) that we teach, the guilt of
eternal damnation being remitted only by the Sacrament of Confession, or by
most perfect contrition in lieu thereof, when there is not opportunity of the
other, the subject of an Indulgence is only a temporal punishment, due to be
suffered (after the guilt of damnation is remitted) which temporal punishment
by means of Indulgences, we hold may be either lessened, or wholly taken away
in a Man, who is in state of Grace, but not if he be in state of Mortal Sin.

Animaduersion CLXXIII.
IT is certain, that the English Translations of the New Testament made by the
Protestants are most corrupt, and in diverse places most different from the
Greek. in which tongue either all, or most of the New Testament was first
written. I will exemplify in two passages: The New Testament makes mention of
good or pious Traditions, and of wicked and Jewish Traditions, expressing them
both by one and the same Greek word, to wit, (...), which properly signifies
Traditio. Now the imposture here rests: For our English Protestant
Translations in such Texts, wherein are understood Good and profitable
Traditions, as in 1. Cor. 2. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. do translate instead of the word
Traditions, the word Ordinances. But where the Texts speak of wicked and
frivolous Traditions, there our Adversaries put down most punctually (as it
Math. 15.) in their Translation, the right word, Traditions. Now this calumny
is used in dislike of Apostolical Traditions, that so the ignorant Reader
should never find the word, Tradition, in Scripture, in a good sense, but
always in a bad and disalowed; though now in their last Translation (but not
in any former) for the better saluing of their credit, they put only in the
Margent of such Texts, speaking of godly Traditions, the word Traditions. The
like course they hold in translating the Greek word, (...), signifying,
dignus, in English, Worthy: and the Verb (...), to be made worthy. For in
those Texts, which concern Merit of works (as in Luc. 20. and 21. and 2 Thessalonians. 1.) wherein those said words are used, they translate them, To seem to
be worthy, or to seem only to be made worthy; thereby to weaken such texts for
the proving of Merit of works. But in other Texts, not touching the Doctrine of
Merit, they can be content to translate those words truly; that is, to be
worthy, and to be worthy indeed, as in this Text: O how Heb. 20.
much sorer punishment shall he be worthy of, who treads underfoot the Son
of God. Thus much for a Taste.

Animaduersion CLXXIV.
THe English Protestant Translation of the Bible is not only by the Catholics
ack^owledged to be corrupt and impure, but ^so by many Protestant themselves.
M. ^urges thus censureth of that Translation, ^ying: How M. Burges in his
Apology sect. 6.
shall I approve under my hand (...) Translation, which has many omissions,
many ^dditio^s, which sometimes obscureth, sometimes peruerteth the sense;
being sometimes sensles, sometimes contrary? To whose Judgment herein subscribe
diverse Ministers in their joint consent thereof in these words: A The ministers
in their abridgment of a Book delivered to king James. page 11. and 12.
Translation, that takes away from the Text, that adds to the Text, and this
sometimes to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost. And
again: A Translation, which is absurd and sensles, perverting in many places
the meaning of the Holy Ghost. All whose Censures herein agree with the like
censure of D. Reynolds, delivered in King James his presence in Hampton Court;
who refused to subscribe to the Communion book; because (said he) it warranted
a false and corrupt translation of the Bible. Now from hence I thus deduce: The
Protestants by their own Confessio^s have had as yet never any true English
Translation of the Scriptures: Therefore as yet the English Protestants never
enjoyed (according to their own Principles) a sufficient and competent Judge
of Controversies; Since admitting the Scripture were the sole Judge of
Controuersyes in faith; yet this of necessity must be understood of the
Scripture, as it is pure, and incorrupt, and not (...) it is impure, and
abastarded with false Translations.

From the Scripture, I will descend to the English Communion book, or Book of
Common Prayer. This Communion book (as it is even at this present) we find to
be thus condemned by Protestan^s. Twenty two preachers in London in The Book
is entitled, The Petition of twenty two Ministers in London.
one Petition, did thus charge the Common Prayer Book, saying: Many things in
the Communion Book are repugnant to the word of God. And again: In the
Communion Book there be things, of which there is no reasonable sense; There
is contradiction in it, even in necessary and essential points of Religion;
The holy Scripture is at graced by it. A point so evident, that D. Couell
rebukes and censureth other Protestants herein, saying: The D. Couell in his
Examen. page 179.
Communion Book is boldly despised (meaning by the Puritans;) Gross errors
and manifest impietyes (meaning in their opinion) are in the Communion Book.
So he redargueth his own brethren. Now, here in like manner (as above) I do
thus argue: If the English Protestants have had no form of Common Prayer
published to them, but such as is repugnant to the Scripture, and in which
there is contradiction, even in the necessary points of Religion; them
follows, that even to this day the ignorant English Protestant never prayed
to God auayleably; For it is Prayer, sorting to the word of God, and not what
is accompanied with errors, which is piercing in Gods ea^es. See here what
dangerous Resu^tancies proceed to the English Protestants from their own
Brethrens Confessions (though most true) that as yet they enjoy not the
Scripture as truly translated, nor a p^ou^ set form of Prayer, or Communion
Book.

Animaduersion CLXXV.
SEeing we, who profess the Roman religion, are commonly (yea often even by
our Adversaries) called Catholics, therefore I will here briefly show, by
laying open the Antiquity of that Title, how much we are honored by being so
styled; whereas other false Doctrines commonly take their Denomination from the
first Author thereof, or from the Doctrine it self. Well then, Cyril.
Cate^his. 18.
Cyrill thus writes hereof: Si iueris in aliquam vrbem etc. If thou shall go
into any City thou demaundest not, where is the Church or house of God, for
even the Heretics say, they have the house of God, and the Church; sed petas,
vbi sit Catholica Ecclesia etc. quasi dicas, si hoc petas, nullus Haereticorum
suam Ecclesiam ostendet: But thou demaundest, where the Catholic Church is,
for that name is peculiar to this holy Church the mother of us all; as if thou
should say, if thou demaundest this, no Heretic will show to thee his
Church.

Pacianus. Christianus In Epist. ad Sympronianum, quae est de Nomine Catholico.
mihi nomen est, Catholicus vero cognomen, illud me nuncupat, istud me
ostendit; A Christian is my Name, a Catholic my surname; by the former J am
named, by this other J am known, or discerned. And again: Catholicum istud
nec Marcionem, nec Apellem etc. This Name (Catholic) neither does it sound or
mean Marcion, or Apelles, or Montanus; nec haereticos sumit authors; neither
does it admit any Heretical Authors. Now on the other side, how Heresies and
their Professors take their appellation, this one testimony of Chrysostom
(for greater breuity) shall serve: Illi habent Chrysostom. hom. 33. in acta.
Apost ol.
quosdam, a quibus appellantur; prout enim Haerefiarchae nomen, ita and secta
vocatur etc. Those men (meaning Heretics) have some men, from whom they take
their Name; for as the Name of the Arch-Heretike is, so is the sect called.
Which saying we find verifyed even at this day, by the words, Lutheran,
Swinglian, Caluinist etc. Now whereas our Adversaries by way of retortion call
us, Papists; To this I answer (as is above in this Treatise touched) that this
word Papist, is not derived from any known Author or Arch-Heretike, as the
words Lutheran, Swinglian, Caluinist etc. but from the Pope, and such was S.
Peter, yea Christ himself. Add hereto that Homil. 33. in Act 4.
Chrysostom (as if it were by way of foreseeing we should be called Papists)
says; It is not hurtful, if Catholics be called by the name of those, who
govern the Church in the name of Christ, so that they receive not their name
from any particular man, as Heretics are named: Thus S. Chrysostom. To
conclude, it is to be observed, that we are called Papists, only by the
Lutherans in Germany, and Heretics in some near Countries; but we are not so
called (to omit Jtaly, and Spain, in Greece, Asia, Affrike, or in the Jndyes.

Animaduersion CLXXVI.
THough the many Controuersyes (agitated between the Catholics and the
Protestants) afford a most conuincing Argument, that both the parties during
their continuance of such their contrary beliefes, cannot expect salvation; yet
this point is made more demonstrable, if we insist only in such controuersyes
between our Adversaries and us, the subject of which are taught by the one
side to be (under Christ) the immediate means of our grace and salvation; and
denied by the other party to be of such force and efficacy for the souls
everlasting Good; and consequently in regard of their subject, are one way
necessarily to be believed. So as if it be showed, that the Catholics, and the
Protestants do mainly dissent in the means of obtaining Grace, and purchasing
of Heaven; it must of necessity be inferred, that both the Catholics, and
Protestants, continuing in such their different states, cannot obtain Grace
and salvation; Since Philosophy, and natural Reason teaches us, that he shall
never attain the End he aymeth at, who uses not the same means, which are
only and necessarily instituted to the gaying of the said End.

Now, to come to the Articles of this kind. First Concerning the Sacraments in
General; the Catholics believe, that all of them (where no just impediment
is) do confer Grace unto the Soul of man; by the help and continuance of
which Grace, the soul in the end obtains its salvation. The Protestant does
not ascribe any such supernatural effect unto them.

To come more particularly to the Sacraments. Touching Baptism, the Catholics
believe, that Children being borne in Original Sin, cannot be saved, except
they be baptized with Water: The Calvin and Beza most frequently teach so.
Protestants believe, that Infants dying unbaptized may be saved.

Touching the Sacrament of Penance, or Confession; the Catholics believe, that
after a Christian has committed any Mortal Sin, that Sin cannot be
forgiven him, but (at least in Voto) by confessing the said Sin to a Priest,
answerably to that in S. John 20. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them etc. The Protestants believe, that neither the Confession of
sins to man, nor the absolution of them given by man, is necessary for the
remitting of them; but that it is sufficient to confess them only to God. And
thus according to the diversity of Doctrine, either the Protestant for want of
this Sacrament (after he has mortally sinned) cannot be saved; or the
Catholics for wrongfully imposing this yoke upon Christians, do lose their
Salvation.

Touching the most B. Sacrament of the Eucharist; The Catholics believe, that
the very body and blood of Christ do lie latently under the forms of bread and
wine, Math. 26. and that unless we eat his body, and drink his blood in the
Eucharist, we shall not have life everlasting, John. 6. Finally, that we are to
adore Christ his body in the Eucharist, being accompanied there with his
Divinity. The Protestants believe, that Christ's true body (as never leaving
Heaven) cannot possibly be under the forms of bread and wine; and consequently
they believe, that the real eating of his body and drinking of his blood in
the Sacrament, is not necessary to Salvation: finally they hold our adoration
of the Sacrament to be open Idolatry.

Fifthly, touching the means of our Justification; the Catholics believe, that
not only faith, but works also do justify. The Protestants do ascribe their
Justification only to Faith, and not to works.

Touching Grace (without which a man cannot be saved) the Catholics believe,
that God out of the depth of his infinite mercy, offers to every Christian
sufficient Grace, whereby he may be saved. The Protestants teach, that God
gives not sufficient Grace to every one, but to certain men only; and
according hereto, Beza most blasphemously thus writes of this point; Beza in
his Display of Popery. page 17. 31. 76. 116. etc.
God decrees some men to destruction, creates to perdition, and
predestinateth to his hatred and destruction.

Touching the ten Commandments, the Catholics believe, that except a
Christian do keep them, he cannot be saved, according to our Savior: If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Math. 19. The Protestants do teach
an absolute impossibility of keeping them: and thereupon Luther thus writes:
The ten Luther ser. de Moyse.
Commandments do not belong unto us.

Finally touching the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, the Catholics do believe, that
he is under Christ, the supreme Pastor upon earth; that who do not communicate
in Sacraments and Doctrine with him, yielding him all true obedience, in
subiecting their judgments in Matter of faith to his sententionall Definitions,
cannot be saved. The Protestants do teach, that the Pope is that Antichrist,
which is deciphered by the 2 Thessalonians. 2. etc.
Apostle; and that who so imbraceth his Doctrine, or yields their assents to
his Cathedral Decrees, cannot be saved.

Thus far of these points (omitting some others of like nature.) Now here I
urge, as above; If these former Doctrines (as they are believed by the
Catholics) do immediately concern Salvation, and become necessary means
thereof; then cannot the Protestants (as rejecting all such doctrines, and all
such necessary means both in belief and practice) be saved; But if by
supposall, the said Doctrines be not of that Nature, but false in themselves,
and the contrary Doctrines true; then cannot the Catholics (as believing false
Doctrines, immediately touching man's Salvation, and accordingly practizing them)
be saved: From whence it ineuitably follows, that the different Professors
of these contrary Doctrines (the one part believing, the other part not
believing the said Doctrines) cannot both be saved.

Animaduersion CLXXVII.
SOme Protestants will maintain, that Protestancy (for its greater antiquity)
was at its full, and perfect state here in England in King Edwards days. But
this is most unadvisedly spoken; The falsehood of which bold Assertion, I prove
from the Communion Book, set out in K. Edwards time, with approbation and
allowance of Peter Martyr. Which Book was further warranted in King Edwards
time, by Act of Parliament. Now this Book, or public Liturgy of the faith of
England in those days, being printed in folio by Edward Whitchurch anno 1549.
prescribes, that the Eucharist shall be consecrated with the Fol. 265.
sign of the Cross. It commands consecration Fol. 2^2.
of the Water of Baptism, with the sign of the Cross. In that Book mention
is made of Prayer Fol. 116.
for the Dead; offering up of our prayers by Fol. 117.
Angels. It defends Baptism being given by Lay Fol. 119.
Persons in time of Necessity; and the Grace Ibidem.
of that Sacrament. It allows Priests absolution of the sick penitent in
these words: By the authority committed Fol. 142.
unto me, I absolve thee of all thy Sins. It men^ioneth a special and
particular Fol. 143.
Confession of the Sick Penitent. Briefly (to omit some other points.) It
commands the Fol. 143.
annoynting of the Sick person; which we Catholics call the Sacrament of
Extreme Unction. But to proceed further in this point; touching the Book of
Common Prayer in those days, I will allege the words of M. Done (an eminent
Protestant) who thus writes hereof: Concerning M. Dove in hit persuasion to
English Recusants. page 31.
the Book of Common prayer, when the Mass was first put down, K. Henry had
his English Liturgy, and that was judged absolute, and without exception. But
when King Edward came to the Crown, that was condemned, and another in the
place was made, which Peter Martyr, and Bucer did approve, as very consonant to
Gods word. When Queen Elizabeth began to reign, the former was judged to be
full of imperfections, and a new devised, and allowed by consent of the Clergy.
But about the middle of her reign we grew weary of that Book and great means
has been made to abandon that, and establish another. Which though it was not
obtained, yet do we at the least at every change of Prince, change our Book of
Common prayer: We be so wanton, that we know not, what we would have. Thus this
Protestant. Now from hence I conclude: First, that Protestancy here in England
is not so ancient, as from king Edwards days; Secondly, that it was not at
perfection in the middle of Queen Elizabeth's reign; For if it had then been
perfect and complete, there had been no need of a new Common Prayer-Booke;
For at every change of the Common book of prayer, there was a change of points
of faith, according to which points the former Communion Book was to be
reformed and corrected. And therefore according to the judgment of men of those
times it is thus said by M. Parker. The day star M. Parker against
Symbolizing. part. 2. cap. 5. page 4.
was not risen so high in their days, when yet Queen Elizabeth reformed the
defects of King Edwards Communion Book etc. Yet so altered Ibidem. page 37.
as that when it was proposed to be confirmed by the Parliament, it was refused.

Animaduersion CLXXVIII.
THe Doctrine of Recusancy is taught both by Protestants and Catholics; Since
both of them hold it a most wicked thing, and not to be done, but under pain
of damnation without final repentance; that a man should communicate only in
going to the Church, and to hear but a sermon, contrary to that Religion,
which himself belieueth to be true. For though this Act may seem to be
covered under pretense of observing the Princes commandment, and for fear of
losing our temporal estates; yet in very deed this Act of going to the Church
virtually and potentially includes a conformity in all points to the religion
of that Church to the which a Man goes; and so ^t comes to be a dissimulation,
or rather an absolute Abnegation of that Religion, which a man houlds in his
soul to be the only true Religion.

Now, that the Protestants do teach the Doctrine of Recusancy (I mean, not to
be present at the sermons, or Prayers of a different Religion) I prove from
Calvin de vitandis superstitionibus. extat in tract. Theolog. page 584.
Calvin, from the Deuines The Deuines of Germany, alleged in this point by
Sleydan in Comment. Englished l. 7 fol. 87.
of Germany, from Melancthon Melancth. in Conc^. Theolog. pa. 618.
, from Peter Peter Martyr in his discourse hereof recited in Melancth. Treatise
de Council. Theolog. p. 394.
Martyr, and (to omit others) from D. W^^e^ in Synops. printed 1600. page 612.
613. etc.
Willet.

That the Catholics do with the like, or greater fervor, preach and practice
the same Doctrine of Recusancy; is clear by the Example in our own Country;
where sin Protestancy was first planted, some scores (besides of the Laity)
of Venerable and learned priests, have chosen rather to suff^^ death in Queen
Elizabeth her Reign, then once to go to the Protestant Church; their lives
being commonly proffered them, if they would conform themselves, and leave
their Recusancy. But they loathed such Conditions.

For the more full proof of this Verity, I add the Testimonies of three most
eminent and most remarkable Men; whose judgments some years past being
demanded, whether the Catholics of England might for saving their goods and
livings, go to the Protestant Church to hear a Sermon, did jointly condemn
the same, as most unlawful and impious. The men were these, Cardinal
Bellarmine, Cardinal Baronius, and Muti^^ Vitellescus, now general of the
Order of the Society of Jesus. I will here set down their own words.

The Judgment of Cardinal Bellarmine.
COnsideratis rationibus pro vtraqueparte allatis, existimo non licere viris
Catholicis in Anglia Haereticorum adire Ecclesias; multo minus concionibus
ipsorum interesse; minime autem omnium cum ipsis in precibus, vel Psalmodia,
alijsque ipsorum Ecclesiasticis ritibus conuenire. Ideo propria manu subscripsi,

Robertus Bellarminus Sanctae R. Ecclesiae Presbyter, Cardinalis tituli Sanctae
Mariae in via.

The judgment of Cardinal Baronius.
VIsis and consideratis, quae superius diligenti peruestigatione in vtramque
partem disputata, reiectis omnino and exufflatis, quae pro par^e affirmatiua
fuere proposita, quod scilicet liceret Catholicis adire Ecclesias Haereticorum,
vt superius sunt proposita, inhaeremus saniori sententie posteriori, ab
Ecclesia Catholica antiquitus recepta, and vsu probata; quod scilicet ita
facere p^^ non liceat: quam rogo nostros Catholicos Angl^^ amplecti ex animo.

Caesar Cardinalis Baronius titul. SS. Nerei and Achillei Presb.

The judgment of Mutius Vitellescus, then Provincial, now General of the
Order of the Jesuits.
VJdi rations, quae in hoc Scripto pro vtraque part afferuntur, and existimo
non licere v^ Catholicis in Anglia, Ecclesias Haereticor^s adire etc. Et puto
hoc debere esse extra Contr^^ersiam.

Mutius Vitellescus Prouincialis Roman Prouin. Societatis Jesus.

Thus much in general touching the Doctrine of Recusancy, mantayned by diue^
learned Protestants; and practiced with los^ of life by many Reverend Priests
here (...) England; and fortifyed with the iudgme^^ of these three former most
learned, pious, and godly Men.

Animaduersion CLXXIX.
^He most common abuse in England, of taking a second wife, during the life of
^e first, committing fornication, induces ^e to expound those words of our
Savior, ^om whence the offenders herein seem to ^arrant their sensual
proceedings: for thus ^^r Savior in Matthew 19. speaks: Whosoe^er shall put
away his wife, except it be for for^^tation, and shall marry another, does
commit ^dultery; from which words our Aduersa^es seem to infer, that who does
put away ^s wife for fornication, and marries another, does not commit
Adultery. But this is ^hus answered; To wit, that this exception (...)
Fornication is only to show, that for this ^use a man may put away his wife for
ever, but not that he may marry another, as (...) most plain in 5. Mark c. 10.
and 5. Luke ^.16. both who leave out this exposition, saying thus absolutely:
Whosoever puts a^ay his wife, and marries another, commits adultery. And
this exposition is given by S. Thomas Sent. in 4. distinct. 35. quaest. vnica
art. 5. So as in these former words of Math. 1^. a Parenthesis is to be
understood, after this manner: Whosoever puts away his wife, (which is not
lawful, except it be for fornication) and marries another commits
adultery. Now that the exposition of our Adversaries of the said text was
condemned throughout all ages of the primitive Church, is most clear, since
the Fathers of each such age, eu^^ taught, that a man putting away his wife upon
any occasion, yea for Fornication, cou^^ not marry any other Woman. For exam^^
thus in the first Age Clemens teaches, (...) Canon. Apostol. can. 48. In the
seco^ Age Justinius Martyr, in Apolog. pro Christ. nis. In the third, Tertullian
l. 4. in Marc^nem. In the fourth Age, the Council of E^^^ris can. 9. In the
fifth, Council. Mileuitan^^ can. 17. and S. Austin lib. de adulterinis con^gijs.
In the sixth age, Primasius in Comment (...) cap. 7. prioris ad Corinth. Now
here I vr^ that if the former exposition of the Cath^likes be false, then did
the Primitive Chu^^^ wholly err therein, which is most absurd^ maintain. In
like manner, the Primit^^ Church of Christ did then wrong man Christians in not
suffering them to use upon occasion of the wives Fornication, t^^ priuiledg,
which Christ may seem to gra^ to them. I may add hereto, that diverse le^^ned
Protestants, by maintayning, that (...) case of Divorce upon adultery the
innoce^ party cannot marry again, do reject c^ Adversaries exposition of the
former (...) of Matthew 19. According hereto (to ^mit many other moderate
Protestants t^^ching the same with us Catholics) D. H^^son in his tertia Thesi
printed 1602. maint^^neth the same, publicly in Oxford. In l^^ sort some
thirty years since (more or le^^ the same Doctrine was preached at Pa^ Crrsse
by D. Doue^. Now, to all this above said, I may adioyne the exposition of S.
Au^^in in l. 1. de adulterinis coniugijs, cap. 9. of the ^oresaid text, who
there says, That the ^ords in Math. 19. vz. (nisi ob fornicationem) ^ught to
be taken negative, non exceptiue, by ^ay of negation, not of exception; So as
the sense of them may be this: Whosoever shall put away his wife, nisi ob
fornicationem, that is, extra causam fornicationis, without the cause of
fornication, and shall marry another, commit^^th adultery. From which
exposition the A^ultery of him is affirmed, who putting away his wife, without
the cause of fornica^^on, shall marry another: But nothing is ^ere said of him,
who putting away his wife ^y reason of fornication, shall marry another. Thus
far of this Text.

Animaduersion CLXXX.
AS the Inuisibility and Latency of the Protestants Church has been fully
above demonstrated; so here I hold it not imper^^nent, if I prove the
Continual and vnin^^rrupted visibility of our Catholic Church; and
consequently that it is that Church of God, to which so many Prophesyes have
^eene made of its vneclipsed splendor and ^^diancy: Thy Esa. 60.
Gates shall be conti^^ally open; neither day nor night shall they be ^^nt etc.

Now this verity is proved several ways. and first from the confessed
Jnuisibility of the Protestant Church during all former ages, till Luthers
insurrection. And this the rather, seeing the learned Protestants confess,
that all the former Inuisibility of the Protestant Church was wrought by the
labor, power, and diligence of the Catholic Roman Church. Now how could the
Roman Church effect so much, for so long a time, except it self during all
that time were most visible? According to this assertion, we find M. Napper to
confess the same reason of his Churches Jnuisibility, in these words: During
Napper upon the Revelations, caps 11. and 12.
even the second and th^s age (meaning since Christ) the true Chur^^ of God,
and the light of the Gospel, was obscure^ by the Roman Antichrist himself.

Secondly, the ever Visibility of the Catholic Church is proved from the
acknowledged succession of Pastors in o^^ Catholic Church ever since the
Apostles since those visible Pastors were the visible and most eminent members
of our said Church, preaching and instructing others, who in this respect must
become also vi^it^ and known. Now this our visible succession of Pastors in
our Roman Church is confessed even by our Adversaries; for thus D. Fulke
exprobrateth the Catholics in these words: You D. Fulke in his answer to a
Counterfayte Catholic. p. 27.
can name (chief) Personages in all ages (mark these words, in all ages) and
their government, and ministry, and especially the succession of the Popes you
have upon your fingars. Thus D. Fulke:

Thirdly, and lastly the same is thus proved: If the most ancient and reverend
Fathers of the primitive Church; I mean, Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagita,
Justinius, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, Athanasius, Hilarious, the
Cyrills, the Gregory's, Ambrose, Basil, Opratus, Gandentius, Chrysostom,
Jerome, Austin, and diverse others, be accounted by our Adversaries most earnest
Professors of our Catholic Roman faith; then it foll^weth most consequently,
that our Catholic Church was most co^spicuous in those times; since those
Fathers were the visible Pastors of the Church then in Being. Now that the
Fathers of those primitive t^mes were Papists, professing the present Roman
faith, appears (besides from what is already most fully confessed by our
Adversaries in that behalf) even from that acknowledgment of Peter Martyr,
saying: As long Peter Martyr l. de votis p. 476.
as we insist in the fathers so long we shall be conuersa^t in the Papists
errors.

Now that our Catholic Church has been further also most visible, since the
times of those primitive Fathers (I mean for these last thousand years) is so
fully confessed by our Adversaries in this Treatise, as that I hold it over
wearisome and fastidious, so often to repeat such their Confessions.

Animaduersion CLXXXI.
THe main Argument drawn from Reason, which our Adversaries urge against
unwritten Traditions, is this; It seems (say they) impossible that unwritten
Traditions can be kept and conserved: since there are diverse hindrances
thereof; as Forgetfulness, Jgnorance, negligence perverseness of men's Natures, and
the like. And hence it is, that we see, that such Sentences, which Lycurgus,
Pythagoras, and others, delivered only in words, and not in writing, are at
this day lost, and perished.

To this I answer, that I hold it impossible, that Apostolical Traditions
should not be preserved; since this care is not properly incumbent upon Man but
upon God, who governs the Church. Now besides the providence of God, which is
the chief cause of preserving the Traditions of the Church, there are four
other inferior, or subordinate Causes, for their preservation.

The first, is the committing of Traditions to writing; For although they be
not set down in Holy writ (I mean, in the divine Scriptures) yet they are
recorded and written in the Monuments of the ancient Authors, and in
Ecclesiastical books.

The second reason may be the continual use of them; For diverse Traditions are
in continual observation and practice, as the Rites and Ceremonies of
administering the Sacraments, Holy Days, appointed times of fasting, the
Celebration of the Mass, and of Divine office, or prayers, and such like.

The third cause, are certain external Monuments, which continue for a most
long time; as most ancient Temples or Churches, in which are Altars, the Holy
Fonts for Baptism, the Memorialls, or Toumbs of Saints, Crosses, Images,
Ecclesiastical books etc.

The fourth Reason, is Heresy it self; For God does wonderfully use the
Enemies of the Church, to the preservation of the Church. For because, as in
every age there have risen up some Heretyks, who have impugned diverse
dogmaticall Traditions of the Church; So has God in each age raised certain
learned and Orthodoxall Men, who, that they might better resist the Heretykes,
have with most great diligence and labor searched out the Doctrine of the
Church, and ancient Traditions, and have transmitted them in writing to all
posterity. I will ad this following observation, in fuller warrant of unwritten
Traditions against such, who restrain the proof of all points to the
Scripture it self; To wit, that it is one thing for an Article of faith to be
expressed in Scripture; Another thing, for an Article of faith to be grounded
upon ^cripture. All Christian doctrine is not expressed in Scripture; yet every
Christian doctrine is so grounded on Scripture, that it may in some sort, or
other, be proved from Scripture; And in this sense all Traditions received by
the universal Church of Christ, may be said to be grounded on Scripture, since
they are grounded upon the authority of the Church, admitting them; To which
Church, Christ himself has promised an infallibility of Truth, and of not
erring; according to that, Ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque Consummationem
saeculi. Math. 18. And again: Portae inferi non praeualebunt aduersum eam.
Math. 16. to wit, against the Church of Christ.

Animaduersion CLXXXII.
PRotestancy is proved to be an intentionall thing in it self, and void of
all Real faith This is proved from the Definition of Faith, given by the
Apostle, thus defining faith: fides est sperandarum substantia rerum,
argumentum non apparentium; That is, faith is the Heb. 11.
substance of things, to be hoped for; the argument of things, not appearing.
This definition shows, that faith is a supernatural Virtue, and the Object
thereof is that, which through its own abstrusenes and sublimity cannot be
apprehended or conceived by force of Man's own wit, it transcending all
Natural Reason. This we see exemplyfyed in the two supreme Articles of the
Trinity, and the Incarnation; the Mysteryes and difficulties of which transcend
all humane reason, or light of Nature. And hence it is, that the Conclusion of
the School Deuines is this: Quae S. Thomas. part. 1. 2. quaest. 1.
fidei sunt, non possunt esse scita. Now to apply this: If Protestancy be a
supernatural faith (or else it is no true saving faith) then the Object of this
Protestanticall faith is of that difficult Nature, as that Man through the
force of Natural reason only, cannot give any assent thereto, without the
special concurrency of Gods Grace.

But here I demand, that seeing the Object of Protestancy (as Protestancy) is
mere Negatiues, and denialls (as denial of Real Presence, denial of
Purgatory, denial of Freewill, denial of praying to Saints, briefly denial
of most of the affirmative points taught by our Catholic Church:) here I say,
I demand, what supernaturality, or force of Gods special concurrency is
required, that man should give an assent to these Negations, or denyalls: Nay I
here say, that man's natural reason even of it self (without any externa^l
help) is propense and inclyning to believe these, and other such like
Negations, except the Affirmatiues to those Negations, can be convinced as for
true, either by Divine or Humane proof, and Authority. Thus it follows, that
Protestancy even from the Definition of Faith, given by the Apostle, is no
supernatural Faith, but in respect of such a Faith, is a mere Irreality, and
wast of faith.

Animaduersion CLXXXIII.
THe reasons, which S. Thomas Aquinas S. Thom in 3. part. quaest. 27. Artic. 4.
does insist upon (being most probable inducements) for freeing the Blessed
Virgin Mary from Original Sin, are these following.

The first: Seeing God did decree to advance the Blessed Virgin to so supreme
dignity, that she should excel even the Angels themselves; therefore it was
most suitable and agreeable, that no priuiledg should be conferred upon any pure
Creature, which was not conferred upon the B. Virgin, (except such a priuiledg
were repugnant to the condition, state, Nature, or Sex:) But to be sanctified
in the first instant of Creation, was given to our First Parents, As also to be
sanctified in the first instant of Creation, and never to be polluted with any
Sin, was given to the holy Angels: But this priuiledg is in no sort
repugnant to the condition, state, Nature, or Sex of the B. Virgin: Therefore
it is a pious thing to believe, that the Mother of God did not want this
privilege.

Secondly, because that testimony of the Heavenly Spouse ought in all
probability to be accomplished and fulfilled in the Blessed Virgin: Tota Can. 4.
pulchra es amica mea, and macula non est in te.

Thirdly, because the Mother of Christ has a singular Affinity, and
Conjunction with Christ himself.

Fourthly, in that the Son of God (who is the wisdom of the Father) did (as
it were) inhabitate in the womb of the Mother, after a most peculiar and
wonderful manner: But it is said in holy Scripture: In maleuolam Wisdoms. c. 1.
animam etc. Wisdom cannot enter into a wicked heart, nor dwell in the body,
which is subject to sin.

Lastly, because as well the honor as the ignominy of the Mother redoundeth to
the Son. Now touching the proof of the Assumption of our B. Lady both in
Body and Soul (pretermitting the Authority of the S. Jerome writes a sermon,
styling it, de Eesto assumptionis Mariae. The Centurists allege that S.
Austin, did write a Book-entituling it, de Assumptione Virginis Mariae.
Ancient Fathers herin) I will at this present, content my self with the
Argument of S. Bernard in proof thereof, who thus disputes: Seeing God has
discovered and revealed the Bodies of many Saints (which lay hid in diverse
places) that they might be honored of faithful Christians; It then ineuitably
follows, that if the sacred Body of the Blessed Virgin had been still on
earth, he would in like manner have made known (no doubt) in what place or
Country it did lie. But it not being certainly known, where that Body, or any
part thereof is in any place of the world; it may irr^pliably be concluded,
that her Body is not to be found in Earth, but only in Heaven; and this is S.
Bernards demonstration in this point.

Animaduersion CLXXXIV.
BEza (as above is showed) thus writes of the Doctrine of reprobation: God
Beza in his Display etc. page 17. 31 76. etc.
decrees to destruction, creates to perdition, and predestinateth to his
hatred, and Destruction, with whom accords Calvin (as elsewhere is showed) in
these words: Calu Instit. l. 3. cap. 23. paragr. 6.
God by his Council and appointment, does so ordain, that amongst men some be
borne destined to certain^ death from their Mothers Womb, who by their
perdition may glorify his Name. Now here I wish the diligent Reader to observe
the dangerous resul^ancyes, and Absurdity (...) necessary following from this
their doctrine of Reprobation. First: it is a main hinderance to Virtue, and
encouragement to Vice, (as above I have declared:) Since i^ teaches, that that
man, who is reprobated cannot prevent his reprobation by any piou^ life, how
virtuous soever; why then should that man abstain from exercise of wickedness,
seeing his wickedness does not in any sort further his damnation; it being (by
the Protestants Doctrine) decreed from a Eternity, without respect of any work
good, or bad?

Secondly, this Doctrine makes God, a Liar, and dissembler. For to omit
infini^^ other texts of Scripture, we find his Prophets thus to speak of God:
God Ezech. 33.
willin^ the death of the wicked. And again: He 2. Peter 3.
w^ not have any to perish. And yet more: God 1. Timoth. 2.
would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Now I say, if
God creates some men absolutely from their Mothers womb, without respect of
his Sins, to eternal damnation; are not these his fair speeches to be
interpreted but Dissimulation, and untruths? and follows it not then
consequently, that this their blasphemous doctrine labors to transform God
into the Devil, by making him to utter lies and speak false; for of the
Devil we thus read: It is 1. Joan. 3.
he, who speaks Lies of himself, and is a liar, the Father of Lies.

Animaduersion CLXXXV.
IF we take into our consideration that other Doctrine of our Adversaries,
which teaches, that God is the Author of sin; (which Doctrine we have above
showed, to be mantayned by the Protestants) the inferences unavoidably
proceeding from that Doctrine are no less blasphemous, then the former. For
first, it makes God to be the only sinner, and that the Devil and Man are
innocent, and no sinners at all. For if the thief (for example) be compelled
by God to steal, who compells the Devil to set on the thief (as Swinglius
Swingl. Sermon. de provident.
affirms) then is not God in this case the only Sinner? This is proved, since
the goodness and badnes of the work in every Action, is chiefly to be
attributed to the Principal Author, willer, and worker of it, and not to the
Instrument: And this the rather, since Austin says: Sin is so voluntary,
that except it be voluntary, it is no sin. But sin is only voluntary in God
(according to the doctrine of our Adversaries) and not in Man, in whom it is
necessary. Therefore hence I conclude, that according to this their blasphemy,
Sin is only in God, and not in Man. Secondly, this Doctrine, of God being the
Author of Sin, ascribes the proprieties of the Devil to God. For it is the
office of the Devil to tempt man, and therefore in the Holy Mat. 4.
writ, the Devil is called a Tempter. But this is more peculiar to God
(according to the foresaid Doctrine) then to the Devil; Since God (in the
judgment of the Protestants) so forcibly tempts man to sin, as that it is
not in his power to resist, or withstand the temptation; which is more, then
the Devil can perform.

Thirdly, it is the property of the Devil to sow Tares, or ill weeds of
sin, in the Fyeld of our Hearts; according to those words: The Enemy Mat. 13.
comes, and sowes tares. But God does this according to the former Doctrine,
more then the Devil: For God (as Calvin affirms) does excecate Calvin. 1.
Instit. 18. and 24. and 4. Instit. 14.
and obdurate the minds of men, does strike them with a spirit of error,
giddines, and madness, and this not by permission, but by operation. Thus Calvin.

Animaduersion CLXXXVI.
THe Protestants Doctrine of the infallibility of only faith justifying a Man,
and of some other of their positions, takes away the force of all Prayer,
making it either needles, or fruitless: Needles, as of things certain, which
need not to be asked; Fruitles, as of things impossible, which cannot be
obtained. The first point is thus proved: That Prayer is needles, which prays
for that which cannot fail us, as either already past, or assuredly possessed,
or to come: Therefore according to the Protestants grounds, they ought not to
pray for Remission of Sins, for the favor of God, for perseverance in faith,
or for the glory of Heaven, since every Protestant by his special faith
belieueth (in his judgment) most certainly, that his Sins are forgiven him,
and that he shall persevere in faith, and come to Heaven. The second point (to
wit, of the Fruitlesnes of Prayer) is in like wise thus euicted: To pray for
the keeping of the Ten Commandments, is fruitles, since our Adversaries teach
(as I have above showed) that the keeping of them is impossible. In like
manner, it is Fruitles, to pray for the Preventing of any Evil, whether it be
Malum culpae, as sin, or Malum paenae, as punishment; or whether it be any
temporal affliction whatsoever. And the reason is, because (as our Adversaries
do teach,) All Evil as well as Good, shall infallibly fall out, as Go^ has,
according to his own irrespectiue immutable, and inevitable will and pleasur^
decreed and appointed it. For sorting here to (to omit the like authorities of
many others in this point) Luther thus writes (...) a Fatal Necessity of
things: Nullius Luther in Assert. damnat. per Leonem Art. 36.
est (...) manu etc. It is in no man's power to think God or Evil, but all
things proceed from absolu^ Necessity. Thus we see, that it ineuitably (...)
most consequently may be gathered from the Protestants Theorems and principles,
tha^ all Prayer is either Needles, or Fruitles, and inauayleable.

Animaduersion CLXXXVII.
MAny of the learned Protestants, we^ghing the emptines of their own Religion,
as consisting only of Tenets, which are but an Annihilation of all positive and
true faith, have therefore upon mature deliberation in diverse weighty points
who^y rejected the Negative Religion of our Adversaries; and in place thereof
have fully embraced the contrary Affirmative, and Catholic Articles of faith,
ever, and at this day maintained by the Church of Rome; So tr^^ is that saying
of S. Austin: Truth Contra Donat. post. coll. c. 24.
is m^n forcible to wring out Confession, then any rac^^ torment. For the
proof of this verity I refer the studious Reader to the Book of the
Protestants Apology; where beginning at the Page 684. and s^quentib. at the
letter M. in the margent, he shall find fyfty at least of our Affirmative, and
Catholic Doctrines defended, and maintained by the most learned Protestants,
that ever did write. I will here only reckon the tiles of diverse of the said
Articles, so believed and taught by the Protestants. viz. 1. Real presence. 2.
That Sacraments do confer grace. 3. The sufficiency of Chricts corporal Death.
4. That Christ descended in soul, into Limbus Patrum. 5. The continual
Visibility of the Church. 6. The Necessity of Good works to Salvation. 7.
Evangelical Counsels. 8. The Doctrine of universality of Grace. 9. That God
does only permit sin, but decrees it not. 10. That men are not certain of
their Election. 11. That to Children of the faithful, dying unbaptized,
salvation is not promised. 12. Freewill. 13. That in regard of Christ's Passion
and promise, our Good works are meritorious. 14. Te^porall punishment reserved
by God in Justice, after the sin is remitted. 15. Peter's Primacy. 16.
Intercession of Angels 17. Intercession of Saints. 18. Jnuocation of Saints.
19. Vowed Chastity. 20. Voluntary ^ouerty, Chastity and Obedience. 21. Prayer
for the Dead. 22. Purgatory. 23. Limbus Patrum. 24. Images in Churches. 25.
Worshipping of Images. 26. Reverence, and bowing at the name of Jesus. 27. That
the good Works of one may help another. 28. Power of a priest to remit sins.
29. Confession of sins. 30. Distinction of mortal, and venial sin. 31.
The indifferency of Communion under one kind. 32. Sacrifice of the New
Testament, according to the Order of Melchisedech 33. The possib^lity of the
Commandments. 34. Transubstantiation. 35. That Christ is God of God. 36. Tha^
Christ (as Man) was from his Nativity free from Ignorance, and was full of
knowledge. 37 Baptism of Women and Lay persons in time o^ Necessity. 38. Seven
Sacraments. 39. Implicit^ faith, called Fides implicita. 40. That Antichrist is
yet to come. 41. Patronage and protection of certain Angels, over certain
Countries and Kingd mes. 42. That the Observation of Sunday for our ^abaoth, is
not alterable. 43 That the alteration of the ^aboth from Saturd^^ to Sunday not
proved by Scripture. 44. Set times of fasting. 45. The true visible Church
cannot err. 46. External judgment (and not on^y Scripture) appointed for
determining of Contr^uersies. 47. That the government of the Church is
Monarchical. 48. Which is true Scripture, determined to us only by the Church.
49. That the Church of Rome is a part of the house of God. 50. Unwritten
Traditions; besides some other Catholic points taught by the learned
Protestants. Here now I demand, that if the Protestants Proselyts, and
followers do believe their Grand-maisters in diverse points of their own
Religion, why then should not they believe the learned Protestants, maintayning
our Catholic doctrines; ^nt^ (abstracting from the authority of the Church)
both the said several sorts of Protestants do maintain their contrary Tenets,
even with equal and indifferent priuiledg of their own Private Spirit?

Animaduersion CLXXXVIII.
AS above I compared Luther, being Catholic (touching manners and Conversation
of Life) with Luther being Protestant; So here I will make another comparatiue
between the Lives of Catholics and of Protestants. And here it is to be
observed; that I will not compare the most pious men in former times, with the
best of the Protestants; nor the worst men for life of the one Religion, with
the worst of the other; but (for the greater confronting of our Adversaries,
and advantage to our Catholic Cause) I will compare the declining state of
Catholic times, with the best times of Protestancy, which is presumed to be at
the first entrance and beginning of Protestancy, when the first Protestants
enjoyed the ^rimitiae, and first fruits of their Religion. This point will be
made evident even from the confessions of the Protestants themselves. First
then, we find Luther himself thus to write: From Luth. in postill. super
Euangel. Domini^ae primae Aduentus
the time, in which the pure Doctrine of the Gospel was first revealed to
light, the world has grown daily worse: Men are more reuengefull, covetous,
licentious, then they were ever before in the Papacy. With whom Musculus
agrees, thus complaining hereof; Vt verum Musculus in loc. com. in cap, de
Decalog. page 62.
ess^ fateor etc. To confess the truth, men are become so v^^ike themselves,
that whereas in the P^pacy, they were religious in their Errors and
Superstition, now in the light of the known truth, they are more propha^^ then
the very Sons of the world. I wi^^ conclude with the testimony of Erasmus,
thus discoursing of this point: Quos Erasmus Ep. ad fratres Inferioris
Germaniae.
a^tea noueram etc. Such men as I knew, to be before upright, candid, modest,
and sincere in the^ Conversation, after, they had embraced th^^ new Sect
(meaning of the Gospel) they i^stantly begun to talk of young Women, to play^
dice, to leave of prayer, to be most impatient, and reuengfull of Injuries, and
to conclude to aba^don all humanity: expertus loquor. Thus far ^rvsmus. And
thus much of the balancing o^ men of these two several Religions. No^ I here
refer to an indifferent Iudgmen^ whether it be not a great blemish to
Protestancy, that it is confessed by the Prot^stants, that the Professors
thereof even (...) their best times, were far worse, and mo^ wicked in manners,
then the Catholik^^ their worst, and most declyning times.

Animaduersion CLXXXIX.
THe Protestants much solace themsel^^ in alleging certain Texts of Script^^
in proof of Justification by faith only, wh^^ passages being truly weighed,
are found (...) be most weakly, or rather impertine^^ alleged, as in Math. 9.
Thy faith has s^^ thee. John 3 Who belieueth in the Son, h^ eternal Life.
Finally (to omit some o^^ such seeming Texts) Romans 5. We being ^^^fyed by
faith, let us have peace toward God. T^ these and such like I answer, and
deny that it follows, That Faith only iustifyeth, though only Faith be named.
For sometimes also other Virtues are only named, or the Sacraments. For
example, Luc. 7. we read: Many sins are forgiven her, because she loved much.
Job. 12. Alms deeds freeth from death. Romans 8. By hope we are saved. Finally,
Titus 3. He has saved us by the Laws of regeneration, besides many other such
passages: And yet no man will gather from the^e authorities that Charity, or
Almesdeeds, or Hope, or Baptism do iusti^y without Faith. Therefore when many
different causes concur to produce one Effect, the Scripture ascribes the same
Effect sometimes to one Cause, sometimes to another, and yet the Scripture does
not intend thereby to signi^y, that one cause is sufficient, without the other
causes. Now the reason, why the Apostle more frequently attributes
Justification to faith, then to other works, is delivered by the ^ouncell Sess.
6 c. 8.
of Trent: To wit, be^^use, Fides est initium gratuitae Justificationis; faith
is the beginning of a gratuit, and free Ju^ification.

Animaduersion CLXXXX.
That so much prostituted passage of Scripture by our Adversaries in proof of
^n absolute Reprobation of some men, even ^^om their Mothers womb, without any
^^ference, or preuision of their works, in a clear judgment proves nothing,
for which it us urged. The place is this: Jacob Romans ^.
dile^^ Esau autem odio habui. Now, to this place I thus answer. First, this
sentence is not to be understood of those particular persons Jacob, and Esau,
but of the two people, to wit the Jsraelits, and the Idumeans. And what here is
spoken o^ Love and Hate, is not to be understood of Eternal Election, or
Reprobation, but of the good and bad times of this Life. This is thus proved.
For when in Malachy 1. God said these words: I loved Jacob, and hated Esau, he
explayneth himself, how he does love, and hate, saying: I have Malach. 1.
made his Mountains (to wit Esau) wast an^ his heritage a wilderness for
Dragons. Therefore God loved Jacob, because he gave to him* Country flowing with
milk and honey; and he hated Esau, because God gave to him a sterill and desert
Country. The same poi^^ is further also thus proved: When Genes. 25.
Rebe^ca did demand of God, why the two Chi^dren (to wit Jacob and Esau) which
she bar^ in her womb, did strive together; she wa^ thus answered: two Nations
are in thy womb, and two sorts of people shall be divided out o^ thy bowels,
and the one people shall be might^^ then the other, and the Elder shall serve
the younger. Secondly admit, that those words Esau autem odio habui, were to be
understood particularly of Esau; yet they cannot be understood of the person of
Esau, without all preuision of his works; For Esau, as being a man, was (as all
other things are) the handiworke of God: and we read the Wiseman to say of God,
Sapient. 11.
Nihil odisti little, quae fecisti; thou natest nothing of those things which
thou have made Therefore what God hated in Esau, was only the Sin of Esau, and
not his Person. Thirdly, and lastly I answer, that admit the former words were
to be understood of the person of Esau, yet it follows not, that any Positive
hatred should be meant thereby, but only a less Love to ^sau, then to Jacob.
Even as we read: Si quis Luc. 14.
venit ad me, and non o^it patrem suum etc. If any man come to me, and hates
not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Chi^dren etc. yea and his own life
besides, he cannot be my Disciple; In which words there is not commanded any
Positive hatred of Father, Mother, Wife etc. but is commanded only a less
degree of love toward these things then toward God. Thus far in explication
of this former so often alleged, Text.

Animaduersion CLXXXXI.
IT is the custom of many of our Adversaries even Scholars, when they see
themselves defective, either in answering our Catholic Arguments, vrg^d
against Protestancy, or impugning of our Catholic faith, do make their la^t
Refuge to the Cloth of State (as I man say) shadowing themselves and their
Cause under it: my meaning is this, That they seek to charge our Religion with
teaching disobedience and disloyalty against our natural Princes.

Now, to vindicate our selves from thi^ false imputation, I will insist in the
doctrine taught of this point (by our Adversaries) far more dangerous, then any
Doctrine of this point, maintained by any learned Catholics. For example. For
first against all sovereignty of Princes we find Luther thus to write: Among
Luther de saecular. potest. Tom. 9.
Christians, no man can or ought to be a Magistrate; but each one is to other
equally subject. Swinglius thus teaches: Qua^^o Swingl tom 1 in exp^anat. art.
42.
perfide etc. When Princes do en^ and contrary to the rule of Christ, they may
be deposed. To be short, in pretermitting the like Censures of Beza and diverse
other eminent Protestants, Calvin in these words subscribeth to the former
Protestants: Ab^^cant Calvin. in Daniel. cap. 6.
s^ potestate terreni principes etc. Earthly Princes do deprive themselves of
authority, when they erect themselves against God; yea they are unworthy to be
accounted in the number of men; And we had rather to spit upon their faces,
then to obey them. Thus Calvin. Now ho^ far are the Catholics from comparting
and joining with the former Protestants in this their doctrine of Rebellion?
since we willingly remember that it is written: We 1. Pet. 3.
ought to be subject to the King, as exceeding; And that: who Romans 13.
resists power, resists the ordinance of God. But to descend more
particularly, and to parallel in part the doctrine and the Actions, or
proceedings of the Catholics, and Protestants herein. The former Protestants
(with many others of their Religion) do extend this power of deposing Princes
to every poor Parochial Superintendent, who is Pope (at least would be so)
within his own Circuit or Parish; and in want of such, to every turbulent
fellow, and to the promiscuous multitude. The Catholic Deuines (those I mean,
who most defend such transcendency of proceedings) do ascribe the doing of it
to the Pope, who is a Stranger, and therefore further of from any such sudden
attempt. To come to the Attempts on both sides: The Protestants have actually
deposed several Kings, Q^eenes, and Sovereigns: Thus is the King of Spain
deposed of a great part of the Low Countries: The Kings of France heretofore of
certain Cittyes in France: The Lord of Geneua of his Territory belonging to
that City: The Emperor of many Cittyes in Germany; Finally his Majesty's
Grandmother and Great Grandmother of the kingdom of Scotland: And all this by
Protestants. The Pope and the Catholics have never yet to this day, actually
deposed any one absolute Protestant Prince, or King from their States and
Territories, throughout Christendom. The greatest matters of this Nature,
which can be alleged, is the Excommunication of king Henry the Eight of
England, Queen Elizabeth his Daughter, and King Henry of France the Fourth.
The Protestants have come into the fyeld against their Catholic Princes in
many huge Armies, and hundred thousands of Men, as appears by the wars made
by them in the Low Countries, France, and Germany; The Catholics never yet
levied any such Arm^es against their Protestant Prince. Lastly the Protestants
have not only deposed their Catholic Princes of several States and Countries;
but (which is far more) they have absolutely impatronized themselves of the said
States, and kept them in their own possession, as is over manifestly evident
by the example heretofore of Rochell in Fance, and at this present of Geneua,
Hol. and Zeland, and several parts of Germany, Sweueland, Transiluanta etc.
The Catholics to this very day have not made themselves Lords of any one
Town, or City (much less of any State or kingdom^) which have belonged to
their Protestant Princes. And thus far though briefly (for the more full
stopping of the mouths of our Adversaries) touching the libration and weighing
in an eauen hand, the doctrine taught, and the Attemps practiced, by the
Protestants and Catholics in point of Disloyalty, against their lawful dread
Soueraigns of a different Religion. And here before lend, the more fully to
discover the loyalty of the Lay Catholics of England, and of us Priests to his
Majesty, our dread Sovereign, I (the Author of this Treatise) in the person
and name of us all, do make bold to offer this our ensuing joint prayer (as a
spiritual Sacrifice) to the Almighty, in behalf of our most Worthy King
Charles, and his most illustrious Spouse Queen Mary: God, who is the
Protector of Kings, and the first Author of all true Sovereignty, and supreme
domination (per me Proverb. 8.
reges regnant) preserve them both, and their noble issue, under the wings of
his Divine care and providence: Defend them from their Enemies, either
domestical, or foraine; Grant unto them a long and most happy reign over us:
And after the dissolution of their bodies, bring their souls into that most
blessed state, where they once leaving this terrene Kingdom, may hear those
joyful words of our Savior (as spoken to them) touching their fruition of the
Celestial Kingdom: Venite, Mat. 25.
possi^ete paratum vobis regnum. And this our Common Prayer (most Heavenly
sovereign) we humbly beseech thee to hear, even by the force of that title,
which is peculiar to thy self, and incommunicable to any other king, Rex
Apocal. 19.
regum, and Dominus dominantium.

Animaduersion CLXXXXII.
THe Calumny, and subtilty of our first Adversaries, in their definition of
Christ's Church, was very great, and obseruable: They Calu. Instit. l. 4. cap.
1. number 2, and 3.
defined the Church to consist only of such, as are Just and predestined (but
who such are, it is not known to any man) and therefore to remain in a
continual Latency. But what was the reason of this their proceeding? Observe.
Both the Old, and New Testament give great praises and Elogia of the Church of
Christ; For we read that it is called Apocal. 2
, A holy City: A Psalm 7.
fructiferous vine: A mighty Esaias 2.
high mountain, and Esaias. 32.
straight way: The only Cantic. 6.
Dove; The Cant. 4.
spouse, and Body Ep 5
of Christ: The pillar of Truth 1. Timoth. 3.
Finally ^to omit much more) that Society, against which who is contumacious,
and refractory, is to be accounted no better then a Heathen Math. 18.
, or Publican. Now in regard of these panegyricke praises, given by the written
word of God to the Church, our first Adversaries dared not in express words
openly to impugn the Church; Therefore most ^ubttlly the name of the Church
they retained, but the thing it self by defining it, they did overthrow. For
as is above said, they define it to consist only of the Elect, and
Predestined; and consequently (since we cannot tell, who are of the number of
the Elect, and predestinate) ever to be in a hidden Latency. And to this they
were forced because (as in many of the former Animaduersions it is expressed)
it is granted by most of our learned Adversaries, that the Protestant Church
has for the space of twelve or thirteen hundred years, layne wholly latent
and invisible: And yet such a Church (if any such were) may be said in show of
words to be capable of the former definition of the Church. See here the
serpentine subtilty of our Adversaries.

Animaduersion CLXXXXIII.
IT is to be much feared, that there are many in England who mask themselves
under the name of Protestants, and yet in their hearts, are no better then
Atheists, as not acknowledging a Deity. If it chance therefore, that this
Treatise shall come to any such men's hands, I have purposely thought good to
close it up with certain Animaduersions, for the proof of so supreme a Truth,
wishing such Readers to peruse the Book entitled, Rawleighs Ghost, (first
written in Latin by the learned Jesuit, Lessius) for his greater confirmation;
out of which book I grant, I have selected most of these ensuing
Animaduersions; all which of this Nature (though contrary to my Method houlden
hitherto in this Discourse) I have ranged together, and reduced to one head.

Now whereas such men, that are tainted with so foul a blasphemy, and
execrable Madness, to whom those words of Cyprian are truly applied: Quae haec
Cyprian, lib. de Idolorum vanitate.
summa delicti nolle illum agnoscere, quem ignorare non possis? do (especially
if they he Scholars) hold that the world was not created of God, but was from
all Eternity; therefore I will first remove this stumbling Block, and will
purposely insist only in two Arguments (or rather two unanswerable
Demonstrations) in disproofe thereof, which lie subject to each man's
apprehension. First then from our own experience, we reason thus: It is a
truth confirmed by trial of all times, that the quantityes of Men's bodies have
a perceiuable impayring, as also the length and continuance of their lives: So
that, if in that infinite space of foregoing time (I mean from Eternity) Men
had a being (as without question the world was never void of men, the
principal and most noble member thereof) then through continual and incessant
Decay, their bodies had been brought before this day to as little a quantity,
as they are capable of, if not clean consumed: But we see, their quantity is
not yet come to the lowest; Therefore I conclude, that they had not a being
from Everlasting.

My second Demonstration is this: Had this world been from Everlasting, and
from all Eternity, then Infinite also had been the propagatio^ of Man; And so
we should bring into the world an actual Infiniteness, as absurd in Nature,
as Paralogismes be in Logic. For in this infinite space and generation, there
had been an infinite number of men's Souls, which being by Nature incapable of
Mortality, we cannot say, that as one Soul was created, another was destroyed;
And therefore it would follow, supposing the world to be ab aeterno, that there
should be an Infiniteness in regard of Number, actually subsisting in Nature.
Thus far for impugning, that the world cannot possibly ^xist from all
Eternity; Omitting many other more abstruse demo^strations, (drawn from
Philosophy) not subject to the capa^ity of the Ignorant.

Animaduersion CLXXXXIV.
ALl those Men, who deny the Jmmortality of Man's Soul, do withal deny a
Deity, or being of God. Therefore the Immortality of the Soul is first thus
proved from Natural Philosophy; the soul of Man has in it self, no
principles or ground of Corruption; seeing then the soul of Man (as being a
simple Spirit) has nothing in it self, from which it should receive any
distraction or extinguishment (contrary to the sensitive soul of other living
Creatures, which have within it self the grounds of its own Mortality,)
therefore it follows, that the soul of Man is immortal, and lives, after it
is divorced from the body.

Another argument in prooffe hereof, is taken from the worth and dignity of
Man's Soul, which dignity is chiefly discerned to us by its own several
Operations.

For first, the knowledge of the soul is altogether illimitable; For it
apprehends all kinds of things; As also it conceaueth the universal reasons
of things, as they are abstracted from particulars, from sensible matter, from
place, and time etc. It searches into the reasons, causes, effects, and
proprieties of all things; All which Action and operations bear no Reference
to the benefit of the Body; but are ornaments only of the Mind, and belong only
to the Mind.

Secondly, The desire of Man's soul is in like sort infinite, and boundles. For
the Soul does not only desire such things, as belong to the Body (to wit to
satisfy the sense of tasting, and feeling, as Beasts do) but it stretches it
self forth to every Truth, desiring the knowledge and contemplation of every
Verity. Neither is the desire of the Soul (I ever mean, the soul of man)
enlarged only to each Truth, but also to every thing, that is Good. Here then
appears, how much the power of desiring in man, is elevated and advanced,
above the Matter, and condition of his Body.

Thirdly, the same is further confirmed from the Delights and Pleasures,
wherewith the Soul solaceth herself. For she is delighted chiefly with the
contemplation of Truth. She is delighted with the Pulchritude and beauty of all
things, and in admiring the Art and skill which appears in every thing. She
is delighted with Proportions, and Mathematical disciplines: She is delighted
with the works of Piety, Justice, and exercise of all other Virtues: Finally
she is delighted with Fame, Honor, glory, rule and domination, Now, seeing
none of these belongs to the benefit of the Body, but all are touching
spiritual objects, or at least concerning such things, which are estranged
from the benefit of the Body: and seeing the soul esteems these things far
more, then any corporal Good; It therefore is most evident, that the Soul is
of a far higher, and more worthy disposition, then the body; and of such a
divine Nature, as that it depends not at all of the commerce and intercourse,
which she has with the flesh.

Fourthly, This verity is warranted from the Dominion, which the soul has
over the Body, and from the Souls enjoying of Freewill. For the Soul does so
direct, govern, and ouerrule the body, in her affections, and passions; as
that neither the expectation of rewards, or fear of torments, can force the
body to say, or do any thing, then what the Soul w^lleth. Now the reason
hereof is, because the Soul depends not of the Body, but is (...), or sui
iuris: whereupon it rises, that the Soul so smally valeweth those things
which appertain to the Body as if they did not belong unto her.

Fifthly, If the Soul should have her dependence of the Body, and could not
consist (the body being once extinct) then should she have against nothing a
greater horror and auersion, then against death: For death of the body,
depriving the Soul (supposing it to be mortal) of all good, should become her
greatest infelicity, and evil; and present life her greatest good and
happiness. But now daily experience teaches the contrary: for many do make so
small account and estimation of life, as that they willingly spend it for
praise, fame, liberty, avoiding of reproach and dishonor; yea some there are,
who for avoiding of disgrace or affliction of mind, stick not to become their
own Homicides: so much do those things which appertain to the Mind, over
balance all that, which appertains to the Body.

Sixthly, If the Soul of man be extinguished together with its body, then
nothing is attended on with greater Calamities, then man's Nature; for in this
life man's nature stands subject to many afflictions, from which Beasts are most
free. For it is incessantly solicited with cares, vexed with fears, burning
with desires, sorrowing and complaining, never content with its own state, nor
enjoying any tranquillity of mind. Besides it often endures poverty,
banishment, imprisonment, disgrace, the yoke of Matrimony, loss of goods,
repentance of things past, a care of things to come etc. from all which Beasts
are free. If therefore the Soul be extinguished with the body, then almost all
kinds of Beasts would be more happy then Man. Therefore it remains, that the
soul must expect its felicity after its departure from its body; and
consequently, that it dies not with the body, but is immortal. For how absurd
is it, that, that which is of the highest Nature in ^his world, should in its
state and being become more miserable, then things of a far meaner Nature?

Seauently, That sentence, which is the source and welspring of all Justice,
Piety, and Virtue, cannot possibly be false; But this Article, which teaches
the Souls immortality, and that after this life it is to be rewarded, or
punished, is the groundwork of all Justice and probity; therefoee the article
of the souls immortality is most true: as on the contrary part, that Opinion,
which teaches the soul to be mortal, and corruptible, does subvert and
overthrow the foundation of all probity and virtue; therefore that Opinion must
of necessity be false, since it promises a man, that (let him live never so
wickedly) he shall not suffer any pains after this life.

Eighthly (to remit the Reader for his fuller satisfaction herein, to the
foresaid book of Rawleighs Ghost) I say, that Nature which is intelligent, is
the worthyest nature of all others which are in the world. Hence it is
gathered, that it is absurd to ma^tayne, this nature utterly to perish and to
be mortal; For if the earth, sea, and stars, all which were created for the
use of this intelligent nature (I mean for man) do never decay, but continue
eternal; then how can it be auerred, that this intelligent nature should
become mortal and passible? Certainly it is altogether unlawful to affirm,
that nature (to wit Man's soul) to be mortal, to which things, that are
immortal, become serviceable, and for whose only use and benefit, the said
immortal things were first created.

Animaduersion CLXXXXV.
THe Consideration of the fabric of Man's body most irresistably conduces us
to the knowledge of a Deity; And therefore not undeservedly is the body of man
styled by the Philosophers, Microcosmus, the lesser world: Meaning lesser in
Quantity, then all this great world, containing in it the universality of all
sublunary things; but far greater with reference to the many mysteryes
discovered in the framing thereof. First then Man's body (but briefly to run
over some chief observations) is made not of one bone, but of several bones,
the better thereby to bend himself; Some of which bones are greater, some
less; of all which every one has that particular magnitude, shape, firmenes,
and connection, which the strength of the body the facility of moving and the
use of the members require. These bones (especially the greatest of them) do
further serve in Man's body, to support the same, with the like use as the great
columns and beams, do vphould an Edifice, or buylding: And every bone is
covered with a piece of flesh, which is called Musculus, which Muscle ends in
a sinewy-matter, called Tendo: By the Tendo the Muscle, and consequently the
Bone belonging thereto, is moved.

We will in this next place consider the three principal parts of man's body:
to wit, the Heart, the Liver, and the Brain. It is a principle in Anatomy, that
all Veins proceed from the Liver and give nourishment; All Arteries from the
Heart, and give Life; All Sinews from the Brain, and give Motion and sense.
The meaning hereof is, that the gross blood in the veins does give
nourishment; The spiritual Blood in the Arteries, Life; And the Animal
Spirits in the Nerves or Sinews, do give sense and Motion. Now the Arteryes,
Veins, and Sinews, are of a reasonable greatness, as their first proceeding
from their sources or heads; but then they divide themselves almost into
infinite branches, and in the end they become so small, as that therefore they
are called Capillares, with reference to the smalnes of the hair of a Man's
head. They are so generally dispersed throughout all the parts of a Man's body,
as that therefore there is no part of the Body, but that it has nourishment,
life, and sense or Motion. Add hereto that motion of the Heart, which is called
Systole, and Diastole, is most admirable. By Diastole, or D^^atation of it
self, the Heart draws in new Air to temper the Heat, and refresh the
Spirits; by Systole, or compression of it self, it expells all fuliginous
vapors. And thus are the Arteries throughout the whole body ever moved with an
incessant and continual vicissitude, in dilating and contracting themselves,
even for the said End. And this ^ystole, and Diastole of the Arteries through
the body, is that, which vulgarly is called, the beating, or Motion of the
Pulse.

Animaduersion CLXXXXVI.
IN this next Animaduersion, I will descend more particularly to the Structure
of two principal Organs, or members of man's body, To wit, the Eye, and the
Hand in the framing of either of which there appears an undoubted c^rtainty
of a Divine providence, or deity, by whom they were so miraculously made and
compacted.

I will begin with the Eye; the knowledge of which Instrument is of such worth,
as that it has purchased a peculiar Name, or appellation to it self; It being
called, Ar^ Optic^, The Art concerning the eye and sight.

Now touching the Eye, First we may observe the bearing out of the forhead and
the nose, serving to beat back all sudden entrance of things hurtful to the
Eye. Next the Hayres of the Eyelids, placed in precise manner, serving to the
foresaid End Then the Eyelidds themselue^, which do shut and open, either for
the preventing of the entrance of things domageable, or for the receiving in of
pleasing Objects. Next are to be considered the many Tunicae, or Skins, which
do encompasse and fortify the Eye. The Tunicae are these: First (and the
outward most) Adnata, otherwise called Alba. Next Jnnonimata. Then Cornea. Next
Vuea, by which the eyes of several men appear to be of several colors. Then
Retina; and lastly Aranea, it being a most thin skin, and nearest to the Eye.

In this next place, are to be considered the thr^e Humor, of the Eye; to wit
Aqu^us, which is the uttermost part of the Eye: Christallinus, which is placed
in the Middle of the Eye; and this humor is almost the chiefest Instrument of
seeing, and therefore it is called Simulacrum visionis. The third Humor is
Vitreus, which is placed in the inmost part of the Eye. Thus the Chrystaline
Humor is between the Aqueus, and the Vitreus. By the help of these Humors,
the Eye receaueth nourishment, as also by them it purges away all hurtful
ordure and filth. Next are presented to our consideration the two Optic
Synews; which serve to convey the Species of Objects from the Eye to the Common
sense: They are called Nerui visibiles.

Now touching the figure of the Eye, it is partly Round, that so the Eye may
see not only stra^ght forward, but also somewhat on both sides, as we observe
it does. Lastly concerning the manner how we see; The opinions of the learned
are two; to wit, either Extramittendo (as they speak) that is, the eye: sends
forth certain visibiles Spiritus to the Object which it sees, and then they
return back again to the Eye, with the true form of the said Object. Or else
it sees intromittendo (which is the more common opinion) that is, the Species,
or forms of the Object are spherically multiplied in the Air, or water and
are received into the Eye per modum Conoidis, vz. in a pyramidall manner. Thus
much touching the Eye. To come to discourse of the Hand and of the admirable
Artifice discovered therein: Three things are chiefly to be considered in the
hand, to wit The number of the fingars; The number of the ioints of every
fingar; and the different length of each fingar.

Touching the Number of the fingars. They are five with the Thumb. Here then
we may observe the fitting number of them: For if there were more fingars then
five; then what is more then five would be superfluous; for we cannot conceive
to what use, that fingar exceeding the number of five, could be put unto. If
fewer then five, then the number would be defective; and so the hand could not
perfectly perform i^s operation, as we see, it falls out in such men, who by
misfortune have lost one or more of their fingars.

To proceed to the Number of the joints of each fingar. All the four fingars
have three joints, whereby they exercise so many inflexions: The Thumb has
only two. If any fingar had less then three joints, then could not the hand so
aptly perform its faculty; as we may observe in those persons, who have any of
their fingars grown stiff through any disease. If the Thumb ha^ three
joints, that third joint would be merely superfluous, and of no use.

To descend to the different length of the fingars, and the Thumb. We are here
to call to mind, that the whole hand performs its faculty by drawing and
closing (as it were in a circular form) either all, or some of the five
fingars together; for by that manner it best graspeth, or houldeth any thing
within it. Now here I say, that if either the long fingar were shorter then it
is, with reference to the other fingars, or the little fingar, and the Thumb
longer then they are, then this supposed shortness in the longest fingar, and
length in the little fingar, and Thumb, would cause the hand to be far less
apt and fit, for compressing it self together, or houlding of any thing within
it. Now here who does contemplate all these things touching the hand, in the
curious frame whereof nothing is superfluous and redundant, nothing wanting or
defective; how can he rest otherwise persuaded, but that all this is framed by
a Divine Providence, which is God; who works all things with most admirable
exactnes in Mensura, Numero, and Pondere, as the wiseman says, Sap. cap. 11.

To come to another most obseruable point, which is this following. As it
appears in the Fabric of the Eye and of the Hand, so also in all bodies
(whether they be the Heavens, the four Elements, the Plants, Beasts, and man's
body) every thing is made with reference to some extrinsecall End, to the which
end the whole structure of the thing, as also all it parts, and faculties of it
parts, are (after a wonderful manner) disposed and framed. Therefore of
Necessity there must be some one most wise Mind, o^ Spirit, which aforehand
conceived in it self all those Ends, and ordained proportionable, and fitting
Means to the said Ends. For Nature, which is not capable of Reason, not endued
therewith, as it cannot conceive or comprehend the End of things so neither can
it dispose, or set down suitable means to the said Ends, since this is a
chief work of Art and wisdom. I will exemplify this (for breuity) only in
the Sun. The Sun is not made for it self (for it cannot apprehe^d or
reflect upon its own Beauty, and Fayrenes) but for the good and benefit of
other things; to wit, that it may enlighten the world, and cherish all things
with its heat. This then being thus, the Sun ought to have a certain
proportion or measure of light, and quantity; as also a determinate Place in
the world; lest that the light being over radiant, shyning, and great, or it
self in Place over near, it should burn the Earth: or on the contrary side,
the light being too remiss and small, or too far off from the Earth, should
not sufficiently lighten it, or heat it. Now this disposition of fitting
Quantity, light, and place, cannot be assigned by Any, but only by such a Mind
or Spirit, as is able to consider the End, and the Means; and of Judgment to
set down a sorting and convenient proportion between them: And this Spirit or
Mind we call God. The same might be exemplifyed in all other things (herefore
for breuity omitted.) For there is nothing idle in this world, but all things
tend, and direct their operations to some End; And they incline, and bend to
their End so ordinatly, and with such convenient ways, and passages, as that
it cannot be bettered by any Art whatsoever. Wherefore seeing the things
themselves (as void of Reason) can neither perceive the Ends, whereunto they
are directed, neither the Means, nor the proportion of the Means, by the
which they are directed; it is therefore most certain, that all things are
directed by some Superior power, who sees and considers both the Means and
the Ends; and this Superior power is God, to whom be all Glory and Honor for
all Eternity.

Animaduersion CLXXXXVII.
THe diversity of Faces, and Voices of Me^ is a strong Argument to prove the
car^ of a Divine Providence. And touching the first. The diversity of Faces is
so multiplicious, and almost so infinite in Man (so ordained to be by God) as
that it affords an unanswerable argument of a Deity: For without this variety
of Faces, neither could Justice be observed, neither could any form of a
Commo^wealth subsist: For suppose men to be in Countenance a like (as sheep,
Oxen, kye, Crows, sparrowes, and many other Creatures of the same nature or
kind are) then most inevitable perturbations and tumults would ensue. For
neither could married Men discern their own wives from other women, nor their
wives their husbands from other men; neither the parents their Children,
neither the Creditours their debtours, the friends their Enemies, nor the
Magistrate the delinquents, nor the subjects the Prince. And therefore each
Commonwealth would be infested with adulteries, incests, frauds, proditions,
murders, and all wickedness whatsoever; since every one through a resemblance
of Fa^e, might give himself forth, for whom (...) would. It cannot be replied,
that this difference of Faces, comes not from any Providence, so disposing
the same; but only by chance, and casualty: This is absurd to say, since upon
this answer, it would follow, that all Justice, and true Policy, which is
found among men, should be grounded only upon Chance.

Furthermore, what proceeds from Chance, is not perpetual, but rarely
hap^eth, as the Philosophers do teach: But we find, that difference of
Countenances and Faces, is not a thing strange and rare, but most ordinary and
common. Therefore this difference of Faces, is not ascribed to chance, but to
some high Providence, which has ordained the same, the better to preserve
Justice, and Civil Life among Men.

Neither among Men, is there only this variety of faces (for their better
discerning of one from another) but also of Voices; so as there is no less
difference among Men in sound of Voice, then in Countenance. For seeing a
precise and distinct knowledge necessarily conduces to the preserving of
Justice; Therefore the Divine Providence (God I mean) has so disposed, that
there should be a disparity and unlikeness not only in Faces, but also in
Voices; that so by a double sense (to wit, by sight, and hearing) as by a
double witness, one man should be made known from another. For if but one of
these disparities were, then perhaps some mistaking might be; but where both of
them do jointly concur and meet, it is almost impossible, that men herein
should be in both deceived. Thus far of the Divine Providence, most clearly
manifested, in o^dayning the diversity of Faces, and voices i^ Men, for the
preservation of Justice, an^ mantayning of a good Commonwealth.

Animaduersion CLXXXXVIII
THe undoubted Truth of a Deity is als^ demonstrated from this ensuing Reason:
It is evident even by infinite Examples, and long experience, that there are
certain Invisible Substances, endued with a^ Understanding, and penetrating
all things through their subtilty of Nature, and which do transcend, and exceed
all humane power, and wisdom. This is manifest by the Orac^^ and Answers,
which were given in forme^ times, by the Idols in all Countries. For those
Statues and Jmages (as wanting altogether life, and sense) could not return
an^ Answer; but it was the Spirits, or devils entering into those Statues,
which so answered. Such were the Oracles of Apollo at Delpho^, and of Jupiter,
of Mammon, and diverse others in former ages: and by this means the Devils did
propagate Idolatry. An^ even at this day, the devils are in this manner
honored in India, China, Iapon, Tartary Brasill, Peru etc. The same point of
being of devils, is further made evident from the doctrine and practice of
Nicromantick^, Magi or Wisards, and Witches, which swarm in all Countries. For
these through certain Ceremonies and Verses, are able to call up the devils,
and do cause, that they do not ^ly show strange effects (which necessarily ^ply
their pre^ence) but also make them to ^peare in a visible form. Yea here in
En^and in Lancashire, about some six or sea^n and twenty years since, there
were ap^ehended about twenty witches, all confes^^g their witchcraft by help of
the devil, and (...) hanged at Lancaster. In like manner some ^^ree years
since, or there abouts, there ^ere certain witches apprehended in the ^me
shyre, and condemned to death by the Judges of that Circuit. Thirdly, the same
^erity of Spirits, or Devils, is euicted from those, who are called
Energumeni, or possessed persons: for two things appear in them which are
above humane power: One, that such, as are possessed, do speak strange
Tongues, which themselves do not understand; The other, that they do discover
things secret; or do relate things done in great distance of place, as if they
saw them openly: But these two things afford an evident demonstration of a
certain Superior Invisible Nature, by the power whereof they are performed.
To conclude, this point of being of Spirits, is further euicted from the many
apparitions of Spirits, which are affirmed to have been, from the testimony of
many most probable Histories.

Now then, if there be Jncorporeall Substances, or Spirits, (and these many in
number, as certain they are many in number) then it ineuitably may be
concluded, the there is one supreme Spirit, to the which a^ the rest are
subject, and at whose command they all are governed; since euer^ multitude of
things (except there be a dependency, and subordination to one mo^^ High)
begets disorder and Confusion* This point is further proved from the mos^
dangerous inconveniences, accompanying the contrary doctrine. For if among
Spirit^ there were no Order, and that the rest should not be subject unto one,
at the command whereof the power of them were not to be restrained; then might
every one of them afflict and trouble the World at his own pleasure, might
take away men's goods, yea even their Lives, burn, and destroy all things,
finally might overthrow all mankind; neither could any redress be found to the
contrary. Now this supreme Spirit, to which they are all subject, we call God,
who at his pleasure, is able to restrain and bridle the forces, and power of
all the rest.

Well then, seeing there are many Spirits, I here demand, from whence this
Multitude had its beginning? or who brought them into the Word? They proceed
not from Bodies, in that they are of a more excellent Nature then bodies are;
as also in that bodies do bring forth only bodies. Neither is one of them
engendered of another; seeing this kind of generation is peculiar to things,
which are subject to corruption; to wit, that by these means the Species and
^ynds of things may be perpetuated, whi^^ the Nature, being extinct in the
Parent, ^conserued in the Issue. Neither lastly can (...) be said, that every
one of these Spirits ^d their being from themselves, so as they ^epend of no
other Cause; Since granting, ^at any thing receaueth its existence and be^^g
from it self, it is far more probable, ^at this so taking its existence,
should be ^ut One, not Many. Therefore I conclude, that this, which takes its
being and existe^ce from it self, is but one, to wit God alone, ^ho is the
supreme spirit of all, and who gave (...) creation, existence, and being to all
other Spirits; be they either good, or wicked Spirits.

Animaduersion CLXXXXIX.
Cardinal Bellarmyne in his book, De ascensione Mentis ad Deum, per scalas
rerum creatarum, takes his second scala or Degree, from the consideration of
the fabric of this whole world, and the things created and contained therein.

Now in this great world, which co^prehendeth all things within it, these
things following are most wonderful; to wit, the Magnitude of the world;
Multitud^ of things Created; Variety of things; E^ficacy or virtue of things;
astly, Beauty of things. The which several Heads being with earnest attention
pondered, have great ^orce, so to eleuate the soul of man, as that it shall be
^uen absorpt in the admiration of a certain immense Magnitude, Multitude,
Variety, E^ficacy, and Pulchritude; all which is God himself.

To begin. 1. The Magnitude of the Eart^ only, is so great, as that in so
many thousand of years since the Creation of the world, yet the whole
superficies of the Earth remaynes undiscovered from Man. Now what i^ the whole
bigness of the Earth; if it be compared to the com^asse and Magnitude of the
Highest Heaven? It is accounted by the Astronomers to be but as it were) a
Point, and this with just Reason: For we observe, that the beams of the Sun
by the interposition of the Earth do so reach and pierce the Stars, opposite to
the Sun, as if the Earth were Nothing. Furthermore if every Star in the
firmament (according to the judgment of the Learned) be greater then the whole
Orb of the Earth, and yet through the almost infinite distance of the Stars,
they seem in our Eyes most little; who the^ can in thought arrive to the
greatness of the Heavens, wherein so many thousands of Stars do shine?
Therefore if we read in Ecclesiasticus Ecclesiasticus. ca. 1.
: Latitudinem terrae, and profu^dum Abismi, quis dimensus est; what then shall
we conceive of the exterior superfices of the Heaven, and of the depth or
profundity of the whole world, from the highest Heaven, to the Center of the
Earth? Certainly the corporal greatness of the whole ^orld is of that
immensity, as that no ^hought or cogitation of man, can comprehand it.

2. The Multitude of things created by ^ne God, who can number? For how many
Metalls of gould, silver, brass, lead, precious stones are within the Earth
and the Sea? And how many Species, kynds, and Indiuidua of herbs, flowers, and
plants are upon the Earth, and how many parts are in them? In like sort how
many kinds, Species, and Indiuidua of perfect, and imperfect Creatures, as of
fourefooted Beasts, of creeping Worms; of flying Creatures? And what may we
say of the Multitude of Men since the first Creation? To conclude, how many
stars are there in Heaven and how many Angels above the Heavens? And of the
stars thus we read: Genes. 15.
Numera stellas si potes. Now here we are to observe, that God would have
himself known of Man in some sort, and because not any one Creature could
aptly represent the infinite perfection of the Creator; therefore God did
multiply Creatures, and gave a certain goodness and perfection to every
Creature, that thereby judgment might be made of the goodness and perfection of
^he Creator, who contains infinite perf^ctions under the perfection of one
mos^ simple Essence: Even as one piece of gold contains the value and worth
of many pieces of silver.

3. Touching the Variety of Creatures; we are to conceive, that though the
Multitude of things created does argue a multiplicious perfection of one God;
notwithstanding the Variety of things which appears in this multiplication,
is far more admirable, and sooner leads man to the knowledge of God, Seeing to
vary forms almost after an infinite manner, (which God has done in the
Creation of things) is a most divine work, and most worthy of admiration. I do
omit the kynds and species of things, which are most various and diverse. How
great a disparity is there in the Jndiuidua of herbs, plants, flowers, and
fruits? Are not the forms, colors, smells, sapours or tastes of them
diuersifyed almost after an infinite manner? And is not the like to be observed
in living Creatures? To speak only of Men; In a huge Multitude of Men, there
cannot be two found altogether like. The which point is in like manner
obseruable in Stars, and Angels: for we read, 1. Cor. 15.
Stella a stella differt in claritate. And S. Thomas 1. Part. quaest. 50. act.
4.
affirms, that the Angels, (though they exceed all corporal things in
number) do diff^r among themselves, not only, Indiuiaua Numero, but also forma
specifica.

Here next follows, to speak of the virtue and efficacy, which God has
implanted in all things created; that thereby we may better ascend to
understand the infinite virtue of the Creator; seeing there is nothing created,
which has not an admirable virtue, or power, or efficacy. A piece of earth or
stone falling down from a great height, with what a force does it descend? The
water, which gently and mildly slydeth upon the superficies of the earth, when
it swells in floods, or torrents, overthrows all things in its way, as
houses, walls of Cittyes, and the like. The Wynds, which at other times most
sweetly breathe, do cast great ships upon the Rocks, and pull up by the roots
Old huge Oaks. In like sort, the fire does instantly increase into so great a
flame, as that it even deuoureth houses, and woods in a moment of time. To
descend to Herbs; How various are their virtues? Touching stones, and
particularly the Loadstone, what admirable virtue is discovered therein. To
conclude, touching living Creatures, we see some of them to be most strong, as
Lions, Bears, Bulls etc. Others (though most little) yet most witty, as Aunts,
spiders, Bees, Apes, and the like. I here omit the power of the Angels, the
virtue of the Sun and Stars; and rest in the wit of Men, by the which so many
Arts are invented, as that we have some Reason to doubt, whether Nature does
surmount Art, or Art Nature?

It remains, that in this place we take into our consideration, the
pulchritude and beauty of things created, according to those words of the
psalmist: Psalm. ^1.
Delectasti me Domine in factura. And truly, as all things are good, which God
made, so also are they all fair. For example, the beauty of a springing
Garden, of an Orchard well cultiuated, is great; great also is the beauty of
the calm Sea, of Rivers, of a clear Element, or Air, of the Heavens shyning
with innumerable stars, as adorned with so many precious gems. Great also is
the beauty of the forms of several kynds of beasts, the flying of Byrds, and
sporting of fishes. What shall a Man say of the pulchritude of the Stars, and
Moon, but especially of the most clear, and most great light of the Sun,
which exhilerateth and cherishes the whole world with its Rising?

To conclude, how great is the beauty and form of Men, and Women. Many Men
(otherwise grave and wise) have been even bewitched with the fair faces of
women, according to those words; Propter Ecclesi^st. cap. 9.
speciem multerum multi perierunt. In like sort many modest women have
descended unto that madness, as that for the beauty and good personage of men,
they have endangered their states, dignityes, reputation, children, parents,
life it self, yea their own souls, for the love and enjoying of such men, as
they did hold to be fair, and of comlines of grace.

Thus far of these five points; to wit, of the Magnitude, Multiplicity,
variety, virtue, and Beauty of things created; the intense and serious
consideration whereof, may much further Man, as above is said, to the
conte^plation of God, from whom only all these do stream and flow.

Animaduersion CC.
THe Regal psalmist admonishes us in these words: Quaerite Psalm. 68.
Deum, and viuet anima vestra. True it is, that during our peregrination here,
we are not able to find out, and perfectly discern what God is; since we read
that God, 1. Timoth. 6.
; Lucem habitat inacces^ibilem. Nevertheless the nearest means for us to
discern what God, in his own Essence, is, may be taken from the contemplation
of Man's Soul. In regard then hereof I will in this Animaduersion brieffly
contract, what the learned Cardinal Belarmine has delivered of this point;
making the consideration of the Soul of man his Iu^^^ book ^e ascensione ad
Deu^, per s^ala^ rerum Creatarum.
Eight Degree or scale, to arrive (in part) to the knowledge of God; in regard
of the great similitude in many points, which the soul of Man bears to God.
And to begin with these Resemblances.

First then, the Soul of Man is a spirit, that is, an incorporeall Substance,
so God is a spirit, for we read, Joan. 4.
Spiritus est Deus: Yet here is the difference, that God is a spirit increated,
and the Creator; The soul of man, a spirit also, but Created.

Secondly, The soul of Man, because it is a simple Spirit, is therefore
immortal; since it has nothing in it self, from whence it may receive its
corruption (contrary to the souls of beasts, or irrational Creatures) yet the
disparity herein also is, that the Soul of Man sometimes was not; and only
through the will and pleasure of God arriueth to its essence and being, and by
the will of the same God, may be reduced to nothing, though in it self it has
not (as above is said) any cause or principle of its Corruption; But God
himself is not only Jmmortall, but also sempiternall; and therefore with
reference to sempiternall Immortality (as I may term it) it was truly said of
the Apostle, speaking of God, Qui solus (5) habet immortalitatem.

Thirdly; The soul of man is endued with the light of Understanding and
Reason. For it knows not only colors, sapours, smells, sounds, Heat, Cold,
and the rest, which lie open to the senses of the body; But it does also judge
of the substance of things; and of things, not only singular, but universal;
and does not know things only present, but also co^iectureth of things to come;
and by discourse ascends to the Heavens, observing and demonstrating the
particular phaynomena, or Apparences of their Motions. In like sort, she
searches the effects out of the Causes, and from the effects recurs to the
Causes: Thus we here see, that the soul of man, is like to God, and unlike to
Beasts. Now here the soul of man differs from God: for the soul of man is
(as is said) endued with the light of Jntelligence or understanding; but God is
the Intelligence or light it self. The soul runs by discourse from the
Causes to the effects, and from the effects to the Causes; and thus not without
great labor gets some knowledge: God with one simple view or aspect
behouldeth all things perfectly. The soul of man understands those things,
which do exist, and already have a Being; and therefore his knowledge depends
upon the being of things: God by understanding, makes, that things be; and
herein the existe^ce of things depends upon the knowledge of God. The Soul
does with an uncertainty, only conjecture of things future; God does no less
evidently discern things future, then things past, and present. The soul
needs many things to exercise the faculty of understanding, as the Object,
the Species, the Phanthasma, and the like: God needs nothing, for even his
Essence it self, is all things to him; and which is more, his Essence is to
him his understanding. To conclude, the Soul, whiles it is in the Body, does
not only see, not God; neither does she see the Angels, nor herself; neither
does she properly and truly see any Substance, though corporal; and in many
things she is ignorant, and has a true knowledge but of few things: God is
ignorant of nothing; neither is he in any thing deceived, or erreth, according
to those words: Omnia nuda sunt, and aperta oculis eius. Hebr. c. 4

Fourthly, there appears in Man's Soul another kind of knowledge, which
consists not in Speculation, but in Action. And from hence proceed so many
Books of Philosophers, touching vices and virtues; so many Laws of Princes
and Magistrates, to teach a man to live well; in all which there is discovered
an admirable light of Reason in man, by the which he most far differs from
Beasts: But all these are nothing to the Eternal Law, which flourishes in the
mind of the Creator; from whom, as from a most streaming fountain, do flow
all Laws and decrees, according to those words, Vnus Jacob. 1.
est legislator, and Judex, Deus.

Fifthly, the Soul of Man does possess a third kind of knowledge, resting in
ing^niously fabricating and working of things. For whereas Beasts do make their
Nests, Denns etc by a certain instinct, ever after the same manner; The soul
of man (as being endued with reason, and judgment) has invented innumerable
Arts, by the which she so ouer-ruleth and commands over all other living
Creatures; as that neither Wings can be safty enough to Birds, nor the depth of
the water to fishes, neither strength to Lions or Bears, but that they all are
subject, to be taken by the wit of Man's Soul. In like manner the light of the
wit of Man's Soul wonderfully shines in inuenting the Art of Navigations, where
it has taught ships laden with most heavy burdens, not only by the help of
Oars to run (as it were) but also by means of the sails, as with wings, to
fly. Finally (to omit diverse other points) what dexterity of man's wit
appears in the Art of picturing or drawing, by the which things are so lively
expressed to the Eye, as if themselves did truly enjoy life? But here we may
turn our Eye back to God, in whom there is the true source of Wisdom, the
Causer of things; and what wit appears to be in Man, all the same is derived
from the said fountain: for if we wonder at man's wit, in that it can master
and rule over beasts; much more we are to admire God, to whom all things are
obedient. And if it seem strange, that man should invent so many Arts of
sailing, building of Edifices etc. much more strange should it seem, that God
by his wisdom and power did create Heaven and Earth, and all things therein.
Finally, if we rest astonished at the Art of paynting, or drawing men's faces
and favors; much more cause have we to rest astonished at the Art of the
Creator; who of Earth framed a true and living Man, and from the Rib of the
man, made the first Woman. And this we are to admire with more reason, in that,
what things Man does make, he cannot make without God cooperating with man;
whereas what things God makes, the same are made only by him, without the
cooperation, or assistance of any other.

Sixthly, The Soul of Man is endued with Freedom of Will, which is common to
him with God, and the Angels, and by which man differs from all other things
created. This Freedom of Will, is an admirable dignity in Man's ^oule; yet the
worth thereof is far more noble in God; For first the freedom of Manswill is
weak; it also is easily inclined to choose things that are Evil; whereas the
Freedom of the Divine Will, is most strong, and cannot possibly incline it
self to any Evil. Furthermore, our Freedom of will, is indeed so free, as
that it is able to will, or not to will; but it is not of power ever to effect
that, which it wills, or to prevent that, which it self wills not,
according to those words of the Apostle, Romans 7. Non quod volo bonum, hoc
facio; sed quod nolo malum, hoc ago. But the Freedom of the Will of God, is so
conjoined with a full and absolute power, as that of him it is said Psalm. 113.
Omnia quaecunque voluit fecit.

Se^uently, and lastly; The soul of man, is after a wounderfull manner in man's
body; For since the Soul of man, is an indivisible Spirit, it is therefore
whole in the whole body, and whole in every part thereof (contrary to the being
of the souls of Beasts,) which are Material, and extended to the extension of
their bodies. Thus the Soul of Man replenisheth the whole body, yet it
possesses no place in the body; and when the body does increase, the Soul
does not increase, but begins to be there, where before it was not. And if a
member of the body be cut of, or become withered and dry, the Soul is not
lessened, nor dried, but cease to be in that member, wherein before it was,
without any detriment or maymednes thereof. This is the true glass of the
existence of God in things created; for God is an indivisible Spirit; and yet
replenisheth the whole world, and all the parts thereof; yet possesses he no
place, but is whole in the whole world, and whole in every part thereof. And
when a new creature is produced; God begins to be in it; neither yet is God
moved; and when any creature is destroyed, or dies, God is not thereby
destroyed, or dies, but cease to be there, and this without any Motion of
place. Thus in these former point God, and the Soul of Man do agree; But in
many other points, God (as there is just Reason) has the prerogative, and
pre-eminence. For that the Soul of Man to be in the body, it is necessary,
that it becomes the Form of the body, and that so it be joined with the
body, as that one man be made of the body and the Soul. But it is not
neeedfull, that God should become the Soul of the world; neither that of him
and the world one compounded substance should be made; For God out of his
immensity is in every place; out of his indivisible unity, is whole wheresoever
he is; and out of his Omnipotency, does govern, support, and move all things.

Furthermore the Soul of Man, though it may be said to be in the whole body,
yet properly it is not, but in such parts of the body, as have life; and
therefore it is not in the Humors, in the Hayres of the head, in the nails.
But God is absolutely in all things, and not only in corporal, but even in
spiritual things: for it is impossible, that any thing should be, in which God
is not. Lastly, the Soul is not, but in the body, and that being but small and
of a narrow compass, so as the parts thereof (during the staying of the Soul
therein) must be continued and joined together; for if any part of the body be
separated or divided from the rest, in that part, or member so divided, the
Soul cannot be. But God is whole even in the University, or frame of all
things created; though that frame be great, and the parts thereof become
separated, and divided asunder. Yea if a second, or third World (or more)
should be created, God would be in them all, and in every part of them; for
where God should not be, there nothing should be. So true are those words of
Holy writ 2. Par. 6. Caelum and Caell Caelorum non te capiunt. Thus far
touching the similitude and resemblance, which the Soul of Man has with his
Creator; the similitude being so great (as is above touched) as that there is
no other way, by the which a man may more easily ^scend to know in part, what
God is, then from the consideration, or contemplation, what the Soul of Man
is; with so just reason we read it said by God himself, when he first created
Man: Let us make man in our Jmage, according to our lyknes. Genes. 1. And with
this I impose an end to these my Animaduersions.

A Pareneticall Conclusion to the younger Sort of Priests, and Students of the
English Seminaries; exhorting them to the study of Controversies, in Faith, and
Religion.
THus far (Reverend Friends, and Brethren) you see, I have proceeded in this
Miscellane, and indigested Tract. These Animaduersions may serve, as certain
prelibations or foretasts of Controuersyes in faith. If so you shall reap
profit thereby, O how abundantly shall I hold my small labor therein taken,
to be recompensed? but if they should not find that full success with you,
which I desire; yet let your charitable acceptance (in part) imitate the
Abysmall, and bottomless charity of God; who places a good intention only
(where further Ability, or other Circumstances are wanting) and a good work
actually performed, in one, and the sa^^ balance. But now before my pen given
you its last farewell, let me take leave (wit^ your good allowance) to
expatiate a li^^ in discourse, thereby to persuade you t^ more forcibly to the
particular study o^ English Controuersyes in faith and Religion: (...)
Province, or charge most peculiarly (in my judgment) incumbent upon you, in
regar^ of your main proiects and determinations espoused (as I may say) to the
Salvation (...) souls.

You are hereafter, in England, to encounter with Protestants (your professed
Adversaries in faith:) Imitate then a skilfu^ General in the wars, who
labors no^ only to hinder his Enemies attempts an^ approaches, but withal
seeks to assau^^ his Enemies. So here you have undertaken both a Defensive,
as also an Offensive War: prepare your selves then, not only to mantaine by way
of disputation and proofs, your own Catholic Religion; but be also pressed,
(which is partly coincident with the former) by all forces, both Divine and
humane, to make violent incursions upon Heresy, or Innovation in Religion.

For your greater encouragement hereto, observe this following? That Prince
would hold it for a great Advantage, to wage such a war, wherein he were
assured, that many of his Enemies soldiers would fight in his behalf.

And yet your Case is here the same; ^^nce in this your spiritual Combat, or
^ookwar with Heresy, you have the volun^ary and vncoacted confessions of your
Ad^ersaries, even fighting on your side; As ^ou may euidenly discern by the
many ^cknowledgments of the Protestants, de^iuered in several former
Animaduersions against themselves, and in strenghtning of our Roman Religion.
Thus you draw a Sword from the Enemies side, and after sheath it in his own
bowels.

The most illustrious and worthy Cardinal Bellarmine (that chief
Heresy-Mastix of this age) in his Preface to the Books of his Prefixed before
his Tome de verbo D^i.
Controversies, undertakes to show the Necessity of study of Controversies in
this our age: I presume his words will be most preuayling with you all, and
therefore I have thought fit to set them down in this place, by translating
them into English for the better satisfaction even of the more vulgar Reader:
Thus then he writes: Vtilitas quidem propositarum nobis Disputationum, ex eo
intelligi facile potest etc. The profit of the Disputations undertaken by us,
may easily from hence be apprehended. Agendum est enim, non de stillicidijs,
and fundis, non de rebus leuibus etc. For here we are to discourse, not of the
droppings of the caves of a House, not of farms, or Country Houses, not of
small and light matters (little auayling, whether they be after one manner or
other:) Neither are we to dispute of Metaphysicall subtiltyes; of which without
an^ detriment to the soul, a man may be ignorant, and the which may sometimes
be impugned, wi^^ Commendation and praise of the Opponent: B^^ here we are to
dispute of God, of Christ, of the Church, of the Sacraments, of Justification,
of the aid of Grace, of the freedom of Man's W^^ and of many other most grave,
most difficult, an^ most ab^^ruse points, which belong even to the foundation
and essence of faith; Of all which several Articles, if a man laboreth by
disputation to weaken but any One, then (as S. Austin Austi^ lib. 1. contra
Julian. cap. 2.
prudently admonishes) that man seeks to overthrow the whole frame of that,
which we believe in Christ. Furthermore, to recall Heretica^l men to the light
of says, or at least to repress and break their force and fury, to drive
awa^ those fierce Beasts, from our Lords sheepefold; to protect and defend the
Church of Christ; to rescue or snatch away the sheep (already taken) from the
jaws of those Wolfes, and to bring them hack unto our Lords custody; How great
(here I demand) is this Benefit, how true a cause of inward Comfort, and how
copious is here the harvest of eternal glory? But not any of these things can
be accompli^hed, but onl^ by these men, who have been long, and much conversant
in these Questions; which men by such their labors and diligence, have both
fortifyed their Cause with the munition or furniture of the Church, as also
have learned to repel, and avoid the weapons of their Enemies, and to turn
the edge of them upon the Enemies themselves. Thus far the learned and zealous
Cardinal.

But to preceede further. It is ingrafted in Man's Nature to use the more
diligence and vigilance, in oppugning and resisting his Enemies, by how much
the Enemy is more dangerous and cruel, where he overcomes From hence then,
may appear the most exitiable, and calamitous effects, which the Enemy here
by me meant (to wit Heresy) produces, where she has any Domination, and rule
over the souls of men. Now this point I will in like manner deliver in the
words of the foresaid Cardinal, who declaring the most dangerous Nature of
Heresy, (thereby to persuade his Auditors and Readers, being capable thereof,
to the study of Controuersyes of Religion, for the better and more easy
resisting or extinguishing of Heresy) thus writes: Duo ^ellar. vbi supra.
sunt, quae pestem prae caeteris morbis, merito horrendam terribilemque
efficient: Vnum etc. There are two things, which cause the plage to become more
fearful and terrible, then any other Disease, or sickness. One is, that the
plage does diffuse and send forth its venom with great have and speed, even
unto the Heart; and so in a moment of time destroys a man, being but a little
before most sound. The other effect of the Plage is, that in killing of one, it
kills many hundreds; and this is performed, in that the plage so quickly
creepes and spreades it self abroad in diverse places; so as if this day it
has infected but one house, within a short time after, it does invade the
whole City replenishing it with dead Bodies. I dipsum omnino est in animis
Haeresis, quod in corporibus pestis etc. Now look, what the plage in the Body,
the same is Heresy in the Mind, or soul: Primum Gratiae munus etc. The first
gift of Grace, which we receive from our Heavenly Father in our Conversion,
and Justification; The first pulse or Motion of a reviving or renewed Heart;
briefly the first sense, or feeling of a spiritual Life, is doubtlesly Faith.
Now from Faith the Myn^ is after by little and little stirred up to Hope; the
Will to love; the tongue bursteth forth into open Confession of true Christian
faith; and the hands are ready to the performance of works worthy a Christian.
^ow then seeing Haeresy presently aymeth at the Heart of the soul, and
proceeds so far in depriui^g hereof her gifts and privileges af Grace, as
that it laboreth to forestall or extinguish the very beginning it self of all
divine and Celestial Life; I then here demand, what pestilence can be thought
more domageable or pernicious, then Heresy?

To come to the second point: I would to God, that the Heretic did hurt but
only himself, and that he had not dispersed his poison, far and abroad. But we
find it most truly written by the 2. Tim. 2.
Apostle; J mean, that the words and speeches of Heretics, as a Canker, do
creep far, and wide. Witness of the truth hereof is this our age; For who is
ignorant, that the Lutheran pest, or plage (first being begun in Saxony) within
a short time did possess almost all Germany? and then it made its passage to
the North, and to the East. For it has already invaded Denmark, Norway,
Suctia, Gothia, Pannonia, Hungaria. Again, with the like celerity it turning
it self toward the West and the South has in a short time depopulated or
destroyed a great part of France all England and Scotland (heretofore most
flourishing kingdoms for Religion) yea it has scaled the Alps, and penetrated
as far as to Jtaly. Thus far, with great sense and feeling does the learned
Cardinal discourse of the Nature of Heresy. But to proceed to divine
Authority; from hence then we now may more clearly see, that the Apostle
speaking of Heretics, had just reason to say: Haereticum Tit. 3.
hominem etc. A man, that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition, avoid; knowing that he, that is such an one, is subverted, and
sins, being condemned by his own judgment. And again the same Apostle:
Certain 1. Timoth. 1.
men made shipwreck touching faith; And S. Austin (touching Heresy) resting
himself upon the Authority of the Apostle, thus pronounces: Nihil Austin tra.
17. in Ioan^^m.
sic formidare debet etc. A Christian ought to fear nothing so much, as to be
separated from the body of Christ, which is his church; and which is One, and
Catholic for if he be separated from the body of Christ, he is not a member of
Christ, If no mem^er of christ, then he is not strengntned with his Spirit; But
who has not the spirit of God, the same Man is not of God. Thus S. Austin.

Now then (Reverend Brethren) against these men, which are mayntayners of
Heresy, I so much desire you to employ your time and studyes. O think how
confortable a Cogitation it will be to any of you, lying upon your death beds
and how able it will be through Gods merciful acceptance thereof, to expiate
many a sin) when any of you may truly say: So many souls, which before were
infected with Error in faith and belief, and th^rein stood obnoxious for the
time to eternal perdition were by me reduced to the true Catholic and saving
faith, through the means (under God) of that small talent in Controuersyes,
which his Divine Majesty vouchsafed to bestow upon me: so as you may say of
them in the words of the Apostle, In Christ's 1. Cor. 4.
Jesu per ^uangelium vos genui.

If many years since, that war was styled and accounted most worthy and
sacred, which was undertaken by Catholic Princes and their Subjects, for the
recovery of the Holy Land, wherein Christ suffered death, and wherein were then
remaining and extant many memorialls of his Life and Passion; And if those
Princes and Soldiers were deservedly endued for such their truly Heroical and
spiritual Resolution and adventure, with many immunities and privileges by
the then Church of God; If that War being undertaken for temporal matters (I
say) was in those days reputed so honorable, as to deserve such great respect
and estimation: what shall we then conceive of this war of yours, whereby you
seek to rescue the souls of your Brethren infected with Heresy; from out the
jaws of the Devil, and to implant in them that faith, in which they only can
be saved? Therefore hold such slothful Clergy men among you (if so otherwise
God has given them sufficient capacity and apprehension) but as Paralitick
members in the Church, who by study and labor will not endeavor to be able to
perform the operations, and facultyes belonging to their profession.

And as touching such of you, as shall arrive to that perfection as to write
Books in defense of your own Religion; what consolation may it be to your
Souls, and increase of accidental glory, when your Bodies being corrupted and
turned into ashes, you neuerlesse shall daily speak (by means or your
wrytings) to posterity, instructing them in the way of Salvation? The living
acknowledge themselves much behoulden to those (though long since departed this
world) who have recorded in writing the temporal and humane Laws of their
own Country, and have cleared them with the true meaning of the first
Lawgiuers; what obligation then is due by the living to such dead men, who have
faithfully by their pens delivered and explicated the Law (not of man but of
Go^, I mean the Gospel, and undoubted faith of Christ; by the fruition of
which Law and faith, the soul arriueth to its eternal felicity, as through
the want of it, precipitately falls into everlasting damnation? And can any
kind of study, more then this, be prized?

But some of you, who are of less spiritual courage, may perhaps say: The
Laws of the Realm prohibit under great penalty all persuading to a Religion,
contrary to the present state and profession of the Realm: It is so indeed;
But withal the same Laws do prohibit your entering into the Realm, after your
taking of the Holy Order of Priesthood; will you be so ready then to expose
your Bodies to death for the one, and yet will forbear for fear of death the
other?

Again, that Statute was made by a Woman Prince, and the Laity, the
incompetent Judges in matters merely spiritual; But there is an other Statute
(so to term it) enacted by a Potentate infinitely supreme, I mean by God
himself, who thus commands us by his Apostle: Obedire Act. 5.
oportet Deo magis, quam hominibus; a Statute indeed, which ought far to
preponderate all human Statutes, or decrees. And admit you should endure death
for such your spiritual Labors (of which there is small fear, or rather
small hope, in regard of his Maiestyes most clement and merciful disposition)
were it not a happiness for you, to redeem your Sins by so glorious a death?
Furthermore, how can that be accounted death, which is suffered for him, who is
Life? Since by so doing, by ceasing to breath, you instantly begin to breath
the Joys of Heaven; and thus by sheeding of blood, you make your own Blood to
become a Key, for the opening of the Gates of Heaven: Sanguis Cyprian.
Martyrum, Clauis Paradisi. Therefore, dear Brethren, take courage and by your
studyes and pains, labor to furnish your self with all Scholerlike
preparation for the overthrowing of Heresies in the soul of men, and in place
thereof for the planting of true faith; and remember that it is said: (...), A
false faith is even worse, then Infidelity. Let those words of the Apostle
often come into your minds, and heat your own ^epedity therewith: Praedica
2. Timoth. 4.
verbum; ^usta oportune, importune; argue, obsecra, in^repa etc.

I speak not this, as if you should pro^eed either by Pen, or Dispute, in any
tu^ultuous or undutiful manner. O noe! Let things in their own nature
Religious, ^e carried withal religious manner, and bear ^ll reverence to the
State, and Loyalty to ^is Majesty, praying daily to the Allmighty ^o preserve
our King Charles (who is full of ^ommiseration and pity, and fraught with ^ll
good moral endowments) and his most ^ertuous Queen (an honor to her Sex)
that ^hey both may Enjoy two Ierusalems; I mean, true temporal felicity here
upon Earth, and eternal in Heaven; and do you often call to mind those words
of S. Paul: We (12) (^3) To. 1^.
are to be subject to higher powers, seeing there is no power but of God. But
to return back. Take to your Consideration, the great use you shall have of
your skill and knowledge in English Controversies. For first, there are ma^y
moral Protestants (both Gentilmen of worth, and others) who scorn all base
carriage toward you, with whom by the interueniency of friends you may have (as
daily experience shows) opportunity to discourse touching matters of Religion;
Many of which (as before little hearing and less believing, what the Catholics
can speak in defense of their Religion, and against theirs) will afford a
greedy and listening Ear to your speech. How large a fyeld then have you here,
wherein to plant and disseminate your own faith?

Diverse Ministers do spit their Venom out of their pulpits, in their weekly
Sermons, and Inuectiues against the Church o^ Rome, as also many Books,
written by Protestants, do yearly come out, impoysoning their Readers with
their imposture and fraud against the Catholic Religion^ And is it not then a
thing worthy of all labor, to be able to detect, and lay open the said
calumnies with your pens? Further more, Admit any of you should be apprehended
and sent to prison, what goo^ (if your knowledge in Controversies be su^ficient)
may you do in that place, to those of a different Religion, who either out of
curiosity will repair to you, to see what can be said by you in defense of
your Religion; or out of a Puritanicall and vaunting Malice of Ministers, shall
seek by dispute (hoping you are little experienced in those studyes) to
disgrace and dishonor your Religion? In proof of which point, I can affirm
out of my own knowledge, that a certain M. W. B.
Priest (a Virtuous man, and much practiced in Controversies) once taken and
sent to the Common prison, was in the beginning much assaulted by diverse
Ministers openly in the presence of the Judges of the Affises, as also after in
the Priests private Chamber; but he so bare himself in his answers and
disputes with them, and did so gaul them (like a strong bear casting of at
his pleasure, the weak and cowardly dogs, which seek to take hold of him) as
that the Judges rested much abashed thereat, commanding, that no further open
Disputation should after be had with him. He also was assaulted by some
Puritans in prison; but he gave them such entertaynment, as that they grew
quickly weary of him; so as staying a good while after in durance, he could not
have a sight of any of them. This Accident gave in that Shyre, where it
happened, great credit to the Catholic Cause, and wrought much spiritual Good.

Now, think you not, that this Priests labor was most happily and fruitfully
spent in the study of Controuersyes? And why may not then any of you upon
return into your own Country, and imprisonment, have the like opportunity
presented unto you? At what time if your talent in dispute be great and
prevailing, you get ground upon Heresy; if but small and elementary, you become
a disgrace to your Priesthood, and to your Religion, and are made a foil to
your Adversary. Therefore (worthy men) make great disquisition and search by
your own private Labors into those Controuersyes, which are at this day most
agitated between the Catholics and the Protestants, and through desire of
vanquishing your Adversaries, become even breathles therein. And though you
shall have use of other Studyes, as Cases of Conscience, and of school
Divinity (which serve chiefly to apply Universal Truths of Schools, to
particular points of Controuersyes) yet let the Study of Controuersyes be your
favorite Study; and make it become (at it were) Ars Architectonica to all the
rest. You are to become spiritual Pastors to men's souls, feeding them with
the celestial food of the Sacraments of Gods Church; yet ever remember, that
that Shephard performs his duty with the greatest perfection, who not only
preserves and keeps safe those sheep, which are already enclosed in his
folds; but labors also to reduce, and bring back to the fold, such straying
sheep, as yet lie open to the danger of the Wolves. Thus much out of my
thirsty desire of persuading you (what in me lies) to the earnest prosecution
and embracing of the foresaid Study.

But now, before I end this my Parenefis, and exhortation to you, I will make
bold (with your good lykings) briefly to s^^ down, what Course, or Method I
could wish you to take in the Studyes of Controuersyes, ever subiecting my
judgment herin, to the judgments of the more learned and better experienced
Controuersists.

1. First then I could wish you (because our Adversaries seem to rely chiefly
upon Scripture) to be much conversant in such Texts of Scripture, as are either
objected by them, for the impugning of our doctrine, or which are insisted upon
by us, for the confirmation of the same; But touching such passages of
Scripture, which we urge, it were good to make choice of those, whose true
interpretation is indifferently acknowledged, by us and our Adversaries; for
these are most pressing. Such are the Texts touching the continual visibility
of the Church of God; and of its priuiledg of converting Heathen Kings, and
Kingdoms unto it, as is above showed in some of the former Animaduersions.

2. Be most expert in the Protestant English Translation of Scripture (as is
above premonished) for this gauleth the Adversaries the more, in that they
cannot take exception against the Translation; and certainly the Scripture,
even as translated by them, most evidently foyleth their Cause.

3. Concerning those passages of Scripture, which are chiefly urged by our
Adversaries, it were necessary to observe the true interpretation of them,
either in Bellarmine his Controversies, or in the Rhemist Testament; if so they
be drawn out of the Ne^ Testament.

4. Touching the authorities of Fathers and Counsels, considering it requires
a mighty labor to read them at large, and that either your want of having
them, or want of opportunity, and time in perusing of them, may easily prevent
the same; Therefore I could wish you first to peruse them in the Tomes of
Bellarmine, and then to content your selves with the Confessions of the learned
Protestants; who openly disclayme from them, as Patrons of Papistry; which
Confessions of our Adversaries throughout all points of faith, you may easily
find in the foresaid book of the Protestants Apology.

5. I could wish you in proof of any Catholic point, to be much conversant in
Arguments drawn from Reason; because those arguments stealingly penetrate the
judgments of the unlearned, and also they are more easily committed to memory.
Again, arguments drawn from Reason may be used at all times and upon any
occasion without the help of Books, which are not ever at hand. And
furthermore the force of Reason is such, as that it is not in Man's power (after
his true apprehension thereof) to withstand in judgment, or struggle against
it, since man himself is a reasonable Creature. The Controversies of
Bellarmine will afford you all abundance of this kind of proof.

6. It is very necessary (as is delivered in one of the Animaduersions) that
you be most prepared, and well furnished in the Controversies, which consist
upon Matter of fact; Such are the foresaid mentioned points of Conversion of
Kingdoms, of the supposed continual Visibility of the Protestant Church, of
Ordination, Vocation, and Mission of Ministers in the Church of God: All which
must receive their proof from Histories. And hence it is, that our Adversaries
foreseeing, they cannot warrant from History these points to be performed in
their Church; therefore in their extremest need herein, many of them are forced
for their last refuge to say, That the true Church is endued with all these
privileges; But their Church is the true Church, as they prove (say they) from
Scripture; Therefore in their Church all the former points have been at all
times performed: A most shameful begging of that, as granted, which still is in
Question, and a subtle transition from History to the Scripture, and this, as
it is expounded only by themselves. Others again of them for the better
vindicating of their Church from the imminent danger ensuing from the
premises, are glad to shroud their Church, under our Catholic Church,
teaching that both of them are but one and the same Church (a Paradox
implicitly refuted in some of the former Animaduersions:) but Durum telum
necessitas; unto such poor shifts does penury and want bring Men.

You ought to be obseruant, what collateral points touching the Articles of
faith, we Catholics hold to be but Matters of Jndifferency, and may without
breach of faith (as not being defined by the Church) be holden either way.
These you are to distinguish, from those other Conclusions of faith, which are
inuiolably maintained and believed by all Catholics. And therefore if your
Adversary should insist in this kind of Indiffere^cy (to prove thereby a
disunion in judgment among Catholics) you may tell him, he does but
diuerberate the air, and impertinently and ignorantly urges such points which
in no sort impugn the Unity of our Catholic Church. Now to know what points
be mere Indifferencyes, I refer you to the most painifull, and learned book
called, The Triple Cord: where you shall find certain Paragraphes, reserved
only for the expressing of them, in each main Co^trouersy.

To conclude (referring the diligent Reader to diverse of the former
Animaduersions, tending to the Method of studying of Controversies; I could
desire you to be most expert in impugning the Question of the Private Spirit,
and skillful in the Judge of Controversies; since these two main points
potentially include all other Controversies within them, as a greater Circle
comprehends in it self a lesser Circle. And thus (Virtuous Men) wishing you
a most plentiful harvest in this your Spiritual tillage of souls (so to
term it) I cease; Once more most humbly beseeching you, even by that force of
Christian charity, which I presume your selves do enjoy; and by that true hope
of Mercy, which at the last day you expect as our Saviors hands, that you
would bear to me (both living and dead) a charitable and pitiful Remembrance,
at the time of your chiefest devotions; I mean, at the time of celebrating
that most Dreadful Sacrifice, wherein our Savior (by the ministry of your
selves) daily offers up his own sacred body and blood to his Heavenly
Father, for the expiating of sin in Man. And with this, I give you all my
last farewell, and shall ever remain,

Yours in all Christian, and religious Obseruancy. N. N. P.

A Table of the chief Controversies handled in this Book.
A.
A Diaphorists in Religion, who? Animad. 60. Adoration of Saints, and Angels.
Anim. 34. Adoration of the holy Eucharist. Anim. 166. Albigenses, and
Waldenses, what they were. Animad. 103. 104. Angels, how they may be painted.
Animad. 32. Antichrist, his first coming assigned by Protestants. Animad. 35.
The Pope cannot be Antichrist Animad. 153. The Antinomi, Heretics, descend
from Luther. Animad. 148. Articles of Cath. Religion maintained by Protestants.
Animad. 187. Articles negative ought to be proved by Scripture by Protestants.
Animad. 55. Atheism in many Protestants of England. Animad. 193. S. Augustine
highly extolled by Protestants. Animad. 162. The Authors vow and Prayer for the
King and Queen. Animad. 191. Cath. Authors ordinarily rejected by Protestants.
Animad. 3. 4. and 42.
B.
Beads, their use and antiquity. Anim. 83. Blessed Virgin Mary her Virginity.
An. 47 Her freeing from Original sin. Anim. 183. Her Assumption into Heaven.
Animad. 183. A Body may be in two places at once. Animad. 91.
C.
Calvin, an Enemy to the Divinity of Christ, and the B. Trinity. Anim. 138.
Caluins exposition of, Hoc est Corpus meum. Animad. 49. Carolostadius impugned
the Mass by persuasion of the Devil. Animad. 59. Catholic Religion never
changed. Animad. 79. 80. Title of Catholics, and antiquity thereof. Animad.
175. Catholics, or Protestants, whether incline more to virtue. Animad. 65.
Catholics and Protestants cannot be both saved. Animad. 176. Ceremonies derided
by Protestants and Puritans. Animad. 63. About the Ceremonies of the Mass.
Anim. 16. The Churches definition of Protestants. Animad. 192. Church of
Protestants invisible. Animad. 1922 Christian Religion plant^^ in England,
when. Animad. 36. Communion under one kind. Animad. 28.76. Comparison between
the lives of Catholics and Protestants. Animad. 188. Conference of places of
Scripture. Anim. 54. Counsels General depressed by Heretics. Animad. 50. The
Creed, whether it contains all Articles necessary of Religion. Animad. 61.
D.
ABout the Decalogue, or Ten Commandments. Animad. 30 Decrees of Popes,
fraudulently urged by Protestants. Animad. 38. 39. Deity of Christ denied. Also
the Immortality of the soul. Animad. 194. Difference between Scriptures and
Fathers. Animad. 40. Difference between Protestants themselves about
Scripture. Animad. 48. Difference between Preachers of Cathol. and Protestant
Doctrine. Animad. 160. Disputation with Protestants, how to order. Animad. 20.
and 41. Disputing with Protestants by intercourse of letters. Animad. 73.
Doctors, and Pastors always to be in the Church. Animad. 117.
E.
ELias his Example much urged by Protestants. Animad. 151. About the Holy
Eucharist. Animad. 26. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130. 165. 166. The Eye of a Man
wonderful. Animad. 196.
F.
Fabric of the world. Animad. 199. The Face of a Man admirable. Anim. 197.
Ancient Fathers their Authorities rejected ordinarily by Protestants. Animad.
3. 4. yet loath to break with them. Anim. 42. 43. Their advantages for
interpreting of Scripture. Animad. 41. Their maintayning of Papistry. Anim. 66.
The doctrine of Freewill. Animad. 133. 134. 135. 136.
G.
General Counsels depressed by Heretics. Animad. 50. God the Father, how he
may be painted. Animad. 31. 32. 33. God, the Author of sin affirmed by
Protestants. Animad. 185. Grace, what concurres in working thereof. Animad. 164.
Grecians ever emulous of the Church of Rome. Animad. 119.
H.
THe Hand of a Man wonderful. Anim 196. All Heresies arising have been recorded
by the Church of Rome. Animad 118. Heretics first denial of diverse points of
Cath Religion. Animad. 11. Heretics called after the Name of their first
Author. Animad. 77. 78. Heretics condemn Prophets, Apostles, Fathers etc.
Animad. 140. Their charge of Catholics with the errors of the Heathens. Animad.
141. Holy Water, and its Antiquity. Animad. 84. About the Hymn of Aue Maris
stella. Animad. 46.
I.
THe Jews delivered many Articles of Catholic Religion before Christ's
coming. Animad. 98. Jewish Ceremonies many still retained. Animad. 158.
Images, how they may be painted. Anim. 31. discussed by Philosophy. Animad. 33.
Jmmortality of the Soul denied, and defended. Animad. 194. About the doctrine
of Jndulgences. Animad. 171. 172. Induration of Pharao his heart. Animad. 150.
Invention of a false opinion, may be perhaps of no Heretic. Animad. 15.
Jnuisibility of the Protestants Church. Animad. 104. 139. 180. Justification
and Merit of Works. Anim. 29. Justification by only Faith. Animad. 189.
K.
OF Kings and Queens excommunicated, and deposed. Animad. 191. Knowledge of a
Deity, what? Animad. 194. Knowledge of the Soul, what? Animad. 194.
L.
LIbertines descended from Luther. Animad. 148. Evil Lives of Popes objected
by Protestants. Animad. 145. 146. Luthers Exposition of Hoc est Corpus meum.
Animad. 49. Luthers Spirit being a Catholic, and being an Heretic. Animad.
57. Luthers Change of the Mass by persuasion of the Devil. Animad. 58. 59.
Luther no perfect, and entyre Protestant. Animad. 101. Luthers doctrine why
applauded. Anim. 144.
M.
B. V. Mary her Conception immaculate. Animad. 44. The little respect
Protestants give unto unto her. Animad. 45. Less given to her by Puritans.
Anim. 47. About her Hymn of Aue Maris Stella. Animad. 46. Marks of the
Protestants Church. Anim. 13. Marriage of Priests urged by Protestants. Animad.
154. Mass, and the Antiquity thereof. Anim. 159. Merit of Works. Animad. 29.
Miracles depressed by Protestants. Animad. 70.
N.
NEcessity of the visibility of the Roman Church. Animad. 137. Neutralls in
Religion, what they hold? Animad. 60. Notes of the Church. Animad. 108. 142.
P.
PErsecution of Catholics under Q. Elizabeth. Anima. 9. Practice in
Controversies much commended. Animad. 86. Prayer to Saints. Animad. 81. Prayer
in a strange tongue. Animad. 169. Prayer needless, and fruitless with
Protestants. Animad. 186. Protestants, their slight in answering Cath. Books.
Animad. 131. Protestants, whether there were any before Luther. Animad. 109.
110. Protestants sooner become Atheists, then do Catholics. Animad. 109. What
required to a perfect Protestant. Animad. 102. Protestants would seem to agree
with the Ancient Fathers. Animad. 67. Protestants void of all real Faith.
Anim. 182. Protestants and Jews iumpe in many things. Animad. 5. Protestants
agree which ancient condemned Heretics. Animad. 6. Their false alleging of
Scriptures. Animad. 52. Protestants opposite one to another, in their writings.
Animad. 17. 18. 19. Protestants charged with a vicious Circle in their
disputes. Animad. 21. Their flying to the Private Spirit. Animad. 22. and 100.
Their little respect to the B. V. Mary. Animad. 45. 46. Protestants maintain
diverse Articles of the Cath. Faith. Animad. 187. Protestants charge Cath.
Religion with teaching disobedience to Princes. Anim. 191. Protestants
Rebellion in France, Holland, Germany etc. Animad. 191. Protestants definition
of their Church. Animad. 192. Protestants, many of them Atheistes. Animad. 193.
Protestants Inuectiues one against another. Animad. 62. ^rotestants charged
with Ancient Heresies by Catholics. Animad. 64. ^rotestants pretend their
Writings and Memory to have been extinguished by the Popes. Animad. 68.
^rotestants borrow from the Church of Rome. Animad. 94. All Protestants, or
their Forefathers sometime Catholics. Animad. 88. They cannot agree about
their own doctrines. Animad. 97. Protestancy, when it was in its full height.
Animad. 177. Puritans their dishonor of the B. V. Mary. Animad. 47. Purgatory
defended. Animad. 149.
R.
THe Reall-Presence discussed. Animad. 89. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 155. 156.
163. Reall-Presence maintained by Protestants against Puritans. Animad. 7.
Their Arguments also against the Reall-Presence. Animad. 8. Doctrine of
Recusancy taught both by Catholics and Protestants. Animad. 178. About the
Doctrine of Reprobation. Anim. 184. 190. Roman Religion never changed. Animad.
10. Roman Religion only capable of Salvation. Animad. 121.
S.
SAints to be prayed unto, lawful. Animad. 27. Salvation certain in the Cath.
Roman Religion. Animad. 71. Scripture how to be interpreted. Animad. 25. 37.
152. Difficult to be understood. Animad. 167. Why written by the Apostles.
Anim. 170. About the Sign of the Cross. Animad. 82. Soul of Man immortal.
Animad. 194. The similitude it bears to God. Anim. 200 Spirits, be an
invisible substance. Anim. 198.
T.
TRaditions unwritten impugned by Protestants. Animad. 181. Traditions known
by certain Rules. Animad. 168. Translations of the Scriptures by Protestants
corrupted. Animad. 173. 174. The doctrine of Transubstantiation. Anim. 122.
123. 124. 125. 126. 127. 128. 129. 130. Truth, how it may be delivered in
negative words. Anim. 96.
V.
THe Vbiquity of God. Animad. 93. The Virginity of our B. Lady. Anim. 47. Her
freedom from Original sin. Anim. 183. Visibility of the Roman Church proved
by the Jnuisibility of the Protestant Church. Animad. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115.
116. 180. Visibility of the Protestants Church maintained by them. Animad. 12.
Universality a strong Argument for Cath. Religion. Animad. 157. The Voice of a
Man admirable. Anim. 197.
W.
WAldenses and Albigenses, what they were (...) Animad. 103. 104. The taking of
a second Wife often an abus^ in Protestants. Animad 179. Word of God written.
Animad. 1. 2. 3. Words of Christ in the last Supper how to b^ taken. Animad.
23. 24. The Worlds existence from Eternity impugned. Animad. 195. The fabric
of the World. Animad. 199.
Z.
ZWinglius his impugning the Mass by persuasion of the Devil. Animad. 5^.
FINIS.

