THE COPY OF THE Sermon preached on Good- Friday before the Kings Majesty.

By D. ANDREWS Deane of Westminster.

VI. April 1604.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

LAMENT. IEREM.
CAP. 1.12. Have ye no Regard, o all ye that pass by the way? Consider, and
behold, If ever there were sorrow, like my Sorrow, which was done unto me,
wherewith the Lord did afflict me in the day of the fierceness of his wrath.
AT the very reading or hearing of which verse, there is none but will
presently conceive, it is the voice of a party in great extremity. A complaint.
In great extremity two ways: First, In such distress, as never was any, If
ever there were sorrow like my sorrow? And then in that distress having none
to regard him: Have ye no Regard all ye?

To be afflicted, and so afflicted, as none ever was, is very much: In that
affliction, to find none to respect him or care for him, what can be more? 1
Cor. 10.13
In all our sufferings it is a comfort to us that we have a Sicut: that
nothing has befallen us, but such as others have felt the like: But here,
Sifuerit sicut? If ever the like were (that is) never the like was.

Again in our greatest pains, it is a kind of ease, even to find some
regard. Naturally we desire it, if we cannot be delivered, if we cannot be
relieved, Job 19.21.
yet to be pitied: It shows there be yet some, that are touched with the
sense of our misery, that wish us well, and would give us ease if they could:
But this afflicted here, finds not so much, neither the one nor the other:
but is even as he were an outcast both of Heaven and Earth. Now verily a heavy
case, and worthy to be put in this book of Lamentations.

I demand then, Christ's complaint.
Of whom speaks the Prophet this? of himself, or of some other? This I
find; there is not any of the ancient writers, but do apply, yea, in a manner
appropriate this speech to our Savior CHRIST: And that this very day, the day
of his Passion, (truly termed here the day of Gods wrath:) And wheresoever
they treat of the Passion, ever this verse comes in: And (to say the truth)
to take the words strictly as they lie, they cannot agree, or be verified of
any but of him, and him only. For though some other, not unfitly, may be
allowed to say the same words: it must be in a qualified sense: for, in full
and perfect property of speech, He, and none but he: None can say, (neither
Jeremy nor any other) Si fuerit dolor sicut dolor meus, as CHRIST can: No day
of wrath, like to his day: no sorrow to be compared to his, (all are short of
it,) nor his to any, it exceeds them all.

And yet, according to the letter, it cannot be denied, but they be set down
by Jeremy, in the person of his own people, being then come to great misery,
and of the holy City, then laid waste, and desolate by the Chaldees. What then?
Ex Aegypto vocaui Filium meum. Hos. 11.1.
Out of Egypt have I called my Son, was literally spoken of this people too:
Matt. 2.15. Psalm. 22.1.
yet is by the Evangelist applied to our Savior CHRIST. My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? at the first uttered by David, yet the same words our
Savior takes to himself, Mat. 27.46.
and that more truly and properly, then ever David could: and of those of
David's, and of these of Ieremies, there is one and the same reason.

Of all which the ground is; 1 Cor. 10.1^
that correspondence which is between CHRIST and the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
People before CHRIST, of whom the Apostles rule is, Omnia in figura
contingebant illis: That they were themselves Types: and their sufferings,
forerunning figures of the great suffering of the Son of God; which makes
Isaaks offering, and Joseph's selling, and Isreal's calling from Egypt, and that
complaint of David's, and this of Ieremies, appliable to him; That he may take
them to himself, and the Church ascribe them to him, and that in more fitness
of terms, and more fullness of truth, then they were at the first spoken by
David, or Jeremy, or any of them all.

And this rule, and the steps of the Fathers proceeding by this rule, are to me
a warrant, to expound and apply this Verse (as they have done before,) to the
present occasion of this time; which requires some such Scripture to be
confidered by us, as does belong to his Passion, who this Day powered out his
most precious Blood, as the only sufficient Price, of the dear purchase of
all our Redemptions.

Be it then to us, (as to them it was, and as most properly it is) The speech
of the SON OF GOD, as this Day hanging on the Cross, to a sort of careless
people, that go up and down without any manner of Regard of these his Sorrows
and sufferings, so worthy of all Regard. Have ye no regard? o all ye that
pass by the way, Consider and behold, if ever there were sorrow, like to my
sorrow, which was done unto me, wherewith the Lord afflicted me in the day of
the fierceness of his wrath. Here is a Complaint, and here is a Request. A
complaint, that we have not: The Parts.
A request, that we would have the Pains and Passions of our Savior CHRIST in
some Regard. For first he complains (and not without cause) Have ye no
regard? And then (as willing to forget their former neglect, so they will yet
do it) he falls to entreat, o consider and behold!

And what is that we should Consider? The Sorrow which he suffers: and in
it, two things: The Quality, and the Cause. 1. The Quality, Si fuerit sicut: If
ever the like were; And that either in respect of Dolor, or Dolor meus. The
Sorrow suffered, or the Person suffering. 2. The Cause: that is God, that in
his wrath, in his fierce wrath, does all this to Him, which cause will not
leave us, till it have led us to another cause in our selves, and to another
yet in him; All which serve to ripen us to Regard.

These two then specially we are moved to Regard. 1. Regard is the maine
point. But because therefore we Regard but faintly, because either we
Consider not, or not aright; we are called to consider seriously of them. As if
he should say, Regard you not? If you did Consider, you would: if you
Considered as you should, you would Regard as you ought. Certainly the
Passion, if it were thoroughly Considered, would be duly Regarded. Consider
then.

So the points are two: The Quality, and the Cause of his suffering: and the
duties two: To Consider, and Regard. So to consider, that we Regard them, and
him for them.

Have ye no Regard? etc.
TO cease this Complaint, and to grant this Request; we are to Regard: and
that we may Regard, we are to Consider the pains of his Passion. The parties
to whom.
Which, that we may reckon no easy common matter of light moment, to do, or
not do, as we list: First, O all ye that pass by the way, Consuler
a general stay is made of all passengers, this day. For (as it were from his
Cross) does our Savior address this his speech to them that go to and fro,
the day of his Passion, without so much as entertaining a thought, or
vouchsafing a look that way. O vos qui transitis! O you that pass by the way,
stay and Consider: To them frames he his speech, that pass by: To them, and
to them all. O vos omnes, qui transitis, O all ye that pass by the way, stay
and Consider.

Which very stay of his, shows it to be some important matter, in that it is,
of all. For as for some to be stayed, and those the greater some, there may be
reason; the most part of those that go thus to and fro, may well intend it,
they have little else to do. But to except none, not some special Person, is
hard. What know we their haste? Their occasions may be such, and so urgent, as
they cannot stay Well, what haste, what business soever, pass not by, stay
though. As much to say, as Be they never so great, your occasions; they are
not, they cannot be so great as this: How urgent soever, this is more, and more
to be intended. The regard of this, is worthy the staying of a lourney. It is
worth the Considering of those, that have never so great affairs in hand. So
material is this sight in his account; which serves to show the exigence of
this duty. But as for this point it needs not to be stood upon to us here at
this time: we are not going by, we need not to be stayed; we have stayed all
other our affairs, to come hither, and here we are all present before God, to
have it set before us, that we may consider it. Thither then let us come.

That which we are called to behold and consider, is his Sorrow: Sorrow.
And Sorrow is a thing which of it self Nature enclineth us to behold, as being
our selves in the body, Heb. 13.3.
which may be one day in the like sorrowful case. Therefore will every good
eye turn it self, 1. Behold. Luke 10.32.
and look upon them that lie in distress. Those two in the Gospel, that
passed by the wounded man, before they passed by him, (though they helped him
not as the Samaritane did) yet they looked upon him as he lay. But this party
here, lies not, John 3.14.
he is lift up as the Serpent in the wilderness, that unless we turn our eyes
away purposely, we can neither will nor choose, but behold him.

But because to Behold, Acts 1.11.
and not to Consider, is but to gaze; And gazing the Angel blames in the
Apostles themselves, we must do both: both Behold, 2. Consider.
and Consider: look upon, with the cie of the body, that is, Behold; and
look into, with the eye of the mind, that is, Consider. So says the Prophet
here. And the very same does the Apostle advise us to do, Heb. 12.23.
First, (...), to look upon him, (that is, to Behold) and then (...), to
think upon him, that is, to Consider his Sorrow: Sorrow sure would be
considered.

Now then, The quality, If ever the like.
because as the quality of the Sorrow is, accordingly it would be considered,
(for if it be but a common sorrow, the less will serve, but if it be some
special, so me very heavy case, the more would be allowed it: for
proportionably with the suffering, the consideration is to arise:) To raise our
consideration to the full, and to eleuate it to the highest point, there is
upon his Sorrow set a Si fuerit sicut, a note of highest eminency: for Si
fuerit sicut, are words that have life in them, and are able to quicken our
consideration, if it be not quite dead: For, by them we are provoked, as it
were to Consider, and considering, to see whether ever any Sicut may be
found, to set by it, whether ever any like it.

For if never any, Our nature is, to regard things exceeding rare and strange;
and such as the like whereof is not else to be seen. Upon this point then,
there is a Case made, As if he should say, If ever the like, Regard not this;
But if never any, Be like your selves in other things, and vouchsafe this,
(if not your cheifest,) yet some Regard.

To enter then this Comparison, In the three parts of his Sorrow.
and to show it for such. That, are we to do, three sundry ways: For three
sundry ways, in three sundry words, are these Sufferings of his here
expressed: all three within the compass of the Verse.

Mac^-ob (which we read Sorrow,) taken from a wound or stripe, as all do
agree.

Done to me, taken from a word that signifies Melting in a furnace; as S.
Hierom notes out of the Chaldaee (who so translateth it.)

Afflicted, from a word which imports Renting off or Bereauing. The old
Latin turns it, Vindemiauit me, As a Vine whose fruit is all plucked off.
The Greek with Theodoret, (...), as a Vine or tree, whose leaves are all
beaten off, and it left naked and bare.

In these three are comprised his Sufferings, Wounded, Melted, and Bereft,
leaf and fruit (that is) all manner of comfort.

Of all that is poenall, Of the quality.
or can be suffered, the common division is, Sensus and Damni, Grief for that
we feel, First of the quality of his Passion.
or for that we forgo. For that we feel, in the two former, Wounded in body,
Melted in soul: for that we forgo, in the last; Bereft all, left neither
fruit, nor so much as a leaf to hang on him.

According to these three, P^na sensus in the body.
To consider his Sufferings, and to begin first with the first. The pains of
his Body, his wounds and his stripes.

Our very eye will soon tell us, No place was left in his Body, where he
might be smitten, and was not. His skin and flesh rent with the whips and
scourges, His hands and feet wounded with the nails, His head with the thorns,
His very heart with the spear point; All his senses, all his parts laden with
whatsoever wit or malice could invent His blessed Body given as an Anuile to be
beaten upon, with the violent hands of those barbarous miscreants, till they
brought him into this case, of Si fuerit sicut. For Pilates (Ecce Homo!) Ioh.
19.5.
His showing him with an Ecce, as if he should say, Behold, look if ever you
saw the like ruefull spectacle; This very showing of his shows plainly, he
was then come into woeful plight: So woeful, as Pilate verily believed, his
very sight so pitiful, as, it would have moved the hardest heart of them all
to have relented, and said, This is enough, we desire no more. And this for the
wounds of his body, (for on this we stand not.)

In this one peradventure some Sicut may be found, in the Pains of the body:
Poena sensus in the Soul.
but in the second, the Sorrow of the Soul, I am sure, none. And indeed, the
Pain of the Body is but the Body of pain: the very soul of Sorrow and Pain
is the souls Sorrow and Pain. Give me any griese, Syra. 15.57.
save the grief of the mind, says the wiseman, For (says Solomon) the
spirit of a man will sustain all his other infirmities, P^o. 18.14.
but a wounded spirit, who can bear? And of this, this of his soul, I dare
make a Case, Si fuerit sicut.

He began to be troubled in Soul, Ioh. 12.27. Luke 22.44.
says S. John: To be in an agony, says S. Luke: To be in anguish of mind
and deep distress, Mar. 14.35. Matt. 26.38.
says S. Mark. To have his Soul round about on every side environed with
Sorrow, and that, Sorrow to the death: Here is trouble, anguish, agony,
sorrow and deadly sorrow: but it must be such, as never the like; So it was
too.

The aestimate whereof we may take from the second word, of Melting, that is,
from his sweat in the Garden; strange, and the like whereof was ueuer heard or
seen. Luke 22.44.


No manner violence offered him in body; no man touching him, or being near him,
in a cold night (for they were feign to have a fire within doors) lying
abroad in the air, and upon the cold earth, to be all of a sweat, and that
Sweat to be Blood; and not as they call it, Diaphoreticus, a thin faint
Sweat; but Grumosus, of great Drops, and those, so many, so plenteous, as they
went through his apparel and an; and through all, streamed to the ground, and
that in great abundance; Read, Enquire, and Consider, Si fuerit sudor, sicut
sudor iste; If ever there were Sweat like this Sweat of his? Never the like
Sweat certainly, and therefore never the like Sorrow. Our translation is, Done
unto me: but we said, the word properly signifies (and so S. Hierome and the
Chaldey Paraphrast read it) Meltedme. And truly it should seem by this
fearful Sweat of his, he was near some furnace, the feeling whereof, was
able to cast him into that Sweat, and to turn his Sweat into drops of Blood.
And sure it was so: For see, even in the very next words of all to this verse,
he complains of it, Verse 13.
Ignem misit in ossibus meis, That a fire was sent into his bones which melted
him, and made that bloody Sweat to distill from him. That hour, what his
feelings were, it is dangerous to define: we know them not, we may be too bold
to determine of them. To very good purpose it was, that the ancient Fathers of
the Greek Church in their Liturgy, after they have recounted all the
particular Pains as they are set down in his Passion, and by all, and by
every one of them, called for mercy; do, after all, shut up all with this,
(...), By thine unknown Sorrows and Sufferings felt by thee, but not
distinctly known by us, have mercy upon us and save us.

Now, though this suffice not, nothing near; yet let it suffice, (the time
being short) for his pains of Body and Soul. for those of the Body, it may be
some may have endured the like: but the sorrows of his Soul are unknown
sorrows: and for them, none ever have; ever have, or ever shall suffer the
like; the like, or near the like in any degree.

And now to the third. Pana Dam^i.
It was said before, To be in distress, such distress as this was, and to
find none to comfort, nay not so much as to regard him, is all that can be
said, to make his sorrow a Nonsicut. Comfort is it, by which in the midst of
all our sorrows, we are Confortati, that is, strengthened and made the better
able to bear them all out. And who is there, even the poorest creature among
us, but in some degree finds some comfort, or some regard at some bodies
hands? For if that be not left, the state of that party is here in the third
word said to be like the tree, whose leaves and whose fruit are all beaten off
quite, and it self left bare and naked both of the one and of the other.

Leaves.
and that so, as what is left the meanest of the sons of men was not left him:
Not a leaf. Not a leaf! Leaves I may well call all humane Comforts and
Regards, Withered leaves.
whereof he was then left clean desolate. 1. His own, they among whom he had
gone about all his life long, healing them, teaching them, feeding them, doing
them all the good he could, Ioh. 18.40. and 19.15. Mat. 27.25. Mar. 15.29.36.
it is they that cry, Not him, no, but Barabbas rather; Away with him, his
blood be upon us and our children. It is they that in the midst of his
sorrows, shake their head at him; and cry, Ah thou wretch: they that in his
most disconsolate estate and cry, Eli, Eli, in most barbarous manner deride
him, and say, Stay, and you shall see Elias come presently and take him down.
And this was their Regard.

But these were but withered leaves. Green leaves.
They then that on earth were nearest him of all, the greenest leaves and
likest to hang on, and to give him some shade: even of them, some bought and
sold him, others denied and forswore him, but all fell away and forsook him.
(...) (says Theodoret) not a leaf left.

But, leaves are but leaves, Fruit.
and so are all earthly stays. The fruit then, the true fruit of the Vine
indeed, the true comfort in all heaviness, is Desuper, from above, is divine
consolation. But Vindemiauit me, (says the Latin Text) even that was in this
his sorrow, this day, bereft him too. And that was his most sorrowful
complaint of all others: not that his friends upon earth, but that his Father
from Heaven had forsaken him, that neither heaven nor earth yielded him any
regard; but that between the passioned powers of his soul, and whatsoever
might any ways refresh him, there was a Trauerse drawn, and he left in the
estate of a weather-beaten tree, all desolate and forlorn. Evident, too
evident, by that his most dreadful cry, which at once moved all the powers in
heaven and earth, Mat 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Weigh well that cry, consider it well
and tell me, Si fuerit clamor sicut clamor iste, if ever there were cry, like
to that of his: never the like cry, and therefore never the like sorrow.

It is strange, very strange, that of none of the Martyrs the like can be read;
who yet endured most exquisite pains in their Martyrdomes; yet we see with
what courage, with what cheerfulness, how even singing they are reported to
have passed through their torments. Will ye know the reason? S. Augustine
sets it down, Martyrs non eripuit, sed nunquid deseruit? He delivered not
his Martyrs, but did he forsake them? He delivered not their bodies, but he
forsook not their souls, but distilled into them the dew of his heavenly
comfort; an abundant supply for all they could endure. Not so here,
Vindemiauit me (says the Prophet) Dereliquisti me (says he himself:) No
comfort, no supply at all.

Leo it is that first said it, (and all antiquity allow of it,) Non soluit
vnionem, sed subtraxit visionem. The union was not dissolved; True, but the
beams, the influence was restrained, and for any comfort from thence, his
Soul was, even as a scorched heath-ground, without so much as any drop of dew
of Divine comfort: as a naked tree, no fruit to refresh him within, no leaf to
give him shadow without: The power of darkness let loose to afflict him: The
influence of comfort, restrained to relieve him. It is a Non sicut this, It
cannot be expressed as it should, and as other things may; In silence we may
admire it, but all our words will not reach it. And though to draw it so far
as some do, is little better then blasphemy; Yet on the other side, to shrink
it so short, as other some do, cannot be but with derogation to his love, who
to kindle our love and loving Regard, would come to a Non sicut in his
suffering: For, so it was, and so we must allow it to be. This in respect of
his Passion. Dolor.

Now in respect of his Person, Secondly, of the quality of his person.
Dolor meus. Whereof, if it please you to take a view, even of the person thus
wounded, thus afflicted and forsaken, you shall then have a perfect Non siout.
And in deed, the Person is here a weighty circumstance, it is thrice
repeated, Meus, Mihi, Me. And we may not leave it out. For, as is the Person,
so is the Passion; and any one, even the very least degree of wrong or
disgrace, offered to a Person of excellency, is more then an hundredth times
more, to one of mean condition: So weighty is the circumstance of the Person.
Consider then, how great the Person was; And I rest fully assured, here we
boldly challenge, and say, Si fuerit sicut.

Ecce Homo, Ioh. 19.5.
says Pilate first, A man he is, as we are: and were he but a man, Nay, were
he not a man, but some poor dumb creature, it were great ruth to see him so
handled, as he was.

A man, Mat. 27.19.
says Pilate, and a Just man. says Pilates wife. Have thou nothing to do
with that Just man. And that is one degree further. For though we pity the
punishment even of malefactors themselves: yet ever, most compassion we have
of them that suffer, and be innocent. And he was Innocent: Pilate and Herod,
Luke 23.14. and 15. Ioh. 14.30.
and the Prince of this world, his very enemies, being his Judges.

Now, among the Innocent, Alas, alas for that Noble Prince, Ier. 22.18.
(says this Prophet,) (the style of mourning for the death of a great
Personage.) And, he that suffers here, is such, even a principal Person
among the sons of men, of the race royal, descended from Kings; Ioh. 19.22.
Pilate styled him so in his Title; and he would not alter it.

Three degrees. But, Quantus. For he is yet more: More, then the highest of
the sons of men: Ioh. 19.5. Mar. 15.39.
for he is THE SON OF THE MOST HIGH GOD. Pilate saw no further, but Ecce
Homo; The Centurion did, Vere Filius Dei erat hic. Now truly this was the
Son of God. And here, all words forsake us, and every tongue becomes
speechless.

We have no way to express it, but a Minore ad Maius. (Thus,) Of this book,
the book of Lamentations, one special occasion was, the death of King Josias:
But behold, a greater then Josias is here.

Of King Josias (as a special reason of mourning) the Prophet says, Cap. 4.10.
Spiritus oris nostri, Christus Domini, The very breath of our nostrills, The
Lords Anointed; (for so are all good Kings in their Subjects accounts) He is
gone. But behold, here is not Christus Domini, but Christus Dominus, The Lords
CHRIST, but the Lord CHRIST himself: And that, not coming to an Honorable
death in battle, as Josias did, But, to a most vile reproachful death, the
death of malefactors in the highest degree. And not slain outright as Josias
was: but mangled and massacred in most pitiful strange manner, wounded in
body, wounded in Spirit, left utterly desolate. O consider this well, and
confess the Case is truly put, Si fuerit Dolor sicut Dolor meus. Never, never
the like Person: And if, as the Person is, the Passion be, Never the like
Passion to his.

It is truly affirmed, that any one, even the least drop of Blood, even the
least pain, yea of the body only, of this so great a Person; any Dolor with
this Meus, had been enough to make a Non sicut of it. That is enough, but that
is not all: for add now the three other degrees; Add to this Person, those
Wounds, that Sweat, and that Cry, and put all together: And, I make no manner
question, the like was not, shall not, cannot ever be. It is far above all
that ever were, or can be. Abyssus est: Men may drowsily hear it, and coldly
affect it: But Principalities and Powers, stand abashed at it. And for the
Quality, both of the Passion and of the Person, That Never the like; thus much.

NOw to proceed to the the Cause, and to consider it: Of the cause.
we shall have but half a Regard, and scarce that. In deed, set the Cause
aside, and the Passion (as rare as it is,) is yet but a dull and heavy sight:
we list not much look upon spectacles of that kind, though never so strange:
they fill us full of pensive thoughts, and make us Melancholique; and so does
this, till upon examination of the Cause, we find it touches us near; And so
near so many ways, as we cannot choose, but have some Regard of it.

What was done to Him we see. GOD.
Let there now be a Quest of Inquiry, to find who was doer of it. Who? who,
but the Power of darkness, wicked Pilate, bloody Caiaphas, the envious
Priests, the barbarous Soldiers? None of these are returned here. We are too
low, by a great deal, if we think to find it among men. Quae fecit mihi
Deus. It was God that did it. An hour of that day was the hour of the power
of darkness: Luke 22.53.
but the whole day it self, is said here plainly, was the day of the wrath
of God. God was a doer in it; Wherewith God has afflicted me.

God afflicts some in Mercy: Gods wrath.
and others in wrath. This was in his wrath. In his wrath God is not alike to
all; Some he afflicts in his more gentle and mild; others in his fierce
wrath. This was in the very fierceness of his wrath. His Sufferings, his Sweat
and Cry, show as much; They could not come, but from a wrath, Si fuerit sicut,
(For we are not past Non sicut, no not here in this part: it follows us
still, and will not leave us in any point, not to the end.)

The Cause then in God, Sin.
was wrath. What caused this wrath? God is not wroth, but with sin; Nor
grievously wroth, but with grievous sin. And in CHRIST there was no grievous
sin, Not his.
Nay, no sin at all. God did it, (the text is plain.) And in his fierce
wrath he did it. Ioh. 18.22.
For what cause? For God forbid God should do as did Annas the high Priest,
cause him to be smitten without cause. God forbid (says Abraham) the Judge of
the world should do wrong to any. To any, Genesis 18.25.
but specially to his own Son: That his Son, of whom with thundering voice
from Heaven, he testifies all his joy and delight were in him, in him only he
was well pleased. And how then could his wrath wax hot, to do all this unto
him?

There is no way to preserve Gods Justice, and Christ's Innocence both, but to
say as the Angel said of him to the Prophet Daniel, The Messiah shall be
slain, (...)ve en lo, shall be slain, Dan. 9.26.
but not for himself. Not for himself? for whom then? for some others. Other
men's.
He took upon him the person of others; and so doing, Justice may have her
course and proceed.

Pity it is to see a man pay that he never took: but if he will become a
Surety, if he will take on him the Person of the Debtor, so he must. Pity to
see a silly poor Lamb lie bleeding to death; but if it must be a sacrifice
(such is the nature of a sacrifice) so it must. And so Christ, though without
sin in himself, yet as a Surety, as a Sacrifice, may justly suffer for others,
if he will take upon him their persons; and so, God may justly give way to his
wrath against him.

And who be those others? Ours.
The Prophet Esaias tells us, and tells it us seven times over for failing,
Esa. 53.4.5.6.
He took upon him our infirmities, and bare our maladies: He was wounded for
our iniquities, and broken for our transgressions. The chastizement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes were we healed. All we as sheep were
gone astray, and turned every man to his own way: and the Lord has laid upon
him the iniquities of us all. All, all, even those that pass to and fro, and
for all this, Regard neither him nor his Passion.

The short is: It was we, that for our sins, our many, great, and grievous
sins, (Si fuerit sicut) the like whereof never were) should have swet this
Sweat, and have cried this Cry; should have been smitten with these sorrows by
the fierce wrath of God, had not he stepped between the blow and us, and
latched it in his own body and soul, even the dint of the fierceness of the
wrath of God. O the Non sicut of our sins, that could not otherwise be
answered!

To return then a true verdict. It is we, (we wretched sinners that we are)
that are to be found the principalls in this act; and those on whom we seek
to shift it, to derive it from our selves, Pilate and Caiaphas and the rest,
but isntrumental causes only. And it is not the executioner that kills the
man properly, (that is, They:) No, nor the Judge, (which is God in this case:)
only sin, Solum peccatum homicida est, Sin only is the murderer, (to say
the truth;) and our sins the murderers of the Son of God: and the Non
sicut of them, the true cause of the Nonsicut both of Gods wrath, and of his
sorrowful sufferings.

Which brings home this our text to us, even into our own bosoms; and
applies it most effectually, to me that speak, and to you that hear, to
every one of us; and that with the Prophet Nathans application; Tu es homo, 2 Samuel 12.7.
Thou art the Man, even thou, for whom God in his fierce wrath thus afflicted
him. Sin then was the cause on our part, Why we, or some other for us.

But yet, Love of us.
what was the cause why He on his part? what was that that moved him thus to
become our Surety, and to take upon him our debt and danger? that moved him
thus to lay down his Soul, a sacrifice for our sin? Sure, Oblatus est quia
voluit, says Esaias again, Esa. 53.7.
Offered he was for no other cause, but because he would. For unless he would,
he needed not: Needed not, for any necessity of Justice; for no Lamb was ever
more innocent: Not for any necessity of constraint; For twelve legions of
Angels were ready at his command: But, because he would.

And why would he? No reason can be given, but, because he Regarded us:
(Mark that reason.) And what were we? Verily, utterly unworthy even his least
regard; not worth the taking up, Romans 5.8.
not worth the looking after. Cuminimici essemus, (says the Apostle) we were
his enemies when he did it; without all desert before, and without all regard
after he had done and suffered all this for us: and yet he would Regard us,
that so little regard him. For when he saw us (a sort of forlorn sinners) Non
prius natos, Ephesians. 2.3.
quam damnatos, Damned as fast as born, as being by nature children of wrath,
and yet still heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
by the errors of our life, till the time of our passing hence: and then the
fierce wrath of God, ready to ouerwhelme us, and to make us endure the terror
and torments of a neuer-dying death, (another Non sicut yet) When (I say) he
saw us in this case, he was moved with compassion over us, and undertook all
this for us. Even then, in his love he regarded us, and so regarded us, that he
regarded not himself, to regard us.

Bernard says most truly, Dilexisti me Domine, magis quam te, quando mori
voluisti prome: In suffering all this for us, thou shewedst (Lord) that we were
more dear to thee, that thou regardest us more, then thine own self: And
shall this Regard find no regard at our hands?

It was Sin then, and the heinousness of Sin in us, that provoked wrath
and the fierceness of his wrath in God: It was love, and the greatness of his
love in CHRIST, that caused him to suffer the Sorrows, and the greeuousnes of
these Sorrows, and all for our sakes.

And indeed, but only to testify the Non sicut of this his Love, all this
needed not, that was done to him. One, any one, even the very least of all the
pains he endured, had been enough; enough, in respect of the Meus: enough,
in respect of the Non sicut of his Person. For that which sets the high
price on this Sacrifice, is this; That he which offers it unto God, is God.
But if little had been suffered, little would the Love have been thought, that
suffered so little; and as little Regard would have been had of it. To awake our
Regard then, or to leave us excuselesse, if we continue regardlesse; all this
he bare for us: that he might as truly make a Case of Sifuerit Amor, sicut
Amor meus, as he did before, of Si fuerit Dolor, sicut Dolor meus. We say we
will Regard Love, if we will, here it is to Regard.

So have we the Causes all three: Wrath in God: Sin in our selves: Love in
Him.

Yet have we not all we should. Our benefit by it. Pertain it not to us?
For, what of all this? What good? Cui bono? That, that is it indeed that we
will Regard, if any thing: as being matter of Benefit, the only thing in a
manner the world regards, which brings us about to the very first words
again. For, the very first words which we read, Have ye no regard? are in
the Original, (...) lo alechem, which the Seventy turn (word for word)
(...), and the Latin likewise, Nonne ad vos pertinet? Pertaines it not to you,
that you Regard it no better? For these two, Pertaining, and Regarding, are
folded one in another, and go together so commonly, as one is taken often for
the other. Then to besure to bring us to Regard, he urges this. Pertaines not
all this to you? Is it not for your good? Is not the benefit yours? Matters of
benefit they partaine to you, and without them, Love, and all the rest may
pertain to whom they will.

Consider then, the inestimable benefit that grows unto you, from this
incomparable Love. It is not impertinent this; Even this; That to us hereby,
all is turned about clean contrary: That by his Stripes, we are healed: 2
Cor. 6.2.
by his Sweat, we refreshed: By his forsaking, we received to Grace. That
this day, to Him the day of the fierceness of Gods wrath: is to us the Day of
the fullness of Gods favor, (as the Apostle calls it) A Day of Salvation. In
respect of that he suffered, (I deny not) an evil day: a day of heaviness:
But, in respect of that, which He, by it has obtained for us: It is, (as we
truly call it, (A good Day, a Day of Joy and Iubilee. For it does not only
rid us of that wrath, which pertained to us for our Sins: but further it
makes that pertain to us whereto we had no manner of right at all.

For, not only by his death, as by the death of our sacrifice, by the blood of
his Cross, as by the blood of the Paschal Lamb; the Destroyer passes over
us, and we shall not perish: Exodus 12.15
But also by his death as by the death of our High Priest (for he is Priest and
Sacrifice both) we are restored from our exile, Number. 15.28
even to our former forfeited estate in the land of Promise. Or rather (as the
Apostle says) Non sicut delictum sic donum: Not to the same estate, Romans 8.15.
but to one nothing like it: (that is) One far better, then the estate our
sins bereft us: For they deprived us of Paradise, a place on earth: but by
the purchase of his blood, we are entitled to a far higher, even the kingdom
of Heaven: and his blood, Mat. 26.28.
not only the blood of Remission to acquit us of our sins; but the blood of
the Testament too, to bequeath us, and give us estate, In that heavenly
inheritance.

Now whatsoever else, this (I am sure) is a Non sicut: as that which the eye,
by all it can see; the ear, by all it can hear; the heart by all it can
conceive, cannot pattern it, or set the like by it. Pertaines not this unto us
neither? Is not this worth the regard? Sure if any thing be worthy the regard,
this is most worthy of our very worthiest and best regard.

Thus have we considered and seen, The recapitulation of all.
not so much as in this sight we might or should, but as much as the time will
give us leave. And now, lay all these before you, (every one of them a Non
sicut of it self) the pains of his Pody, esteemed by Pilates Ecce; the
sorrows of his Soul, by his sweat in the Garden; the comfortless estate of
his sorrows, by his cry on the Cross: And with these, his Person, as being
the Son of the great and Eternal God. Then join to these, the Cause: In
God, his fierce wrath: In us, our heinous sins deserving it: In him, his
exceeding great Love, both suffering that for us which we had deserved; and
procuring for us, that we could never deserve: making that to appertain to
himself, which of right pertained to us; and making that pertain to us, which
pertained to him only, and not to us at all, but by his means alone. And
after their view in several, lay them all together, so many Non sicuts into
one, and tell me, if his Complaint be not just, and his request most
reasonable.

Yes sure, his Complaint is just, The complaint. The matter Just.
Have ye no Regard? None? and yet never the like? None and it pertaines unto
you? No Regard? As if it were some common ordinary matter, and the like never
was? No Regard? As if it concerned you not a whit, and it touches you so
near? As if he should say: Rare things you regard, yea though they no ways
pertain to you; this is exceeding rare, and will you not regard it? Again,
things that nearly touch you, you regard, though they be not rare at all; this
touches you exceeding near, even as near as your soul touches you, and
will you no^, yet regard it? will neither of these by it self, move you? will
not both these together move you? what will move you? will Pity, Here is
Distress, Never the like: will Duty? here is a Person, never the like: will
Fear? here is wrath, never the like: will Remorse? here are sins, never the
like: will Kindness? here is Love, never the like: will bounty? here are
Benefits, never the like: will all these? here they be all, all above any
Sicut, all in the highest degree.

Truly the Complaint is Just, (...)
it may move us: it wants no reason, it may move: and it wants no
affection in the delivery of it to us, on his part to move us. Sure it moved
him exceeding much, for among all the deadly sorrows of his most bitter
Passion, This, even this seems to be his greatest of all, and that which did
most affect him, even the grief of the slender reckoning most men have it in;
as little respecting him, as if he had done, or suffered nothing at all for
them. For lo, of all the sharp pains he endures, he complains not but of
this he complains, of No Regard: That which greeueth him most, that, which
most he moaneth, is this. It is strange, he should be in pains, such pains as
never any was, and not complain himself of them, But, of want of regard
only. Strange, he should not make request, O Deliver me, or Relieve me: But
only, O Consider and Regard me. In effect, as if he said, None, no
deliverance, no relief do I seek: Regard I seek. And all that I suffer, I am
content with it: I regard it not: I suffer most willingly, if this I may find
at your hands, Regard.

Truly, The regard of the Creatures of it.
This so passionate a Complaint may move us; it moved all but us: For most
strange of all it is, that all the Creatures in heaven and earth, seemed to
hear this his mournful Complaint, and in their kind, to show their Regard of
it: The Sun in heaven shrinking in his light: the earth trembling under it;
the very stones cleaving in sunder, as if they had sense and Sympathy of it:
and sinful men only, not moved with it. And yet it was not for the
Creatures, this was done to Him, to them it pertains not: But for us it was,
and to us it does; And shall we not yet Regard it? Shall the Creature, and not
we? Shall we not?

If we do not, it may pertain to us, The benefit, if
but we pertain not to it: It pertaines to all, but all pertain not to it.
None pertain to it, but they that take benefit by it; and none take benefit by
it, no more then by the brazen Serpent, but they that fix their eye on it.
Behold, Consider, and Regard it: the profit, the benefit is lost without Regard.

If we do not, The peril, (...) not.
as this was a day of Gods fierce wrath against him, only for regarding us; so
there is another day coming, and it will quickly be here, a day of like
fierce wrath against us, Psalm. 90.11.
for not regarding him. And who regards the power of this wrath? He that does
will surely Regard this.

In that day, there is not the most careless of us all, but shall cry as they
did in the Gospel, Domine, Mark. 4.38.
non ad te pertinet, si perimus? Pertaines it not to thee, Carest thou not that
we perish? Then would we be glad to pertain to him, and his Passion.
Pertaines it to us then, and pertaines it not now? Sure now it must, if then it
shall.

Then, The Request. H^^e some Regard.
to give end to this Complaint, let us grant him his request, and Regard his
Passion. Let the Rareness of it: The Neerenesse to us: Let Pity, or Duty:
Fear, or Remorse: Love, or Bounty Any of them, or all of them. Let the
justness of his Complaint: Let his affectionate manner of Complaining of this,
and only this. Let the shame of the Creatures Regard. Let our Profit, or our
Peril. Let some thing prevail with us, to have it in some Regard.

Some Regard! Verily, as his sufferings, Our best stegard.
his Love, our good by them are: so should our Regard be, a Non sicut too, That
is, a Regard of these, and of nothing in comparison of these. It should be so:
For with the benefit, ever the Regard should arise.

But God help us poor sinners, and be merciful unto us. Our Regard is a Non
sicut, indeed: but it is backward, and in a contrary sense; That is, no where
so shallow, so short, or so soon done. It should be otherwise, it should have
our deepest consideration, this; and our highest Regard.

But if that cannot be had, At least, some Regard.
(our nature is so heavy, and flesh and blood so dull of apprehension in
Spiritual things,) yet at least wise some Regard. Some, I say: The more the
better; But in any wise some. And not as here, No Regard, none at all: Some
ways to show, we make account of it, to withdraw our selves, to void our
minds of other matters, to set this before us, to think upon it, to thank
him for it; to regard him, and stay and see, whether he will regard us, or no.
Sure he will, Acts 2.37.
and we shall feel our hearts pricked with sorrow, by consideration of the
cause in us, our sin: And again, Luke 24.32.
warm within us, by consideration of the cause in him, his Love; till by some
motion of Grace he answer us, and show, that our Regard is accepted of him.
This Day specially.
And this, as at all other times, (for no day is amiss, but at all times,
sometime to be taken for this duty) so specially on this Day; this Day which
we hold holy to the memory of his Passion, this day to do it; to make this
Day, the Day of Gods wrath and CHRIST'S suffering, a Day to us of serious
consideration and Regard of them both.

It is kindly to consider Opus diei, in die suo, The work of the Day, in the
Day it was wrought: and this day it was wrought. This Day therefore, whatsoever
business be, to lay them aside a little; whatsoever our haste, yet to stay a
little, and to spend a few thoughts in calling to mind and taking to Regard,
what this day the Son of God did and suffered for us: and all for this end,
that what he was then, we might not be; and what he is now, we might be for
ever.

Which, Almighty God grant we may do, more or less, even every one of us,
according to the several measures of his grace in us, etc.

Concio Latin habita CORAM REGIA MAIESTATE, quinto Augusti 1606. in Aula
Grenuici:

Quo tempore venerat in Angliam, Regem nostrum inuisurus, Serenissimus
Potentissimusque Princeps CHRISTIANVS quartus, Daniae and Noruegiae Rex.

Ab Episcopo Cicestriensi Eleemosynario Regio.

LONDINI, Excude bat Robertus Barkerus, Serenissimae Regiae Maiestatis
Typographus.


