CERTAIN DEMANDES WITH their grounds, drawn out of holy Writ, and propounded
in foro conscientiae by some religious Gen^tl. unto the reverend Fathers,
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of London, William Bishop of
Lincoln, Garvase Bishop of Worcester, William Bishop of Exeter, and Thomas
Bishop of Peterbourough, whereunto the said Gentl. require that it would please
their Lordships to make a true, plain, direct, honest and resolute answer.

Isai. 66. 5. Hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his word, your
brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my Names sake, said, let the Lord
be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

Ier. 23. 27 Think they to cause my people to forget my Name by their dreams,
which they tell every man to his neighbor, as their forefathers have forgotten
my Name, for Baall?

Isai. 8. 16. Bind up the Testimony: seal up the Law among my disciples.

Isai. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word: it is because there is no light in them.

1605.

To the Reverend Fathers, etc.
RIght Reverend Fathers, your Lordships having been a long time Divinity
Readers in the schole of Christ, and some of us also, a long time scholars
brought up in the same schole at your feet, give us leave, we pray you, by way
of Question, and not of Definition, to propound these Demaundes following. And
as we briefly and plainly have opposed, so let your Lordships be well pleased
simply and honestly to make us answer. For we having (as the men of Beraea
did) searched the scriptures, for our satisfaction in the doubts propounded,
and out of them, not being able to resolve our selves, our desire is, to be
resolved, by men of greater skill, and not to rest our selves upon our own
judgments. Now then we thus propound, and we thus demand:

FIRST, whether every supreme Christian Magistrate, for The like demand we
make concerning the command of the Church.
every command to be given by virtue of his Christian Magistracy, touching
the worship of God, ought not to have the word of faith, for the ground and
warrant of his command; that so his command being of faith, may not be of
sin?

Secondly, whether any supreme Christian Magistrate, by Authority The like
demand we make of the ability of the Church.
of holy Writ, be enabled to devise, ordain and appropriate a Ministerial
garment for the Ministry of the Gospel, without putting on of which garment,
he may command the Ministers of the Gospel, neither publicly to pray, to
preach the Word, nor administer the Sacraments?

Thirdly, if it be lawful for a sovereign Christian Magistrate, by authority
of holy Writ, to ordain and appropriate a Ministerial garment, for the
Ministers of the Gospel, then we demand, whether by Authority of holy
Writ, he may ordain and appropriate such a Ministerial garment, as in matter
and form, differs not from that proper and necessary Priestlie garment,
which the Prince, and chief Priest of Idolatry has appropriated to be worn
by his Jdolatrous Priests in their Idol service?

The reason moving us to make the first demand, respects some others, rather
then our selves. For we doubt not, but that every supreme Christian Magistrate,
will agnize, that every his mandatorie action concerning the outward worship of
God, of what nature, or quality soever it be (if it be not sin) must be of
faith. And that no such action of his, can be of faith, unless the same have the
word of faith for the ground and warrant thereof.

Concerning the second Demand, For our parts we never yet read of any
commandment, of any word of faith, or of any godly example in holy Writ,
whereby the supreme Christian Magistrate, is either directly, or by consequence
enabled to ordain and appropriate a Ministerial garment, for the Ministers of
the Gospel.

For howsoever by imitation of the Priestly garments, ordained for the
Leviticall Priesthood, under the Law, your Lordships may think that a
ministerial garment may lawfully be commanded for the Ministers of the
Gospel: nevertheless, there being an express commandment given unto Moses,
under the law, for the one, and no general or particular rule delivered unto a
Christian Magistrate, in the Gospel, for the other, we desire to be satisfied
by your Lordships, whether such an imitation of Leviticall garments, be
lawful, yea or no? If your Lordships answer, that the institution of a
Ministerial garment, under the Gospel, is not by imitatio^ from the Leviticall
law, then we demand, from whence the original and offspring of that
Ministerial garment came?

If your Lordships answer, that it sprange originally from Man's invention,
then you directly charge the Christian Magistrate, to have no rule of faith for
the guidance of his conscience in the institution of a ministerial garment.
For your Lordships very well know, and according to this your own knowledge,
have a long time taught us, that no devise or invention of man, can be a
divine rule, for a Christian Magistrates conscience to be guyded by.

But as well for the better clearing of the proper and right use of the
Priestlie garments under the law, as also of the clear opening of this point,
namely, that no reason can be yielded, from the use of the priestly garments
under the law, for the use of ministerial garments under the Gospel, we
demand:

Whether your Lordships did ever read in any part of holy Writ, that the
Priests were commanded to eat the Passover in any other garments, then in
their ordinary garments?

Whether your Lordships did ever read in any part of holy Writ, that any holy
Ministerial garment was commanded to be worn, by him, that cut of the
foreskinne of the flesh upon the eight day?

Whether your Lordships have read in any place of holy Writ, that the
Prophets had any proper or special attire, enjoined unto them, as a proper
and necessary habit, wherein they should exercise, and without which they
might not exercise their prophetical office? For we find it 1. Ki. 20. 41.
written; When the Prophet hasted, and took the ashes away from his face, that
the King of Israll knew him, that he was of the Prophets. Whereby it seems
unto us, that, that Prophet, rather by his face, then by his proper
Prophetical garment, was discerned from other men to be a Prophet, especially
in the execution of that his prophetical function: 1. Sam. 9. 1(...)
And this again is made more manifest, by those words which Saul used, when
meeting with Samuel in the midst of the gate of one of the Cities of Zuph,
he questioned with him after this manner: Tell me, I pray thee, where the Seers
house is? For had the Prophets been known in those days by their proper
prophetical garments, then needed not Saul in the midst of the gate, and at
so solemn a feast, to have enquired of Samuel, for the Seers house.

But it is written, that Saul knew that it was Samuel, when an old
Objection. 1. Sa^. 28. 14 Isa. 20. 1.
man came up, lapped in a mantell, And Isayah was commanded to loose his
sackcloth from his loins, and to put off his shoe from his foot. And again
it is written: And in that day shall the Prophets be ashamed every Zech. 13.
4.
one of his vision, when he has prophesied, neither shall they wear a rough
garment to deceyve: And lastly, that John the Baptist had his Math. 3. 4.
garment of Camels hair, and that a girdle of a skin was about his loins:
By all which places it is apparent, that in old time the Prophets used a
special attire, or habit, and were accustomed to put upon them a distinct
kind of garment from other men.

We confess plainly and simply, that your Lordships herein speak Answers.
the truth, neither do we deny, that it is both lawful and convenient for
the Minister of the Gospel, daily and ordinarily, to wear such a special
kind of civil apparel, as whereby he may be known from being a Merchant, a
Lawier, a Gentleman, or an Husbandman: But what for that? For to the point in
question, what resolution is that? For how follows is, that the prophet
Isayah, the other old prophets, and John Baptist* by their every days rough
and hayrie apparel, whersoever in the streets, in the fields, in the Markets,
in the schools, in the gates, in the Court, or in the country, they were
seen, how (we say) does it follwe (they being known by their special
garments to be of the number of the prophets) that therefore whenever in the
Temple, in the Synagogue, or in any other place, wherein they prophesied, that
they put upon that their ordinary and usual garment, some other garment,
necessarily and properly to be worn in their prophetical office? and without
which necessary and prophetical garment, it was not lawful for them to
prophecy?

If your Lordships could make good your objection by the holy scriptures, you
should then have some color from the example of the old prophets, to affirm
that extraordinary prophets, (if there were any in our times) might wear some
rough and haytie garments; But to allege these examples, as sufficient
authorities for ordinary Pastors and Teachers, that they may or ought to wear
proper ministerial garments, whenever they pray, preach the word or
administer the Sacraments, is to allege quidlibet pro quolibet? instead of a
kernel, to give a nutshale, and to imagine as Saul imagined, that he saw
Samuel when he saw Satan, who to blind Saul's eyes, had put upon him the form
of an old man lapped in a Mantell.

And yet nevertheles we grant that from the place of Samuel, we may learn
thus much: viz. If any person in our age were so sottish, as to seek unto a
Witch, to have the body of an Archbishop raised up; that Satan in this case,
by lapping him self in an Archbishops Pall, Rochet and square Cap, might
transform him self to the shape and likeness of Thomas Beckett, though he be
long since dead.

As for that which is alleged out of the prophecy of Isaiah, it proves
directly that his garment of Sackcloth, was not any proper prophetical
garment, but only such an ordinary garment, as whereby in his common and daily
attire, his condition of being a Prophet, was distinguished from the apparel
of other men, who were no Prophets. For if by the commandment of loosing the
sackcloth from his loins, the Lord had meant a proper prophetical Mantell or
garment, which was only usual in the execution of his prophetical function,
then might the same well-inough have been put of, and yet Jsaiah not have been
naked, and his buttocks uncovered.

Besides, if by Isaiahs garment, a proper prophetical garment in the exercise
of Prophecy, and not a special ordinary garment, common with other Prophets
in their daily use, had been noted; then by Isaiahs shoes likewise, why should
not a proper and prophetical kind of shoes be understood?

And if so, why then by this place might not Ministers be appointed,
(whenever they pray, preach or minister the Sacraments) to have proper
ministerial shoes or pantofles upon their feet, as well as proper ministerial
Surplices or Copes upon their backs?

The place out of Zachary, and that argument from John Baptists apparel, be
of like interpretation with that of Esai. And that out of Zachary, what else
proves it, but that the false Prophets ordinarily did wear some such manner of
special rough garments, as were after the form of ordinary garments, worn by
the true Prophets? and that those false Prophets, for deceiving of the people,
by color of their garments, should have those garments, (as it were) plucked
over their ears, and no more be suffered by their garments, to make their
doctrine seem more holy: seeing they were never sent from God, to be Prophets
for the good of his people, but might still have continewed husbandmen or
herds men, as not having any true prophetical doctrine, but only making a
show their of by their outward rough garments, as if their garments had been
sufficient to have approved their prophesies? In like manner as at this day a
number of idol ministers, have naught* else to approve them to be ministers,
but only that they wear a large whit Surplice with two wide sleeves, and a
little black Cappe with four narrow corners.

Nay, again we demand, whether your Lordships have read in holy 1 Chro. 23. 6
1 Chro. 25. 1. 1 Chro. 26. 20. 1 Chro. 9. ^2. 2 Chro. 19. 25.
Writ, that King David deviding Offices to the sons of Levy, and separating
some to be Singers, some to be Porters, and some to be over the Treasures of
the House of God, according to the commandment of the Lord, by the hands of
the Prophets Samuel, Gad and Nathan, did appoint any other songsterlike,
porterlike or other ministerlike garments, to be worn by these Officers in the
service of the House of God, then such only as were appointed by the Law.

And if your Lordships can produce no place out of holy Writ for the proof of
these questions; then from the example of celebrating the Passover, ministering
Circumcision, Prophesying by the Prophets, and from services done by the
Singers, Porters and Treasures, without other ministerial garments then were
appointed to be under the Law:

We demand what good proof your Lordships can make out of holy Writ, that
ministers of the Gospel may be commanded, not to pray, not to preach, and not
to administer the Sacraments without ministerial garments, not appointed by
God, but by man in the time of the Gospel?

And yet touching certain holy garments, used by the Priests and Levites
under the Law, your Lordships have not read (as we suppose) that either Moses
or Aaron, did appoint any other holy garments for the Priests or Levits in
their priestly or Leviticall Offices, then such Exo. 28. 12 29. 30. 35. 41. 43.
Eze. 42, 13. 14. Eze. 44. 15. 17. 18. 19.
only as the Lord him self commanded to be made and worn; which holy and
Priestly garments also, you read that they might not be worn by the Priests
or Levites in the utter Court, but only in the holy place, when they came to
minister in the Priests and Levites Office before the Lord.

And so from the proportion of the Ministry of the Priesthood under the Law,
unto the ministry of faith under the Gospel, we question thus: If God the
only author of the Priesthood under the Law, were the only author of the
Priests holy and ministerial garments, under the Law, why should not the same
God, being the holy author of the ministry of the Gospel, be likewise the
only author of ministerial garments under the Gospel? For otherwise how
should the Ministers perfectly understand, that the wearing of ministerial
garments in the time of the Gospel, be as well pleasing to the Lord, as were
the Priests holy garments in the time of the Law?

Besides, for so much as the Priests when they came out of the inner Court even
to the utter Court to the people, and approached to those Ezekiel. 42. Eze. 44. 15.
17. 18. 19.
things which were for the people, were then commanded to put of their holy
and Lynen garments, and to put on their other garments, namely, their Woollen
garments which they had put of when they entered into the inner Court.

From whence we again demand, what reason your Lordships can yeald out of
holy Writ, that the Ministers of the Gospel when they approach to pray, to
preach the Word and to administer the Sacraments, which are things for the
people under the Gospel, should put upon them ministerial Lynen garments? And
not rather from the identitie of reason and equity of that order, which was
given to the Priests under the Law, challendge a free and liberal use of
their ministry in their ordinary garments? We mean such comely and cleanly
woollen garments, as by the law, use, or custom of the country, wherein they
live, may lawfully be worn.

Where it is written that David had on him a lynen garment, as all the 1 Chro.
15.
Levites that bare the Arc, and the singers: If your Lordships from this place
shall urge, that lynen garments were ordinarily worn by the Levites, among the
people, when they approached to the services, which were for the people, you
shall in this case but wrest the holy scriptures, to an other sense then
rightly can be gathered from the same, because the same your sense directly
repugneth the aforesaid testimony of the Prophet Ezekiell: neither indeed
does this place any more prove, the ordinary wearing of lynen garments, by
the Levites among the people, in the utter court, then it does prove the
ordinary wearing of an Ephod by King David, whenever he came into the Temple
to worship.

The reason then of the Levites wearing of lynen garments at this time, being
in the presence of the Arc of the covenant of the Lord which was now to be
remooved from the house of Obed Edom, and Number. 4. 15.
to be carried upon the shoulders of the sons of Koath, and to be attended
upon by other of the Levites their brethren, in holy garments, it seems
plain that this wearing of holy garments, in this peculiar service thus
performed to the Lord, in the presence of the Arc, excludes the wearing of
the same garments in common services done among the people.

Besides, that the Singers and Levites did not at any time minister in their
lynen garments, among the people, is apparent. For that the proper place of
their ministration was before the Arc in the inner court; And this is evident
by the scriptures:

For it is written, that 1. Chr. 15 17. 19.
Heman and Asaph and Ethan were singers, and that the King left 1. Chro. 16 37.
before the Arc of the Lords covenant, Asaph the chief and his brethren to
minister continually before the Arc, that which was to be done every day, to
singe with 1. Chro. 45. 16.
instruments, and to lift up their voice with joy, and to 1. Chro. 16. 41.
praise the Lord, because his mercy endures for ever: yea and this manner of
singing and ministering before the Arc in the Tabernacle of the congregation
did not only continue until 1. Chr. 6. 32.
Solomon had built the house of the Lord in Jerusalem, but then also, the
singers continewed their office according to their custom for it is written
thus. And the 2. Chro 5. 12.
Levites the singers of all sorts, as of Asaph, of Heman, and Ieduthun, and of
their sonns, and of their brethren being clad in fine Lynen, stood with
Cymbales and with Vyolles, and Harpes, at the East end of the Altar, and with
them an hundred and twentye priests, blowinge which Trumpettes, unless then
your Lordships be able to prove by holy wrytt, that the inner court, or holy
place, wherein the Altar stood, was not a place separated for the preistes, and
Levites alone, but that the people as well, as the Priests and Levites, came
into the same place, to worshipp before the Arc, we may bouldly (as we
think) affirm that you shall never be able to prove, that the Priests or
Levites under the law, did at any time wear any Ministerial garments, when
they approached into their utter court, to the people, to do services for the
people. Among the reasons (why the Priests under the law were commanded to put
on their lynen garments when they ministered in the sanctuary and at the
table) one reason among other is rendered to be this: namely, for that the
garments were holy garments, as having from the God of holiness an holy
institution.

The reason also why the priests were commanded to put of their lynen
garments, and to put on other woollen garments, when they approached to those
things which were for the people, is this: viz. for that they should not
sanctify the people with their garments: From which two reasons, we question
thus:

First, seeing under the Ministry of the Gospel, the Ministers thereof, have
neither holy place, nor inner court, separated from the people; neither any
garments, by any holy institution, appointed by the name of holy garments to
minister in; we demand, what authority your Lordships can allege out of
holy Writ, that it should not be as comely and as decent a thing, for the
Ministers of the Gospel, to approach unto prayer, preaching the word, and
administering the Sacraments (which are things for the people under the
Gospel) without any Ministerial garments devised, and instituted only by
man: as it was for the Priests to approach unto the like things, which were for
the people under the Law, without those holy garments, which were ordained by
God?

Secondly, the reason of the prohibition of the Priests putting on their holy
and priestly garments, when they approached into the utter court to those
things which were for the people: being this: Namely, that they should not
sanctify the people with their garments; we demand with what reason
deduced from holy Writ, you can impugn this position, viz.

That our Savior Christ (to preserve the equity and integrity of that
prohibition, as well in the time of the Gospel, as in the time of the Law, did
not institute any proper ministerial garments, for the Apostles,
Evangelistes, Prophets, Doers of Miracles, or Teachers, to exercise any their
ministerial function in, least the people putting an opinion of holiness in
their garments, might think the doing of miracles, preaching the word,
prophesying, or ministering the Sacraments, to be sanctified by their
garments? And therefore from the manner of preaching the word, administering
Baptism, celebrating the Lords Supper, doing Miracles, and praying by the
Apostles, Evangelistes, Prophets, etc. without any proper ministerial
garments: we question thus:

In as much as John Baptist did both cry in the wilderness, and baptize in
Jorden, having upon him none other proper ministerial garments, but only his
ordinary garment, of Camells hair, with a girdle of a skin about his
loins: And seeing the Apostles did neither preach the word, nor administer
the Sacraments, nor do miracles, among the people, in any other garments,
then in their usual and ordinary garments. And besides, seeing the Apostles,
did not institute or command any proper ministerial garments for their
successors, namely for Bishops, Pastors and Teachers to minister in: seeing
(we say) these things can not be prooved out of holy writ to be otherwise, our
desire is to be satisfied from your Lordships, by some holy rule of faith, why
Bishops, Pastors, and Teachers, so long after the Apostles times, should be
commanded, to wear any other form or manner of garments in their holy
ministrations, then such their ordinary and usual garments, (being comely
and cleanly garments) as by custom, or law of the Country, they usually
wear.

For if all ordinary garments be sanctified a like, to minister, and people,
by the word of God and prayer, as all ordinary meats and drinks be, we
demand, what reason your Lordships can allege out of holy writ, that the
public service, accomplished by the Minister, in his ordinary apparel,
should not be as acceptable to the Lord, as is the public service performed
by the people, in their ordinary garments.

And if your Lordships can afford us no reason out of holy Writ, why offering
up of prayers, preaching the Word, or administering the Sacraments, should be
less acceptable to the Lord, when the same are performed in an ordinary
garment, and not in a proper ministerial garment: we then demand, whether
your Lordships by any rule of holy Writ, can prove unto us, that the word
preached, Sacraments administered, and prayers offered up in a proper
ministerial, rather then in an ordinary garment, can be of more efficacy,
profit or edification unto men?

For as the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, so must all things which are done in the Church, be done to the use,
benefit and profit of the Church: Unto these two latter questions, if your
Lordships shall answer, that the ministration of the Word and Sacraments,
can not be proved by holy Writ, to be in it own nature, either more
acceptable to the Lord, or of more efficacy, profit and edification unto men,
when the same is accomplished by a Minister, wearing only his ordinary
garment: And yet notwithstanding shall tell us, that the not wearinge of a
proper ministerial garment in the service of prayer, preaching the Word, and
ministering the Sacraments, may be both displeasing to God, and hurtful to the
people, upon circumstance and contempt of the Churches, or Magistrates
command: Then we reply and affirm, that you beg the thing in question,
driving us* back again, to seek your resolution of that doubt, which we
moved above, in the second principal demand:

For unless the Church and sovereigne Christian Magistrate, be enabled by holy
Writ to command a proper ministerial garment under the Gospel, the not
wearing of such a proper ministerial garment, commanded by the Magistrate, or
by the Church, can be neither an offense to God, nor hurtful to the people.

Besides if neither the Church nor Magistrate, have any certain rule out of
holy Writ, for the resolution of faith, in commanding a proper ministerial
garment; Then lies the same Ministerial garment under a just suspicion of
abomination, as being a thing invented by man: And then also how should a
Minister being bound to take for his mark the only will of God, as it is
manifested and opened unto him in the word, be excusable in foro conscientiae,
if in the execution of his ministry, he may fashion him self to the
invention of man?

But the preaching of the word of God, is of greater moment and importance,
Objection.
then that the same should be left of for the not using of a proper
ministerial garment.

That is true indeed (say we) if a Minister by the use of such a garment
Answer.
should not sin? But that a Minister not fully persuaded in his mind of the
lawful use of a proper ministerial garment, may wear it doubtingly, and so
sin, to the end he may preach the Word: we doubt greatly whether your
Lordships be able to prove this out of holy Writ and of this we pray your
resolutions? For how should a man do evil that good may come thereby, when as
the Scripture teaches us, that his damnation is just, that so does?

The not preaching of the word then, being no sin in a Minister, when for the
keeping of a good conscience, in not using a proper ministerial garment, he is
commanded by a superior power not to preach the word; we demand hereupon,
whether your Lordships sin not rather in pressing, then the Minister in
refusing this kind of Ministerial garment.

And seeing we are fallen by occasion upon this comparison of preaching the
word, and wearing a proper ministerial garment, we pray your Lordships
patiently to hear, and quietly to answer our demandes?

Our demand then, is whether in your judgments, the preaching of the word be
not in it own nature more precious, more needful and more profitable for the
people, then can be the wearing of a proper ministerial garment?

If your Lordships should prefer the wearing of such a ministerial garment
to the preaching of the word, in this case, if we should hold our peace, the
very stones might cry out shame upon our faces; for we are taught out of holy
Writ, that Marie was commended before Martha, for that she sitting at the
feet of Jesus to hear him preach the word, had chosen the better part, even
one thing that was necessary, and which might not be taken from her.

If your Lordships answer (as the truth is) that the preaching of the word,
is more precious, needful and profitable for the Church, then is the wearing
of a proper ministerial garment; Then we demand why grave, learned and Godly
Preachers, whom the King him self confesses to love and to honor, have been
put to the worse, commanded to silence, suspended and excommunicated for the
not wearing of such a Ministerial garment, when as notwithstanding light,
lascivious, and unlearned Ministers no-preachers, (if so be they have worn a
proper ministerial garment) have been suffered quietly to enjoy their
functions, and their benefices?

But all Preachers were never silenced, only certain Preachers not Bishops.
submitting them selves to the wearing of a ministerial garment according to
the orders and laws of the Church are displaced.

Well be it so? what other thing does this argue, but that the not Gentl.
wearing of a ministerall garment, is reputed to be a sin more heinous then
is the not preaching of the word?

But there are a multitude of Ministers who be not able to preach Bishops.
the word; whereas there is not one preacher but he is able to put on a
ministerial garment:

What then? did ever any Preacher (we pray you) when he was Gentl.
made a Minister, bind him self by a solemn vow to wear a ministerial
garment? No. And did not every Minister when he was made a Minister, bind him
self by a solemn vow to preach the word? Yea: And how then comes it to
pass, (unless the wearing of a ministerial garment, be reputed more
precious then is the preaching of the Word) that the not wearing of the one by
a Preacher, and the not preaching of the other by a Minister, should be
offenses, in degree of pain unmatchable? especially when as the not preaching
is a breach of the ordinance of God, and the not wearing of a Ministerial
garment, but a transgression of the law of man?

When any husbandman shall have sown clean and pure wheat in his field, if
the envious man shall sow tares, in this case, if the husbandman pluck up the
wheat, and let the tares grow, would you commend his husbandry?

But your Lordships will sow the fields with purer Wheat, and provide
(...)ishops.
men of softer Spirits, less Novelous, better affected to the state, and of
more discretion and maturitie of judgment.

Indeed if it may please your Lordships, this is soon said; but by Gentl.
your leaves, the thing is not so sone done; yea and besides we demand what
good security your Lordships can give unto the King and State in this case?

For in a matter of so great danger, as is the peril of the souls of the
Kings subjects, it were no good saftie (in our opinion,) to trust your bare
words for the time to come; when as in time past upon pretense of the want of
able and preaching Ministers, ye have thought it fit, rather then to have none
at all, to reteyne a number of unpreaching ministers, known to be no better
then idle beasts and flow bellies.

And if your Lordships already have such a sufficient number of learned, sober,
wise and soft spirited Preachers, to be disposed upon vacant benefices at
your command, as that you be able to furnishe the Churches of all those
ministers, whom you intend to deprive, for not conformity upon an instant: we
pray your Lordshippes to resolve the King what charity you have carried
toward his people in time past, when you have collated (for a great part) the
benifices of your own gifts, either upon no Preachers, or at leastwise upon
strawberie preachers; but if your Lordshippes intend hereafter to send forth
Preachers, that shall yield beryes, not once in the year only, but at the
least straw once every month; then we demand? what thanks you would con^
your Stewardes, in case they should provide no better Cooks for the dressing
of your dyners, then such only, as under one whole months space, could not
dispatch the roasting of an egg, or frying of a smelt?

If your Lordships think that the preaching Ministers, not yealding to the
Christian Magistrates authority, in the not using of this ministerial (falsely
by you so called indifferent) apparel, by such their disobedience, may be an
example unto the people, of like disobedience in other matters: Then we
demand, whether your Lordshippes carry not a testimony in your own
consciences, that their abstayning from the use of Ministerial apparel,
proceed not rather from an honest and good heart, to the obedience of GOD,
then of any evil affection conceyved against the authority of the Magistrate?
for before the Kingdom of England was lawfully invested in the Royal person of
our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, did not sundry of them abide many sharp
reproaches and bitter tauntes, for their Scotizing, and defending the single
form of church policy, vpheld by the Kings authority in the Realm of
Scotland? yea and do not the same Ministers now at this day heartily and
devoutly pray, for the life and prosperity of the King, the Queen, the noble
young Prince, and all other the Kings Royal progeny? yea and excepting this
one point of their not conformity unto the ceremonies (wherein they allege
for them selves, the conscience of the unlawfulness and inconvenience of the
said ceremonies) are they not known to be men worthy to be respected as the
Ministers of Christ? men of good reputation for learning? of honest
conversation? and peaceable among their neighbors? and men very obedient (this
one thing excepted) to all authority? by whose good doctrine also, and example
of life, the Magistrates in every County have found it more easy to continue
the common people in the duties of their subjection, and loyalty to the
supreme power?

Nay, which is more at this very instant, do not they extraordinarily declare
and testify their love, their loyalty and their fidelity unto the King, when
by their loanes they supply the Kings want, though in the mean time they them
selves want, and be driven to borrow to supply their own necessities? if then
in these great and weighty things, appertaining to the dignity of the Kings
Crown, they carefully and holily approve the^ selves to be both teachers and
followers of the Apostles doctrine, would they not as well (trow you) by the
wearing of a ministerial garment, subject their necks to the Kings
authority, if by a greater band of faith and obedience to the most high and
mighty God, they were not drawn to the not wearing thereof?

Touching the reason yealded by some, that ministerial apparel, is to
distinguish the minister from other men: it seems unto us to be a reason
altogether without reason: for albeit the outward form of a Ministers ordinary
apparel may lawfully and expediently differ from the outward fashion of
apparel common to other men, and so the Ministers person by his apparel may
be known unto all such as know him not by face: Nevertheless it is void of
all sense, that his ministerial apparel, in the public service of that
Church, whereof he is a Minister, should be an inseparable note, to
distinguish his person, from the persons of every of his people: For sithence
by name, by face, by office, by place, by voice, yea by ordinary apparel
also, every minister is, or ought to be known unto his people, what a kind of
foundnesse is it, to imagine that a minister can better be known by wearing of
a ministerial garment, then by the dew execution of his ministerial function.

Concerning the reason of decency and comlines urged by some, for the use of a
white ministerial garment, in the ministry of the Gospel, because the same
comes more aptly to be discussed in the question following, we will not
trouble your Lordships at this time with any other matter, about the two first
demandes: And therefore we will proceed to the third; which for your
Lordships better remembrance, we hold it not amiss to repeat again.

If it be lawful for a sovereign Magistrate, by authority of holy writ, to
ordeine and appropriate a ministerial garment, for the ministers of the
Gospel, then we demand, whether by authority of holy Writ, he may ordain
and appropriate such a ministerial garment* as in matter, form and specie
differs not from that ministerial garment, which by the high Priest and
chief Prince of idolatry, has been, and still is ordained and appropriated to
be a necessary priestly garment, for his idolatrous Priests, in their idol
service?

And to the end your Lordships may perceave our demands to be made
co^scionably and not humorously, or novelously, we have thought necessary to
lay down and annex certain principles or canons out of holy Writ, whereupon
our Demands and reasons are grounded, which grounds and reasons also, we extend
against crossing in Baptism, and Kneeling in the act of receving the
Communion.

The first ground.
The graven images of their Gods, shall ye burn with fire, and covet Deuteronomy. 7.
25.
not the silver and gold that is on them, nor take it to thee, least thou be
snared therewith, for it is an abomination.

Bring not therefore abomination into thine house, least thou be accursed
Deuteronomy, 7. 26.
like it, but utterly abhor it, and count it most abominable, for it is
accursed.

There shall cleave nothing of the damned thing to thine hands; All Deuteronomy. 13.
17 Isa. 44. 9.
they that make any image are vanity, and their delectable things shall
nothing profit.

And shall polute the covering of the images of silver, and the rich Esa. 30.
22.
ornaments of gold, and cast them away, as a menstruous cloth, and thou shall
say unto it, get thee hence.

Neither be ye idolaters, as some of them were. 1 Cor. 10. 7 ^ John. 5. 2^


Babes keep your selves from idols.

From these grounds of the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, we demand
whether your Lordships against these, can oppose any other rules of holy Writ,
to prove that any Christian Magistrate, Christian Minister, or Christian people
may be blameless and without fault, in foro conscientiae, if in the public
and outward worship of God, either he shall command, or they shall use, any the
relickes, monuments or memorialls, any the delectable, vain, and unprofitable
things, some times, or now apperteyning to the idolatrous sacrifice of that
great and known idol, the Popish Mass.

For if every commandment of the first Table of the Law, be a way, and be a
path out of the which no Christian ought to turn a side, either to the right
hand, or to the left; but in the which every Christian is bound as well in the
time of the Gospel, as every Israelite was bound in the time of the Law to
walk; then not only that great Idol of the Popish Mass it self, set up
and worshipped in the time of the Gospel; but then also, all relickes,
monuments, memorialls and delectable things with their accessaries, appendices,
and appurtinances, as a menstrous cloth, ought to be cast away, and to be
bidden get ye hence; especially we say in the public service and worship of
the true God.

For by how much more, the glory of the Son, who spoke from heaven, does
far excel the honor of a servant, which spoke on earth, by so much the more
ought that Idol and that Idolatry, which is set up and committed in the time
of the Gospel, be esteemed more vile and detestable, then was that Idol and
that Idolatry set up and committed in the time of the law.

The reasons of the prohibition of coveting, and of taking any the images,
their coverings, their ornaments* their gold and their silver, under the Law
were in number four: Namely:

First they were an abomination to the Lord.

Then: A fear of the peoples being snared.

Thirdly, a threat of being accursed:

And lastly, for that they were vain, and could nothing profit.

If then that great Idol of the Popish Mass, with all the Copes, Vestiments,
Surplices, Crosses, Kneelings, Candles and other memorialls and delectable
things, invented for the adorning and pomp thereof, be abominable and
accursed in the sight of God, be also vain and can nothing profit men: If
also the Magistrate, the Ministers and people believing the Gospel, may be
snared, and shall be accursed after the manner of the Israelites, if so be without
warrant from holy Writ, they shall use these things in the worship of God; we
demand, whether from the doctrine of the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel, we
may not conclude thus:

With whatsoever things, either Magistrate, Minister, or people may be snared,
and for the use of whatsoever things they may be accursed, those things may not
lawfully be commanded or used in the public worship of God.

But as well the Magistrate as the Ministers and people may then be snared, and
shall be accursed with, and for the command and use of Copes, Surplices, Crosses,
etc. when in the public worship of God, they be commanded and used without
warrant of his word:

Therefore Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. may not be commanded nor used in the
public worship of God, without warrant of his word.

If your Lordships deny the assumpt; and answer, that Copes, Surplices,
Crosses, etc. commanded and used for the adorning, and bewtifying of that great
Idol the Mass, be in their own nature things indifferent, and none other
otherwise can be accursed or be a snare to any Christian Magistrate, Minister
or people, then as they be employed to the use and service of that Idol; and
in this regard, their free and liberal use is no more now forbidden, then is
the eating of meats sacrificed unto Idols, and that therefore all fear of
being snared and accursed, does cease, because we have free liberty by the
word for the eating of meats sacrificed unto Idols; then hereunto we reply,
that your answer is very insufficient and uncertain, and without any strength
of reason, drawn from holy Writ.

For though we grant that nothing is unclean of it self, and that we ought
not to account that polluted, which God has purified: nevertheless we pray
your Lordships to resolve us by holy Writ, that God has by his word as well
purified Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. for the outward use of his public
worship, as by his word he has purified meats sacrificed unto idols, for the
private use of man's life.

When Peter had fastened his eyes upon the sheet, let down from Act. 11.
heaven by the four corners, he considered and saw four footed beasts of the
earth, and wild beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the heaven, which
were all the good creatures of God, and which also in the beginning were
created for the food of man: only for a time while Israel was under the
Schoolmaistership of the Law, certain of these creatures were forbidden to be
eaten, not because they were in their own nature evil, or unclean, but only
because they were made unclean for a time, by prohibition: And therefore when
the fullness of time was come, and that Christ the end of the Law, was risen
from the dead, the law of not eating meats forbidden ceased: And by letting
down the sheet, and commandment given to Peter, to slay and to eat, Peter
was assured that all those meats were restored to their primarie use,
integrity, and purity. And therefore these creatures being in their own
original nature good; and in the beginning sanctified by the Lord, to the use
of man's life, howsoever the idolaters profanely and abusively did sacrifice
them unto their idols, yet could those idols never so pullute them by their
abuse, as that they might utterly take away the good and profitable use, for
the which they were first created.

But that Copes, Surplices, Crosses, Candles, and other memorialls and
delectable things, authorized by that man of sin, for the pompous service of
his great idol, the Mass, be of the nature of meats, or of the nature of
gold and silver, (howsoever sacrificed unto idols) we deny.

For first: meats, gold and silver in their own nature, were by creation (as
erst was said) good, and to the end whereunto they were created ever blessed
of God, and never accursed; whereas on the other side, no relics, monuments,
or memorials of any idolatry, were ever blessed, but ever accursed.

Secondly, they were never in their first original good or profitable, no not
for that use whereupon they were employed: for as the Idol it self, is vain,
unprofitable, polluted and abominable, yea nothing in respect of that thing
which it represents, even so also be all the accessories and appurtenances
thereof, damned and execrable.

Thirdly, these relics, monumentes and memorialls of Idolatry, being not the
works of God, created in the beginning for the use of man, but the works of
men's hands, applied to the service of an Idol, are not by the prohibition of
God, unclean, and polluted only for a time, as certain meats were, but are
evermore by a perpetual decree, things damned and accursed for the use of any
service unto God: And therefore howsoever (as meats are usually sold in the
shambles) they may be sold in a spinsters, or in an Embrotherers shopp, and may
be used by man, to some benefit of this life: yet that they may be translated
from the service of an Idol, to the worship of the true God, without warrant of
being sanctified to that use, by the word of God, or that the Ministers and
people professing the gospel, may as intyrely and freely use and receive them
in the outward worship of the true God, as the popish priests and people did
in the service of their great Idol the Mass; we deny: And whether you be able
to prove the contrary out of holy Writ, we demand your resolutions?

And thus much for confirmation of the assumption of our former request: it
follows that we demand, whether your Lordships by any rule out of holy
Writ, be able to repugne these conclusions following.

First.

All Idols with all their ornaments, and all their appurtenances, by the
doctrine of holy Scriptures, as a menstruous cloth, are to be cast away and to
be bidden get you hence:

But the Popish Mass is an Idol, and all the Copes, Surplices, Crosses,
Candles, etc. have been, and yet be, ornaments and appurtenances unto that
Idol of the popish Mass:

Therefore the popish Mass, and all Copes, Surplices, Crosses, Candles, etc.
as a menstruous cloth are to be cast away, and to be bidden get you hence.

Secondly.

Whatsoever has been first invented by man, and afterward appropried by
authority of the great whore, to be a note, token, badge or ensign unto all
her lovers, in the act of her fornication, the same ought not to be any note,
token, badge, or ensign unto the spouse of Christ, or any her lovers, in the
act of the outward worship of the true God.

But all Copes, Surplices, Crossings have been first inve^ted by man, and
appropried by authority of the great whore, to be notes, tokens, badges, and
ensigns unto all her lovers in the act of her fornication:

Therefore no Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. ought to be any badge, token or
ensign, to the Spouse of Christ, or any her lovers, in the act of the worship
of the true God.

If your Lordships deny the truth of the first proposition of the first
argument to be proved by those places before quoted out of the law, the
Prophets and Apostles, then we pray your Lordships to yield us some reason,
from other places of holy Writ, for the confirmation of such your negation?
For unto us the letter of the scriptures, seem to be very direct and plain to
the purpose, for the which we have alleged them:

If your Lordships deny the consequence of the first proposition, of the second
argument, and affirm that the spouse of Christ, and her lovers may lawfully
wear in the outward act of the worship of the true God, the notes, tokens,
badges and ensigns, commanded by the great whore to be worn in the act of
her fornication; then we demand, by what places of holy Writ your Lordships be
able to prove this your affirmation? in the mean time give us leave, according
to the measure of our skill, to discharge the assum^t: of the first argument,
from such error, as happily at the first view may seem in your opinions, to
be contained therein.

If then your Lordships shall challenge the assumpt: of the first argument,
either of particularitie, or ambiguitie of the words (Copes, Surplices,
Crosses, etc.) for that all Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. have not been, ^e
now be ornaments, and appurtenances unto that great Idol of the Mass,
because some Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. be ornaments and solemnites for
the administration of Baptism, celebration of the Lords Supper, and other
divine services; then for the adnulling as well of your Lordships distinction,
as for the overthrow of all, both new and old Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc.
to be used by the Spouse, and her lovers, in the act of the worship of the
true God, we propound unto your Lordships these grounds of holy Writ
following, whereunto also we demand your resolutions?

Beware least thou be taken in a snare after them after that they be Deu. 12.
30 31
destroyed before thee, and least thou ask after their gods, saying, how did
these nations serve their gods, that I may do so likewise, thou shall not do so
unto the Lord thy God.

Ye are the children of the Lord your God, you shall not cut your selves Deu.
14. ^. 2
nor make you any baldnes between your eyes for the dead: for thou art an holy
people, unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord has chosen thee to be a precious
people unto him self, above all the people that are upon the earth.

What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? what communion 1. Cor.
6. 14 15. 16
has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Beliall, or what part
has the believer with the infidel? and what agreement has the temple of God,
with Idols?

Come I will show thee the damnation of the great whore, that fitteth Rev. 17
1. 2
upon many Waters; with whom have committed fornication the Kings of the earth,
and the inhabitants of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication.

And I saw seats, and I saw the souls of them that were dead for Revel. 20.
4
the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship the
beast, neither his image, neither had taken his mark upon their forheads, or
on their hands.

From these grounds of holy Writ, taken out of the law, we demand, Deuteronomy. 12.
30. 31.
whether the worship of every Idol, and false god, or not, rather every
superstitious, and false worship of the true God be forbidden? And whether
this superstitious and false worship of the true God, be not intended to be
that manner, form and fashion of worship, both wholly and in part, which the
Gentiles used in the worship of their Idolles?

For there being a commandment given before unto the children of Israel, for
the burning of the Images, and of the utter destruction of all the Idolles of
the Cananites: it is by these Scriptures commanded (after these Idols were
destroyed, and the Images burnt) that the children of Israel should not so
much as once hearken after, or inquire; how those nations served their gods,
least they should be taken in a snare, to do so, and likewise unto the Lord
their God, as the nations did unto their Idols:

And thus much also does that argument, drawn from the doctrine of the gospel
enforce, of not having fellowship, concord, part, or agreement with beliall; or
with an Idol: of the not taking of the mark of the beast in their hands, or
in their foreheads; And therefore we again demand, whether the Church (falsely
so called) of Rome, be not this great whore, with whom the kings of the earth
have committed fornication? And whether she also be not from the earth, and of
this world? Whether the beauty of this great whore stand not in outward pomp
of apparel, and outward shows, after the manner of a strumpett?

Whether this outward pomp of apparel and shows of impudency consist not
partly in Copes, Surplices, Crosses, and such like trashe? And whether these
Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. be not designed by that whore, to be the proper
and peculiar cognizances, tokens, badges and ensigns of her lovers, committing
fornication with her great Idol the breaden God?

If your Lordships can justly deny our demands, in the affirmative to be true:
we then again demand; If the bryde of the lamb, being a pure virgin, shall
at any time be apparelled, in the act of the service of her beloved, like to
the minnions waiting upon the great Whore, in the act of her fornications:
we demand (we say) whether the Bryde (in this case) can be precious and
amiable in the eyes of the Bridegroom? can be said to have no concord with
beliall? no part with an infidel? no agreement with an Idol? can be said,
not to take upon her hand, upon her forehead, or upon her back, the mark of
the beast? Can be said, not to do so, and lykwise to the brydgrome, as the
mynions of the whore, do to their Idol? or not to do so, and likewise, to
God, as the papists do to the devil?

Nay, if the Church of England herself alone; be not the bryde, but one of the
maids of the Bride, and if also she profess her self, to be the first of the
three, rather then the last, of the the thirty worthyes and honorable Virgins;
we demand what holy reason should move this maid of England, still to fashion
her Necklaces, her Bracelets, her Frontlets, her Cheynes, her Jewels, her lynen
Apornes, her gaudie Kirtles, like to those which the most famous strumpett,
that ever was, (for pompous ostentation and braverie) daily uses and puts
on, especially sithence all her other fellow maids, in other Countries
attending upon the Bride with most solemn vows and obtestations, and with a
most holy disdain and indignation have abandoned and cast away, as a
menstruous cloth, what attire soever has been, or yet is proper, to the
minions of that great Whore?

If your Lordships answer that the Maid of England, being perfectly
instructed from the Bridegroms voice, (that no Cope, Surplice or Cross is
unclean of it self,) may command her Damsels, to attire and fashion their
liveries, colors and badges, like to those which the minions and lovers of the
great whore, commonly deck them selves withal: if so be her commandment tend
not, that her Damsells should be defiled or be drunken with the Wine of the
fornication of the great whore, but only that they should be humbled at the
feet of the Christian Magistrate, whom the Bridgrome has armed with power, to
be a protector and a nursing father of all the liberties and franchises of the
Bride, and of her Maids: if your Lordships (we say) to dischardge the Maid of
England, in foro conscientiae, shall answer thus and thus: then because the
Christian Magistrate is him self not the Bridgrome; but one of the children of
the Bride chamber, and a friend of the Bridegromes; and for this cause, and in
this respect, can not rightly command the Maid of England to be appareled
otherwise in the service of the Bridegroom, then as the Bridegroom has
lycensed the Magistrate to command; we then demand, by what rule of holy
Writ, your Lordships can prove, that the Christian Magistrate has commission
from the Bridegroom, to command the Maid of England at all seasons, and in all
the courts of his aboade, to wait and to attend, to present, and to put up her
requests, her prayers, and her services, in such suite and change of raiment,
as is common with that of the minions of the great whore?

For unless the Christian Magistrate be armed with power from the Bridegroom,
to chardge the maid of England to be thus attired, your Lordships can not be
ignorant, but that as well the nursing Father in commanding, as the nurse Child
in obeying, shall sin against the Bridgrome.

For howsoever it may be lawful for the Christian Magistrate to command or
forbid the use, or not use of every kind of creature, which in it own
nature, by virtue of creation, is good, and therefore only called indifferent,
because indifferently at the moderate pleasure of every man, the same with
prayer and thanksgiving, may be used, or refused, for the use of this life
without offense to God; nevertheles we greatly stand in doubt, whether the
Christian Magistrates authority reach so far as to command that the work of
man's hands be used in the outward worship of the true God, which for the
pollution and profanation thereof in the service of an Idol, is become for
the service of the true God, abominable and damned.

Nay; if Hezekiah King of Judah, be commended in holy Writ, for 2 Ki. 1^. 3. 4
doing uprightly in the sight of the Lord, when he brake in pieces the brazen
Serpent, and called it a piece of brass, when the children of Israel, by
burning incense to it, abused it to Idolatry, notwitstanding the same were
first set up by Moses, at the commandment of God: How much more ought
Christian Magistrates to destroy and to break in pieces all manner works of
men's hands, never commanded in holy writ, either for the service of God, or
for the profit of his people?

But Hezekiah might have done well and uprightly also, if so be he Bishops.
had still reserved the Serpent, as a memorial of the miracles wrought by the
looking upon it, though for the abuse of burning incense before it, he had not
broken the same in pieces.

But we beseech your Lordships to inform us rightly out of holy Gentl.
Writ, whether this your answer in the sight of the Lord, be upright, yea or
no?

First, after the peoples hearts were once turned aside, by burning incense to
the Serpent, it was not in the power of Hezekiah to know, whether the peoples
hearts would have been again upright in the memorial of the miracles, yea or
no? And as for the restitution of the Serpent, to that integrity of doing
miracles, after the peoples departure out of the wilderness, when they were no
more stunge by Serpents, that to do, was much less in the power of Hezekiah:
Besides, because by the doctrine of holy Writ, we be taught, not only that the
forbidding of one thing, includes a commandment of the contrary, and that the
commandment of one thing inforceth a forbidding of the contrary; but also that
as well the omission of a dewtie required, as the commission of a thing
prohibited, is an offense to God: We pray your Lordships to resolve us out of
holy writ; whether the holy Ghost, commending the vprightnes of Hezekiah, as well
for breaking to pieces the 2. K^. 18. 4.
brazen Serpent, as in taking away the high places, and breaking the Images and
cutting down the groves, do not instruct us that he was to have been
discommended, in case he had let the Serpent stood unbroken down, though he had
cut down the Groves, broken the Images, and taken away the high places?

For in our judgments by the doctrine aforesaid, founded upon holy Writ, the
breaking of the Serpent, being reckoned as a part of his vprightnes, and for
the which he is commended, the not breaking thereof, must needs have been as
an vnvpright and as discommendable a thing, as the not cutting down of the
Groves, the not breaking the Images, and the not taking away the High places.

But such Copes, Surplices, Crosses, etc. as heretofore have been worn, Bb.
and used at, and for Idols service, are not eadem numero with ours: For all
the old Popish Copes, Surplices, etc. be long since out of date, and we will
have all spicke and span new.

Yea be it so, yet if the fashion and workmanship of their old, be the Gentl.
true paterns of our new, how shall not ours be like unto theirs? King Ahaz
though he sent not the very same Altar which he saw at Damascus, 2. Ki. 10. 10
but the pattern and the fashion of it, and all the workemanshippe thereof to
Vriah the Priest, yet does the holy Story witness, that he trespassed, and
did evil, and commends Hezekiah, that 2. Ki. 29. 5^ 15. 16. 17
in the first year and first month of his reign, he commanded the Levites
to carry forth the filthiness out of the Temple, and all the uncleanness that
they found in the Temple of the Lord, brought in by their Fathers.

In the second book of the Kings, the holy Ghost testifying what 2. Ki. 17. 15
evil Hoshea the son of Elah King of Israel and his Fathers had done, in
the sight of the Lord, shows us, that they followed vanity, and became
vain, and followed the Heathen, that were round about them; concerning whom
the Lord has charged them, that they should not do like them. And again that
they walked according to the fashion 8. 11.
of the Heathen; And again that they burned incense in the High places as did
the Heathen.

And again, that they would not obey, but hardened their necks, 12. 40.
like to the necks of their Fathers: and again, that they obeyed not, but did
after their old custom? yea and the Lord by the mouth of Abijah King of Judah
reproved Jeroboam to his face, not for that he had made Priests of other
countries, but that he had made him Priests, like the people of other countries.

But by your patience, Sirs, these cases be not alike, For there was an Bb.
express commandment in the Law, that there should be but one Altar, the
pattern also whereof, was given to Moses in the holy Mount, whereas we be not
expressly forbidden in the Gospel to wear Copes, Surplices, or to make
Crosses.

But by your Lordships favor (say we) the cases (notwithstanding this Gentl.
your exception) be a like: for the Bride (say we) of the Lamb; by the
doctrine of the Gospel, is as well expressly taught and bound as the Israelites
were, to observe and keep the second commandment of the Law; yea she is
commanded not to fashion her self like to this world; not to wear the liverye
of the great whore: not to mark her self in the hand or in the forehead, with
the mark of the Beast: not to have any fellowship, concord, part or agreement
with Beliall, with an infidel, or with an Idol.

If then the great whore do still reign, though not over us; if the beast do
still rage, though his horns push not at us; if Beliall be still worshipped,
though not by us: And if also this Beliall, and this Beast, vaunt him self,
and this great Whore glory and deck her self in, and with this kind of
apparelling, and this manner of Crossing, we humbly pray your Lordships to
resolve us out of holy Writ, whether among our Priests, whosoever shall come to
pray, to preach, or to administer the Sacraments, with a Cope, with a
Surplice, with a Taper, with a Cross, or with a shaven Crown, like to the
Copes, Surplices, Tapers, Crosses and shaven Crowns, of those Priests which
are Priests to them which are no gods, whether such our Priests (we say)
borrowing this attire from the great whore, and using the same in the service
of the true God; do not follow vanity and become vain, and follow the Popish
Idolaters about us, concerning whom, the Lord has forbidden we should not do
like them, neither walk according to their fashion, and after their old
custom, niether to have any part, fellowship, communion, concord, or agreement
with them?

What Sirs? would you then have us, to have no manner of agreement, Bishops.
concord, or communion, with the Papists with the Beast, or with the great
whore? what, no thing at all? why then Sirs, you would belike have us pull
down our Churches, our Oratories and our Chappells?

Though our desire be to keep our selves from all the defilements Gentl.
and pollutions of that Romish strumpett, yet do we dislike the pullinge
down of Churches, etc. For we know and are fully persuaded, by rules of holy
Writ, that we may lawfully use, not only Churches, Oratories and Chappells:
but also that we may have seats in Churches; Pulpits in Churches; Fonts in
Churches; Tables together with fair lynen table clothes, to cover these Tables
in Churches; Bells, and Ropes for Bells* in Churches; yea and besides that,
Reading, Praying, Preaching, administering of Sacraments, Singing, yea and
Ringing too: are things which lawfully may be performed by us in Churches,
because all these and every of these things being of some holy, natural,
necessary, profitable, comely or good, orderly use for the people, in, for,
and toward the service of God, by some general rule of holy Writ, be
approved, and therefore by the same commanded, and sanctified for our use.

But as for Copes, Surplices, Crosses, Candles at noone days, and such like
superstitious ornaments, rites and ceremonies, because there is neither
holiness, neither nature, neither necessity, neither utility, neither
decency, neither any good order that require the same; Nay, because what
soever good order, decency, utility, necessity, nature, or holiness can
require, may without those ornaments, rites, and ceremonies, be fully
accomplished; we affirm that they ought as a menstruous cloth be cast away,
and to be bidden, get ye hence.

Why, Sirs? do you approve of a white lynen table-cloth to cover the Bishops.
communion table, and do you disallow a white lynen Surplice? What? is it not
as comely a thing, and as good an order, we pray you, for the Minister at the
communion table, to stand in a fine, large, and clean lynen Surplice, as it is
a thing decent and orderly, for the communion table, to be overspread with a
fine and clean lynen table-cloth?

Until your Lordships shall be able to prove unto us, either out of Gentl.
holy Writ, or by some good reason, that it is, as indecent a thing for your
pages, to wait and to attend upon your tre^chers and upon your cups, without
wearing whit lynen Surplices, as it is a slovenly manner, for any kind of
persons to sit down, to eat, and to drink, at the table, without having laid
before them a whit lynen table-cloth, or napkin; we are bold to affirm, that
there is great odds, between the decent use of a white lynen table-cloth, for
the communion table, and between the use of a white Surplice, for the back of
a minister.

Indeed, if it were as comely and as orderly a thing, for all sorts of people,
as well women, as men, to wear Surplices upon their upper garments, when they
come to the Lords table, as it is a decent and orderly manner for all men and
women, whenever they sit down to eat, and to drink, to have their tables
covered, with fair lynen table-clothes; we would not then much stand with your
Lordships, that the wearing of a Surplice, by a Minister, at the communion
table, might be as decent, and as orderly a thing, as is the covering of the
communion table, with a fair lynen table-cloth: but the first being a thing
indecent, we deny the second to be decent: And yet were the latter granted to
be decent, what advantage, we pray your Lordships, does this argument of
comparison (from a white lynen table-cloth, to a whit lynen Surplice) bring for
the use of a silken, Embrodered, and yellow glittering Cope? Are the hearts of
the Priests in Cathedral and Collegiat churches, so golden, as they must
signify their golden hearts, by their golden garments?

Hic tacuere phriges, auro sua somnia caelant:
Well, by your patience (Sirs) though we have not much to say for Bb.
maintenance and defense of our Copes, which are to be used only in our
Cathedral and great churches, and not in your Parochial churches, yet we pray
you to carry a better estimation of the wearing of Surplices, by your
Ministers, then you do of the wearing of Surplices, by the popish Priests:
Because the fountain from whence ours sprange, and the end whereunto ours
tend and are applied, be much every way different from theirs.

Why then give us leave* by your Lordships favor, to demand what Gentl.
were the fountaynes from whence, and what are the ends whereunto both theirs
and ours sprang, and do tend? Your Lordships can not deny but as theirs were
first worn, without any commandment of God, so be ours, and that therefore, as
the wearing of theirs was but by devise and authority of man, so is ours: As
theirs were commanded for order, comelines and decency, unto the minions of
the great whore, so be ours commended to be decent, comely and orderly
garments, for the maids of the bryde. As theirs were for a conformity among
the lovers of her that committed fornication, so be ours for an uniformity
among the lovers of a pure and chaste virgin: As theirs were for Treat: of
ceremon: sect. 3.
notes and distinctions between the people and the priests, so be ours held
to be marks between the shepheardes and the sheep: As theirs might not be
worn but upon the upper peltes of their priests, so must not ours be used,
but upon the upper garments of our ministers: As their Priests might not
sacrifice, nor make holy water without them, even so is it not lawful for our
Ministers without them, to pray or to administer the Sacraments. As theirs
were significant, and yet notwithstanding, were altogether idle, vain,
fruitless, and without edification: so be ours mainteyned to be neither dark
nor dumme ceremonies, to serve as a decent order, and discipline, and such as
be apt to stir up the dull mind of man, to the remembrance of his duty to
God, by some special signification, whereby he might be edified, to have
respect how to please God and profit the church. Whereas nevertheless they be
in truth without edificatio^, without profit, nay rather hurtful to the
church, without pleasing God, without use, idle, vain, and needles; As theirs
might not be used at any other time, or in any other place, but only in the
place and at the time of their service of their false god; so may not ours be
used in any other place, or at any other time, but only at the time, and in the
place of the worship of the true God.

And lastly, whosoever among the Priests, refused to wear their Surplices,
were adjudged Scismatickes and to be excommunicated; even so what soever
minister, among our Ministers, denies to receive and to put on one of our
Surplices, he is at the pleasure of his ordinary, for such refusal, to be
suspended, excommunicated, and deprived. In so much as there is not any one
least circumstance to be found, wherein their, and our Surplices, differ in
matter, form, use, end, or application.

And thus much of our Demaundes, grounded upon holy Writ, whether the
Christian Magistrate, may command and appropriate a Ministerial garment for
the Ministers of the Gospel, and especially such a Ministerial garment, as
has been a priestly garment, for the Priests of that great Idol the Mass.
Now it follows that we demand, upon what rules of holy Writ the making of
a Cross, and signing of the child in the forehead in the administration of
Baptism is grounded; against which we propound these grounds of holy Writ.

Grounds out of holy writ against the use of the Cross in Baptism.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. Exodus 20


All they that make an Image are vanity, and their delectable things Isa. 44.
9.
nothing profit.

Every man is a beast by his own knowledge. Ierem. 10* 14. 15. 17 Isa. 29, 13


This people have removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward me,
was taught by the precept of man.

In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of Math. 15. 8.
men.

From which grounds we demand:

Whether your Lordships can prove out of holy Writ, that there can be a
service yealded unto God, where God has not given a commandment?

Whether the more a man thinks to do any thing by his own wisdom, and
not as God instructs him, the more he do not prove him self to be a vile
beast?

Whether any thing can be acceptable in the sight of God, which he never
required at our hands?

Whether God will be honored, according to man's fantasy, or rather does not
detest, whatsoever is not grounded upon his word?

If your Lordships for the avoiding of these demandes, shall deny the feigned
making of a cross, and feigned signing of the child in the forehead with a
cross, in the administration of Baptism, to be any service, or to be any
worship unto God, and therefore neither voluntary service, neither
will worship unto God: then we demand for what intent, or to what end, the
making of a Cross, and signinge the forehead of the child with a cross, is
commanded as a necessary service, to be performed by the Minister, in that
public act of Gods worship? for if the form and manner of Gods worship (as
you say) be established, prescribed, and contained in the book of common
Constitut. and ca. published 1604. com. 4. 10.
prayer, if also the ministration of the Sacrament commanded in that book, be
(as you say) no corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful worship, neither
containing any thing in it that is repugnant to the scriptures: how should not
the making of a Cross, and signing of the child in the forehead with a
cross, but be a pure, a religious, and a lawful worship unto God? Besides, if
making a cross upon the childs forehead, and signing the forehead of the
child with a cross, be no act of gods worship in the administration of
Baptism; Then we demand, how the Minister in foro co^scientiae, can be
guiltles of taking the holy name of God in vain, when as in the act of Gods
service and worship, he does neither worship, nor serve God?

But, Sirs, by your patience, the Minister in obeying the authority of Bishops.
the Church, when she commands him, to make a Cross, herein obeys God.

Why then, by your Lordships favor, we demand, whether the Gentl.
church do serve God, or do but please her self, in that her commandment?
For (say we) where no commandment of God, there no service unto God: And
therefore if the Church, by such her commandment, do but please her self;
and not serve and please God. Then we demand, whether the Church in thus
pleasing her self, and not serving ^od, do not offend God, as much, nay rather
more, then if she had commanded a voluntary service, and a will worship unto
God?

But, Sirs, the act of making a Cross, and signing the child in the Bishops.
forehead with a cross, is no part of baptism, for we grant, that baptism
is perfect and absolute without it.

But yet by your Lordships favor, the question is not, whether making Gentl.
of a cross, or signing with a cross, be any part of baptism, but whether
making of a cross, and signing with a cross, be any part of the continued
act of the outward and divine worship given unto God in the public
administration of baptism? For if it be a mere traditionall, and no divine or
religious action* or if it be partly traditional, and partly divine, we still
urge your Lordships to prove unto us, by the holy scriptures, whether it were
ever lawful in any act of Gods worship, to act a thing merely traditionall,
or partly traditionall, and partly divine.

As for the action of sitting, standing, kneeling, going, reading, praying,
preaching, and if there be any other Divine, natural, or necessary actions,
powers or faculties of the body or mind, without which no outward service can
be yealded unto God.

We confess, that the Church with the Magistrates consent, may determine of
the comely and orderly acting of these things: because Aliquo per Deum mandato,
omnia ea mandantur, ne quibus illud mandatum commode and religiose adimpleri
non potest: And therefore those divine, necessary, and natural actions before
remembered, depending upon, or proceeding from the powers and faculties of the
body or mind, being such as without which the outward service of God can not*
commodiously, decently, and orderly be accomplished, we affirm, that they be
confirmed unto us from general rules of holy writ.

And this also may serve for an answer, for the having of water, and a vessel
to conteyne water; because, as water of necessity is required to the
administration of baptism, so must also water (we having no waters running
through our churches) of necessity be contained in some vessel* but as for
making a cross, or signing the forehead of the child with a cross in
baptism, because the same by your confession, is no part of Baptism; And
because also the same is not properly and simply any necessary, natural or
divine actio^, as without which Baptism can not be administered; Nay, because
it is such an action, as without which Baptism very decently and orderly may
be administered: we pray your Lordships to resolve us out of holy Writ, how
the Minister may act the sign in the outward act of Gods worship: And yet
not break (as erst has been said) either the second commandment, by
outwardly serving God otherwise then he has commanded in his word, or not
violate the third commandment, by taking his holy Name in vain?

But by your patience, Sirs, this making a cross upon the childs forehead,
Bishops.
and this signing him with a sign of the cross, in token, etc. though the
same be no part of Baptism, nor any part of the outward worship of God, nor
any natural, nor necessary action of the body or mind, without which Baptism
can not be administered, yet is the same a solemnity, and an ornament
apperteyning unto Baptism, by the order of the church* which ought not to be
omitted and left undone.

But by your Lordships favor, this your Apology is of no fresher Gentl.
hue, nor of any deeper dye, then wherewith the great Papists and fond
Canonistes have always bepainted and becouloured their signing, their salting,
their spitteling, their oyling, their chrismating, and their other such like
solemnities, according to these verses:

Sal, oleum, chrisma, cereus, chrismate, saliua,
Flatus, virtutem Baptismatis ista figurant;
Haec cum patrinis, non mutant esse, sed ornant.
And therefore we pray your Lordships to resolve us by some place of holy
Writ, whether the Papists and you, or either of you, be enabled to invent, or
ordeyne such solemnities, ornaments, signs and figures of crosses to be used
in the public administration of Baptism, as never once came in the mind of
God to have devised or used? And so much the rather do we desire your
Lordships resolutions herein, because there is no manner of solemnity, sign,
figure or ornament of a cross, required by the book of common prayer, to be
used in that administration of Baptism, which in the same book, is entitled
private Baptism.

For if Baptism without any real solemnity, or actual ornament of a cross,
or of the sign of a cross, may be administered privately, how much more
without these humane solemnities and ornaments might baptism be administered
publicly?

There being then in the Church of England, two forms and manners of the
administration of Baptism, the one private, the other public; the one with a
cross, the other without a cross, and both of these concluded by your late
Canons, not to be corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful, by means also whereof
there is to be seen no co^formitie, or uniformity between having solemnities
and ornaments of crosses, and signs of crosses in public baptism, and
between the not having solemnities and ornaments of crosses, and signs of
crosses in private baptism: we pray your Ll. to resolve us out of holy writ;
whether these ornaments and solemnities of crosses, and signs of crosses, for
the stability of public peace and quiet in the church, and the not enforcing
of any man's conscience with the use of the cross, might not as well be left out
in the administration of public, as it is in the administration of private
baptism?

For whether respect be had to the brethren offended, or made weak by the use
thereof, or whether we regard the not co^firming and strenghtening of the
superstitious in their error, there is far much more danger like to ensue,
both to the one sort and to the other, by the use of it, in public, then in
private Baptism, by reason that the assembly generally is evermore great in
the one, and never but small in the other.

But to let pass this deformity of crossing and not crossing, in publik and
private baptism, we will prosecute some few demands, not yet moved, concerning
the feigned imaginary and ayrie crossing, used in public Baptism. And first,
we pray your Lordships to resolve us out of holy writ, how a Minister, in foro
conscientiae, can be clear and without sin, when as in the same public and
continewed act of Gods worship, imaginarily and feignedly he shall affirm the
doing of a thing, which indeed and in truth he does not, ne possibly can do? if
the Minister then without some instrument, chalk, rudle or such like, can make
no cross upon the child's forehead, and yet shall say (as the book
prescribes) that he signeth him with the sign of the cross, what a gross
fitten call ye that?

To affirm that the passing of the Ministers hand, thu^me or finger, croswise
in the air over the child's forehead, is to make a cross upon the child's
forehead, and that the same passing in the air, is also the sign of a cross,
this (we say) to affirm, is as if a man should assevere, that the flying of a
bird in the air, and the slyding of a serpent upon a stone, leaves a bird,
and the sign of a bird in the air; a serpent, and the sign of a serpent,
upon a stone: And to say that there is an invisible cross, or a sign of an
invisible sign of a cross, remaining in the air over the childs forehead,
how absurd, and without all reason that saying is, we leave to your Lordships
considerations.

For if it be impossible to make a cross, or the sign of a cross, upon the
running water, much more impossible is it to make a cross, or the sign of a
cross, in the subtle and replenishing air: wherefore unless your Lordships
can prove by some rule of holy Writ, that every Minister is endowed with power
from above, to make crosses, and signs of crosses, which be invisible, and
that these invisible signs and crosses be also invisible tokens in the childs
forehead, of his being not ashamed of Christ crucified, of his manfull
fighting, etc. we demand, what good plea in foro conscientiae, your Lordships
can frame to dischardge the Minister from being guilty of a thrice feigned,
imaginary and lying cross? we say, thrice feigned at the least.

First, we receive and do sign thee: secondly, with the sign; and thirdly,
of the Cross. And what, if we said fourthly, in token? for what token can the
child, or his witness, in his name receive and keep, when as neither he, nor
they, have any cross, any sign, or any token of a cross given or delivered
unto them at all? which manner of crossing, signing and tokening, may well be
compared to our atturnies proceeding by signs and profers, signs and profers;
when indeed by such their pleadings they hasten not, but delay their clyents
causes, only making signs and profers, signs and profers, as though by this
means they hastened to an end, when as indeed they mind nothing less.

But to speak no more of the Ministers feigned signs and profers of making
crosses and signs of crosses in the air, upon or over the child's forehead;
We demand? whether not to be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ
crucified; whether not to be ashamed manfully to fight under his banner,
against sin, the world and the devil; whether not to be ashamed to continewe
Christ's faithful soldier and servant to his life's end? We demand (we say)
whether these three graces, be not all, and every of them, inward, invisible
and spiritual graces, yea or no?

If your Lordships answer, (as the truth is) that these graces be all
spiritual, invisible and inward graces, then because by the book of common
prayer (so the Minister make a cross) it is not material of what form the
cross be made: we demand, by what rules of holy writ, your Lordships can
prove, that the sign of the cross of saint John's of Jerusalem, the sign of
saint Andrews cross, the sign of saint Peter's cross, the sign of the cross
made after the Greek T. or like the Hebrew chapter or like the Greek X. or the
sign of any other cross, (for there be diverse other forms of crosses) can be
a token of these spiritual and invisible graces, if so be they were engraven
with a Diamond upon the childs forehead.

If your Lordships answer affirmatively, that the sign of saint Andrews
cross, of saint John's cross, of saint Peter's cross, or the sign of any
other cross, made by the Minister upon the childs forehead, is a token of
these inward, spiritual and invisible graces; then we demand, whether your
Lordships ascribe not like power to every minister, for the tra^substantiation
of every invisible cross, feinedly made in the administration of Baptism, to
the form of a true and visible cross, as the Pope attributes to every
Priest, for the transubstantiation of every piece of bread, whereupon he
blows at the Altar, into the Body of Christ? or if your Lordships answer
(because there is no cross sensibly to be seen, but intelligiblie to be
understood) that the imaginary feigned and ayrie cross is a token of these
invisible and spiritual graces; then again we pray your Lordships to resolve
us out of holy Writ, whether God did ever ordeine any invisible signs, to be
invisible tokens, of invisible graces, yea or no?

And if God did never ordeine such signs; then we demand, what authority man
has to ordeine such signs?

But if your Lordships shall answer negatively, viz: that the invisible sign
of the cross, imaginarily pretended to be made by the Minister, is not a
token of these inward and spiritual graces; then we demand, whether your
Lordships with your own mouths pronounce not that thing to be false, which
the book of common prayer commands every Minister, with his lips to
proclaim to be true?

But Sirs, by your leave, the Church has power from Christ to ordeyne Bb.
rites and ceremonies, and the Magistrate may command that all things be done
decently and according to order, in the time of prayer and administration of
Sacraments.

Yea, and so say we too: Nay we say more, that the Christian Magistrate Gentl.
knowing any thing to be done indecently and unorderly, shall sin against
God, if by his authority, he take not order, for reformation of such disorder;
but by your Lordships favor, the question is not whether the Church may
ordeine Rites and Ceremonies, or whether the Christian Magistrate may command
such things, as by the Apostles doctrine are to be done, that the same be done
decently and orderly: but the question is, whether all rites and ceremonies
indefinitlie, and without limitation approved by the Church and commanded by
the Magistrate to be decent, and to be in order, be in deed and without
contradiction absolutely decent, and absolutely in order? And for this cause
and in this regard only, both by ministers and people, without any search or
inquisitio^ of their agreeablenes with holy writ, absolutely to be receyved,
as if the same by some holy oracle, were immediately sent unto them from God?

For be it supposed, that some rites and ceremonies ordained by the Church and
commanded by the Christian Magistrate, be of the nature of things either
unlawful, or inexpedient, or that they be vain, idle, unnecessary and
unprofitable things: in these cases, we pray your Lordships to resolve us out
of holy Writ, whether the Apostles rule of having all things to be done
decently and according to order in the Church cease not? For how should those
things be done decently and orderly in the Church for the which the Church has
no warrant, that the same should be done at all?

The Apostle then having taught the Corinthians, that the things (...) Cor.
14. 40.
which he wrote, were the commandments of the Lord, and concluding that all
things treated of by him in the former parts of that chapter, touching the
right use of spiritual gifts, are to be done decently and in order, we
demand, whether your Lordships from this apostolical rule can religiously
conclude any otherwise then thus?

All the commandments and all the spiritual gifts of the Lord, are to be
done and used in the Church decently and orderly.

But the wearing of a Surplice, in time of prayer and administration of
Sacraments, the making of a Cross upon the childs forehead, etc. And
kneeling in the act of receyving bread and wine at the Lords Table, be
spiritual gifts, or at leastwise be the commandments of the Lord:

Therefore these things are to be done decently and in order.

But now if your Lordships being not able to strengthen your minor proposition
by any place of holy Writ, shall make the same answer which the Romanistes
frame in all like cases, for the Authority of their church, namely: that the
Ministers, and people, ought preciselie to observe and do these things, if
not propter Authoritatem Apostolicam, yet propter authoritatem Ecclesiae, seu
Christiani Magistratus sic statuentis: Then do your Lordships but as they do,
even run from the Rock, and buyld upon the Sand; yea and besides, flee from
the point in question: making the Church, and Christian Magistrate not only to
be preservers, but commanders of all Evangelicall decency and order, And then
might not this consequution, and conclusion infallibly be true?

What soever things by the Church, with consent of the Christian Magistrate,
be, or shall be appointed, for Evangelicall decency and order in the Church: the
same without all exception, and challendge of any vndecencie, or disorder, must
and ought to be receyved of every member of the Church, for decent and orderly
things:

But all such and such things by the Church, with consent of the Christian
Magistrate be appointed, etc.

Therefore all such and such things, must and ought, without all exception, be
receyved, etc.

Yea, Sirs: and is not this a good consequution, and does not this Bb.
conclusion necessarily follow? For who shall be Judge of Evangelicall
decency and order, if not the Church and Christian Magistrate alone?

Before we answer unto this question, we deny your proposition, Gentl.
because the same seems unto us to be rather an inversion, then a true
conversion of the Apostles rule, viz.

Let all things be done decently and in order.

1 Cor. 14. 4(...)
The meaning whereof, according to the Analogy of the place, we take to be
this, namely: that all things, or what soever things are to be done in the
Church, that the same things ought to be done decently and in order:

But what agreement, we pray you, has this rule with your proposition? or what
coherence has your proposition with this rule? for by what art can you frame
this your proposition upon the Apostles foundation?

This your proposition (we say) namely all things, or whatsoever things the
Church with consent of the Christian Magistrate shall authorize for decency
and order, the same are all decent and orderly things.

Indeed, if this your proposition could be proved true by any doctrine drawn
from any other place of holy Writ, we would easily grant, the church with
consent of the christian Magistrate having commanded Copes, Surplices, Crosses,
kneelings, etc. to be used in the church, that this the Apostles rule did bind
all those to kneel, to make crosses, and to wear Copes, and Surplices, not
vngaynely, disorderly or slovenly, but comely, hansomely, and netely; but
seeing your proposition is false, and can not by any other place of holy
scripture be proved true, you have drawn in the Apostles rule, as it were by
the hair, and plucked it in, as it were by the heels, to a wrong purpose, and
forced it to a wrong sense.

Furthermore, because these words decency and order, mentioned in your
proposition, carry a double sense, we pray your Lordships to resolve us,
whether by these words decency and order, you mean simply such a decency,
and such an order, as for the allowance whereof, plain and evident testimonies
may be found in holy Writ, that the same decency and order is pleasing unto
God? or whether you mean such a decency and order only, as for the which (we
having no other warrant, then tradition or commaundment of man) is only
pleasinge unto man? touching which latter kind of decency and order, the same
being but humane, we demand, if either Ministers or people be not fully
persuaded in mind, that this humane decency and order, is by some general
rule of holy Writ, as well pleasing unto God; as the same by some law of man,
is known to be well pleasing unto man: we demand (we say) in this case
whether Minister or people, in foro conscientiae, be obliged to use this so
called and commanded decency or order, yea or no? For albeit every soul be
subject to the higher powers; nevertheless, for the avoiding of error, and
that the conscience of every soul may be upright with God, in her subjection,
to the ordinance of man: the conscience must take direction, not from the only
will and authority of man, but from the only Writ and authority of God. And
therefore as every Magistrate, ought to be fully persuaded in his conscience of
his command, before he conscionably may require, that to be obeyed which he
commands: even so it be hoveth every soul, before he obey, to be persuaded
fully in his mind, that the thing commanded, ought for conscience sake, to be
obeyed, because the same is approved by the holy word of God: For otherwise
howsoever outwardly he may serve, and please the Magistrate, yet inwardly and
in the spirit, he can never be assured that in this case, he shall serve God:
because the Magistrates commandment simply considered in it self, is not any
true spiritual guide, for the conscience of any soul, to be ledd and
conducted by.

Now then to your Lordships former question, whether the Church and supreme
christian Magistrate, ought not to sit, as sovereign Judge, upon the
conscience of every soul, about the determination of all decency and order to
be kept by that soul, your Lordships by this our discourse, easily may
perceave, that we may well answer your demand, if we propound but one question
to another.

And therefore we demand, who shall be sovereigne Judge over that soul and
conscience, that commands decency and order in the church, if not only the
holy word of God alone? And if the christian Magistrate must for the safety of
his soul, have some rule of holy writ, to be his sovereign Judge, for the
thing that he commands; how should not the christian subject in like sort
for the safety of his soul, have some word of faith, to be his sovereigne
Judge, for his subjection in the thing which he obeys? for so shall not the
conscience of him that commands, be any more a sovereigne Judge over him that
obeys, then shall the conscience of him that obeys, be sovereigne Judge
over him that commands.

But, Sirs, if this be so, what soverainitie do ye yield unto the Christian Bb.
Magistrate, above the subject, or what shall his authority avayle, when every
soul commanded to be subject to his power, shall examine the validity of the
lawfulness of his command? shall not every rule of holy writ, whereupon the
christian Magistrate does ground his conscience, for the thing commanded, be a
good and sufficient ground for the conscience of every one, in the thing that
is obeyed?

Unto this we answer; that the Christian Magistrates conscience can Gentl.
not be any sufficient discharge for the conscience of him that obeys,
unless your Lordships be able to prove unto us by some place of holy Writ,
that the Magistrate touching the lawfulnes of the thing commanded, can not
err. For every soul, as well of the subject, must answer and give an account
for him self unto God, for the thing wherein he obeys, as the Magistrate
must for the thing which he commands; for the good and rightful obedience,
and command whereof, he has appointed his holy word alone, to be the only
Judge as well unto the subject, as unto the Magistrate: or else what
soverainitie should the word of God bear over the conscience of a subject, if
so be the Magistrates conscience and command should be the sovereign Judge
over the subjects soul, and sway the subjects conscience? And yet by this
means do we not take away the due preeminence and authority, which by the
holy Word of God is given to the civil Magistrate, over the subject: For in
that, (...)om. 13.
that every soul is commanded to be subject, for conscience sake, to the
higher powers, this scripture by your Lordships patience (as we take it) is to
be understood, not for the conscience of him that commands, but for the
conscience of him that obeys: because the subject, without the breach of his
conscience, can not contemn the civil government, which God has appointed,
not to be over the soul, but to be over the body. And indeed to establish the
command or conscience of the civil Magistrate, to be the squire and plu^met of
every subjects conscience, were to wrest the holy Scriptures, and to establish
(as the Antichristianites do) a tyranny over the consciences of subjects: Thus
much touching that later kind of humane decency and order before spoken of.

And as concerning that kind of decency and order for the which there may be
testimonies found in holy Writ, that they be pleasing unto God: we affirm that
the church and Christian Magistrate ought not only to be commanders and
preservers of the same, but that both Ministers and people also ought to be
followers and embracers thereof.

Nay, we say more, yea we affirm, that every humane decency and order
whatsoever ought to stoop and give place unto that order and decency for the
which testimonies are to be found in holy writ, that the same be pleasing unto
God, And therefore we demand, by what rule of holy writ, your Lordships can
prove your late convocationall canons, to have allowance from the spirit of
Christ, when as by the same ye have commanded a decency and order, merely
humane precisely to be observed in the church, instead of that decency and
order which at the beginning was in the church and which being pleasing unto
God could not be but divine?

It had been (in our judgments) a fact not simply commendable, if your
Lordships had but invented and added an humane decency and order unto that
which has warrant from holy writ, to be divine: but wholly to disseyse the
Church of that decency and order, which by testimony of holy Writ, is
witnessed to be pleasing unto God; and to give your own devises, decencies
and orders, liverie and seysin this to do, we demand, whether, in foro
conscientiae, it be not a double sin, and in curiae Christianitatis, deserve
not a double censure?

But, Sirs, by your patience, what is that Divine order, and what is that
Bishops.
Divine decency, whereof we have disseysed the Churches, and what decency and
order, of our own, have we put in seysin thereof?

By your Lordships favor, before we make full answer unto this your Gentl.
question; we demand, whether your Lordships be able to prove out of holy
Writ, that the outward form and manner of acting any service unto God, by our
Savior Christ or his Apostles in prayer, preaching the word and administering
the Sacraments, was an unorderly, or an indecent form or manner of acting that
service before God, yea or no?

If your Lordships answer, as the truth is, that the outward manner of acting
every kind of service by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, was so decently
and orderly done, and so acceptable unto God, as nothing in the outward acting
thereof could be more, we then pray your Lordships to resolve us first, what
warrant you have out of holy writ, to disseyse all the Ministers of the
outward acting of the whole worship of God in prayer and administering the
Sacraments, without a Surplice?

Secondly, what warrant you have from the spirit of Christ, to disseyse all the
Ministers of the acting of some part of Gods worship, in the administration of
public Baptism, without making a cross upon the childs forehead, and
signing him with the sign of the cross?

Lastly, what approbation you have from the spirit of Christ, wholly Constable. 27
to disseyse all the sons and daughters of God, of the act of sitting in the
act of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper? For in that you have
commanded that no Minister, when he celebrateth the communion, shall wittingly
administer the same to any but to such as kneel, you have, by consequence,
inhibited every one that sits, to receive the same. And thus to establish
your own humane decency and order of kneeling, in the act of receiving the
communion, you have disseysed us of that Evangelical decency and order of
sitting, warranted unto the Ministers and unto us by the example of our Savior
Christ and his Mar. 14. 18.
Apostles, when as at his last Supper, he him self delivered both the Bread and
the Wine unto his Apostles, as they sat, and not as they kneeled at the Table;
whereby it appears that you looked not unto the holy one of Israel, nor
sought unto the Lord; and he yet is wisest. Isa. 21. 1. 2


But, Sirs, by your patience, it is not required as a thing of mere
necessity, Bb.
as though without kneeling the Sacrament might not lawfully be ministered and
received at all, but for reverence and conformities sake only, it is commanded
that the people should kneel.

Why then, by your Lordships favor, we demand, unto whom this reverence Gentl.
is yealded, and unto what thing this conformity is proportioned? for that
this form of kneeling is not conformed to the Apostles manner of sitting at the
table, is evident, nether can it be denied, but that this kind of reverence is
fashioned like to that manner of reverence, which every catholic fornicatour,
by the ordinance of his love the great whore, does yealde unto his Idol, when
he received his breaden Levi. 18. 3. 19. 27. 2. Cor. 6. 14 15. 16.
god: wherefore we pray your Lordships to resolve us out of holy Writ, whether
your conformity, and your reverence of kneeling (in the act of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper) may not rightly be condemned, as things not
having any due reverence, conformity or proportion with the written Law of
God, or example of our Savior Christ and his Apostles before mentioned?

Besides, we demand, whether your Lordships had not worthily deserved to have
been much praised and commended by all the churches, for that thanks might have
been given by many unto God, for you, if so be for reverence unto the example
of our Savior Christ, who did all things well, and conformity to his
Apostles, ye had commanded the people not to have kneeled in the act of
receiving after the fashion of the catholic fornicatours, who do all things
ill, but rather to have sitten after the manner of the Apostles? especially
sithence between this manner prescribed of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper kneeling, and the manner of the receiving the Sacrament of Baptism, yea
and the word it self, sitting or standing, and not kneeling, there can be
found no manner of conformity at all; And yet as we deny not (when we come to
the Font, or to the Sermon, both before, and after the Word preached and
Baptism administered) but that we ought reverently and uniformly to kneel in
prayer and thankesgiving prescribed by the book. Even so also, we acknowledge,
when we come to the Lords Table, that before and after the deliverie and
receiving of the Sacrament, we ought to confess our sins, to pray and to
give thanks, reverently and uniformly kneeling upon our knees: But that we
should more kneel in the very act of receiving Bread and Wine, at the
Ministers hand, at the Lords Table, then in the name of our children, in the
very act of our childrens receiving Water upon their faces, or being dipped in
Water, we should kneel at the Font, in the time of Baptism; we for our
parts must confess, that as yet this mystery of conformity and reverence,
to kneel in the act of receiving the communion, is hidden from us: because we
see no more needfulnesse of reverence and conformity for kneeling, to be in
the act of receiving the one Sacrament, then to be in the act of receiving the
other: nor that there is any greater reverence, or conformity of kneeling to
be used, when the Minister breaks bread for our bodies, which perishes at
the communion Table, then when he breaks the bread of life for our souls,
which perishes not in the Pulpit.

Nay, furthermore what conformity is there prescribed in the book of common
prayer; when in one and the same church, and in one and the same act of
receiving the Lords Supper, it permits the Minister to receive standing, and
prescribes the people to receive kneeling? or what greater reverence is there
required by the sheep, then is to be performed by the shepherd, who should
be an example to the flock?

The words of the book for the Ministers standing, when he receives the
communion, seem unto us to be so perspicuous and without all manner of
ambiguitie, as without an absurdity they can not be construed to command a
Minister to kneel* for the manner how the Minister of the place, or how other
Ministers, if any be present to help him, should receive, is not prescribed at
all, unless it be prescribed, that he and they, should receive standing.

Nay, howsoever in the same book it be said, that the Minister shall deliver
the communion in both kinds to the people in their hands kneeling,
nevertheless it follows not hereupon, (the law being not in the negative,
but in the affirmative) that the Minister may not deliver the communion to the
people standing or sitting, or that the people be exactly bound not to stand or
to sit, but to kneel.

Besides, because by the book of common prayer of the second of Edw. 6.
whereunto only (as we take it) touching ornaments* rites, and ceremonies our
book has reference (which book also of Edw. the 6. by the repeal made of
the statute of primo of Queen Mary, in the first session of this last
Parliament is revived) because (we say) by this book of common prayer of the
second of Edw. 6. kneeling, crossing, holding up of hands, knocking upon the
breaste, and other gestures are to be used, at least, as every man's devotion
serves, without blame: We pray your Lordships to suffer us without blame, and
danger of your late canons, peaceably, and quietly to enjoy and possess our
liberty; That so we may receyve the communion, sitting, standing, or kneeling,
as every man's devotion serves.

And thus much for our full and perfect answer unto your questions of
disseysing the church of her evangelicall decency and order, and of reverence
and conformity, in kneeling in the act of receyving the communion; whereupon
we most instantly pray your Lordships, that you would be well pleased upon your
second thoughts, to heal your former errors; And withal to be content, not
only to suppress the use of your Copes, Surplices, making of Crosses, signing
with Crosses, tokening with Crosses* kneeling, etc.

But also to restore our possession, and to give us livery and seysin of all
those decencies, conformities, and reverend manner of prayer, preaching the
word, receiving and administering the Sacraments (without Copes, Surplices,
Crosses, and kneelings) whereof the Churches were seysed in the Apostles times:
And which being moderated by the wisdom and authority of our Savior Christ,
we are most assured, can not be but well-pleasing unto God.

But, Sirs, by your patience, our Christian Magistrate imposes them, Bb.
as matters of order, according to that form, wherein he found the church at
his coming, and this his pleasure must command, and may satisfy us; if it
should please the King not to command them, we, for our parts* could be well
content not to urge them.

See, see, what a dalliance is this in a matter of so high a quality, and
Gentl.
touching the dignity, and pre-eminence of so excellent a person? what? was
your melody yesterday, and that in the presence of the King, and assembly of
his Nobles; was your melody but yesterday (we say) viz. No ceremony, no
Bishop: no Bishop, no King? and can your Lordships Lord Bishop of Lincolae
to day, sitting Iudicially in your Consistory (to censure the Ministers for
not conformity) thus sudenly change your note, and cry openly; No
commandment of ceremonies by the King; no imposition of ceremonies by the
Bishop? For is it not? as if you should have laid the whole blame upon the
King, and have spoken thus: No ceremonious King, no ceremonious Bishop? And yet
for all this, do not all men know, that your Lordships were too too
ceremonious, and too too great masters of ceremonies, before ever the King saw
your faces?

And how then comes it to pass (ceremonies having hitherto ben vpheld by your
Lordlines) that your Lordlines should not now stand but by ceremonies? or how
comes it to pass (your Lordlines heretofore being propped up by the crown
and scepter of our late Queen) that your Lordlines should now uphold the
scepter and crown of our Christian King?

This your Lordships gradation therefore, made upon the first day from the not
being of a Ceremony, to the not being of a Bishop, to the not being of a King:
And this your protestation made upon the next day, of the being of a King, to
the being of a ceremony, what else does the one and the other argue and
importe, but a fear and a suspicion (if the King should once command down
your laws of Ceremonies) that the Laws of your Lordlinesse likewise would of
them selves, sone after fall to the ground. And therefore whether the King did
conceive, that you might but gloss and flatter with your gradation, or whether
poor, simple and plain meaning men might be seduced by your protestation, we
know not, neither is it our purpose to enquire.

Only we can not but much marveile, that each of you professing him self to be
a Gad, and to be a Nathan: to be a Seer, and to be a Prophet unto our christian
Magistrate, should thus protest, and thus chardge the King, to be the only
spirit, by whom your selves do speak, and the only prophet from whom your
selves do learn.

Nay, what a thing is this? your Lordships prophesying unto the King, in the
name of the Lord; That your rites and ceremonies, are no way contrariant, or
repugnant, but every way agreeable and consonant to the holy word of God, and
meet to be retained, as well for the manner and form of Gods worship, as for
edification of the church, should notwithstanding openly avow the Kings
pleasure, and the Kings command, to be the fountain and welspring of your
prophesies?

Nay, which is more, your selves, making for your selves Ceremonious horns of
Iron, and assuring the king, that with the same he should be able to overthrowe
and push down al such as by your Lordships be falsely called puritanes, What a
thing is this, that you should notwithstanding, proclayme the kings mind, to
be, as it were, the only mould wherein your ceremonies were cast?

Nay, which is more, What a thing is this? your Lordships assuring to your
selves, to be the chiefest of the Lords Priests and Levites, should
notwithstanding put the holy Censores into his Majesty's hand, and lay the
holy Arcke of the Covenant, upon the kings shoulders, to burn incense, and
to bear it, and to carrye it him self alone?

Nay, which is more, What a thing is this (your Lordships by a definitive
sentence, publicly given, read and divulged in your sacred (so called) Synod,
having not only iudicially decreed, the lawfulnes of ornaments, rites and
ceremonies, but also humbly and professedly desired the same to be confirmed by
the Kings royal authority under the broad Seal of England) that you should
notwithstanding, for the execution of your said Decree, call to witness the
Kings command, and the Kings pleasure? As though the Kings pleasure and
command were the only cause, and not the effect of your decree; and not rather
your decree the only cause and not the effect of his Highness command?

Your second canon, by which the same power is justly (as we confess) given to
our Sovereigne Lord the King in causes ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings
had among the Jews, will not serve to excuse you, in the making of your
canons, if any of them be blame worthy; for the godly Kings of Judah, never
had any authority to command what ceremonies should be ordained among the
jews: Neither did King David, neither any other of the godly kings of Judah,
do any thing in building of the Temple, in distribution of offices among the
Levites, or in any manner services performed to the Lord, but the same was sent
unto them in writing from the hand of the Lord, or by the mouth of the
Prophets, or by casting of Lot.

What soever authority then the godly Kings of Judah had, to command
ceremonies once made, to be observed, the same authority, and none other in
matter of ceremonies, does your canon yeald unto the King: And therefore we
beseech your Lordships hereafter to carry such a loyal and conscionable
reverence, and estimation, to the honor and dignity of our Christian King, and
the noblenes of his kingly charity declared by his proclamation, as that
hereafter in your consistories and public seats of Judgment, you would use
conferences, arguments, and persuasions, ways of love, and gentleness, workings
by clemency, and weight of reason, to reclayme all that be in the ministry,
to the obedience of the church laws, according as by the Kings proclamation
you are required; rather the^ by rigor of law, shaking the kings sword, and
pressing the kings commandment, to enforce the trembling consciences of your
weak brethren, contrary to the Kings most noble and christian intention
plainly uttered by his proclamation.

There be sundry other points in his Majesty's proclamation, which by your
Lordships worthily deserved consideration, before you had begun those violent
courses, which some of you have pursued in this case: The peremptory day
assigned to the Ministers for their conformity by the King, being of more
authority then 1000. of your canonical admonitious, ^
would have been fully expired, before you had troubled the Ministers about
this matter, otherwise then by conferences, arguments, persuasions, etc.

All Ministers who had incurred no censures of the church or penalties 2.
of the law in the Queens time, or since the Kings reign, before the sixth of
July 1604. be exempted out of the proclamation; though before the day
appointed, they have not conformed them selves, to the orders of the Church.
And yet many such have you disquieted?

The Laws and orders of the Church remain very uncertain, so as 3.
it is not certain, to what laws and orders established the ministers should
conform them selves, And yet before the day expired, you have urged some
Ministers to conform them selves to Canons divulged since the Proclamation.

The Canon law, is utterly void within the Realm, and therefore 4.
your oath of Canonical obedience is of no force, and all your Canonical
admonitions not worth a rush.

The old provincial constitutions, entreat of no such oath, besides 5.
they little or nothing respect any orders, or ceremonies of our Church.

To which book of common prayer the Ministers should subscribe, 6.
in that manner and form, as by the Canon is required, is not decided. If they
subscribe to the book published since the Kings reign, they may then be
called into question, at every sessions and assizes, for using an other form,
then is prescribed in the Queens book, the same remaining still in force and
unrepealed: if subscription be urged to the Queens book, then may not the
Ministers yield thereunto, because the King and Bishops have concluded to
reform some things contained in the same, as being repugnant to the holy word
of God.

Besides, the book of common prayer of the second of Edward 6. touching
ornaments, rites and ceremonies, and whereunto for the same respect both the
Queens and the Kings book has reference, revived this last Parliament, by
disannulling the statute of repeal made the first of Queen Mary.

This book, we say of the 2. of Edw. 6* establishing other ornaments, rites and
ceremonies, then the former books do, some of those ceremonies also to be
used, or at least at every man's devotion, and the ornaments after another manner
the^ ours, make us greatly to stand in doubt, whether all ceremonies, contained
in every of these books, or but some, or which of them, are to be used, yea or
no.

Touching the late Canons, of what authority many of them be, may justly be
questioned: because some of them seem unto us, to be contrariant or repugnant
to the laws, statutes, and customs of the realm, some to be derogatorie to
the Kings prerogative royal, and other some to be repugnant to the holy word
of God, and therefore in all these three respects 25. H. 8. c. 19.
to be void canons, by the common law, and statutes of the realm.

Lastly, howsoever some ministers might be within the compass of the
proclamation, not conforming them selves, before the last of Nove^b. to the
laws established before the 16. of July, nevertheless the Bishops after the
day expired, ought to have atte^ded the Kings pleasure, by what ways and
means, he had determined to take from among the people; all occasions of
sects, divisions and unquietness, much less before the day, should they have
attempted any thing, unless, as the proclamation requires them, they had
provided meet persons, to be substitutes, in the places of those, who
wilfully had abandoned their charges.

These things being thus most providently, nobly, and Royally, for the quietness
of the church, set forth by the Kings proclamation, it had been a part of very
great wisdom and moderation for your Lordships (in our opinions) patiently to
have expected the Kings further direction, before by your untimely pressing the
kings commandment, authority and rigor of his laws, ye had indevoured the
enforcing of their consciences, without persuasions by weight of reason; And so
much the rather should your Lordships have done this, that hereby ye might have
satisfied, all civil Magistrates, Gentlemen and others of understanding, that
they seeing by your conferences, arguments, persuasions, love, gentleness,
clemency, and weight of reason, that the cause which you maintain, and not
that which they impugn, is good, might not in any sort have supported,
favored, or countenanced any factious ministers, in their obstinacy, as by
the proclamation they are required.

And yet by your Lordships favor, not to conceal any thing, which hitherto we
have (as we think) rightly conceaved of the Kings proclamation, we can not
but inform your Lordships, that by the same the King has more te^dered the
good estate of the ministers, and of their controversy in hand, then ever was
te^dred, by any former Prince, since popery was banished. For when was there
in England, before this time, by any kingly proclamation, any conference,
argument, persuasion, love, gentleness, clemency* and weight of reason,
commanded, and rigor of the law forbidden to be used by the Archbishops and
Bishops, for the reclayming of the ministers to the laws of the church?

When were any ministers by public authority, called, as it were, into open
field, to stand upon arguments and weight of reason?

When was it appointed by public authority, that any ministers should
answer, and that Archbishops and Bishops should oppose? that the ministers
should be defendants, and the Bishops plaintifes?

When was it proclaimed, by any Princes authority, that the Archbishops and
Bishops, to their uttermost indevours, by arguments, and weight of reason,
should prove unto the ministers, that the book of common prayer, books of
homilies, book of co^secrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, book of
Articles, and other laws, and orders of the church conteyne nothing, in the
whole, or in any part, disagreeable either in doctrine, or government to the
word of God?

All which things by the proclamation, are intended should be done, which
things also if the Archbishops and Bishops have done, the^ indeed we confess,
the ministers (that have not yielded to conform themselves) to be wilful, and
the King to be righteous, for the abandoning of sects, divisions and
unquietness, among his people, if he shall allow no factious ministers in their
obstinacy.

But if the Archbishops and Bishops have not endeavored, much less not
indevoured to the uttermost of their powers (as by the king they are required)
by conferences, arguments, persuasions, love, gentleness, clemency, and weight
of reason, to reclayme al ministers, to the obedience of the church laws; then
we can not see, how any civil Magistrates, Gentlemen, or others of
understanding, can be intended by the proclamation to be favorers, supporters,
or contenancers, of factiousnes, or obstinacy in the ministers, which are not
conformable.

As for those two and twenty thousand Ministers, if possible there Judge. 7. 3.
could have been so many, who, without any conferences, arguments,
persuasions, or weight of reason used by the Archbishops, or Bishops, have
turned their heels, and as Gedeons tymerous and fearful soldiers, have
returned and departed early from mount Gilead, before the appointed time came,
we leave them to the Lord, unto whom in this case they have stood, or fallen.
And who is able, to raise the^ up though for a time they be down?

Nay, if of the ten thousand (if possible there were so many) which be
left, there should nine thousand seven-hundered, bow down their knees, to
drink water at the Bishops poole, and but 300. only should stand up, to lapp
water with their tongues, as a dog lappeth, in that well of water, which
springs to eternal life, yet by these 300. only, is the Lord able to save
Israel, and to deliver the Medianites Reve. 11. 3. 4. 5.
into Gedeons hand.

Nay, if of these 300. but two only shall stand up, clothed in sackcloth, to be
witnesses, yet in the end, shall these two witnesses, be two Olyve trees, and
two Candlestickes standing before God, who governs the earth, out of whose
mouth, if any will hurt them, shall fire proceed and devour their enemies.

And thus much have we thought necessary to be spoken, touching our
understanding of the Kings pleasure and command, declared by his Highness
proclamation; yea this also have we done, not only in regard of our loyalty
unto our christian King, but also in regard of the clearing of ourselves from
every unjust imputation of being favorers, supporters, or countenancers of
factious ministers in their obstinacy, praying your Lordships to carry a
favorable construction of these our Demaundes; Because our desire is to be
fully satisfied by holy Writ, and not rest our judgments upon humane
authority, especially sithence both your Lordships and our selves, by the
experience of full fifty years, have both heard and seen how unprofitably,
and to no good purpose this salve of humane power has been applied unto the
church surfeted with drinkings, and eatings, of that romish strumpet: yea and
for our parts, we can not but be heartily sorry, that after so long a time of
trial, your Lordships should still remain so vnperswasible, as not once to
make experiment of the pouring in of some more sweet and medicinable oil, to
this so deadly and desperate a wound: Especially, the sore being at this day
as deep, as noisome, and as full of dead flesh, as the same was the very first
moment, that your predecessors began to stop the issue thereof, with this
kind of humane tente. And so we will proceed to our last ground drawn out of
holy Writ, for the resolutenes of our judgments whereupon, and wherein we
yet stand.

The third ground.
If thy brother be grieved for the meat, now walk thou not charitably, Romans
14. 15. Romans 14. 20. 21.
destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed.

It is evil for the man, which eats with offense.

It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any other thing,
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or made weak.

Let us not therefore judge one an other any more, but use your judgment Romans
14. 13.
rather in this, that no man put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block
before his brother.

From which grounds we demand.

First, whether your Lordships judge not all godly Ministers and true believers
within your jurisdictions, to be your Christian brethren. And whetherye, and
they be not all sons unto one Father, and servants unto one Lord?

Whether your Lordships be not of opinion, that the putting, and not putting on
of a Surplice, the making and the not making of a cross upon the child's
forehead in Baptism, the wearing and not wearing of a square Cap; and kneeling
and not kneeling, in the act of receiving bread and wine at the Lords Table,
be not things in their own nature of like indifferency, as were the eating,
and not eating of meats, drinking and not drinking of wine, or any thing in
the Apostles time?

Whether your Lordships can prove by any place of holy writ, that these rules
and precepts given by the Apostles of not greeving a brother for meat; of not
walking charitably by eating meat: of not destroying him, for whom Christ died
with meat; of not doing evil by eating meat, of not eating or drinking,
whereby a brother stumbleth, is offended, or made weak, and of not putting an
occasion, to fall before a brother by eating meat. We demand, (we say) whether
these the Apostles commandments, in the not doing of all things of like
indifferency, with that of not eating meat, and not drinking wine, do not
as well bind your Lordships at this day, as they did the Bishops, Pastors,
Elders and Brethren of that time? And therefore we demand:

If any of your Ll. had been Archbishop of Ephesus, or of Creete, had been
Bishop of Jerusalem, Rome or Colosse, in the Apostles time: whether under the
title of order and uniformity, or by right of superiority and power, (you
might without breach or co^tradiction of the Apostles doctrine) have commanded
any brethren, within your charge, being weak in faith, to have eaten meats,
forbidden by the law, or sacrificed unto Idols?

Again, if any of your Lordships in the Apostles time, had been an Archbishop
or a Bishop, and by your Archiepiscopall, or Episcopal authority, had
commanded the Pastors, Elders and Brethren under your chardge, being weak in
faith, by example of the strong in faith, and for conformities sake, to have
eaten meats sacrificed unto Idols, or forbidden by the law; we demand, whether
such your commandment had been a charitable commandment, yea or no?

Yea, and we demand, whether the same your commandment (under what pretense of
canonical obedience, unity or conformity, soever) might have excused the
weak in faith, from sinning against Christ, if at your commandment they being
not fully persuaded in their minds, had eaten of these meats doubtingly?

And if the Apostles charity were so great, as that he would never have 1.
Cor. 8. 13.
eaten flesh, while the world stands, rather then he would greeve or offend
his weak brother, or give him an occasion to sin; we dema^d how small
charity the men of our age may seem to have, who be so far from not greeving
and not offending a weak brother, and of not giving him an occasion to sin,
as that not only they content not the^ selves, by eating flesh themselves, to
grieve and to offend a weak brother, and to give him an occasion to sin, but
also command a weak brother to eat that meat, by eating whereof, he can not
but fall, but stumble, but grieve, but offend, but sin, and but destroy him
self? This kind of charity may deserve unhappily the name of some Synodal or
Provincial charity, but certes it can neverworthely deserve to be called an
Apostolical charity.

But, Sirs, you mistake the matter very much, you deceive your selves, and
Bishops.
draw not the cases rightly: The use of Crosses, Copes, Surplices, Cappes, and
kneelings are commanded by the christian Magistrates sovereign authority, only
as things indifferent for orders sake, and not that men should be grieved and
offended, or that they should fall, stumble, sin, and destroy them selves:

Touching the christian Magistrates authority about ordering rites Gentl.
and ceremonies in the church, we have somewhat at large argued before, which
we had thought might have fully satisfied your Lordships, but because it
pleases you still to press us with the same, we must once again plainly
signify unto you; that we believe, that your selves do not attribute any more
spiritual authority unto the King, to make, constitute and ordeine canons,
constitutions, rites or ceremonies, then you give unto him spiritual power to
preach the word, administer the Sacraments, and excommunicate: For we believe,
that your selves with the residue of the clergy, assembled by the Kings writ,
in your convocation, do chalendge all spiritual power unto your selves, to
make, ordeine and decree all manner of canons, constitutions, ordinances,
ornaments, rites and ceremonies in the Church.

Yea, and this spiritual power we believe, that you pretend to be derived unto
your selves, and the rest of the clergy in the convocation, not from any
spiritual power invested in the person of our sovereign Lord the King, but
only from the spiritual power of our Savior Christ alone. And this is
manifest by your Cxxxix. canon, for so are your words: Whosoever shall
hereafter affirm that the Sacred Synod of this nation in the name of Christ,
and by the Kings authority assembled, is not the church of England by
representation, let him be excommunicated, etc. These words (we say) of your
canon, viz. Sacred Synod is assembled in the name of Christ, and by authority
of the King, plainly testify, that you hold your Synod not to be assembled
by authority of the King, in the name of the King, or in the name of Christ
and the King, but only in the name of Christ: And therefore by your own
words, we are enforced to believe that you attribute unto the King none other
authority, then such as you attribute to the godly Kings of Judah: namely an
authority to assemble and command your persons, as they assembled and
commanded the persons of the Priests. What? to execute the 1. Chron. 13. 2.
rites and ceremonies of the Kings of Judah? No: but to execute the rites and
ceremonies of God.

And so we believe your persons being assembled by authority and commandment
of the King, that your selves by your own authority, and that in the name and
by the power of Christ, and not in the name and power of the King, do ordeine,
decree and make canons, constitutions, rites and ceremonies, as if they were
sent unto us, by your hands, from God. And thus much do the very first words
of your first canon, and some words in your 140. 141. canons clearly prove: For
howsoever in the title of your book, you use these words: Constitutions and
Canons treated and agreed upon, by the Bishop of London, etc.

Yet both in the proheme and body of your first cano^, you affirm as
follows. In your proheme or title you say thus: the Kings supremacy over the
church of England in causes ecclesiastical, you say not over the church and
causes, but over the church in causes* and in the body of the same cano^ you
say, we first decree and ordeine, that the Archb. of Canterbury, etc. and in
the Cxl. canon your words are these: Whosoever shall affime, that no manner of
person, etc. are to be subject to the decrees thereof (speaking of the Synod
eccllesiasticall) made and ratified by the kings Majesty's supreme authority,
etc. let him be, etc. your words also in your last cano^, are these, whosoever
shall hereafter affirm, etc. that the sacred Sinod assembled, etc. was a company
of persons, etc. in making canons and co^stitutions in causes ecclesiastical,
etc. ought to be despised, etc. the same being ratified, confirmed and enjoined
by the regal power, supremacy and authority, let them be excommunicated;
Now by all these your own words and sentences, we decree and ordeine: decrees
of the Synod, making canons by the sacred Synod; ratified, confirmed, enjoined
by the regal power, etc. by all these words (we say) we can not but believe,
that you chalendge your ecclesiastical power of ordeining, decreeing, and
making decrees, canons, constitutions, rites and ceremonies, to be invested in
your own persons assembled by authority of the King, from the authority and
power of Christ; and not from any spiritual or ecclesiastical power, invested
in the person of the King, and derived, and conveyed unto your persons
assembled by his regal writ, For then how should we not believe also, but
that you judged the Kings writ, to be no civil, but an ecclesiastical and
spiritual writ. But howsoever (as yet) we believe not this latter, yet still
we believe, that you appropriate unto your own persons assembled by the Kings
writ, a sole power, and that from our Savior Christ, to give unto your
decrees, canons, constitutions, rites and ceremonies, their first being and
their first birthright: and that you assign unto the King none other power,
but a power of their after birth, and of ratifying and confirming of that life,
and being, which your persons have first put into them: So that the King is in
this, but as it were an executioner of your canons, and not you the
executioners of the Kings decrees. Yea and thus much M. Doctor Bilson, in his
Book entitled, True difference, between Christian subjection, and unchristian
rebellion, Page 243. avoweth and testifies, whose words are these; We never
said that Princes had any spiritual power, it is a false collection of yours,
it is no part of our confession, and the sword which they bear, we never called
but external and te^porall.

Again to devise new rites and ceremonies for the Church, is not the Princes
vocation, but to receive and allow such as the Scriptures and canons commend,
and such as the Bishops and Pastors of the place shall advise, not infringing
the Scriptures or canons, and so for all other ecclesiastical things and
causes, Princes be neither the devisors nor directors of them, but the
confirmers and establishers of that which is good, and displacers, and
revengers of that which is evil, which power we say they have in all things,
be they spiritual, ecclesiastical or temporal. ibid. page 252.

Yea, and moreover we believe, if any should impugn or gainsay, this your
power of making spiritual and ecclesiastical decrees, in your convocatio^,
not to belong properly to your ministerial power which you have by your divine
offices in the church, that you would then fly for the interpretation of the
statute: 1. Elizab. to our late Queens injunctions; Title, admonition to
simple men.
whereby it is declared that nothing was, is, or shall be meant, or intended by
the oath required, to have any other duty allegiance, or band, then was
acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings, of famous memory K. H. the
eight her Majesty's Father, or to K. Ed. 6. her Majesty's brother: And that the
Kings and Queens of this Realm, may not challendge authoririe and power of
any ministry of divine offices in the Churches.

But under God to have soveraintie and rule of all manner of persons borne
within her Realms, so as no other foreigne power, shall or ought to have any
superiority over them; upon this iniunction (we say) we build our former
credence, that your Lordships judge your only persons, and the persons of the
rest of the Clergy, and not the ministry of your divine offices, or any
part thereof, to be under the obedience of the Kings power; unto which
ministry also of divine offices, you attribute right of ordeyning and making
canons, rites and ceremonies in the Church, as a right properly incident and
appertaining to that ministry, not of doctrine, but of divine government,
which you challendge to be due unto you, as unto Ministers and Officers
appointed to rule and govern the Church under Christ, by the holy Scriptures;
And therefore we pray your Lordships henceforwards to put us unto no more
pain, to answer this your argument, of Kingly and supreme authority.

For we believe assuredly, if Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons and the
rest of the clergy, assembled by the Kings writ, by their deliberate
counsel, voluntary and vnconstrayned will, had not in their Synod decreed the
use of Copes, Surplices, Crosses, square Cappes, Tippets, and such trash, or if
they had not by the president of their assembly, most instantly supplicated the
King to command the use of these things, thus ordained by them selves: we
persuade our selves assuredly, that the King by his absolute, regal and
supreme power, would never have constrained, Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
Archdeacons, etc. to have undergone the yoke of these ceremonies; for the King
right well knows, that in so doing, he should not have walked in the ways of
the Godly kings of Judah, then whose holy example to follow, his Highness has
protested, to desire nothing more.

Neither for any other purpose, as it seems unto us, by your late speeches in
the ears of the King ( no ceremony, no Bishop) do your selves press these
ceremonies, then that they should be in your own hands, as crosier staves, to
stay up from falling the tottering walls of your Lordly Jurisdictions. And yet
because we never read in holy Writ, that any ceremony was ever planted by our
heavenly Father, to be a leanetoo, for any Bishops of Gods planting, or that
the vnplanting of an humane ceremony, would be the vnplanting of any of Gods
Bishops, what should we gather from hence, but that your Lordships be no
Bishops of Gods planting; for Bishops planted by the hand of God, in the
Vineyard of Christ, be so fast set, and so deeply rooted, that by no blast or
storm of humane ceremonies, they can be blown up.

And thus much touching your argument of the Kings commandment, for orders
sake; As for the indifferency of the things commanded, the same has already
been handled in an other place; but touching the last part of your exception,
that the use of these things is not commanded, to the end, that men should be
grieved, offended, fall, stumble, sin, and destroy them selves; we reject
this, as an impertinent and insufficient answer to our demand; for our demand
tends not to insinuate, that we think, that these things be commanded to the
end, that every man by the use of them, should sin, but our demand concerns
the uncharitable commandment, of the use of these things imposed upon a weak
brother, which weak brother, by the use of these things (notwithstanding the
commandment) can not but full, but stumble, but give an offense, but sin.
What? because of the commandment? No: but by reason of his weakness, which the
commandment has not power to ridd, and take from him. And therefore unless
your Lordships by some learning taught you in holy Writ, can inform your
selves, and our Christian Magistrate, that your Synod in the Apostles absence,
is placed in the Apostolic chair, and being so placed, has also received by
the Apostles doctrine, an Apostolic authority, to command those things in
his absence, which he expressly forbade in his presence, we doubt greatly
whether your convocationall assembly, can charitably by Gods Law command the
weak in faith, to eat meat sacrificed unto Idols, and so by consequence to
wear a Surplice, a Cope, a square Cap, a shaven Crown, a Friars Coule, or a
Monckes Hood, yea or no?

Nay, sithence the Apostle has directly, and in plain terms forbidden 1.
Cor. 10 28.
the strong in faith, the eating of meat sacrificed unto Idols; because of
him that showed it, and for the conscience, not of thine, but of that other
which says, this is sacrificed unto Idols; and if withal, he have taught,
that it is evil, for a man to eat with offense: we demand, by what rule of
holy Writ, your Lordships can assure the conscience of our Christian
Magistrate, and the souls of your assembly in convocation, that his Highness
and they shall do charitably, uprightly, and not sin, in the sight of the
Lord, in case by a commandment, ye impose a necessity of eating meats, or
using things of like indifferency, upon the weak, which the weak, by the
Apostles doctrine have free liberty, nay rather which by the Apostles doctrine
they be taught, so long as they be weak, not to use.

Besides, if eating, drinking, appareling, crossing or kneeling, doubtingly and
without faith, or with offense, be sins against the soul and defilements of
the soul, we then pray your Ll. to deal plainly with us, and divinely to
teach us, whether it be an Apostolic charity, to command the doing of a thing
which can not be done, either by the weak in faith, but doubtingly; or by the
strong in faith without offense, giving an occasion to fall, or putting a
stumbling block before his brother?

But, Sirs, by your patience, the Christian Magistrate does not inioyne,
Bishops.
neither does the Clergy in their convocation decree, that the Ministers or
people, should wear a Surplice, make a Cross, or kneel doubtingly and
without faith, only his commandment is, that they kneel, that they make a
cross, and that they wear a Surplice.

Yea, by your Lordships favor, we demand, whether such their doubting, Gentl.
and such their being without faith, can either be purged by any glister or be
dispensed with, by any faculty of humane authority?

Yea, and whether any humane dispensation, or purgative receipt, may be of such
validity and operation, in foro conscientiae, that it may exempt the patient,
or the dispencer in foro conscientiae from sin, in case he judge his
apparel, crossings and kneelings, to be unclean?

For though the Christian Magistrate, be persuaded through the Lord Ro^. 14. 14
Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, yet to him that judges it
unclean, to him it is unclean. And therefore albeit the christian Magistrate
may not sin in his commandment, yet may neither Minister nor people, be
without sin, in their obedience.

For the conscience only of the co^mander (be he never so Christian) can not be
any warrant for the conscience of him that obeys doubtingly.

But, Sirs, it is their folly, and their wilful peevishnes, that (having been
so Bb.
long a time instructed) they have no better profited, in the knowledge of their
christian liberty, and of the cleanes of the things: (by my faith) if they
continue weak long, it were not amiss to bring some of them to the stake.
Oh! my Lords, bona verba quaesumus, soft fire makes sweet malt, preach Gentl.
faith we beseech your Lordships, but swear not by your faith: For by your
Lordships favor, if the Apostle (having as well by doctrine as by example taught
the weak brethren, among the Romans and Corinthians, of their Romans 14. 1. Cor.
8.
Christian liberty, did neither reprove them of peevishnes, wilfulnes, or
folly, neither yet condemn their ignorance of Christian liberty to be a sin
against Christ, albeit the same their ignorance, consisted only about the use
of meats, created for the benefit of man's life; we desire your Lordships to
resolve us out of holy Writ, whether ignorance of Christian liberty, in the
weak of our time, which consists about the use of things dedicated to the
service of an Idol, may be a sin against Christ, for not using the same, in
the worship of the true God?

Besides, we demand, by what rule of holy wtitt your Lordships in these things
may condemn an other man's servant, or judge his error of christian liberty
in this case, to be worthy of punishment? For seeing ye be not able to make
him stand, whom God has left weak, and not enabled to stand: And seeing the
Apostle did not prescribe unto the weak brethren of his time, any time for the
amendment of their error, of the not use of things indifferent, but did
rather bind him self and all other, for all ages to come, by his example, never
to eat flesh, while the world stands, that he might not offend his brother,
or cause him to fall, or to stumble: The Apostle, we say, having appointed no
time, no not while the world stands in this case, and all others of the same
nature, we demand, by what rule of holy Writ, your Lordships may limite a
certain time, as by the eight, tenth or twelfe month for the reformation of
judgment, in this but supposed error, of not using Popish apparel, crossings
and kneelings?

Nay if by the decree and canons of the Apostle, both Ministers and people, be
infranchised, to use, and not to use, these things freely and frankly without
let; we then demand, by what rule of holy Writ, it may be lawful for your
Synod, by a provincial ordinance and constitution, to change and to turn
this their Christian freedom and liberty, into a mere slavish servitude and
necessity? And therefore we protest from your Synod, and avow, that your
Synod in this case, was not guided by the spirit of Christ, and that
thereupon it follows your decrees, (so many of them) as abate the edge of
charity, whetted upon the brethren, by the Apostles rule, or bringing into
bondage again, servants Cor. 10. 28.
manumissed by the authority of Christ, that the same your decrees are both
erroneous in them selves, and injurious to the church of God.

For unless the world have been dissolved since the Apostles time, and that
the same world, stand not now, which stood then; or unless the same be not
charity now, and the same freedom now, which the Apostle commended for
charity, and left for freedom: or unless you would have us, wink with our
eyes, least we should see, and stop our ears, least we should hear, and
harden our hearts least we should understand, and consequently have no faith,
except it be a Synodall, a Provincial, or a Canturbury-church faith: we must
needs speak both what we have seen, what we have heard, and what we have
understood, out of holy scriptures; Namely that some of your Synodall decrees
be opposite and repugnant to the Apostles both christian charity and christian
liberty.

For if it be sin for one brother, to do any act, by doing whereof an other
brothers conscience, is wounded and made weak; if also whosoever shall wound
the weak conscience, of a brother, and sin against a brother, does sin
against Christ: then of necessity be your canons of popish rites and
ceremonies, both uncharitable canons against your brethren, and sinful canons
against Christ. For though it were free for christians to use Copes, Surplices,
square Cappes, Crosses, etc. civilly upon their backs, heads or foreheads; yet
if some remain ignorant of this liberty, and thinking them to be unclean, as
having been things offered to the service of an Idol, should by the example of
others, with wavering consciences, enterprise to use them, when inwardly they
think the use of them to displease God: if in this case (we say) men shall
sin against Christ: how much more shall they sin against Christ, when they
shall use them in the worship of God? against which use, they have many
testimonies out of holy Writ, seated in their consciences by the finger of
God, that their use is altogether unlawful in the worship of God.

On the other side, if it be no sin against Christ, for weak brethren not to
use either these or any other relickes, monumentes and memorialls of Idolatry;
in the service and worship of the true God: If also the weak in faith can not
use the^ waveringly, without sin against Christ, If lastly they have liberty
and freedom, by the Apostles doctrine, not to use them at all; we desire your
Lordships to resolve us out of holy Writ, how it may be lawful, in foro
conscientiae, to bring weak brethren, before the seats of Magistrates, to
excommunicate them, to revile them, and to speak all manner of evil against
them, for using their Apostolical freedom, for being charitable, and for not
committing sin.

But, Sirs, by your patience, they be not handled after any such manner, simply,
Bb.
and only for not using the Surplice, not making a cross, not kneeling in the
act of receyving the communion, but for contempt of not using and making the
same, and not kneeling at the commandment of the christian Magistrate, whom not
to obey in things indifferent, is to sin against Christ; and for this sin
they ought to be excommunicated, etc.

Though this be a Maxim in some learning, non solent quae superabundant Gentl.
vitiare scripturas; yet by your Lordships favor, your etc. swells to high,
and gulleth the passages of a soft spirit overmuch: your argument also of
christian Magistracy; at the least three times already urged, is in this place
more then superabundant, as amounting above the third, unto a fourth degree of
comparison. But to the points. And first, because (as erst has been said) it
was the decree, and supplication of your Synod that begat this commandment,
and not this commandment, that travayled, and brought your Synodall decree and
supplication to the birth: touching which your Synodall decree, for the use of
these ornaments, rites and ceremonies, by the weak, what else is there to be
added, then that we deny again, what in effect, more then once, and twice, we
have in this behalf denied before: namely granting these things in their own
nature to be indifferent, and that they may be used in the service of God, by
them that be strong in faith, and have knowledge of their indifferency:
nevertheless we deny that by any Decree of the Church, they may be appointed
to be used, by the weak, and them that have no knowledge of their
indifferency: For this we have learned of the nature of things indifferent, if
the conscience be strong, that the things be good; if the conscience be weak,
that they be evil: not in regard of their own nature, but in regard of the
conscience of him that judges them to be evil.

For as it is not meat it self, but the use of meat, whereunto the Apostle
would have men stick, so is it not apparel, a Cross, or a Ceremony,
whereupon the servantes of Christ are to cast their eyes, that they may not be
reprehended, by their consciences rightly guyded, for the use of that thing
which they use; And how should a conscience be rightly guyded in the thing
which he uses, unless he have ground out of Gods word for the thing which he
uses? But he has (you will say) a commandment of God, to obey the higher
powers, in the use of things indifferent. This is true in deed (say we) if
they (having for the guide of their consciences, the holy word of God) shall
judge the things, and the use of the things, for the service whereunto they
be commanded, to be indifferent; but they being not fully persuaded in their
minds, both of the indifferency of the things, and of the use of the things,
in that service whereunto they be commanded, how can your Lordships prove,
that in this case the Church may decree, and the Magistrate command them to do
an act, in the doing whereof, they shall commit sin, yea and which they can
by no means avoyde, if in doing the thing commanded, they stand in doubt. For
he that doubts is condemned, Ro^. 14. 23
in that he does, because he does it not of faith. And what soever is not of
faith, is sin.

Wherefore, because no canon, nor decree of the Church, can cleanse a man's
conscience of the weakness of faith, or pour strength into the same that he
sin not; we affirm, that every decree, and canon of your Synod, which gives
an occasion of offense, and emboldeneth the weak in faith to sin, by the use
of these rites and ceremonies, in the worship of God, is a Canon and is a
Decree conteyninge matter in the substance of it, contrary and repugnant to the
doctrine of the Apostle: And that therefore it is no sin, for any brother
weak in faith, not to obey the same, though at the request of your Synod, it
has pleased our Christian Magistrate to inioyne him thereunto: because the
groundwork of your Decree being sandy, the buylding of the Magistrate, can
not surely and firmly stand: This your Lordships argument therefore of the
lawful use of indifferent things, by commandment of the christian Magistrate,
for orders sake, is but a begging of the point in question: For we hold, that
no church, nor christian Magistrate, can decree or impose any rites and
ceremonies (being relickes, monuments, or memorialls of idolatry) to be used,
no not for orders sake, in the worship of the true God; because the use of all
relickes, monumentes, and memorialles of idolatry, in divine worship, is not a
thing, not only not indifferent, but a thing in all respects, merely and
absolutely unlawful. And therefore it imports your Lordships to prove unto
us, by some holy Writ, the contrary of that which we affirm: namely, that the
use of all Relickes, Monumentes, and Memorialles of Idolatry, (as things
indifferent for orders sake) may be decreed by the Church, and enjoined by the
Christian Magistrate, in the worship of God; what we have alleged out of holy
Writ, for the proof of our general negative, your Lordships have seen and
read, And now we wait and exspect that you would produce your strong reasons,
for the proof of your general affirmative.

Our general negative is this.
No Relics, Monumentes, or Memorialls of Idolatry may lawfully be decreed by
the Church, or enjoined by the Christian Magistrate to be used by the ministers
and servants of Christ, as indifferent rites and ceremonies, for orders sake,
in the worship of God: And if none, Then not your Copes, Surplices, Crosses,
etc.

Your Lordships affirmation.

All Relics, Monumentes, and Memorialls of Idolatry, may lawfully be
decreed by the Church and enjoined by the Christian Magistrate to be used by
the Ministers and servants of Christ, as indifferent rites and ceremonies, for
orders sake in the worship of God: And if all, why not then a Friars coule, for
an Archbishop: a Monks hood, for a Bishop: a shaven crown, for a Deane? and a
shaven chinne for an Archdeacon? But now alas, alas, to add and to speak but
one word touching the use of these rites, etc. appointed by your Synod for
orders sake, may not we, and all the Churches take up a complaynt, and
lamentably cry, saying: Alas, alas, what? Was it not possible for your sacred
Synod assembled (as you say) in the name of Christ, but that the same must
decree popish and Idolatrous rites and ceremonies, to be still continued in the
church for orders sake? Or was it not possible, for your sacred Synod,
assembled (as you say) in the name of Christ, but that the same must needs
devise and decree such rites, and ceremonies, for orders sake, as by the use
whereof your weak brethren, the servantes of Christ, can not be but tempted,
and captiously ensnared? Or was it not possible for your Synod, to have used
their judgment, but to the peril of the souls of their brethren? but to put
occasions of falling and of stumbling, before their brethren?

But by your patience, Sirs, we abhor the popish pollutions of the Surplice,
Bb.
of the Cross, and of the Idolatrous kneeling to a piece of bread. And as we
take not our garments, rites, and ceremonies from the papists, but from their
betters, so we profess the detestation of their superstitious abuses, and
restore them to their ancient integrity.

But by your Lordships favor, all men have not knowledge of the Idol, Genel.
as you have, All men's knowledge among us does not edify, but by their
knowledge many men be puffed up: All men among us profess not a detestation of
their pollutions: All men do not know those betters from whom (as you say)
they were taken. Neither lastly do all men understand, what that ancient
integrity is whereof you speak.

The Papists you know, as they daily commit fornication with that great whore,
so do they greatly delight, and much solace them selves, to see their minionly
Priests attired in the unchaste colors of their wanton paramoure.

Nay, with great insolency and ostentation they vaunt, that Crosses, In a
libell cast out in London against one of the Sherifes and certain Ministers.
Surplices, etc. are to be received and used, not as things indifferent, but as
necessary parts of Gods divine worship.

The Atheistes, as they neither embrace the doctrine, nor reverence the person
of the Minister of Christ, much less do they regard from whence ministerial
apparel originally came. Only if they live under an ordinary, who glories to
be a ceremony master, they can then find wit, and opportunity, and agilitie,
and nimblenes enough, to make use of these ceremonies, as by them to work
mischief against their Godly Minister, if at any time them selves be reproved
for their drunkenness, whoredom, usury, swearing, popery and such like: But
if any of them Bishop Horn.
being of the age of 60. 70. or 80. years, shall be willed by their honest
ordinary, to return home, and to learn of their Minister the Catechism,
before they prosecute their presentment, for the not wearing of a Surplice in
this case, rather then they will be religiously taught the principles of
godliness, at their Ministers hand, they force not for xxv. years space
together, to be wholly silent: Liking in the mean while the not wearing of a
Surplice well enough. And as for our parts, and others of the Religion, we
doubt very much whether your Lordships be able to prove, that the Surplice, the
cross in Baptism, or kneeling in the act of receiving the Communion, were by
their first original of any integrity, for an orderly or comely use of
outward divine service or worship, as now they be used, yea or no; For though
now they be urged as decent and comely signs and ornaments, to the form of
Gods worship; yet if at the beginning they were not for this end and purpose,
drawn directly or by consequence, from some express commandment of God, but
were merely the devises and inventions of men: then can we not assure our
selves, that they be restored, to their ancient integrity. For how should
their original be of ancient integrity, when they had beginning, not from
the will of God, but from the wit of man? not from the Well of life, but from
the pit of death? when they Deuteronomy. 31. 28
were not pure, but corrupt, and therefore without integrity? For which cause
we are to beware least we be taken in a snare by them, provoking the Lord to
anger through the works of our own hands.

And howsoever these ceremonies be taken from men, better affected to the
Gospel, then be the Papists: nevertheless seeing servants (be they never so
young) are not to be guided by their fellow servants (be they never so old)
without knowledge of their Lord and Masters pleasure, first declared unto them
by his Prophets or Apostles, we pray your Lordships to prove unto us, out of
holy Writ, that these ceremonies hold their original from God.

For, if they be not according to the old way, which is the good way, Ierem. 16
and wherein we are bidd to stand, and to behold, and to ask after it, namely,
the Testimony which is bound up, and the Law which is sealed Isai. 8. 16
up among Gods Disciples, then shall the Pastors offend for running Iere. 2.
8. 36
about so much, to change their ways, going after things that do not profit;
yea (if they do not according to this word) they may justly Isa. 16. 20
be reproved, because their is no light in them.

The ancienty then of your ceremonies, let the same be as ancient as possibly
ye can devise, yet in respect of the ancient of days, and of him that
inhabiteth the eternity, they shall be but novelties, and the Author of them but
a novelist. For as this saying in the School of reason, is true, omne magnum
tum est paruum, cum sit aliquid maius; so is this saying also in the same
School true, omne vetus tum est novum, cum sit aliquid vetustius.

Yea and the holy Scriptures teach us, to call those things new, whatsoever man
inventeth, be the error never so old. They have (says the holy Ghost) offered
unto Devils, not unto God, but to gods whom they Deu. 32. 17
knew not: new gods, that came newly up, whom their Fathers feared not; And in
an other place, they are pronounced to be accursed when Deuteronomy. 27. 5.
they turn after other gods, which they have not known, whereby also is
reproved the vanity and fondnes of those men, which leave that which is
certain, to follow that which is uncertain.

If the Apostle then, the first and most ancient father of all the children
whom he begat with the word of the Gospel, and the planter of all the
Churches among the Gentiles, never knew those or any the like rites, ornaments,
or ceremonies, much less never knew them to be for any decent and orderly
form of Gods worship, in any of the churches which he begat, and which he
planted; it must needs follow (as we conceave) that the children of the
Church, (who devised and appointed these rites and ceremonies, for an orderly
and decent form of Gods worship, in the ages succeeding the Apostles) left the
ancient integrity together with the certain and single form of Gods worship,
settled in the Apostolical churches, without any ministerial apparel,
crossings or kneelings in the act of receiving the communion: And so following
their own hearts, became Novelistes unto the Apostles, in these uncertain and
new found ceremonies.

Neither for the point in question is it material, whether they were children,
next and immediately succeeding the Apostles, yea or no: For so soon as they
declined from that integrity, and simple manner of Gods Deuteronomy. 9. 12.
worship, and from that certeyntie, wherein the Apostle left the Churches, even
so soon was their uncertain and newly start up form of Gods worship corrupt
and impure: For when the Lord has once spoken Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
words, and does add no more, thereby we are taught, by his example, to lay
our hands upon our mouths, to be content with his word, and to add nothing
of our own. Yea and we be warned to beware, Deu. 11. 16
least our hearts deceyve us, and least we turn aside by devisinge foolish
inventions, according to our own fantasies.

Wherefore your Lordships argument, of such ancientie, and of such integrity
of these ceremonies, as declineth from that ancient, and in all points and
qualities certain and upright form of Gods worship practiced without Copes,
Surplices, Crosses, and kneelings in the act of receyving the communion, by
the Apostle in all the Churches planted by his Ministry, argues rather
corruption and noveltie, then either any ancientie or integrity.

And therefore we pray your Lordships, that hereafter you would be advised by
us, not to license your Scribes and prolocutors, to cast an imputation of
Noveltie upon the Ministers of Christ: or to vpbrayde them with that odious and
reproachful name of Novelistes: least for their safeguard, and just defense in
this behalf, they be constreyned to pray for remedy, protection, and aid from
our Sovereigne Lord King James: That by a writ of error, out of the Records
of the High Court of Parliament, to be granted unto them, they may procure the
reversing, and adnihilating of your worthy orators, their unjust and Novelous
accusation: For unless it should seem a small matter, in your Lordships
sight, to upbraid our Sovereigne Lord the King, his Nobles and Commons of both
Realms, with a blemish of being Novelistes, and to be complotters of
Novelties, for that his Highness, and they, by all good counselles, endeavor,
that the English, and Scottish nations, should be united into one people, and
be restored to their first and ancient name of Brittans: And that the two
Realms, England and Scotland, as in most Ancient time should be called by the
name of Great Brittany, unless (we say) it should seem a small matter, in your
eyes, to traduce the King, his Nobles and Commons, in this case, of being
Novelistes, we pray your Lordships to bear with us; if we tell you plain,
that for our parts we can not thoroughly discern, with what honesty your
Scribes be endowed, when as in their pamphlettes, they blaze the Ministers of
Christ to be Novelistes. Which Ministers notwithstanding hate nothing more then
Noveltie, and crave nothing so much as that the most certain and most single
form of Gods worship, left to the Churches, by the Apostle, without your many,
and uncertain rites and ceremonies, might be restored, to her primative, and
Apostolical ancientie, and integrity.

God save King JAMES.
Faults eschaped in the Print.
Page 6. lin. 6. is for it. Page 6. li. 10. follow, for follow. Page 17. li. a
fine 8. oovet, for covet. Page 18. li. a fine 7. prohibition, for prohibition.
Page 24. li. 4. outward, for outward. Page 26. ad marg. li. 2. Numb. 21. 8. 9.
Page 27. marg Kin 10. 10, for 16 10. Page 42. li. 12. comn: and, for command.

