A NECESSARY DOCTRINE AND ERVDITION FOR ANY CHRISTEN man, set furthe by the
kings majesty of England etc.

Psalm. xix. Lord preserve the King and here us when we call upon the.

Psalm xx. Lord in thy strength the King shall rejoice, and be marvelous
glad through thy salvation.

The contents of this book.
The declaration of faith. The articles of our belief, called the Creed. The
seven sacraments. The.x. commandementes of almighty god. Our lords prayer
called the Pater noster. The salutation of the angel / called the Aue Maria.
An article of freewyll. An article of justification. An article of good works.
Of prayer for souls departed.
HENRY THE EIGHT BY THE GRACE OF GOD KING of England, France, and Irelande,
defendour of the faith, and in earth of the church of England and also of
Ireland, supreme head, unto all his faithful and loving subjects sends
greetyng.
LIke as in the time of darckenesse and ignorance, finding our people seduced
and drawn from the truth by hypocrisy and superstition, we by the help of god
and his word have trauayled to purge and cleanse our realm from the apparent
enormities of the same, wherein by opening of gods truth, with setting forth
and publishyng of the scriptures, our labors (thanks be to god) have not ben
void and frustrate: So now perceiving, that in the time of knowledge, the
devil (who ceasseth not in all times to vex the world) has attented to
return again, (as the parable in the gospel she with) into the house purged and
cleansed, accompanied with seven worse spirits: and hypocrisy and superstition
being excluded and put away, we find entered into some of our peoples hearts,
an inclination to sinister under standing of scripture, presumption,
arrogancye, carnal liberty, and contention: we be therefore constrained for the
reformation of them in time, and for avoiding of such diversity in opinions,
as by the said evil spirits might be engendered, to set forth with the advice of our clergy such a doctrine and declaration of the true knowledge of
god and his word, with the principal articles of our religion, as whereby all
men may uniformly be led and taught the true understanding of that which is
necessary for every christen man to know, for the ordering of him self in this
life, agreably to the will and pleasure of almighty god. Which doctrine also
the lords both spiritual and temporal, with the nether house of our
parliament, have both seen and like very well. And for knowledge of the order of
the matter in this book contained, for as much as we know not perfectly god,
Faith
but by faith, the declaration of faith occupies in this tretise the first
place. Whereunto is next adjoined the declaration of the articles of our Creed,
The creed
conteinyng what we should believe. And incontinently after them follows the
explication of the seven sacraments, The sacraments.
wherein god ordinarily works, and whereby he participateth unto us his
special gifts and graces, in this life. Which matters so digested and set
forth with simplicity and plainness, as the capacities and understandings of
the multitude of our people may easily receive and comprehend the same: The
commandments.
There follows conuenientlye the declaration of the.x. commandments, being
by God ordained the high way, wherein each man should walk in this life, to
finishe fruitfully his journey here, and after to rest eternally in joy with
him. Which because we can not do of our self, but have need always of the
grace of god, as without whom we can neither continue in this life ne without
his special grace do any thing to his pleasure, whereby to atteine the life to
come: We have after declaration of the co^mandementes, expounded the.vii. The
pater noster.
petitions of our Pater noster, wherein be contained requests and suites for
all things necessary to a christen man in this present life, with declaration
of the Aue Maria, The Aue
as a prayer conteinyng a joyful rehersall, and magnifiyng of god in the work
of the incarnation of Christ which is the ground of our salvation, wherein the
blessed virgin our Lady, for the abundance of grace, wherewith god endued her,
is also with this remembrance honored and worshypped. And for as much as the
heads and sensis of our people have been imbusied, and in these days travailed
with the understanding of Freewill, Justification, Freewyll, Justification.

Good works.

Prayer for souls.


Good works, and Praying for the souls departed: we have by the advice of our
clergy, for the purgation of erroneous doctrine, declared and set furthe
openly plainly, and without ambiguitie of speech, the mere and certain truth
in them. So as we verily trust that to know god, and how to live after his
pleasure, to the atteining of everlasting life in the end, this book
conteyneth a perfect and sufficient doctrine, grounded and established in holy
scriptures. Wherefore we heartily exhort our people of all degrees, willyngly
and earnestly both to read and printe in their hearts the doctrine of this
book, considering that god (who as saint Paul says, distributeth (...)
divides to his church his graces distinctly) has ordered some sort of men
to teach other, and some to be taught, that al things should be done semely
and in order, and has beautified and set furthe by distinction of ministers
and offices, the same church: And considering also that for the one part
which should teach other, is necessary not only knowledge, but also learning
and cunnyng in the same knowledge, whereby they may be hable conveniently to
dispense and distribute to their audience the truth of god, according to their
connyng for the edification of other, and by true exposition of the scriptures
according to the apostolical doctrine received and maintained from the
beginning, and by conferring and declaration of them, to convince, refell, and
reprove all errors and vntrouthes set furthe to the contrary and finally be
also able to give an account, as saint Peter says, of that they profess: It
must be agreed than that for the instruction of this part of the church, whose
office is to teach other, the having, redyng, and studyeng of holy scripture,
both of the old and new testament, is not only convenient but also
necessary: But for the other part of the church ordained to be taught, it
ought to be denied certainly that the reading of the old and new testament,
is not so necessary for all those folks, that of duty they ought and be bound
to read it, but as the prince and the policy of the realm shall think
convenient, so to be tolerated or taken from it. Consonant whereunto the
politic law of our realm has now restrained it from a great meyny,
esteming it sufficient for those so restrained, to here and truly bear away
the doctrine of scripture taught by the preachers, and so imprint the lessons
of the same, that they may observe and keep them inwardly in their heart, and
as occasion serves, express the^ in their deeds outwardly, whereby they may be
partakers of that bliss, which the gyuer of blessedness our savior Christ
spoke of and promised to such, saying: Beati qui audiu^t uerbum dei, and
custodiunt illud. Blessed by they that here the true doctrine of god, and keep
it, which is the true sense of that text, Wherefore we exhort and desire al
our loving subjects, that they prayeng to God for the spirit of humility, do
conform them selves as good scholars and learners ought, to here and bear
away as before, and willingly to observe such order, as is by us and our laws
prescribed, and to read and bear well away the true doctrine, lately by us and
our clergy set forth for their erudition, whereby presumption and arrogancye
shall be withstanded, malice and contention expelled, and carnal liberty
refrayned and tempered, and disdeyne clearly removed and taken away. So as
endeuouryng our selves to live quietly and charitably together, each one in his
vocation, we shall be so replenyshed with manifold graces and gifts of god,
that after this life we shall reign in joy everlasting with the only head of
the universal catholic church our savior and redemer Jesus Christ. Amen.

Faith.
FORASMOCHE AS IN this book, which is set furthe for the institution and
crudition of the common people, the articles of our faith have the first
place, it is very necessary, before we enter into the declaration of the said
articles, some thing to entreat of faith, to the intent that it may be known.
what is meant proprely by the word Faith, as it is apperteynyng to a christen
man, who by faith is partaker of goddis benefits by Christ. And although
Faith be diversely taken in scripture, it shall be sufficient to entreat here,
of two kinds or acceptions of the same.

Faith in the first acception, is considered as it is a several gift of god
by it self dystincte from hope and charity, and so taken, it signifies a
persuasion and belefe, wrought by god in man's heart, whereby he assenteth,
grants, and takes for true, not only that god is, which knoweledge is
taught and declared by the marvelous works of the creation of the world,
Romans i.
as says saint Paul in the epistle to the Romans, but also that all the
words and sayenges of god, which be reveled and opened in the scripture, be of
most certain truth and infallible verity. And further also, that all those
things, which were taught by the apostles, and have been by an hole universal
consent of the church of Christ, ever sithe that time, taught continually and
taken always for true, ought to be received accepted and kept, as a perfect
doctrine apostolyke. And this is the first acception of Faith, which man has
of god, wherein man leans not to his own natural knowledge, which is by
reason, but leans to the knowledge, atteyned by Faith, without the which
Faith, we be ignorant and blind, and can not understand, according as the
prophet Esaie says, Vii. iuxta sept,
Nisi credideritis, non intelligitis, Onles ye believe, ye shall not
understand. And this faith is the beginning, entry, and introduction unto
all christen relygion and godlynes. For as saint Paul says, Hebr. xi.
He that comes to god, must believe that be is, and that he is a rewarder unto
them, which seek to please him. And this faith, although it be the
necessary beginning of all righteousness, yet if it proceed not further, to
Hope and Charity, it is called in scripture a dead Faith, because it is
void and destitute of the life and efficacy of charity.

Faith in the second acception is considered as it has hope and charity
annexed and joined unto it: And faith so taken signifies not only the belefe
and persuasion before mentioned in the first acception, but also a sure
confidence and hope, to atteyn what so ever god has promised for Christ's
sake, and an hearty love to god, and obedience to his commandments. And this
Faith is a lively faith, and works in man a ready submission of his will to
goddis will. And this is the effectual faith that works by charity,
which faynte Paul unto the Galathians affirms to be of value and strength
in CHRIST IESV. Gala. v.
By this Faith, Abraham, not knowing whether he should goo, went out of his
countreye, Hebr. xi.
and dwelte in the land of beheste, as in a strange land, lokynge and
trusting for a city founded and builded by almighty god. By this Faith also,
he was ready to offer up his only begotten son Isaac, when he was tempted,
in whom he looked for the promise, nothing doubting, but that god was able to
raise him up again from death. And this wise is Faith taken in the most
part of the examples, which be recyted of saint Paul in the eleuenthe
chapter of his epistle to the Hebrews. And this Faith every christen man
professes and couenanteth to keep, when he receives the sacrament of
baptism.

For declaration whereof, it is to be noted, that all promyses of god, made to
man after the fall of Adam, for Christ's sake, be made under this condition,
that man should believe in god, and with the grace of god, given for CHRIST,
endeavor him self to accomplish goddis commandementes. The church (therefore
intending that man should always have in mind, how the promyses of god be
made upon condition, and without kepinge of the condition, no man is partaker
of goddis promyses) has taught and ordained, that men before they receive
baptism, shall promise and couenaunte to fulfylle the said condytion, and to
forsake the devil and the world, and to serve only god. And of this
especial covenant, whereby man byndeth him self to god, he is called in latin
Fidelis, faithefull, and he that never made the same covenant, or after he has
made it, renounceth and refuses the same, is called among christen men
Infidelis, unfaithful or heathen. And because god has made promise and
covenant with man (as is before declared) which we must most assuredly
believe, that god will observe and keep, and is ever in his words and promyses,
most true, most just, most constant: therefore god is called (as he is in
deed faithful to man, and keeps and observes his faith, that is to say, his
promise to man, requiryng that man should likewise keep his faith and promise
toward him.

Now of that which is beforesayd, it is manifest, that Faith (as it is taken
in the second acception) is the perfect faith of a true christen man, and
contains the obedience to the hole doctrine and religion of Christ. And thus
is faith taken of saint Paul, and in other places of scripture, where it is
said, that we be justified by faith. In which places men may not think that we
be justified by faith, as it is a several virtue separated from hope and
charity, fear of god and repentance, but by it is meant Faith, neither only
ne alone, but with the foresaid virtues coupled together, containing as it is
aforesaid, the obedience to the hole doctrine and religion of Christ.

And here is to be noted, that every man, that does offend god, does not
lose his faith thereby. For they that sin by frailty and sodeyn motions
(which just men do not avoid) and be taught therefore of Christ to say in
their Pater noster, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us: Yet those men, so breaking their promise with god, and
slackyng in such care and desire, as they should have to please god,
nevertheless be not accounted to have lost their faith thereby, yea they also
who after the knowledge of god, fall into deadly sin advisedly, as they that
commit murder, adultery, and other abominations, and so fall from faith,
as it is taken in the second acception, and be therefore out of the state of
grace and favor of god for the time, yet do not those men fall from faith, as
it is taken in the first acception, Luc. xii.
that is to say from certain and assured knowledge of god and his doctrine.
And therefore the gospel speaks of a servant, that knows the will of his
lord, and does it not. And saint James in his epistle says, Jacob. ii.
that Faith may remain without charity. Wherefore a transgressour of the law
of almighty God after baptism, keeps still a remorse of conscience, and the
light of knowledge by Faith, whereby he sees the remedies, how to atteyne
remyssion of sin, and by a special gift of further grace is moved to use the
same remedies, and so by faith walks the ways ordained to atteine remission
of sins, as in the sacrament of penance, shall be declared.

Thus we have showed two acceptions of faith and declared, that the faith of
knowledge may remain in him that has fallen from faith, after the second
acception. But whether there be any special particular knowledge, which man by
faith has certainly of him self, whereby he may testify to him self, that he
is of the predestinates, which shall to the end persevere in their calling, we
have not spoken, ne can not in scripture ne doctors find, that any such faith
can be taught or preached. Truth it is, that in the sacraments instituted by
Christ, we may constantly believe the works of god in them, to our present
comfort, and applycation of his grace and favor, with assurance also, that he
will not fail us, if we fall not from him. Wherefore so continuinge in the
state of grace with him, we may believe undoubtedly to be saved. But forasmoche
as our own frailty and naughtynes, ought ever to be feared in us, it is
therefore expedient for us to live in contynuall watch, and continual fight
with our enemies, the devil, the flesh, and the world, and not to presume to
much of our perseverance and contynuance in the state of grace, which on our
behalf is uncertain and unstable. For although goddis promises made in
Christ be immutable, yet he makes them not to us, but with condition, so that
his promise standing we may yet fail of the promise, because we keep not our
promise. And therefore if we assuredly reckon upon the state of our felicity,
as grounded upon goddis promise, and do not therewith remember, that no man
shall be crowned, onles he laufully fight, we shall triumph before the victory,
and so look in vain for that which is not otherwise promised, but under a
condition. And this every christen man must assuredly believe.

The Creed or the.xii. articles of the christen faith.
i I Believe in god the fatheralmighty maker of heaven and earth. ii And in Jesus
Christ his only son our lord. iii which was conceived by the holy ghost,
borne of the virgin Mary. iiii Suffered under Po^ce Pylate, was crucified,
dead, buried, and descended into hell. v And the third day he rose agein from
death. vi He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of god the
father almighty. vii From thens he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. viii I believe in the holy ghost. ix The holy catholic church. x The
communyon of saints: The forgyuenes of sins. xi The resurrection of the
body. xii And the life everlasting. Amen.
THE NOTES. Here follow certain notes for the better understanding of this
Creed.
FIrst it is to be noted, that all and singular the.xii. articles, contained in
this Creed, be so necessary to be believed for man's salvation, that who so ever
will not constantly believe them, or will obstinately affirm the contrary of
them, can not be the very members of Christ, and his espouse the church, but
are very infidelles or heretics, and members of the deuel, with whom they
shall be perpetually damned.

Secondly it is to be noted, that all true christen men, ought and must most
constantly believe, maynteyne and defend all those things to be true, which
be comprehended in this Creed, and in the other.ii. credes, whereof the one is
used to be said at mass, and is approved by the auncyen: general councelles,
and the other was made by the holy man Athanasius: And also all other things
which be comprehended in the hole body and canon of the bible.

Thirdly that all true christen men ought and must not only repute take and
hold all the said things for the most holy, most sure, and most certain and
infallible truths of goddis word, and such as neither ought ne can be
altered or conuelled by any contrary opinion or authority: but also must take
and interpretate all the same things according to the self same sentence and
interpretation, which the words of scripture do signify, and the holy
approved doctors of the church, do agreably entreat and defend.

Fourthly that all true christen men ought and must utterly refuse and condemn
al those opinions contrary to the said.xii. articles of our creed, which were
of long time paste condemned in the.iiii. holy counsels, that is to say, in
the counsel of Nece, Constanstinople, Ephese, and Calcidonense.

The first article. I believe in god the father almighty maker of heaven and
earth.
FOr the plain understanding hereof, every material word of this article
shall be declared hereafter. And first we must know, God.
that God is a spiritual and an invisible substance, or nature, of infinite
power and eternal, without beginning or endyng, and of incomprehensible
knowledge, wisdom, goodness, justice, and mercy, and that there is but one very
god, three persons, the father, the son, and the holy ghost, and that these
three persons, be not three goddis, but all one god, one nature, one substance,
all one everlasting essence or being, and all like and equal in might, power,
wisdom, knowledge, rightwysnes, and all other things belongyng unto the
deity. And that beside or without this god, there is none other god.

Moreover we must know, that god the father is the first person in trinity,
Father.
and Father of his only begotten son, the second person in Trinity, and
that he did begette him of his own substance, by eternal generation, that is
to say, by generation that never had beginning.

And where this article contains, that god the father is Almighty, it is as
much to say, as that he may do all things that he will. in heaven and in
earth, and nothing is to him impossible, and that his godly power and might
excels infinitely, and incomparably all other powers, in heaven, earth, and
hell: so that all other powers which be in heaven, earth, or hell, be
nothing as of them selves, but have all their might force and strength of
him, and be all subject unto his power, and can not resyst or let the same.
And although god be omnipotent, and of infinite power, yet he is not author or
worker of any sin: for when soever any sin is done by any creature, the
same is wrought by the malice of the devil, or free will of man, only by the
sufferance and permission of god, not and by the working and power of god, in
styryng up, furtheryng, or assisting the malice of the evil thought or deed.

This article contains further, that god the father Almighty, did at the
beginning, create, form, and make of naught, heaven and earth and all
things visible, and invisible, and that he did give unto them, all their power
and might, and so he does from time to time continually preserve, govern,
sustain, and maintain the hole world, and all creatures therein, by his only
goodness and high providence, in so much that without his continual
workynge, nothing should be able, any while to continue.

And for the more euydent and plain understanding of the first part of this
article, which is, I believe in god, it is to be noted, that we must not only
believe steadfastly, that god is, and that he is true in all his words and
promyses, and that he is omnipotente, and creator of heaven and earth, and so
forth: but we must also with this our believe, love god, and cleave only unto
him, and that with all our heart and power, and so continue and dwell still in
him, by love. It sygnifieth also, that we must obey unto his will, as well in all our inward thoughts and affections, as also in all our outward acts and
deeds, and that we must abhor all vice, and not wish or desire of god, any
evil or ungodly thing. It sygnyfyeth also that we must constantly betake and
commytte our selves, and all ours holy unto god, and fyxe all our hole hope,
trust, and confidence in him, and quyete our selves in him, beleuynge perfectly
and assuredly that he will in deed show no less goodness, love, mercy,
grace, and favor unto us, than he promyseth by his word to do with us, using
our selves as before is said.

This manner of believe we ought to have in no creator of god, be it never so
excellent, but in god only, and therefore in this creed, the said manner of
speaking king, I believe in, is used only in the three articles, which concern
the three persons in trinity, that is the Father, the son, and the holy ghost.

The second article. And in Jesus Christ his only son our lord.
FOr the understanding of this second article, it is to be known, that JESUS
CHRIST is the only begotten son of almighty god the father, and yt he was
begotten of his godly nature and substance eternally, and that he is very god,
the same substance with god the father, and the holy ghost, unto whom he is
equal in all things of the godhead. And although we christen men, may be
called the children of god by adoption and grace, yet only our savior Jesus
Christ is god the fathers son by nature.

We must know also and believe, that JESUS CHRIST, was eternally preordeined
and appointed, by the decree of the hole Trinity, to be our lord, and to
redeem and bring us from under the dominion of the devil and sin, unto his
kingdom, lordshyp, and governance, and therefore is worthily called JESUS that
is to say, savior: and CHRIST that is to say, anointed king and priest, and
LORD, that is to say, redemer and governor, for he has done and fulfilled
for all mankind the very office both of a priest, and of a king, and lord.
Of a priest, for asmoch as he has made sacrifice and oblation on the cross,
in that he there willingly suffered his natural body to be slain, and his
bloudde to be shed for remission of sin, and so was both the priest and the
sacrifice it self. And of a king and lord, in that he has like a most
mighty conqueror, overcome and utterly oppressed his enemies, and has
spoiled them of the possession of mankind, which they wanne before by fraud
and deceyte, by lyinge and blasphemynge, and has brought up now into his
possession and dominion, to reign over us in mercy, like a most loving lord
and governor. And therefore in this article we call him Our lord.

And although this word Dominus, diverse times is translated in to our
english tongue, the lord, and the place and circumstance of scripture,
oftentimes requires the same, yet among us christen men, in our common
speech, when we speak of Christ and call him Lord, it is most mete and
convenient, that we call him, Our lord, to signify and admonish us, that we
be his peculiar people, redeemed by him, and delivered from the dominion and the
captivity of the devil, and be made his own propre and obedient servants,
after which sort, the heathen people (because of their infidelity) be neither
his servants, ne partakers of his benefits, and therefore can not say, and
call him as (Christen men do) Our lord.

The third article. which was conceived by the holy ghost borne of the virgin
Mary.
FOr declaratyon of this article, ye shall understand, that when the time was
come, in the which is was before ordained and appointed, by the decree of the
hole Trinity, that mankind should be saved and redeemed, than the son of
god, the second person in Trinity, and very god, descended from heaven in to
the world, to take upon him the very habit form and nature of man, and in
the same nature to suffer his glorious passion for the redemption and salvation
of all mankind.

And for farther declaration hereof, it is to be considered, that before the
coming of Christ, mankind was so blinded and drowned in sin, that the
true knowledge of god was every where in the world forgotten, and his laws
broken, not only by the gentiles in all other nations, but also by the jews,
the chosen people of god, to whom god had by his servant Moises given his
laws, where by they might know how to avoid sin and pleased him, and where
those laws given by god, were often by them transgressed, yet almighty god did
from time to time, send to them his prophets, inspired with his holy
spirit, both to admonyshe them of their sins, and to teach them how they
should truly understand and observe the said laws given by his servant
Moses. After the which admonitions many times so given by the prophets and
nothing regarded, almighty god of his infinite goodness and inestimable mercy,
for the love that he bear to mankind, did send at the last in to the world
his only begotten son, being his eternal wisdom, by whom in the beginning
he did create heaven and earth, and all creatures in them, to take upon him
man's nature, for to redeem mankind, and to teach the world the truth of his
laws, and by what means the world might by faith to be given to his words
and doctrine, amend their lives, and atteyne to comme to the life in heaven,
following him in his doctrine, who was the way, to come to the father, the
Truth, to atteyne the knowledge of the father, and the Life it self, wherein he
should finally lead them, to come unto the father, unto whom god the father,
commaundyng the world to give full credence said to all men, Ipsum audire,
bear him. Mat. xvii.


Wherefore the said son of god, in the womb of the blessed virgin called
Mary, did take upon him of her very flesh, nature and substance, man's nature,
and being conceived by the holy ghost, was borne of her body, and did unite and
conioyne together the same nature of man, taken of the substance of the said
most blessed virgin, with his godheade in one person, with such an
indissoluble and inseparable knotte and bond, that he being one person JESUS
CHRIST, was, is, and ever shall be in the same person, very perfect god,
and very perfect man, which holy work of the incarnation, was not wrought by
the seed of man, but by the holy ghost in the said most blessed virgin,
without any motion of concupiscence or spotte of sin, and was accomplysshed
without any violation or detriment unto the virginity of that blessed virgin
saint Mary, who both in the conception and also in the birth and nativity of
our savior IESV CHRIST her child, and ever after retained still her
virginity pure and immaculate, and as clear without blotte as she was at the
time that she was first borne.

The fourth article. Suffered under Ponce Pilate / was crucified, dead, buried,
and descended into hell.
FOr declaration of this article it shall be expedient brefely to repete the
process, of a great part of our savior Christis life, from the beginning,
unto the time of his most glorious passion, with the same passion also, and the
descense of his soul into hell, wherefore we must understand, that Christ
very god and man, after he was conceived and borne of his blessed mother, waxed
and lived forth here in the world, until he came unto the.xxxiii. year of
his age, and that in all this time of his life, he suffered and endured for our
sakes and our welthe, and also for our example, much bodyly affliction, much
labor, much travail, much hunger, thyrst, and poverty, much injury and
ignominy, and many other such miseries and infirmities, as all mortal men be
subject unto (syn and ignorance only except (and so passed over all the hole
course of his life, even from his nativity until his death, in such perfect
obedience unto the laws of god and man, according to the will of his father,
and in such perfect innocencye of living, that no fault or blame of living,
ne any offense or transgression could justly and truly be laid against him and
yet the blind, ignorant, and obstinate Jews, replete with envy and malice, as
the very members of the devil, by whom they were provoked and enduced
thereunto, labored continually by all craft and means they could, to dystroye
him, and at length conspiring together, they took him serching and procuringe
false witness to accuse him, and after they had bette him, and spette in his
face, and used all the vyllany they could unto him, they bound him, and brought
him before Pontius Pilatus, being than the chief judge in Jerusalem, under
the emperor of Rome, and there they most falsely accused him, as a subuerter
of the laws of god, and as a person that seduced the people, and moved
sedition among them, and as a traitor against the emperor of Rome, after
which accusations our said savior and redemer Jesus Christ was greuousely
scourged, by the commandment of Pylate, and had a crown of thorn put upon
his head by the soldiers of the garrison, and was by them not only most
spitefully mocked and scorned, but also most cruelly tormented and afflycted,
and after this he was at the last in public and open judgment, condemned by
the sentence of the said judge, to be crucified, to the intent he should
suffer that kind of death, which among the Jews was ever most abhorred and
detested, and accounted to be the most shameful and cursed of all other: and
so according to the said sentence, the soldiers of the garryson crucified
him, that is to say, they nailed him through hands and feet to a cross, and
hanged him upon the same between two thieves, upon a certain hill called
Caluary, until he was dead: and after he was thus dead, one Joseph of
Aramathia, being one of Christis disciples, obtained license of the said
judge, to take down the blessed body of our savior IESV CHRIST from the
said cross, and that done he and an other of Christis disciples, called
Nicodemus, wrapped and foolded the same body in a clean syndon, and so laid
it and buried it in a new grave or sepulcher, which the said Joseph had made
a stone, wherein there was never man buried before. and after he was thus
crucified and dead upon the cross, he descended in soul into hell, and
losed the peynes or sorrows thereof, wherewith it was not possible, that he
should be holden, and conquered and oppressed both the devil and hell, and
also death it self, whereunto all mankind was condemned by the fall of our
forefather Adam into sin.

The process of our savior Jesus Christis life, death, burial, and discence to
hell, thus declared, it is specially to be noted, and to be believed for a
certain truth, that our said savior, in all the time of his most bitter
and grievous passion, and in sufferynge his most peynfull and cruel death,
not only endured and sustained for our redemption, all the peynes and injuries,
and all the obprobries and ignominies, which were done to him, most
pacientely without resistance, and like an innocent lamb, but also that he
did wyllyngly and gladly suffer this cross, and this kind of death for our
example, that we should follow the steps of him, in pacyence and humylitie,
and that we should bear our own cross, as he did bear his, and that we
should also hate and abhor all sin, knowinge for surety, that who so ever
does not in his heart, hate and abhor sin, but rather accompteth the
breach and violation of goddis commandment, but as a light matter, and of
small weight and importance, he estemeth not the price and value of the passion
and death of Christ, according to the dignity and worthynesse thereof.

The fyfte article. And the third day he rose again from death.
BY this article it appears / how our savior Jesus Christ, after he had
conquered and spoiled the devil and hell, he returned again from thens, like
a most mighty king and conqueror, in triumph and glory, and so resumed and
took again his blessed natural body, the third day after his said death. And so
doing, rose out of that sepulcre, in his natural and perfect manhood, that
is to say, in his soul, and in the self same body, which was borne of the
virgin Mary, and did hang upon the cross. After which resurrection, he was
conuersaunt in the world, by the space of forty days, and did eat and drink
with his apostles and his disciples, and preached unto them, and authorized
them to go forth into the world, to manifest and declare, that he was the
very Christ, the very Messiah, and the very god and man, which was promised in
scripture to come to save and to redeem all those, that beleuynge in him,
ordered them selves in obeying and following his precepts and commandments
accordyngly.

In this article of Resurrection it is to be noted, that there is nothing,
that can in all adversity and trouble, be more ioyefull and comfortable unto
us, than the belefe of this article, that Christ rose again from corporal
death to life, and that we shall also do the same. The faith and belefe of
this (if we do continue in living well) is our victory and triumph over the
devil, hell, and death, and a special remedy, to put away the horror and
fear of them, for as much as hereby we be assured, that as death could not
hold Christ, even so it can not hold us, which are by a christen faith,
the very members and body of Christ, but that we shall rise from death, and
live again in glory with him, euerlastyngely, if we order and conform our
will in this world to his precepts. And the only hope hereof, should make
us not to fear the adversities in this world, because we living as before, be
assured to have a better and more glorious life after this, as saint Paul
writes to the Corinthians, saying: i. Cor. xv.
If we christen men bad no hope of other life, than this that is present,
than were we the most miserable of all men. But now Christ is risen again
from death, and has declared thereby, that there is a life after this life,
which all christen men hope to come to. According hereunto says saint
Augustine. All the hope of our faith stands in this point, that we shall
rise again. Hebr. xi.
This made the faythefull and good men (of whom saint Paul speaks to the
Hebrews) to refuse to be preserved from bodyly death, because they looked
assuredly for a better resurrection.

Of this article the epistles of saint Paul, and the new testament be full, to
the Romans he writes Christ rose again for our justification. Romans iiii. ii.
Tim. ii. Act. i. and ^.
to Timothe he says: Remember that Jesus Christ is risen agein from death. The
apostles besides other names perteynyng to their office, be specially called
the witnesses of Christis resurrection, the which resurrection, as it was by
many and sundry apparitions and other infallible arguments, declared and
proved unto them, so they did in all places, and at all times open and
inculcate the same, as a special and a chief article of Christ's doctrine,
wherein should depend and rest, the great comfort and solace of all true and
faithful beleuers in Christ.

Moreover by this article, it is not only confyrmed unto us, how the natural
body of man, shall after the corporal death and departing out of this present
life arise again, as is before expressed, but also by this resurrection of our
savior Christ we be admonyshed, that as Christ after his death rose again,
so we dyinge from sin, should rise again, and walk in a new life of spirit
and grace.

The syxte article. He ascended into heaven / and sytteth on the right hand of
god the father almighty.
THis article contains, how our savior JESUS CHRIST, after that he had
perfectely accomplisshed and performed the hole mystery of the redemption of
mankind, by his incarnation, his birthe, his passion, his death his burial,
his descendinge into hell, and rysynge again from death to life, and after he
had been here in earth, conversant with his apostles and disciples, by the
space of forty days, after his resurrection, when he was among the apostles,
he in their sight ascended up into heaven, in the very same his naturally body,
which was borne of the blessed virgin his mother, and was crucified upon the
cross, and so did withdraw his accustomed visible conversation, from the
prese^s of his apostles, and from the bodily sight of all other creatures, By
remembrance whereof, both they and we should here in earth eleuate and lift up
our hole hearts, minds, desires, and all affections, from earthely things,
and from all carnal and worldly cares, toward heaven and heavenly things,
and so should by his grace prepare our hearts, and make our selves mete and
apt to receive his spiritual gifts, which he sends into the world.

In this article also is exppressed, how our savior Christ, being ascended
into heaven, sytteth on the right hand of god the father, that is to say, has
and shall ever have communicate unto him of god the father, glory, honor,
felicity, power, and everlasting monarchye, governance, rule, and dominyon
over all the pryncipates, potestates, powers, dominions, and over all
creatures, that can be named either in this world, or in the world to come,
to be ordained king of al kings, and lord of all lords, and all things in
heaven and earth, to be cast under his fete and made subject unto him, and he
is appointed the only head of the universal catholic church, which is his
mystical body. And likewise as the head always excels all the other
members, so Christ does excelle incomparably in honor and dignity, all the
members of his said body, the Church, whereof he is the only perfection and
consummation, and is also the only eternal priest and bishop of his said
church, that is to say, the only mediator between god and mankind, the
redemer, intercessour, and advocate, for the remyssion of sins, as hereafter
in this book it shall more at large appear.

And it is to be noted, that although the intercession and mediation by prayer
of saints departed, and of such the members of the catholic church, as be
yet living on earth, be good, acceptable, and profitable unto us, yet that is
only by the mediation and intercession of Christ our head, in whom god the
father is pleased and contented, and through whom saints departed this life,
and reigning in heaven with Christ, and such as truly confess Christ, in
the church catholyke, yet living, may and do effectually pray for us: and
therefore be of us also auaylably prayed unto, that is to say, desired to pray
for us: according whereunto all common prayers of the church, ought to be
always fynyshed and ended, with a remembrance of our savior Jesus Christ, In
whom, by whom, and for whom, all is accepted of god, and without whom,
nothing can be effectually done or granted.

And therefore it is much to our comfort, to remember the exaltation of man's
nature in our head, our savior and redemer IESV CHRIST, which inseparably
and indissolubly conjoined and united to the deity, in the person of him,
sytteth on the right hand of god the father almighty, by communion of
preeminence, and power, as before is expressed, whereby we be certified, how our
savior Jesus Christ, is god, equal to god the father in godhead, and therein
not inferyour unto him, and therefore to be honored, worshypped, loved, and
dread, feared and trusted on, believed and hoped on, as on very god almighty, to
whom nothing is impossible, and yet he is man also, which has experience of
our infirmities, and can and will mercyfully have compassion on the same, who
ascended unto heaven, Ephe. iiii.
to send gifts unto men, whereby we might be able and strong to pass over
this transitorye life to the pleasure of god, and the atteynyng of everlasting
life.

The seventh article. From thens he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead.
IN this article it is declared / how our savior and redemer IESV CHRIST,
shall come from thens that is to say, from heaven, to the which he ascended,
and coming in his majesty and glory, shall than in the very visible form of
his natural body, appear unto the bodily eyes of all the people of the world
in his perfect manhood, and in the self same body, wherein he ascended, to
the inestimable comfort and rejoice of the good, and to the extreme terror and
confusion of the wicked. Where being accompanied with his holy angels his
ministers, waiting upon him, he shall sytte openly in the clouds of the air,
and shall judge all, quick and dead, according to truth and justice: and
according to his holy word expressed in scripture, that is to say, according
to every man's own works and deeds, done by him in his life time, which
works and deeds shall be than examyned, discussed and tried, not after men's
own fantasy and invention, without authority and ground of scripture, but
according to the commandment of god, and the teaching of Christ and his
apostles, for at that day of judgment, all the people of the world, quycke
and dead, that is to say, as well all those which shall be found on live in
the world at that day, as also al those, which ever sith the creation of
Adam lived here in this world, and dyed before that day, shall come and appear
before the presence of Christ, in their very bodies and souls.

And when they shall be so gathered and assembled together, our savior JESUS
CHRIST, shall pronounce the fynall sentence and judgment of everlasting
salvation, upon all those persons, which in their life time obeyed and
conformed themselves unto the will of god, and exercised the works of right
belief and charity, Romans ii.
and so perseueryng in well doing, sought in their hearts and deeds, honor,
glory, and life immortal: And contrary, upon all those, which in their life
time, were contentious, and did repugne against the will of god, and followed
iniustyce and iniquity. rather than truth and virtue our savior Christ shall
than and there pronounce the sentence of ever lastyng punyshement and
damnation. Mat. xxvi
In which sentence there shall be made a perfect separation or dyuision,
between these two sorts of people, that is to say, between the sheep and the
gotes, the corn and the chafe, the good and the badde, the blessed and the
cursed, the members of his body, and the members of the devil, and so the good
and the blessed being upon his right hand, he shall clearly and perfectly
deliver them for ever, from the power and malice of the wicked, and from all
the pains and evil, and so take them all up with him into heaven, there to be
crowned and rewarded in body and soul, with honor and glory, and
everlasting joy and peace, which was prepared for them from the beginning
of the world. And all the other, which shall be judged to everlasting pain
and death, being upon his left hand, he shall send them down into hell,
there to be punyshed in body and soul eternally with fire, that never shall
have end, which was prepared from the beginning of the world, unto the
devil and his aungelles.

And here it is especially to be remembered, how this article was for great
consideratio^s added immediately and conjoined unto the former articles, and
chiefly to the intent that no man should in his life time, presume upon the
said benefits of Christ, or take occasion of carnal liberty or security,
and so live without fear to transgress, or without regard, to observe the
commandments of god: but rather that every good christen man, should in
every part of his life, have a continual remembrance and respect, unto the
last day of judgment, and so be in continual fear, to commit any thing
contrary to the will of god, for the which he might deserve, to have the
sentence of everlasting damnation, pronounced upon him. For this is certainly
true, that at that day, every man shall be called to an account of his life,
and shall be than finally judged, according to his works, good or bad, done in
his life time, Romans ^.
that is as saint Paul says: to them that persevere in well doing, and
labor to atteyne glory, honor, and immortality, shall be given life
everlasting: and to them that be contentions, and obey not the truth, but
follow and do injustice, shall come indignation, ire, affliction, trouble, and
peines everlasting.

In this article it is further to be noted, that like as there is nothing more
certain unto us, than that we be all mortal and shall ones dye, and yet no
man living knows the time when he shall dye: even so there is nothing more
certain, than that this day of judgment shall ones come, and yet the hour
and time when it shall be, is hidden and kept secret from the knowledge of all
men and aungelles, and is reserved to the only knowledge of god. which thing
proceeds of his only goodness toward us, and is done, to the intent we
should always here in our life time, flee from sin, and employ all our hole
study, and endeavor, to walk in the ways, of god, that is to say, in such
faith, hope and charity, as God requires of us, and so prepare our selves,
and order our living toward god, that we may be in a redynesse at all times,
when so ever it shall please god to call and summon us, to appear before him
in the said general judgment, there by his mercy and goodness to receive the
crown, which he promised unto al men, that do fear him, and love him, and
walk in his ways.

The eight article. I believe in the holy ghost.
THe holy ghost is the third person in trinity, very god and lord, author
and former of all things created, and proceeds both from god the father,
and from god the son, one with them in nature and substance, and of the same
everlasting essence or being, which the father and the son be of, and
equal also unto them both in almyghtynesse of power, and in the work of
creation, and all other things perteyning unto the deity or godhead, wherefore
he is also to be honored and glorified, equally with them both.

This holy ghost, which is the spirit of god, is of his nature all holy, ye
holiness it self, that is to say, he is the only ghost or spirit, which with
the father and the son is, was, and ever shall be the autour, causer, and
worker, of all holiness, purity, and sanctimonye, and of all the grace,
comfort, and spiritual life, which is wrought, and comes into the heart of
any man, in so mothe that no man can think well, or do any thing that good
is, but by the motion, aid, and assistence of this holy spirit, neither it is
possible, that the deuylle, or any of those evil spirits, which do possess
and reygne in such persons as be subject unto sin, can be expelled or put
out of them, but by the power of this holy spirit, neither it is possible,
that the heart of any man, being ones corrupted and made as profane by sin,
can be purged, purified, sanctified, or justified, without the work and
operation of this holy spirit, neither it is possible for any man, to be
reconciled unto the favor of god, or to be made and adopted into the number of
his children, or to obtain that incomparable treasure, which our savior
Jesus Christ has purchased and laid up for mankind, onelesse this holy
spirit, shall first illumine and lyghten his heart, with the right knowledge and
faith of Christ, and stir him by grace, to have due contrition and penance
for his sins, and shall also instruct him, govern him, aid him, dyrecte
him, and indue him, with such spiritual gifts and graces, as shall be
requisite and necessary to that end and purpose.

Moreover this holy sipirit of god, is of his own nature, full of all goodness
and benignity, yea goodness it self, from whom proceeds all and syngular
graces and gifts of fear, wisdom, understanding, counsel, strength,
faith, charity, hope, and all other, which be given, conferred, and
distributed unto us mortal men here in the eatthe, at his own will and
dispensation, and that no man can pourchase or obtain, ne yet receive,
reteyne or use any one of them, without the special operation of this holy
spirit, which gifts never the less he gives not, nor dyspenseth the same
equally, and unto every man in like, but he dyuydeth them, particularly and
specially to every member of the church, as is most necessary for the hole
body, and in such plentye and measure, as unto his godly will and knowledge,
is thought to be most beneficial and expedient for the same: All which
things he does of his mere mercy and goodness, freeely and above our
deseruynge.

Farthermore this holy spirit is of his own nature, full of charity and holy
love, yea charity it self, from whom proceeds all charity, and so by his
godly operation is the bond and knot, wherewith our savior JESUS CHRIST, and
his most dear espouse the church (which is also his mystical body) be
united, knyt, and conjoined together in such perfect and everlasting love
and charity, that the same can not be dissolved or separated: And over this is
also the very bond and knot, whereby all and every one of the very members of
Christis church and body, be united, coupled, and conjoined, the one of them
with the other in mutual love and charity.

Also this holy spirit of god is the spyrite of truth, and the autour of
all holy scripture, contained in the hole canon of the bible, and did not only
inspire and instruct all the holy patriarchs and prophets, with all the other
members of the catholyke church, that ever was from the beginning of the
world, in all the godly truths and verities, that ever they did know,
speak, or write, but also descended and appeared in the symilitude and lykenes
of fyery tongues, and did light upon the apostles and disciples of Christ, and
inspired them with the knowledge of all truth, and replenyshed them with
heavenly gifts and graces: and shall be continually present in the catholyke
church, and shall teach and reuele unto the same church, the secrets and
mysteries of all truths, which are necessary to be known, and shall also
continually from time to time, rule, direct, govern, and sanctify the same
church, and give remission of sins, and all spiritual comfort, as well
inwardely by secret operations, as also outwardly by the open ministration and
efficacy of the word of god, and of the holy sacraments in the said church,
and shall endue it with all such spiritual graces and gifts, as shall be
necessary for the same.

Finally it is to be noted, that albeit holy scripture does worthily attribute
unto the holy ghost, our sanctification, our justification, and all other
benefits, which Christ by his passion has merited and deserved for us, yet
nevertheless the same be also the works of the hole trinity, and be not to
be separated in any wise, although scripture commonly does attribute them unto
the holy ghost: For in like manner does scripture attrybute power unto the
father, and wisdom unto the son, which nevertheless be common unto all
three.

The nynth article. The holy catholyke church.
AFter the eight articles of our belefe, in which we knowledge gods might and
power in the creation of the world, his mercy and goodness in our redemption,
and his spiritual benefits exhibited and given to us by the holy ghost,
follows the nynth article, in which we declare that we do believe and confess
the manner of goddis working, in calling us to have fruition of him, and to be
made partakers, of his said benefits.

Wherefore we must understand, that besides the inward and secret calling,
which god has alwais used, and yet still does use, he has also ordained an
outward calling of the people unto him by, preaching of his most holy word,
upon which outward calling, the people yeldyng, assentyng, and obeyeng to
the same word of god, and receyuynge it also with true faith, and the
sacrament of baptism (as Christis law requires) be named in scripture
Ecclesia, that is to say, an assemble of people called out from other, as from
infidels or heathens, to one faith and confession of the name of Christ,
which word Ecclesia, is in english called Church.

And it is to be noted specially, that in our english tungue, by the word
Church, we understand not only the hole multitude of people, which be
called of god to one faith, be they of the clergy or of the laymen, but also
by the same word we signify the place, wherein the word of god is commonly
preached, and the sacraments ministered and used, and call that the church: to
entreat whereof at this time in this article, is no part of our intent, but
only of the assemble and company called to profess Christ in one faith,
which in this article is named the Holy church.

For all be it in this assemble of men, called by the word of god, and
received by faith and baptism, be many evil men, many sinners, many that
turn by true penance to grace, and sometime yet fall again, some after their
turn by true penance, still persevere and increace in goodness, many that fall
and never rise again: so that spots, blottes, and imperfections, appear
evidently in this church, and many times in the more part thereof: Yet
nevertheless because the calling is of it self holy, the caller also holy,
and the end of the calling holiness, with this also that the people so called,
profess holiness, and make a body, whereof the only head our savior CHRIST
is most holy, and holiness it self, by the merits of whose passion they be
relieved and norisshed with diverse holy sacraments, and be in their calling
endued with most special holy gifts and graces of almightye god, autour
thereof, and by his holy spirit directed and governed in the same, so long as
they by following their concupiscence, the devil, or the world, fall not from
that estate: For these causes (although some members thereof be evil) the
church is called Holy church, taking the name Holy, of that, that Christ the
only head is holy, the caller holy, the profession and calling holy, and the
end holiness, which of very duty ought to be in all them, that be called, and
is in deed in such members, as continue and persevere in that holy calling.

And for so much as god of his goodness calls people, as before, without
acception of persons, or privilege of place. Therefore this holy church is also
Catholic, that is to say, not limited to any one place or regio^ of the
world, but is in every place universally through the world, where it pleases
god to call people to him, in the profession of Christis name and faith, be it in
Europe, Affrike, or Asia. And all these churches in diverse countries severally
called, although for knowledge of the one from the other, among them they have
diverse additions of names, and for their most necessary government, as they
be distinct in places, so they have distinct ministers and diverse heads in
earth, governors, and rulers, yet be al these holy churches but one holy
church catholyke, invited and called by one god the father, to enjoy the
benefit of redemption, wrought by our only lord and savior Jesus Christ, and
governed by one holy spirit, which reaches to this foresaid holy church,
one truth of goddis holy word, in one faith and baptism. And this church is
relieved, norished, and fortified, by his holy and invincible word and his
sacraments, which in all places have each of them their own propre force and
strength, with gifts of graces also, distributed by the goodness of almighty
god in all places, as to his wisdom is seen convenient.

Whereby it appears, that the unity of these holy churches in sundry places
assembled, stands not by knowledging of one governor in earth over al
churches. For neither the hole church catholyke together, nor any particular
church apart, is bound to aknowlege any one universal governor over the hole
church, other than Christ, although by sufferaunce of some princes and
potentates, not being truly instructed in the word of god, by such as of
duty both to god and them, ought to have declared the truth of scripture to
them, and by hypocrisy and usurpation of the sea and court of Rome, the
bishop of the same, giuinge him self more to worldly polycy, than to the
execution of his duty, has long time gone about to obtain and establishe
unto him self, such an universal authority, and has by abuses always
compassed to cause other, to uphold and maintain the same, contrary to gods
law, as more largely shall be declared in the sacrament of orders.

The unity therefore of the church, is not conserved by the bishop of Romes
authority or doctrine, but the unity of the catholyke church, which all
christen men in this article do profess, is co^serued and kept, by the help
and assistence of the holy spirit of god, in reteining and mainteynynge of
such doctrine and profession of christen faith, and true observance of the
same, as is taught by the scripture and the doctrine apostolic. And
particular churches ought not in the said doctrine so accepted and allowed to
vary one from an other, for any lucre, arrogance, or any other worldly
affection, but inuiolably to observe the same, so that by reason of that
doctrine, each church that teaches the same, may be worthily called (as it
is in deed) an apostolic church, that is to say, following such teaching as
the apostels preached, with ministration of such sacraments, as be approved
by the same.

And this unity of the holy church of Christ, is not divided by distance of
place, nor by diversity of traditions and ceremonies, dyuersely observed in
diverse churches, for good order of the same. For the church of Corinthe, and
of Ephese, were one church in god, though the one were far distant in place
from the other: And though also in traditions, opinions, and policies, there
was some diversity among them, likewise as the church of England, Spain,
Italy, and Poole, be not separate from the unity, but be one church in god,
not withstanding, that among them, there is great distance of place,
diversity of traditions, not in all things unity of opinions, alteration in
rites, ceremonies, and ordinances, or estimation of the same, as one church
peradventure does esteem their rytes, traditions, laws, ordinances, and
ceremonies to be of more virtue and efficacy, than an other church does
esteem the same. As the church of Rome does affirm certain of their laws
and ordinances, to be of such estimation, that they be of equal force with
the word of god, and that who so ever disobeyeth or transgresses the same,
commytteth deadly sin: Yet we perceiving the same, to be discrepant from the
truth of scripture, must needs therein dissent from them. But such diversity
in opinions, and other outward manners and customs of policy, does not
dissolve and break the unity, which is in one god, one faith, one doctrine
of Christ and his sacraments, preserved and kept in these several churches,
without any superiority or preeminence, that one church by goddis laws, may
or ought to challenge over an other.

And therefore the church of Rome, being but a several church, chalenginge
that name of Catholic, above all other, does great wrong to all other
churches, and does only by force and mayntenance, support an unjust
usurpation: for that church has no more right to that name, than the church
of France, Spain, England, or Portugale, which be justly called catholyke
churches, in that they do profess, consent, and agree in one unity of true
faith, with other catholic churches. This usurpation before rehearsed well
considered, it may appear, that the bishop of Rome, does contrary to goddis
law, in chalengynge superiority and preeminence, by a cloak of goddis law
over all. And yet to make an appearance, that it should be so, he has and
does wreste scriptures for that purpose, contrary both to the true meaning of
the same, and the interpretation of ancient doctors of the church, so that by
that chanleng he would not do wrong only to this church of England, but also
to all other churches, in claymyng this superiority, without any authority by
god, so to him given. For God by his goodness has called indifferently and
equally, all such churches, in sundry places, as his high wisdom, has
thought good to assemble and call unto him.

Moreover the perfitte believe of this article, works in all true christen
people, a love to continue in this vnicie, and a fear to be cast out of the
same, and it works in them that be sinners and repentaunte, great comfort,
and consolation, to obtain remission of sin, by virtue of Christis passion,
and administration of his sacraments at the ministers hands, ordained for
that purpose, for as much, as god does not ordinarily give such things, but
only within this church.

It is to be noted, that this church of England, and other known particular
churches, in which Christis name is truly honored, called on, and professed
in faith, and baptism, be members of the hole catholic church, and each of
them by him self, is also worthyly called a catholyke church, when they
merely profess and teach the faith and relygion of Christ, according to the
scripture and the apostolic doctrine. And so every christ man ought to
honor, give credence, and to follow the particular church, of that region so
ordered (as before) wherein he is borne, or inhabiteth, and as al christen
people, as well spiritual as temporal, be bound to believe, honor, and obey
our savior Jesus Christ, the only head of the universal church, so
likewise they be, by his commandment, bound to honor and obey, next unto
him self, christen kings and princes, which be the head governors under
him, in the particular churches, to whose office it apperteyneth, not only to
provide for the tra^quillitie and wealth, of their subjects, in temporal and
worldly things, to the co^seruation of their bodies, but also to forsee, that
within their dominions such ministers be ordained and appointed in their
churches, as can and will truly and purely set out the true doctrine of
Christ, and teach the same, and to see the commandments of god well
observed and kept, to the wealth and salvation of their souls.

The tenth article. The communion of saints / The forgyuenes of sins.
IN this article be taught two special fruits and benefytes, which all men
called of god, and obeying to the same calling in their will, and works, do
obtain by gods grace, in the said catholic church, which benefits be,
the communion saints, and forgyuenes of sins.

And here is to be noted, that although this word Sayntines our english tungue
signifies proprely them, that be departed this life, and be establysshed in
glory with Christ: Yet the same word Saints, whereby in this article we
express the latin word Sanctorum, is here extended, to signify not only
these before mentioned, but also all such, as be called into this holy
assemble and church, and be santified in our savior Jesus Christ.

And as touching the communion, that is to say, the mutual participation of
these saints, ye must understand, that like as all the parts and members,
which be living in the natural body of a man, do naturally communicate and
minister each to other the use, commodity, and benefit of all their forces,
nutrimentes, and perfections: (In so much that it lies not in the power of
any man to say, that the meat, which he puts into his own mouth shall
nouryshe one particular membre of his body, and not an other, but that all and
every one particularly, shall receive of the said nutriment, and of the virtue
and benefyte thereof, more or less according to the natural disposition,
portion, and place, which it has within the same body): even so, what so
ever spiritual gifts or treasure is given by god unto any one membre of the
holy church, although the same be given particularly unto one membre, and not
unto an other: Yet the fruit and merits thereof, shall by reason of their
abydyng together in the unity of the catholic church, redounde unto the
common profit, edifienge, and increace of all the other members of the same
catholic church.

In so much that there shall need no man's authority to dispense and
dystribute the same, or to apply it unto this membre or that, but each membre
shall be made participante of the said treasure, and shall have and enjoy the
fruit and benefyte of the same, in such quantity and measure, as for the rate
and proportion of the faith and charity, which he has in the same body,
shall be expedient and necessary for him to have.

And hereby is notified and declared unto us, the utility and profit, which
all the members of the church do receive, by the merits, suffrages, and
prayers of the church.

And forasmoche as the most blessed sacrament of the Aultare, wherein by the
mighty operation of goddis word, is really present in form of bread, the
natural living body and blood of our savior and redemer IESV CHRIST,
increases and works in them that worthily receive it, the communion and
conjunction in body and soul of them to Christ, and Christ to them, with a
mutual conjunction also in love and charity, of each good man in Christ to
other: Therefore the said sacrament may worthily be called the Communion of
saints. And so the first part of this article has been by good devout and
learned men expounded, to sygnifie the said blessed sacrament of the aultare,
which we must believe to be a real and effectual communion of all saints,
that is to say, of al men, which be called by the holy calling of god, and
there with wyllyngely and obediently do knowledge and follow the same.

In the second part of this article, we be taught to believe remission of
sins, which is one of the effects and chief benefits of the most blessed
passion of Christ, head of the holy church, which is called and assembled in
his name, in which church is applied the benefits of remission of sins, by
the workynge of god in his sacraments ministered in the same, as shall be
hereafter declared in their place.

The.XI. and.XII. article. The resurrection of the body / and the life
everlasting.
AT the day of the general dome or judgment, when Christ shall come (as in
the seventh article of this Creed is contained) and sit to judge both quycke
and dead, almighty god shall stir and raise up again, the very flesh and
bodies of all men, women, and children, both good and bad christened and
heathen, that ever lived here in this world, from the beginning of the same,
and died before that day. And although the said flesh and bodies were dead
and buried, yea and consumed, or by any means, destroyed, yet god shall of his
infinite power make them all at that day, hole and perfect again. And so every
man generally shall resume and take again, the very self same body and
flesh, which he had whiles he lived here on earth, and so shall rise from
death, and live again in the very self same body and soul, which he had
before.

At which time, man being thus made perfect in conjunction of body and soul,
shall at that day, appear before the high judge our savior IESV CHRIST, and
there shall make an account of his works and his deeds, such as he did, good
or evil, while he lived here in this world. And such as have led their
lives, in obedience and observation of goddis commandementes, and die in true
faith and charity, shall than be perfitely sanctified, purified, and delivered
from al contagion of sin, and from all corruption and mortality of the
flesh, and shall be perpetually glorified, and receive both in body and soul
together, everlasting life.

Which life everlasting, though it passes al men's wits, to express how
pleasant and joyful it is, nor yet man's capacity, can compryse and
understand the same, as saint Paul witnesses, saying, That, which the eye
has not seen, nor the ear has not herd, nor has not entered in to man's
heart, i. Cor. ^
God has ordained for them, that love him: Yet holy scripture speaks of it,
after our capacity and intelligence, but far under the worthynes and
excellency thereof. The prophet Esaie says, Esa. xxxv.
Everlasting gladness shall be over their heads, they shall have joy and
gladness, sorrow and wayling shall forsake them. Apoc. vii.
And saint John says, God that sytteth on his throne, shall dwell over them.
They shall not hunger or thyrst any more, neither son, nor hear shall hurt
them, for the lamb, that is in the mids of the throne, shall feed them, and
bring them to the fountains of the water of life: And god shall wipe away, all
weeping and tears from their eyes, death shall endure no longer. There shall be
no waylyng, nor cryenge, nor sorrow any more: Yea there is no joy or comfort,
that can be wished for, but it is there most plentifully. There is true glory,
where praise shall be without error or flatterye. There is true honor, which
shall be given to none, onles he be worthy. There is true peace, where no man
shall be molested or grieved, neither by him self, nor by others. There is true
and pleasant fellowship, where is the company of blessed angels, and the elect
and chosen saints of god. There is true and perfect love, that never shall
fail. For all the heavenly company, is linked and fastened together, by the
bond of perfect charity: whereby also they be united and knytte to almighty
god euerlastyngly.

Finally there is the true reward of al godliness, God him self: The syghte
and fruition of whom, is the end and reward, of all our belief, and all our
good works, and of all those things, which were purchased for us by CHRIST,
he shall be our sacietie, our fullness, and desire, he shall be our life, our
health, our glory, our honor, our peace, our everlasting rest and joy: He is
the end of all our desires, whom we shall see continually, whom we shall love
most fervently, whom we shall praise and magnify, world with out end.

The sacrament of Baptism.
AS touching the holy sacrament of Baptism, it is to be noted: First, that
this sacrament was instituted and ordained, by our savior IESV CHRIST, in the
new testament, as it does appear by Christis own words unto his apostles,
where he says: Go ye abroad through out all the world, Math. xxviii.
and preach the gospel unto al people, and baptize them in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost.

Furthermore that the effect and virtue of this sacrament, is forgyuenes of
sin, and grace of the holy ghost, as is manifestely declared in the second
chapter of the acts of the apostles, where it is said: Do penance, and be
baptized every one of you, and ye shall have forgyuenes of sin, and shall
receive the gift of the holy ghost. Which effect of grace and forgyuenes of
sin, this sacrament has by virtue and force of the workyng of almighty god,
according to his promise annexed and conjoined unto this sacrament, as is
manifestly declared by the word of Christ, saying: who so ever believes and
is baptized, shall be saved. Marc. xvi.
Which saying of our savior Christ, is to be understand, of all such
persons, which die in the grace conferred and given to them in baptism, and do
not finally fall from the same by sin.

Moreover because all men be borne sinners, through the transgression of our
father Adam, in whom (as the apostle says): Romans v.
All have sinned, and can not be saved without remission of their sin, which
is given in baptism, by the workyng of the holy ghost. Therefore the sacrament
of baptism is necessary for the atteyning of salvation and everlasting life,
John. iiii.
according to the words of Christ, saying: No man can enter into the
kyngedome of god, except he be borne again of water and the holy gooste. For
which causes also it is offered, and pertayneth to all men, not only such as
have the use of reason, in whom the same duly received, takes away and
purges all kind of sins, both original and actual, committed and done
before their baptism: but also it apperteyneth and is offered unto infantes,
which because they be borne in original sin, have need and ought to be
christened: Whereby they being offered in the faith of the church, receive
forgiveness of their sin: and such grace of the holy ghost, that if they dye
in the state of their infancye, they shall thereby undoubtedly be saved.

And here we must know, that as touching original sin in infantes, like as
they take of their parents, their original and natural qualities: even so
they receive from them original sin, by which, they are made the children of
their of god, and by the same have a natural inclination to sin, by lusts
and desires, which in further age and time, sensibly move and stir them to
wickedness. For although the parents be never so clean purged, and pardoned of
their origynall sin by baptism, and grace given in the same^ yet nevertheless
the children of them begotten, be conceived and borne in original sin.
Example we may take of corn, which though it be never so clean winowed and
purged from the chafe, yet if it be cast into the ground and sown, the new,
which springs of it, is full of chafe again, until it be also wynowed and
cleansed: So likewise the children of christen men be full of chafe and
corruptution of original sin, until that by baptism, they be washed cleansed
and purged from the same, as their parents were.

And where as we have before showed, that original sin is remitted and taken
away, by baptism, both in infantes and all other, which having the use of
reason, duly receive the same:

Yet further we think good, to note a special virtue and efficacy of this
sacrament of baptism. Which is: That all be it, there remain in us that be
christened, a certain infirmity or inclination of sin called Concupiscence,
which by lusts and desires, moves us many times to sin and wickedness, yet
almighty god of his great mercy and goodness, has given us such grace in this
his holy sacrament of baptism, that such carnal and fleshly lusts and
desires, shall or can in no wise hurt us if we do not consent unto them. And by
the same grace also conferred unto us in baptism, we be made more strong and
able, to resist and withstand the said concupiscences and carnal desires,
than is any other man, which never was christened.

Farthermore for as much as in these days, certain heresies have risen and
sprung up, against the christenyng of infantes. It is to be noted, that (as the
holy doctors of the church do testify) the universal consent of the churches
in all places, and of all times, vsyng and freque^ting the christening of
infantes, is a sufficient witness and proof, that this custom of the church in
baptising of infantes, was used by Christis apostles them selves, and by them
given unto the church, and in the same has been alwais continued even unto
these days. And this custom and perpetual usage of the church, even from
the beginning, is agreeable with the saying of saint Paul: Christ loved his
church, Ephe. v.
and has given him self to the death for his churches sake, to sanctify her
and make her holy in cle^sing her by the fou^tain of water in his word etc. So
that no man is, nor can be of this church, but he which is cle^sed by ye
sacrament of baptism: Like as the texe before alleged, shows, where Christ
says: Joan. iii.
who so ever is not born again of water and the holy ghost, shall not enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore seeing that out of the church, neither
infantes, nor no man else can be saved, they must needs be christened and
cleansed by baptism, and so incorporated into the church. And as the infancye
of the children of the Hebrews, in the old testament did not let, but that they
were made participant of the grace and benefit given in circumcision: Even so
in the new testament, the infancy of children does not let, but that they may
and ought to be baptized, and so receive the graces and virtues of the same.

In this part also it is to be noted, that children or men ones baptized,
ought never to be baptized again. And all good christen men ought and must
repute and take all the Anabaptists and the Pelagians opinions, which be
contrary to the premises, and every other man's opinion, agreeable unto the said
Anabaptists, or the Pelagians in that behalf, for detestable heresies, and
utterly to be condemned.

Moreover for because, as well this sacrament of baptism, as all other
sacraments instituted by Christ, have all their virtue, efficacy, and
strength by the word of god, which by his holy spirit, works all the graces
and virtues, which be given by the sacraments, to all those that worthily
receive the same: We must understand and know, that although he which does
minister the sacrament, be of a sinful and evil conversation, yet the virtue
and effect of the sacrament, is thereby nothing diminished or hurted, neither in
infantes, nor yet in them, which being endued with the use of reason, come
thereunto, truly contrite and penitent of al their sins done before beleuyng
and confessing all the articles of the Creed, and having a sure faith and
trust in the promises of god, of remission of their sins, and purposing ever
after to live a christen life.

Finally this sacrament of baptism, may well be called a covenant between god
and us, whereby god testifies, that he for his son Christis sake, justifies
us, that is to say, forgiueth us our sins, and indueth us with his holy
spirit, and gives us such gracis, that thereby, we be made able to walk in
the works of justice ordained by god, to be exercysed of us in this present
life, to the glory and praise of god: And so perseueryng, to enjoy the fruit
of the life everlasting. And we again upon our part, ought most diligently
to remember and keep the promise, that we in baptism have made to almighty
god, that is, to believe only in him, only to serve and obey him, to forsake
all sin, and the works of Satan, to mortify our affections of the flesh,
and to live after the spirit in a new life. Of which promise and covenant by
us made to god, saint Paul puts us in remembrance, saying: Know ye not
that all we, Romans vi.
which are baptized in Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye with him, for we be
buried with him, by baptism to dye, that likewise as Christ was raised up from
death by the glory of his father: even so we should walk in a new life? By
the which words saint Paul gives us to understand, that all we which be
baptized in Christ, that is to say, which by baptism are incorporated in to
the mystycall body of Christ, have professed and bound ourselfe in baptism,
to dye from sin, and utterly to absteyne from the corruption of our old
sinful life, and to walk and proceed in a new life of grace, and the
spirit, into the which we are called by the word of god, and by faith and
due receyuyng of this holy sacrament, are brought and set into the same.

The sacrament of penance
FOr the clear understanding of this sacrament, it is to be considered, what
penance is, and also what is the sacrament of penance.

Penance is an inward sorrow and grief of the heart, for the sins by us
done and committed, and an hatrede and detestation of the same with an earnest
desire, to be purged from them, and to recover again the grace and favor of
god, by such means and remedies, as god has appointed for the obteynyng
thereof, with a steadfast purpose and mind, never to offend again. For he that
says, that he is sorry for his offenses committed against the high majesty
of god, and yet still contynueth or intends to continue in the same, is no
penytent person, but a dissembler, or rather a deryder of penance. And thus is
penance commonly taken in the scripture, as well in the new, as in the old
testament. And this penance is a thing so necessary for man's salvation, that
without it, no man that offends god, can be saved, or attain everlasting
life.

The sacrament of penance is proprely the absolution, pronounced by the
priest, upon such as be penitent for their sins, and so do knowledge and
show them selves to be. To the obteynynge of the which absolution or
sacrament of penance, be required, contrition, confession, and satisfaction,
as ways and means expedyent and necessary to obtain the said absolution. In
all which ways and means, faith is necessarily required, as the ground and
foundation of all things, that are to be done for to atteyne the benefit of
the sacrament of penance. For who can have true penance, with hope to atteyn
any grace of remission of sin thereby, onles he believe steadfastly, that god
is, and that in the new testament by the mean of our savior Jesus Christ, and
by the force of his passion, there is promise made to his church, to grant
remission of sins, by his ministers, to such as falling from the grace
received in baptism, do at his calling turn unto him by penance? And like as
they, which were not baptized, being infantes, when they come to the years of
discretion, and desire baptism, be taught first to believe in god, and to
renounce the devil and his works, upon which ground of faith, they desire
baptism, as a necessary sacrament for remission of syn: So every man, before
he enters into the ways of fruitful penance, must have for a ground and
foundation, such a belefe, as whereby he hops and looks by the sacrament of
penance, to atteine remission of all his sins, whereunto we do come (as is
aforesaid) by contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

Contrition is an inward sorrow and grief for sin, which every true
penitent, called by goddis grace, has by knowledge of the word of god,
whereupon, remembrynge his own sinful and viciouse living, whereby he has
provoked the high indygnation and wrath of god: and on the other side,
considering, the dignity and purity of that state, whereunto he was called in
baptism, and his promise made there to god, the manifold benefits also, daily
received of god. Hereupon the said penitent, moved and stirred, with the great
love and goodness of god, showed before toward him on the one party, and his
own ingratitude or unkindness toward god on the other party, conceiueth an
ernest sorrow, for that he has relinquisshed so loving a lord, and an
hateful displeasure, that he has followed sin, and thereby so grievously
offended god, of whom he was before called, to be in the state of a son, and
inheritour with our savior Jesus Christ.

And thus being moved and troubled in spirit, and lamenting the miserable
state, which he is now in, by his own defaut, is pricked and styrred in his
heart, according to the teaching of his mother, holy church; to repair to
such a minister as god has ordained, to pronounce the sentence of remission
of sin. And knowing him to occupy that place, as deputed of god, does
prostrate him self to god, and there humbly proceeds to confession, wherein he
calling to his remembrance, his sinful life past, does knowledge to the priest
al such sins in which his conscience tells him, that he has greuousely
offended the goodness of god almighty, and the same, before the priest goddis
minister, he declares and utters with his mouth, and so blames, accuses,
Luc. xv. Luc. xii.
and condemns him self, for an unkind prodigal son, to almighty god his
father, for a naughty servant, that knew by light of grace, the commandment
of his lord Jesus Christ, and did it not, was endued with many gifts of the
holy ghost, and exercised them not. And so detestinge and abhorryng sin, and
desirous to be raised from that estate, confesses in humility, the cause of
sin, to have been of him self, by yeldyng to the concupiscence of the flesh,
the world, and the devil. Wherefore he is glad to submytte him self to
such dyscipline and ways of reformation, as the priest hering his sins and
offenses, shall by his discretion and wisdom, according to the word of god,
think convenient. Which humble submission to the gostly father, with consent
and agreement to receive the said discipline, is a part of satisfaction, which
is the third way or mean to the sacrament of penance, as is before rehearsed.

And this satisfaction declares a desire to plese and content god his father,
for the unkindness toward him, in falling from the estate of grace, wherein
he was called to be his son, and inherytour of heaven, unto the miserable
condition of sin, whereby he has made him self most vile bondsman unto the
devil.

But here ye must understand, that the satisfaction (which is here spoken of)
is not so to be taken as though the penitent sinner could worthyly merit or
deserve remission of sins, by any peyn or punishment to be by him suffered,
or to make to god any just or full recompense, equivalent to the sin, that
he has committed against him, and so to satisfy, which he can never do. For
that satisfaction, has only our savior Christ wrought in his glorious
passion. But to satisfy (as here is me^t by satisfaction) is to plese god with
an humble lowly heart, ready to bring forth the fruits of penance, and to
bring them forth in deed, as in alms, prayer, and fasting, with all such
means, as may serve for the cutting away of the occasion of sin, as the
minister shall think good, according to the word of god, and with such
weping, lamentyng, and wayling, as do burst out of the heart, with a full purpose
to lead a new life, and therewith to forgive al men their trespaces, to
restore to all men, that he has unjustly taken or retained from them, to
recompense all hurtes and injuries done by him, according to his ability and
power, and as he may, not only to will, but also to do thus, to his neighbor
in deed, wherein the neighbor ought to be satisfied.

And hereby appears, how god estemeth satisfaction, both to him self, and to
the neighbor, after the will and power, and not after the equiualence of that
which is done. For to god no man can so satisfy for sin. And Christ therefore
has satisfied for all, by virtue whereof, our satisfaction is accepted and
allowed of god, who of his infinite goodness, and for Christ's sake, is
satisfied, that is to say, pleased with that littell we do.

Whereupon after this contrition had in heart, confession made with mouth, and
satisfaction showed and promised, the penitent may desire to here of the
minister, the comfortable words of remyssion of sins. And the minister
thereupon, according to Christ's gospel, pronounce the sentence of absolution,
unto the which absolution, the penitent must give credence, and believe with a
perfect faith, that his sins be now forgyuen freely, by the merits of
Christ's passion, to the which forgyuenes, he has recourse by the sacrament
of penance, as he had at the first entry unto Christis religion by the
sacrament of Baptism.

It is also to be noted, that confession to the priest is in the church
profitably commanded to be used, and frequented, for many other good causes,
and specially for this cause, that they which by custom be drowned in sin,
and se not the abomination and fill thines thereof, ne remember the goodness of
god, and want therefore contrition, may by a good gostly father, be stirred and
moved, to deteste and lament their sin, by declaring unto the^ the word of
god in such scriptures, as serve for that purpose, in such wise, that not only
contrition shall arise in the heart, to the pleasure of god, but also
satisfaction ensue, wherewith goddis merciful goodness shall be co^te^ted. So that
the words of absolutio^ may be effectually pronounced to the penitent, of the
remission of his sins.

Finally it is to be remembered, that not withsta^dynge this way before
described, is the ordinary mean, for penitent sinners, to opteine remission of
sins, and to be reconciled to the favor of god, yet in case there lack a
minister, to pronounce the words of absolution, or in time of necessity, when
a sinner has not sufficient leisure or opportunity to do the works of penance
before declared, if he truly repent him of his sinful life, and withal his
heart, purpose through goddis grace to change and amend the same, he shall
undoubtedly have pardon and forgyuenes of all his missedoynges. For as saint
Cyprian says: Even in the hour of death, when the soul is ready to depart
out of the body, the great merciful goodness of god despises not penance: In
so much that than, neither ye greatness of sin, nor the shortenes of time,
nor yet the enormitie of life, excludes from the mercy of god, if there be true
contrition, and an unfeigned change of the heart from synnefull conversation.
The these that hanged upon the cross, asked mercy with a contryte heart, and
forthwith was made a citezen of Paradise, and where as he deserved condemnation
and punyshement, this contrite heart, changed his peyn into martyrdom, and his
blood into baptism. yet not withstandyng, no man ought upon hope of goddis
mercy, still to continue in sinful living. Like as no man would be sick in his
body, upon hope to recover health. For such as will not forsake their wickedness,
and yet think that god will forgive them, be oftentimes, so prevented with the
just plage of god, that neither they have time to convert, nor grace to
receive the benefitte of forgyuenesse. Therefore scripture says: Slack not to
convert and turn to god. And linger not from day to day. For his anger will
come suddenly, and in the time of vengeance, he will distroy the. Wherefore
imbracyng the mercy of god on the one side, and fearing the justice of god on
the other side: Let us at no time, neither despair (...) man ought to reason
over far, nor go about to compass the will and work of god, by his weak
sense and ymagination: But we must without further serching give firm assent
and credence, unto Christis almighty word, by the which heaven and earth were
made, and not trouble our wits, in labouryng to comprehend the power and
might of god, but rather (steadfastly giving faith to his word) apply our hole
will and affection, to atteine the fruit and profit of this most holy
sacrament, toward our salvation, according to thentent of Christis
institution: Who, of his inestimable mercy and love toward us, willing that
we should have perfect hope, strength, comfort and joy in him, and that we should
have continual remembrance, of his most dear charity, showed toward us, in
his death and passion, did institute this sacrament, as a permanent memorial of
his mercy, and the wonderful work of our redemption, and a perpetual fode and
nourishement for our spiritual sustentation, in this dangerous passage and
travail of this wretched life. It is therefore necessary, that in the vsyng,
receiving, and beholding of this sacrament, we have hearty remembrance, of our
most loving and dear savior Jesus Christ, that is to say, that we think
effectuously of his most bitter passion, which he being ye lord of glory
suffered for us. And to be wail our sins, which were cause of ye said death
and passion, calling mekely for grace and the mercy of god, which most
abundantly is obtained, by the virtue and merit of the same passion. And
thinking that our lord, which gave him self in that manner for us, will not
forsake us, or cast us away, but forgive us, if we truly repent, and will
amend, and become faithful servants to him, which so derely has bought us,
and paid for us, neither gold ne yet silver (as saint Peter says) but his
own precious blood. Wherefore, saying we be so bought, i. Pet. i.
we must know, that we be not our own, yt is to say, We may not be at the
liberty and wildnes of our own flesh, nor we may not be servants to the
world, nor the devil: but we must be servants to our lord, and master Jesus
Christ, in all obedience unto rightwisenes, and godliness, according to his will
and co^mandementes.

Therefore when so ever we shall receive or use this holy sacrament, we must
take heed, and have reverence to the majesty thereof, and beware that we come
not unworthily thereunto. i. Cor. xi.
For as saint Paul says: He that eats of that heavenly fode, or drinks of
the cup of our lord unworthily, that is to say, without due reverence, faith,
repentance, charity, and the fear of god, he eats and drinks his own
damnation, because he puts no difference, between the body of our lord and
other meats. And further truly, sense christen men ought to have remembrance
of god, whenever they go, to their bodily meat or drink, and receive it not
without thanckes giving unto god (as saint Paul says) whether ye eat or
drink or whatsoever ye do, i. Cor. x.
do it in the name of our lord Jesus Christ: how much more ought all christen
men (when they come to be fed at the table of our lord, and to receive this
blessed and glorious sacrament) to have special and entier devotion, with most
tha^ckefull remembrance to god, for his goodness, declared toward us, in the
benefit of our redemption. And therefore among other names, this sacrament is
called Eucharistia, that is to say, the sacrament of thanks and blessinge.
For as much, as it sets before us, and does exhibit unto us, the very
price of our redemtion, and salvation, which is the body of our lord that
suffered and died for us.

Furthermore here is to be noted, as touching the receyuyng of this sacrament,
that although our savior Jesus Christ, at the first institution thereof in his
supper, did minister it unto his disciples tha^ present, under both the kinds
of bread and wine: Yet that fascion and manner of ministering is not so necessary
to the receyuer, except it be to the priest when he consecrateth, that without
the due observation of that way, man might not receive that blessed
sacrament, to his salvation. For the benefit or hurt that comes to a christen
man by receiving of this sacrament, stands not in the fascion or manner of
receiving of it, under one or both kinds, but in the worthy or unworthy
receiving of the same. For he yt receives this sacrament worthily, under the
one kind, as under the form of bread only, receives the hole body and blood
of Christ, and as many and great benefits of Christ, as he that receives it
in both kinds. And therefore if any man should teach, that the lay people
(which by the ordinance and ancient custom of the catholic church have used
to receive this holy sacrament in form of bread only) be seduced, and so
cause them to think, that the hole body and blood of Christ were not
comprehended in that only form of bread, as well as in both the kinds, this
doctrine ought utterly to be refused and abiected, as a pestiferous and a
diuelyshe schole. For surely scripture teaches the contrary. And also natural
reason, although it can not comprehend the hole mystery of this sacrament, yet
herein it teaches us agreably with scripture, that the lively body can not be
without blood, and so men ought to be led from that fond opinion (if any
such be) both by that faith and credyte they owe to scripture, and in this
point also by natural reason.

Wherefore christen men ought not to grudge at this form and manner of
receyuyng of this sacrament under one kind, used and allowed by the catholic
church, both to avoid that error before rehearsed, and also for many other
weyghty considerations, concerning both the honor of the sacrament, and the
liberty and commodity of the hole church. And not only lay men, but also
priests (saving when they consecrate) use to receive this sacrament none
otherwise. Let christen men therefore, humbly apply them self, to put all
erroneous fantasies (if any such arise) clean out of their hearts, and
satisfye themselves with this, that when they receive this sacrament worthily,
though it be but in one kind, they lose no part of the profit and benefit
promised by virtue of the said sacrament.

Wherefore considering (as is before rehearsed (the dignity and excellency of
this sacrament, we ought with all humblenes of heart and devotion, to prepare
our selves, that we (using accordyngly the same) may be partakers of such
fruit and grace, as undoubtedly is offered and given to all such, as in due
manner receive this sacrament. For they that so do, be made one with Christ,
and dwell in him, and he in them, as he says in the.vi. chapter of saint
John's gospel, where he speaks also of this sacrament: This is the bread
which descended from heaven, that who so ever eats thereof should not dye, I
am the lively bread, which have descended from heaven, if any shall eat of
this bread, he shall live euerlastyngly. And than he declaryng him self, what
he means by the bread, says, as incontinentely follows: And the bread,
which I shall give, is my flesh, which I shall give for the life of the
world. Which words be most comfortable, for the perfyte confirmation and
establishment of our faith in this sacrament: For as much as they both
certify us, that his very flesh, bloudde, and body, is that meat, which we
receive in the sacrament, and that also it preserves from death, and
conferreth life to all, Math. ix.
which duelye receive it. For seeing it is the very body of our savior Christ,
which is united and knytte to his godheade in one person, and by reason
thereof, has the very virtue and substance of life in it, it must needs
consequently, by the most holy and blessed participation of the same, give and
communicate life also to them, that worthily receive it: And it endueth them
with grace, strength, and virtue, against all temptation, sin, and death, and
does much ease, and relieve all the troubles dieases and infirmities of their
soul. For seeing the woman, which was diseased with the flux of blood (as it
is written in the gospel) was healed, by touching the hemme of the garment of
Christ, through the virtue which came from him: How much more shall they
find remedy of the sickness and malady of their soul, which with due
reverence and faith receive and eat the blessed body of Christ, and so be
made lively temples of him, dwelling in them, yea made as one flesh and body
with him? For this heavenly meat is not turned into our substance, as other
corporal meat is, but by the godly operation thereof, we be turned toward
the nature of it, that is to say, of earthely, corruptible, and sinful, we be
made heavenly spiritual, and strong against sin, and all wyckednes.

And further it is to be remembered, that as in the receyuyng of this sacrament,
we have most entter communion with Christ: so be we also joined by the same,
in most perfect unity with his church, and all the me^bres thereof. And for
that cause among other, this sacrament was instituted of our savior Christ,
in the form of bread, to sygnyfye the unity, concord, and charity, that
is between Christ our head, and his mystical body the church, and every
part and membre thereof one with an other. For as bread is made of many graynes
or corns, which all make but one loofe, so should all true christen people,
being many in number, yet be all one in faith and charity, as sayncte Paul
says, we be one breadde and one body, i. Cor. xi.
all that be partakers of one bread, that is of this blessed sacrament.

Finally it is to be noted, that although Christ at the first institution of
this sacrament, did consecrate and give it to his disciples, at supper, after
they had eaten the paschal lamb, partly to declare that the sacraments and
sacrifices of the old law, should from thensforth cease and take an end, and
partly, that by this sacrament, being the last thing that he next before his
death, left unto his disciples, the remembrance of him should be the more
depely and effectuously imprinted in the hearts of them and of all other, that
after should receive the same: Yet (as saint Augustine says) it was thought
good to the apostles and the universal church, being moved with the holy
ghost, for the more honor of so high a sacrament, and for the more reverence
and devout receyuynge thereof, that it should always be received of christen
people, wha^ they be fasting, and before they receive any bodily sustena^ce,
except it be in case of syckenes or necessity.

Wherefore considering the most excellent grace, efficacy, and virtue of this
sacrament, it were greatly to be wyshed and prayed for, that al christen
people, had such devotion thereunto, that they would gladly dispose and prepare
themselves, to the more often worthy receyuynge of the same. But seeing that in
these last days, Mat. xxiiii
Charity is waxed cold, and sin does abound (as Christ says in the
gospel that it should) yet if christen men will avoid the great indignation
of god, it shall be good for them, when so ever they receive this sacrament
them selves, or be present, where it is ministered or used, as specially in
the time of mass, to behave them self reverently, in pure devotion and prayer
and not to talk or walk up and down, or to offend their brethern, by any evil
example of irreverence to the said sacrament: except they will declare them
self to have small regard to our savior CHRIST, there bodyly present, of
which irreverence and contempt may ensue, not only spiritual punishemementes
of god, by withdrawyng his grace from such ungodly persons, i. Cor. xi.
but also bodily and open scourge, as saint Paul shows to the Corinthians,
That for the unworthy entreatyng and using of this sacrament, many among
them were weak, sick, and dyed.

The sacrament of Matrimony.
AS touching the sacrament of matrimonye, and the institution thereof, you
shall understand, that almighty god at the first creation of man, considering
of his infynite goodness and wisdom, how necessary it was, to couple and
conioyne man and woman together in marriage, as well for their mutual aid and
comfort, and for the preservation and continuance of mankind in lawful
succession, as also that the same generation might after the fall of man, be
exercised perpetually unto the worlds end, without sin and offense toward
god, did conioine Adam and Eve together in marriage. And tha^ instituted
matrimony, and consecrated and blessed it by his holy word, as appears in the
book of Genesis, where is also described the virtue and effycacye of the same,
by these words following:

Gene. ii.
Now this bone is of my bones, and this flesh is of my flesh, and therefore
the man shall leave his father and mother, and adhere and cleave unto his wise,
and they shall be two in one flesh and in one body.

By which words it is mente, that by the virtue and efficacy of matrimony,
rightfully and by the authority of god contracted, the man and woman which
were before two bodies, be now united and made one body, during their lives,
so that the husband has no power of his own body, to use the same as him
list, and with whom him lyketh, but it is his wives, and with her only he may
use the act of matrimonye. Nor the wife has any power of her own body, to
use it as her list, or with whom her likes, but her body is her husbands
body, and with him only may she use the act of matrimony. And therefore the
said two persons, so conjoined, may not after be divided, for any affection
to father or mother, or for any earthely thing in the world, but each must
adhere and cleave to other, for as much as they be now two persons in one
flesh and in one body.

Secondely how that almighty god, allowing and approving the said institution
of matrimony, sanctified and blessed it with his holy word immediately after
Noes fludde, saying unto Noe, and his children in this wise: Romans vl.
Increase and be ye multiplied, and replenyshe the earth. This institution of
matrimonye thus allowed by god, unto Noe and his children, although it was a
sufficient instruction unto them, and all their posterity, how to use the
same in all purity and clennesse, to goddis pleasure and his contentation: Yet
god considering the natural inclination of man to malice and sin, did
afterward, further explycate and establysshe the same, by his other laws
written, whereby god prohibited, that any matrimony should be made in the
degrees following, that is to say.

No man shall marry with his mother, his graundame, his great graundame, and so
upward: neither may he marry with the wife his father, his graundfather, or his
great graundefather, and so upward: neither any man may marry with the sister
of his father, or of his mother, his graundefather or his graundmother, and so
upward: neither may any man marry with the wife of him, that is brother to his
father, his mother, his graundefather, his graundmother, and so upward. And
like wise every woman is forbidden to marry any man, within any degrees above
rehearsed. It is also further forbidden, that any man shall marry with his
sister, whether she be his hole sister, or his half sister begotten in
marriage, or out of marriage: neither may he marry with his brothers wife, nor
with his wives sister. Which laws of prohibition in marriage, although they
were not, by express words of God, declared at the first instytution of
matrimonye, ne also when the same was allowed after Noes flud, yet god did
ingraue and imprinte the same laws in the heart of man, before they were
written by Moses. And forasmuch as the natural light and knowledge of man, was
not only by original sin, obscured and blinded, but also in the most part
of men, by the increace of sin and malice, in long continuance and process
of time almost peryshed and extincte: In so much that they could not
perceive nor judge, what things were of their own nature naught and
detestable in the sight of god, ne yet how far the natural honesty and
reverence, which we owe unto such persons as be nere of our kynne, or
alliance unto us, was extended: God therefore wyllyng manne to return from
darckenesse, commanded his prophet Moses, to promulgate and to declare by
his word unto the people of Israel, the said laws of prohibition of
matrimony in certain degrees of consanguinitie and affinity, as is before
mentioned. In the declaration of the which laws of prohibition, Moses so
tempred his words, that it may evidently appear thereby, that not only the
Jews. but also all other the people of the world, were as much and as
streyghtly bounden, to the continual observation of the same laws, as they
were to the other moral laws of the ten commandementes.

Thyrdely / that the conjunction between man and woman in matrimony, does not
only signify and represent the perfyte and indissoluble conjunction and union
of the nature of god with the nature of man, which was fulfilled, when the
second person in trinity, descendyng from his father, did take upon him the
very form and substance of our nature, and so these two natures were united
and knyt together in one person: but also thereby is sygnified and represented,
the society and conjunction in perfect and indissoluble love and charity
between Christ and his church, that is to say, the congregation of al christen
people. And this to be true saint Paul him self affirms in the fyst
chapyter of the epistle unto the Ephesians. In which place the apostle
minding to prove and persuade, that al women, being married, ought to love,
to reverence, to honor, to obey, to be subject unto their husbands in all
things, even as the church is subject unto Christ: and likewise that all
husbands ought and be bound to love their wives, even as they love their own
self and their own bodies, and even as Christ loves the church his
espouse: He brings in the first institution of matrimonye, as it was ordained
by god in Paradise, and alleges the words of god as they be before rehearsed:
upon which words the apostle infers and says. This conjunction of man
and woman together in marriage, whereby they are knytted, united, and made al one
flesh and one body, Is the sacrament, that is to say: a mystery and
signification of that great and meruaylous conjunction, which is between
Christ and his church. For like as by virtue and efficacy of the first
institution of matrimony, the husband and the wife be made to be but one body,
whereof the husband is head: Even so Christ does knytte and unite, conglutinate
and make his church to be one body with him, whereof he is the very head. By
the which words of saint Paul, it appears not only what is the virtue and
efficacy of matrimony, in the vnitinge and incorporatynge of two bodies in one,
but also that it does signifye this other coniu^ction, which is between Christ
and his church. And that this conjunction between Christ and the church, is
the very self thing, which is signified and represented by the other
conjunction of man and woman in marriage. For though saint Paul used in this
place, other arguments and persuasions, taken of the law of nature, to enduce
married persons, the one to love the other, saying that men naturally do love
and nourishe their own bodies and their own flesh: Yet he uses this as a
reason of great efficacye, to persuade his purpose, that is to say, that all
husbands and wives ought so to use them selves, the one to the other, that
their matrimony and all their works and affections in the same, might and
should corresponde, and be comfortable and like unto that most holy thing,
which is signified and represented thereby, that is to say, unto that
spiritual conjunction, which is between Christ and his espouse the church.
And that therefore especially, the man ought and is bound to love his wife, and
the wife to love and obey her husband in all things, lest by doing the
contrary, they should make their matrimony unlike to the thing that is signified
thereby.

And thus was matrimony not only instituted by god, sanctified by his word,
and dignified by his laws, even from the beginning of the world: But also
Christ him self did accept, approve, and allow the same in the new testament,
as well by his word, as also by his sundry works and deeds testifienge the
same: In so much that he being invited to a certain marriage, made in Cana a
town of Galile, Joan.i^.
did vouchesafe, not only to come thither, and there to honor the said
marriage with his corporal presence, and with the presence also of his blessed
mother and his holy apostles: but there he began also, by tournyng of water in
to wine, first to work miracles, and to manyfeste his glory unto the world.
Matt. xix.
And afterward in one other place when the pharisees came unto him, and
demanded, whether a man might laufully be divorced from his wife for every
cause:

Christ puttyng the said pharisees in remembrance of the first institution of
matrimony said unto them: Have you not red, how that god which created all
things in the beginning, did also form and create man and woman, and said
these words: Therefore the man shall leave his father and mother, and shall
adhere and cleave unto his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh and one
body? Wherefore understand you (says he) that since man and woman conjoined in
matrimony, be by goddis ordinance but one flesh and one body, they should not
afterward be separated or divorced one from the other. And understand you also
that it is not laufull for any man, to separate and divide those persons a
sunder, which by goddis word and his will and power be conjoined together. And
when the pharisees replying thereunto said: Why than did Moses command us, to
make a lybell of divorce, and so to depart and separate our selves from our
wives? Christ answered them and said. Moises consydering the hardenes and
obstynacy of your hearts, did permyt and suffer you so to do. How be it I say
unto you, that it was not so at the beginnynge, that is to say, it is clean
contrary to the godly institution and natural order of the laws of matrimony,
as it was instituted by god at the beginning, that any man married, should be
divorced from his lawful wife, and be set at liberty to marry. And therefore I
say again unto you, that who so ever does forsake his laufull wife, onles it be
for adultery, committed by her, and mary an other, I say he commytteth
adulterye in so doing, And likewise what woman so ever does forsake her
laufull husband, and marries an other, she also commits adultery, and the
man also that marries her offends in like manner.

These words of Christ euydently declare his sentence in the approbation of
the instytution of matrimony, made at the beginning of the world, and that it
is Christ's will and commandment, that the people of god should follow and
conform their doings unto the laws of matrimonye than made, and should
observe the same in such purity and santimony, as it was first ordained,
without separation or divorce, and that under the pain of damnation.

And here also is one thing specially to be noted that in these words of
Christ, (That, which god has conioined, man may not separate) is declared
the infinite benignity and goodness of god toward us, in that he has not
only conjoined our first progenitors Adam and Eve together in marriage whereby
he gave unto us the original beginnynge of our procreation, but that he does
also ever sith that time, continually assiste man and woman, and works with
them in this conjunction of marriage, and is the very author of all
matrimonies, which be laufully made between man and woman. And therefore saint
Paul says: Hebr. xiii.
Honorabile coniugium in omnibus, and thorus immaculatus, that is to say,
Matrimony is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled.

An other thing also is to be noted, that not only the act and procreation,
which else of it self were unlawful, is by this sacrament made lawful: but
also that the good bryngyng up of children, borne in matrimony, is so well
accepted of god, that unto it as unto other good works, done in faith by
grace, is promised life everlasting, according to the words of saint Paul,
where he says? i. Tim. ii.
The woman was seduced and blinded by the serpent, and so sinned daily, but
she shall be saved by procreation and bringing forth of children: if the same
do persevere and continue in faith and love toward god, and in holiness and
temperance in their acts and deeds. And as this is spoken of the woman, so it
is also veryfied in the man, doing his duty likewise, as is required of the
woman.

Finally it is to be considered, how in matrimony be co^me^ded specially three
good things, al which they that contracte matrimony, ought to remember and
regard: First of al, the thing it self, which is signified thereby, which as
is said before, is the high, the mighty, and incomprensible work of god, in
the conjunction of Christ and the church together, wrought by him to our
singular benefit and everlasting salvation. And that therefore the man and
wife ought to live together in perfect unity and concord, and to love each
other as their own bodies, and to use the same in all cleanness, purity, and
honor, Ephe. v.
even as Christ him self loved his espouse the church, and suffered all
afflictions and peynes to make her glorious and void from all manner of spotte
or wrinkle of uncleanness. Which matter saint Paul most godly declares in
his epistle to the Thessalonia^s, where he writes in this manner. ^ The. iiii.
I pray you brethern, and instantely desire you, for our lord Jesus Christis
sake, that like as ye have herd heretofore of us, how and in what manner, you
should go forward, and please god, so ye do proceed in the same, and that after
such sort and manner, that you may contynually profitte and encreace therein.
You remember, I doubt not, what precepts and commandementes I have given unto
you in times past, in the name of our lord IESV CHRIST: And now in like manner,
and in his name also I say again unto you, that the will and commandment of
god is, that you should sanctify your selves, that is to say, that you should
absteyn from all manner of fornication, and that every one of you should use and
keep the vesselle of his body, in holiness and honor, and not in desire of
carnal concupiscence, like as the Gentyles do, which know not god, and that
no man should craftyly compass and circumuent his brother, to obtein his
flesshely lusts: For almighty god takes vengeance upon all such people, as
do commit any of those things. Know you also, that god has not called us
to uncleanness and fylthynes of life, but unto holiness and santimonie. And
therefore I do exhort you all, and in the name of god command you, to eschew
all fornication and adultery, all uncleanness and carnal concupiscence, all
fylthynes and vnpure living in flesshely lusts of the body. And I say
further, that who so ever despyseth and breaks these my commandementes, does
not despise me, but despises god: For they be his commandments, whose
spirit ye have received.

The second good thing, which ought to be remembered in the said sacrament, is
the faith and mutual promise, made between the husband and the wife,
conjoined in lawful matrimony. whereby and by the virtue of the said sacrament,
the persons so laufully conjoined, be bound esche one to keep promise with the
other, according to such trust and co^fydence, as each had in the other, and
expressed by words in the same contracte, which promise god did assiste and
ratify, and is now party thereunto: so that the breach of that promise and
faith, is now a high and displeasant offense unto almighty god, like as the
observation and keeping thereof, is in the sight of god, pleasant, acceptable,
and meritorious and the knotte also and bond of matrimony, contracted between
the said persons, is made thereby to be indissoluble. Truth it is, that if in
any marriage, it may appear, and be duly proved, that there is such
insufficient impediment, by the laws of god, or by the laws of the realm,
that the same matrymony was at the beginning unlawful, and of none effect: in
that case, the church may and ought, to divorce the same persons so unlawfully
contracted, and declare, that such matrimony is unlawful, and the bond
thereof, to be of no strength or efficacy, because is was never good from the
beginning. Notwithstanding, in marriages laufully made, and according to the
ordinance of matrimonye, prescribed by god and the laws of every realm, the
bond thereof can not be dissolved, during the lives of the parties, between
whom such matrimony is made.

The third good thing to be considered and observed in matrimony, is the child
that comes of marriage, and the good and virtuous education and bringynge up of
the same. Whereunto all married men and women ought to have a special regard,
and to follow therein the example of Thoby, Tobi. iiii.
which taught his son from his infancy, to love and dread god, and to flee
and abstain from all manner of sin, for goddis sake. For surely if the
fathers and mothers be negligent in good bringing up of their children in their
youth, and suffer them to fall in to folies and sin, in defaut of due
correction and chastisement of them for the same: no doubt they shall answer
unto god for it, as it appears by the great stroke and punyshement of god, i.
Reg. ii. and. iiii.
when he did suddenly strike Ely unto death, because that he knowinge his
children to do amiss, did not punish them therefore.

And therefore let all parents emply their diligence and busy cure, to educate
and instruct their children, by all means in virtue and goodness, and to
restrain them from vices, by convenient discipline and castigation, according
to the saying of the wise man: Withdraw not thy just discipline from thy child,
for if thou do so, he will fall into sundry inconveniences, Pro. xx^.
and so finally shall be lost and undone. Wherefore spare not to chastise thy
child with the rod, and so doing, thou shall deliver his soul from hell.
And co^cerninge the childs duty toward the father, it shall be declared
hereafter in the commandementes.

The sacrament of Orders.
AS concerning the sacrament of Orders, tt is to be understand, that order is a
gift or grace of mynistration in Christis church, given of god to christen men,
by the consecration and imposition of the bishops hands upon them, and this
sacrament was conferred and given at the beginning by the apostles, as it
appears in the epistle of saint Paul to Timothe, whom he had ordered and
consecrate priest, where he says thus: ii. Tim. i.
I do exhort the, that thou do stir up the grace of god, the which is given
the by the imposition of my hands. And in an other place he does monish the
same Timothe, and put him in remembrance of the rome and ministry, that he was
called unto in these words: Do not neglect the grace, i. Tim. iiii.
which thou have in the, and the which is given the through prophecy, and
with imposition of hands, by the authority of priesthode. Whereby it appears,
that saint Paul did consecrate and order priests and bishops by the imposition
of his hands. And as the apostles them selves, in the beginning of the
church, did order priests and bishops: So they appointed and wylled the other
bishops, after them, to do the like, as saint Paul manifestly shows in his
epistle to Tite, saying thus: i Tim. v.
For this cause I left the Crete, that thou should ordeyne priests in every
city, according as I have appointed the. T^. i.
And to Timothe he says: Se that thou be not hasty, to put thy hands upon
any man

And here is to be noted, that although this form before declared, is to be
observed in gyuyng orders: yet there is no certain rule prescribed or
limited, by the word of god, for the nomination, election, presentation, or
appointing of any such ecclesiastical ministers: But the same is holy left
unto the positive laws and ordinances of every christian region, proiuded and
made, or to be made in that behalf, with the assent of the prince and ruler.
And as concerning the office and duty of the said ecclesiastical mynisters,
the same consysteth in true preaching and teaching the word of god unto the
people, in dispensyng and ministering the sacraments of Christ, in
consecratynge and offering the blessed body and blood of Christ in the
sacrament of the altar, in losing and assoylyng from sin, such persons as
be sorry and truly penitent for the same, and excommunicatynge such as be
gyltie in manifest crimes, and will not be reformed otherwise, and finally in
praying for the hole church of Christ, and specially for the flock committed
unto them. And although the office and minysterye of priests and bishops,
stand chiefly in these things before rehearsed: yet neither they nor any of
them may exercise and execute any of the same offices, but with such sort and
such limitation as the ordinances and laws of every christian realm, do permit
and suffer.

And because it is not mete, that this so chargeable a cure, should be committed
to every man, that peradventure, ambiciously would desire it: Therefore saint
Paul does dilygently set out to his disciples Timothe and Tite, the
conversation, learning, conditions, and qualities of them that should be
admitted to the mynistery of priesthode, i. Tim. iii. and Tit. i.
writing in this manner: A bishop or a priest ought to be blameless, as the
steward of god, not wilful, not angry, no drunkarde, no fyghter, not gredy of
fylthy lucre, but given to hospitality, liberal, discrete, sobre, rightuous,
devout, temperate, and continent, and such one as holds the true word of
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort with bolsom lerning, and to reprove
them that say against it. Thus we have shortly touched first, the ordrynge of
priests and bishops: Secondly, their ministry office and duty, with the
charge and cure belonging thereunto, and finally the qualities and conditions
required in the same.

And for as much as it is an old heresy of the Donatistes, condemned in the
general counselles, to think that the word of god, and his sacraments should
be of no efficacy, strength, or virtue, wha^ they be ministered by evil men, it
is to be remembered, that according to the saying of saint Gregory Nazianzene:
Like as there is no difference between the self same image or figure of any
thing imprinted with a signet of gold, and a signet made of iron, or of wood,
or any other viler mattier: even so the word of god, and the sacraments of
god mynystred by an evil and noughty man, be of the self same vygour,
strength, and efficacy, as when they be ministered by a man of excellent virtue
and goodness. The cause and reason whereof is, for that the priests and bishops,
although in the execution of their office and administration, they do use and
exercise the power and authority of god, committed unto them: yet they be not
the principal causers, nor the sufficient, or of them selves the efficient
causers or gyuers of grace, or of any other spiritual gift, which proceeds
and is given of god, by his word and his sacraments. But god is the only
principal, sufficient, and perfect cause of all the efficacy of his word, and
his sacraments, and by his only power, grace, and benefits it is, that we
receive the holy ghost, and his gracis, by the office and administration of the
said priests and bishops, and the said priests and bysshoppes be but only
as officers, to execute and minister with their hands and tongues, the
outward and corporal things, wherein god works and gives grace inward,
according to his pacte and covenant, made with and to his espouse, the
church. And this also Chrysostom affirms the.lxxxv. homily upon saint John,
where he says in this manner: What speak I of priestis, I say that neither
aungel nor archangell can give us any of these things, which be given unto us
of god, but it is the father, the son, and the holy ghost, which is the
effectual cause of all these things, the priest does only put to his
hands, and his tongue. And in this point saint Ambrose also agrees, with the
said sayings of Chrysostom writing thus. The priest lays his hands upon
us, but it is god, that gives the grace, the priest lays upon us his
besechynge hands, but god blesses us with his mighty hand. The bishop
consecrateth an other bishop, but it is god that gives the worthynesse.
Wherefore we must always think and believe, that the virtue and efficacy of the
word of god, and his sacraments, consists and depends, in and upon the
commandment, ordinance, power, and authority of god only, and that neither
the merits or worthynes of the ministers, be they never of such excellency,
do give them their authority, strength, or effycacie, neither yet the malice,
nor corrupt living of them, be it never so evil, can frustrate or take away
from the said word or sacraments, their said power, authority, strength, or
virtue.

Moreover as touching the order of deacons we read in the acts of the
Apostles, Act. vi.
that they were ordered and instituted by the same apostelles, by prayer and
imposition of their hands upon them. And as for the qualities and virtuous
conversation, which be required in them, saint Paul sets them out in his
epistle to Timothe, in these words: l. Tim. iii.
Deacons ought to be chaste, not double tounged, no drunkardes, not gredy of
fylthy lucre, having the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. And their
office in the primitive church, was partly in mynistringe meat and drink,
and other necessaryes, to poor people found of the church, partly also in
mynystrynge to the bysshoppes and priests, and in doing their duty in the
church. And of these two orders only, that is to say, priests and deacons,
scripture makes express mention, and how they were conferred of the apostels
by prayer and imposition of their hands. And to these two, the primitive
church did add and conioyn certain other inferior and lower degrees, as
subdeacons, accolites, exorcistes, with diverse other, of the which mention is
made of both of the most ancient writers, that we have in the church of
CHRIST, after the apostelles, and also in diverse old counsayles, and namely
in the fourth counsel of Aphrike, in which saint Augustine was present,
where as all the kinds of orders, which were than in the church, be
rehearsed, and also with what rites and ceremonies, they were co^ferred and
given at that time. And thus by succession from the apostles time has Order
continued in the church and has ever been called and counted for a sacrament,
as it may appear by diverse other aunciente writers, and specially by saint
Augustine, where he writes thus, speakinge both of the sacrament of baptism,
and of order: Either of them (says he) is a sacrament, and either of them is
given to men, by a certain consecration, the one when a man is baptized, and
the other, when he is ordered, and therefore neither of them both, may be
iterate or repeted in the catholyke church of Christ.

And where as we have thus summaryly declared, what is the office and
ministration, which in holy scriptures has been committed to bysshoppes and
priests, and in what things it consists, as is before rehearsed, lest
peradventure it might be thought to some persons, that such auctorities,
powers, and jurisdictions, as patriarchs, prymates, archebysshoppes, and
metropolitanes, now have, or heretofore at any time have had justly and
laufully over other bishops, were given them by god in holy scripture. We
think it expediente and necessary, that all men should be advertised and
taught, that all such laufull powers and authorities of any one bishop over
an other, were and be given to them, by the consent, ordinance, and posytiue
laws of men only, and not by any ordinance of god in holy scripture. And all
other power and authority, which any bishop has used or exercysed over an
other, which has not benne given to him by such consent and ordinance of
men, (as is aforesaid) is in very deed no laufull power, but plain
usurpation and tyranny.

And therefore where as the bishop of Rome, has heretofore claymed and
usurped, to be head and governor of all priests and bishops of the hole
catholyke church of Christ, by the laws of god: It is euydent, that the same
power is utterly feigned and untrue, and was neither given to him by god in his
holy scripture, nor allowed by the holy fathers in the ancient general
counsels, nor yet by the consent of the hole catholyke church. For it is
plain, that Christ never gave unto saint Peter, or to any of the apostels, or
their successors, any such universal authority over all the other. But he
set them all indifferently, and in like power, dignity, and authority, as it
does evidently appear in all such places, where any authority is given to
them by Christ. And also by saint Paul, in his epistle to the Galathians,
where he compares him self to James, Gala. ii.
Peter, and John^, which were the most notable emonge the apostles, affirminge
him self to be equal in authority with them.

And as concerning the most ancient and most famous holy general counsayles,
it is euydent, that they gave the bishops of Rome, no such authority, for in
them be diverse acts and decres, plainly testifieng the contrary.

As first in the former counsel of Nece, emonge other, there is one decree,
that the patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antiochia, should have like power over
the countries about those citees, as the bishops of Rome, have had over the
countries about Rome.

Also in the counsel Mileuitane, in which counsel saint Augustine was
present, and subscribed to the same, it was decreed, that if any clerk of the
countries of Aphrike, would appeal out of Aphrica, unto any bysshoppes beyond
the sea, that such a one should be taken through out all the countries of
Aphrica, as a person excommunicate.

Moreover in the general counsel Constantinopolitan the first, it was
likewise decreed, that every cause and controversy between any persons, should
be determined within the provinces, where the matters did lie, and that by the
bishops of the same provinces. And also that no bishops should exercise any
power out of his own dioces or province. And this was also the mind of the
holy doctor and martyr saint Cypriane, and of the other holy fathers of
Aphrica, before the time of any general counsel.

And for the better and more plain and assured confirmation, that the bishop
of Rome has no such universal authority, neither by goddis lawene yet by
any ordinances of any ancient catholyke counsel: It is to be considered, that
in the.vi. great counsel Carthaginense, the bishop of Rome sent his legates
to that counsel, to allege and vendicate his usurped primacy, and by title
of the same, to defend and maintain the receiving of appeles made unto him of
causes and controversies commenced in Aphrike, because the hole counsel had
by their decree, prohibited and forbidden before, al such appeles to any
toreyn bishop. In the entreting and debatyng of which matter, the bishop of
Rome for his title, alleged only a canon, made (as he pretended) in the first
Nicene counsel, The bishops of Aphrica denieng any such canon to be made. For
trial whereof, messangers were sent to the patriarchs sees of the orient, to
make search for the hole canons of that counsel. And finally after long and
dilligent search, wha^ the hole canons were brought forth from thense, there
was no such canon emonges them, as the bishop of Rome for his said title had
alleged.

Whereupon two things are to be noted, as evident by the premises. First that
the bishop of Rome has no such primacy, nor any such can challenge by any
words in scripture: For than the bishop of Rome would at that time by his
legates have alleged it, and the great multitude of so many fathers, as were
assembled in that Aphrican counsel (of who^ saint Augustine was one) were so
well and profoundly learned in holy scripture, that no such thing (if it were
there) could have been hid unto them. And also they were so good and
virtuous, that if they had known it there, they than would have made no act
before to the contrary, nor yet at that time, so ernestly and extremely refused
it.

The second thing to be noted as evident by the premises is, that the bishops
of Rome, have no such power given them by any ancient general counsel. For
they at that time of this Aphicane counsel, would than have alleged it, where
in deed they alleged none but a pretensed canon of the first Nicene counsel,
which after great trial and search as is aforesaid, could never be found in
the autentikes. And that chapter autentique, which of all the canons of that
counsel most concerns the bishop of Rome, makes directly and plainly
against the said pretensed universal primacy, giuyng (as is said before) to
other patriarchs, like and equal authority in their countries, as bishops of
Rome had and used than in the countries about Rome.

Thirdly that the bishops of Rome had no such universal primacy given unto
them by the common consent of the hole catholyke church, it well appears in
that ye diverse patriarchs and archebysshops have of ancient time refused, to
owe unto them any such subjection, as they by color of an universal primary
challenged and required over them. As the patriarchs of Constantinople and
other of the east, and the archebisshops of Rauenna, Millan, and such other.
And also Agatho him self being bishop of Rome, long after the.iiii. first
universal counsayles, in his letters sent unto the emperor, concerning a
general counsel to be holden at Constantinople, plainly declares and
confesses his primacy to extend only to the bishops of the weste and north
parties: And that in such wise, as it is evident, that at that time the
bishops of Rome, neither by the words of scripture, nor by any decree of
ancient general counsels, nor by the consent of the hole catholyke church,
had any such universal primacy, as he now requires.

And if the bishops of Rome, will allege any later counsayles, for their
pretensed universal primacy, as the counsayles, of Constance, Basil, and
Florence: It is manifest and open, that the counsels of Basil and Constance
were in the time of scismes, and they which were there divided in to factions,
after the favor of their princis, which princis were also divided, some
favoring the one part of the scisme, some the other. And the great part of the
learned men that were there, were of this later institute religious, and
therefore obsequente to the pleasure and will of the bishops of Rome, and
brought up only in this later scolasticall doctrine, and little exercised or
learned in the holy scriptures, or in the old ancient doctors and writers.
And both of those counsayles were dyssolued and broken up, without any perfect
end or conclusion. And since that time, the canons pragmatical of these two
counsayles, be no where used, nor yet alleged, as to be of effect, by the
authority of those counsayles. And as to the counsel Florentine, over and
besides, that the greattest part of learned men there, were such, as we spoke
of before, the consent also in this matter, of the Orientalles and Grecians,
that were there, seemed to the hole countries that sent them, so far both
against scripture, and general counsayles, and their ancient holy writers,
that they forthwith showed them selves so much disco^tent with that consent
of their ambassadors, that they then neither would receive the determination,
concerning the universal primacy of the bishop of Rome, neither sith that
time could be induced to agree to the same.

And thus by all those things before rehearsed, it plainly appears, that the
bishops of Rome, claiming this pretensed universal primacie, do yet not only
without any ground of holy scripture, and without any consent of the hole
catholic church, but also contrary to the determination and decrees of such
general counsayles, as the bisshoppes of Rome, these many hundred years unto
this day, in their creation do solemnly and expressly profess to keep and
observe. For as it appears by their own laws and acts from time to time,
every bishop of Rome, wha^ he is created, does openly and solemnly profess,
that he shall inuiolably observe and keep all the canons of the first.viii.
general counsels, among the which be the canons before rehearsed, plainly
repugnant and contrary to his said pretensed universal primacy.

Finally this being manifestly declared and proved, that the bishops of
Rome, has not justly and laufully any such universal power over the
bysshoppes and clergy, al wise men may easily perceive and see, that they may
much less claim to have the hole monarchye of the world, and such
authority over all princes and kings, that they may thereby depose them from
their realms, dominions, and seignories, and transfer and give the same unto
such persons, as them likes. Where as the scripture does teach and command
the contrary, that is to say: That all christen people as well priestis and
bishops, as all other, should be obedient unto princes and potestates of the
world. For the truth is, that god constituted and ordained the authority of
christen kings and princes, to be the most high and supreme, above all other
powers and officers in this world, in the regiment and government of their
people, and committed unto them, as unto the chief heads of their common
wealths, the cure and oversight of all the people, which be in their realms,
and dominions, without any exception: And to them of right, and by goddis
commandment, belongs not only to prohibit unlawful violence, to correct
offenders by corporal death or other punishment, to conserve moral honesty
among their subjects, according to the laws of their realms, to defend
justice, and to procure the public well and common peace and tra^quillitie in
outward and earthly things: But specially and principally to defend the faith
of Christ, and his religion, to conserve and maintein the true doctrine of
Christ, and all such as be true preachers and setters forth thereof, and to
abolishe all abuses, heresies, and idolatries, and to punish with corporal
peines, such as of malice be the occasion of the same. And finally to over see
and cause that the said bishops and priests, do execute their pastoral office
truly and faithfully, and specially in those points, which by Christ and his
apostles, were given and committed unto them: and in case they shall be
negligent in any part thereof, or would not diligently execute the same, to
cause them to redoube and supply their lack. And if they obstinately withstand
their princes kind monition, and will not amend their faults, than and in such
case to put other in their roumes and places. And god has also commanded the
said bishops and priests, to obey with all humblenes and reverence, both
kings and princis, and governors, and all their laws not being contrary to
the laws of god, what so ever they be, and that not only propter iram, but
also propter co^scientia^, that is to say, not only for fear of punishment,
but also for discharge of conscience. Whereby it appears well, that this
pretended monarchy of the bishop of Rome, is not founded upon the gospel, but
it is repugnant thereunto.

And therefore it apperteyneth to christen kings and princis, for the discharge
of their office and duty toward god, to endeavor them selves to refourme and
reduce the same again unto the old limittes and pristine estate of that
power, which was given to them by Christ, and used in the primitive church.
For it is out of doubt, that Christis faith was than most firm and pure, and
the scriptures of god, were than best understand, and virtue did than most
abound and excel. And therefore it must needs follow, that the customs and
ordynaunces than used and made be more conform and agreeable unto the true
doctrine of Christ and more conducynge unto the edifieng and benefit of the
church of Christ, than any custom or laws used or made by the bishop of
Rome, or any other addicted to that see and usurped power, since that time.

And therefore where as the kings most royal majesty, considering of his
most excellent wisdom, not only the notable decay of Christis true and
perfect religion, emonges us, but also the intolerable thraldom, captivity,
and bondage, with the infynite dangers and preiudices, which we his subjects
continually sustained, by reason of that long usurped and abused power, which
the bishops of Rome were wo^t to exercise here in this realm: has now of
his most godly disposition, and by the consent of his nobles spiritual and
temporal, by authority of the hole parliament determined, no longer to suffer
the bishop of Rome, to exercise any part of his usurped jurisdiction here
within this realm, but clearly to deliver us from the same, and restore us
again unto our liberty.

Surely we have great cause, most joyfully and thankefully to enbrace and
accept the same, considering that thereby no prejudice is done to goddis word
or his ordinances. For as we have showed and declared before, it was by
princes sufferaunce only, that the bishop of Rome, exercised any such
jurisdiction within this realm, and not by the authority given unto him by
Christ. And as for the bishop of Rome, he can not pretend him self no more
to be grieved or iniuried therewith, than any of the kings officers might
worthily think, that the kings byghnes should do him wrong, in case he
should upon good cause, remove him from his room and office, and commit it
to an other. And as for us the kings faithful subjects, we shall undoubtedly
receive and have thereby syngular wealth and commodity, as well spiritually to
the edifieng of our souls, as corporally to the increase of our substance and
richesse. The which how much it was impaired and decayed continually, from time
to time, by the great exactions of the bishops of Rome, and such treasures
as went yearly out of this realm to his coffers, for annates, annuities, and
exemptions, pardons, and such other unlawful exactions, we doubt not, but
all men endued with any wit and zeal to the welthe of this our country, do
right well perceive and understand, and accordingly with heart and mind, will
not only pray for the kings highness and his preservation, by whose occasion
this light came first unto us, but also firmly and constantly stycke to
those laws, whereby we have so much ease of wrongful exactions and abuses,
and also our prince and king, now enioieth most rightfully his just title, with
restitution of his royal and imperial dignity and princely governance.

The sacrament of Confirmation.
WE read in holy scripture / how the apostels, in the beginning of the
church, although they did certainly know and believe, that al such as had
duly received the sacrament of baptism, were by virtue and efficacy thereof,
perfitely regenerated in Christ, perfitely incorporated and made the very
members of his body, and had received full remission of their sins, and were
endued with graces and gifts of the holy ghost, yet they went unto the people,
after they were baptized, and so by their prayer and imposition of their hands
upon them, the holy ghost was given and conferred unto them. And the said
people did speak diverse languages, and prophesied, whereby not only they,
which had received baptism and professed Christ, were the better confirmed
and established in Christis religion, and made more constant to confess the
same: But also other which were out of the church, and infideles, might the
sooner be reduced, by such gift and miracle from their errors, and be brought
in to the right belief of Christ and his gospele.

Whereupon the holy fathers of the primitive church taking occasion, and
founding them selves upon the said acts and deeds of the apostles, and
considering also, that such as had ones received the gifts and benefits of
the holy ghost, by the sacrament of baptism, might and oftentimes did in deed,
by temptation, frailty, or otherwise by their own sin and malice, lose and
fall from the same again: did use and observe (as it has been hitherto by
succession of ages continued) that al christen people, should after their
baptism, be presented to their bishops, to the intent that by their prayers,
and imposition of their hands upon them, and consigning of them with the holy
Christ, they should be confirmed, that is to say, they should receive such
gifts of the holy ghost, as whereby they should be so corroborated, and
establisshed in the gifts and graces before received in baptism, that they
should not lightly fall again from the same: but should constantly reteyne
them, and persevere therein, and should also be made stronger and hardier, as
well to confess boldly and manfully their faith, before all the persecutours of
the same, and to resist and fight against their gostly ennemies, the world, the
devil, and the flesh: as also to bear the cross of Christ, that is, to
suffer and sustain patiently all the afflictions and adversities of this
world, and finally that they should atteyne encreace and abundance of virtues
and graces of the holy ghost.

And although men ought not to contemn this sacrament, but should present their
children unto the bishop, to receive at his hands the sacrament of
confirmation, yet it is not to be thought, that there is any such necessity
of confirmation of infantes, but that they being baptized and dieng innocents
before they be confirmed, shall be assured to atteine everlasting life and
salvation, by the effect of the sacrament of baptism received.

The sacrament of extreme unction.
AS towching extreme unction, we must understand, how according to scripture,
and the rule and order prescribed by the holy apostle saint James, the
catholic church of Christ, has observed and minystred this sacrament, to
such as have required it in their sickness and disease of body, to the intent
that by the workinge of god, in ministration thereof, the sick man through
prayer of the priest the minister, and such as assist him, might be releued of
his bodily disease, and also atteyne pardon and remission of his sins. For
saint James says: If any be sick among you, let him call for the priests of
the church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the name
of our lord, and the prayer of faith, shall save the sick man, and if be be
in sins, they shall be forgiven him.

By which words, like as the use of the sacrament is confirmed, and proved,
so that the church may well use the same, with assurance that god assisteth
the ministration thereof: So we must also remember, that although health of body,
which here is prayed for, does not always follow, yet we should not doubt, but
god orders man's prayer therein always to the best, as he does of his
infinite goodness, all other prayers that men make, who in deed know not what
they should ask, ne what is best or most profitable for them. Wherefore, albeit
we be taught to make all our prayers in a most certain faith, to atteine our
desires, according to the general promise made by god through Christ: Ask
and you shall receive, Mat. vii.
which promise can not fail, for goddis word can not be frustrate, but
takes ever effect: Yet may we not trust our own determination, and our
judgment so precisely in our prayer and requests, but committing our selves
holy to gods gouernans, we ought to take, esteem, and judge, for the best,
what so ever god shall order and dispose for us, although it be contrary to our
prayer, and desire, which must ever have direction and submission to goddis
pleasure, Sap. x^.
who knows our necessities, and can and will dispose al things swetely and
pleasantly, to the atteynyng of everlasting comfort, which all good men
chiefly desire and pray for.

And where as saint James speaks of remission of sin to be obtained in this
sacrament, in as much as the remission of sin, is a necessary petition to be
made of and for all men, considering the frailty of man's nature, which
continually sins, and therefore continually is taught to say:

Dimitte nobis debita nostra, Lord forgive us our trespaces: We ought
assuredly to trust, Math. vi.
that god workynge in the ministration of his sacrament, does by the prayer of
the minister, and of such as assiste him, forgive those sins of the sick
man which by the frailnes of his nature, in sudden motions and vehement
agonies, he does commyt and fall into.

And yet we ought not thereupon, to conceive a vain false hope of the effect
of this sacrament, that living in filthy and abominable sin, and not caringe
to be delivered from it by true penance, we should by the ministration of
extreme unction have all our sins forgiven: For this sacrament is ministered
fruitfully, only to those, that be members of Christis church, and such as
being fallen out of the state of grace by deadely sin, have been by penance
restored to the same, which men by this sacrament, be strengthened and comforted
in their agonye and fight, against the devil, who in the time of sickness and
vexation of the body, is very busye to assault them.

And where it is called thextreme unction, that is to say, the last unction,
we must not so understand it, as though this sacrament might never be
mynistred but ones, that is to say, in extreme peril of death, when men be
without hope of life: for it should rather be mynistred, in the entry of
sickness, and so oftener, when so ever any great and peryllouse sickness, and
malady shall come to any man. But the fathers of the church did call it by
the said name of extreme unction, because it is the last, in the respect of
the other unctions, which be mynistred before, in the other sacraments, of
baptism, confirmation, and order, in which sacraments christen men be also
anointed.

And for as much, as the sacrament of the aultare, (being duly received) is
the very spiritual food, and the very sustentation, comfort, and
preservation of all christen men, in all dangerous passages and adventures:
therefore it is expedient, that the said sacrament of the aultare, should be
received after this auodinge done, in the time of syckenes. For surely the
receyuyng of the body of our savior Jesus Christ, is the very consummation,
not only of this, but also of all other sacraments.

THe seven sacraments thus declared, the use and effect of them does
manifestely appear. For by baptism we be incorporated into the body of
Christ's church, obteyninge in that sacrament, remission of sin, and grace
wherewith we be able to lead a new life.

By the sacrament of penance, they that be fallen into deadly sin, may be
restored unto the state of grace, received in baptism, and so made again the
lively members of Christis mystical body.

In the most blessed sacrament of the aultare, is the most precious body and
blood of our savior and redemer Jesus Christ, both in form of bread and
wine, by whom, for whom, and in whom, all sacraments take effect, and
therefore is this the most worthy sacrament, and of highest dignity.

The sacrament of Matrimony is a necessary thing for due generation of man, to
goddis pleasure, which although it be honorable and acceptable to god, and
therefore the laufull conjunction of man and woman, is assisted by god in this
holy sacrament, yet this estate is not commanded as necessary, to any
particular man, but left at liberty, to all men, saving priests, and to
other which of their free liberty, by vow advisedly made, have chosen the
estate of continency, who according to their free choice, must freely and
willingly continue in the same.

The sacrament of order, although it be not commanded to any particular man,
as necessary for the atteyning of everlasting life: yet in the church which
is the mystical body of Christ, it has a necessity, to the intent that by
ministers duly placed there may be due spiritual fathers, for spiritual
generation. So that both the estates of matrimony and order, be for the hole
church necessary, but yet not so necessaryly commanded to any particular man.

The other two sacraments of confirmation and extreme unction, although they
be not of such necessity, but that without them men may be saved, yet for as
much as in the ministration of them, if they be worthily taken, men receive
more abu^dantly gostly strength, aid, and comfort, They be very wholesome and
profitable, and to be desired, and reverently received.

The.x. commandementes of almighty god.
i THou shalt have none other gods but me. ii Thou shalt not have any
graven image / nor any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above / or in
the earth beneth / or in the water under the earth / to the intent to do and
godly honor and worship unto them. iii Thou shalt not take the name of thy
lord god in vain. iiii Remember that thou keep holy the sabbotte day. v
Honor thy father and thy mother. vi Thou shalt do no murder. vii Thou shalt
not commit adultery. viii Thou shalt not steal. ix Thou shalt not bear
false wytnes against thy neighbor. x Thou shall not unjustly desire thy
neighbors house / nor thy neighbors wife / nor his servant / nor his maid /
nor his ox / nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbors.
The exposition of the first commandment of god.
Thou shall have none other goddis but me.
THis first commandment like as it is the first in order, so it is the most
chief and principal among all the other precepts. For in this first
commandment god requires of us those things, in the which consysteth his
chief and principal worship and honor, that is to say, perfyte faith, sure
hope, and unfeigned love and dread of god.

And therefore it is to be noted, that to have god, is not to have him, as we
have other outward things, as clothes upon our back, or treasure in our
chestes, nor also to have him in our mouth outwardly, or to worship him with
knelynge, or such other gestures only: but to have him our god, is to
conceive him in our hearts, to cleave fast and surely unto him, with heart and
mind, to put all our trust and confidence in him, to set all our thoughts and
care above all things to please him, and to depend holely of him, taking him
to be infinitely good and merciful unto us, being his creatures, and
continuyng in his flock.

Secondly god commands us thus to do to him only, and to no creature, nor to
no false and feigned god. For as a kind and loving man, can not be content,
that his wife should take any other husband: So can not our most kind and most
loving god and creator, be pleased, if we should forsake him, and take any
other goddis. And surely he is more present with us, and more ready to show
us all kyndnes and goodness, than any creature is or can be. And already of his
gift, we have all that we have, meat, drink, clothe, reason, wit,
understanding, dyscretion and all good things, that we have, perteynynge
both to the soul and the body. And therefore he will not suffer unpunished
so much ingratitude and unkindness at our hands, that we should forsake
him, and fyxe our faith and godly trust in any other thing besides him.

Thyrdly by this precepte god commands us not only to trust thus in him:
but also to give him the hole love of our hearts, above all worldly things,
yea and above our selves, so that we may not love our selves, ne any other
thing but for him, according as Moises says in the book of Deutronomie: Thy
lord god is one god, Deuteronomy. vi.
and thou shalt love him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength and power. And this love must bring
with it a fear, that even for very pure love, we ought to be much ashamed and
afraid, to break the least of his commandments: Like as the child, the
more he loves his father, the more he is loathe and afraid to displease him in
any manner of case.

Fourthly all they offend against this commandment, which set their
hearts and minds upon any worldly thing above god. For what so ever we love
above god, so that we set our minds upon it, more than we do upon god, or for
it we will offend god, truly we make that for the time our god. For as saint
Paul says: The covetous man makes his goods his god, And the gluttonous
man makes his bealy his god. For the one sets his mind upon his goods,
the other upon his bealy, more than they do upon god, and for them they will
not stick to offend god.

Also all they which have more confidence in the creatures of god, than in
god, do make the creatures of god their god. And how greuousely god is
offended therewith, we find in the book of Paralipomenon, ^ Par. xvi.
where it is written, that when Aza king of Judah, being sore constrained by
Baasa king of Israel, sent for help to Benadad king of Syria, and gave him
great treasure, for to allure him to his aid. Our lord sent the prophet
Hanani to Aza the king of Judah, who said unto him on this manner: Because thou
haste trusted in the king of Syria, and not in thy lord god, therefore the
host of the king Syria is escaped from thy hands. Were not they of Ethiopia
and Libia. of far greatter power, both in charyottes and horsemen, and in
number and multitude, which were innumerable, and yet our lord (as long as
thou dyddest put thy trust in him) did yield them in to thy hands? The eyes
of god do behold all the world, and gives strength to them that trust in
him with all their heart. In which words it does appear, that it is laid to
Azaes charge, that he did not believe in our lord, because he did more trust in
Benadad the hethen prince tha^ in our lord.

It is noted also in the same chapter, that where as Aza had very great pain
in his feet, he sought not to our lord for remedy of his disease, but trusted
more in the art and remedy of phisike. Whereby we may learn, that it is one
great part of perfect belefe in our lord god, to put our trust and confidence
most principally and above al other in him, wherefore they that do otherwise,
do transgress this commandment, and make to them other goddis.

Also all they transgress this commandment, which either presume so much
upon the mercy of god, that they fear not his justice, and by reason thereof
do still continue in their sin, or else so much fear his justice, that
they have no trust in his mercy.

Also they be of the same sort, which by lottes, divination, chatterynge of
birds, and lokynge of men's hands, or other unlawful or superstitiouse
crafts, take upon them certainly to tell, determine, and judge before hand, of
men's acts and fortunes which be to come afterward. For what do they but make
them selves goddis in this behalf, as the prophet Esaie says? Tell us before
what shall come, Esai. xii.
and we shall say that ye be goddis.

Also al they, which by charms and witchecraftes, do use any prescribed
letters, signs, or carectes words, blessings, rods, crystal stones,
sceptures, sweardes, measures, or for any superstitious entente, charms, or
wytchecraftes, hang saint John's gospelle, or any other thing about their
necks, or any other parts of their bodies, or use to drink holy water, or
any other such vain observation, trustyng thereby to continue in long life, to
drive away syckenes, to preserve them from sicnes, fire, water, or any other
peril, otherwise than phisike or surgery does allow, do also offend
against this commandment.

But most greuousely of all, and above all other, they do offend against this
commandment which profess Christ, and contrary to their profession, made
at their baptism: do make secret pactes and couenantes with the devil, or do
use any manner of coniurations, to raise up deuyls for treasure, or any other
thing hid or lost, or for any manner of cause, what so ever it be: for such
commit so high offense and treason to god, that there can be no greatter. For
they yield the honor due unto god to the devil, goddis ennemie. And not only
all such as use charms, wytchecraftes, and coniurations, transgress this
chief and high commandment, but also all those that seek and resort unto
them, for any counsel or remedy, according to the saying of god, when he
said: Let no man ask counsel of them that use false diuinations, Deu. xviii.
or such as take heed to dreams, or chattering of birds. Let there be no
witch or enchanter among you, or any that asks counsel of them, that
have spirits, nor of sothesayers, nor that seek the truth of them that be
dead, for god abhors all these things.

The exposition of the second commandment of god.
Thou shalt not have any graven Image, nor any lykenes of any thing, that is
in heaven above, or in earth benethe, or in the water under the earth, to the
intent to do any godly honor and worship unto them.
BY THESE words we be not forbidden, to make or to have similitudes, or
images, but only we be forbidden, to make or to have them to the intent to do
godly honor unto them, as it appears in the.xxvi. chapter of Leuiticus.

And therefore although images of Christ, and his saints, be the works of
men's hands only: Yet they be not prohibited, but that they may be had and
set up, both in churches and in other places, to the intent, that we (in
beholding and loking upon them, as in certain books and signs) may call to
remembrance the manifold exaumples of virtues, which were in the saints,
whom they do represent: And so may they rather be provoked, kindled, and
styred, to yield thanks to our lord, and to praise him and his said saints,
and to remember and lamente our sins and offenses, and to pray god, that we
may have grace to follow their goodness and holy living.

As for an example, the image of our savior hangs on the cross in the
roode, or is painted in clothes, walls, or wyndowes, as an open book, to the
intent that besides the examples of virtues, which we may learn at Christ,
we may be also many ways provoked, to remember his peynfull and cruel
passion, and also to consider our selves when we behold the same image, and to
condemn and abhor our sin, which was the cause of his so cruel death.
And farthermore, consideringe, what high charity was in him, that would dye
for us his enemies, and what great dangers we have escaped, and what high
benefits we receive by his redemption: we may be provoked, in all our
dystresses and troubles, to rounne for comfort unto him. And these lessons,
with many mo, be brought to our remembrance, by the book of the roode, if we
being first well instruct and taught, what is represented and meant thereby, do
dilygently behold and look upon it. And as our savior Christ is represented
by this image of the roode: even so the holy saints, which followed him, be
represented unto us by their images: and therefore the said images may well be
set up in churches, to be as books for unlearned people, to put them in
remembrance of those saints: of whom they may learn exaumples of faith,
humility, charity, patience, temperance, and of all other their virtues and
gifts of god, which were in them, for which causes, images may be set in
the church, and ought not to be despised, but to be used reverently, although
we be forbidden to do any godly honor unto them. These lessons should be
taught, by every curate to their parrishe. And where as we use to sense the
said images, and to knele before them, and to crepe to the cross, with such
other things: Yet we wust know and understand, that such things be not,
nor ought to be done to the image it self, but to god and in his honor,
although it be done before the image whether it be of Christ, of the cross, or
of our lady, or of any other saint.

Against this commandment did offend generally, before the coming of
Christ, all gentiles, and people, that were of the nation of Israel. For they
did godly honor unto images, and worshipped false goddis, some one, some an
other, of the which sort there was a great number. For besides their common
goddis, every country, every city or town, every house and familye, had
their propre goddis: whereof is much mention made in authors, both christen
and heathen. And these Gentiles, though they had knowledge of a very god, yet
(as saint Paul says) they had ydell and vain fantasies, which led them from
the truth, and where they compted them selves wise, they became fools.

And against this commandment offended the Jews, many and sundry times, and
almost continually. For not withstandinge, that they professed the knowledge
and worshipping of the very true god, yet they fell to the adoration of images,
idols, and false gods, as the holy scripture makes mention in many places.

Also all they do greatly err, which put difference between image and image,
trusting more in one than in an other, as though one could help or do more
than an other, when both do represente but one thing, and saving by way of
representation, neither of the^ is able to work or do any thing.

And they also do err, that be more ready with their substance to deck images
gorgiousely, than with the same to help poor christen people, the quick and
living images of god, which is the necessary work of charity commanded by
god.

And they also offend, that so dote in this behalf, that they make vows, and
go on pylgremages, even to the images, and there do call upon the same images
for aid and help, phantasyng, that either the image woll work the same, or
else some other thing in the image, or god for the image sake, as though god
supernaturally wrought by images carved, engraven, or painted, brought ones in
to churches, as he does naturally work by other his creatures. In which
things, if any person heretofore has, or yet does offend, all good and
learned men have great cause to lamente such error and rudenes, and to put
their studies and diligences for the reformation of the same.

The exposition of the third commandment of god.
Thou shall not take the name of thy lord god in vain.
IN this commandment god requires of us to use his name with all honor and
reverence. Whervppon you shall understand, that the right use of the name of
god, and the true honor of the same, stands chiefly in those things
folowinge, that is to say, in the constant confession of his name, and
mainteyning of his doctrine, in the right invocation of him, in the gyuyng of
due thanks unto him, as well in adversity as in prosperity. For Christ
says, Math. x.
He that openly confesses me before men, I shall confess him before my father
in heaven: And he that is ashamed of me, to confess my name before men, I
will be ashamed of him before my father in heaven. In which words Christ
teaches us not only to profess the name of god, but also boldly and
constantly to defend the same, and not to swerve from it, for any manner of
persecution or injury.

We must also in our tribulation and necessity, and in all temptations and
assaults of the devil invoke and call upon the name of god, for god
accompteth his name to be hallowed, magnified, and worshipped, when we call upon
him in our need: Call upon me, says he, in the time of trouble, Psalm. xlix.
and I will deliver the, Pro. xviii.
and thou shall honor me. And again the wise man says. The name of god is
the most strong tower, the rightuous man runs to it, and he shall be helped.

Furthermore we may not seek our own name laud and fame, but utterly avoyde
and eschew the desy^e of al worldly honors, glory, and praise, and must give
all laud, praise and thanks unto god for his benefits, which be so many in
number, and so great, that we ought never to cesse from such lauds and
thanks, like as the prophet David admonishes us, Ps^ ^ix.
saying: Offer unto god the sacrifice of laud and praise. And saint Paul
commands us, ^ Cor. x.
when soever we eat, drink, or do any manner of business, to give honor,
praise, and thanks unto god.

And finally they that be appointed, to be mynysters of goddis word, must
also preach the word of god truly and purely, and set forth the name of god
unto other, and reprove all false and erromouse doctrine heresies and
idolatries. And although the bishops and priests only, be specially called
and deputed to be public ministers of goddis word, teachers, preachers, and
interpretours of the same: Yet every christen man is bound particularly by
good example of living and according to the godly knowledge, that he has
learned, to teach and order his family, and such as be under his governance
within his house, when time and place requiteth. So that as much as in him
lies, he suffice not sin to be used in his rule and famyly, but virtue to be
used and exercised.

Secondly by this precepte we^e commanded, to use the name of god to all
goodness and truth. And contrary wise, we be forbidden in the same, to ^e his
name to any manner of evil, as to lyeng, deceyuinge, or any untruth. And
therefore against this commandment, they do offend that swear in vain. They
swear in vain, that swear with out lawful or just cause: For that they
take the name of god in vain, although the thing, which they swear be true.
And likewise do all they, which for every light and vain thing, be ready to
swear unprovoked, or provoked of light cause. And they that do glory in
outrageous oaths, or of custom do use to swear, or that do swear, a false oath,
and be forsworn wyttingly. And such an oath is not only perjury, but also a
kind of blasphemy and is high dishonor and injury to god, because such
persons as make such oaths, do wyttingly bring god for a false witness, who
is all truth, and hates all untruth.

They also do take the name of god in vain, which swear any thing, that is
true or false, they being in doubt, whether it be true or false, and do not
before well examine and discuss, whether it be true or false: or that swear
that thing to be false which though in deed it be false, yet they think it
to be true: or swear that thing to be true, which though in deed it be
true, yet they think it to be false.

They also do swear in vain, which swear to do that thing, which they
inte^d not to do, or swear to forbear that, which they intend not to forbear,
or swear to do any thing, which to do is unlawful, or swear to leave any
thing undone, which to omytte or leave undone, is neither right nor
reasonable. And all such as swear to do things unlawful, not only offend
in such swearyng, but also they much more offend, if they perform the
thing which they do swear.

They also break this commandment, which make any oath contrary to their
lauful oath or promise made before, so long as their promise stands in
strength, which in no wise it does, if it be contrary to the laws of god, or
to the due obedience to the princes, and their laws.

They also break this commandment, which by rewards or fair promises, or
by power or fear do induce or constrain any man to be perjured.

They also break this commandment, which either by preaching or teaching,
or by pretense of holy living, do abuse this holy name to their own vain
glory, or to any other ungodly purpose. And generally all evil christen men,
which profess the name of Christ, and live not according to their
profession, do also take the name of god in vain, in words confessing
Christ, and denyinge him in deeds.

They also break this commandment, which in trouble do murmr or grudge,
and do not call upon the name of god, nor do thank him in all things both
sweet and sour, good and evil, welfare and evil fare. For god does send us
many troubles, and adversities, because we should run to him, cry to him
for help, and call upon his holy name.

Thyrdly for as much as the gifts of health of body, health of soul, forgiveness
of sins, the gift of grace or life everlasting, and such other, be the
gifts of god, and can not be given but by god, who so ever makes invocation
to saints for these gifts, praieng to them for any of the said gifts, or any
such like, which can not be given but by god only, yeldeth the glory of god
to his creature contrary to this commandment. Esai. xlii.
For god says to his prophet: I will not yield my glory to any other.
Therefore they that so pray to saints for these gifts, as though they could
give them, or be gyuers of them, transgress this commandment, yeldynge to a
creature the honor of god. Never the less, to pray unto saynctes to be
intercessours with us and for us, to our lord in our suites, which we make
unto him, and for such things as we can obtain of none but of him, so that
we esteem not, or worship not them, as gyuers of those gifts, but as
intercessours for the same, is laufull, and allowed by the catholyke church,
and if we honor them any other ways, than as the friends of god dwelling
with him, and establysshed now in his glory everlasting, and as examples,
which were requisite for us to follow in holy life and conversation, or if we
yield unto saints, the adoration and honor, which is due unto god alone, we
do (no doubt) break this commandment.

Finally it is to be considered, that because no temple, ne church, nor
aultare ought to be made, but only to god (For to whom we make temple,
church, or aultare, to him, as saint Augustine says, we do sacryfice: And
sacrifice we may do to none, but to God) Therefore where we use in our
englisshe tongue to call the temples, churches, or aultars, by the name of any
saint, as the church or aultare of our lady, the church or aultare of
saint Michaell, saint Peter, of saint Paul, and so of other saints, the
true meaning thereof is, and ought to be taken, that the said aultars and
churches, be not dedicate to any saynctes, but to god only, and be of the
saints but a memorial, to put us in remembrance of them, that we may
follow their example and living, and also to make a knowledge of dyuersitie
between one church or aultare, and an other. And therefore if we mean
otherwise, than here is declared, when we call them churches or aultars of
saynctes, we yield the honor of god from him to the saints, and break this
commandment.

The exposition of the fourth commandment of god.
Remember that thou keep holy the sabbote day.
AS touching this commandment it is to be noted, that this word Sabotte, is
an hebrew word, and signifies in english Rest: So that the sabotte day, is
as much to say, as the day of rest and quietness. And there is specially a
notable difference between this commandment, and the other nine
commandementes. For as saint Austine says: all the other nine, be merely
morrall commandementes, and belonged not only to the Jews, and all other
people of the world, in the time of the old testament, but also belong now
to all christen people in the new testament. But this precept of the Sabbote,
as concerning rest from bodily labor the seventh day, is ceremonial, and
perteined only unto the Jews in the old testament, before the coming of
Christ, and perteyneth not unto us christen people in the new testament.
Never the less as concerning the spiritual rest, which is figured and
signified by this corporal rest, that is to say, rest from the carnal works
of the flesh, and all manner of sin, this precepte is morrall, and remains
still, and binds them that belong unto Christ: and not for every seventh
day only, but for all days, hours, and times. For at all times we be bound
to rest, from fulfillinge of our own carnal will and pleasure, and from all
sins and evil desires, from pride, disobedience, ire, hate, covetousness, and
all such corrupt and carnal appetites, and to commit our selves holely unto
god, that he may work in us all things that be to his will and pleasure. And
this is the true sabbote or rest of us that be christened, when we rest from
our own carnal wylles, and be not led thereby, but be guided by god and his
holy spirit. And this is the thing that we pray for in the Pater noster, when
we say: Father let thy kingdom come to us. Thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven. Reign thou in us. Make that we may do thy will, and from our
corrupt will we may rest and cease. And for this purpose, god has ordained
fast, watch, and labor, to the end that by these and such other exercises,
we moughte mortify and kill the evil and sinful desires of the flesh, and
attein this spiritual rest and quietness, which is figured and signified in
this commandment.

Furthermore besides this spiritual rest, which chiefly and principally is
required of us, we be bound by this precepte, at certain times, to cease
from bodily labor, and to give our minds entierly and holly unto god, to
hear the divine service approved, used, and observed in the church, and also
ye word of god, to aknowlege our own sinfulnes unto god, and his great mercy
and goodness unto us, to give thanks unto him for his benefits, to make
public and common prayer for all things nedeful, to visit the sick to
instruct every man his children and familye in virtue and goodness, and such
other like works. Which things although all christen people be bound unto,
by this commandment, yet the sabbote day, which is called the saturday, is
not now prescribed and appointed thereunto, as it was to the Jews, but instead
of the sabbote day, succedeth the sunday in the memory of Christis
resurrection. And also many other holy and festival days, which the church
has ordained, from time to time, which be called holy days, not because that
one day is more acceptable to god than an other, or of it self more holy than
an other, but because the church has ordained, that upon those days, we
should give our selves holly without any impediment, unto such holy works, as
be before expressed, where as upon other days we may do and apply our selves
to bodily labor, and be thereby much let from such holy and spiritual
works.

And to the intent the ignorant people may be the more clearly instructed,
what holy and spiritual works they ought to do upon the holy day, here
follows a brefe declaration thereof. First let them make an account with them
selves, how they have bestowed the weke past, reme^bryng what evil minds and
purposes they have had, what words they have spoken, what things they have
done, or left undone, to the dishonor and displeasure of god, and to the hurt
of their neighbor, and what example or occasion of evil they have given unto
other. And when they have thus recollected and considered al these things in
their minds, than let them humbly knowledge their fautes unto god, and ask
forgiveness for ye same, with unfeigned purpose in their hearts to convert and
return from their naughty lives, and to amend the same, and let them also
clearly and purely in their hearts, remitte and forgive al malice and
displeasure, which they bear to any creature. Than let them fall unto prayer
according to the commandment of Christ, where he says: (...).xi.
when you begin to pray, forgive what so ever displeasure you have against
any man. And when they be weary of prayer, than let them use reading of the
word of god, or some other good or heavenly doctrine, so that they do it
quietly, without disturbance of other, that be in the church, or else let them
occupy their minds, with wholesome and godly meditations, whereby they may be
the better, and they that can read, may be well occupied upon the holy day,
if in time and place convenient, they read sobrely and quietly unto other,
such as they have charge of, such good books as be allowed, which may be
unto them instead of a sermon: for all things that edify man's soul in our
lord god, be good and wholesome sermons.

And truly if men would occupy them selves upon the holy days, and spend the
same days holily after this form and manner, not only in the house of god,
but also in their own houses, they should eschew thereby much vice, confound
their ancient ennemie the devil, much edify both themselves and other, and
finally atteyne much grace and high reward of almighty god.

Also men must have special regard, that they be not over scrupulouse, or
rather supersticiouse, in absteinynge from bodily labor upon the holy day.
For not withstanding all that is before spoken, it is not meant, but we may
upon the holy day, give our selves to labor, for the spedy perfourmaunce of
the necessary affairs of the prince, and the common welthe, at the
commandment of them, that have rule and authority therein. And also in all
other times of necessity, as for saving of our corn and cattle, when it is
like to be in dangier, or like to be destroyed, if remedy be not had in time,
for this lesson our savior teaches us in the gospel, and we need not to have
any scruple or grudge in conscience, in such case of necessity, to labor on
the holy days, but rather we should offend, if we should for scrupulositie
nor save, that god has sent for the sustenance and relief of his people. And
yet in such times of necessity (if their business be not very great and vrgen)
men ought to have such regard, to the holy day, that they do bestow some
convenient time, in hearing divine service, as is aforesaid.

Against this commandment generally do offend all they, which will not
cease from their own carnal wills and pleasures.

Also they, which having no lawful impediment, do not give them self upon
the holy day to hear mass, to hear the word of god, to remember these
things in their minds, than let them humbly knowledge their fautes unto god,
and ask for giuenes for ye same, with unfeigned purpose in their hearts to
convert and return from their naughty lives, and to amend the same, and let
them also clearly and purely in their hearts, remitte and forgive al malice and
displeasure, which they bear to any creature. Than let them fall unto prayer
according to the commandment of Christ, where he says: (...).xi.
when you begin to pray, forgive what so ever displeasure you have against
any man. And when they be weary of prayer, than let them use reading of the
word of god, or some other good or heavenly doctrine, so that they do it
quietly, without disturbance of other, that be in the church, or else let them
occupy their minds, with wholesome and godly meditations, whereby they may be
the better, and they that can read, may be well occupied upon the holy day,
if in time and place convenient, they read sobrely and quietly unto other,
such as they have charge of, such good books as be allowed, which may be
unto them instead of a sermon: for all things that edify man's soul in our
lord god, be good and wholesome sermons.

And truly if men would occupy them selves upon the holy days, and spend the
same days holily after this form and manner, not only in the house of god,
but also in their own houses, they should eschew thereby much vice, confound
their ancient ennemie the devil, much edify both themselves and other, and
finally atteyne much grace and high reward of almighty god.

Also men must have special regard, that they be not over scrupulouse, or
rather supersticiouse, in absteinynge from bodily labor upon the holy day.
For not withstanding all that is before spoken, it is not meant, but we may
upon the holy day, give our selves to labor, for the spedy perfourmaunce of
the necessary affairs of the prince, and the common welthe, at the
commandment of them, that have rule and authority therein. And also in all
other times of necessity, as for saving of our corn and cattle, when it is
like to be in dangier, or like to be destroyed, if remedy be not had in time,
for this lesson our savior teaches us in the gospel, and we need not to have
any scruple or grudge in conscience, in such case of necessity, to labor on
the holy days, but rather we should offend, if we should for scrupulositie
not save, that god has sent for the sustenance and relief of his people. And
yet in such times of necessity (if their business be not very great and
urgent) men ought to have such regard, to the holy day, that they do bestow
some convenient time, in hearing divine service, as is aforesaid.

Against this commandment generally do offend all they, which will not
cease from their own carnal wills and pleasures.

Also they, which having no lawful impediment, do not give them self upon
the holy day to hear mass, to hear the word of god, to remember the
benefits of god, to give thanks for the same, to pray, to exercise such holy
works, as he appointed for such days, but (as commonly is used) pass the
time, either in idelnes, in glotony, in riot, or other vain, or idel pastime,
do break this commandment. For surely such keeping of holy day is not
according to the intent and meaning of this commandment, but after the usage
and custom of the Jews, and does not please god, but does much more offend
him, and provoke his indignation and wrath toward us. For as saint Austine
says of the Jews. They should be better occupied, labouringe in their
feeldes, and to be at plough, than to be idle at home. And women should better
bestow their time in spinning of woll, than upon the sabbot day, to lose their
time in leapyng or daunsyng, and other ydell wantonness.

All they do also offend against this commandment, which do hear the word
of god, and give not good head thereunto, that they may understand it, or if
they do understand it, yet they endeavor not their selves to remember it, or if
they remember it, yet they study not to follow it.

And all they break this commandment, which in mass time, do occupy their
minds with other matters, and like unkind people, remember not the passion and
death of Christ, nor give thanks unto him: which things in the mass time
they ought specially to do. For the mass, wherein after the consecration is
really present the very blessed body and bloudde of Christ, is celebrate in
the church for a perpetual memory of his death and passion.

And likewise do all those, which in such time as the common prayers be made,
or the word of god is taught, not only them selves do give none attendance
thereunto, but also by readyng, walkinge, talking, and other evil demeanor,
let other that would well use them selves.

And like wise do all they, which do not observe, but despise such laudable
ceremonies of the church, as set forth goddis honor, and apperteyne to good
order to be used in the church. And therefore concerning such ceremonies of
the church, as have been institute by our forfathers, and be allowed by the
princes or kings of the domynions, which next to god be the chief heads of
the churches: although men ought not to have so fond opinion of the said
ceremonies, to think that they have power to remytte sin, yet they be very
expedient things, either to excite or stir up men's devotion, and to cause
them to have the more reverence toward the sacraments: as the hallowing of the
font, of the chalice, of the corporace, of the aultare, and other like
exorcismes and benedictions, done by the mynisters of Christis church: or
else to put us in contynuall remembrance of those spiritual things, which
be signified by them. As sprinklinge of holy water, does put us in remembrance
of our baptism, and of the blood of Christ sprinkled for our redemption upon
the cross. Giuinge of holy bread does put us in remembrance of the sacrament
of the aultare, which we ought to receive in right charity: And also that all
christen men be one body mystical of Christ, as the bread is made of many
grains, and yet but one lofe. Bearing the candels on Candelmas day, does put
us in remembrance of Christ, the spiritual light, of whom Symeon did prophecy,
as is read in the church that day. Gyuinge ashes on ashwednesday, does put
us in remembrance, that every christen manne should considre, that he is but
ashes and earth, and thereunto he shall return. Bearyng of palms on palm
sunday, does put us in remembrance of the receiuynge of Christ in to
Jerusalem a little before his death, and that we must have the same desire
to receive him in our hearts. Crepynge to the cross on good friday, and there
offering unto Christ before the same, and kissing of it, declares our humble
submission and thanks giuynge to Christ for our redemption, which he has
wroughte for us upon the cross. And so finally the setting up of the sepulcher
of Christ, whose body after his death was buried: And al other like laudable
customs, rites, and ceremonies do put us in remembrance of some spiritual
thing. And therefore they be not to be contemned, and cast away, but obediently
to be used and continued, as things good and laudable for the purposes
abouesaid.

The exposition of the.v. commandment of god.
Honor thy father and thy mother.
IN this commandment / by these words, Father and mother, is understand not
only the natural father and mother, which did carnally begette us, and
brought us up, but also princes and all other governors, rulers, and
pastors, under whom we be nourished and brought up, ordered, and guiged.

And by this word Honor, in this commandment, is not only meant a reverence,
and lowlines in words and outward gesture, which children and inferiors
ought to exhibit unto their parents and superiors, but also a prompt and a
ready obedience to their lawful commandementes, a regard to their words, a
forbearyng and sufferinge of them, an inward love and veneration toward them,
a reverence, fear, and lothenes to dysplease or offend them, and a good will
or gladness to assiste them, aid them, succor them, and help them with their
counsel, with their goods and substance, and by all other means to their
power, as hereafter is declared. This is the very honor and duty, which not
only the children do owe unto their parents, but also all subjects and
inferiors, to their heads and rulers.

And that children owe this duetye to their fathers, it appears in many places
of scripture: in ye proverbs it is written: Prou i.
Obey my son the chastisement of thy father, and be not negligent in thy
mothers commandementes. Deu xxvi.
In the book of Deutronomie it is also written: Accursed be he that does not
honor his father and his mother. And in the book of Leuiticus it is said:
Leuit. xix.
Let every man stand in awe of his father and mother: (...) xxi.
And if any man have a stubburne and a disobedient son, which will not hear
the voice of his father and mother, and for correction will not amend and
follow them: Than shall his father and mother take him, and bring him to the
judge of the city and say: This our son is stubburne and disobedient, and
dispiseth our admonitio^s, and is a riotour and a drunkerde. Than shall all the
people stone him to death, and thou shall put away the evil from the, that all
Israel may here thereof. and be afraid. Exodus xxi.
And in the book of Exody, it is also written: He that strikes his father or
mother, he shall be put to death: And likewise be that curses his father or
mother shall be put to death. And in the book of proverbs, Prouer. xxviii.
the wise man also says: He that steals any thing from his father or mother,
is to be taken as a murderer. And although these great punysshementes of
disobedient children by death, be not now in the new law in force and
strength, but left to the order of princes and governors and their laws: yet
it evidently appears, how sore god is agreued and dipleased, with such
disobedience of children toward their parents, for as much as in the old
law he did appointe thereunto so greuouse punishementes.

And as almighty god does threaten these punishementes unto those children,
which do break this commandment, so he does promise great rewards to them
that keep it. For he that honors his father, says the wyseman, Eccle. iii.
his sins shall be forgyuen him. And he that honors his mother, is as one
that gathers treasures. who so ever honors his father, shall have joy in
his own children, and when he makes his prayer unto god, he is herd. He that
honors his father shall have a long and a prosperous life.

And as the children by this commandment be bound to honor and obey their
parents, according as is before expressed, so it is implied in the same
precepte, that the parents should nourysshe and godly bring up their
children, that is to say, that they must not only find them meat and drink
in youth, and also set them forward in learning, labor, and some other good
exercise, that they may eschew idleness, and have some craft or occupation, or
some other lauful mean to get their living: but also they must learn them
to believe and trust in god, to love him, to fear him, to love their
neighbors, to hate no man, to hurt no man, to wisshe well to every man, and
so much as they may, do good to every man, not to curse, not to swear, not to
be riotous, but to be sobre and temperate in all things, not to be worldly, but
to set their minds upon the love of god and heavenly things, more than upon
te^porall things of the world. And generally to do all that is good, and to
eschew all that is evil: and this the parents ought to do, not by cruel
entreatinge of their children, whereby they might discourage them, and provoke
them to hate their parents, but by charitable rebuking, threatening, and
charitable chastising and correcting of them, when they do evil, and
cherishing, mainteyninge, and commending them, when they do well. This office
and duty of the parents toward their children is witnessed in many places
of scripture. First saint Paul writes thus: Ep^e. vi.
Fathers provoke not your children unto anger, but bring them up in the
correction and doctrine of god. Deuteronomy. vi.
And in Deutronomy al mighty god says: Pro. xxix.
Teach my laws and commandementes to thy children. And the wise man says:
The rod of correction gives wisdom. The child that is left to his own
will, Prou. xiii.
shall be confusion to his mother. And in an other place he says: He that
spares the rod, hates his son, and he that loves him, will se him
corrected. Pro. xxiii.
And in an other place he says: Se thou withdraw not from thy child
discipline and chastysynge, if thou strike him with the rod, he shall not
die, thou shalt strike him with a rod, and shall thereby deliver his soul
from hell. (...).
And on the other side it is written: The son untaught and vnchastised is the
confusion of his father. And for this cause we find in the book of ye kings,
how that our lord conceived great indignation against Hely the chief priest,
i Reg ii.
because he did not duly correct his two sons Ophni and Phinees, i Reg.
^iii.
when he knew that they did grievously offend god, and how in revenging of
their fathers negligence and remissenes in correcting of his children, almighty
god took from Hely, and all his issue and householde for ever, the office of
the high priesthode, and how his two sons Ophni and Phinees were slain both
upon a day, and Hely their father brake his neck. This example of Hely is
necessary for fathers to imprynt in their hearts, that they may se their
children well taught and corrected, lest they run into the great indignation
of almighty god, as Hely did, and not only in this world have confusion: but
also in the world to come, have damnation for the mysorder of their children
through their defaute, and they must not think, that it is enough to speak
somewhat to them, when they do amiss, for so did Hely to his sons, and yet
our lord was not pleased, because he did not much more sharply correct them,
and se them reformed: but when words will not serve, the fathers and mothers
must put to sharper correction, and by such discipline save their souls, orels
they shall answer to god for them. And truly they greatly deserve the
indignation of god, that when they have received of him children, do not bring
them up to his service, but without regard what comes of them, suffer them
to run into the service of the devil. Wherefore al fathers ought diligently to
consider and remember, how much and how grievously they offend god, and of how
many evils they be the cause, which either bring up their children in wantonness
and idelnes, and do not put them forth be time to some faculty, exercise, or
labor, whereby they may after get their living, or occupy their life to the
profit and commodity of the common weal, or else do suffer their children
in youth to be corruptid for lack of good teaching and good bringing up in the
true knowledge of god, and of his will and commandementes, or commit in word or
deed such things, in the presence of their children, whereof the young tender
hearts of the said children (which like a small twygge be inclinable every way,
and by fraylenes of youth be inclyned to evil) do take so evil example and
corruption of vices, and worldely affections, that hard it will be for them
after to eschew the same.

This commandment also contains the honor and obedience, which subjects
owe unto their princes. And also the office of princes toward their
subjects. For scripture takes princes, to be as it were fathers, (...) xlix.
and nurses, to their subjects. And by scripture it appears, that it
apperteyneth unto the office of princes, to se that the right religion and
true doctrine of Christ, be maintained and taught, and that their subjects be
well ruled and governed, by good and just laws, and to provide and care, that
the people and common weal may encreace, and to defend them from
oppression, and invasion, as well within the realm as without, their subjects
aiding them thereunto, and to se that justice be ministered unto them
indifferently, and to here by themselves, or by their mynisters beningly, al
their complaints, and to show toward them (although they offend) fatherly
pity. And finally so to correct them that be evil, that they had yet rather
save them than lose them, if it were not for respect of justice and maintenance
of peace and good order in ye common weal. And therefore al their subjects
must again on their parts, and be bound by this commandment, not only to
honor and obey their said princes, according as subjects be bound to do, and
to owe their truth and fidelity unto them, as unto their natural lords: but
they must also love them, as children do love their fathers, yea they must more
tender the surety of their princes person, and his estate, than their own or
any others, Even like as the health of the head is more to be tendered, tha^ the
health of any other membre.

And by this commandment also, subjects be bound, not to withdraw their said
fealty, troth, love and obedience, toward their prince, for any cause what
so ever it be, ne for any cause they may conspire against his person, ne do
any thing toward the hinderance or hurt thereof, nor of his estate.

And furthermore by this commandment they be bound to obey also, all the
laws, proclamations, precepts and co^mandementes made by their princes and
governors, except they be against the commandementes of god. And likewise they
be bound to obey all such as be in authority under their prince, as far as
he will have them obeyed. They must also give unto their prince, aid, help,
and assistaunce, when so ever he shall require the same, either for surety,
preservation, or maintenance of his person and estate, or of the realm, or of
the defense of any of the same against all persons. And wha^ so ever subjects
be called by their prince unto pryuy counsel, or unto the parliament, where
is the general counsel of this realm, than they be bound to give unto
their prince, as their learning, wisdom, or experyence can serve them, the
most faythefull counsel they can, and such as may be to the honor of god,
to the honor and suertie of his regal person and state, and to the general
wealth of this hole realm.

And further if any subject shall know of any thing, which is or may be to
the noyaunce or damage of his princis person or estate, he is bound by this
commandment to disclose the same with all speed, to the prince him self, or to
some of his counsel. For it is the very law of nature, that every membre
shall employ him self to preserve and defend the head. And surely wisdom
and polycie will the same: for of conspiracy and treason comes no goodness,
but infinite hurt, damage, and peril to the common weal.

And that all subjects do owe unto their princes and governors, such honor
and obedience as is aforesaid, it appears evidently in sundry places of
scripture, but specially in the epistles of saint Paul, Romans xiii.
and saint Peter. For saint Paul says in this manner: Every man must be
obedient unto the high powers, for the powers be of god. And therefore who so
ever resists the powers, resysteth the ordinance of god. And they that
resyst the ordinance of god, shall get to them selves damnation: For rulers
are not fearful to them that be good, but to them that do evil. Wilt not thou
fear the power? Do well, and thou shalt have praise of the same: for he is
the minister of god for thy wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear, for he
bears not the sword without cause. For he is the minister of god to punish
the evil doer, therefore you must obey, not only for the fear of
punysshement, but also because of conscience. And for this cause ye pay
tributes, for they be gods ministers seruinge for the same purpose. Give
therefore to all men that is due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
who^ custom is due, fear to whom fear is due, and honor to who^ honor is
due. And saint Peter says, Obey unto all sorts of governors for gods
sake, i. Peul. ii.
whether it be unto the king, as unto the chief head, or unto rulers, as unto
them that be sent of him, to punyshe evil doers, and to cherishe them that do
well. And shortly after it follows, Fear god, honor the king

And there be many exaumples in scripture, of the great vengeance of god, that
has fallen upon rulers, and such as have been disobedient unto their
princes. But one principal exaumple to be noted is of the rebellion, which
Chore, Dathan, and Abiron made against their gouernous, Number. xvi.
Moses, and Aaron. For punyshement of which rebels god not only caused the
earth to open, and to swalowe them down and a great number of other people
with them, with their houses, and all their substance, but caused also the fire
to descend from heaven, and to burn up. CCl. capitaines, which conspired
with them in the said rebellion.

Moreover all christen men be bound by this commandment to exhibit due
honor and reverence unto the spiritual fathers and parents, which have cure
and charge of their souls, as unto those who be appointed by god to minister
his sacraments unto the people, and to feed them with his word, and by the
same to conducte and to lead them the straight way to the father in heaven
everlasting.

And our savior Christ in the gospel makes mention as well of the
obedience, as of the corporal sustenance, which all christen people do owe
unto their spiritual fathers. Of the obedience he says: That who so ever
receives you, Math. x.
receives me. And in an other place he says: He that hears you hears me,
Luc. vii.
and he that dispiseth you, dispiseth me. And saint Paul says, Obey your
prelates, and give place unto them, Heb. xiii.
for they have much charge, and much care for your souls, as they, which
must give an account therefore, that they may do it with joy and not with
grief, that is to say, that they may gladly, and with much comfort do their
cure and charge, when they do perceive, that the people be obedient to their
teaching. Like as contrary wise, although they be bound to do it, yet the
people give them little comfort to do it, when they find them disobedient
and repugnant.

And for the sustenance of their living, which is comprised in this word
Honor, Luc x.
(as before is declared) Christ says in the gospel: The workman is worthy
his wages. Corin. ix.
And saint Paul says: who goes on warfare upon his own stipende? And who
planteth the vine, and eats no part of the fruit?

And who fedeth the flock, and eats no part of the milk? And after
follows and Even so has the lord ordained, that they which preach the
gospel, 1. Tim. vi
should live of the gospel. And therefore in an other place it is written:
Priests that rule well, be worthy of double honor, specially they that
labor in the ministration of the word of god, and his doctrine. In which
place the apostle means by Double honor, not only the reverence, which is
due unto the spiritual fathers, as is aforesaid, but also sufficiencye of all
things necessary and requisite, as well for their sustenance and findyng, as
for the quiet and commodiouse exercisynge and executynge of their said office.

Finally in this commandment is contained the honor and obedience of the
servant unto his master: that is, to love his master, to be reuerente and
lowly to him in all his words and gesture, to suffer and forbear him, to be
ready with a good will without murmuration or grudging, to obey all his laufull
and reasonable commandementes, to fear him, and to be loath to displease him,
to be faithful and true unto him. And to his power to procure and do that,
which is for his masters honesty and profit. And that as well in his
masters absence, and out of his sight, as when he is present, and looks upon
him, according to the words of saint Paul, where he says: Ephe. vi.
Servants be you obedient unto your masters, with fear and trembling, with
simple and plain hearts, as unto Christ, not seruyng only in their syghte,
as pleasers of men, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of god
from the heart, and with good will, thynkyng that ye serve god, and not men.
And be you sure, that of all your good service, you shall receive reward of
god. Tit. ii.
And again to Titus he writes thus: exhort the servants to be obedient unto
their masters, to please them well in all things, not to be patterers and
praters against them, nor pickers nor privy co^ueiours of their masters
goods. But to show all truth and faythfulnes. i. Petri. ii.
Saint Peter also byddeth servants to obey their masters with all fear, not
only if they be good and gentile, but also though they be froward.

And of the other side, the office and duty of masters to their servants
is, to provide sufficiently for them, of all things necessary, to se them
instruct in the knowledge of the commandementes of god, and that they observe
the same, and not be over rigorouse unto them, but with discretion to correct
them, when they do amiss, and to commend and cherishe them, when they do
well, according to the saying of saint Paul: Col iiii.
You that be masters, do unto your servants, that is right and reason,
knowing that your selves have also a master in heaven.

Ephe. vi.
And in an other place he says: Be not rigorous unto your servants, for you
have a master in heaven, that regards al persons indifferently. And the wise
man says: Ec. xxxiii.
Meat, correction and work is due unto servants. Set thy seruante unto
labor, that he be not idle, for idleness brings much evil, set him to work,
for that belongs to him: if he be not obedient, correct him.

And in this commandment is also implied, that children and young folks,
should give due honor and reverence to old men, and to all such as be their
masters and tutours, to bring them up in lernyng and virtue, which be in this
behalf as fathers unto them, and so as fathers, must be honored and obeyed.

The exposition of the.vi. commandment of god.
Thou shall do no murder.
IN this commandment is forbidden, not only bodily killing, and all manner of
violent layinge of hands upon any man, as strikyng, cuttyng, woundynge, and
all manner of bodyly hurtyng, by act or deed: but also all malice, anger,
hate, envy, disdain, and al other evil affections of the heart, and also al
sclander, backbityng, scoldyng, bannyng, raylynge, scornyng, or mocking, and
all other evil behauyour of our tongue against our neighbors, which all be
forbidden by this commandment, for they be roots and occasions of murder,
and other bodily hurt.

The contrary of all these things be commanded by this commandment, that is
to say, that we should with our hearts love our neighbors, and with our
tongues speak well of them and to them, and in our acts and deeds do good
unto them showing toward them in heart, word, and deed, patience, mekenes,
mercy, and gentylnes, yea though they be our adversaries, and ennemies. And
that this is the true sense and meaning of this commandment, it appears, by
the exposition of our savior Christ in the gospel, Math. ^.
where he declares, that we should neither hurt any man in deed, nor speak
of him or unto him maliciousely or contemptuousely with our tounges, nor bear
malice or anger in our hearts: But that we should love them that hate us, say
well by them, that say evil by us, and do good unto them that do evil unto
us. And according to the same saying of Christ, saint John says also: That he
that hates his brother, ^. Joan. iii.
is a manqueller.

It is not forbidden by this commandment, but that al rulers and governors,
as princes, judges, fathers, masters, and such other, may for the correction
of them, which be under their governance, use such manner of punysshemente,
either by rebukefull or sharp words, or by bodyly chastysing, as the laws of
every realm do permit. And not only they may do thus, but also they be
bound so to do (onles they se reasonable cause to the contrary) and offend god
if they do it not, as is before declared in the.v. commandment.

All rulers also must beware and take heed that in their corrections and
punishments, they do not proceed upon any private malice of their hearts, or
displeasure toward any man, or for any lucre, favor, or fear of any person,
but that they have their eye and consideration only upon the reformation and
amendment of the person, whom they do correct, or else upon the good order and
quietness of the common weal, so that still there may remain in their hearts
charity, and love toward the person, they punyshe. And like as the father
loves his child, even when he beats him: Eeuen so a good judge, when he
gives sentence of death upon any gylty person, although he show outwardly
sharpenes, and rigor, yet inwardely he ought to love the person and to be
sorye and heavy for his offenses, and for the death which he him self by the
law, does and must needs condemn him unto. And although inferior rulers and
governors, may correct and punysshe such as he under their governance, yet
they may not punysshe by death, nor mutilate, maime, or imprison them, or use
any corporal violence toward them, otherwise then is permitted by the high
governor, that is to say, by the prince and his laws, from whom al such
authority does come. For no man may kylle, or use such bodily coertion, but
only princes, and they which have authority from princes, ne the said
princes, nor any for them, may do the same, but by and according to the just
order of their laws and ordinances.

Moreover no subjects may draw their swords against their prince for any
cause what so ever it be, nor against any other (saving for laufull defense)
without their princes license. And it is their duty to draw their swords for
the defense of their prince and realm, when so ever the prince shall command
them so to do. And although princes, which be the chief and supreme heads
of their realms, do otherwise than they ought to do: Yet god has assigned no
judges over them in this world, but will have the judgment of them reserved to
himself, and will punyshe them when he sees his time. And for amendment of
such princes that do otherwise than they should do, the subjects may not
rebel, but must pray to god, which has the hearts of princes in his hands,
that he so turn their hearts unto him, that they may use the sword, which he
has given them, unto his pleasure.

Against this commandment offend al they, which do kill, mayme, or hurt
any man without just order of the law, and gives counsel, aid, favor,
provocation, or consent thereto.

And also all they, which may (if they will) by their authority or laufull
means, deliver a man from wrongful death, mutulation, hurt or injury, and
will not do it, but will wyncke thereat, and dissemble it, be transgressors of
this commandment.

And al judges, which seeing no sufficient matter or cause of death, or upon
light trial, without sufficient examination and discussion, give sentence of
death, or when the matter or cause of death is sufficient, and the trial good,
yet delight in the death of the person, be transgressors of this commandment.

And likewise be all those, which in causes of life and death, being
impanelled upon inquestes do lightly condemn or endite any person, without
sufficient evidence, examination, and discussion of the informations given unto
them. And moreover all those, which either in such causes do give false
evidence or information, either wittyngly, contrary to their own conscience,
or doubting of the truth of those informations, or without sufficient
examination, do promote, enforce, or maintain such evidences, informatio^s, or
inditementes, do also break this commandment.

So do all they which wyllyngly do kill themself for any manner of cause, for
so to do, there can be no pretense of lawfulle cause, ne of just order. And
therefore he that so does, kylleth at ones both body and soul.

Finally all they, which bear hatred and malice against their neighbors,
and either malyciousely speak words of contempt, dyspite, checkynge,
cursynge, and such other, or else publysshe their neighbors offenses to
their sclander, rather than to their amendment: And generally all they that
live in ire, malice, envy, and murmuringe at other men's wealth, or rejoicing at
other men's trouble or hurt, or such other like, they offend all against this
precepte.

The exposition of the seuenthe commandment of god.
Thou shall not commit adultery
ALthough this word Adultery does signify properly the unlawful commixtion of
a married man with any other woman, than with his own wife, or else of a
married woman with any other man, than her own husband: yet in this
commandment, it is taken not only for that, but also for all manner unlawful
copulation between man and woman married and unmarried, and all manner of
unlawful use of those parts, which be ordained for generation, whether it be
by adultery, fornication, incest, or any other mean.

And in laufull matrimonye a man may break this commandment, and live
unchaste with his own wife, if he do vnmeasurably or inordinatly serve his or
her fleshely appetite or lust. And of such the devil has power, as the angel
Raphael said unto Thoby: Tob. vi.
They that marrye in such wise, that they exclude god out of their hearts, and
give themselves unto their own carnal lusts, as it were an horse or a mule,
which have no reason: upon such persons the devil has power.

Also all christen people ought highly to regard the observation of this
commandment, considering how much god is displeased, and what vengeance he
has always taken, and ever will take for the transgression of the same. For
confirmation whereof, you shall understand, that god in the time of Moses
law, commanded, that who so ever committed adultery, should be stoned to death.

And that almightye god, after the childerne of Israel had committed adultery
with the women of Moab and Madian, commanded first, that the heads and rulers
of the people should be hanged for that they suffered the people so to offend
god. And afterward commanded also, every man to slay his neighbor, that had
so offended. In so much that there was slain of that people the number
of.xxiiii. M. and many mo should have been slain, had not Phinees the son of
Eleazar the high priest, turned the indignation of god from the children of
Israel. For this Phinees, when he saw Zamry, chief of the tribe of Simeon, in
the presence of Moises, and all the people, go unto Cosoy, a noble man's daughter
of the Madianites, to commit fornication with her, he rose from among all the
multitude, and taking a sword in his hand, went into the house where they
were, and thrust them both through the bealyes. Whose fervent mind and zeal,
god did so much allow, that he did therefore both cease from the farther
punisshement of the Israelytes, and also granted to Phinees, and his
successors for ever, the dignity of the high priesthode.

Also the tribe and stock of Benjamin was so punisshed for the maintenance
of certain persons of the city of Gaba, which had contrary to this
commandment, shamefully abused a certain man's wife, that of.xxv.M. and.vii. C.
men of arms, there remained on live but.vi. C.

Genesis xix.
Moreover almighty god for the transgression of this commandment, caused
brymstone and fire to rain down from heaven, upon all the country of Sodom
and Gomor, and so destroyed the hole region, both men women and beasts, and
all that grew upon the earth, reserving only Loath and his two daughters.

These terrible examples and many other like, almighty god did show in times
past, to the intent we should have them in our continual remembrance and
should ever stand in awe and fear so to offend god. For though he does not
presently punyshe us here in this world, as he did the persons before rehearsed:
yet his long patience and forbearynge, is no allowance or forgyuenes of our
offenses, if we continue still in them, but a sore accumulation and heapinge
together of goddis wrath and indignation against the day of judgment. At
which time instead of this temporal pain, we shall receive everlasting
pain, Romans ii.
being (as saint paul sayeh) excluded from the everlasting kingdom of
heaven. And as Christ says in he gospel, and saint John in the apocalypse: we
shall be cast into the burning lake of hell, Mat. xxv. Luc. xiii.
where is fire, brymstone, weeping, waylyng, and gnasshyng of tethe without
end.

Furthermore in this commandment not only the vices before rehearsed, be
forbidden and prohibited, but also the virtues contrary to them be required and
commanded: That is to say, fidelity, and true keeping of wedlock, in them that
be married, continence in them that be unmarried: And generally in all persons,
shamefastnes and chastenes not only of deeds, but of words and manners,
countenance and thought. And moreover fasting, temperance, watchynge, labor,
and all laufull things that conduce and help to chastity.

And therefore against this commandment offend all they, which take any syngle
woman, or other ma^s wife, or that in their hearts do covet or desire
unlawfully to have them. For as Christ says: Mat. xxv.
who so ever beholds a woman, coveting her unlawfully, has already committed
adultery with her in his heart.

They also offend this commandment, Leui. xviii. and.xx.
that take in marriage, or out of marriage, any of their own kynrede or
affinity, within the degrees for bydden by the law of god.

They also offend this commandment, which abuse them selves, or any other
persons against nature, or abuse their wives in the time of their menstruall
purgation.

They also that do nourishe, styre up, and provoke them selves, or any other,
to carnal lusts and plesures of the body, by uncleanly and wanton words,
tales, songs, syghtes, touchinges, gay and wanton apparel and lascivious
deckynge of them selves, or any such wanton behavior and inticement. And
also all those, which procure any such act, or that minister house, license,
or place thereunto. And all counsaylers, helpers, and consentours to the same,
do greuousely offend, and transgress this commandment. Likewise al they
that avoid not the causes hereof so much as they conveniently may, as
surfettynge, sloth. idleness, immoderate sleep, and company of such both men
and women, as be unchaste and evil disposed, be giltye of the transgression of
this commandment.

The exposition of the eight commandment of god.
Thou shall not steal.
Under the name of theft or stealing, in this commandment, is understand
all manner of unlawful taking away, occupiyng, or keeping of an other man's
goods, whether it be by force, extortion, oppression, brybery, usury, simony,
unlawful cheuisance, or shifts, or else by false bying and selling, either by
false weightes, or by false measures, or by sellyng of a thing counterfayt for
a true. as gylte copper, for true gold, or glass for precious stones, and
generally all manner of fraud and deceyte.

And like as the vices before rehearsed, be forbidden by this precepte: Even so
sundry virtues contrary to the said vices, be commanded by the same, as to
deal truly and plainly with our neighbors in all things, to get our own
goods trewly, to spend them liberally upon them that have need, to feed the
hungery, to give drink to the thristy, to clothe the naked, to harborowe the
harbourlesse, to comfort the sick, to visit the prisoners: And finally to
help our neighbors, with our learning good counsel and exhortation, and by
all other good mean that we can.

Against this commandment offend al they, which by craft or violence, upon
sea or land, spoil rob or take away any other man's servant or child, land,
or inheritance, horse, sheep, or cattle, fysshe, foul, conies, or dear,
money, jewels, apparaile, or any other thing, which is not their own.

Likewise offend all they against this commandment, which have goods given
to an use, and put them not to the same use, but keep them to their own
advantage, as masters of hospitals, and falls executours, which convert the
goods given to the sustentation of the pore folks, and to other good and
charitable uses, unto their own profit. And also all they, which receive rent
or stipend, for any office spiritual or temporal, and yet do not there office
belonging thereunto, be transgressors of this commandment.

And so al they, which take wages or fee, prete^dyng to deserve it, and yet do
not in deed, as laborers, and hired servants, which loyter and do not apply
their business. And like wise advocates, proctours, attourneys, counsaylours
in any of the laws, which sometime for little pain take much stipende, or
by their defaut and negligence, mar good causes, or do any thing to the
hinderance of spedy justice, for their aduauntages, do transgress this
commandment.

Also all ydell vacabundes and sturdy beggars, which being able to get their
living by labor, take such alms, wherewith the poor and impotent folks
should be releued and sustained, do offend against this commandment.

Moreover all they transgress this commandment, which bye any stoolne goods,
knowing that they be stoolne, or that bye things of them that have none
authority to sell them, or alienate them, if they know the same. And likewise
do they, which withholde goods stoolne, or that find things lost, and
knowinge the owner thereof, will not restore them, or will not do their diligence
to know the owner.

They also which defraude their hired servants of their due wages, and they
that borowe any thing, or reteyne any thing delivered unto them upon trust,
and will not restore the same again. And they that use false weyghtes or
mesures, or deceytefull wares, or sell their own wares at an unreasonable
price, far above the just value.

And they that ingrosse and bye up any kind of wares holely into their own
hands, to the intent that they may make a scarcenes thereof in other men's
hands, and sell it again as they list.

And generally all covetous men, which by any means unlawfully get, or
unmercifully keep their goods from them that have need, be transgressors and
breakers of this commandment.

The exposition of the nynth commandment of god.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
BY this commandment is forbidden all manner of lying, sclanderyng, bakbyting,
false reportyng, false accusyng, evil counsaylynge, and all such mysusyng of
our tongue to the hurt of our neighbors, whether it be in their body or
goods, Jacob. ii^.
or in their good name and fame. The apostle saint James likeneth the tongue of a
man, unto the bitte of an horse mouth, which turns the hole horse every way,
as pleases him that sytteth on the horse back: and he compares it also to
the healme of a ship, whereby all the hole ship is ruled, at the pleasure of
him that governs the healme. And thirdly, he compares it unto a spark of
fire, which if it be suffered, will burn up an hole town or city. And surely
all these comparisons be very apt and mete. For the tongue of a man no doubt,
is the chief stay of all the hole body either to do much good, or to do much
hurt. The voice of the tongue perceth the hearts of hearers, and causes them
to conceive of other men, good or evil opinion. It kyndleth or quenches
contention. It disposes men to war or peace, and moves the hearers sundry
ways, to goodness or vice. And like as the great ragious flames, that goo from
house to house, come but of one sparkell, which in the beginning might have been easily quenched, but by negligence and sufferaunce increases and waxes so
great, that no man can resist it: And like as fire is a great commodity many
ways, if it be well and wisely used, and contrary an utter destruction, if it
be suffered, and not taken head unto: Even so of man's tongue, although it be a
very small membre of the body, yet there comes excedyng great benefits, both
to him self and to others, if it be well and wisely governed. And contrarywyse,
if no head be taken thereunto, but be suffered to run at large, than it is not
one evil alone, but a root and occasion, or rather a heapyng together of all
euyls.

And because that of the tongue comes so much good, or so much evil:
Therefore by this commandment is not only forbidden all evil use of the
tongue, to the hurt of our neighbors, but also in the same is commanded all the
good use of the tongue, to the benefit of our neighbors, as to be true and
plain in our words, to be faithful in couenantes, bargains, and promyses,
to testify the truth in all courts, iugementes, and other places, to report
well of them that be absent, to give good counsel and exhortation to all
goodness, to dyssuade from all evil. And when we know any man to do amysse, not
to publyshe his fault to other men to his sclander, but rather to admonish him
privily between him and us, and to seek his reformation to speak well by our
ennemies, to pacify and set at one them that be ennemies, to excuse them, and
to answer for them, that be unjustly slaundered: and generally in all other
things to use our tounges in truth, to the wealth of our neighbors.

Against this commandment offend all they, which by lying and uttering of
false speech, deceive and hurt any man. And such liars, be the deuyls
children. For as saint John says in his gospel: Joan. viii.
The devil is a liar, and father of liars. And therefore byddeth saint Paul:
Ephe. iiii.
That we should put away lyinge and speak troth every man to his neighbor.

They also offend against this commandment, which be detractours,
backebiters, and sclanderers whom the wiseman does liken unto serpents, that
privily byte or sting men behind, Eccl. ^.
when they be not ware thereof. And surely such men (what so ever they pretend)
go not about to heal and amend them that do amysse, but rather do satisfy
their own malice. and sclanderous tongues. For like as the surgeon, that will
heal a wound, does cover it, and bind it that it take no open air: So if
we intend the amendment of our neighbors fau^, we must not open it abroad to
his hurt, but we must be sorry, and pray to god for him, and so taking him to us
we must privily counsel and exhort him. And this loving correction, will make
him beware and take heed, that he offend no more. But if we tell his fautes,
first to one, and after to an other, and charge every one to keep counsel, as
though we had told it to no mo, this is no amendment of his fault, but a
declaration of our own, and a reprehension of our selves, in that we utter
forth unto other, that thing which we our selves judge not to be uttered. And
surely we condemn our selves therein, for we should first have kept it secret
to our selves, if we would not, an other man should utter the same. And
therefore the wise man says: Eccl. xix.
If thou have herd any thing against thy neighbor, let it dye within the, and
be sure it will not burst the. An in an other place: As evil is be that
backebiteth privily, as the serpent which styngeth unawares.

And they also offend against this commandment, which gladly give ears, and
be ready to here such backebitoures. For as saint Barnarde says: Like as the
backebiter caryeth the devil in his mouth: so the hearer carries the devil
in his ear. For the detractour is not glad to tell but to him, which is glad
to hear. And the wise man says. That like as the wind drives away the
rain, Pro. xxv.
even so does a sad and a dyspleasant countenance drive away the tongue of
the backebitours, and makes them abashed.

They also break this commandment, which with flatteryng and double
tounges, go about to please such as be glad to here complayntes. Iuges also,
which give sentence, contrary to that, which they know to be true, and they
that in judgment do hyde and supresse the truth, and they that make false
plees, to the delay and hynderance of Justice, or any otherwise do stop
justice: And enquestes: which upon light grounds, or upon grounds not well
examined or discussed, give verdite, be transgressors and breakers of this
commandment. And above other, they do tra^sgresse this commandment, which
in preaching or other ways, do teach or meinteyne any false or erroneous
doctrine, contrary to the word of god, or that do teach fables, or men's
fantasies and imaginations, affirming them to be the word of god. And such be
wors than false wyttnesses of worldly matters, for they bear false wytnes
against god and his truth.

The exposition of the tenthe commandment of god.
Thou shall not unjustly desire thy neighbors house, nor thy neighbors wife,
nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor any thing that
is thy neighbors.
Where as in the other co^ma^dementes before rehearsed, be forbidden all words
and deeds, which be against gods pleasure, and the love of our neighbors:
In this last precept is forbidden the inward consent of the heart, to all
unlawful motions, desires, delites, inclinations, and affections unto evil,
which things be so roted and planted in all us the children of Adam, even from
the first hour of our birth, that although by the inspiration of the holy
ghost, and the grace of god given unto us, we do entende never so well, and
would most gladly eschew all evil: yet there remains in us a disposition
and redynesse unto such things, as be contrary to the will and commandment of
god: In so much, that if the grace of god did not help us to stay and resist
our naughty thoughts and delight unto sin, the same our concupiscence and
noughtines, should be so much, that we should tun headlynge in to sin and
mischefe, our nature is corrupt, and we be so far from the perfect
obedience unto goddis will, which obedience Adam had in the state of innocence.
And of this corruption of our nature and redynes unto evil, complayneth saint
Paul in his epistile unto the Romans, where he declares at length, Romans vii.
that the nature of man is so full of concupiscence and evil affections, that
no man does or can of him self satisfy or fulfill the law of god: And that
the law condemns all men as transgressors, and that therefore every man for
his salvation, must have refuge unto the grace and mercy of god, obtained by
our savior Jesus Christ.

Furthermore like as in the fyfte commandment, under the name of father and
mother is understand al superiors: And in the.vi. commandment, under the
name of kyllyng is understand al wroth and revenging. And in the.vii.
commandment, under the name of adultery, is understand all unchaste living.
And in the eight commandemente, under the name of theft is understand all
disceytfull dealing with our neighbors: And in the.ix. commandment, under
the name of false witness, is understand all misreporte, and untrue use of
our tongue: So in this last commandment, under the name of desyring of an
others man's wife and goods, is understand all manner of evil and unlawful
desire of any thing.

And like as in this precepte be forbidden evil desires, even so in the same
be commanded good desires, good affections, good inclinations to godly
things, and the perfect obedience of our hearts unto goddis will, which
although we shall not fully and absolutely atteyne unto, whiles we be in this
life: Yet this commandment does bind us to enforce and endeavor our selves
thereunto, by co^tynual fighting and resystyng against the said corruption,
concupiscence, and evil desires, for as much as by them man is continually
tempted to evil deeds and vicious living, according whereunto sayncte James
writes: Let no man say, Jacob. i.
when he is tempted to evil, that he is tempted of god. For as god can not be
tempted to evil, so he tempts no man to evil, but every man is tempted
drawn, and allured by his own concupiscence: than concupiscence when she has
conceived, brings forth sin.

All they be transgressors of this commandment, which by delyberation and
full consent, cast their minds and lusts, to accomplysshe the concupisence
and desire, which they have to obtain and get unlawfully an other man's
wife, child, servant, house, land, cattall, or any thing or goods that be his.

And they also be transgressors of this commandment which by envy, be sorry
of their neighbors wealth and prosperity, or be glad of their sorrow
hinderance and adversity. And also all they which do not set their minds and
studies, to preserve, maynteyne, and defend unto their neighbors (as much as
it is in them) their wives, children, servants, howses, lands, goods, and
all that is theyrs. For (as before is declared) this commandment not only
forbideth us to desire unlawfully from our neighbor any thing that is his: But
by the same we be also commanded, gladly to wish and will unto him, that he may
quietly possess and enjoy all that god has sent him, be it never so great
abundance. And this mind we ought to bear unto every man by this commandment,
not only if they be our friends and lovers, but also if they be our enemies
and adversaries.

Here follows the exposition of the prayer of our lord called the Pater
noster, divided in to seven petitions.
i Our father which art in heaven: hallowed be thy name. ii Thy kingdom come.
iii Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. iiii Give us this day our
daily bread. v And forgive us our trespasses: as we forgive them that
trespass against us. vi And let us not be led into temptation. vii But
deliver us from evil. Amen.
The notes.
FOr the better and more ample declaration of this prayer, ye shall
understand, first that our savior Jesus Christ, was the author and maker
thereof, and that therefore like as he is of infinite wisdom, and of infinite
love and charity toward us: even so al christen men ought to think and
believe, that this same prayer is the most excellent and most sufficient, and
most perfect of al others. For neither there is any thing in this prayer
superfluous, neither there wants any petition, suite, or request for such
things as be necessary for our journey and passage in this world, or for
our furtherance to that ^eming of the life and glory everlasting.

Secondly that every good christen man may be assured to atteine the requests
made in this prayer, if he shall enforce him self, and apply his hole heart
and will to the will and grace of him, unto whom this prayer is made, and also
if he shall utter and offer the said petitions inwardly with his heart and with
such faith, confidence, and trust in god, as he requires. For surely no
prayer is thankful unto god, Ps cxviii. Exodus xiiii
but that which is made with the heart. And therefore the prophet David cries
to our lord with all his heart. And Moses is noted to cry out aloude, when he
spoke no word with his mouth, but he spoke aloude with his heart. And our lord
by his prophet notes, Psalm. xxix.
that some pray with their lyppes and in their hearts mind nothing less than
that which they pray for. And therefore who so ever intends by saying his
Pater noster, to atteyne his desire, he must have with faith a good and ernest
devotion, and his heart as nigh as he can, void of vain thoughts, and applied
to god, so that the entente and desire of his heart may be joined always with
the prayer of his mouth.

And for this purpose it is mete and much requisite, that the unlearned people
should use to make their prayers in their mother tongue, which they best
understand, whereby they may be the more moved and stirred unto devotion, and
the more ernestly mind the thing that they pray for.

Our father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name.
OF these words, Our father, placed in the beginning of this petition, all
true christen me^ ought to conceive a great comfort and joy, in that they be
taught and commanded in this prayer, to take almighty god for their father,
and so to call him, as for example: If our sovereign lord the king would
say to any of us, take me for your father, and so call me, what joy in heart,
what comfort, what confidence would we co^ceyue of so favorable, and
graciouse words? Than much more inco^parably have we cause to rejoice, that
the king and prince of al princes shewith unto us this grace and goodness, to
make us his children. And surely as the natural son may assuredly trust that
his father will do for him all things that may be for his setting forth and
aduanceme^t: even so we may undoubtedly assure our selves, that having almighty
god to our father, vsinge our self as obedient children, we shall lack
nothing which may be profitable for us, toward the everlasting inheritance
prepared for us.

And here is to be noted a lesson, that as this word Father, declares the
great benevolence, mercy and love of god toward us, as well in the creation,
as also in the redemption of man: so it admonishes us again of our duty
toward him, and how we be bound to show again unto him our hole heart,
love, and our obedience and redynes to fulfill all his precepts and
commandments, with all gladness and humility. And therefore who so ever
presumes to come to god with this prayer, and to call him father, and yet has
not full entente and purpose to use him self in all things like a kind and
an obedient son, he comes to him, as Judas came to Christ with a kiss,
(...). xx.i.
pretending to be his friend and his servant in calling him master, and yet he
was in deed a traitor to him, and a deadly ennemy. And for this consideration,
every christen man that intends to make this prayer, ought inwardly and
thoroughly to inserche and examine him self, and if he find in him self any
notable crime, for the which he ought to be ashamed to call god his father:
Let him accuse him self thereof to god, and recognize his unworthiness, saying,
as the prodigal son said: Father I have offended the, Luc. xv.
I am not worthy to be called thy son. And with due repentance, and firm
purpose and intent to amend his naughty life, let him lift up his heart to
god, and calling for his grace of reconciltation humbly say: Our father. etc.

Moreover by these words, Our father, is signified that we ought to believe,
that almighty god is the common father of al true christen people, and fatherly
regards all, through and by the mean of our savior Jesus Christ, unto whom
all faitheful and obedient christen men be brethern by grace and adoption, and
called to inherit with him the kingdom of heaven. And they be also brethern
each one to other, having al one father, which is god almighty. And therefore we
ought not only to be of one spirit toward our said father, and to employ
and endeavor our selves to the uttermost, to please him, and to keep his laws
and commandementes, but we ought also each to consent with other, in perfect
love and charity, and each to help and further other, toward the said
inheritance of heaven. And finally in all our prayers to god each to co^prise
other, and to pray for other, like as in this prayer we be taught to say: Our
father, give us our bread: forgive us our sins: suffer us not to fall into
temptation: and deliver us from evil.

By these words, which art in heaven, we be taught that we ought to have an
inward desire, and a great care and study, to come to the place where our
heavenly father is, and much covet his sight and presence. For like as a
loving child is even desirous to be where his father is: even so ought we
ever desire to be with our heavenly father, and to endeavor our selves that our
conversation be al withdrawn from the world, the flesh, and the devil, and
be set in heaven and heavenly things, Phili. iii.
as saint Paul teaches, and we should continualy wayle and lament, because we
be not with our heavenly father, saying with the prophet: Ps. cxix.
woeful am I, that my dwelling upon the earth is so much prolonged.

In these words, Hallowed be thy name, it is to be noted, that by the name of
god, is understand god him self, the power of god, the might, the majesty,
the glory, the wisdom, the providence, the mercy and goodness of god, and al
such other good things, as in scripture be attributed unto god.

And this name is hallowed, when it is praised, glorified, set forth,
honored and magnified of us both in word and deed.

And where in this petition we pray, that his name might be hallowed, it is
not to be taken or thought, that this name of god, which in it self is
evermore most holy, most gloriouse, most marvelous and full of majesty, can
be either advanced or diminished by us, or any thing that we can do, but we
desire here, that this most holy name may (according as it is in it self most
holy) be so taken, used, honored, and hallowed of us, and of all others, as
well heathen as christened, like as on the contrary part, this name is said to
be polluted and defiled, when we do either in word or deed, contumeliously,
and contemptuously or otherwise disshonour the same.

We desire therefore in this petition, that al false faith, by the which men
either mistruste god, or put their confidence in any other thing more than in
him, may be destroyed. And that all witchecraftes and false charms and
coniuratio^s, by the which Satan and other creatures be enchanted may cease
and give place to gods holy name, and so likewise, that all heresies and
false doctrines may vanishe away, so that goddis holy word may be truly
interpreted, and purely taught and set forth unto all the world, and that all
infidels may receive the same: and be converted to the right catholyke faith,
whereby all disceite, hypocrysie, and cou^terfaiting of truth, of righteousness,
or of holiness might clearly be extincte.

Furthermore we beseech and pray god here, that his name may be hallowed, so
that no man should swear in vain by it, or otherwise abuse ye same, to lie or
to disceyue his neighbor. And generally, ye none should fall into pride or
ambition, in to desire of worldly glory and fame, into envy, malice,
covetousness, adultery, glutteny, sloth, backebytynge, Coll. i.
slaundering of his neighbors, ne into any other evil or wicked thoughts and
deeds, whereby the name of god may be dishonored and blasphemed.

In this prayer also we require god to grant us, that in all perilles and
dangers we run unto him, as unto our only refuge, and call upon his holy
name, and that in our good words and works, we may please and magnify him,
and be by him preserved from the most damnable sin of unkindness toward him.
And also that we, which do already profess the right faith, may still continue
therein, and may do and express the same as well in our outward conversation,
as in confessing it with our mouth, so that by our good life, and our good
works, all other may be moved to good, and that by our evil works and
sins, no man may take occasion to slander the name, or dimynysshe the laud
and praise of god, Phili. iii.
but that all our works and doings might return to the honor and praise of
gods name.

Thy kingdom come.
THis second petition is very necessary, for no doubt our ancient ennemie
the devil, goes about contynually by all craftye means, to deceive us, and
bring us under his power and dominion. And surely so long as pride and
dysobedyence reigns in us, so long as ire, envy, wroth, or covetousness
reigns in us, so long as glotteny, lechery or any kind of sin reygneth in
us, so long we be under the dominion and kingedome of the devil. For the
devil undoubtedly, is king over all the children of pride, that is to say,
over all them that be sinners, rebels and disobedient unto god.

And for as much as it is not in our power to deliver our selves from under
this tyranny of the devil, but only by gods help ( for our perdition and
undoing is of our selves, but our help and salvation is of god, Osc. xiiii.
as says the prophet Osee) therefore it is very necessary for all true christen
people, to make this petition incessantly unto our heavenly father, and to
beseech him according to this doctrine of Christ, that by his grace and
help, we may escape the dominion and power of the devil, and that we may be
made subject unto his heavenly kingdom, therefore in this petition we desire
god to give us before all things, true and constant faith in him, and in his
son Jesus Christ, and in the holy ghost, with pure love and charity toward
him and al men, to keep us also from infidelity, desperation, and malice,
which might be the cause of our destruction, to deliver us from dissentions,
covetousness, lechery, and evil desires and lusts of sin, and so the virtue
of his kingdom to come, and to reign with in us, that all our heart, mind, and
wits, with all our strength inward and outward, may be ordered and directed
to serve god, to observe his commandementes and his will, and not to serve our
self the flesh, the world, or the devil.

We desire also, that this kingdom ones in us begun, may be daily increased,
and go forward more and more, so that all subtle and secret hate or sloth,
which we have to goodness, be not suffered to rule so in us, that it shall
cause us to look back again, and to fall into sin, but that we may have a
stable purpose and strength, not only to begin the life of innocence, but
also to proceed ernestly further in it, and to perform it according to the
saying of saint Paul, where he prays, Coll. i.
that we may walk worthily, pleasynge god in all things, being fruitful in
all good works, and growing and increasing in the knowledge of god. Also in an
other place he says: work and do the truth in Charity, and increase and go
forward in Christ. Ephe. iiii.i


Therefore in this prayer, desiring the kingedome of god to come, we require
also, that we being already received and entered in to the kyngedome of grace and
mercy of god, may so continue and persevere therein, that after this life, we
may come to the kingdom of glory, which endures for ever. And this is that
great and fervent desire, wherewith good men being mortified from worldly
affections, have lain and be always kyndled and enflamed, as appears by saint
Paul, Phili. i.
wha^ he said: I would be losed from this body, and be with Christ. And in an
other place he says: Romans viii.
we that have received the first fruits of the spirit, wayle and mourn in
our selves, wisshinge and lokinge to be delivered from the mortality and
miseries of this body, into the glory of the children of god.

The third petition. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
FOr the better understanding of this third petition, we must know, that by
disobedience and sin of our first father Adam, we be as of our nature only
without the grace of god, unable to fulfill the will and precepts of god, and
so inclined to love our selves, and our own wills, that we can not heartily
love neither god nor man, as we ought to do. And therefore we being ones
christen men, it is requisite for us to pray, that like as the holy aungelles
and saints in heaven (in whom god reigns perfectly and holy) do never
cease ne shall cease to glorify him, to praise him, and to fulfill his will
and pleasure in all things, and that most readyly and gladly without any manner
of grudging or resisting theru^to, knowing certainly and clearly, that his will
is always the best: even so that we the children of god in earth, may daily and
continually praise god, and by our holy conversation in good works, and good
life, honor and glorify him. And that we may from time to time so mortify
our own natural corrupt and sinful appetite and will, that we may be ever
ready, like loving children, humblye, lowly, and obediently, to approve, allow,
and accomplysshe the will of god our father in all things, and to submit our
selves with all our heart unto the same, and to acknowledge, that what so ever
is the will of god, the same is most perfect, most just, most holy, and most
expedient for the wealth and health of our souls.

Wherefore in this petition also, we desire of god true and stable patience,
when our will is let or broken, And that when any man speaks or does
contrary to our will: yet therefore we be not out of patience, neither curse or
murmr, or seek vengeance against our adversaries, or them which let our
will, but that we may say well of them, and do well to them. We pray also, that
by goddis grace we may gladly suffer al diseases, poverty, dispisinges,
persecutions, and adversities, knowing that it is the will of god, that we
should crucify and mortify our wills. And when any such adversity
chances unto us, attribute all unto the will or sufferance of god, and give
him thanks therefore, who does order all such things for our weal and
benefit, either for the exercise and the trial of the good, to make them
stronger in goodness and virtue: or else for the chastisement and amendment of
the evil, to suppress their evil motions and desires.

And also we pray, that wha^ so ever it shall please god to call us out of this
transitory life, we may be wyllinge to die, and that conformynge our will to
the will of god, we may take our death gladly: so that by fear or infirmity,
we be not made disobedient unto him.

We desire furthermore, that all our members, eyes, tongue, heart, hands, and
fete be not suffered to follow the desires of the flesh, but that all may be
used to the will and pleasure of god: and that maliciousely we rejoice not in
their troubles, which have resisted our will, or have hurt us, nor that we be
enuiousely sorry, when that they prosper and have welfare, but that we may be
contented and pleased with all thing that is goddis will.

The fourth petition. Give us this day our daily bread.
FOr the better declaration of this fourth petition, ye shall understand first,
that our lord teaches us not in this petition to ask any superfluous thing of
pleasure or delight, but only things necessary and sufficient, and therefore he
bids us only ask bread: wherein is not meant superfluous riches, or great
substance or abundance of things above our estate or condition, but such
things only as be necessary and sufficient for every man in his degree, and
according thereunto, i. Tim. vi.
saint Paul says: we have brought nothing in to this world, ne shall take
any thing with us when we depart hense. And therefore if we christen me^ have
meat and drink and cloth, that is to say, things sufficient, let us hold our
selves content, for they that set their minds on riches, and will have
superfluities more than needs, or is expedient to their vocation, they fall
into dangerous temptations, and into snares of the devil, and into many
unprofitable and noisome desires, which drown men in to perdition and
everlasting damnation: for the spring and root of all evils, is such
superfluous desire. The wise man also making his petition to our lord says:
Pro. xxx.
Give me neither poverty nor excess, but only things sufficient for my
living, left that having to much, I be provoked to deny god, and to forget who
is the lord, and on the other side, lest that by poverty constrained, I fall
in to theft and forswear the name of my god. These two wise men the one of
the old, and the other of the new testament, agree with the lesson of our
savior, for both declare that they desire only things necessary, sygnified
here by bread, and both refuse and renounce superfluities unprofitable,
daungerouse and noisome.

Secondely in these words of our savior Jesus Christ, be reproved all those
persons, which eat not their own bread, and devour other men's bread, of
which sort be all those which live of raven and spoils, of theft, of
extortion, of craft and deceit, and they also which neither labor with their
hands, nor otherwise apply their study, industry and diligence to some thing
which is good and beneficial to the common weal, and to the honor of god,
but live in ease, rest, idelnes, and wanton pleasure, without doing or caring
for any such thing. And al they likewise be reproved, which being called in
this world unto any rome, office or authority, do abuse the same, and do not
emply them self, according to their vocation.

Thirdly as the husband man tilleth and sows his ground, wedeth it, and
keeps it from destroieng, praying therewith to god for the increase, and
puts al his trust in him, to send him more or less at his pleasure, even
so besides our own diligence policy, labor and travail, we must also pray
daily to god, to send us sufficient, and we must take thankefully at his
hands all that is sent, and be no further careful than needs, but putting to
our endeavor, set our hole confidence and trust in him: for our savior Christ
says in ye gospel, I say to you be not careful for your living, Math. vi.
what ye shall eat, ne what clothes ye shall wear: Is not life better than
your meat, and your body better tha^ your clothinge? Look upon the birds of
the air, they sow not, they reap not, they bring nothing in to the barn,
and yet your heavenly father feeds them, be not you of more price then they?
Look upon the lillies of the field, they labor not, they spin not, and yet I
tell you, Solomon in all his precious and royal apparel, was not so clothed as
one of them, therefore care you not for these things: Leave this care to them
that know not god, your heavenly father knows yt you have need of all these
things, but seek you first the kingdom of god, and his rightuousenes, and the
ways justly and truly to live, and the^ god shall cast al these things unto
you. These be the words of Christ, full of good and comfortable lessons, that
we should not care ne set our hearts to much upon these worldly thing, ne
care so much for to morrow, that we shall seem to mistrust our lord. And here
is a thing greatly to be noted in comfort of the true laboring man, for surely
be he crafts man, or be he labourer, doing truly his office whereunto he is
called, he may in that state and kind of life please god and atteine
salvation, as surely as in any other state or kind of lyuinge. And although
our lord has so provided for some, that they have already sufficient and plenty
for many days and years, yet that not withstandyng they ought to make this
petition to god and say: Give us this day our daily bread, for as much as their
substance (though it be never so great) like as it could not have been gotten,
without god had sent it, so it can not prospre and continue except god preserve
it. For how many great rich men have we known suddenly made pore, some by
fire, some by water, some by theft, and many other ways? Was not Job the on
day the richest man that was in all the este land, and the morrow after had
utterly nothing? It is therefore as needful to pray our lord, to preserve that
he has given us, as to pray him to give it, for if he give, and do not
preserve it, we shall have no use of it.

Fourthly by this bread, which we be taught to ask in this petition, may be
understand the holy sacrament of the aultare, the very flesh and blood of our
savior Jesus Christ, as it is write in the.vi. chapter of saint John: John.
vi.
I am the bread of life, which came down from heaven. And the bread which I
will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. And in
this prayer, we desire, that the same may be purely mynistred and distributed,
to the comfort and benefit of all us, the true children of god. And that we
also may receive the same with a right faith and perfect charity, at all
times, when we do and ought to receive the same, so that we may be spiritually
fed therewith to our salvation, and thereby enjoy the life everlasting.

Finally by the bread, which our savior teaches us to ask in this petition,
is meant also the true doctrine of the word of god, which is the spiritual
bread that fedeth the soul. For as the body is nourished and brought up,
grows and feeds with bread and meat, so needs the soul even from our
youth to be nourished and brought up with the word of god, and to be fed with
it. And like as the body wol faint and decay, if it be not from time to time
releued and refresshed with bodily sustenance: even so the soul waxes feeble
and weak toward god, unless ye same be cherished and kept up with the word
of god, according to the saying of Christ: A man lives not with meat only,
(...)
but with every word that proceeds from the mouth of god. And surely the word
of god is the very comfort remedy, and health of ye soul. For if we have
adversity in this world, as poverty, sickness, imprisonment, and such other
miseries, where should we seek for comfort but at goddis word? If we think
our selves so holy that we be without sin, where should we find a glass to
se our sins in, but in the word of god? If we be so full of sins, that we
be like to fall into desperation, where can we have comfort and learn to know
the mercy of god, but only in goddis word? Where shall we have armure to
fight against our three great ennemies, the world, the flesh, and the devil?
Where shall we have strength and power to withstand them but as Christ did, in
and by ye word of god? And finally, if we have any manner of syknes or disease
in our souls, what medicine or remedy can we have, but that is declared in
goddis word? So that the word of god is the very bread of the soul, and
therefore as well for this bread of the soul, as for the blessed sacrament of
the aultare, also for the bread and daily sustenance of the body, our savior
Christ teaches us to pray in this fourth petition.

The fyft petition. And forgive us our trespasses / as we for give them that
trespass against us.
IN this petition we be taught a fruitful advertisement of man's estate in
this present life, which considered, no man ought to glory in him self, as
though he were innocent, and without sin, but rather that every good christen
man without exception, ought to knowledge him self to be a sinner, and that he
has need to ask forgyuenes of god for his sins, and to require him of his
mercy: for doubtless we daily commyt sin, which be commanded daily to ask
remyssion for our sins. Joan. i.
And saint John says in his epistle: If we say that we be without sin, we
deceive our selves, and truth is not in us.

Moreover it is to be noted, that we be taught to desire god to forgive us our
sins, like as we forgive them that trespass against us, so that if we
forgive in heart, god will forgive, and not otherwise, as by many places of
scripture may appear, first by express words, Man ^i.
Christ says: If you forgive men their offenses done against you, your
heuen-father will forgive you your offenses, and if you will not forgive them
that offend you, (...) viii.
be you assured your father will not forgive you your offenses. And in an other
place, when Peter came to our lord, and demanded of him how often he should
forgive his brother, which had offended him, and whether it was not suffycyent
to forgive him seven times: Our lord answered him and said, I tell the Peter,
that thou ought to forgive him not only seven times but seventy times seven
times, meaning thereby that from time to time we must continually forgive our
brother or neighbor, although he trespasseth against us never so often.

(...) viii.
And Christ also declares the same by a parable. There was (says Christ) a
king, which calling his servants unto a compte, and findinge, that one of
them should owe unto him the sum of ten thousand talentes, because he
had it not to pay, commanded that the said debtour, his wife, and his
children, and all that he had, should be sold: but wha^ the debtour came unto
the king and prayed him on his knees to have patience with him, promising him
to pay all, the king had pity of him, and forgave him the hole debt: it
fortuned afterward, that this man being thus acquitted, met with an other of
his fellows, that ought him but one hundredth pence, and with violence almost
strangled him, and said unto him: Pay that thou owe. And the said servant
his fellow fell upon his knees, and prayed him to have patience, promising to
pay all, which would not, but cast him into prison until all was paid. and
when the rest of his fellows seeing this cruelty, had told the king thereof, the
king forthwith sent for this cruel fellow, and said to him: O wicked man I
forgave the thy hole debt at thy suit and request, it should therefore have
besemid the, to have showed like compassion unto thy fellow, as I showed to
the. And the king sore displeased with this cruelty committed him to
tormentours, that should roughly and streitly handle him in prison, til he had
paid ye hole det.

Upon this parable Christ infers and says, Even so shall your heavenly
father do with you, if you will not forgive every one of you his brother even
from the heart. Thus it apereth plainly, that if we will be for given, if we will
escape everlasting damnation, we must put out of our heart al ra^cour, malice,
and will to revenge and, satisfy our own carnal affections referryng the
punishment of the offenders, which in their offenses have transgressed the
laws of god, or of the prince, to the order of justice, whereof under god, the
princes and rulers be mynysters in earth, In which doing we please god, so
that we utterly forgive our own private grudge and dyspleasure.

And if any paraduenture will think it to be an hard thing, to suffer and
forgive his enemy, which in word and deed has done him many displesures,
let him consider again, how many hard storms our savior Christ suffered
and abode for us, what were we when he gave his most precious life for us, but
horrible sinners and his ennmies? how mekely took he for our sake all rebukes,
mockes, byndyng, beating, crownyng with thorn, and the most opprobrious
death? It is undoubtedly above our frail and corrupt nature to love our
ennemies that do hate us, and to forgive them that do hurt and offend us: and
it is a deed of greatter perfection than man has of him self, but god that
requires it, will give grace that we may do it, if we ask and seek for it.
And therefore in this petition our savior Christ teaches us to ask this
grace of our heavenly father, that we may forgive our ennemies, and that he will
forgive us our trespasses, eue^ so as we forgive them that trespass against us.

It is further to be noted, that to forgive our brother his defaute, is also to
pray to god, that he will forgive him, and will not impute his offense to him
and to wyshe to him the same grace and glory, that we desire unto our selves,
and also our self when occasion shall come, to help him as we be bound to
help our christen brother.

And finally for as much as in the expounding and declaration of scripture, it
is convenient, and requisite to observe and follow this rule, that wha^ so ever
scripture speaks of any duetye to be done of one christen man to an other,
that than the same duty be so plainly and fully opened and set forth that
each man may hear his own duty to wched: so that both parties (that is to
say) as well he that is bound to forgive, as he which receives forgyuenes,
may indifferently know their duty and be hauyour, and according thereunto,
endeavor them self to do the same. For these causes it is expedient, that
like as in the former part of this petition, we have declared the part and
duty of him, which should for charities sake forgive, so to declare the part
and duty of them, to whom forgiveness should be made, lest evil doers and
naughty minded people, might by the former declaration take occasion stylle to
persevere in their naughtye minds and doings, and yet claim forgiveness of
their neighbor.

Wherefore ye shall understand, that forgyuenes before spoken of, is not so meant
in scripture, that by it justice or laws of princes should be broken,
condemned, or not executed. For although our savior Christ in this petition
does teach us to remitte and forgive all injuries and trespasses done against
us, yet he which has done the injury or trespass, is nevertheless bound to
aknowlege his faut, and to ask forgiveness therefore, not only of god, but of
him also whom he has offended, and to intend to do no more so. And furthermore
to recompense and make amends unto the parties, against whom he has
trespassed, according to his ability and power, and as the greuousenesse and
greatness of the offense requires. And in case he which has committed the
offense or trespass, be obstinate, and will not do these things before
rehearsed, which he is bound to do by the law of god: than may the party,
which finds him self grieved, notwithstanding any thing that is said before
in this petition, laufully and without offense of goddis commandementes ask
and seek recompense of such injuries, as be done to him, according unto the
order and provision of the laws of the realm, made in that behalf, so that
he always have an eye and respect unto charity, and do nothing for rancour or
malice, or for sinister affection, neither bear any hatred in his heart
toward him, whom he sueth, but only upon a zeal and love of the mayntenance
of justice, correction of vice, and reformation of the party that has
offended, remembringe always that he excede not, nor go beyond the limits and
bounds of this general rule, taught by our savior Christ in his gospel:
(...)
As ye would that other men should do unto you, even so do you unto them. For
this is the law and the prophets. And thus we christen folk, wayinge
forgyuenes on the one party, and the duty of him that is forgyuen on the
other party (as here now we be taught) shall the better know how to endeavor
our selves to observe both ways. And by these means se and understand more
perfectly, the agreement and intent of scriptures, which we be bound to
observe and follow.

The syxte petition. And let us not be led into temptation.
IT is to be noted first that there be two manner of temptations, whereof one
comes and is sent to us by god, who suffers those that be his, to be tempted
by one means or other, for their probation or trial, al be it he so assisteth
and aydeth them, in all such temptations, that he tourneth all at the end
unto their profit and benefit. For as the wise man says: Like as the oven
tries the potters vessel, Ec. xxviii.
so does temptation of trouble try the rightuous man. And with this manner of
temptation, god tempted sundry wise our holy father Abraham, he tempted also
Job with extreme poverty, horrible syckenes, and sudden death of his
children, and daily he tempts and proves all such as he loves.

The other manner of temptation comes chiefly of the devil, i. Pet. v.
which like a furyouse and a wood lion ragith and runs about perpetually
seking how he may devour us. And comes also of our own concupiscence, which
continually inclines and stireth us to evil, Jacob. i.
as saint James says, Every man is tempted drawn and entised by his own
concupiscence. This concupiscence is an inclination and prouate of our
inordinate nature to sin, which imperfection man has by the fall of Adam,
so that although original sin is taken away by baptism, and the dyspleasure
appeased betwyxte God and man, yet remains the dysorder and debate between
the soul and the flesh, which shall not be extincte but only by bodily
death. For there is no man so mortified, so sequestered from the world, and so
ravished in spirit, in devotion, or in contemplation, but that some
concupiscence is in him: how be it by goddis grace and mercy it reigns not,
nor is of god accounted for sin, nor is hurtful but only to them, that by
consent yield unto it. It will never cesse but one way or an other it will ever
assaut us, and if we do not fight with it, and resist it continually, it will
overcome us, and bring us into bondage, so that the devil by this our
concupiscence and our consent, all vice and sins be engendered, like as
between man and woman children be engendered, according to the saying of
saint James where he says: Jacob i.
Concupiscence when she does conceive, she brings forth sin, and that of
all sorts, that is to say, first acts and deeds, contrary to the laws of
god, and after that, use and custom of the same deeds, and at length blyndnes
and contempt. For so the wise man says: Pro. xviii.
The wicked man when he comes to the bottom of sin, sets naught thereby,
but blinded with evil custom, either thinks the sin that he uses to be no
sin, orels if he take it for syn, yet he carith not for it, but either upon
vain trust of the mercy of god (which is in deed no right trust, but a very
presumption) he will continue still in purpose to syn, orels upon vain hope of
long life, he will prolonge, differ, and delay to do penance for the same,
until the last end of his life. And so ofttimes prevented with sudden death,
dies without repentance. Wherefore considering how dangerous it is to fall into
sin, and how hard it is to arise: the chief and the best way is, to resist
with goddis help the first suggestion unto sin, and not to suffer it to
prevail with us, but as soon as may be, to put it out of our minds. For if
we suffer it to tarry any while in our hearts, it is great peril, lest that
consent and deed will follow shortly after.

Secondly that our savior Jesus Christ teaches not us in this syxt petition,
to pray unto god our father, that we should be clearly without al temptation:
but that he wol not suffer us to be led into temptation, that is to say, that
when we be tempted, he woll give us grace to withstand it, and not suffer us to
be overcome therewith, according whereunto saint Paul says: God is true and
faithful, i. Cor. ii.
and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we may bear, but he will so
moderate the temptation, that we may sustain and overcome it. And saint James
says: Jacob. i.
Think that you have a great cause to joy, when you be troubled with diverse
temptations. For the trienge of your faith brings patience, and patience
makes perfect works, so that you may be perfect and sound, lacking in
nothing. And almighty god also exhorts us, and calls upon us to fight
against temptations, Iaco. i.
saying: He that gets the victory against them, I shall give him to eat of
the tree of life. And again he says: Apo. ii.
He that ouercometh them, shall not be burte with the second death. And
saint Paul says: ii. Tim. ii.
No man shall be crowned, except be fight laufully, that is to say, except he
defend him self, and resist his enemies at all points to his power. And our
savior gives us a good courage to fight in this battle, John. xvi.
where he says: Be of good comfort, for I have overcome the world, that is
to say, I have had the victory of all sins and temptations, and so shall you
have, if the fault be not in your selves. For ye fight with an adversary,
which is already vanquyshed and overcome.

The seventh petition. But deliver us from evil.
IT is first to be noted, that like as in the syxte petition Christ taught us
to desire of our heavenly father, that we should not be overcome with
temptation, ne brought into sin, so now in this seventh and last petition,
he teaches us to pray him, that if by frailenes we fall in to the captivity
of the devil by sin, he will soon deliver us from it, not to let us
continue in it, not to let it take root in us, not to suffer sin to reign
upon us, but to deliver us free from it.

Sin is the exceeding evil, from the which in this petytion we desire to be
delivered: And though in this petito^ be also comprehended all evils in the
world, as syckenes, poverty, derth, with other like adversities, yet chiefly
it is to be understand of sin, which only of it self is evil, and ought
ever without condition to be eschued.

And as for other aduersyties, neither we can ne ought to refuse, when god
shall send them neither we ought to pray for the eschuyng of them, otherwise
than with this condition, if goddis pleasure so be. Many things we suffer in
this world, and take them for evil, but they be not evil of them self. All
affections, dyseases, punysshementes and torments of the body, all the
troubles of this world, and all adversities, be good and necessary
instruments of god for our salvation. For god him self (who can not say
other than truth) says: Those that I love, I chastise. Apoc i^. Hebr. xii.
And again the apostle says. He receives none, but whom he scourges. This
is time of scourgynge, and the time to come, is the time of rest, ease, and
bliss. And surely it is a great token, that we be in the favor of god, when
he does scourge us, and tries and fyneth us like gold in the fire, whiles we
be in this world. As contrary it is a great token of his indignation toward
us, to suffer us living evil, to continue in prosperity, and to have all
things after our will and pleasure, and never to trouble us or punyshe us
with adversity. Therefore our savior Christ Jesus (who knows what is best
for us) teaches us to pray and desire to be delivered, not chiefly from
worldly afflictions, trouble, and adversity, which god sends abundantly,
even to them, whom he best loves, and with whom he is best pleased: But the
evil, which we most chiefly should pray to be delivered from, is Sin,
which of it self is so evil, that in no wise god can be pleased therewith.

And because our ancient enemy the devil, who is the well and spring of
iniquity, and is not only him self an homicide, a liar, and an hater of the
truth from the beginning: but also is the very rote and occasion of all sin,
and the common prouoker and styrer of man to the same, and the letter and
hinderer of all virtue and goodness, because this ennemy never ceasseth, but
continually sercheth by all crafts and wyles to enduce us to sin, and so to
devour us, and to bring us thereby to everlasting damnation: Therefore like as
we desire here to be delivered from sin, so also we desire, that our heavenly
father will save us, and defend us from this evil, the causer of sin, that
is to say, the devil, and from his power and tyranny,, so that he should not by
his malice and gyles entice us and draw us into sin, whereby we might finally
be brought unto everlasting damnation. From the which also we pray here to
be delivered.

The salutation of the angel to the blessed virgin Mary.
HAyle Mary full of grace / the lord is with the, blessed art thou emonge
women, And blessed is the fruit of thy womb.
FOr the better understanding of this salutation of the angel, made to the
blessed virgin Mary, ye shall first consider, how it was decreed of the hole
trinity, That after the fall of our first father Adam (by which mankind was
so long in the great indignation of god, and exiled out of heaven) the second
person, the everlasting so^nne of the father everlasting, should take upon
him the nature of man, and so as he was perfect god should be perfect man, to
redeem mankind from the power of the devil, Luc. i.
and to reconcile the same again to his lord god. And for this purpose (as
saint Luce in his gospel declares) in the.vi. month after saint Elizabeth was
conceived, with saint John the Baptist, the angel Gabriel was sent from god,
into a city of Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin, which was despoused or
ensured to a man, whose name was Joseph, of the house of David, and the
virgins name was Mary. And when this angel came unto this said virgin, he
said these words: Hayle full of grace, the lord is with the, blessed art thou
among women. And when the virgin hearing these words, was troubled with
them, and mused with her self, what manner of salutation ti should be. The
angel said to her: Fear not Mary, be not abashed, for thou haste found
favor in the sight of god. Lo thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and shalt
bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name JESUS, he shall be great,
and shall be called the son of the highest. And the lord god shall give unto
him the seat of David, his father, And he shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever, And his kingdom shall have no end. Than said Mary to the aungelle:
How can this be done? for I have not knowledge of man. And the aungelle
answering said unto her: The holy ghost shall come from above in to the, and
the power of the highest shall ouershadowe the. And therefore that holy one,
that shall be borne of the, shall be called the son of god: And lo thy cousyn
Elyzabeth has also conceived a son in her old age, and this is the syxte
month sithe she conceived, which was called the bareyn woman: for there is
nothing impossible to god. To this Mary answered: Lo I am the handmayde of our
lord, be it done unto me as thou have spoken. And than forthwith upon the
departure of the angel. Mary being newly conceived with the most blessed
child JESUS, went up into the mountains with speed in to a city of Judah,
and came to the house of Zacharye, and saluted Elyzabeth. And as soon as
Elyzabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the child sprange in her womb, and
furthwith Elyzabeth was replenyshed with the holy ghost, and cried with a
great voice and said: Blessed art thou emonge women, and blessed is the
fruit of thy womb. And whereof comes this, that the mother of my lord
comes to me? For lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation was in my ears,
the child in my womb lept for joy. And blessed art thou that dyddest
believe, for all things that have been spoken to the from our lord, shall be
performed.

Secondly it is to be noted, that the angel Gabriell, which spoke to the
virgin, was an high angel, and an high messanger. And truly it was
convenient, that he should be so, for he came with the highest message, that
ever was sent, which was the entreaty and leage of peace between god and
man. And therefore the first word of his salutation, that is to ssye, Hayle, or
be joyful, was very convenient for the same. For he came with the message of
joy, and so said the other angel, which at the birth of our savior,
appeared to the shepherdes, Luc. ii.
I show to you (said he) great joy that shall be to all the people. And
surely consyderyng the effects that ensued upon his high message, all
mankind had great cause to joy. For man being in the indignation and
displeasure of god, was hereby reconciled, Man being in the bonds of the
devil, was hereby delivered, Man being exiled and banyshed out of heaven, was
hereby restored thither again.

These be such matters of joy and comfort to us, that there never was or
shall be nor can be any like. And not only for this purpose he began with this
high word of comfort, but also for he perceived that the virgin being alone,
would be much abashed and astonished at his maruailous and sodeine coming unto
her. And therefore he thought it expedient, first of all to utter the word of
joy and comfort, which might put away all fear from the blessed virgin. And
he called her Full of grace, by god endued so plentuously, because she should
conceive and bear him, that was the very plenytude and fulness of grace, the
lord of grace, by whom is all grace, and without whom is no grace. And this
is the syngular grace, by which she is called, not only the mother of man, but
also the mother of god.

Thirdly by these words, The lord is with the, is declared, why the angel
called her full of grace: for surely our lord is not with them, that be not in
grace, nor tarieth with them, that be void of grace and be in sin. For there
is a separation and dyuorce between the sinful soul and our lord, as the wise
man says: (...)
Perverse thoughts make a separation and a divorce from god.

Fourthly by these words, Blessed art thou emonge women, was meant, that there
was never woman so blessed. And truly she may well be called so, most blessed
among all women: for she had great and high prerogatives, which none other
woman ever had, has, or shall have. Is not this an high prerogative, that of
all women she was chosen to be mother to the son of god? And what excellent
honor was she put to, when, not withstandinge, the decree was made of his
nativity by the hole trinity, yet the thing was not done and accomplished
without or before her consent was granted? For the which, so solemn a
messanger was sent. And also how high grace was this, that after the defaute
made through the persuasion of the first woman our mother Eve, by whom Adam
was brought into disobedience, this blessed virgin was elect to be the
instrument of our reparation, in that she was chosen to bear the savior and
redemer of the world? And is not this a wonderful prerogative, to see a
virgin to be a mother, and conceive her child without sin? we may worthily
say, that she is the most blessed of all other women. And to thentent that all
good christen men should repute and take her so: Behold the providence of god,
that would by annother witness confirm the same, for even the very same
words that the angel spoke, the blessed matrone saint Elyzabeth spoke also,
and where the angel made an end, there she began.

The angel made an end of his salutation, with these words, Blessed art thou
among women, The blessed matrone began her salutation with the same words,
declarynge that she was inspired with the same spirit, that sent the angel,
and that they were both ministers to the holy Trinity, the one from heaven,
the other in earth. And afterward she added these words, saying: And blessed
is the fruit of thy womb. These be not the words of the angel but of saint
Elizabeth: For when the vyrgin Mary came to salute her, the said Elizabeth
being inspired with the holy ghost, and knowing that the virgin Mary was
conceived, spoke these words, of the fruit that the virgin should bring
forth.

And there is also an other wonderful thing to be noted, For as it appears in
the gospel, the child in saint Elizabethes womb, that is to say, saint John
Baptist (which yet had scant life) gave testimony to this Fruit, that this
fruit should save him and all the world, and as a prophet he lepte for joy
in his mothers womb, and although he could not than speak, yet nevertheless he
declared by such signs and tokens as he could, that blessed was the fruit of
that womb, And worthily called the fruit of her womb in that the substance of
the nature of man, which our savior Christ took upon him, was taken of the
substance and nature of the most blessed virgin, and in her womb. And so is
called the fruit of her womb. And well he may be called the blessed fruit,
which has saved us and given us life, contrary to the cursyd fruit, which
Eve gave to Adam, by which we were destroyed and brought to death: But
blessed is the fruit of this womb, which is the fruit of life everlasting.

And it is to be noted, that although this salutation be not a prayer of
petition, supplication, or request or suit: Yet nevertheless, ye church has
used to adioyn it to the end of the Pater noster, as an himne, or a prayer of
laud and praise, partly of our lord and savior Jesus Christ, for our
redemtion, and partly of the blessed virgin, for her humble consent given and
expressed to the angel, at this salutation. Lauds, praise, and thanks ar in
this Aue Maria, principally given and yielded to our lord, as to the autour of
our redemption: But herewithal the virgin lackith not her lauds, praise, and
thanks, for her excellent and singular virtues, and chiefly for that she
believed and humbly consented, according to the saying of the holy matrone saint
Elizabeth when she said, unto this virgin: Blessed art thou that dyddest give
trust and credence to the angels words, for all things that have been spoken
unto the, shall be performed.

The article of free will.
THe co^mandementes and threatninges of almighty god in scripture whereby man is
called upon, and put in remembrance, what god would have him to do, most
euydently do express and declare, that man has freewyll also now after the
fall of our first father Adam, as plainly appears in these places following.
Romans xii. i. Tim. iiii i. Joan. ii. Mat. xix.
Be not overcome of evil. Neglecte not the grace that is in the. Love not the
world. etc. If thou will enter into life, keep the commandementes. Which
undoubtedly should be said in vain, onelesse there were some faculty or
power left in man, whereby he may, by the help and grace of god (if he will
receive it, when it is offered unto him) understand his co^mandeme^tes, and
freely consent and obey unto them: which thing of the catholyke fathers, is
called Freewyll, Free will
which if we will describe, we may call it conveniently in all men, A certain
power of the will joined with reason, whereby a reasonable creature, without
constraint, in things of reason discerns and wills good and evil, but it
wills not that good, which is acceptable to god: except it be helped with
grace: but that which is ill, it wills of it self: and therefore other men
defyned frewyll in this wise: Frewyl is a power of reason and will, by which
good is chosen by the assistance of grace, or evil is chose^ without the
assistance of the same.

Howbeit the state and condition of freewylle, was otherwise in our first
parents, before they sinned, than it was either in them, or in their
posterity after they had sinned. For our first parents Adam and Eve,
until they wounded and ouerthrewe them self by sin, had so in possession
the said power of freewyll, by the most lyberall gift and grace of god their
maker, that not only they might eschew all manner of sin, but also know god,
and love him, and fulfylle all things apperteynyng to their felicity and
welthe. For they were made ryghtuous, and to the image and symilitude of god,
having power of frewyll (as Chrisostom says) to obey or disobey. So that by
obedience they might live, and by disobedience they should worthyly deserve to
dye. For the wise man affirms, that the state of them was of that sort in the
beginning: saying thus: E^l. xvi.
God in the beginning did create man: and left him in the hands of his own
counsel, he gave unto him his precepts and co^mandementes, saying: If thou
wylt keep the co^mandeme^tes, they shall preserve the: he has set before the
fire and water put forth thy hands to whether thou wylt, before man is life
and death, good and evil what him likes, that shall he have. From this most
happy state, our first parents falling by disobedience, most grievously hurted
them selves and their posterity. For besides many other evils, that came by,
ye transgression, the high power of man's reason, and fredome of will were
wounded and corrupted, and all men thereby brought in to such blyndnes and
infirmity, that they can not eschew sin, except they be illumined and made
free by an especial grace, that is to say, by a supernatural help and working
of the holy ghost, which although the goodness of god offers to all men, yet
they only enjoy it, which by their free will do accept and embrace the
same. Nor they also that be helped by the said grace, can accomplish and
perform things that be for their wealth, but with much labor and endeavor: so
great is in our nature the corruption of the first sin, and the heavy hurdein
bering us down to evil. For truly albeit the light of reason does abide, yet it
is much darkened, and with much difficulty both discern things yt be
inferior, and perteyne to their present life, but to understand and perceive
things that be spiritual, and perteyn to the everlasting life, it is of it
self unable. And so likewise although there remayn a certain fredom of will in
those things, which do perteyn unto the desires and works of this present
life, yet to perform spiritual and heavenly things, Frewyl of it self is
insufficie^t: and therefore the power of man's frewyl, being thus wounded and
decayed, has need of a physician to heal it, and an help to repair it, that
it may receive light and strength, whereby it may se, and have power to do those
godly and spiritual things, which before ye fall of Ada^, it was able and
might have done.

Ps. Cxviii.
To this blyndnes and infirmity of man's nature, procedyng of original sin,
the prophet David had regard, when he desired his eyes to be lightened of
almighty god that he might consider the meruaylous things that be in his law.
And also the prophet Hieremy, saying: Hele me O lord, and I shall be made hole.
Hier. xviii
Saint Augustine also plainly declares the same, saying: We conclude that
frewyll is in man after his fall, which thing who so denies is not a
catholic man: but in spiritual desires and works to please god, it is so
weak and feeble, that it can not either begin or perform them, onelesse by
the grace and help of god, it be prevented and helped. And hereby it appears,
that man's strength and will in all things, which be helthfull to the soul,
and shall please god* has need of grace of the holy ghost, by which such
spiritual things be inspired to men, and strength and constance given to
perform them, if men do not wylfully refuse the said grace offered unto them.

And likewise as many things be in the scripture, which do show freewylle
to be in man: so there be no fewer places in scripture, which do declare the
grace of god to be so necessary, that if by it freewyl be not prevented and
helped, it can neither do nor will any thing, ^n. xv.
good and godly. Of which sort be these scriptures following: without me ye
can do nothing. No man comes to me, John. vi. ii. Cor. iii.
except it be given him of my father. we be not sufficient of our self, as of
our self to think any good thing. According unto which scriptures, and such
other like, it follows, that free will, before it may will, or think any
godly thing, must be helped by the grace of Christ, and by his spirit be
prevented and inspyred, that it may be able thereto. And being so made able, may
from thensforthe work together with grace, and by the same sustained, helped,
and mainteyned, may do and accomplish good works, and avoid sin, and
persevere also, and increase in grace. It is surely of the grace of god only,
that first we be inspired and moved to any good thing: but to resyst
temptations, and to persyste in goodness and go forward, it is both of the
grace of god, and of our free will and endeavor. And finally after we have
perseuered to the end, to be crowned with glory therefore, is the gift and mercy
of god, who of his bountiful goodness has ordained that reward to be given
after this life, according to such good works as be done in this life by his
grace.

Therefore men ought with much diligence and gratitude of mind, to consider and
regard the inspirations and wholesome motions of the holy ghost, and to embrace
the grace of god, which is offered unto them in Christ, and moves them to
good things. And furthermore to go about by all means to show them self such,
as unto whom the grace of god is not given in vain, And when they do feel,
that not withstandinge their diligence, yet through their own infirmity,
they be not able to do that they desire, than they ought earnestly and with a
fervent devotion, and steadfast faith, to ask of him which gave the
beginning, that he would vouchesafe to perform it: which thing god woll
undoubtedly grant, according to his promise, to such as persevere in
calling upon him. For he is naturally good, and wills al men to be saved,
and cares for them, and prouydeth al thing, by which they may be saved,
except by their own malice they woll be evil, and so by rightuous judgment of
god, perish and be lost. For truly men be to them selves the autours of
sin and damnation. God is neither autour of sin, nor the cause of
damnation. And yet does he most ryghtuousely damn those men, that do with
vices corrupt their nature, which he made good, and do abuse the same to
evil desires against his most holy will. Wherefore men be to be warned, that
they do not impute to god their vice, or their damnation, but to them selves,
which by freewyl have abused the grace and benefits of god.

All men be also to be monisshed and chiefly preachers, that in this high
matter, they lokynge on both sides, so attempre and moderate them selves,
that neither they so preach the grace of god, that they take away thereby
freewylle, Nor on the other side so extol free will, that injury be done to
the grace of god.

The article of Justification.
FOr the more clear understanding of this article following, it is to be noted
that all men after the fall of Adam, naturally descendyng and coming of him,
be borne in original sin, that is to say, they lack that original justice
and innocence wherewith Adam in his creation was endued, and which also all his
posterity should have had if he through his disobedience, and breakyng of the
commandment of god, had not lost the same from him self, and all his
posterity. And further also they be borne with concupiscence, whereof spring
unlawful desires, repugnant and contrary unto the laws of god, and be guilty
to everlasting death and damnation, from the which they can in no wise be
delivered by any strength or power that is in them, but rather fall daily into
further displeasure of god, by committyng and addyng of many actual sins.

Wherefore to the intent, that man might be delivered out of this wretched and
miserable state, whereunto he had brought him self, and might recover again
the same things that were given unto him in his first creation, and thereby
atteyne the everlasting bliss in heaven, it pleased almighty god of his great
and infinite mercy and goodness, to send his own only begotten son, the
second person in trinity, to take upon him the nature of man, and therein to
work the mystery of our redemtion, that is to say, to deliver us from the
captivity of the devil, sin, and damnation, and to be the very mean of our
reconciliation to god, and of our justification. And surely this reconciliation
of mortal man to the favor of god immortal, did necessarily require such a
mediator between them, as had in him self the perfect nature of them both,
which is the very property of a mean between two, to be partener with both
them, between whom he takes upon him to be a mean. For if he be holely joined
with the one and clearly separated from the other: Than he is not mete to be a
mean, or mediator between two, which be at debate and enmity. Wherefore our
savior Christ being naturally god, took upon him the nature of man, that he
might thereby be conuersaunt among men, and by his death redeem them, and yet he
still retained and kept his godhead, and was both god and man together. For if
he had been man only, and not god, than his death could not have been a worthy
and sufficient satisfaction for sin, to the justice of god. And if he had been
only god and not man, than he by his bodily conversation, could not have
called us again to god, nor suffered and died bodily for us. And this
property of a mediator saint Paul considering writes to Timothe, That there
is but one mediator between god and man which is Christ Jesus, ^ Tim ii.
meaning thereby, that because he only had both the natures in him, therefore
he only, and none other but he, was able to be a sufficient mediator and
mean of our reconciliation to god, and of our justification.

And for a further declaration, how and by what means, we be made partakers of
this benefit of justification. It is to be noted, that this word
Justification, as it is taken in scripture, signifies the making of us
rightuous before god, where before we were unrighteous, as when by his grace we
convert unto him, and be reconciled into his favor, and of the children of ire
and damnation, we be made the children of god, and inheritours of everlasting
life that by his grace we may walk so in his wais that finally we may be
reputed and taken, as just and rightuous in the day of judgment, and so
receive the everlasting possession of the kingedome of heaven. And albeit god
is the principal cause, and chief worker of this justification in us, without
whose grace no man can do no good thing, but following his free will in the state
of a sinner, increases his own injustice, and multiplieth his sin: Yet so
it pleases the high wisdom of god, that man prevented by his grace (which
being offered, man may if he will refuse or receive) shall be also a worker by
his free consent, and obedience to the same, in the atteinyng of his own
justification, and by goddis grace and help, shall walk in such works, as be
requisite to his justification, and so continuing come to the perfect end
thereof, by such means and ways, as god has ordained.

Wherein it is to be considered, that although our savior CHRIST has offered
him self upon the cross, a sufficient redemption and satisfaction for the
sins of all the world, and has made him self an open way and enter unto god
the father for all man only by his worthy merit and deseruynge, and willing
all men to be saved, calls upon all the world, without respect of persons,
to come and be partakers of the ryghtuousnesse, peace, and glory, which is in
him: yet for all this benignity and grace showed universally to ye hole world,
none shall have the effect of this benefit of our savior Christ, and enjoy
everlasting salvation by him: but they that take such ways to atteyne the
same, as he has taught and appointed by his holy word, in such order, manner,
and form, as here follows: that is to say, First as touching all them,
which be of age, and have the use of natural reason before they be christened,
the will of god is, that all such (if they will be saved) shall at the heryng
of his blessed word give steadfast faith and assente thereunto, as saint Paul
says: (...). xi.
He that comes to god must believe: and by that faith grounded on the truth of
the word of god, being taught both of the threatenings of god, against
sinners, and also of the great goodness and mercy of god, offered to mankind in
our savior and redemer Christ Jesus, they must conceive an hearty sorrow and
repentance for their sins, with a sure trust to have forgyuenes of them, by
the merytes and passion of our savior Christ. And ioyninge thereunto a full
purpose to amend their life, and to commit sin no more, but to serve god
al their life after, they must than receive the sacrament of baptism. And
this is the very plain ordinary way, by the which god has determined, that
man being of age, and coming to christendom, should be justified. For as for
infantes, it is to be believed, that their justification is wrought, by the
secret operation of the holy ghost in their baptism, they being offered in
the faith of the church.

And this Justification, whereof we have hitherto spoken, may be called the
first Justification, that is to say, our first coming into goddis house, which
is the church of Christ, at which coming we be received and admitted, to be
of the flock and family of our savior Christ, and be professed and sworn to
be the servants of god: and to be soldiers under Christ, to fight against
our ennemies the devil, the world and the flesh. Of which enemies if it
chance us, after our baptism to be overthrown, and cast into mortal sin,
than is there no remedy, but for the recovering of our former estate of
Justification, which we have lost, to arise by penance, wherein proceeding in
sorrow and much lamentation for our sins, with fasting, alms prayer, and
doing all such things, at the least in true purpose and will, as god
requires of us we must have a sure trust and confidence in the mercy of god,
that for his son our savior Christis sake, he will yet forgive us our
sins, and receive us unto his favor again, and so being thus restored to our
justification, we must goo forward in our battle aforesaid, in mortifienge
our concupiscence, and in our daily spiritual renouation, in following the
motions of the spirit of Christ in doing good works, and absteining from
sin, and all occasions thereof, being armed with faith, hope, and charity, to
the intent we may atteyne our final justification, and so be glorified in the
day of judgment, with the reward of everlasting life.

Wherefore it is necessary for the keeping and holding of this Justification,
ones conferred and give in baptism, or recovered again by penance, through the
mercy of our savior Christ, and also for the encreasynge of the same
justification, and fynall consummation thereof, to take good head, and to watch
that we be not deceived by the false suggestion and temptation of our gostly
enemy the devil, who as saint Peter says, i. Petri. v.
goes about like a roaring lion, seking whom be may devour.

And it is no doubt, but although we be ones justified, yet we may fall there
fro, by our own free will and consenting unto sin, and following the desires
thereof. For albeit the house of our conscience be ones made clean, and the
foul spirit be expelled from us in baptism, or penance: yet if we wax idle
and take not head, he will return with seven worse spirits, and possess us a
gain. And although we be illuminat, and have tastid the heavenly gift, and be
made partakers of the holy ghost: yet may we fall and displease god, Wherefore as
saint Paul says: He that stands, ^. Corin. x
let him take bid that he fall not.

And here all fantastical imagination, curyous reasoning, and vain trust of
predestination, is to be laid apart. And according to the plain manner of
speaking and teaching of scripture, in innumerable places, we ought evermore to
be in dread of our own frailty, natural pronitie to fall to sin, and not
to assure our self, that we be elected any other wise, than by feling of
spiritual motions in our heart and by the tokens of good and virtuous living, in
following the grace of god, and persevering in the same to the end. ii. Petri.
ii.
And this saint Peter exhorts us to make our vocation and election sure and
stable. And Christ says: Ma. xxii.
He that perseuereth unto the end, shall be saved. And in revelation of saint
John: Be faithful unto death, Apoc. ii.
and I shall give the the crown of life. Wherefore when we be ones elected, and
admitted unto goddis service (as is aforesaid) and have received our
justification in baptism, or be restored thereunto by true penance, than must
we continually walk after Christ, bearyng our cross, and encreasinge in his
grate by good works, and so doing proceed, go forward and encreace in our
Justification, according to the saying of saint John: He that is just, let him
be more justified. For as the grace of god and the gifts thereof, that is to
say, faith, repentance, dread, hope, charity, with other fruits of the holy
ghost do encreace in us, so do we wax and encreace in our Justification.

And therefore it is plain, that not only faith, as it is a distinct virtue or
gift by it self, is required to our justification: but also the other gifts
of ye grace of god, with a desire to do good works, proceeding of ye the same
grace. And where as in certain places of scripture, our justification is
ascribed to faith without any further addition or mention of any other virtue
or gift of god: it is to be understand of faith in the second acception, as
before is declared in the article of faith wherein the fear of god, repentance,
hope, and charity, be included and comprysed, all which must be joined
together in our Justification: So that no faith is sufficient to Justification
or salvation, but such a faith, as works by charity, as is plainly
expressed by saint Paul in his epistle to the Galathians. And that also our
good works, Gala. v.
which we do, being ones justified, by faith and charity, avail both to the
conservation and perfection of the said virtues in us, and also to the encreace
and end of our Justification and everlasting salvation.

And although we can never be justified without these gifts of the holy
ghost, faith, repentance, hope, charity, with desire and study to bring forth
good works: Yet it is to be understand that nevertheless we be justified
Gratis, that is to say, freely, for as much as all gifts or works, whereby
our justification is wroughte and accomplyshed, come of the free mercy and
grace of god, and not of our deserving: So that our pride and glory in our
self, and our own worthynes, is utterly excluded. For we be not able of our
selves, as of our selves, not as much as to think any good thing, but our
ablenes and our sufficiency is of god, which gives us the said gifts of his
own inestimable goodness and does also assiste us with his holy spirit, and
strength us, to keep his commandementes.

And further where our keeping of them is imperfect, and even in the best men
wants a great deal of that duetye to god, which they ought and be bound to
do: yet almighty god of his mere mercy and goodness, accepts the same as a
perfect fulfillynge of them for our savior Christis sake, which has
fulfilled the law for us, and is the end and perfection of the law, to all
that truly believe in him. And so we have all Gratis, that is to say of his
grace, and not of our worthiness, or any merit goinge before grace, but
receiving all of god, as saint Paul says: i. Cor. iii.
what have thou that thou have not received? we refer all unto his goodness
and mercy, by the which we both come unto the beginnynge of our justification,
and do proceed and go forward in the same, and finally atteyne the end
thereof, and be brought to everlasting life, unto the which the very way
appointed by Christ (whose word no man may change) is, to keep and observe
the co^mandementes of god, for he says expressly: If thou wylt enter into
life, Math. xix.
keep the commandementes: that is, apply thy hole study and affection to walk
in the law of god, wherein if thou persevere, thou shall be saved. And so after
thy justification, thou shalt be glorified according to the order of god,
which saint Paul speaks of when he says: Quos iustificauit, Illos
glorificauit.

The article of good works.
AL preaching and learning of the word of god in Christis church, ought to
tend to this end, that men may be induced, not only to know god, and to
believe and trust in him, but also to honor and serve him with good works
wrought in faith and charity, and utterly to forsake the works of sin and
the flesh, which who so ever do commit (except they repent and amend by
penance) they shall not (as saint Paul says) inherit the kingdom of god.

And that holy scripture goth to this point, to persuade men to live well, and
to do good works saint Paul testifies saienge unto Timothe: All scripture
written by the inspiration of god, (...)
is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct, that the
servant of god may be perfect, and made apt unto every good work. And where
as we speak of good works, it is to be understand, that we mean not only of
outward corporal acts and deeds. but also and rather of al inward spiritual
works, motions, and desires, as the love and fear of god, joy in god, godly
meditations and thoughts, patience, humility, and such like. And also it is
to be understand, that by good works, we mean not the superstitiouse works
of men's own invention, which be not commanded of god, nor approved by his
word, in which kind of works many christen men, and specially of them that
were lately called religious (as monks, friars, nuns, and such other) have
in times past, put their great trust and confidence. Nor yet we mean not of
such moral acts, as be done by the power of reason and natural will of man,
without faith in Christ: which albeit of their own kind they be good and by
the law and light of nature, man is taught to do them, and god also many times
does temporally reward men for doing the same, yet they be not meritoriouse,
nor auaylable to the atteynynge of everlasting life, when they be not done in
the faith of Christ, and therefore be not accounted among the good works,
whereof we do here entreat: but we speak of such outward and inward works
as god has prepared for us to walk in, and be done in the faith of Christ,
for love and respect to god, and can not be brought forth only by man's
power, but he must be prevented and helped thereto by a special grace.

And these works be of two sorts, for some be such as men truly justified,
and so continuinge, do work in charity of a pure heart, and a good conscience
and an unfeigned faith: Which works although they be of them selves unworthy,
imperfect and insufficient: yet for as much as they be done in the faith of
Christ, and by the virtue and merits of his passion, their vnperfectues is
supplied: the merciful goodness of god accepts them, as an observation and
fulfillinge of his law, and they be the very service of god, and be
meritoryouse toward the atteyninge of everlasting life. And these be called
the works and fruits of righteousness.

Other works there be, which be not so perfect as these, and yet they be done
by the grace of god in faith and good affection of heart toward god, as those
be, which me^ that have been in deadly sin and by grace turn to god, do work
and bring forth upon respect and remorse, that they have for their offenses
done against god. And these may be called proprely the works of penance. As
for exaumple: when a sinner hearing or remembering the law of god, is moved by
grace, to be contrite and sorye for his offenses, and begins to lament his
estate, and to fall to prayer and other good deeds, seking to avoid the
indignation of god, and to be reconciled in to his favor: These works come of
grace, but yet this man is not to be accounted a justified man, but he is yet
in sekinge remission of his sins, and his justification, which the anguishe
of his own conscience tells him, that he yet wants, but he is in a good
way, and by these means does enter into justification, and if he do proceed
and with hearty devotion seek for further grace, he shall be assured of
remission of his sins, and atteine his justification, and so be made able and
mete to walk in the very pure service of god, with a clean conscience, and to
bring forth the foresaid works of righteousness in Christ, which he can not
do, before he be justified.

And that such works of penance, as we have spoken of, be required to the
atteining of remission of sins and justification: It is very evident and
plain by scripture, as when our savior Christ says: Be penitent, and believe
the gospel, Marc i.
that is to say, First be contrite, and knowledge your sins, and than receive
the glad tidinges of remission of your sins. And saint John Baptist preached
penance, and made a way unto Christ, and taught men which came unto him, what
they should do to come unto Christ, and to have remission of sins by him, as
it is written in the third chapter of Luke, and specially that they, which be
ones christened, and afterward fall from the grace of god by mortal syn, can
not recover their justification without penance, it is plain by the saying of
saint Peter unto Simon Magus, where he says: Act. vii.
Do penance for this thy wyckendnes, and pray god, if peradventure this
thought of thy heart, may be forgyuen unto the.

And truly this way and form of doctrine is to be observed, which is the
very trade of scripture, wherein men be taught, first to leave sins, and to
return by works of penance unto god, and that than they shall receive
remission of sins and justification. And although such works of penance be
required in us, toward the atteining of remission of sins and
justification: yet the same justification and remission of sins is the free
gift of god, and conferred unto us, Gratis, that is to say, of the grace of
god, whereby we doing such things, and having such motions and works of
penance, be prepared and made more apt, to receive further grace of remission
of our sins and justification.

And it is not inconvenient that such things should through grace be done by
us first, and yet it should be said, that we receive the said gift freely. For
Christ says in the revelation of saint John, Qui sitit ueniat, Apo. xxii.
and qui uult, accipiat aquam uitae gratis: He that is thristy, let him come,
and he that woll, let him take the water of life freely. Where he affyrmeth
this gift of god to be freely given and conferred, and yet there is required
some labor before as to have a will and desire to come, which coming can not
be without arising by faith and penance, and proceeding in the same, and so to
take the water of life, yt is to say justification, through our savior Christ:
which ones received in baptism or after baptism being recovered by penance,
although man daily do offend and fall into diverse venial sins, by reason of
his infirmity and weakness, and therefore has need of continual and daily
repentance: Yet as long as he consents not to deadely sin, he leseth not
the state of his justification, but remains still the child of god. And being
in that state, has power by goddis grace, dwelling in him, to do such works,
as by acceptance of god through Christ, be compted works of righteousness, and
do serve for the preservation and increase of his farther justification, and be
appointed by goddis most gracious promise, to have everlasting reward in
heaven. Which both inward and outward works be not only the declaring of
our faith and confidence in god, and of the grace which we have received: but
also a continual exercise, nourishment, preservation, increase, and perfection
of the same. For if we should not, after that we have professed Christ, apply
our will to work well according to our said profession, than should we fall
from the grace of god, and the estate of righteousness and justification, which
we were ones set in, and become again the servants of sin. And as saint
Peter says: we should be in wors case, ii. Pet. ii.
than we were before we received the knowledge of Christ.

And that we encreace in grace by workynge in the grace of god ones received,
it appears by the word of our savior Christ, where he says: Omni habenti
dabitur and abundabit. Meaning thereby, that who so ever uses well the grace of
god, which is offered unto him al ready, he shall have more, and wax plentyfull
in grace. wherefore as we continue and persevere in good works, so more and
more we go forward and proceed in our justification, and in encreasyng the
same, whereunto saint Peter exhorts us, saying: ii. Pet. ^.
Fall not from the sure estate wherein ye be set, but increase and grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our lord and savior Jesus Christ.

And to ascribe this dignity unto good works, it is no derogatio^ to the
grace of god. Forasmoch as it is to be confessed, that al good works come of
the grace of god. And our merits, as saint Augustine says, be but the gifts
of god, and so in our self we may not glory nor look back on our own
worthiness or dignity, which is naught, as of our self: but of the only
acceptance of gods mercy. And therefore we must as saint Paul says: Phili.
iii.
Extend our self to that which is before us, to the reward of the heavenly
calling, which is in Christ, and stille proceed in good works, knowing our
selves to be evermore greatter debtours to god for his grace. And when we have
done all, which we be bydden do, the scripture teaches us to say, that we be
unprofitable servants: Luc. xvii.
because that what so ever we have done, it is but our duty, nor we have done
nothing but that we have received of his gift to do, and that to our profit
and not to his. But yet must we take heed, that seeing we have received the
grace of god, we be not found unprofitable servants in this wise, that is to
say, idell servants: to whom it shall be said: Cast out the unprofitable
servants, Ma. xxv.
into the outward darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashyng of tethe. And
saint Paul also exhorts saying: ^ Cor. ii.
Receive not the grace of god in vain: that is to say: work well: For the
grace of god is given you to that intent, and to that end we are redeemed by
Christ, and delivered from the thraldom of sin, and captivity of the
devil, that we should serve god, (...)
as Zachary says, in holiness and righteousness before him all our life. And in
an other place saint Paul says: The grace of god has appeared to bring
salvation unto all men, teaching us, that we renouncing all ungodliness, and
worldly desires, should live in this present world sobrely, justly, and
deuoutely, loking for the blessed hope and apperance of the glory of the great
god, and our savior IESV CHRIST: Which gave him self for us, to redeem us
from all wykednes, and to cleanse unto him self, a special people which
should be studious folowers of good works. In which godly sentence of saint
Paul, besides other great plenty of fruitful lerning and edifienge, he
touches in three words, all the good works of a true christen man, where he
says Soberly, Justly, and Devoutly. For in this word Soberly, he
comprehends all abstinence and temperance, and our duty touching our body.
And in saying, Justly, he contains al works of charity toward our
neighbor, with due obedience to our princes, heads and governors. And in
this word Devoutly, he concludes all our works spiritual which be done
immediately unto god, as prayer, thinkinge of god, desiringe of his glory. etc.

And unto all these works, ought we most diligently with all labor and care
to apply our will, for these effects and ends, that is to say, the glory of
god, the profit of our neighbor, and our own merit, that we may show our
self thankful servants to our savior Jesus Christ, and to be the very people
of god, and that he may be glorified in us, that his church may be edified by
our exaumple, that we may avoid falling into temptation and sin, that we
may escape the scourge of god, that the grace of god and the gifts thereof may
encreace, and be made perfect in us, that we may make our election stable and
sure, that we may attain everlasting life, being found fruitful in the day
of judgment, where every man shall receive according to his works.

Of prayer for souls departed.
FOr as much as due order of charity requires, and the book of Machabeis,
and diverse ancient doctors plainly show, that it is a very good and
charitable deed, to pray for souls departed. And for as much as such usage,
has continued in the church so many years even from the beginning: men ought
to judge and think, the same to be well and profitable done. And truly it
stands with the very order of charity, a christen man to pray for a another
both quycke and dead, and to commend one an other in their prayers to goddis
mercy, and to cause other to pray for them also, as well in masses and
exequies, as at other times, and to give alms for them, according to the usage
of the church, and ancient opinion of the old fathers: trusting that these
things, do not only profit and avail them, but also declare us to be
charitable folk, because we have mind and desire to profit them, which
notwithstanding they be departed this present life, yet remain they still,
members of the same mystical body of Christ, whereunto we pertein.

And here is specially to be noted, that it is not in the power or knowledge of
any man, to limit and dispense, how much, and in what space of time, or to what
person particularly the said masses, exequies, and suffrages do profit and
avail: Therefore charity requires, that who so ever causes any such masses,
exequies, or suffrages to be done, should yet (though their intent be more for
one then for an other) cause them also to be done for the universal
congregation of christen people quycke and dead, for that power and knowledge
before rehearsed pertains only unto god, which alone knows the measures and
times of his own judgment and mercies.

Furthermore because the place where the sowles remain, the name thereof, the
state and condition which they be in, be to us uncertain, therefore these with all other such things, must also be left to almighty god, unto whose mercy it
is meet and convenient for us, to commend them, trustyng that god accepts
our prayers for them reseruyng the rest holy to god, unto whom is known
their estate and condition, And not we to take upon us neither in the one
part, ne yet in the other, to give any fond and temerarious judgment, in so
high things, so far passing our knowledge.

Finally it is much necessary, that all such abuses as heretofore have been
brought in, by supporters and mainteners of the papacye of Rome, and their
complicies, concerning this matter, be clearly put away, and that we therefore
abstain from the name of purgatory, and no more dispute or reason thereof.
Under color of which, have been aduansed many fond and great abuses, to make
men believe that through the bishop of Romes pardons, souls might clearly be
delivered out of it, and released out of the bondage of sin. And that masses
said at Scala celi, and other prescribed places pha^tasied by me^, did there
in those places more profit the souls, them in an other. And also that a
prescribed number of prayers, sooner than other (though as devoutly said) should
further their petition sooner: yea specially if they were said before one image
more than an other, which they phantasied. Al these and such like abuses be
necessary utterly to be abolished and extinguished.

This book bound in paper boordes or claspes, not to be sold above.xvi. d.

IMPRINTED at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Barthelet printer to the kings
hyghnes, the.XXIX. day of May, the year of our Lord M.D.XLIII.

CVM priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


