Vox Graculi, OR Jack Davves PROGNOSTICATION.

NO less wittily, then wondrously rectified, for the Elevation of all Vanity,
Villainy, Sin, and Surquedrie sublimate, keeping quarter in the Courts,
Cities, and Countries, of all Christendom; For this year 1623.

Saepe malum hoc vobis praedixit ab aethere Cornix. Published by Authority.



TO THE GENTLEmen READERS, J wish no worse, then white Boots, and wet WEATHER.
GAllants, (and yet I hope no Gulls neither) As on a time I sat musing on the
very verticke point of Hie-gate-hil, (with as little coin in my Pocket, and as
much cunning in my Craneon, as most of our Starre-gazers have) To make
experiment of my skill, if it could reach so high, as to take the just Altitude
of the Blindmans Bottle-ale at Holloway. I spied such a cluster of Knaves below
in the valley, (like so many Danske Crows summoned on Dover sands against a
storm) as that by my Astrolabe I began to collect; That this Producing more
wonders then Plato's Mirabilis Annus.
Year would prove intemperate, by reason of an extreme heat in Summer;
insomuch that the stones in Cheapside shall be so hot, that diverse
Steeletto-bearded Scape-thrifts shall fear to go from Paul's to the Counter
in the Poultrie: Whereupon I betook me to my Ephimerides, and erecting a figure,
have found such strange Accidents to fall out this year (Mercury being Lord
and predominate in the house of Fortune) that many fools shall have full
Bellies, and crammed Coffers; when wise men shall walk up and down with
hungry stomachs* and empty pockets: and that many (who have newly buried
their Sires, and leap*t into their Lands, before they be come to their wits)
shall this year drown many an Acre of their Ancestors, in the bottom of a
wine-seller; and bury their Quae male parta, male dilabuntur.
Demesnes in the Bellies of Brothell houses: Moreover, if Jupiter were not
joined with Mercury in a more favorable aspect, Butchers wines should have
little or naught to do all Lent, but ride out of town with their Iourneymen,
and provide Pricks against Easter: Seeing therefore the wonders that are like
to ensue this succeeding year, I have taken upon me (for the beneficial
content of all my Countrymen) to complie this Prognostication, discoursing and
discovering briefly the disposition of the four Quarters of the year 1623.
the Ecclipses both of Sun and Moon, with their dangerous and subsequent
effects: by which (if Pisces play not the Porter) many poor men, wanting
money, are like to fast on Sundays for Lack of food; and such as have no
Shoes, to go barefoot; if certain devout Cobblers prove not the more
propicious: Yet Astrology is not so certain, but that it may fail: and
therefore diverse Ale-stufft-beleeuing Hostesses, may perhaps chalk up more
this year, then shall by their Customers be wiped out in two years after; But
V. P. for that: Monedula capiet muscas, and digest them as easily, as some
Churchmen do two livings, and never surfeit on them neither. Now as touching
my Dedication; I was at first half way suggested to have culled out some
Churchwarden or other for my Maecenas, who perhaps would have bid me once a
year to dinner, or have fisted me with Forty-pence out of the poore-mans Box:
But in the very rumination on this merry-thought, steps in a good Star, and
plainly told me, that Cum insipientibus ludere, insipidum est. Therefore, with
the rest of my weather-beaten brethen, I must needs conclude, that Sapiens
dominabitur astris.

Your unparalleled Practitioner in Astrology, I. D.

Health to all my friendly Acquaintance.
ME thinks I hear you whisper (Sirs) that I
Present you with a piece of Beggerie,
Or concealed Craving: And that here I show
More Wit than's good: what would you have me do?
Use Citty-fashion? heard you with brave speaking,
And make the nearest show, at nearest breaking?
If Poverty be it, you so much hate;
O pardon that; for it is the Hen quanta Poeta patiunturt
Muses Fate.
It Is better beg an alms, then fall to Yet Viro esurienti, necesse est
furari, says Suidas.
stealing;
And worse to be dishonest, then Appare quod es, aut esto quod appares. Aug.
plaine-dealing.
The hide-bound Earth, of all relief me bars,
I Am feign to pick a living from the Stars:
And that is the mighty Motive, which excites me
To this Attempt. Acceptance, full requites me
In amplest measure, and contents me best:
But (faith) I Am poor: You may conceive the rest.
Of the Ecclipses that shall happen in the year 1623. to the wonderful
amazement of the beholders.
IF we may credit the authentical Censures of Albumazar and Ptolomey, about
the circumuolutions of celestial Bodies, whose influence does excitate and
procure perpetual Mutability in this lower Region: we shall find, that the
Moon this year shall be ecclipsed; which shall happen in one of the twelve
Months, and in some one of the four Quarters of the year, whose dozen of
points, as they shall be totally darkened, so the effects shall follow most
strange and wondrous. For Cancer being the sole house of the Moon, does
presage, That this year, fruits shall be rauenously devoured by Caterpillars;
as Petifoggers, Brokers, and Flatterers, who feeding on the sweat of other
men's brows, shall greatly blemish the Beauty of the Spring of Goodness, and
disparage the forward growth of all wholesome and hottest herbs, unless some
Northerly blast of Heavens vengeance, clear the plants of suc^ Catterpillers,
with a sweeping plague. But Cancer being a liquide sign, and chief
Water-Baylife over Floods and Streams, it foresheweth, that Fishmongers (if
they be not narrowly looked unto) shall go down as far as Grauesend in
Wherries to forestall the Market, to the great prejudice of the poor, who all
Lent long do partly rely on the benefit of Saltfish and red Herring.
Moreover, it signifies, that Brewers shall make havoc of Thames water, and
put more liquor then they ought amongst their Malt; to the utter undoing of
certain red-nos'd Ale-Knights, whose morning draughts of strong liquor, is a
sufficient Baricado against cold weather; a lamentable case, if it be not
looked into, and prevented by some special Supplication to the strong
Coppernation, and worshipful Company of Ale-cunners. But in this we have great
hope, that because the Effects cannot surpass the Cause, that diverse Tapsters
shall trust out more in a moment, then they can get in, in a month; and
although they fill their Iugges with frothy emptiness, yet for want of true
dealing shall they die in the Brewers debt. Thus much for the watery Sign of
Cancer: And because this Eclipse is like to play vnderboard, and to be little
visible in our Horizon, though it will have great operation in it, I pass it
over with this prouiso to all Seafaring men, that they carry more shirts then
one with them a Shipboard, left to their great labor they bestow many hours
in searching slike-wormes on the hatches.

Of the Eclipse of the Sun.
THe Eclipse of the Sun, according to A learned Author in the Antipodes.
Demogorgons opinion, is like to produce many hot and pestilent infirmities,
especially amongst Sumners and Petifoggers, whose faces being combust with many
fiery inflammations, shall prognosticate the scarcity (that by their devout
drinking) is like to ensue of Barley, if violent surfets sweep not away
speedily such devouring Maultwormes.

There are many also who are like to be troubled with such hot rheumes in
their heads, by walking the purlewes, that their hair shall fall off without
the help of a The Pockes* a sharp shauer.
Barber; and such hot agues shall reign this year, with strange fevers and
calamities, that if Sol were not placed in a cold Sign, Renish wine would
mount to tenpence a Quart, before the latter end of August: But some few good
and auspicious Planets being retrograde, foretells, that Lemmans this year
shall be plenty, insomuch that many shall use them to Bed-ward, for the
qualifying of their hot and inflamed stomachs.

By all coniecturall arguments, the influence of Mars this year shall be so
violent, that here in our Clime, great quarrels shall be stirred up between
man and man, especially in cases of Law: Muli se mutuo scabunt. Cic.
Justice and Gentry shall conniue with each other, and coin shall
out-countenance the iustest cause.

The dissentious Corid^n shall sell his Coat to strive for a straw, and
Lawyers laugh such fools out of their Livings, as cannot keep their seditious
spirits from wronging their neighbors.

Further, there will be certain fond Sects of Religion, who are like to pester
the Commonweal; as sanctimonious selfe-Conceiters, holy White Devils.
Counterfeits, whose profession and practice dwell as far a sunder, as Dives
did from Lazarus, when he cried out for water to cool his tongue; these, I say,
shall bandy themselves against Ecclesiastical Authority, and be ready to
outstare civil Government, were it not that Saturn with a frowning
influence, did menace them with the strangling evil.

But whereas the Sun is darkened but by digits, and that upon the
South-points, it presageth great miseries to Southerly Countries; for there
shall Friars and Monks, so heat themselves this year with confessing of
Harlots, that their crowns shall grow bald of their own accord, to the utter
impouerishing of all Barbers.

Many brave Spirits, this year, and men of high merit, shall be so well
respected, as that for their magnanimous atchieuements, they shall be
recompensed with a Date obolum Belisario, quim in^^dia, non ^utpa caec^uit.
Belisarian alms, and have the eyes of their Reputation, popt out by the
infectious fingers of Envy and base Neglect, and so cast out of favor, as
unworthy of humane society.

Furthermore, let me not omit this remarkable Observation, that this Eclipse
affords unto me: For this year there shall happen some strange Births of
children, produced in an hideous and formidable shape, as thus: Some children
shall be borne, that when they come to age, shall not know their own fathers:
Others shall have their fingers of the nature of Polypus, quicquid tetigit,
tenet. Diog.
Lime-twigs, to get most part of their living with five and a reach: Some shall
be borne with feet like Hares, who shall run so swift, as that they never
shall tarry with any Master, but trudge from post to pillar, till they take up
Beggers-bush for their lodging: Others shall have noses like Swine, that there
shall not be a feast within a mile, but they will smell it out: But this is
shroudly to be feared, that some women this year shall be borne with two
tongues, to the terrible grief of those that shall marry them, thundering in
their fury such Caninam sacundiam exercent. Salust.
rough-cast Eloquence that No better hopes of a Scold.

Aquad Pu^ice non postulanda.


Knave and Slave, shall be but Holy Day words to their husbands; dropping as
fast from their litigious lips, as oaths do from the chaps of a choleric
Cook, against a long Sermon, (frying in his own grease) when his joints
scorch, and are over roasted: of which rank or range of men I must confess,
that some of them are already profane enough, if they could but once leave A
bad custom, hardly left.
swearing. And whereas this fearful Eclipse does continue but an hour and an
half, it fore signifies, that this year, women's loves to their husbands
shall be very short, and in some so Mulier Lun^ mutabilior.
mutable, that it shall scarce continue from the Church door to the wedding
house: and that Hens, Capons, (Geesse especially,) and Chickens, shall be
banished from poor men's houses; and be feign to fly away with spits in their
bellies to fat Churles tables, whose panches iutte forth like an Aldermans
dining room, or King Harries Codpiece, in the Tower, with bumbasting them with
delicious Viands.

Many other effects are to be prognosticated in the subsequent predictions;
give me leave in the mean season, to lay in this Caution between my
Countrymen, and this wonderful Eclipse: No worse Counsel given, then I would
be content to take my self.

Frustrasapit, qui sibi non sapit, Eurip.


Let such as have clothes enough, keep themselves warm, for fear of taking
cold; and I would wish rich men all this Winter to sit by a good fire, and
seldom to go to bed without a Cup of Sack, and that so thickly qualified
with Sugar, as they may not grow rheumaticke. Let them take ease enough, and
feed daintily, then no doubt, (consonant to the learned Judgment of Albumazar)
they are like to live as long as they can, and not die one hour before their
time: But in special, let them take this premonition along with them; That
they be drunk twice aweeke, and then (under pretense of taking Too common a
shift in these times, to cover the rich man's excess.
Physic) lie yawning two days after to euaporate the excess of a Surfeit; no
matter, though the poor Caitiffe lie staruing in the streets without respect
or pity.

And thus have I led you through the adumbrageous Eclipse of the Sun.

A PREDICTION OF THE GENERAL DISPOSITION OF SUNDRY CONCEITED QVALIties,
incident unto men's minds and natures throughout the four quarters of the
year, 1623. by the merry Influence of the Planets, with some other tragical
Observations, comprised under each separated Revolution.
Of Winter.
VVInter, the sworn Enemy to Summer, friend to none but Colliars, Chandelers
and Woodmongers: The frost-bitten Churl, that hangs his dropping nose still
over the fire: the Dog that bites fruits, and the waste-good, that fels wood;
the unconscionable binder up of Vintners fagots, and the only consumer of
burnt Sack and Sugar. This kinsman to Death, furtherer to Sickness, and
brother to Old Age, shall not put forth his hoarie Bald-pate in this Climate
of ours, according to our usual computation, upon the 12. of December, at the
first entering of the Sun into the first minute of the Sign Capricorn, etc.
With much more such fustian futilitie, then ever any reasonable man could truly
understand; but take this from me, as an infallible rule, that Winter begins,
when Charitas laudatur, and alget.
Charity blows her nails, and is ready to stern, yet not so much as a
drowsy Watchman will lend her a flap of his freeze Gown to keep her warm:

When Paid in their own coin; for Malo hercle* vestro, tam versute vi^itis,
Plaut.
Tradesmen shut up shops, by reason that their frozen-hearted Creditours exact
more for days of trust, then they are able to raise (and play the Knaves too)
out of their Commodities so taken up:

When the price of Sea-coale rises, and the rate of poor men's labors is
pulled down:

When every Chimney or rather Tobacco Pipe vomits out smoke, but scarce any
door opens, to hurl out so much as a Marrow-bone for a Dog to break his
fast on:

When Beasts die for want of fodder in the field, and men's Molestus
interpellat^r venture, Plaut.
bellies cry out, who are ready to famish for lack of food in the City:

When the first word that a Punke speaks at her Ingles coming into her
Chamber in a Morning, I pray thee send for some Fagots; and the cold comfort a
Lawyer heates you withal, is to say; What will you give me?

When Gluttons blow their pottage to cool them; and Prentises blow their
nails to heat them: And lastly,

When the A hard time for Watermen.
Thames is covered over with ice, and men's hearts caked over, and crusted with
Cruelty; then may any man boldly swear it is Winter.

But let us wade a little further into the fountain of Infallibility, and
then shall we find, that Winter this year, (being the first Astronomicall
Quarter, according to my coniecturall Computation) whatsoever Ptolomee says,
begins sooner with poor men, then with rich; and so granted; by the
malignant influence of Saturn, whose constellation maleuolent, portends; That
such as have no money nor credit, shall want Coals and Wood, and be feign to
beat their jaws one against another with cold, while your old peny-fathers
sit and toste themselves by the fire.

And by reason that this Winter will begin, when Sol makes his entrance into
the degree of Capricorn, that Hyemall solstitial Sign foreshewes, that the
Bakers basket shall give the wall to the Brewers barrel; and an halfepenny
dry, shall do homage to an halfepeny wet. The weather likewise shall be so
unseasonably cold, that diverse for fear of being frost-bit, shall Aleator,
quanto est in art peritior, tanto est nequior, Sir.
craftily sit all day at Cards and Tables, while their poor wives and families
knock their heels, and fast at home for their thriftlesse follies.

And for that I find, three of the Planets to be drencht in aquaticke Signs,
as Jupiter, Mars, and Luna, it plainly demonstrates; That diverse pretenders to
good fellowship shall for want of strong Taplash, go sober to bed against
their wills.

That there shall be coagulated Frosts, so as upon small acquaintance men and
women shall creep to bed together, and some of them lie so long, till they be
fetched out with a Beadle, and a Basen.

That Seafaring men (if they be not the better provided of skilful Pilots)
shall either stick in the sands, or split their Ships against the sturdie
Rocks, and so condemn them to the bottom; * Quicquid sclet nocers, ide^^
solet docer^.
or else loose their goods by Pyracie and Palliardise.

Saturn falling retrograde in Gemini, shows, That there shall fall this
Winter such tenebrous fogges, and stifling Mists, that many rich Chuffes shall
loose their purses by the highways side; and poor men be so weather-beaten
by the unconscionable craft of Qui infiniti^ aucup^js emu^gunt pecuniant.
Vsureres, that they shall be forced to beg their bread by the extremity of such
Extortion: But Mercury and Venus being congregated in Sagittarius,
prognosticate; That for want of fair weather, such as have but one shirt,
shall go wool-ward, till that be a washing; and that Watermen who want Fares,
shall sit and blow their fingers, or lie in Alehouses till they be drunk, and
then for want of better employment, bast one another with their unmerciful
Stretchers.

And for that Mars, that rugged Planet, has no predominance in this Brumall
Revolution, Soldiers for the more part, though their fare be hard, yet shall
they lie in field beds, and not be too much molested neither with more money
then shall be necessary:

And it is greatly to be feared, that through extreme cold, diverse pooremen
shall die not dine, at rich men's gates: Pity shall be exiled; Goodworkes
thrust out of doors with Iack-a-lent, and Hospitality whipped out of the Country
as a relicke of the old Religion; and were it not that some moist showers of
Mercy shall mollify the obduration of the frost, Charity, should for want of
house-roome lie and freeze to death in the heart of our highest Cities.

Impetuous storms are this year to be expected, especially in houses where
the wives wear the breeches; and such loud Winds, that the husbands shall be
whurld out of doors; and withal there are like to fall huge Hailestones, as
big as ioyn'd-stooles, that some shall be sure to have their crowns cracked,
and all through the petulant disposition of Venus. But Mars shall come in, and
play the tall man, who being placed in Gemini, that gouernes the arms and
shoulders; and he presageth, that sundry tall fellows shall take heart of
grass, who armed with sour Cudgels shall so Lambeake their irregular
huswiues, that the wind shall turn into another quarter, and so the weather
wax more Post nubila, Ph^bu^.
calm and temperate.

Such superfluxe of waters are like to ensue, through this Hyemall
distemperature, that many bold-braines shall be drowned on dry hills; and
fish, if they could not swim, were in great danger totally to perish. Eeles are
like to be dear, if there be few or none taken: But plenty of Pouts shall be
had in all places, especially in those Countries where women have not their own
wills.

Now (patient Reader) in respect of diverse particular circumstances drawn from
the quotidian motions, progressions, stations, retrogradations, aspects, and
other appointments of fixed and extrauagant Stars, I am induced to declare,
that such as have no fire, shall feel most cold; That Wier-drawers and
Presse-men, if they follow not their work close, shall feel no great heat;
and that Compositors, let them ply the Box never so fast, shall share a great
part of extreme cold; and be Stulti fortunati mis^r^s co^temn^^t.
laughed at for their labor.

The distemperance of this Quarter, is like to breed sundry sicknesses as well
in young as in old, proceeding either of vicious blood, or of the superabundance
of inordinate guzling; as Catching diseases, that spare none who come in their
walks.
Cephalagies, Quirimobs, or Whimsies in the head, that shall make men so
dizzie, as that some shall stagger and stumble up and down the streets, till
they have stolen a nappe to settle their distempered Coxcombes.

Aches in the shoulders shall be rife amongst diverse Women that have Knaves to
their husbands; and diverse Drunken Sots shall be pestered with Surfets.

Maidens this Winter shall have strange A malady as unavoidable, as incurable.
stitches and gripings about the girding place, which diseases principally will
proceed, by their situation in Supinity: and many active men shall be troubled
with such pain in their eyes, that they shall not Wilful misprisions.
know their chamber maids from their own wives.

Now because I find in the Ephimerides of heaven, certain unlucky, critical,
and dangerous days pointed out, whose foreheads are full of Plagues, and under
whose wings do lurk other dismal calamities, that threaten this Region; it
shall not be impertinent, if I open the foul bosom of Winter before he pass
further, and show unto you what contagious maladies do hang upon him, and
harbor within him. I find therefore, that a brown Twelve strange plagues to
happen this year.
dozen of inevitable plagues, shall heavily light on the heads and hearts of
this our English Nation; and thus I bring them out in orderly rank:

1. Plague of Poverty.
The first, is the plague of Animi generosi neruos egestas execat.
Poverty, When a man has never a penny in's purse, credit with his neighbors,
nor a hole to hide his head in: Alas! how many will lie languishing of this
frenzy? how many that haunt Bowling alleyes, and fill up Play Houses with
their infection; nay, how many that stalk in the middle-Ile of Paulcs in
indifferent good clothes too, will be struck with this Plague? It is harder to
reckon them, then to sum up the virtues of a wandering woman which are
numberless.

Plague of Discontent.
2. The second, is the Plague of Discontent; when a husband shall find cold
cheer, and hot words, from a scolding wife: Many Cobblers will be subject to
this disease; yet they will not lie long upon it, but every hour be of the
mending hand; marry it is supposed, their wives will prove worse and worse.

Plague of Contention.
3. The third, is the Plague of Contention: when a Trauailer has a long
journey, a tired horse, and a little money: This Plague will meet with many
poor Yorke-shire Clients; and (unless they keep it off with their hooks)
with some Welch-men too.

Plague of Deceit.
4. The fourth, is the Plague of Deceit; when a man has fraudulently congested
heaps of riches, enioyes it but a while, and leaves a fool behind him to
spend it: It is to be feared, that some wealthy Citizens, and quirking Lawyers
cannot escape this Plague.

Plague of Extortion.
5. The fifth, is the Plague of Extortion; when a man is grown old in years,
yet a child in goodness; when his wife is a Drunkard, and his daughter a
wanton, his son a Lecher, and his servant a pilferer: This Plague is sure to
shake hands with exacting Usurers, and extorting Landlords; but chiefly with
Brokers, their bodies being subject to many infections, and their Consciences
to much corruption. So that it is thought, Lord have mercy upon us, will stick
on most of the doors in Hounds-ditch and Longlane: and that all people who
love themselves, for honesty sake, will shun those places, and those
persons, whereof but one of them is sufficient to poison a whole City.

Plague of Lust.
6. The sixth, is the hot Plague of Lust: when a Maid is fair, and has no
portion; of ripe years, yet troubled with the Greene-sicknesse; and longs for
a husband, yet Nobody will have her. This Plague will tickle poor
Chambermaids, and though it fall hard upon them, yet will it not prove so
mortal, because they have a trick to help themselves: It is to be suspected,
that some Citizens daughters will be tainted too, unless they take a private
receipt against it, of their fathers Prentises: Young Gentlewomen likewise would
hardly escape, were it not that the Gentlemen-ushers, and smooth-faced Pages,
must stand between them and infection.

Plague of Marriage.
7. The seventh, is the Plague of Marriage: when a woman possesses a husband
that is very poor, yet jealous: young, yet a choleric fool. Seruingmens
wives (it is thought) will turn up their heels of this Disease; or if not
die, yet lie for it a long time.

Plague of Debt.
8. The eight, is the Plague of Debt: when a man has much to pay; little to
discharge, and an unmerciful Creditour. This Plague (I fear me) will fly as
far as Bohemia, and pitifully pester our English Soldiers, who will take
more care how to wipe off the Rundles in chalk, then to win a Town from the
enemy.

Plague of Hunger.
9. The ninth, is the Plague of Hunger: when a man sees or smells good cheer,
and has an excellent stomach, but knows not how to get it: if any complain
of this malady, it will be those that are the attendants at a scamling feast,
or else, such as walk snuffing up and down in Winter Euenings through
Pie-corner, yet have not one cross to replenish their pasternes.

Plague of Prodigality.
10. The tenth, is the Plague of Prodigality: when a man marying a Wagtaile,
and letting her out to the full length of her own Lust, Pride and Pleasure;
must thereby be beholden to his enemy, must honor him, that horns him, yet
dares not be revenged: The tokens of this Plague will stand thick on a number
of young Bankrupts, who have had dealing with Courtiers.

The Horn-Plague.
11. The eleventh, is the Horne-plague: It will be too common both in Court,
City, and Country: and albeit, it be incurable, yet none can die of it: this
aching Plague takes a man first in the head, and he must needs sicken of it,
that is either a Cuckold, a Wittall, or a Suffragatour. In very many streets
(besides Cheapfide and the Strand) will there be houses contaminated with this
monstrous disease.

Plague of Ingratitude.
12. The twelfth, is the fearful Plague of Ingratitude: when a man has much
wealth, and no wisdom; much coin and no conscience; continual health, and no
grace to return thanks unto him that bestows it on him: when he talks of
God, yet keeps company with the devil. This Plague strikes deep, even to the
wounding of the Soul, and yet sticks by many, even of the better sort:
Besides these capital Plagues, there be many Boyles, Carbunkles, and Blisters
of Impieties, that will lie sucking the bones of common people, which I omit.

Thus may you discover a far off, how sharp a Winter we are like to have:
let us now make trial if the Spring will look upon our Horizon with a more
favorable aspect, or accorst us with a more cheerful salutation.

Exit Hyems.
Of the Spring.
Description of the Spring.
NExt enters upon her Cu, that odoriferous Lady Ver, or the Spring, attended
with all her Attributes of Honor: For she is the Bride of the Sun, the
Nosegay-giuer to weddings, the richest Hearbe-wife in the world: the rarest
Gardener, sweetest Perfumer, cunningst Weauer, purest Dyer, and noblest
Musician; for all the Quiristers of the Groves are her Scholars: This mother
of health, Physician to the sick, Surgeon to the wounded; this daughter of
Plenty, and sister to Summer, comes not attired in her verdant robes, as by
Poets and Printers she is published, upon the tenth day of March, after the
Sun (with an Herculean Vigor) has conquered his twelve Labors, and like a
skillful Charioter) has hurried his golden Wagon through the twelve Signs,
ready again (as some will have it) to begin his task afresh, by making his
entrance upon the first Minute of the Equinoctial Sign of the Ram, whose
horns stand in such an even proportion a sunder, as that the Day and Night
take them for their measure, and are contented to be of an equal length.

Reformation of bad manners, is the propagation of a good Spring.
Shall I tell you then at what Sign the Spring dwells at? turn up your eyes
and behold; for by these marks shall you know her, when she comes: When
Philomele sits singing with a briar at her breast, and the Adulterer stands
sighing at the thorns which prick his C^^science: When young tears of
Repentance (...) Liueries, and Old Whoremongers pluck off the Vizars of their
Vices: when the big-bellied Earth bears all kinds of flowers, and the O (...)
Conrts of Princes bring forth all sorts of Virtues: When Gardens begin to be
dressed, and abuses in the Church reformed: When Lords leave falsifying their
promises, and Ladies leave sophisticating their faces: When Courtiers pay their
debts, and Citizens surcease to sell counterfeit Wares: When Players turn
Preachers, and Poets carry money in their purses: When Lawyers plead without
Fees, and Tailors carry true Bills to their Customers: When Usurers give all
they have to the poor, and Brokers lend money without pawnes: When Vintners
do not mix their Wines, nor Tapsters froth up their lugges: When Ostlers
leave greasing of Horses teeth, and Chamberlaines forbear to lie with Country
Wenches: When Beasts wax wanton by nature, without violating her Laws, only
to multiply their kind for the good of man; and when men abhor to change
themselves into the nature of Beasts: Then, and only then shall the vernall
gates fly wide open; then may you boldly swear, it is the Spring.

But as the S^pe dissident ab animis gratu^antium vultus.
slickest horse may have the slowest pace, and oftentimes the fairest Attera
^anu ^ert aquam, ulter^, ignem, Plutare.
Brow may have the foulest Body, so this beautiful daughter of old Ianus, who
is Master Porter to the twelve Months, by dealing with some few vnsalubrious
Planets, is thought not to be free from diseases. A spice therefore of one
Plague or other, will lie in her tender bones, by which means this Spring to
some people (especially the French, and I fear the English cannot go
Scot-free) will prove as fatal, and as busy in privy Searches, as the fall
of the Leaf*

The Dugges of this delicate young bed fellow to the Sun, will so flow with
the milk of Profit and Plenty; that (of all other) Some Players (if Praestat
fortunatum, qu^^ sapere.
Fortune, turned Phoenix, fail not of her promise) will lie sucking at them
with their fulsome forcastings, for pence and two-pences, like young Aurisacra
fames, quid non mortalia pect^ra coget? Virg.
Pigges at a Sow newly farrowed, for that they are in danger to meet with a hard
Winter, and be forced to travel softly on the hoof.

It is coniectured likewise, That in this time of coalition between the
Planets and the Earth, Lawyers will grow up so thick, as that they will scarce
live But one step lower then Impossibility.
honestly one by another; and most of them shall prove to their Clients, as
tares to a field of Corn: for they shall prosper best when they choke those
by whom they were nourished: yet on the contrary side, shall Maiden-heads be so
scant, that if Lust, like death, sweeps all before it.
two hundred be to be had ouer-night, one hundred ninety and nine of them will
be struck off before the next Morning.

Notwithstanding all this, I find, that Winter finishing with the last grade
of the watrie Sign Pisces, at Sols joyful Progress into the first degree of
Aries, then must the Spring needs march up in the next rank, and show her
face An infallible sign of the Springs approach.
when grass begins to sprout, and trees to bud. By which I gather, That this
Spring will be very ill for Scholars for they shall study much, and gain
little: They shall carry more wit in their pates, then white. ^ney in their
purses. Rebus Immanis, ordine nullo, fortuna regit, spargitque manu m^nera c
aeca pejora fouens, Sen.
Dunces shall prove more wealthy then Doctors; insomuch that sundry unlettered
sots shall scrue themselves into the Ministry, if the provident care of
reverend Bishops do not iustle them aside. And by the opinion of Proteus,
Plent, rident, sapiunt, insaniunt, etc.
women are like to grow wilful, and so variable, that they shall laugh and
weep, chide and chat, and all with a breath.

Butchers shall sell their meat as dear as they can, and if they be not
careful, horns shall be hurtful unto them: and some shall be so wedded to
swines flesh, that they shall never be without a Sow in their house as long as
they live.

This vernall Revolution being naturally hot and moist, is like to be very
forward for flowrie fields and blooming trees: and because Saturn will reside
in his proper mansion, Old men are like to be very wayward, and crafty
Scriueners (or Error ex amore, non ex more.
Knaves, all is one) shall need no Brokers: Usury, shall be called, good
Husbandry; and men shall be esteemed honest for their wealth, not for their
Quarenda pecunia primum est, virtus post numnos. Horat*
Virtues. And because Aquarius must keep some leuell-coile this Quarter, it is
to be doubted that many Springs of water will rise up in Vintners Sellars, to
the great weakening of their Gascoine Wine, and to the utter dissolution of the
ancient Order of the Red-noses. March Beer shall also be more set by, then
small Ale.

Multiplicity of Sects, dangerous to a State.
Out of the Old Stock of Heresy, it is to be expected this Spring, will
sprout forth new schismatic Opinions, and strange Sects, as Separatists,
Armanists, with other exoticke Niceties and Balductum diseases, to the
disturbance of the unity of the Church, and disquieting of good men's
consciences: but I could wish, that the learned Doctor, Sir T. Tyburne might
be put to that task, as to confute such vpstart Statists, with his rope-ripe
conclusions.

Because Cancer will be busy this Springtide, it is therefore likely, that
the flourishing blossoms of young unstayed Gentlemen, shall be so
unmercifully annoyed with Caterpillars, who shall entangle them in such
Statutes and Recognizances, that they shall cry out against Brokers, as Jeremy
did against the false Prophets. Besides, though this last Winter nipt up many
Picke-pockets, yet this Spring is like to afford twice as many; so tha^t at
every Read me a Riddle, what is this?
Term shall be found an Hundred at least in Westminster Hall.

Barbers also shall become poulers of the Commonwealth; and latronicall
Lease-mongers, pillars of their poor Tenants.

Mercury combust shall so set men together by the ears, that many Lawyers
shall grow rich, get the Devil and all, no matter Si L^^nina pelli^ non
suffi^ie, vulpina add^nda, Zenod.
how; and wear side gowns, and wide Consciences; still keeping their mouths
open to call for a feeling, and their purses shut, when they should bestow an
alms. Ostlers shall steal Hay in the night from Gentlemen's horses, and rub
their teeth with tallow, that they may eat little prouender while they stand
at Livery: but this I prognosticate against them, that being extruded from
humane society, they shall die in Hay-lofts, and that so poorly too, as all
their wealth shall scarce purchase them Christian burial.

Wonderful events premonstrated.
But let me not hide these secrets from you (my Countrymen) that Jupiter,
being in mild aspect with Venus, discovers; which are; That diverse shall
drink more then they bleed; That Tailors shall steal nothing but what is
brought unto them: That Poulterers shall be stinkingly pestered with rotten
Eggs; and that Butchers dogs shall make Libels against Lent, for affording no
better diet then Herring-cobs, for their slabbring Chappes.

Other diseases incident to this Quarter, as by Astrologicall Conjectures I can
gather, are these* Discovery of diseases.
Prentises that have been soundly cudgel'd shall be troubled with a soreness
on their shoulders; and it shall be very ill for them that have sore eyes to
have sand thrown in them, or to look against the Sun. This plague shall
reign mightily amongst poor stage-keepers, that they shall not be able to
change a groat for a box o'th ear. Beside, sick folks shall have queasier
stomachs, then those that be sound: and men that cannot sleep, shall take
very little rest: with other accidental infirmities, which for breuity sake I
am content to flurre over.

A Prediction of Summer, 1623,
Description of Summer.
NOW steps in the Minion of the year, Summer: the Mistress of the earth,
daughter and heir to the Spring, and Empress over many Kingdoms; whose robes
are fields of standing corn; whose crown is a garland playted of all
varieties of fruits. Summer, the poor man's Almner, and the rich man's
Land-lady: the Ploughmans Gods to whom he prays, the shepherds Queen to
whom he does homage: the filler of Barnes, the feeder of Birds, the fatner of
men and beasts, the worlds Magazine, the Nurse of Plenty, the sworne-enemy to
dearths and scarcity. Summer, that is the Saint, to whom Bowyers, and Fletchers
kneel; in whose praise, Archers send out shouts, and Hay-makers merry Songs.

This red-lipt, liuely-fac'd, rosie-finger'd Damsel, comes not by turn to her
Coronation, on the Eleventh day of June, according to vulgar Astronomicall
computation, when the Sun has fetched his cariere up as high, as the first
degree of the Estiuall Solstice (Cancer,) which is the utmost declension from
the North to the Equinoctial, etc. but I find that she has forsaken those
celestial houses, wherein she did use to lie, in her illustrious progress,
and has taken up her lodging in sublunarie Mansions, from whence she must
issue: And these that follow shall be the Harbingers, to make way, or the
Heralds to proclaim her coming.

Entrance of Summer.
When our exuberant, though superanuated Grandam (the Earth) shall (albeit in
her days of morositie) be great with child of Corn, Flowers, and Fruits, and
be joyfully delivered of them; yet that Non est dig^^^ dandis, qui non agit
grates pro datis, Greg in Moral.
ungrateful creature, enriched with Reason only, shall be barren of all
goodness:

When the heat of the Sunne-beames begets Gold in the Veins of the Earth, yet
Gold when it is brought forth, shall beget a coldness in the hearts of men:

When Rivers shall swell with Spring-tides, and the fountains of Learning be
drawn dry; and stopped up with the rubbish of Disreputation. When sheep
hurrie to broad trees, to shroud their carkeises under their shades from the
wrath of Heaven, and when Innocence is protected under the wings of
Greatness, from the fury of Oppression:

When Cuckooes sing merrily; and Cuckolds laugh at their own horns:

When Courtiers ride the Wild-goose chase; and Farmers stand by, and never
curse their Horsemanship.

When Haruesters come singing from the field, because their corn is bound up
in sheaues; and when Citizens Wives walk to their Gardens, yet bring from
thence to their husbands no Nosegayes bestucke with Columbines:

These, and many other like these, are the Badges that Summer wears; and never
comes, but when she puts on these and such like Liueries: yet for all this,
that Original curse which at first was laid upon her, shall this year 1623.
so crush her beautiful structure, insomuch that her lusty and neruall limbs
shall grow weak, and her entrails be ready to dry and rumple up to nothing,
by reason of a strange famine, which shall most unmercifully feed upon her.

Diverse dear years have crept out of the Chronicles of precedent ages, to
show their visages to this present time, but the face of this shall look more
grizly then them all. In the time of Holinshed cum multis alijs.
Edward the second there was such a famine, that horseflesh then was accounted
as dainty, as Hares-flesh now; and fat O quantum cogit egestas!
Dogs snapt up as fast then, as fat Pigs are now with us at Bartlemewtide; for
that Oxen and Sheep, and other provisions, were drawn up to such an excessive
rate, as that people of the meaner rank could not reach unto it. But this
year, 1623. Oxen and Calves shall not be sold so dear in Smithfield; men
shall be sold as cheap: nay men shall turn Homo homini lupus.
Omophagi, and devour one another. Country Gentlemen shall eat up the
industrious Farmers: Citizens, the Country Gentlemen: Courtiers, the Citizens:
Lease-mongers, their Tenants: the devil, the Lease-mongers. The Shopkeepers,
or crafty-handed men, shall feed on the handicrafts men: Lawyers shall swallow
their Clients, and many of them be suddenly choked, with a bad Cause sticking
cross their throats: And Usurers shall cramme down young Heirs, as if they
were pickled green Geese, or bakt Woodcocks.

But here Albumazar steps in with a crossepoint to counterbuffe mine opinion,
and he will needs affirm: That when the Sun has made his voyage through the
germinall Signs, Aries, Taurus, and Gemini, and takes up his Inn at the
solsticiall estiuall Sign Cancer, then shall the third part of the year,
called Summer, begin his reign: But I positiuely conclude, (and to maintain
the Proverb, will have mine own saying,) That An infallible rule to know when
Summer begins.
Summer begins, when the weather waxes so hot, that beggars scorn Barnes,
and lie in the fields; and the night-Crowes of Saint Pancrace-church, build
their nests under the shades of Colman-hedge, or the new found vaulting School
adjacent.

This Quarter therefore will prove so immoderately hot, that diverse
Mechanickes shall hurl their cloakes into Hounds-ditch, doffe their Cantabit
v^e^us coram ^^^rom pota^^r.
doublets and damme them in Debt-lane; and walk in their Waste-coates and
greasy apernes, for nimblenesse-sake, for that they must trudge to provide a
cooling-card for their inflamed Livers. And by reason that the flammigerous,
and fire-foming Dog Star shall snuff up the Planets, and with his flaring
tongue, lick up the grass off the tops of hills, parch the corne-fields, sear
the low-layd Valleys, and dye the face of Ceres as tawnie as a Gypsies, all
Tobacco-shops shall smoke for it; but especially the Katherine-wheele, An
honest man, is his own praiser.
where (by the confluence of Kind-hearts) shall be found these three Contentus
in pace bibere*
Contentments: Great Pipes, Good Tobacco, and gentle Usage.

If this year, Aquarius piss freely after quaffing, then at the Sign of the
Cerulean-coloured savage Boar, shall, (this year,) be had for ready money,
all sorts of precious Waters; as your Aquafrigida, refecta, calida, colorata,
limpida, luctuosa, fucosa, feculenta, potabilis, portabilis, vtilis, futilis,
Bumme, Humme, and Hawberna: The which Hawberna, (as it is reported by a famous,
and fumous Radulphus Brutus. Iseldonius.
Historian) the great Duke of Mosco drinks of, but upon Festiuals: for if he
should drink it daily, the revenues of his whole Empire could not maintain it.

But because that Vrsa-maior shall be auspiciously inclined to Homogeneall
Congruity, and similiancie of condition, by his appointment shall Or; the white
Bear.
Vrsa-minor be vnmuzzled, and blurt out more Because stopped with Cork.
lightheaded Bottle-beare then half Barbican; the which being once let loose,
will furiously fly in any man's face; nay, if he gape, to gallop down into
his guts too: but being discharged, if it happen to bounce or hit against a
Goodfellowes nose, it will hiss like a Snake bathing in the Sun under the
skirts of a Grove, or as Oil poured down upon an ouer-heated Anuile.
Bottle-ale likewise shall be as busy as a foolish Constable; and mad-brain'd
Malt, shall be ready to do the offices of a knauish Sic figulus figulum, sic
Faber fabrum odit
Beadle against mealy-mouthed Wheat. Of purpose to entertain the Suns
glorious return from the Antipodes, innocent More-fields shall this Quarter
be clothed all in white: For the shirts of Masters, the smockes of Maids;
the smockes of Mistrisses, and the shirts of servants, shall be there so A
fearful confusion to happen this Summer in Moore-fields.
promiscuously laid together, that it would almost make a sinner of a Saint to
behold them: And (three to one) if they dare lie so near together abroad, they
will venture to lie closer when they are at home; as questionless they do, when
(being folded up) they lie one upon another: so that this is the forcible
occasion, that will stir up shirts and smockes to Citizens, old smel-smocks.
s;mell after each other; or at least wise, shirts to smell after smockes all
the year after.

Mercury, moreover, has so constituted, that those who are drunk ouer-night
will be dry in the morning: those that be-pisse their beds shall be Optimum
est pati, quod cmendare non potes, Sen. Epi. 4. lib. 18.
vexed with Fleas; and such as want meat, and have no Feras non culpes, quod
vit^ri non potest.
money to buy it, shall be very likely to go supperlesse to bed.

Besides, this Quarter, great hurly-burlyes are to be expected, and horrible
Stratagemes like to be performed: for Butchers shall make unmerciful havoc
amongst Flies, and Beggars on Sunshine days shall commit monstrous murders
upon their neuer-ceasing blood-suckers. The Assistants like wise of
Copersmiths-hall shall do mighty deeds of arms upon Cups, Kannes, Pots,
Glasses, and Blew-anckour Iackes; not giving over the skirmish as long as they
are able to stand, or wagge a finger.

Further it is to be doubted, that because Venus soiournes in the house of
Mars; That Millars, Weauers, and Tailors, will prove as theeuish, as they are
knauish: and Maids this Quarter will make sillibubbes for their Lovers so long,
till at the length some of them calue with the Cow for company. But Jupiter in
his exaltation presageth, that diverse Semelenbidi, decies pallidi* Suidas.
Gallants shall creep further into the Mercers book in a month, then they can
get out in a year. If there be such excessive plenty of Cherries this Quarter,
that Fruterers know not what to do with them, they perchance may fall to
sixe-shillings the pound: and Costard-mongers this Summer shall be licensed by
the Wardens of their Hall, to wear broad baskets on their heads, to keep them
from the heat of the Sun.

But Libra adust, and retrograde, foretells, that there is like to be a
League between diverse Bakers and the Pillorie, for making their bread too
light; and the Sun shall be so hot, that it shall melt away the Qu^ plus sunt
pota, plus sitiunt^r aqua.
dropsy consciences of covetous men; and that by the amorous aspects of Venus,
residing in the lodge of Scorpio, women shall fall so loue-sicke, that civil
Lawyers; Sumners, and Surgeons shall feed upon their sins, and fare the betby
them all their life time after; and besides diverse of these Lying spirits shall
be seen to stand in white sheets like Ghosts, in Churches, of purpose to
affright such like offenders.

But by the way learn this of me, That Shoomakers will grow so proud, that
they shall refuse the name of Souters: And the Tailor and the Louse shall stand
so upon the point, in defense of each other; That were it not, the worshipful
Company of Botchers have set down this Order; That he who lies a bed, till his
clothes be mended, needs not keep a man to look to his Wardrobe. But
amongst all, the Necessary Impositions on Pot-hunters.
Smiths have exhibited a Supplication to the Ale-cunners, That he who goes
drunk to bed, and as soon as he wakes in the morning, dares not carouse a
hearty draught next his heart, shall be adjudged to drink small Ale for his
penance, provided he can get no strong.

Consonant to the variation of this Season, shall variable diseases be
predominant; as namely, the In omnibus rebu^ magis offendit nimium, quam parum,
Cicero.
Plurisie, which shall so abound in many, that in ill, they shall exceed their
pattern, though in goodness they fall short of their samplar. Fluxes also,
and those in poor men's purses; for they shall be so laxatiue, that money shall
run out faster, then they are able to put in. The small Pockes amongst
children, and the great amongst Cum magnis, magna cresennt.
great men: Infirmities also in the tongue; for some shall do naught but lie,
and oftentimes with those they should not.

But because we would not swelt, and wax faint, under the heat of this
unseasonable Summer, let us make haste out of it, and descend to the next
Quarter, to make trial what benefits that will participate unto us.

Of Autumn or the Fall of the Leaf.
Description of the fall of the Leaf.
AVtumnus, the chief Barber to the right Honorable Lord Annus, that mad shauer
of Bushes, Hedges, and Trees: the ragged Prodigal that consumes all, and
leaves himself nothing: the arrantest Raggamuffin amongst all the four
Quarters, and the most diseased, as being always troubled with the
Falling Sickness, and (Frenchman like) not suffering an hair to stay on his
head. This murderer of the Spring, this thief to Summer, and bad companion to
Winter, scorns to come in according to his old wont, when the Sun sits
Justice with a pair of scales in her hand, weighing no more hours to the day,
then he does to the night, as he did before in his Vernall progress, when he
rode on a Ram: But this Dominatur vt in grege Taurus, Liu.

Quod non potest, vult posse, qui nimium potest.


Bald pate will be seen walking up and down Groves, Gardens, Meadows, Fields,
Woods, Parkes and Pastures, Dominatur vt in grege Taurus, Liu.

Quod non potest, vult posse, qui nimium potest.


blasting of fruits, beating leaves from their livings; and trampling the gaudy
garments of his Sister, the Spring, under his feet.

Signs of his coming.
By these tokens also shall you perceive his approach, when the World looks
like the old Chaos; and the Ground, like a young Prodigal, new shorn by an
Usurer: when Lust rides to the Ba^be, and is at great charge with Cornelius to
keep him company: when Luxury flies amongst Hen-sparrowes, and brings not
half the feathers home he carried out: when Lust, its own punisher.
Whoredom craules along with a staff in his hand, saddle-sunke Nose on his
face, and a nightcap, in stead of hair, on his naked scalpe: when Bawdes cry
out of their bones; Punkes, pray for the morning; and Panders put off their
Calves with their stockings when they go to bed* when many Great Ones cry, Oh,
with a pox to them; and some too, who would be entitled, Gentlemen; shall not
be able to lift their Arms, to show them.

But all these are the fond fancies of Aesoulapius, whose judgment in these
kinds I would be loathe to embrace. Therefore mine opinion is, (and that must
carry it) That this Tatterdemalian Autumn, (whom Physicians call, The fall of
the Leaf, and the Farmers Harnest,) begins to show his ill-fauoured face,
True entrance of Autumn.
when co^^e is ripe, and calls to be reaped, and when the sins of men are shot
up to that height, as that they cry out for the sickle of Gods vengeance to cut
them down*

When the issue of the Earth are disroabed of all their Verdures, and the brood
o^ man stipt naked of all their Virtues:

When Greatness sits pruning her feathers, (and those borrowed too) in the
Sunshine of Reputation, and Goodness be feign to lie sculking in the shadow
of Contempt:

When Flattery is every Lords fellow in the Exeat aula qui vult esse piu^.
Court, and Honesty is forced to go a begging in in the Country, because the
City will not entertain her:

When Cousnage shall Foxe-like, be coopt and chained up in the dark corners of
Sale-mens shops, and upon advantage, be let loose on the buyer, to gnaw out the
bowels of his purse, and yet he never feel it.

When Churches shall be empty of soundhearted professors, and Alehouses crammed
full of Vbiregnat Ebrieta^* ibi exulat Ratio.
bestiall and pernicious Pot-suckers*

When Murder shall be held but manly revenge, and the maine act of
manslaughter, made but the light Scaene of mans-laughter:

When Usury shall be termed Thrift, and Lechery, a tolerable trick of youth:
Extorsion, wary husbandry; Pride, comeliness; and Drunkenness, a laudable
recreation.

When Hypocrisy gets on the gabbardine of Quod simile Vero est, pess^mum est
mendacium, Quint. D^cl. 11.
Sanctity, to go to Church in on a Sabbath day, where he will sit sighing at
a Sermon, and turn up his eyes, as though he would shoot them through the
Churches roof into Heaven; and being returned home, falls to an undigested
seeming-deuout prayer, and that so loud too, as his Aliud palam agere, aliud
clam, dedecet probos. Plin. lib. 4.
neighbors round about may hear him: yet nevertheless, all the week after
will practice no worse, then to lie for advantage, falsify his promise, filch
himself drunk, if he can catch it a free-cost, traduce his neighbor
secretly, defraud his friend, and then fliere in his face:

When children shall fling up oaths and execrations against the face of
heaven, in the streets, and their Parents sit laughing at their doors, to
hear them so forward of their tongues:

When Qui scel^^is parcit, o^nes perditum it bon^s, Salust.
Justice is so troubled with the palsy in her hand, that when she is to poyze
her balance, she makes a solid cause seem light, and a light cause, he auie
and downe-waight; and when she heaues her sword, and strikes more out of rage
then right; madman like, wounding those that stand nearest unto her.

When the grafs of Grace lie stark deaded in the hearts of men, and Goodness
is excluded from human society.

These, with a supernumerarie multitude of the same breed, shall be the
undoubted signals of the Fall of the Leaf, or rather of the final dissolution
and desolation of this wide, wild, and wicked Universe.

But for the nature of this Autumnall Revolution, because it begins in Libra, I
find, That Grocers, Chandlers, and such like, shall use little weights in their
public Shoppes, and lesser measures in their private Chambers: That Knaves
shall wear smockes, and Women have Warrens in their hearts, that as fast as
Love creepes in at one hole, it runs out at another.

Yet Leo, being an igniferall Sign, foresheweth; That diverse men shall wear
their teeth longer then their Monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, quo crinis
ademptus.
Beards, and some shall be so Sunneburnt with sitting in the Alehouse, that
their noses shall Match like, light a Candle. Others shall for want of money
pawn their Cloakes, and stalk mannerly in their hose and Doublets. Some also
this Quarter shall have barnes, yet want corn to fill them with.

Rye, this Quarter shall be common and plentiful every where, and Knaves
shall have license to sell it by the mouthfull: and he that will not spend a
penny with his friend, by the counsel of One of the learned Doctors of the
Labour-in-^ains.
Drinkalius, shall be thrust quire out of all good Company for a Hoggrubber.

It may be doubted, that some uncouth maladies will be obuious and obnoxious
this quarter: as Hollownesse of the heart, so as one shall hardly know a Knave
from an honest man: lingering * Consumptions also of the liver, that diverse men
Plutus claudus est, cum accedit, cum recedit aliger. Lucian in Timone.
of good wealth shall (by the persuasion of their kind hearts) spend all, and
die bankrupts: Some shall be troubled with suffocations in their throats,
which cannot be helped, unless Brandon the hang man, play the skillful
Chyrurgion. Amongst the rest, many that have wives with fair faces, and soul
hearts, shall be troubled with an invisible swelling in their brows; a
mischievous Malady as incurable, as unavoidable. Some shall be troubled with
the Stone, and seek to cunning women to assuage the fury of that disease; an
infirmity easily cured, were it not, that the Doctors of Bridewell did punish
such feminine Physicians by a Statute. But the most grievous disease that is to
be feared, is the * Cataphalusie An uncouth Malady never known before.
(that is) when good fellows (for want of money) shall often times be contented
to break up company.

Thus far have you heard of imminent Plagues, Famines, and Diseases, that
hang in the tumerous clouds, every minute striving to burst out, and fall upon
our criminal Coxcombes; Misfortunes are not borne alone, but like married
fools they come in couples. Now must a civil War march at the heels of these
bypast miseries, and in this variable Quarter will he first strike up his
Drum at Strange calamities to ceize on Westminster.
Westminster: who in the beginning thereof, shall lie sick of a long Vacation,
and being enraged with the furious operation of this disease, she buffets her
own cheeks, tears her hair, and would drink her own heart-blood in the
anguish of her soul. Then sits she like a Proh dolor binc lachryme!
Widow in the midst of her mourning; then do her goodly Buildings look like
infected Pest-houses, from whence the Inhabitants are fled: then are her
Chambers empty, and her common paths untrodden. Thus shall the beginning of the
Fall of the leaf trouble her, insomuch that she feels the state of her body
very weak, and liable to infirmities: for these Canker-wormes, called
Vacations, corrode her carcass, and then leave it in a long and wasting
consumption, more grievous to her memory, then the coming on of a tedious
Winters night to a man tormented with sickness, or a marriage delayed, to
those that lie sighing for the delights thereof.

But now note with me, how suddenly the Tem^ora temporibus mutantur tristia
laetis: Succedunt ^ummis, gaudia sun* ma malis.
stream of her sorrow is * turned another way: for just in the neck of this,
shall come in the Meditullium, or middle part of this interchangeable season,
and bring her Balm to cure her fore-receiued wounds; and that is the Law,
(which lies in ateuery Vacation) who is brought a bed four times a year, and
delivered of four sons, that is, the four Terms; one of which comes to
visit her: At whose first sight, her heart leapes Lanolto's in her bosom; Now
shall Character of her excescessiue joy.
ye see her as * iocund, as a damsel fast folded in the embracements of her
Lover: now shall her cheeks look red, with an high and Iusty color, for she
will wash them in Wines: now shall her Tenants sleep securely, for they will
drink soundly: now dares she talk * any thing, for she Quid non?
has the Law on her side: now shall her Inhabitants be contented to take
cracked crowns, though at another time, they would go near to stab him, that
should but play with their noses.

Description of a wellcustom'd Tavern.
Now shall Vintners be as busy, as Bees in a Hiue; for as Bees fly from one
flower to another to suck out Honey, so shall the Drawers leap from one
Hogshead to another to let out Wines. In every room are the Pottle-pots
working, to bring in gains to their Master, as the other labor to bring forth
Wax for their Hiues. The stings which should be placed in their tails, are
brought in their tongues, to those that at the end of Cup-emptying, are
summoned Qui bibit, solua^, is Tavern law.
to the * Bar for a reckoning; for none but men of Reckoning can there be
entertained: now the Drones, are such, as guzzle down that, which would do
others good, yet hurt themselves.

Neither shall Tauernes alone fall into this profitable and healthful sweating
* sickness: but Morbus vtilis, non eget medicamme bono.
all other Trades, Occupations, Mysteries, and Professions, shall row up and
down this Springtide stream of business: and such good draughts shall they
have, that all shall prove Fish that come into their nets.

Besides, in the open streets shall be such walking, such talking, such
running, such riding, such clapping too of windows, such rapping at
Chamber-doores, such rattling of pen and Inkehornes, such rustling of
Buckram-bags, such balling for Prouant, such calling upon Shots, and such
ruffling of stuff Gowns, that at this time, some shall verily think
themselves in a Town of War, and it shall truly fall out so to be.

For in the height and heat of this irregular combustion, shall a most heavy,
black, and Tanto be^^o, innocens, ac noxius iuxta cadit. Tacit. lib. 1. Anual.
cap. 48.
bitter * conflict happen (if the Stars do not gull me) between Lawyers,
and their Clyents; and Westminster Hall shall be the field where it shall be
tried out: what thundering, what thumping, what threatening, what mustring, what
marching, what Baricadoing, what countermuring, what wheelings, what windings,
what summoning to parlees, what defiances will there be racketed on either
side? dismal shall this expedition be to some, deadly to others, and joyful
to a third sort. It is not yet doomed by the Palma in medio posita est,
accipiat qui potest, Terent.
Metaphysicall Moderators, on whose side the * victory will fly, but by all
Metempsichosicall conjectures, it is thought the Lawyers will carry away the
day, be it but with wrangling: For those that go armed with Buckram-bagges, in
stead of Muskets; with Pen and Inkehornes by their sides, in stead of
Touch-boxes, and shoot nothing but Paper-pellets, shall have those in terrible
execution, * who match with black Weakest go to the walls.
Boxes at their girdles, and white Bills in their hands.

And albeit, it go hard on either side ouernight, or that the one part be put
to the worse, yet the next morning, shall there be siding into Factions; *
Lawyer, against Lawyer; Client against Lis lit^m parit, Phocylid.
Client, and all of them endeavor to reassume fresh courage and magnanimity.
Then shall these men of Law march again into the Hall, as it were to the
field: The Councellers shall be the Leaders, Atturnyes, and Clerks, petty
Commanders, and Officers of both the Armies: the trained old weather-beaten
Soldadoe's, shall be those that have followed the Law a long time, and by
brabbles have made themselves, and their families Beggars: The fresh water
Soldiers, shall be those, as were but the last Term embarked in the Action.

En quo discordia ciues, perduxit miser^^! Virg.
In which * March of theirs, if you should but fall in amongst the Ranckes, you
will presently suppose your selves in the Turkish Leaguer: for as the Soldiers
there, so these here, talk of nothing but Stratagems and points of War.
Some threaten to overthrow their Foe-men, upon Assaults and Batteries: Some (as
if an enemy were to be blown up in a Cittadell) swear to drive them out by
way of Eiections: Others, as if they came to the sacking of Constantinople,
upon nothing but Attachments, both of body and goods.

But because I have wit enough to keep my self out of Gunshot, and to
remember an oldsaid Saw, which long ago I learned of my Grandame, That it is
wholesome sleeping in a whole skin; I will here leave them together by the
ears Tutissimum in portu nauigare.
: Fight Dog, fight Beat; and for me the Devil part them.

A brief Prediction of the 12. Months of the Year. 1623.
But for I scorn to undervalue so my Skill, as to serve under the Standard of
vulgar Astronomy, I should here lay down some Documents, when to eat hot
meats, and when to drink new Wines: but because every Widgin (that has money
in his purse, and eyes in his head to stumble to a Tavern) can do this
without a Calendar, I pretermit it, as frivolous and feeulent.

Moreover, I should show you how many followers every Month maintains, as some
Thirty, some One and thirty, and one only but Eight and twenty; because he is
fallen to decay, and therefore keeps but a cold house: amongst which serving
Creatures, I should give you the names of the Gentlemen, who are the Dominc all
Letters, wearing Red liueries both Winter and Summer: but because I would not
willingly have a hand in grinding such base Colors, give me leave to air your
thoughts on a nimbler wing, where they shall fly in a high place; and from
whence (as if you sat in the most perspicuous Twopenny Gallery of a Playhouse)
you shall with perspicacity behold all the parts, which I (your new-come
Astrologer) shall Act among the Stars; and thus I begin:

The working days of every Month, shall not be observed this Year, as in
times of yore; by reason of certain morball infirmities, that are unavoidably
to domineere over Tradesmen, as the Wonderful Maladies amongst Tradesmen.
Lazie-euill, the Lethargy, and the Whiripuffe; which is, a forgetful
carelessness of their own State: Dizzinesse of the pate, (arising from the
fumes of Tap-lash) and the like. For men of occupations shall in spite of
Order; or the rules of Almanacke-makers, transpose Workidayes into the rooms
of Holidayes: yea, by my fea, and women shall hold Holy Days in such base
contempt, that though their Husbands do then shut up Shops, and lay not abroad
their Wares; yet shall the Wives fall close to work in their secret Chambers.

Diverse Grocers this year perhaps may break, for many Reasons, best known to
themselves: but (if Agrippa soble me not) those Apothecaries must have maine
good doings, whose Wives are surpassing ^aire, and their Doctors superlatiuely
famous for their practick and Chance-medley Science.

This year shall Religion be Mockers of Religion, are in the high way to
Reprobation.
scoft at, and a deep scandal struck on the Professors thereof: so that
Holiness shall be feign to hide its head, for fear of being branded with
that irreligious Nickname of Puritan; and many zealous Saints shall not dare,
outwardly to show the fruits of that Profession, which inwardly has taken
deep root in their hearts, lest they should be snapt up with the thorny teeth
of calumnious Reproach. But woe to the world (cry I) because of offenses: For
my better Genius tells me, that had it not been for these Moseses, these
heavenly stop-gaps, who by their powerful Ejaculations and prayers, have from
time to time, bung'd up the vessels of Gods wrath, it long ere this, had been,
in no less fearful manner, then plentiful Measure, powered down upon this
Kingdom, to its utter demolishment and perdition.

Diverse likewise this year, shall surfeit in sin and sensuality, wholly
anchoring their hopes on the Spanish Proverb, A Roma por todo, At Rome there
are Gr^ale a Friar in the fist, then live as you list.
Ablolutions enough for all manner of Transgressions: and so nuzzeling themselves
in all sorts of Naughtiness, at last shall dye of the A Disease, of which
many dye laughing.
Sardinian Disease. O may the Sun of Grace so shine into them, that at last
they may see (with melting souls) the Cimmerian blindness of their caltginous
Errors! And that is all the harm I wish them.

This year, shall more News be coined by the numerous * Multitude, in a
minute of an (...)Phocyl.
hour, then shall fall out to be true, in a Million of years: For diverse, out
of an ill-season'd, discomposed, and vn-occasion'd Affection, and fanaticall
Fancy, shall conclude infinite Infallibilities.

Many Monster-Muliers also of our Age, shall lay out large sums of Time,
about white-liming their cheeks, and blemishing the brightness of their
Creation; beginning their work in their beds betimes in the morning, and
ending it at Noone a little before the Cloth is laid: So that I may justly take
up this Spanish Proverb; and (if I dare come near them, for fear of
Infection) hurl it at their impious Impudence; That these painted * Puppets,
the more Que la Muger, quento mas mirare la cara, tanto mas destruye la casa.
curious they are about their faces, the more careless they are about their
houses; the reparation of the one, being the ruination of the other.

The loss of Memory, or the Lethall Evil, shall ceize upon them that shall
go drunk to bed: but to those who recluse themselves in Counters or other
places of dear reckoning, because they abhor the vanities of the world; and
to those that shall be swinged with French-Birch, or be struck with a
Gentleman-like disease; the curtallest day in Winter shall seem more tedious,
Annulus arctus, non gestandus, Pythag.
yea, and indeed shall produce more * wearisome hours, then S. Bar^abies day,
which Nature has decreed to be the longest in the year.

The Sundays (as if it were Bissextile, or Leapeyeare) shall be by a number
leaped over, so that a filme of Sensuality being drawn over their eyes, they
shall not for four, five, or six months together, be able (by the advice and
help of those that make the best waters, to recover eyesight) to see a
Church, but shall be struck with such Megrimes, and Vagaries of the brain,
that in stead of going to Church, they will (if my cunning faulter not) stumble
into a Tanerne.

The Dogge-dayes will all this year rage twice a week, and that very
furiously; but their forest outrage will be about the Beare-garden. The rising
also and declination of the Sun, shall be so miraculous; that albeit, it
shine never so brightly in our Horizon, yet there shall be certain persons
(and those close fellows too) that shall not have power at high-Noone to
behold it. The Moon also shall be so various in her influence, that as well
men as women shall be as mad in all the rest of the months, as in that of
Midsommer.

The setting up of a An intolerable liberty in a Christian Commonwealth.
Whorehouse this year, shall be as common, as the setting up of a Trade, yea,
and shall pass under that name. For a stock of two beds and four Wenches,
shall be sufficient to put a Madame Pimpernelle into present practice, and
bring them into reasonable doings. In these Shops of the World, the flesh, and
the devil, many souls shall be set to sale, and bodies exposed to Shipwreck:
for men and women there shall as Consuetude vim naturae obtinet propter
vetustatem, Cicero.
familiarly go into a Chamber to endanger one another on a Flock-bed, as into a
Tavern to make one another merry with Wine.

But give me leave (my little sweet sinful Citizens) to season your
dis-rellisht palates with this saucie counsel: That when you are misled with
lust (that Will-with wispe,) to those caves of Cockatrises, gather your selves
within this thought, That notwithstanding you seem to suck cool and supple
blandishments from their * moist-warme tongues, yet are they but like (...).
Binis fidibus con^t, Aristid. Non omnes qui habent Cytharam, sunt Cytharaedi,
Nar.
Sampsons Foxes, and carry fire in their tails: I mean, when you are hurried
with the heat of Concupiscence to any of those Limbo-patrums, and are at point
of entrance, then start back, as from a bed of Snakes, or as you would do
from a house, where a Red-crosse affronts the upper post of the door, and be
sure to recall this ancient Adage into your memory; Quicquid agis, prudenter
agas, and respice finem: the which for the lesse-learneds benefit I conster
thus: On what exploit soever you venture, be first well advised, and remember
the end. For this is probatum, whosoever rides long on the belly of Lechery,
shall be sure at last to be hurled at an Hospital gate.

A Paradoxe.
On St. Lukes day is there likely to happen such a confusion of Caterpillars at
Cuckoldshaven; as that this year there shall not die one Scricant; and yet in
all the 24. Wards of London, shall there be scarce one honest man found alive
of that claw-back Faculty.

Aliud agit, aliud simulas, Cic.
Drunkenness this year, shall turn * Machiauell, and play the Politician;
for though she cannot have license to keep open-house on the Sabbath Day, and
get her full swinge, to out-stare the Lam, to reele and ramble out of every
tipling-Schoole; by reason of some wholesome Inhibitions conceived against her
Irregularity; yet will she in the midst of divine Service, slily filtch her
self into the Tavern under a Churchwardens Gown; where she suddenly will
sacrifice more pence in pintes of Sack to her spoungie Lungs, then shall be
after the Sermon, distributed to the poor of the Parish; and at her coming
soorth, shall wipe her judicious chinne with such a composed gravity, as if
she had been searching those nests, for some birds of the same feather.

The governance of Scorpio, this year, shall be so flammigerous; that
Court-bloods shall so boil in their burning bosoms; as that the most
monstrous or manlike Lady of them all, shall be glad (not withstanding her
Stilletto) to run behind the Arras (perhaps you will think, of purpose to be
found there) to hide and preserve her Chastity from their irresistable fury;
but in Lust, lawl^sse,
this jumbling * combustion, poor Chamberpot Wenches shall be sure (how ere the
game goes) to go to the walls; where, to cry out, will be bootlesse, for they
shall be put in no stronger hopes, then to be used without pity, until the
storm be laid and ouerblowne. Absque vata ^ auda virtus, manca^* Orbis
gloria, Syn. Epist, 49.


Poets * who are virtues Crutches, and keep life in the dying world, this
year, shall be in a poor case: for if they be but taken napping with Haec
raro aus nunquam.
good Clothes on their backs, and store of money in their pockets; they shall
presently be apprehended by the Cities Anniuersaries, and clapped into the
Chronicles: but to prevent this danger, I hope, that Opus and Vsus, their two
daily Companions, will continually lie knocking at their Chamber doors, to
keep them waking.

Proh dolor! hinc lachryma!
Very few Footmen this year shall purchase Land: for that in the course of
their lives, they commonly are unstayed fellows, and most an end, carry
running heads.

This is likely to be an heavy year to poor * Q^isque portabit Onus.
Porters too: For though sundry Commutatiue differences fall between Merchant
and Merchant, Sale-men and Countrey-Chapmen, with other like accidental
occurrences; yet the Porters must bear the burden of it; and by the help of
* Pattence shall carry it away willingly: Patientia asininum onus, says a
Spaniard.
And besides, for that they are generally reputed, men of the best
vnder-standing, they shall this year be trusted with the weightiest matters of
the Commonwealth.

Trumpetters, of all other men, this year, had most need to carry Aqua-vitae
Bottles at their girdles; and the reason is; for that they are most subject to
sounding. And as for common Fiddlers; they shall scrape out a poor living out
of dried Cats-guts; and many of them shall this year be troubled with
abominable noyses and singings in their heads, insomuch as the most part of
them shall dye Beggars; or at the best, as bare as their Cloakes, or a base
Vyoll uncased; and those that survive, shall often feed on melody for want of
better meat.

And whereas the Ecclipses of this year shall be far remote from the sign
Pisces, it shows, that there shall be much stinking Fish at Belinsgate; and
that Queene-borrow Oyster-boates shall carry more Knaves then Honest men: but
let Fishwiues beware, left most of them this year, prove not insufferable
Scolds: yet because Pisces is a Sign that gouernes the feet, they shall wear
out more Shoes in Lent, then in any 2. months besides throughout the whole
year, and get their living (liking the wandering * Jew) Read Trundle, in his 1.
Tome of the Wandering Jew.
by walking and Crying; because they will rail against Pyecorner, and call
her, The foule-fac'd fulsome Slut of the City.

I should here unlock the Casket of my knowledge, (having well nie forgot) and
lay open some rarities concerning Qui b^na, bon^; mala malo redduns.
Players: but because the Commonwealth affoords them not their due desert; and
for they are men of some parts, and live not like lazy Drones, but are still in
Action; I am content silently to refer them to three Sublunary Felicities;
which are these: A Fair Day, a Good Play, and a Gallant Audience, and so let
them shift for their lives.

But now have I an horrible Months mind, to cut through the Main of the 12.
Months, in a particular successiue Order: but the Glass which Time has lent
me, being not filled with many hours, I will hoyst Sail, and only discover
six of them, and then cast Anchor.

Behold them therefore at hand, how they come frisking in single file one after
another, like so many Morice-Dancers, (my self being the Hobbyhorse) and
every Month wearing in his Cap, in stead of a Feather, Four unhandsome
wholesome Rimes; conformable to the fashion of our Neo^ericke Prognosticators.
And thus hear the Foreman of the Morice deliver his speech.

IANVARY.
This Mon'th drink you no Wine commixt with Dregs,
Eat Capons, and fat Hens with dumpling Legs:
Whether it bluster, Sleete, hayle, freeze, or Snow,
Be sure, that from the Fire you do not go.
Disposition of January.
THE First day of January being raw, cold and comfortless to such as have
lost their money at One being asked, what his Opinion was of Gaming, thus
replied: He that loses, loses Heaven, and he that winnes, winnes Hell.
Dice at one of the Temples ouer-night, strange apparitions are like to be
seen: Marchpanes marching betwixt Leaden Hall and the little Conduit in
Cheap, in such abundance, that an hundred good fellows may sooner starve,
then catch a corner, or a Comfit to sweeten their mouths.

It is also to be feared, that through frailty, if a slip be made on the
Messengers default that carries them, for non-deliuery at the place appointed;
that unless the said messenger, be not the more inward with his Mistress, his
Master will give him ribrost for his Newyeares-gift the next morning.

This day shall be given many more gifts then shall be asked for: and Apples,
Eggs, and Orenges, shall be lifted to a lofty rate; when a Pomewater bestucke
with a few rotten Cloves, shall be more worth then the honesty of an Hypocrite:
and half a dozen of Eggs of more estimation, then the Vows of a Strumpet.
Poets this day shall get mightily by their Pamphlets: for an hundred of
Eleborate Lines shall be less esteemed in London, then an hundred of Walfleet
Oysters at Cambridge.

Be not proud my nimble pated Mercuries: you that send forth your Pamphlets
fluttering about the City to fetch in Crowns: for ere this years Semicircles
meet, (if I ouershoot not my skill in Astrology) Quo Fata trabunt,
retra^untque sequamur, Virg.
Latin shall be set at a lower rate, then a Lobster; and Fat^^^ cuiq, quid
fleat, quid ^^^dea. Sen. Prou.
Greek stand begging in Paul's with a Paper on its breast, as a punishment,
that it should be so presumptuous, as to beg with an Heathen Tongue, in this
our Jewish Nation; and all this, long of a malignant Aspect of some pursie
Planet, that had rather hear an Ox of his own low in his Pasture, then a
Scholar declaime of Hospitality in his Larder.

The 2. 3. 4. and 5. of this Month, to begin the New year thriftily; He that
has any business of import abroad; the first thing he does, must be sure,
first to rise in the morning, before he go any whether. For though Albumazar
and Ptolomee talk of these Circumstances, yet my Books * warrant me; That
about Soper-Lanes end, (Heaven keep Printers from thence) these days early
Tant^ quisq^ i^tus amplius stultior, quanto o^natur exteri^^, sapiens videri.
Greg.
in the morning, if you set six double ribs of rost-Beefe, with Bread and
Drink suitable; ere a Sergeant can go to Paul's to say his prayers with a
sound Conscience, will be no more relics seen of the Rost-meate (I trow
well) then is at this day of great Illium.

The sixth of this Month; if your business ask not much have, it will be
better going by Land then by water to Brainford: and being like to be cold and
a close Sky, better putting into an * Testudo (...) tegumen tut^ est. Luc.
Alehouse at Putney, then to wing against wind and tide without a tilt-Cloath
to Richmond bank.

About six a clock in the morning (the tide serving well at Queen-hiue) he
that sups not ouernight, and lands at the Court with Purse and stomach empty,
unless he find some friend to comfort him, six to four, he could find in
his heart to venture the stealing of the Guards Chine of Beef: which thing to
do, would be an Herculean task, considering the great Fire-forke so near,
and so many sharp shauers at hand, Champions for the Beef and the Bombard.

This day about the hours of 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and 10. yea in some places till
midnight well nigh, will be such a Massacre of Spice-bread, that ere the next
day at noone, a Two-penny brown Loaf will set twenty poor Folks teeth on
edge: which hungry humor will hold so violent, that a number of good fellows
will not refuse to give a statute Merchant of all the Lands and goods they
enjoy, for half a Crowned worth of Two-penny pasties.

And if on this night there be never so much Masking in the Strand, Cheapside,
Holburne, or Fleetstreet, yet it is to be thought, (propter Sympathiam) there
will be as hot Revels without Libido nullo loco excluditur.
Torch-light, in * White-friers, Turnbull, Fieldlane, etc. at Noone days, as
you shall find at Antwerpe in Lepwel-Street, or London in Peticote-Lane.

For the residue of the days dispositions of this Month, I find they will be
conformable to the former, and far different from that, which our annual
Prognosticators shall foretell of them: Therefore lest my Pen should freeze to
my fingers ends, I will abandon the Company of this Clumzy-fisted Gray-bearded
January, and leave him to blow his Nails.

FEBRVARY.
If thou have store of Cash, drink Muskadine,
And choose a young Wench to thy Valentine:
For she that is queasie, ouer-worne and Old,
Can make no music in a Month so Cold.
FEBRVARY fill-dike: An old saying and a true; for it is like this year to
fill Dike, I can tell you, but not fill Dickes belly: For according to the
course of Astrology, the Charity of men will refrigerate extremely with the
weather; both being as cold as the Harrowes Bottle-Beere was the last year on
Christmas even, which warmed me at the heart, like the croking Call of a
carrion Constable at midnight, abetted by his barbarous Bill-men to encounter
me. Twenty seven of these 28. days, Men, Women, and Children, are like to
fill the Ditches in some Countries, and make poor Cabbins in high ways, for
want of warmer Stowage, long of a swarm of cruel Caterpillars, that * Quis
metus aut pudor est v^quam proper axtis ^^ari!
Cormorant-like shall swallow the patrimonies of the Widows and Fatherless,
who disburse no more benevolence at their doors, then comes from the poor,
out of the back Gate of the Sauoy.

But that I am a Prognosticator and no Preacher, (my small honest friends) I
could else render you some sauory Sentences out of holy Writ, against this
hardness of heart, contempt, and covetousness, that might perhaps move you never
a whit to amend: but because you care as little for Sermons as Almanackes, and
all one, I will leave you to your Idolatry, who have seen more Angels on Earth,
then ever you shall see in Heaven; (unless you repent) hang me else (Usurers)
and let me lack no Rope.

To the Ninth day of this Month, such will be the sharpness of the weather for
the most part; that it will be as good walking in a fur'd Gown, as in a
Doublet cut upon stark naked: and as good Dining well in a matted Chamber, as
Dialoguing with Duke Humphrey in Paul's.

This day will be such stormy weather in Westminster Hall, that some through
the fullness of grief, and emptiness of Purse, will go nie to burn his
Capcase, and be glad to take 13. groates de claro for his gray-Maro.

The 10. 11. and 12. days, such a slaughter shall be committed in East-Cheape,
St. Nicholas Shambles, Southwarke, and Smithfield-Barres, that for 6. weeks
and upward, some one or two Carnifices in those corners, are like to do
Penance, and stand all day under a white Sheet, selling that for two Shillings,
that they might well afford for 16. pence; if they did not pay some 40. Marks
for a License: which indeed forces the Fishmongers take up this cold
complaint, and say truly: Licentia sumus omnes deteriores; and wish wisely
besides, that such Patents did not prove Patent oppressions?

Description of Shroue-Tuesday.
But now stand off (my friends) give room I say: for here must enter that
wadling, stradling, bursten-gutted Carnifex of all Christendom; vulgarly
enstiled Shroue-Tuesday, but more pertinently, sole-monarch of the Mouth, high
Steward to the Stomach, chief Ganimede to the Guts, prime Peer of the
Pullets, first favorite to the Frying-pans, greatest Bashaw to the
Batterbowles, Protector of the Pan-cakes, first Founder of the Fritters, Baron
of Bacon-flitch, Earl of Egge-baskets, and in the least and last place, lower
Warden of the Stinke-ports. This corpulent Commander of those chollericke
things, called Cooks, will show himself to be but of ignoble education; for
by his manners, you may find him better fed then taught where ever he comes:
For he feeds fulsomly on nothing but flesh, of purpose to empty Plenties
Palace, to fill the dirty draught; and deuoures with delight, only to
impouerish Heavens Bounty, and quite eraze the race of Rost-meate.

By the revolution of the Stars, this is also infallible, the sign being in
Pisces; That Fishmongers shall sell more fish in six weeks this year, then
in sixteen after Easter: by which I divine, That he that makes his dinner with
red Herrings on a Sunday, would be Esurienti (Lu-po) ne occurras, Thcocrit.
glad with all his heart of a loyne of Veale, to close his stomach; which
because he cannot so conveniently cate at noone days in new Fish-street, I
wish him to the Bars in Smithfield, or a little beyond, where for money he
may have flesh at all times of the day.

From the 13. to the 20. of this present Month, what weather soever comes, ye
shall at all times of the day find such good Customers in Paul's, that for
three single yards of Satin, will seal with you to a * Cum maxim fallit,
bonus vir videri vult.
Recognizance of an hundred pound howsoever: but it is to be feared, Mercury
being predominant, that a day or two before the day of payment, one March blast
will blow them to Virginia; who when once being gone, you shall find a measure
of Hercules foot, as sufficient, as their obligation ever after.

For the residue of the days of this Month, if the snow fall but a foot
thick, are like to be seen such formidable Monsters, Bears, Lions,
Elephants, and Unicorns, in Cheapside, Cornehill, Fleetstreet, and
Paules-Church-yard, that some shall not dare to put their heads out of door,
or walk the streets for fear of snapping: others, shall gather up on credit,
as much as they can, and then take Ludgate for Sanctuary: nay, and I fear me
too, that the proudest Astrologer of us all, shall not dare to * Semper plus
a^^nus metuit, ignorans (...).
venture by the Poultry gate; lest he should be ceaz'd on, and hurried too into
a Gulf, where he shall see nothing but Misery charactred on the naked walls,
lowzie lodging, and men walking up and down like affrighted Spirits in
Purgatory, crying out on Conscience, and Cousnage, their continual Companions.

Dij talem terris auertite pestem. MARCH.
Walk warm within thy Chamber or thine Hall;
March not too fast, lest thou do catch a fall:
And better is the dust (when winds do rise,)
To lie beneath thy feet, then in thine eyes.
MARCH, my books say, is this year like to be wet and windy. The 1. 2. 3. 4.
and 5. day, such weather, that if it rain a pace, it will be better and dryer
going in Thamesstreete in a pair of liquor'd Neates-leather Boots, then in a
pair of Spanish leather Pumpes: and far worse marching over Hownslow heath
without a Cloak, then with one.

The 6. 7. 8. and 9. days; if it power downeright in the after noone, it will
be as good tarying at an honest Alchouse, and take impost, as going to a
bowling Alley, and loose every bet.

The 10. 11. and 12. if the Clouds swell, and tend to skuds, though it thunder
not aloft, yet six to four, once ere night, it will so thunder in
Turne-againe-Lane, that the * Fish-wiues will Caninam facundiam exercent, Salu^^
fight a combat with Belins-gate Playce: whereof this year shall be such
stinking store, that a man had better hang them at his back, then put them in
his belly.

Till the 26. of this Month, the weather will be so raw and raynie, that never
a Merchant, Metcer, Grocer, Draper, Fishmonger, Goldsmith, Haberdasher,
Skinner, Salter, Iron-monger, or Vintner, but had as lieue deliver for ready
money, as for days, to the best Chapman, Courtier, or Customer he has: and
moreover, will arise such gales of pestiferous gusts, that not a Physician, or
Surgeon in the Town, but had rather have a rich man to his Patient, then
one who has neither money to give in earnest nor in jest.

The 26. 27. and so to the end of this Month, you can guess as well as I,
what weather will happen: marie this I find in many more Authors, then either
you or I have ever seen or heard of, That he that has not his Pecuniae sunt
necessariae, sine quibus n^^^l recte geripotest, Demost. 3. Olynth.
Rent ready some one of these days, being the last of March; may perchance hop
without his house in April, unless happily his Featherbed reprieue him, and
his Landlord freely and friendly give him leave to lie in the straw, till the
day of Redime come on.

A few flawes are like to fall the latter end of this Month; which foul
weather, if it hold, will keep some so fast in the Counter, as that without an
Habeas corpus, or a better comprimise, they are not likely to walk abroad in
have. As for thunder and lightning, you shall be sure to have more store this
Month, at the Fortune in Golding-lane, then in Graues-end Barge, or in
Westminster Hall, in a long Vacation.

APRIL.
Aprils softshowers, as ancient Authors say,
Bring in and beautify the flowers of May:
Whether thy Doublet be or thick or thin,
It Is better to be warm, then wet to the skin.
APRIL showers bring May flowers. This is as true as February fill-dike: and
indeed if showers fall fast in April, it is like enough that some bodies
money and gold will be clean washed out of their purses ere May: For the 1. 2.
and 3. day of this Month, a shoulder of Mutton will then be in as good
request, as at any time of the year before or after.

The 4. or 5. and sixth, shall be many more suites of apparel worn, then will
be paid for: and more money Nullum bonum est, quo quis male non vtatur.
bestowed on fat Lambs in Eastcheape, then will be given to all the poor
between the Tower and Westminster.

The 7. 8. 9. and 10. young men shall wax so covetous, that they shall seek
to ceize on all the pretty Wenches they can come by; and old men so lusty and
wanton, that a wealthy Widow shall be better welcome unto them, then a pure
poor virgin, that has never a penny to her marriage. Batchelours wives, and
maidens children in these days are like to be well taught, and more
seeming-friendship to be had in an house of Transgression for a French-crowne,
though it be a bald one, then at Belins-gate for a box o'th ear.

The 11. 12. and 13. shall be much deluing with Spade and Pick-Axe, amongst
Gardeners: But this I must tell you, that not one pot of gold so found or taken
up, shall ever be drawn in question at the Exchequer, or come into the Cryers
mouth at Fortuna faue^^atuis.
Alders-gate. And if peradventure one or other with his Mattocke hit upon any
such mischance; if he repair the ruins of some Church with it, presently he
forfeits his eyesight, and ten to one, will lack money, ere he dies, to buy
his dinner.

From the 13. to the 21. the weather shall be so variable, that he who lies in
Lud-gate, and becomes a close fellow, shall not wear out so many shoes in a
day, as a foot-post will do in a whole twelue-moneth; and those that lie
encountered, shall be sure to have a dry house over their heads, when their
Creditours (perhaps) go dabbling up and down in the dirt: but for that Venus
will be in conjunction with Mars, it presageth; that many a sturdy knaue-Ostler
will be busy with the Sinon cast, ^^men caute.
Kitchin-maid in the manger, while their Mistresses silver Whistle keeps time
to their Trench-more.

About this time, new Plays will be in more request, then old* and if company
come current to the Bull and Curtain, there will be more money gathered in one
afternoon, then will be given to Kings-land Spittle in a whole month. Also,
if at this time, about the hours of four and five, it wax cloudy, and then
rain downeright, they shall sit dryer in the Galleries, then those who are the
understanding men in the yard.

In the rest of this Month will be such moisture stirring, that if some do
not look warily this Spring to the English Rheum, it may chance turn the
next fall to the French -- P.

In the last quarter, No more pity to see a widow weep, then to see a Goose go^
barefoot.
Widows that follow their Husbands howling to the Church, will drill such
showers of sorrow from their eyes, as that ere the burial banquet be fully
ended, they will be more then half sped of fresh bed-fellowes.

For the storms, showers, gusts, flawes, and Changes incident in this Moon, I
might set down a more: concise Discourse, if I could tell how: but let this
satisfy, that in this Month, many Ca^aclismes will fall in the bottomes,
flats, and low grounds, that will bring forth such fruit in February, as will
go alone with a little help within forty weeks after.

MAY.
To Islington and Hogsdon, runs the stream
Of giddie people, to eat Cakes and Cream.
Which is far wholesomer, with Sugar in,
Then in the dirt, to wade up to the chin.
MAY is the merry month, and may not be put beside his iocund humor: yet on
the first day betimes in the morning, shall young Fellows and Mayds be so
inucloped with a mist of wandering out of their ways, that they shall fall into
ditches one upon another, and there shall the young men lie for a little while,
not being able to stand, while the Maids after their downe-falls, being
astonished, shall rise sooner then they would do. Yet in the afternoon, if the
sky clear up, shall be a stinking stir at Picke-hatch, with the solemn
revels of Morice-dancing, and the Hobbiehorse so neately presented, as if one
of the Masters of the Parish had played it himself. Against this high day
likewise shall be such preparations for merry meetings, that diverse durty-Sluts
shall bestow more in Cit^ ignomi^ia fit superbi gloria, Sy r. Omnium super^ia,
procedit ex sui ignoratione.
Stuff, Lace, and making up of a Gown, and a Peticote, then their two years
wages comes too, besides the benefit of Candles ends, and Kitchin-stuffe.

This day shall be erected long wooden Idols called May-poles; whereat many
greasy Churles shall murmr, that will not bestow so much as a Faggot-sticke
toward the warming of the Poor: an humor, that while it seems to smell of
Conscience, savors indeed of nothing but Covetousness.

From the 1. to the 23. day, he that lives to see them, shall see more broken
heads at Cudgels under the Zenith of London, then Angels or French Crowns in
the poor men's Box at Ludgate. And within the compass of these days, shall
there happen such a tenebrous obfuscation of the Sun, that in all Great
Britain shall you hardly discern a common Horse-courser from an arrant Knave.
As for Tailors and Millers, such shall be their Conscience, that work Mercury
never so mightily, they shall steal nothing, but that which is brought unto
them.

The residue of this pleasant Month, will be Congruous to the sweet Season,
only it will be somewhat bleake in the mornings, which will so Difficulter
r^^iduntur vitia, quae nobiscum creuerunt. Seneca.
cool the Hospitality of many a Country-Gentleman, as being in hope to buy
Fowls better cheap in St. Nicholas-Shambles, then kill them with his own
Hawks, he will leave his Bayliffe, and his Dairy-Maydes to multiply together
at home, and either sojourne with some Citizen, for the love of his Wife; or
keep a Garden-House, and a fresh Wench, some-where about the Suburbs.

JUNE.
Take heed of tossing Balls until you sweat,
And to be swelted with unkindly heat:
Yet though the time serve, you your Sheep may sheare,
It Is better have good Clothes, then none to wear.
THE 1. 2. and 3. of this Month, the weather is like to be^ so inconstant in
disposition; as that he who has made an ill bargain at Algate, shall Criminis
Medidicina princeps ipsa poenitentia, Arrian.
repent him twice, ere he come to Charing-Crosse. And Painters shall prove the
craftiest Corporation in the City: for whatsoever business they take in hand,
they shall find some Color for it.

The 4. 5. 6. and 7. if the weather prove fair, many men's eyes shall be so
dazeled with the illustrious coruscation of the Sunbeams; That A trick of
legerdumain, called Deceptio visus.
they shall meet a * Tailor in the street, and take him to be some Knight: and
presently after meet a Knight, and think him to be a Gentleman of some Noble
descent.

About this Month's 8. 9. and 10. shall Diseases reign powerfully in this
Realm, and especially the swelling-Euill; insomuch as diverse fat
gorrell-gutted Churles, shall have golden Tumors and Tympanies in their purses.

But if they be long let alone (an hundred to one) some one or other of them
will never see well, till he be Sheriff of his Shire, or have bought his
neighbors House over his head for a favor. Beggars at this time shall be no
choosers, unless it be Robin-Hoods choice; Either this or nothing. Brewers
also shall by exchange, take up money out of the Thames without Bill or
Assurance, and turn Water into double Beer, without miracle.

Hackney-men this Month, shall be prodigiously Planet-strucke: For he that
takes six Shillings for three days hyre of a Curtoll; may happen never to set
eye of him, till his tail has attained a seven years growth: such kind *
Fallere fallentem non est fraus.
Customers shall they meet with, this fair weather, that because Hay and
Horse-meate are dear, they will give them the running of a Nag or Gelding all
their lifetime for nothing.

Till the 20. th of this Month of June; the Weather is like to show so serene a
browe; That Watermen shall row in their Shirts up and down the River: And he
that plyes a man at Paules-wharse, with his Cap in's hand for a Penny; shall be
as ready to out-braue him in scuruy terms, the next day on the Banke-side, or
the Beare-garden, as if he were a Gentleman of Five hundred pounds Land per
Annum.

The 21. 22. and 23. of this Month, will be good shearing Sheep, and better
owning them. These days, it is to be doubted, that Gentlemen and wealthy
Countrey-chuffes, will so fleece their poor neighbors, that twenty Tenements
shall fly at once into one Manner-house, and a goodly large Common transformed
to a Park, for cumbring the Parish.

These days the Ecclipses chancing in Cancer, sole house of the Moon:
Colliers, Smithes, Blacking-boyes, Armorers, and Chimney-sweepers, are like to
wear the foulest Faces in the City: and Ladies, Landresses, and curious
Sempsters, the fairest hands. etc About this time of the year, will be far
better rising to Prayers then at St. Andrewes-tide: and St. Antlins Church
better filled at six in the morning, then in February or March at hye Noone.

In this Season the weather being as fair as it will be, an ambling Nag shall
be as easy for an Old man to ride on, as an hard Trotter: and he that is
perplexed with an Ague, shall be more desirous to keep his Bed, or the
Chimney corner, then to back a great Horse in a Scottishsaddle. Scholars
likewise shall be kindly entreated, the rather, for it is the latter end of
the Quarter; and Tutors as ready to receive Quarteridge, as read Logic
Lectures to their Pupils.

The 24. 25. and so onward to the end of this Month, though the weather shall
be extremely hot, yet shall Satin be as fair wearing as Sackcloath; and a
perfumed Leather Ierkin, as good as a pair of Sheepe-skin breeches: Velvet,
though it wear best in the Winter, shall be far dearer then Buckram; and
Silke-stockings not so good cheap, as linen Boot-hose.

About these days, if the Lions in the Tower roar, as they were wont; a
seaming-lac'd Shirt, and an open-sleeu'd Doublet, shall be bought cheaper for
ready money, then upon lackadandies bond; though it be sealed with his wooden
stump at the Wrestling place.

In this Month, let Graues-end Barge look to her freight; for lie the winds
never so low; if there be neither Lowse, nor Flea, Knave, nor Drab; Thief, nor
Whore in it, it will sink between Wapping and Woolwich, a Noble to a Groat.

For posting between Dover and Graues-end; howsoever the Tide fall by day or
night; the softer you ride, (the sooner I will not say,) the safer you come to
your iourneys end. And this I can tell you; though the weather toward the
latter end of this Month be never so hot; yet he that lies in the bottom of
the Thames two hours together, were as good be on the Temple-stayres
starke-naked, with an hundred pound of his own in a bag under his arm.

The two last days of this Month, will be as good a time to lay a furred
Gown to pawn as in any season of the year; unless it be to be used for a
greater exigent, as to bribe a Sergeant, so to euolue out of a more intricate
danger: then (all excuses set apart) pawn Gown, or whatsoever, according to
the old aduerbe: Better suffer a mischief then a conuenience.

Now at the close should I lead you up into those spangled Palaces above us,
and show you * According to the opinion of all Astrologers.
two and twenty thousand Stars, and tell you the names of them all; then bring
you into the Planets banqueting house, where you might behold their glorious
Magnificence: but because they are (like bad Tenants here below) always
removing, I know not where to find them: The Sphaeres harmonious
conglomerations, etc. but some wiser then some, therefore for these trifles, I
refer you to the reading of Doctor Dondolo: Only take this decurtate
conclusiue prediction along with you for a parting blow, as touching obnoxious
accidents: That it will be far better for the bodies and purses of men to
drink Bottle-Ale moderately, then Claret, or Sack excessiuely: and far
worse for a woman to receive a thumpe o'th back with a stone, or a pop in the
eye with a stick; then have a mess of whitebroath, or a Iowle of fresh-Cod to
dinner.

Lenuoy.
THVS far (my capricious Construers) have I guided you, by the slender twist
of my cackling Skill, through the Labyrinth of this busy Season of six
Months: So that by this time, I doubt not, but you are substantially
instructed in Jack Dawes Dialect; which is, (suting to the garb of all us
Astrologers) to prattle much, to little purpose. Therefore, lest my too-much
chattering should pester the ears of Patience, I will now take wing, and fly
from out this contagious Climate, into some Solitary and sacred place; where
(after pruning my infected feathers) I will re-edisie my towzed Nest, and there
carefully hatch up the other six Months; which shall be fledge and ready to
fly the next Term, or never. But here suppose me to speak Spanish; or
promise Quousque and mean to perform upon Advantage. Till when, I hopefully
Conclude, to have left behind me such an evident Demonstration of my unparalleled
Practice in Starre-staring, as shall induce the both meanest, and most
judicious, to say; That (well fare his Chaps) -- Mouet Cornicula risum.

OIONISMA: OR A Cox-comicall Prediction of this succeeding years Production.
1623. (*)
OVt of high Self-conceit, I forth could chatter,
Such monstrous Omens, as it makes no matter,
To win a windy Reputation from
Phlebean Breath, as (* wisely) have done some; Sc^ptic^.

And so tho Turne-Key draw upon my back:
Qui nescit tacere, loqui nescit.
But I have Wit enough to keep my ^ clacke,
And not ore-swell my Banks; as did that Flood,
Who soyl'd his purer Current in the Mudde
of Scandal; whose foul stigmaticke deep Shame,
Was struck so home, as 'twill out-last his Name.
I cannot Cogge, though I can talk Non-sonse;
Maugre Eaues-dropping slye Intelligence:
For who faines Truth unto a false Intent;
May some sharp Ulcer play on's Fundament
The Spanish-Panin; or else the English Horse
Of Wood, dis-mount him, and stop's Natures course.
Heavens bless the King: And God good-speed the Plough:
If Corn be plentiful, wee's have enough:
If It chance to Rain or Shine; or both, or either,
We shall be sure to have foul, or else fair Weather.
If Flattery be sent packing from the Court,
Falsehood in the City, shall in Truthfull sort
Then stuff each Shop: when Good-things come, Bad fly;
If Fish want Water, they must needs be Dry.
If fruitless Strife, the Country do dis-ease,
Then Lawyers must (its fury to appease)
Take Fees a both sides. This I dare presage,
That the clear Sun never looked on such an Age
Of untamed Badnesse, as will take's Carreere
Quite through the Circle of this sequent Year.
I am not yet excentricke; I know how
To scrue up Vice, and Virtue to allow.
But to all Knaves this mostly will appear;
That Fools had never less Wit, than th have this Year.
Would I had Crowns* enough: I, those for me;
One thousand and Six hundred Twenty three.
And no more.
Some Faults have escaped: Such Faults Good-men can mend:
The Printer's faulty: for it was truly pe'd.

