Clinton, Purser and Arnold, to their Countrymen wheresoever.

Wherein is described by their own hands their unfeigned penitence for their
offenses past: their patience in welcoming their Death, and their duetiful
minds toward her most excellent Majesty.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf and are to be sold at the middle shop in the
Poultry, joining to S. Mildredes Church.



LOrdinges that list to hear a dreery tale,
where every Comma shows a Corosiue:
Set mirth apart, and strike your pleasant sail,
my sighs may serve your laden barks to drive,
along the shore where sorrows Ships arrive:
Whose case is such as when you shall have scand
Say as you see, and set my sighs on land.
Not long since then, I held a hapless Ship,
precisely rigged, and furnished for the nones:
Whom nothing crazed, till Fortune began to trippe,
and dashed my state so stiffly against the stones,
as brake my Bark, and bruised all my bones:
But if I say, my sin deserved the same,
In telling truth I merit meaner blame.
When red as blood the Horizon appeared,
about the door, which lets forth the day,
And when the morn, the mist had scarce ycleerd,
amidst the Seas, we furrowed forth our way
with hope before that harbored our decay.
But who too late preuentes alluring charms,
With us too soon shall sorrow for his harms.
Two lofty sail, from out the lovely East
it was our hap vnhaply to descry:
I wish they had been further in the West,
when graceless we to greet them came so nie.
But who fares well, whom Fortune does defy.
We stoupt, we struck, and vaild, when we had seen,
The Arms of England, and our noble Queen.
We knew the Lion would not hurt the Lamb,
it was not fear, that forced us to be faint,
From hoater broils, too late we Victors came,
to know our friends we never made it quaint,
when we began yield, there needed no constraint,
For both my conscience, and my God can tell
I ever wished my Queen and country well.
But yet eftsoons, we at her mercy are,
for Life, or Death: as God and She shall please*
These be the Notes, that make my Music jar,
these be the Cliffes, to wit, my want of ease:
these be the sorrows, which succeed the Seas:
This is the Comma and the Corosiue too
That urge me more then some suppose they do.
And therefore since you see our case is such,
it shall not hurt to lend us your lament:
Though evil tongues abuse us ner so much,
imagining untruths of our intent,
there is a God can their despite prevent.
What though the weak be driven to the wall,
It Is foul to triumph in an others fall.
I help the helpless, but it was my worst,
good countrymen, with conscience way my case:
In deed I shot, but they discharged first
how could I choose but take it in disgrace,
when they so fierce, defide me to my face.
Admit I slew a merchant by my shot,
Good friends forgive me for I wished it not.
For if I had I might have harmd them more,
then I or did or deigned to desire
But The English still I loved on Sea and shore,
though they returned me hatred for my hire.
when I am dead they have what they require.
Yet I forget, forgive and pardon those,
Whom I befriended to become my foes.
But some could say, as secret as they seem,
through our supportes some perils they had past:
But stricken down, who dares of us esteem?
they fly not now, but they have faund as fast,
when foreign foes had made them all aghast:
When they have crept, and croucht to us for aid,
Like harmless birds, whom Falcones make afraid.
When even the Purser, with his piece on Poope,
in steed of Captain, carefully has stood:
In their defense, to make the Stallants stoop,
but his reward is wandered to the wood,
and they forget that ere he did them good.
But were they now as weak, as erst they were,
Then would they wish the silly Purser there.
Some faithless French are pleased to see perhaps,
that his good will has wrought him this reward:
Clapping their hands to hear of his mishaps,
which had his Realm and rightes in such regard,
and bet them back, that else your Martes had mard.
But look abroad, have care unto your Roades,
And cleanse your Coasts, of such unseemly Toades.
As for my self, I owe a due to Death,
and I respect it not, in that I die:
Only the manner of my loss of breath,
is cause that I for some compassion cry,
My soul is saved, where ere my body lie.
This makes me sigh, that faith unto my friend,
Has brought me thus, to this untimely end.
Thomas Walton alias Purser.

NE in furore, oh my sovereign God,
reprove me not in wrath I thee desire:
Let it suffice that with thy gracious rod,
I meekely take my death (of sin the hire)
no flesh may stand in thy consuming ire.
I ask no more so thou my sins forgive,
It Is one to me if I do die or live.
What else is life but as a sonny day,
which every cloud discoloureth and o'rcastes
What else is life but as we use to say.
the more agreeu'd the longer that it lasts,
what else is life but like to sudden blasts.
What else is life but being good or ill,
The very means our souls to save or spill.
Then lovely friends and such whose hap shall be,
to hear or read the tenor of my tale
As you have cause conjecture so of me,
whose blislesse life was never free from bale,
it were vain thus late to set my self to sale.
I Will say the sooth as God shall make me able,
For condemnd men have little cause to fable.
First then suppose that you in presence see,
an aged man of no great personage
Yet of a mind as many others be
more nobly bent then seemed by mine age,
who among the thickest thrust unto the Stage.
To breath abroad from my constrained breast,
The smoaky reekes of mine extreme unrest.
Arnold I hight by birth a gentleman*
of honest parents and in Hamshire borne
Well left to live when hapless I began,
in Th'Irish bogges a Soldier to be sworn,
howbeit a Priest was cause of all my scorn.
A worthless Priest a Priest of such despite,
As shadoweth that which should have given us light.
This spiteful Priest too rough in his revenge,
as one that sought to keep me under awe
My scarcefull purse not prelatelike did clenge
by busy suit wherein I was too raw,
as seemed by the lirch I got by law.
Whose lewd demurs to lengthen out their fees
Consumde my furs and clapped me up in freese.
This made me first to set my farms to sale,
this drove poor Arnall out of house and home
When I as rich as he that begs his ale,
amongst my friends enforced was to rome,
but friends are fendes when friendship should be shone.
For when my cause they thoroughly understood,
They said they grieved but could not do me good.
What rested then when this outrageous Priest
had wrackt me thus that never did him wrong
What rested then when fees my coin had fleecd,
that reft my friends in whom I hopt so long
naught as I saw but even to sing this song.
From such bad Priests, law bribes, and friends Sanz faith,
Deliver all good men poor Arnold says.
After a while though band, with bell and book
by God and mine endeavor I obtaind
A silly Bark and to the Seas betook
the crazed bones wherein such sorrow raignd
but soon I lost what I so slightly gaind.
My Bark was spoyld and I on shoore was set.
For spiteful hap to plague me better yet.
Strife, sorrow, cold, and many a care
began urge me now as fiercely as before
But as the subtle slyly slick their ware
in hope to pryse their marchandies the more,
not recking wrong so they increase their store.
So Fortune chose to use her finest charm,
When sooth to say, she sought my greatest harm.
For after this, upon our English Coast,
from Frenchmen there, a Pinnace Purser took
Of whose brave courage Britain well might boast,
if so they list in his exploytes to look
but idle ease can no adventures brook.
Purser on me this Pinnase straight bestowde,
Which wrought my pain and yet his pity showde.
Hence grew my grief here began my bale abound,
this was the path that led me forth to pain
There ran the Sea which my decay did sound,
thence came the cause that queld me once again,
and yet of Purser can I not complain
He franckly gave what I too freely used
Then blame not him for I his gifts abusde.
On Seas I met a sort of faithles French,
that through a leake their ship had welny lost
But I in pity sought the same to stench,
for which good deed they bad me fare well frost,
a tun of coals naught else my labor cost.
These coals by law the Jury did conuart,
To such a case as cooles me at the heart.
Short tale to make of force I must confess
my God my life no longer would defer
My Prince displeasde that I did so digress,
to warn the rest that otherwise might err
to cut me off, it also pleased her.
Yet lives he not that can in conscience say,
Purser or Arnold made one English pray.
But we abusde our Princes league and law,
through which in deed we did deserve to dye
For if we live not under sovereign awe
but senseless seek our own security
the public weal would perish presently.
As for my self as bitter as it is,
Welcome sweet Death for I have done amiss.
This only restes that my example charm
all other men heareafter to beware
For fear themselves incur as great a harm,
as we whose proofs of such importance are,
let rage and rigor among Deuines be rare,
For God he knows that his extremity
was only cause of my first misery.
He brocht my bale but his abode in laws
consumde my self and soakte my substance dry
No other like when men will strive for strawes,
which (though he caused) yet I forgive him I
and quyetly I am content to dye.
Fare well vain world with thine aluring shows,
And welcome Death the end of all my woes.
FINIS
Arnold.

Clinton to his Country men
AMongst the most not least in his laments,
give Clinton leave to wail his inward woes
Whose sore mishap whose sharp and hard events
sufficient method for his matter shows
but who can alter what the Heavens dispose.
Let mortal men determine what they list,
The heavenly powers their purpose can resist.
Then mourn with me the stay of vain estate,
whose brickle steps are slippery and unsure
What though proud Fortune puffed up with hate,
untimely thus my timeles end procure,
I recke her not her rage can not endure.
Her greatest triumph I esteem as toys,
For why my hope disharbors mine annoyes.
Though not my power yet may my pitious plaintes
without offense be thrust amongst the rest
Alas my Lordings what? they are not Saints,
is sin unseen because it is suppressed?
no, God does search the secrets of the breast.
And surely such are more then most unwise.
That think sin safe, not seen with mortal eyes.
The bushie wood, the grove, th'obscured hurst,
the secret cave, the surging furrowed Seas
Whereon to venture I too ventrous durst
as now I feel unto my want of ease
lie plain as plats when th'heuenly power shall please.
No ship so swift their speedy passage make
But with a trice he can them over take.
Wealth, worldly wit, Ambition or Renown,
nor ought on earth so parmanent abides
But fickle Fortune sometime pulls them down,
so vain we are, so soon our honor slides,
so trustles she, whose mirth to mischief glydes.
Our pains endure our pleasures are but short,
But what auailes the heedlesse to exhort.
My self sometime not least in Fortunes love
may best give instance of her great disgrace
Which whilom liude amidst the heave and shoue.
and among the proudest gaind the chiefest place,
till trustlesse she began turn away her face.
Till she (too sharp) returned me check and mate
And topside turuey turned mine estate.
Besides my self who bare so brave a sway,
who reigned more then I that ruld the roast?
Who durst resist if I did him gainsay?
and boldly be it spoke withouten boast,
who more then Clinton scowrd in every coast
who help the helpless more, (say what they shall)
Then Clinton did that came at every call.
A world to see how wretched tongues are bent,
to thunder forth the fables which they feign
who with their lewd illusions so content,
they blaze abroad what comes in their brain,
when (God he knows) they wot not what they sayen
Condemning Clinton for the cruelest Rouer,
That euersaild Sea, and yet their mouths run over
Yet such they are, as work my present woe
as unacquainted with my better deeds
And I have rescude many as they know,
but my good works are choked up with weeds,
such kankered malice their supposes feeds.
The Londoners whereof I need not boast
Regard me least whom I have favored most.
But who can cure so venomous a sly,
as slanders forge in credulous conceates
My nommed heart that frosen was before,
for thought of this amidst my sorrows sweates.
their false report like rust my credit eats.
Their double tongues although they do me wrong,
Are only cause I sing this Swanlike song.
Poor I that sought to pleasure each oppressed,
pdore I that sought to cure another pain
Poor I that watched when others took their rest,
poor I that did my countries cause maintain
poor I that saved, must now my self be slain.
Poor I that wished my Queen and countries wealth
Am now suppressed, but hope vpholdes my health.
Then give me leave to breath abroad my moanes,
whose life or death my Prince may take or give
And though they stand like stocks and sensles stones
whom I have help whilst I in hap did live,
and sooner might have filled an empty sieve.
The time has been when they to please me pressed,
But now they dare not cause, I am distressed.
who more my foes then whom I pleasured most
who seek my life, but such as plain of peace
who dig my grave, who persecute my ghost,
who to procure my ruin sooner prease,
Then hate and slander coupled in a lease?
But God is just and he in mercy will,
Forgive my sins and plague them for their ill.
Lo Lordings thus I leave my last adue
for you to scan what ere of me become
It Were vain for me to tell that were untrue,
you may believe what I herein have done
my pain is past though yet my glass does run.
This grieves me most that many a poor man lackes
The gelt that I have given the Sea by sackes.
FINIS.
Clinton.


