A SOVEREIGN CORDIAL FOR a Christian Conscience.

Content thy self with patience,
with Christ to bear the cross of pain
which can and will the recompense,
A thousand fold with joys again
Let nothing cause thy heart to quail
Lau^ch out thy bote, hoise up the sail
Put from the shore.
And be thou sure thou shall atain
Unto the port that shall remain,
For evermore.
From Roane the. xi. day of May Anno Domi. M. D. Liiii.
A SOVEREIGN CORDIAL for a Christian conscience.
BE not a fraid (most dearly beloved in our Savior Christ) at these most
perilous days, wherein by the sufferaunce of God, the Mar. xiii
prince of darkness is broken loose, and rages in his members against the elect
of God, with all suttelty, Apo. xx.
to set up again the kingdom of Antechrist, against whom se that ye be strong
in faith, to resist their i. Pet. v.
diuelishe doctrine with the pure gospel of god, arming your selves Philpi. i.
with patience to abide whatsoever be laid unto your charge, for Act. xiiii.
the truths sake, knowing that thereunto you be called, not only i. Pet. iii
to believe in him* but also to suffer for him. O how happi are ye, that Acts.
v.
in the sight of God are counted worthy to suffer for the testimony of Christ*
quiet therefore your selves (oh my loving brethren) and rejoice in him for whom
you suffer, Ezi. lxiiii i. Cor. ii. Apo. xvii
for unto you do remain th^se unspeakable joys* neither eye has seen,
nether ear has herd, neither the heart of man is able to comprehend. Be not
afraid therefore of the bodily death, for your names are written in the book of
life. And the prophet does record that in the sight of the Lord, precious is
the death of his saints. Psa. cxv. Luk xxi. Mat. vii.
whatch therefore and prai, that ye be not prevented in the day of te^ptacion.
Now comes the day of your trial, wherein the waters rage and the stormy winds
blow. Now shall it appear whether you have builded upon the fleting sands, or
upon the immovable rock Christ, which is the foundation of the Apostles and
prophets, where on eueri house that is builded grows into an holy temple to
the Ephe. ii.
Lord by the mighty working of the holy ghost. Now aprocheth the day of your
battle, wherein it is required that you show your selves the valeaunt
soldiers of II Tim. i^ Ephe. vi. Philip. ii
Jesus Christ* armed with the armor of God, that ye may be able to stand sted
fast against all the crafty assaults of the devil. Christ is your captain,
and you be his christians, whose cognisaunce is the Hebr. xii. Collos. i. 1.
Pete. v. Math. x.
cross, to the which he willinglye humbled himself, even unto the death, and
has therbi spoiled his e nemies. and now triu^pheth he over the^ in the glory
of his father, making intersession for us that here are to be fulfilled in his
mystical body. Vt behooves therefore every one that will be counted his scholar,
to take up each one his cross and follow Christ, as ye have him for an example,
being assured that he being on your side* nothing Rom* viii Matthew xxviii.
Apoc. vi. i. ^oti. i. ii. Tit. iii.
shall be able to prevail against you* and that he will be with you unto the
worlds end* ye have his promis in the* xx^ iii of Matthew* he will go forth with
his host like a conqueror to make a conquest. He is the man that sits on
the white horse crowned with immor talitie* and ye brethren are his fellowship*
whereof he is the head. He has your hearts in his hands as a bow bent after
his godly will, he shall direct the same after the riches of his grace into al
spiritual and heavenly cogitacions* he is faithful and will not further suffer
i. Cor. x.
you to be assaulted, then shall be a boue your power, and in the most danger
he will make a way, that ye may be able to bear it. Shrink i. Pet. iii. Exodus
iiii
not therefore dear hearts, whether you shall be called, for the hope that is in
you, for ye have a comfortout* even the spirit of truth, Psa. xxxi
which was sent from the heaven, to teach us, he shall speak in us, Luke xiii.
he shall strengthen us* what is he then that will be able to confound Acts. ii.
us? nay* what tirau^t is he that now bosteth him self of his strength Psalm.
cl.
to do mischief* whom the Lord shall not in the sayings by the mouth of his
servants stryke down to hell fire? ye suddenly will the Lord bring down the
glory of the proud Philistian* by the hand of his servant David. Their i. Re.
xvii
strength stands in the spear and shield* but our help is in the name of the
Lord* which has made Psalm. lx.
both heaven and earth He is our buckler* wall, and tower of defense, ii Cor.
vi
he is our god* and we are his people, he shall bring the counsel of Heb. viii.
the ungodly unto naught. He shall Psa. lxxx
take them in their own net, he shall destroy them in their own inventions, the
right hand of the Lord Psalm. cxi.
shall work this wonder, his power is known among the children of men, their
fathers have felt it, and Psalm. lii
are confounded. In like manner shall their children know that there is no Psalm.
lxv.
counsel against the lord, when their secrets ar opened unto the world i. Cor.
xi.
and are found to be against the living God, work they never so crafteli,
build they never so strong lie* yet shall their Babell fall down, and the
builders them selves shall be scatered upon the face of the Psa. xciii
earth, as accursed of God. The just shall see this and be glad, and praise the
name of the lord, that so mercifully has dealt with his servants, as to
bring their enemies Genesis iiii. Genesis xxi.
under their feet. Then shall the fearful seed of Cain tremble and quake.
Then shall the more king Ismalittes be cast out of the Gene. xi.
door: Then shall the proud Nempro these his labor lost. The^ shall Phil, iii.
the host of Babylon be trodden under foot, then shall the Scribes and
Pharisees for madness fear and rage. Then shall their wisdom be Psalm. ii.
known for extreme folly. Then shall the bloody dragon be void 1. Cor. iii.
of his pray. Then shall the whore of Babylon, receive a double vengeance,
Psalm. xc.
then shall the market me^ of the beast, come unto an open Job. v. Apoc. xii
shame, then shall they scratche their crowns for the very fall of the
monstrous harlot (whom now Ap. xviii. Apo. xiii. Ap. xviii.
they serve for filthye lucre) when no man will bye their wares any more. Then
shall the popish priest hoode cry well away with care, Psa. cxlv.
even when the lord shall help his servants, which day is not far. The day
wherein the kingdom of Antichrist shall have an end, and never arise any more.
In the mean time, abide in certain and sure hope cleaving unto the promises of
god, which in their dutime shall 1. Cor. xvi
be fulfilled, and aquit your selves like men* against the enemies of 1. Cor.
viii
God in all humblenes of mind, puissaunt in spirit, to acknowledge Heb. ix. x
one God, one only savior Jesus Christ, one only sufficient and everlasting
sacryfice for the remission of sins, even the precious body of the lord
Jesus Christ* once offe red for all and for ever. which now sits on the right
hand of god, Psa. lxvii Acts. iii.
and from thence shall he come to judge both the quick and the dead, and the
last day he shall* etc. and Hebru. i.
until that time occupyeth that blessed body none other place to i. Pet. iii.
dwell in, to be kept in, to be enclosed in, but only in the heavens, even
Ephesi. i.
in the glorious maiesti of god, personalli abiding there in the self same body
without coming down from thence til the last hour and as he never cease to
lie man, so does he never leese the similitude of a man, his body there has his
liniamentes, and leaves them Philip. il.
not, so has that body there his bigness, and shrincketh not* and his manly
shape at any time, he alters not. He is in that he took of the virgin Mary a
natural man in Ro^^. ^^
al conditions (except sin) and what he took of his blessed mother by the
working of the holy ghost, he took it for ever, and will not exchange for
any other, he took the shape of a man, with Phil. ii.
the substance of his manhood in one sacred womb, there were they coupled
together by the holy ghost, never to be divided a sunder, he retains the one
from the other inseparablye, as he will not alter the substance of his flesh
in to the substance of bread, so he will no more alter the shape of his bodi
into the form of bread, the^ cannot be a greater absurdite against the truth,
then to think that he would leave the shape that he took in the virgins womb
(being an accident unto his manhood) and join unto the same the form of a
wafer cake baken in an oven, or betwyxt a pair of irons. As he is in heaven
very God, so is he in heaven very man, Ioh. xvi. i. John, ii. ^. Tim. ii.
one only mediatout betwixt god and man, even the man Christ Jesus, he it is
that is the propitiati on for our sins. Behold therefore to confess this
most apostolycke doctrine, and also that al favor, mercy and forgiveness
Collo. xi.
comes only by him. The only son of God the father for us al, was made
wisdom, righteousness, i. Corin. i
sanctification and redemption, all these are the gifts of God the father,
Ephe. ii.
freely given unto us by Christ Jesus, God and man, through faith in his blood,
and not by the merits of men, gifts they are (I say) freely given, given unto
us of favor, with Abac. ii.
out desert by believing, and not de serving. To this the law* and Apo Gala. iii.
stles bear wytnes. This doctrine have all the blessed Martires of Ephesians. ii.
Acts. x.
Christ's church witnessed with their blud to be true. To this truth has all the consciences of all true beleuers confessed, ever since the ascension of
Christ, this witness is not but of God, what better quarrel can ye then have to
give your lives for, then for the truth it self? That man that gives his life
for Luke. ix.
the truth: takes the readiest way unto life. He that has the Popes curs for
the truth: is surer of Christ's blessing, well then my brethren Phili. iii. i.
Cor. ix.
what shall you let, but that you go forward as ye have begone, nay rather
run with the runers, that Ihon. iiii. Psalm. xv
ye may obtain the appointed glory. Hold on the right wai, that ye neither
look back, have the eye Ephe. iiii
of your faith fixed upon God, and so run that ye may get hold of Collo.
iii. Math. x. Mar* viii.
it. Cast away al your worldly pelf, as the favor of friends, fear of men*
sensual affection, pouertye, riches lands, posessions, carnal fathers and
mothers, wife and children, with the love of your own selves, and in respect
of heavenly treasures, ye look for. Let al these be denied and vtrerlye
refused of you, so that in no co^ditio^ they do abate your zeal, or quench
your love toward God. In this case make no account of them, but rather Ephe.
iii.
repute the^ as vile, in co^pariso^ of everlasting life, away with the^ as
thorns that choke the heuenli seed of the gospel, where they be suffered to
grow. They are burdens Luke. viii
of the flesh* which encomber the soul* exchau^ge them there Romans vii.
fore for advantage. Does not he gain that finds immortal treasures, for
heavenly and corruptible Psa. xxvi.
riches. Leseth that man any thing which of his carnal fathers and mothers is
forsaken, when therefore Ephesians. i.
he is received of god the father to be his child and heir in Christ, heavenly
Gala. iiii
for earthlye, for mortal immortal, Phili. iii.
for transitory things, things permanent, is great gains to a Christian
conscience. Therefore (as I begone) I exhort you in the Lord, not to be
afraid. Shrink not my brethren and sisterne, mystrust Hebr. vi. i. Cori. ii.
not God, be of good comfort, rejoice in the Lord, hold fast your faith, and
continue unto the end. Deny the world, and take your cross and follow him,
which is ii. Tim. ii
your lodes man, and is gone before. If ye suffer with him, ye shall reign with
him. What way can you glorifi more the name of your heavenly father, then by
sufferynge the death for his sons sake? what a spectacle shall it be to the
world, to behold so godly a fellowship as the servants of God, in so just a
quarrel as the gospel of Christ* with so pure a conscience, so strong a faith,
and so liuelye an hope, to offer them selves, to suffer most cruel torments
at the hands of Gods enemies, and so to end their days in peace, to receive
in the resurrection of the rightuons life everlasting. Be strong therefore in
Hebru. x.
your battle, the Lord God is on your side, and his truth is your cause and
against you be none, but the enemies of the cross of Christ, as Phili. iii.
the serpent and his seed, the dragon with his tail, the market men of the
beast, the offspring of the pharisees, the congregation malig Math. iii.
naunt, the generation of Vipers, murderers, as their father the devil has
been from the beginning, to conclude, such are they as the John. vi.
Lord god has al ways abhorred and in all ages resisted and overthrown. God,
from whom nothing is hid, he knows what they are, he Ps. xxxiiii
that searches the hearts of men, he has found them out to be craf Heb. iiii.
tie* subtle* full of poison* proud* dis daineful* stifnecked* deuouters,
rauenours, barkers against Christ's Testament, filthy and shameless* and
therefore does the spirit of god by the mouth of his holy prophets and Apostles
call them by the names of Foxes, Serpents, Cockcatrices, Lions, Leoperdes,
Bulls, Bears, Wolves, Dogs, Swine, Beasts, teaching us thereby to
understand that their natural inclination is to Psalm. vi
disceiue, poison, and destroy (as much as in them lies) the faithful and
elect of God, but he with his right arm shall defend his little flock against
the whole rabilme^t of these world linges, which have conspired against him. He
has nombred up the hears of his chil Math. xx
drens head, so that not one of the^ shall perish without his fatherly Luke. xxi
will. He keeps the Sparowes, much more will he preserve them Math. x.
whom he has purchased with the blood of the immaculate la^be. i. Peter. i.
He will keep them, until the hour appointed, wherein the name of god shall be
glorified in his saints, in the mean time let them work their wills, let them
envy, let them malyng, let them blaspheme, let Math. x.
them curs, banne, betraie, whippe, scourge, hang and burn. For by these
means God wyil try his elect as gold is tried in the furnace Sapi. iii.
and by these fruits shall they bring them selves to be known what Math. vii
they be, for all their shepes skin. For as he that in suffering pacie^tlie
for the gospel of God, is thereby known to be of Christ: even so Ieromes words
up on the vii. psalm.
in like manner is the persecutour of them known thereby to be a mem ber of
Antechriste. Besides that, these their extreme cruelty shall be a mean the sooner
to provoke god to take pite upon his servants, and to destroy those that so
tiranouslie entreat his people, as we may learn by the historyes, as well in
the bondage of Israel, under Pha Exo. xiii.
roo in Egypt, as also in the misera ble captivity of Judah in Babylon, Esd.
xxiii
whereas when the people of God were in most extreme thraldom, then did the
Lord stretch fourth his mighty power to deliver his servants. Though god for
a time suffer them to be exalted in their Match. vii
own pride. yet shall they not escape his vengeance. They are his Iaco. iiii.
rods, and when he has woren them to the stumpes, then will he i. Pete. v.
Apoca* i.
cast them into the fire. This shall be their final reward, your duty is in Hebr.
xii. Jacob* i.
the mean while patientli to abide the will of god, which works al things
for the best. Thus deals he with us, partly for our trial, and partly also
for our sins, which we most greuouslie have committed to the great slander
of his gos Ezechias xxxvi. Roma. ii.
pel, whereby the name of God is evil spoken of among his enemies, for the which
he now punishes us with his fatherly correction in i. Cori. i. Luke* xv.
this world, that we should not be dampened with the world. By this mean
seeks he his sheep that were lost, to bring them home to the fold again.
By this way seeks he to refourme us* that we may be like unto him after the
image of his son Jesus Christ in Ephesians. iiii.
al holiness and righteousness before him. Finally* this wave uses his godly
wisdom, to make us thereby to know him* and our selves in him that before time
had a manner forgot Osi. xiii.
him, praised be his name. As For these Balamites which now do molest us, let
us now commit them unto the hands of GOD, give Romans xii Phili. iii
him the vengeance, and he will reward them. Fall ye to prayer, and let these
belly gods prate, for he is in heaven and sleeps not, that keeps Israel, he
is in heaven that made the seas calm, when the disciples Luke viii. Mar. iiii.
were afraid. Let us now faithfully call upon him* and he will hear us, let us
cry unto the Lord, for he is gracious and merciful when we Psa. lxxx Psa. xc.
are in trouble. He is with us, he will deliver us, and he will glorify us. If
we be turned unto him, we shall Iere. xii.
find him turned unto us, if we repent us of our wyckednes done against Ier.
xviii
him, then shall he take away the plage that he has devised against us. Let us
therefore earnestly repent* and bring forth the worthi Math. iii
fruits of repentance. Let us studi to be his* then shall we not fear what
these hipocrites do against us* which with their pretensed holiness deceive the
hearts of the people that be simple* and abuse the autoriti of god in his
princes* causing Mat. xii.
them by their procurement to establish the ambitious prelasy, and to erect up
their idol again, with the romish mass. God (in whose Job. xii. Prou. xv.
hands are the hattes of kings) open the heart of the queen's majesty to epsy
them out what they be, and so to weed them out, that they no longer be
suffered to trouble the congregation of God, and to poison the realm with
their pope ho ly doctrine. God almighty for his son Jesus Christ's sake,
deliver the queen's hyghnes and this her realm from the proud prelates, which are as profitable in the church Psa. xiiii. l. lxxviii.
of Christ, as a polecat in a war rin. Their fellowship is noisome, their
absence is right necessary. Acts. xx.
To conclude (my brethren) I commit you to God, and to the power of his word,
which is able to establish you in all truth* his spirit be with you, and work
in you that ye may always be mindful of your duties toward him* whose you are
Math. x.
both body and soul. whom se that ye love and serve, dread and obeie, before
Exodus i. Deuteronomy* iiii.
al earthly powers, and for nothing under the heaven defile your consciences in
the sight of god. Dis Romans xii.
semble not with his word* god will not be mocked, nay, they ye disse^ble i.
Pete. ii.
with him, deceive the^ selves* such the lord deny and cast out at the last
Mar. viii. Math. x. Apoa. iii. Heb. xiii.
day. Such as bear ii. faces in one hoode, such as play on both hands, such
as deni the known truth such as obstinatly rebel against it, al such with
their partakers, shall the Lord destroi. God defend you from al such* and make
you perfect unto the end. Amen.

Fear not for death, pass not for bands,
Only in God put thy whole trust.
For god will require thy blood at their hands.
And this thou do know, that once die thou must*
Only for Christ thy life if thou give:
Death is no death, but a meano for to live.
FINIS.
In your prayers remember me your brother and servant in the Lord Jesus Christ.
A GODLY PRAYER.
BE merciful unto is (O Lord God of mercies) and destroi us not in thy wrath.
we have offended (O lord) we have trespassed against thee, therefore have thou
now visited us with thy heavy hand, suffering our enemies to triu^phe over us.
But yet (O Lord) our hope is in thee, that thou will not forsake us, nor leave
us, which put our trust in the. Hear us (O Lord) for thy son our Lord Jesus
Christ's sake, and give not thy people to be a pray unto the wicked for ever,
O Lord in thee have we trusted, let us never be confounded. Have mercy upon
us, and after this great miseri, show us the light of thy countenance, that we
may se the brightness of the gospel again, to thy great glory, and our great
comfort* and to the salvation of thy people. Turn unto us (O Lord) that be
turned unto the, and by thy holy spirit work in us, that we never return
from thee any more* but always walk in thy holy fear, as it besemeth thy
children* withdraw (O Lord God) this thy heavy displeasure, and be mercyful
unto us. Let not thy enemies of thy word, spoil thy servants, neither give
thy people to be an everlasting stock to the foolish. Finally (O Lord God)
deal with us after thy accustomed kyndnes. As thou art iustlye displeased for
our sins, so be favorable to us that repent the same, that thou may be
known a righteous God, full of pity and compassion. Grant this we beseech
thee, for the blood of Jesus Christ* to whom with the and the holy ghost be al
honor, praise and glory, world without end

Amen,

