A Breife Narration of the possession, dispossession, and, repossession of
William Summers: and of some proceedings against Mr John Dorrell preacher, with
aunsweres to such objections as are made to prove the pretended counterfeiting
of the said Summers. ()

Together with certain depositions taken at Nottingham concerning the said
matter.

Anno M.D.XCVIII.

THou shall here receive (Gentle Reader) a short narration of a large matter,
together with certain depositions taken at Nottingham, tending to the
manifestation of a marvelous work of God, lately showed among us; written (as
it seems) by some friend of this cause, and of the witnesses thereof: to stay
if it may be the malice of some, and rashness of others, who will not be
reclamed from impugning, or baselie esteeming of this glorious work, a greatter
then which, has skarcelie been heard of (saving performed in like cases)
either in our days, or in the days of our fore fathers for many years. If
it were particularly and fully discovered (as we wish it might be) how
strangely this William Summers came to be possessed by means of a witch in
Worcester shire, who sent a wicked spirit into him, witch he called Lucie: how
he was tormented during his possession: how the foul spirit raged, and the
Lord Jesus prevailed at his dispossession: how he was subtillie tempted, and
estsoones repossessed: how extraordinarelie he has carried himself since his
dispossession: how the Devil has busied himself against the servant of
Christ Jesus, who was the chife means of the dispossession: and how some
persons truly other wise fearing God, have been incredulous, some upon one
fancy, and some upon an other: speaking Iere. 23. 16. by vision out of their
own heart, and not from the Lords mouth: or else giving credit to this work,
and the witnesses thereof have not taken it to heart, much les vouchsafed to
visit, comfort, and relieve them, or to use some lawefull means, and mediation
to our godly Magistrates, (as they should) in the behalf of the men of God
their brethren whom God has honored to suffer for the testimony of this his
holy truth: If (I say) all these things were fully discovered, and well
weighed, doubtless a man must needs be astonished, and expect a rarer event of
these things then can be yet conceived. By the way the providence of our
merciful and heavenly father is to be wisely observed, and with great
humility to be reverenced, that he has suffered this matter to becalled in
question, and for so long time to be ventilated, and sifted into as it has
been. Doubtless, as we have experience of our dulnes in apprehending, and
profitablie meditating upon other marvelous acts of the Lord daily showed
before our eyes, so if this work had not been mightily impugned, we should
also have negligentlie slipped it over, and the residue of like nature of late
performed, without yielding such due honor to God, and to the powerful
exercises of prayer and fasting, as appertains. Albeit God thus turns the
rage of man to his glory, yet I would advise them who slander this work, and
persecute the serva^thes of God, without cause, to take heed least they be
found eve^ fighters against God. For he that sits in the heaven sees their
devises, and laughes them to skorne and they, and all their conspiracies, plots
slaunderingh, and revelingh shall consume like a snaile that melts but this
mighty work, seeing it is of God, and was without question a deed done
according to the witness given unto it, cannot be reversed or destroyed but
mager the malice, and subtlety of the Devil though Mr Dorrell should be
consumed to ashes the truth thereof shall break forth as the light, and the
glory thereof as a burning lamp. God has lighted a candle, not in a corner,
but has advanced it as it were on a candelstick in the heart, or center of our
land that the beams thereof might shine forth, and give light to all the
Realm. It is not in their power (though it has been given out by a great man
among them, that seeing they have taken it in hand they will have the credit of
it) altogether to eclipse, or wholly to hide it under abus hell when they have
had their swinge but a little, they will be ashamed of their own folly. Now
till the time appointed be expired, let all faithful hearted men beware, least
they take Gods name in vain by baselie esteeming of this mighty work or bear
false witness against their neighbors, in crediting lying rumors against those
men of God who do now, or hereafter shall suffer in this holy cause. I
pray, consider with me a little these circumstances, and procedings, and
indifferently judge wihth whom the right stands. Mr Dorrell and Mr Moore who
are now imprisoned for giving testimony to this truth, have been both of them
for many years aproved godly ministers, just, and simple hearted men,
fearing God, of good reputation among the best Christians, and painful
preachers where they lived. God has marvelouslie blessed their joint labors
in dispossessing seven persons together in Lamashire: which is so notorious,
and free from challenge, as the enemies to this Action of Nottingham dare not
once to call yt into question. The Papists take knowledge of the possession,
and dispossession in Lamashire: but they would feign have us beleyve that their
seminary Priests were the only actors: Yea this fancy has taken such
impressio^ in them, that some of them have not doubted to say, if it can be
proved that Mr Moore, and Mr Dorrell did perform that work, they would
disclayme their religion, and embrace ours. They that have accused, and
prosecuted, against Mr Dorrell be men that have blasphemed the Scriptures,
Popish persons, and known enemies to the preaching of the Gospel. The wrath
of God is allreadie gone forth against one of Mr Dorrells greattest enemies,
namely Mr Sale Official of Wesson whose child is lately vexed whith an evil
spirit: because (as his wife reports) he has been adversary to Mr Dorrell.
The procedings against him, and others have been very violent. He was put to
silence by the Archbishop of York whithout fufficient cause warranted by law:
and as if this had been too little to be deprived of the use of his ministry,
and of his livelihode, having a wife, and five children: he was called before
the Commissioners of Canterbury province: and without hearing, or examining
his cause was suddenly committed. Brought before the seat of justice: they
who at the same time gave gentle audience to Papists. Arrians, Atheists, and
blasphemers, would not permit him to speak any thing almost in his own
defense: but (as though he had been the most damnable wretch in the world)
before any conviction exceedingly reviled him. Judges became parties,
pleaders, and accusers: Some stormed that any should be present as witnesses
to their doings: They would not suffer one of the depositions to be read before
them: the Commissioners, and deponents, were contemptvouslie rejected: charge
given that no copies of the depositio^s should be divulged. Committance was
threatened to diverse, only because they took acquaintance which Mr Moore.
saying none ought to be countenanced, that was disgraced before them. Mr
Dorrell having but one copy of the depositions, he delivered it unto them for
their satis-faction, and though they gave him promise that it should be
returned, when his wife required it, they menaced her to Bridewell. There has
been running to the court to forestall the Lords, and Ladies of honor, and to
hinder the preferring of petitions in Mr Dorrels behalf to the right honorable
Lords of the privy Counsel. And because Thomas Darling a boie of Burton upon
Trent of the age of 15. Years, or thereabouts had been dispossessed by prayer
upon advise taken from Mr Dorrell, (as appears by a book published some
years ago): in hatred of Mr Dorrell the books were called in, and the
printer imprisoned as if he had published a fined matter. Mr Bainbridge, a
Gentleman of good reckoning in Darbie shire was required by the Bishop of
London to show his opinion touching the said Darling, he answered it was the
common voice of the country, which he beleyved to be true, that he was in
deed possessed, and dispossessed: the Bishop told him in great anger but that
if he had not heard well of him, he would clap him in prison for so saying.
Thus having dealt whith the printer, and Mr Bainbridge, then he thought meet to
examine the matter: belike to see whether he had done well or not, thus to
determine, and then to hear. So he sent a Pursivant for the boy of Barton.
The Pursivant having receyved 40.s. of the boys friends: the boy was kept in
the Bishop of Londons house: and committed to the tuition of Mr Harsenet who
lately had been vomited out of Cambridge for his erroneous opinions. None of
the boys friends might be suffered to come unto him. He was allured by
promises: terrified by threatenings: as that he should be hanged as the
Burgonion was whom they showed unto him, ha^ging at London, all a day long for
a murder: Also that he should be whipped, and laid in Newegate. He was close
prisoner in a chamber two days, the boie of Nottingham appointed for his
keeper, who with the profane serving men were always skorning at him being a
stranger among them: letters were contrived in Mr Dorrells name unto him
willing him to acknowledge a counterfeyt possession: and letters were returned
by him whereyn he protested the truth, and would not in any sort be removed
from it. All this was practiced to heap shame, if it might be upon Mr Dorrell:
but when they percived that the power of God in the boie was stronger then the
malice of Satan, they let him go: but I do not hear that the 40. shillings
was again restored. Not finding any help herein to prove Mr Dorrell a
practitioner in conterfeyting whith this boy of Burton, a Commission was
directed to five persons in Nottingham, (Satan could not have wished better):
that is to the very same men who have persecuted Mr Dorrell at Nottingham,
York, and London ever since this matter came in question. This was to encounter
the former depositions taken by virtue of a Commission awarded from York as is
set forth in this treatise. It fell out that Robert Cooper the Clerk of St
Mary's in Nottingham caused the 94. Psalm to be song before these
Commissioners sat in Commission, which being done of purpose, or unawares, (I
know not) but sure it is, it so galled them, because it describes the like
practizes of old as they now had in hand, that the poor man was fetch up to
London for this heinous fact. These proper Commissioners refused such as were
willing to justify the truth upon their oaths, they picked out whom they
listed, and wrote what pleased them* When they were to examine Mr Aldridge, and
his Curate they caused them to swear that they would not reveal unto any
others the things whereof they should be deposed. What goodly stuff they have
returned, time and malice will make known unto us. Yet all this being not
sufficient to obscure, and suppress the work of God, if any man about
Nottingham do say that Summers was possessed, and dispossessed, he is
threatened to be bound to the good behavior. Behold and wonder at the violence
of these men. Do ye thinck that if they had a good matter in hand* they would
be half so zealous. O Lord, (if it be thy good will) open their eyes, and
turn their hearts that they may see and comprehe^d this great and wonderful
work which thou have done among us, that the faith of us all may be
strengthened, our love to thee and thine Ambassadors increased* Satan
confounded, and our sinful lives amended to the great praise of thy holy name
and our everlastin comfort in Christ Jesus. Amen.

G. CO.

A BREIFE NARRATION OF THE POSSESSION, dispossession, and repossession of w:
Summers, and of some proceedings against Mr JOHN. Dorrel preacher, together
with answers to such objections as are made to justify, or show the pretended
counterfeiting of the said Summers.
WIlliam Summers of Nottingham: of the age of 19. or. 20 years, about the
beginning of October 1597. began to be strangely tormented in body and so
continued for diverse weekx, to the great astonishment of the beholders, and
trouble of his friends: and gave great tokens that he was possessed by a wicked
spirit, whereupon the MAYOR and some of the Aldermen of Not: understanding
that Mr Dorrell, a minister of Gods word dwellingh in Ashbie de la zouche, had
by prayer and fasting restored 8. or 9. persons that in like sort had been
vexed, did insta^tlie se^d for the said Mr Dorrell to com to Not. to bestwe
some pains about the faid summers: which he refused sundry times to yield
unto: because he took upon him nogreatter power in such cases, then was
incident to any godly minisster, or other persons; with only was to entreat
the Lord in the name of Christ Jesus to disposesse the wicked spirit out of the
possessed person: yet by their importunate letters and messengers he
condiscended to their desires. And came to Not. the 5 of November in the year
aforesaid: having never before that time (to his knowledge) seen the said
Summers. The 7. day of November, being Mondaie, was appointed for the exercise
of prayer, and fasting, to the end the said Summers might be dispossessed:
which Almighty God* only at the prayers of Mr Dorrell, and others to the
number of 150. persons brought to pass. Hyereuppon Mr Dorrell was retained
preacher in Not: that populous town, having had no settled preacher before
this time since the beginning of her Majesty's reign. Summers being
dispossessed, he discovered certain witches; whereof one was called Doll
ffreeman, allied to one ffreeman an Alderma^ of Not: This ffreema^ offended
that his kinswoma^ should be called in question, threatened Summers that he was
a which: laiing to his charge some presumptions tending that way. So^mers was
committed to prison, where the Devil appeared unto him in liknes of a mouse:
threatening that if he would not let him That the Devil destreth to reenter is
proved by mat. 12. 42. and ^are. 925. and by experience. and seem Thy^aus de
(...) 4. capit. 1. sect. 6. 7.
reenter, and would not say that all that he had done touching his tormenting
during his possession was but counterfeyt, then he should be hanged: but if he
would yield to him, he would save him. Thus anew stipulation being made between
them, the Devil entered: And afterward Some: still pretented that all which
before he had done was only counterfeyt. Yet this notwithstanding, upon his
repossessio^ he was as horribly (spite of his face) tormented as before, as
appears by diverse of the Deponents, if the time when the things which they
deposed were done, be well observed. To search into the truth hereof a
Commission was awarded from the high Commissioners for the province of york,
to certify the matter, to 12. principal person of account there abouth. Mr
Dorrell had taken the names of threescore persons: who were ready to have been
deposed touching the extraordinary handeling of the said Some. 17. of them
being sworn, examined, and their depositions taken Some was called before the
Comissioners to be examined himself, whether he had counterfeited, or not. He
told them, all that he did, was but counterfeit. The high Sheriff exhorted
him in the name of God to tell the truth: then sodenlie Some. was violently
cast into one of his fits before them all where he wallowed up and down the
chamber where they sat, in a farefull manner. There were pius thrust deep into
his hand, and leg, to try if he did counterfeyt: but he was senseles, and no
blood followed. At length being re^^^ed as out of sleep: they asked what he
had done. He said, he could not tell: whether he had not been pricked with
pins, he said, yes: they asked where, and he showed the wrong hand: when he was
examined, how the hole came in his other hand which had been pricked he said it
was there before: being demanded, why he fell down? he answered, a qualme
came over his stomach. Then he was conveied away: and being absent he was
worse tormented them before. They brought him back again to know if he would
confess, who persuaded him to say, he had counterfeited. As he should have
gone up a pair of stairs, through a gallerie, if he had not been hindered, he
had cast himself headlong over the gallerie, to have broken his neck. When he
was the second time brought before the Commissioners, he was more terriblie
handled them before, in so much that the Commissioners, and all that were
present were fully satisfied, that he the^ was corporally possessed: and
surcessed to examie any more witnesses Mr Walton Archdeaco^ of derbie being
present, and a principal enime to Mr Dorrell acknowledged it was the finger of
God upon this rare accident. Then was generally great rejoicing in Not: in
so much as it had pleased God thus to manifest the truth when it came to trial.
After, the Commission was returned to York, and Some. committed to the custody
of certain honest persons where he was still tormented as before; and in his
fits delivered, One of these is a great persecutor of Mr Dorrel and is
suspected to be a which.
how the Devil had appeared unto him in prison in likeness of a mouse as before
said: and how the Devil and also certain persons had advised him to say,
that he was but a counterfeyt, and what promises they made unto him. Also he
told of things that happened at that time elsewhere whithout having knowledge from
any. Which things were taken in writing by some that heard him: and they are
ready to be deposed thereof, if they might be suffered. And being come to
himself he did confess his possession; and gave himself body, and soul to
the Devil, if he did counterfeyt. The Archbishop of York after the
depositions came to his hands was satisfied that in deed Some: was possessed.
Yet having receive^ letters from some great personages / he took occasion to
silence Mr Dor: pretending this only cause, that Mr Dorrell should hold that
the Devil might be dispossessed by prayer, and fasting. Which yet he told him was
his private opinion, and that he would willingly alter it, if he might be
better informed. But the A. B. never endeavored to inform him better: But
after goodwords, as that he was an honest man, ecc sent him aware silenced. The
matter thus apprehended at york, the Commissioners of the province of
Canterbury convented Mr Dorrell before them: he appeared a for the day and
being used with hard speeches, was sent to the Gatehouse. Some: was brought up
to London, and committed to a barber of East Smithfeild, a man of evil report.
And afterward was taken into the Bisschop of London his house. The matter was
so well handled that Some: persisted in saiing that he had been a counterfeyt:
and at length seeing this to be so plausible, grew to be so impudent, that he
said Mr Dorrell had hired him to counterfeyt, and had been acquained with him
4. years before, and caused him to practice his feats in Ashbie parck: and
informed him after his coming to Not: how he should demean himself in time
of his dispossession. All which Mr Dorrell upon his oath denied, but Some: bare
word (now growone to be a mam of great credit, though he had confessed
himself, heretofore to have been a counterfeyt) was better believed then Mr
Dorrell a godly, and faithful man, of honest conversation, long approved by
the best Christians, and ministers where he lived. But Mr Dorrell for a week
was herevppon close prisoner. And at length again he was convented at Lambith.
Where taken up with hard speeches: as if all that Some: had said was true, he
not being suffered to answer for himself, and the depositions which might best
show the matter being taken away, and detained from him, was remanded to the
prison: where he yet lies, till it please God, his cause may be heard. Now
to the end that it may appear upon what ground Mr Dorrel has been thus
handled, and taken up with speeches, as, the most impudent varlet that ever
came before them: ass, heretic, a Devil, one that had seven Devils: that he
should be the Devils mrthyr, and either recant, at Paul's, cross, or be burnt
in Smithfeild, and such like: for this cause, and for the better clearing of
the truth: I will deliver such objections, as have been made against him, with
evident aunsweres (as I hope) to every of them.

There have been many counterfeits: (...)
therefore Some. did couterfeit

This follows not. for we may with as good reason say, Aus. 1.
many have not counterfeyt: therefore Some: did not counterfeyt.

2. There could never any man counterfeyt such things as summers in truth has
done.

Summers himself said he did counterfeyt. 2. objection


1. Summers likewise said, he did not counterfeyt: yea gave himself body and
soul to the Devil: Aus. ^.
if he ded counterfeyt: as will be deposed: why should he not be believed as well
with an exetration deniing, as barelie affirming he did counterfeit?

2. Somm. is not to be believed when he affirms an impossibility. for it
appears by the depositions that he did such things, as by humane power without
the Devil are not possible for him to do

3. Somm: for fear he should be counted a witch said he did couterfeit, as
appears in the narration, and now perceiving that this is well pleasing to
some great personages, he does more i^pudentlie stand in defense of it.

4. If Some. did counterfeit, he is to be burnt as a blasphemer for saiing that
he was God, Christ, and that he made Baptism. And if he be not punished, we
must conclude he did not counterfeit. Else men will imagine that the reverend
fathers would tolerate blasphemy; hitherto he has been rather rewarded.

Summers own confession is more to be credited, 3. ob.
then all the Depone^ts: he best knows what himself did: the depositions are
not worth 2 D. the Commissioners simple men.

1 So^mers being in his fits knew not what himself did, Answer.
or, said or was done unto him, as has been confessed by himself, and is
deposed, and further may be.

2 There can no exception be taken against the witnesses: if it were in case of
hie treason, or in matters concerning any man's life, or lands in England: so
many, and such witnesses are sufficient in any other court of justice in
England. 6 of the Commissioners were in degree of Esquires, or better: the
residue (save the Mayor of Not: a very simple man) were men of learning: they
can not be noted of partiality save such of the^, as were enemies to Mr
Dorrell. for the others if there be fault in them, let them be sent for, and
punished. But it is not like that any shall be called till more indiffere^cie be
procured, but such only as will seek rather to obscure then to reveal the
truth of these proceedings

Summers can act all those things again that are deposed. 4. ob.


1 If he can act them all in such manner, Ans.
and form as is deposed, then he is, either still possessed, or more then a
man: for no humane power can do the like.

2 Let him be brought before some indifferent persons, let the depositions be
read, and let him act the same in such manner, and form as is deposed, by
natural, or artificial power, then Mr Dorrell will peeld that he did
conterfeit. If he cannot, (as undoubtedly he cannot,) then plead no longer
for the Devil: but punish that imp. of Satan as a wicked lier, and blasphemer
of the mighty work of God

He says he seemed to be stronger then, ^. ob.
4. or 5 men in his fits, because he looked rerriblie, and they were so afraid
they durst not use their strength upon him.

It appears, Ans.
by the depositions of Robert Aldridge, Ihon wood Ioane Pie, Ihon Slrellie,
Richard Me, and William Langford, that they, and others labored wiht all
their might, and strength so as they sweat again and could not rule him: he
neither sweating, panting, nor changing color.

It was an easy matter for him to trouble 3. 6. ob.
or 4 persons, being carried alost upon their shoulders: such strength he can
show again.

It is deposed that being upon his bed, and on the ground, and sitting in a
chair he was so strong, Ans.
he could not be mastered by 3. or 4. persons joining together their united
forces; as appears by the depositions. 7. ob.


Where some say he had a swelling in his body, it was nothing but the
windcollick.

A strange colic that should run in a variable bigness between the flesh and
skin up, Ans.
and down his body, from leg to leg, the^ to his toe, belly, ear, root
cheek, throat, tongue, and eye, changing the color of the eye; and making the
part in which it was inflexible, and heavy as iron. Yet if Mr Dorrell should by
praer, and fasting cure such a colic, 8. ob.
he ought rather to be reverenced then reviled.

But Some: denies that it ran up and down his body in that sort.

It is deposed by eleven witnesses: Ans.
many more also will be ready to depose.

But where find you that in Scripture? 9. ob.
quoth. My L: of London.

Mr Dorrell affirmed, Ans.
there were twelve things deposed concerning Some: his possession, which he could
not possibly counterfeit: he was suffered to produce the running of this lump
up and down his body, for one of the^ which was directly proved by manifold
witnesses. When some that had seen the depositions knwe this to be most
certenlie deposed, thy had nothing to object but: Where find you that in
Scripture. Whereby they shwe manifestly, that some of the^ do fight against
the light of their own conscience. for themselves knowing that Some: could not
counterfeit this, neither could Mr Dorrel possibly instruct him how to
practice any such feat, they had nothing in reason to answer but least by
their silence they should seem to be co^vinced and confounded, they object a
matter nothing to the purpose, namely that this is not found in Scripture. The
weight of which objection is this.

All impossibilities are found in Scripture: this is not found in Scipture:
therefore this is not an impossibility. Who feels not the grosnes of this
argument. as if a man mihht not name a 1000 things vnposible to be performed by
W Some: which yet are not to be found in Scrip: It is not possible for Some: to
go to Rome in an hour, yet this is not found in Scripture. It is not possible
for Some: to touch the stars, yet this is not found in Scrip: no more surely is
it possible for Some: to counterfeit such a variable motion, as was evidently
seen, and felt upon his body though it be not to be fonnd in Scrip. This one
thing alone (if there were nothing else) is sufficient to convince any man
whose heart is not hardened, that Some: did not conterfeit: much les coold Mr
Dorrell be accessarie to him in such iniquity.

2. All the signs mentioned in Scrip: might more easily be deluded by this
conceit of counterfeyting* then this moveable swelling net the Devil in those
days was not so witty as to afcribe all possessions unto counterfeyting. Such
swelling is observed in others as asigne of possession, vide Thyr: de
demoniaris part. 1. cap. 3 sect. 3.
But seeing men in this matter are grown more incredulous then heretofore, it
has pleased God beside the signs of possessions mentioned in Scrip: to give
other signs also, more free from cavil to make his glorious works most
apparent, and certain.

The kitlings that seemed to move under this coverlet, 10. objection.
where he lay, was but the motion of his own hand: One put his hand under the
coverlet, and caught Some: hand moving.

1. If this be true then he had five hands in bed with him for there seemed to
be five kitlings some time, Ans.
as is deposed by Rob. Aldridge.

2. It may be after the time that he pretended to counterfeyt, some
confederate of his might catch his hand under the coverlet to delude the former
accidents.

3. This motion was, when Some: hands, and feet were held: deposed by Th. Graie.

4. Lastly deposed; that the rising up under the coverlet being felt, it
yielded like a bladder full of wind when it is pricked: and filled again as
with wind: and some times it patted, like the foot of a kitling.

Those things which he told in his fits to be said and done in his absence, 11.
ob.
he understood by the people who were with him, that talked of such matters,
supposing he heard them not.

By the depositions it is plain, Ans.
he spoke of things done in his absence, at the instant when he spoke them: as
that of the examination of Millecent Horselere, and of Mr Dorrells, and Mr
Abdredges coming, unknown to any there present.

Where it is said, 12. ob.
he spoke, his mouth open, not moving tongue, chaps, etc. he can do so again:
for gaping he can say, hang* hang.

It is deposed by Richard Newto, Ans.
he spoke a continued speech. his mouth being wide open, his tongue drawn into
his throat, uttering those words among others. Ego sum rex, ego sum Deus.

He can foame as he did before by keeping soape in his mouth, 13. ob.
and working it with his tongue.

Belike he brought this concert from the barbars shop. Ans.
It is deposed by Mr Langford, that he continued his foaming the space of an
hour, in such abundant manner, that the foame did hang down from his mouth to
his breast, notwithstanding it was continually wiped with clats, in such
abundance, as is not able to be uttered by any humane creature, not having
receyved any thing from 6 in the morning, till 5 at night to augment it.

When he threw himself into the fire, 14. ob.
he knew there were some present speedily to relcue him.

He was thrown with such violence against the chimneie as they that were
present thought his neck had been broken, Ans.
he could not sodenlie be taken out of the fire; for it is deposed, he was of
such weight as is not possible to any natural body* so as there were 3. or
4. forced to join in taking him by: yet he had not his hair singed, nor was
himself hurt.

When he fell down before the Commissioners, 15. ob.
it was done by the advice of the Mayor, and some of the Aldermen at Not:
who persuaded him to it; and should have given him a vvatchvvord, when to
risevp, but it was forgotten: whereby (alas) the poor boie was in great
pains through the majors forgetfulness.

1. Then belike the mayor, Ans.
and Aldermen were complotters in this counterfeyting: me thincks they should
as well be punished as Mr Dorrell.

2. Could they by teaching, or he by practizing stay the issuing of blood when
he was deeply pricked with a yin, both in his hand, and leg? how came it to
pass that he had forgotten which hand was pricked? why did he purpose to
counterfeyt, and yet would tell them, that he fell down because a qualme came
over his stomach, howesoever it is an easy matter to delude such as were
absent by words, yet the Commissioners being choice men of the country, both
for learning, and authority could not be deceyved by such a paltrie companion.
For the matter was so apparent unto them, that they held it superfluous to
proceed any further to examination of witnesses: in so much as Mr Walton the
Archdeacon confessed it to be the finger of God: and shrunck away ashamed,
being convinced with the evidence, and demonstration of truth.

He says, 16. ob.
Mr Dorrell taught him to counterfeyt, and how to behave himself at the
dispossession.

1. This relieth upon the ariome and infallible principle whervppon most of
the objections are founded, Ans.
namely this whatsoever With. Some: says is true, he says Mr Dorrell instructed
him to counterfeyt etc. let them prove the proposition: and we will yield the
Conclusion. As if a godly minister were not better to be beleyved upon his
oath, then the bare affirmatio^ of a lewd voie whom they say was a counterfeyt.

2. If Mr Dorrell should say, or swear that Some: by his teaching can do
these things; he were not to be credited: for none can by reaching, or learning
practice impossibilities. Therefore it is a mere vanity to seek to draw Mr
Dorrell into any confederacy in this action, unless they prove these witnesses
to be all perjured persons.

3. Mr Dorrell never came to him but with company finding also company
always with him: he never (to his knowledge) did see him before the 5 of
November. 1597. us he has deposed.

4 Why should Mr Dorrell teach him to conterfeit more then others, whom he has
dealt withal in like cases of dispossession? especially the 7. in Lancashire?
whereof 4 were under 12 years, troubled 2 years before he came to them; and 2
of them children to a gentleman of good credit; who was at 200 ll charges by
occasion of their possession? and could not expect any advantage by giving out
that 6 in his family were vexed by Satan: the procurer of their trouble was
indicted and executed for coniuration: yet till this likewise be proved
conterfeiting; a possession and dispossession must be held for granted.

It is Popery to hold there is any possession since Christ's time: 17.
Objection.
and it is heresy to maintain that the Devil may now be cast out by
prayer, and fasting. Miracles are now ceased: these are but devices to
maintain your hypocritical fastings.

To hold there are possessions, Answer.
and may be dispossessions by prayer and fasting, is neither Popery, nor
heresy. If it be, why do they not send for Mr. Ihon Ireton of Legworth a man
known to be learned and sound in religion, as any of them: who shamefullie
confounded Archd: Walton in this question: and offered to maintain the same in
the University? there being in deed (as I am verily persuaded) nothing in
the Scripture, the Apology, or articles of rereligion proffessed in England,
nor in the armonie of Confessions, nor in any sound Protestant Divine to the
contrary. In this, and in other Vr: Whether a Bishop, et Elder be all one in
scrip. whether Christ suffered in soul et^
questions it is fit to be known, which me^ learnd in the law do tell us 1
Elizabeth. c. 1.
that the Ecclesiastical Commissioners ought not to determine any matter to
be heresy, but only such as has heretofore been determined to be heresy by
authorite of the Canonical Scripture; or by the first four General Councels,
or any of them; or by any other General Counsel, whereyn the same was
declared to be heresy by the express, and plain words of the Canonical
Scripture; or such as has heretofore been judged heresy by the Parleame^t
with the assent of the Clergy in the Convocation; as appears by the statute
made in the first year of her M.ties reign and the first chapter. There have
been possessions before Christ's time, which may be seen by these things which
are recorded of the Joseph. de antiq:
Exorcists among the Jews, Mat. 12. 27
and of the Levit. 20 27. 1 Sa 28. 7. who had the Devil in the^. in their
belly: called also Pythonists. Ad 16 16. 18. See hereof Orig lib. 7. cont
Cells: Chrysostom. hom. 29.
Oracles, Engastrimuthoj, and others among the Gentiles. Since Christ's time
there have been infinite examples testied by the Cyprian ad Deniet etc. de
Idolor: Vanitate. Orig. hom. 244 in Ios. Iact. lib. 4. Ca. 27. Justin. disp.
cont. Fryph. Chrysostom. hom. 4. Athanas: de incarnat. August. de temp. ser. 197.
Cass. Coll. 7. c. 25. 27. Prosper de promiss. Gregor. didlog. lib. 1. r. 10.
Za^ch. de operibus. l. 4. c. 10. Martyr in 1. reg. 8. Melanct. in Epist. Gualt.
hom. in Luc. 8. Szeged. loc com. f. 400. Ches. Geuev. Giffard dialog. of with.
monuments of all ages. A thing so usual in the times of Antiquity, since
Christ, and his Apostles, that I marvel any men who would seem to be
learned, and do profess great reading, should beware their ignorance in such
a trivial matter. Hierome in vita Hilariom speaks of one Hilarion who
dipossessed very near 200. persons. omitting others I will only allege
tertullia^ in his apology, who made the like offer in his time, as was made of
late up Mr More a godly Minister, to the Bish: of London touching W. Some: for
which he was committed to the prison of the Clinck. Let a man (says tertullian)
that is vexed by a Devil be brought before your judgment seat: and ad the
commandment of the meanest Christian, the spirit shall speak, and confess
himself to be an unclean spirit. Let one of those folk be brought whom you
thinck to be inspired of a God, etc. If he dare bie before a Christian, or if
he confess not himself to be a Devil, take the Christian to be presumptuous,
and let him die for it out of hand, etc. Now none will speak his own shame,
but rather the which may sound to his honor. Tertul in Apolog.
Surely they will not tell you that Jesus is a deceyver, or of the common stamp
of men: or that he was stolen out of his grave, as has been reported unto you:
but that he is the power the wisdom, and the word of God: that he sits in
heaven, and that he shall come to judge us. And on the contrary part that
themselves be Devils, damned for their naughtines, and waiting for their
dreadful dome: and this because that being afraid of Christ in God, and of
God in Christ they yield to God and Christ, and to the servants of God, and
Christ. nd Scap. cap. 3.
And again else where he says, We do not only despite the Devils, but also
we bind them, and do daily traduce them, and expel them out of men, as it is
well known unto very many. Of corporal possessions also even in these days.
Lirie and others.
We do read in credible histories of the west Indies.

But to seek no further, there has been evident demonstration hereof in our
own land. Where the Symptoms, or signs of possession mentioned in Scripture
have been apparent in the parties possessed, as namely Luke 8. 29.
extraordinary strength Luke 8. 28.
knowledge, Act. 16. 16. and 19. 15.
and tormenting of the bodies, Mar. 9. 20.
Foaming, wallowing, beatting of themselves gnashing whith the teeth. Marc. 9.
22
casting into the fire, and such lick. Mote this ye Atheisis:
When the signs of possession, and dispossession have been delivered out of
the Scripture, the very same at the naming of them (the work corresponding
with the word, sufficient to confound all Actheists) have at that instant been
showed in the persons affected, being themselves senseles, not remembering
afterward what had happened unto them. When the godliemen have called upon the
Lord to dispossess the wicked spirit out of the tormented creature, he has
answered, as it were from heaven, be it unto you, as you have desired. Lastly
when Saran has been dispossessed, he has (as the Scrip: sayte) walked in dry
and barren places, Mat. 12. 43.
seeking rest, but finding none: and returning back into the house from whence
he came, he has appeared in diverse shapes, persuading the parties by
promises, and threatenings to let him ^reenter. Marc. 9. 25.
Some have yielded, as Jane Ashton in Lancashire, this Some: and others: and
have been greivouslie tormented as before without giving hope of recoverie:
seeing ouwr Savior says, Mat. 12. 45.
that in such case, the spirit taking 7. worse dwells there and of such is
worse, then the beginning. Others have repulsed him, and would not relent,
either by this allurements or threathnings. Whereof he has outwardly in their
body so pinched, and tormented them, that they could not go without halting
for a good time after. Yet he being still resisted in faith, has after many
assaults surceased to trouble them any further. The miraculous curing of
fevers, palsae^, leprosies, and other diseases by Christ, and his Apostels gave
credit to the Gospel: Yet the like diseases remain at this day. Seeing
therefore there may be possessions at this day, as before (for what has been
done, that may not again be done, the Devil being as malicious, and
powerful as in times past) What shall we do (says P. in 1 Reg. 8.
Martyr) with them that be taken, and tormented with Devils, Shall we forsake
them. Undoubtedly they must not be forsaken; yet we must not by adjurations
command them to go forth. Wherefore (says he) we will use faithful prayers
for the recoverie of them. in Epist. Demonologie.
The like is the opinon of Phillip. Melanthon, and the godly learned King of
Schoth: men more judicious, and better grounded in religiom, then these that
speak at random of Popery, and of heresy. To remove the Devil by prayer
and fasting is no miracle: Mat. 17. 21.
this kind is not cast out but by prayer and fasting. says our Savior. If God
by prayer should heal the falling, sickness, or frenzy, or should grant
rain, drought, victory, or such like requests, where this a miracle? Christ,
and his Apostels spoke the word only (as the Centuriom says) and it was
done: Mat. 8. 8. Act. 16. 18. Mat. 10.
they commanded, and it came to pass. The Disciples had power given them
against unclean spirits, and to heal all diseases. This in deed was
miraculous. But Mr Fox, Mr Greenham, Mr Dorrel, Mr More nor others in these
days, neither challenge, nor have any power only in an extraordinary case,
wherein the Physicians say there is (...), somewhat divine, or supernatural,
not curable by any humane ordinary skill, they use in extraordinary, and
supernatural lawful mean of cure, that is by long, and earnest entreaty to
beseech Almighty God by mediation of Christ Jesus, to release the party. This
God has done, and these men for our good are witnesses hereof: and woe be to
them who have prevailed against Satan, and heard with their ears, and seen
with their eyes the great works of Almighty God, if they should relinquish
the truth of God, for the fear of man, Touching the ceasing of miracles there
is no determination thereof in holy Scripture: neither is that article in this
action to be controversed. Sure w^are that the Scripture, the deity, and all
religion is by some among us as much called in question, as ever heretofore.
The Ecclesiastical Commissioners can witness, how many Atheists and
blasphemers have been brought before them, likewise there be some who call
themselves Christians, and also Ministers of the Gospel, who yet in their
practiced live Atheists, and make a scorn at the exercises of religion, as
namely at preaching, praiing, fasting, sanctifiing the Saboth, reading the
word of God, giving thanks at meate-vsing the phrases of the Scriptures and do
revile, and hate others because they refrain from swearing liing, filthy
speaking, gaming, plays, and such abominations of this age where in we live.
It is to be doubted. that neither the word, nor miracles can prevail with
those men. when God shuts no man can open: when Lazarus was raised from the
dead, many believed: but some were hardened, and complained upon our Savior.

Though some saw Christ visiblie rise^ from the dead, yet they still doubted.
Therefore all is to little to vnbeleivers. The greatter, and more noble the
works of God be, the more earnest is the Devil in obscuring them. If there
were no other proof hereof but this matter of Nottingham: it were sufficient
to exemplify unto us, the exceeding subtlety, and malice of Satan. For by
disgracing this wonderful work of God, the powerful preaching of the Gospel
is hindered in Nottingham, where it has been a strannger for many years: a
number of people in that town whose hearth were opened hereby to receive the
Gospel are left to the wolf: the holy exercise of prayer, and fasting are
shamefullie skorned: wicked and Popish persons are kindly entertained: and
highly commended: the witnesses of Christ Jesus, and enimes of Satan are evil
entreated: the Papists opinion who hold that Satan cannot possibly by the
Ministry of any Protestant be dispossessed, is mightlie countenanced: the
Atheists, and carnal Gospellers (who not knowing the power of godliness, and
holy exercises do attrebute all things to art, chance, or nature) are
exceedingly hardened.

It cannot be endured that those kind of men which be accounted the of
scouring of the world should be thought to have such interest in CHrist Jesus,
as that their (falselie termed) verbal prayers, and hypocritical fastings, he
should, as it were visiblie descend from heaven, and tread down Satan under
their feet: where as other men who account themselves more learned, excellent,
and wise then they, do not with all their Physic, Rhethorick, pomp, and
primacie accomplish the like. But God has chosen the foolish things of the
world. to confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the
mighty.

THus much touching the objections which have been made to prove the pretended
counterfeiting of W. Summers. But how by counterfeyting he could speak a
quarter of an hour together his mouth being shut: how he should stay his
temples, and pulses from and beating: how his eye, hands, and face should be
unnaturally black and turn by and by into their natural color: how there
should be extraordinary smells in the place where he lay: how he should
violently be with great force cast-against the iron bars, and posts of the
chimneies receyving no heart: how he could be taller then the highest man in
Not: how all his body should be as cold as ice, and heavy as iron: how his
face should be turned quite backward his neck thrown round about without hurt
unto him: how he being naturally weak should so oftentimes belabour so many
strong men, himself not panting, sweatting, or changing color: how he made
his tongue to swell to the bigness of a Calves tongue, and his eyes as great as
beasts eyes: how he should forget continually what he did, or was done unto
him in his fits: how his legs crooked with falls, should be inflexible as any
iron: how the colic should run along all his body, in a variable quantity:
How such a colic should be cured by prayer, and fasting: how in his fits he
should utter strange voices, which at other times he could not do again, as
is deposed: how he did counterfeyt all these impossibilities, when the
Sadduces, Galenists, and Naturalists of our time have considered of the matter,
we will expect some new objections suitable in discretion to the former. In the
mean season, Let him that is filthy, be filthy still: but do Satan what he
can, Wisdom shall be justified of her children.

Surely the rage of man shall turn to thy praise: Psalm. 76. 10. Depositions
taken at Nottingham the 20. of March. An. 1597. by virtue of a Commission
granted from the right reverend father in God Mathewe Archbisschop of York,
and others her Mties high Commissioners before John Therrald Esquier high
sheriff of the County of Not. sr John Byron Knight, John Stanhop, Robert
Markham, Richard Parkins Esquires, Peter Clerk Mayor of the town of Nottingham.
Miles Leigh Official of the Archdeaconrie of Not. John Ireton Parson of
Legworth John Brown parson of Loughborrowe, Robert Evington parson of
Normanton upon Sore, and Thomas Bolton, Ministers, and preachers of Gods Word.
Commissioners appointed for the taking of the same.
1 THomas Hais of Kirkbie in Ashfeild in the county of Not. Thomas Hais.
Clerk, and preacher of Gods word sworn, and examined, says that being at
Not. upon All Saints day to attend upon Sr Charles Candish, the said day
was entreated to come to the house where William Summers was, by the said Some.
mother: At the name of Jesus cast down.
and there found the said Some. wonderfully tormented, and at the name of Jesus
suddenly oftentimes cast on the earth, the one leg being bended crooked
toward this examinant: not able to streighten the same. In which leg he saw
something run, The leg bound.
and so out of that leg into the other: thence forth with into his belly
greatly swelling the same, in so much that the same was much bowned upwards:
and when the same departed thence, he saw it plainly in his throat, a
running swelling.
in his tongue, and in his cheek near unto his ear roo^e, appearing there as
at that time he conceived the quantity of the yelke of aneg and liing his hand
upon it, ann taking it between his fingers found the same in softnes, and quam
try to the yelke of an eg. And bein doubtful what to thinck, or say of such
a strange sight this Examinant went thence to Mr Arkinson of the same town of
Not. with whom he had often been, and sent for such as were troubled with
Melancholies, or temptations, to cry out some natural cause, if he might. But
after many aunsweres of his touching convulsions, falling sicknesses, and such
others, he could conceive none that might lead him to the finding of a
natural cause. No desease, but the Devil.
So he procured Mr Ebings, and Mr Aldredg the same day to come to him, where
in their prayers, and presences, he had diverse fits as before, giving out
words, that it was no disease, but the Devil.

2. 2. Robert Aldridg.
Robert Aldridge Clerk vicar of Sanct Mary's in Not: sworn, and examined
says, that first he coming to William Somm: upon Thurs day being the 3 of
November (as he thinks) he found him lying upon a bed, no bed clothes lying
upon him, Running swelling.
but only his own hose: and saw a thing running up his right leg to the
quantity of a mouse, and he calling unto God by prayer, immediately it
removed out of the right leg, into the left, and laying his hand therevppon
immediately it removed into his belly, where it did swell to a very great
quantity, twice so big as his body as he thinks, and from thence into his
breast, and there it was the bigness of his fist, and from thence into his neck,
and from thence under his ear, where it remained in the bigness of a french
wallnut, not changing his former color, and so remained there for the space of
a quarter of an hour: and the said Summers liing upon his back, his hands
were holden by two there standing by the whole time this examinant was there.

And this examinant further says, A hollowish voice.
that he heard in a strange hollowish voice, that he was his, and this
examinant answering said that he lied, he was Gods: and that he had made a
promise unto God in Baptism to be his, Blasphemy.
then the voice answered that he was God, Christ, and a king; and that he made
Baptism, and that he made him his by a new Covenant, for he had given him 3.
pen: and that it was in the boys sleiue, which beingh searched, there was
noone such to be found, then it said again that it was in his glove.

This Examinant also further says, that the said William Summers: the xvij. of
November last, from the hour of 7. off the clock, unto 3. off the Clock in the
afternoon off the same day continued straungelie, Extrrordinarie strength.
and diverselie vexed, and tormented: and had such strength as five men had
much a do to keep him down during which time he exceded in swelling,
stritching, roaring, and yelling very fearefullie gnashinsh of his teeth, and
foaming at his mouth. And also says that upon the xviij. th of November
betwixt 7, and 8. of the clock in the morning, he went into the house of Robert
Cooper, where William Some: lay to hear how he had done the night before,
knocking
and he standing in the hall heard a great knocking in the Parlour where the
boy lay, and suddenly he rushed in, where he found the boy alone in his
bed, lying with his face upward in his fit, with his mouth drawn awrie, and
his eyes staringh as though they would have started out of his head. And this
Examinant kneeling down to prayer heard the knockingh again under his knees
as he thought. And in the bed under the coverlet, he saw the form, 5 kitlings
and shape as it were of five kitlings in quantity to the veiwe of his eye.
And again this Examinant saw the bed clothes at the feet to shake, move, and
leap as the leaves of an Aspen tres shaken with the wind.

3. William Hyinde of the town of Notthingham taylour sworn, 3. w. Hind.
and examined says that at his coming unto the said Summers he found Master
Aldridge there (being upon Frydaie the fourth of November as this Examinant
thinks) and did see a swelling in his neck to the bigness off a great walnut,
The running. swciling.
and from thence unto the bone of the check, and there was to the bigness of a
great hasselnut: and from thence it removed into his eye, and the skin of his
eye waxed black, and bycame this Examinant had heard before that he the said
Summers did counterfeyt, Eye skin-black.
he did lay his hand upon the said swelling upon the chekebone which
swelling did tremble like an Aspen leaf in a calm wind, and was very soft,
but in that place did not change his natural color.

4. Thomas Westfeyld in the countye of Nottingham Clerk, and preacher of Gods
word savorne, the running swelling.
and examined says, that upon Sunday at night, being the 6. of November last
passed (as he thincketh) being desirours to see the strange things which he had
heard of the said Summer: came thither with Master Dorrell to see him, The ey^
changed color 8. times.
where he found him with a great swelling under the left ear, to the bigness of
a wallnut, and from thence it removed into the eye, where it seemed not so
great, but caused a great blacknes in his eye, and upon that this Examinant
laid his hand where he felt a certain moving, and his eye changed into his
natural color immediately: and so changed 8. times betwixt 3. and 6. a Clock
in the morning.

5. William Aldred of Colwick in the county of Nottingham Clerk, and preacher
of Gods word sworn, and Examined says, that upon the 6. of November last
being the Saboth, Mr Ihon Dorrell, and diverse other Ministers, whereof this
Examinant, was one, together with the Major of Nottingham and others, being
about 7. of the clock in the Evening came into the house where the said Summers
was. And after prayers made to GOd, the said Ihon Dorrell exhorted with many
words all such whose hearts GOd should touch with his fear, to prepare, and
assemble themselves the next day against 7 of the clock in the morning, and to
consecrate that day wholly unto the Lord with fastings and praper, 150.
persons present
and so departed from them at that time. And the Ministers withdrawing
themselves, and conferring about the keeping of the said exercise, it was
thought good that this said Examinant should begin the next day. Mouth
distorted.
There were assembled at the time appointed about an hundred, and fifty
Persons: and this Examinant beginning with prayer preached against the sins of
our time. Tongue doubled into his throat.
The boie in the mean time being tormented by fits in his body wonderfully,
as by heaving up his body by hailing his lips awrire, one toward the one
ear, and the other toward the other ear: opening his mouth wide, as if it where
fouresquare, thrusting out his tongue, and putting it double again into his
throat: with many fearful cries, and strikes and sometimes lay silent. This
examinant having ended his sermon the above named Ihon Dorrell began with
prayer, at which time the torments in the boy seemed to be doubled: and after
exhortation to the people ended, and the said Ihon Dorrell discoursing of the
signs of possession as they bie in order in the 9. of Mark, the very same
signs there spoken of appeared most evidentlie in the said William Some: The
signs appear according to the word.
in most terrible manner, for he striked, and roared with a loud voice, he
fomed abundantly, he gnashed with his teeth his body distracted several
ways, and the preacher coming to these words: all things are possible to him
that beleyveth, answer was made from the boy, thou lie, and with terrible
countenance staring with his eyes, gaping with his mouth, stretched out his
hands with bended fingers like Eagles poun^s toward the preacher, as menacing
him, with leaping up with his body, and other threatening gestures, but that he
was restrained by his keepers. And thus he continued the whole discourse of
faith. But when he began to speak of the signs of dispossession, (as it
follows in the same chapter) the said William Summers was again tortured
with the former torments moan forcibly. And the said Ihon Dorrell dilating
upon this speech. He came out out of him, the said W. Some: made as though he
would have vomited. And the said John Dorrell besought God to glorify his
word, and work: then the whole congregation breaking their hitherto continued
silence cried out all at once as it were with one voice unto the Lord, to
releyve the distressed person: and with in a quarter of an hour, or
thereabouts it pleased God to hear their prayers: for the body of the boie
was taken, and thrown thwart the bed grovelling, in which manner he lay as if
he had been dead for a season. The preacher then glorifying God, and willing
the people to be thankful (the which being accordingly performed) the boat
turned himself over, and upon his knees rendered thanks unto God for his
deliverie By which time the sun being seth the exercise ended, and the boie
went home with his master.

6. Ioane Pie wise of Robert Pie of the town of Not: baker sworn, and
e^a^^^ed deposes, and says that about a week before M. Dorrell was sent for
to come to W. Some: being the Saturdaie before all Saintsdaie at night this
Examina^t coming to the house of Thomas Porter where the boie lay, His body
doubled etc.
and after a while he fell into a fit of laughing, and then presently he was
threwen suddenly into the beds feet, his body doubled, and his head between
his legs: and then suddenly he was plucked round upon an heap, as though his
body had leave like a great brown loaf, of a strike: and so rolled in the
bed, cast up from the bed like a ball, 3. or 4. times together, about half a
yard in height, the coverlet being so fast wrapped about him, as all that were
present had much a do to pull the clothes from him: and this Examinant tame
many times to the said Summers, of purpose to see the accidents that did show
his possession, wherein she desired to be satisfied. And this Examinant also
says, that about Allhallowtide, and many others times she has seen the said
Summers handled with such violence, as when his fit had come, he could have
been so strong as sometimes there have been 4. extraordinary strength
or 5 women, and could not hold him liing flat upon the ground: and that
notwithstanding all their force he could have beatten his menbers one after an
other, as his legs, arms, and head, as though he would have beatten his head
in pieces, if he had done it in Gods name and that part, or members with the
fit did possess 3 or 4 could not hold it, leg massy inflexible.
or bow it. This Examinant further says that on Allhallowe even at noone, or
thereabouts, she with sundry others, being with the said bote, he was sitting
in a chair about two yards from the fire side, and suddenly was cast toward
the fire, his head lighting upon the iron that kept up the fire, and one of
his hands in the fire: Cast into the fire.
and they being 3 or 4 taking him up to save him from burning, they could not
set him in the chair again: for his legs were so bowed as they could not not
al straight them: and he so heavy, leg bowed
as they could scarce lift him, and that neither his head heir, nor any part
of his body was hurt, or burned by the fire, and she further says, though so
heave as hardly by 3. or 4. taken out yet unhurt.
that there was a small line, which tied up a painted cloth: which was hung over
the bed: to which the said Somm: stretched his hand, but could not reach it: and
then to their imagination he seeming to exceed the stature of the tallest man
in the town suddenly got his chin over the said line: extraordinary stature.
and so with his hands plucked the line so fast about his neck, as that they
with stood by had much a do to save him from hanging. She further says that
the boie in one of his fiths (the night before Mr Dorrell came) said that
Dorrell was coming, extraord: knowledge.
when neither she nor any other to her knowledge had any certain intelligence
that Mr Dorrell would come. for the messengers which went for him brought
answer, that he purposed not to come till the next week. And she also further
says, that the said Saturdaie which Mr Dorrell came to the town he was more
extremely handled then before: Speech without moving tongue, othps.
and that he late many times with his mouth extraordinarily void, and
strangely open, and that he spoke these words vz I will use W: S his tongue,
and members for 3 days without moving, or stirring his tongue, or lips in
speaking any of the said words. And that the speech was in the ordinary
voice of W: Somm: And this deponent further says, that an hour and half
before Mr Dorrells coming to the town, the boie fell into an extreme fit in
such manner as she, For dead.
and those with were prefent judged verily he was dead: for he lay senceles,
and speechles, his eyes out of his head, like wallnuts: his face black in a
strange manner, No remembrance.
and all his members, and the parts of his body instanlie cold upon the
sudain by the space of an hour. And being asked when his fits were past,
whether he remembered the extremlie or any part denied, that he remembered any
thing, and that during the time off his extremity they many times endeavored
to recover him by giving him Aquavitae, and other comfortable things, but it
wrought nothing in him to revive him. And Mr Dorrell being come into the town,
the boy instantly spoke of it with these words: I have but a small time now
to stay, Extraord. knowledge.
but I will shortly return: And that Mr Dorrell coming in at the backside of
the house without knowledge off the boy (as she verily thincketh) the boy
fortolde off his coming, strange smells like brimstone.
and he also had foretold of Mr Aldridg his coming at sundry times. This
Examinant says likewise that at diverse times when the boy was in his fits
she has felt smells like brimstone: Running swelling.
and also says that being in his fits she has seen a swelling in his foot,
which removed, from toe to toe, and so to his leg, and from thence in his body
to the bigness off a 3. penie white leaf: and so to his throat to the bigness
off a rat, and under his ear to the bigness off a wallnut, and in his eye brees
like a black clock, and so removed from place to place. which this Examinant,
and others have sensibly seen, and felt. And this deponent further says that
after the time of his dispossession, the hope discovered by speech certain
which he named to be witches, amongst the rest he named one Milicent Horselie,
who dwelled at Bridgeford: which Master Dorrel and Mr Aldred carried to Mr
Parkins to be examined, and the boy about one of the clock in the same day in
his fits uttered these words. extraord. knowledge.
Now they have her, and are examining her: and she says she does all by
prayer, and now she is saying her prayer, and this was not known to this
Examinant, or any other then present to her knowledge. And she further
deposes, and says that at diverse times she has heard a clapping in his bed,
as though it had been the clapping of 3. hands. and that she has seen a
motion in the bed, kitlings.
as though it had been the creeping off 3. kitlings, which she, and diverse
others have endeavored to take hold of, but never could, for when they have
attempted the same: knocking.
It has vanished: and his hands and feet never sturring to their sights and
that at other times, at his beds feet a knocking as though it were under the
bed to their understanding: and in some of those extreme fits, he would cry,
Nec troend and mouth drawn aside immeasurablie.
Now she comes, now she comes, now she will break my neck, and therevppon
his neck was thrown about* as though it had been broken, with his mouth drawn
of the one side immeasurable, some time on the one side, and some times on the
other.

7. Richard Newton of the town of Nottingham glover, sworn, and examined
says that he heraing off the straungenes off this extremities of the said
Summer: came unto him with a full determination to understand whether his
strange actions were counterfeyted, or not: and thought to satisfy himself
with a full understanding of the truth of the cause, and found he the said Some:
in his fit: and heard him speak plainly with a continued speech with his
mouth wide open, Speech with mouth open, his tongue drawn into his throat,
neither lips nor chaps moving.
his tongue drawn into his throat, so that there could be seen nothing of it
but the roots in his throat, neither lips, nor chaps moving: and uttered this
speech among others Ego sum rex, Ego sum Deus, with some other speeches, which
he (this Examinant) could not understand well for that he is no good Latinest:
and this was done in the sight of many.

8. Henry Nussie of the town of Not: locksmith, sworn, and examined,
deposes, and says, that he came unto the said Some: to wake with him: and
about 10. or 11. of the Clock in the night, he saw him with his mouth wide
open: and he spoke certain words unto Ihon Wigan in Lattin: which this
Examinant understood not, speech. without moving chaps.
his chaps nor tongue moving, and did so speak, and this Examinant saw these
things evidentlie: for he came very near him to behold him.

9. William Langford of the town of Nottingham Chirurgiam sworn, and examined
deposes, and says that it is true, that the same day of his dispossessing
being the 7. of November he did gnash, wallowe, Foaming exceeding.
and foame in such abundant manner, that the foame did hang down from his
mouth unto his breast: notwithstanding it was wiped away continually with
clothes: and that he continued for the space of an hour: and that it was in
such abundance, that this Examinant did not thinck it possible to be uttered
off any humane creature, and so much the more he did marvel at it, for that
the said Summer had not taken any thing from 6. Skriking hideouslie. like a
bull, and a bear and a small voice vncounterfeyt able
of the Clock in the morning until 5. of the clock in the after noone to
augme^t it any ways: and that he did strike with 3. several voices so
hideouslie, and so terriblie as they were not like any humane creature, but
rather the one of them was like unto a bull, the other like unto a bear, and the
third a very small voice, and such as this Examinant thinks cannot be
counterfeyted. extra ordinary strength. Feb. 17.
And this Examinant further says, that the said Summer did show
extraordinary strength: and specially upon the 17. of February last, when
he this Examinant, a kisman of his, temples. pulses. not beating.
and one other servant to Mr Graie could not hold him: and that then this
Examinant felt his temples, and his pulses of his arms which had no motion:
but was as he had been senceles, and like a dead man: and that he was cold of
all outward parts of his body: which he purposelie then did try, for the
strangenes thereof: neither did he extraordinarily pant, or blow, that this
Examinant could perceyve. And this Examinant says that he has heard him make
rhyme of the Scriptures, a small tuneable voice.
and heard him sing so small a tuneable voice, as that out of his fit he could
not sing the like, as this Examinant made proof of, of very purpose: and
hearing him sing many times before in his perfect memori, he did never hear
him sing with so small a voice. And this examina^t further says that on the
said 7. of Nove^. last (with day the said exercise for his dispossessio^ was
appointed) this Examinant came to the house of the said Thomas Porter, where
the said W. Some. was, and there finding the said Some: upon his knees praiing,
and with him some company in prayer, this deponent told secretly some in the
company, that it was appointed that instantly the said Some: Extraord.
knowledge.
was to be co^veied to the place where the said exercise was to be used: and
therevppon (without the understanding of the said Some. 5. or 6. with much a
do carry him.
by audible speech) he was cast sodenlie thwart upon the bed: and this
deponent with 5. or 6. others had much trouble (though they used their whole
strength) to carry him to the said place, where the said exercise was
appointed, and kept: and that this examinant havivg only the guiding of his
head could not continually keep it by his strength: but sometime it was taken
from him. He also says, that upon the said 7. of November the said Some.
being extremely tormented, and toiled, and his buttons therewith opened he
saw a rising, the running swelling.
or swelling in the bottom of his belly, which to his knowledge moved the
clothes: and his breast, and stomach being hare he saw visiblie the same
rising, or swelling in bigness of a goose eg, or a half penie white loaf,
ascend up to his breast, and so to his throat, with which he would have offered,
as though he would have vomited, and therein continued till the time of his
dispossession as was generally thought by all the standers by. for in a trice
he was sodenlie thrown over, by what motion they which were then present could
not conceive by any humane experience, or practice.

10. Thomas Graie of Graies Langlie in the conntie of Leicester Esquire,
sworn, and examined says that about the 3. day of December. last, he was in
the house of one Cooper Clarke of St. Mary's in Not. wherein he saw W. Some:
liing upon a bed, being hold by sandrie persons, December. 3.
at his feet, and also at his head: so that it seemed unto this deponent
thereby that he was in some fit but by the countenance of his face it seemed to
this Examinant, that he the said Somm: did but dissemble. whereuppo^ this
Examina^t considering the strange report which he had heard by diverse credible
persons concerning matters in fact done by the said W. Summers in the time of
his possession, and dispossession desired of God in his heart that some
manifest token might beshewed unto him this Examinant for his better
understanding of the truth in that behalf. And immediately he saw a moving
under the uppermost covering of the bed (not far dista^t from the small of the
said W Some: the running swelling.
leg) which lay in a round lump panting: which this Examina^t perceiving pointed
at, and said to the sta^ders by, what might this be: whereuppo^ one of them
said it is his foot: then it was answered by those that satt upon the beds
feet, thus: We have his feet here, and do hold them. Then this deponent for
the better understanding thereof laid his hand upon the said lump, and felt it
move, and clasping his hand together, he felt that it yielded, as air, or
wind, and opening his hand again it filled the same in very full manner: And
this Examinant taking away his hand, saw the clothes settle very softly
down, like as a bladder being blown full of wind falls together after it
is pricked: and immediately the like moving was on the other side of the said
W. Some: and this deponent seeing it said (laiing his hand upon the place,
where before it was) here it was even now: patting like the foot of a kicing.
and at that very instant this deponent (without moving of his hands)
sensibly felt something under the clothes part very fast in the palm of his
hand, like the foot of a kirtling, or such like thing.

11. Ihon Wood of Lenton in the county of Not: clerk, sworn, and examined
says, that upon Fridaie being the 17 of Februa. last, he being credibly
informed that W. Some. was very miseserablie tormented, and piteously vexed
with most strange fits, was desirous to visit him: and to that end going with
some other of his friends to the house of Robert Cooper clerk of St Mary's in
Nottaforesaid, where the said W. Some: then was at this coming thither.
Extraord. strength.
and this Examinant found him in a fit, wherein he perceived that 3. or 4. men
had enough to do to hold him: and this Examinant thincking with himself that
it was impossible that a boie of his age, and strength, should in such wise
toil 3. or 4. lusty fellows, being desirous to know whether his strength
was such as they pretended, or not: in another of his fits which lasted from
between 9, and 10. of the clock, until it was past twelve, this Examinant was
desirous to deal with him himself for satisfaction of his own mind: and to
the end he might have the better advauntage (as he thought) he stepped behind
him as he was sitting in a chair, and got fast hold of the brawnes of his
arms, as though he would have pinioned him. But when this Examinant preceived
that he could not hold him, but that he would slip from him, whether he would
or not, he was enforced to let go his hold there, and with his fingers fast
locked one into another, so that he could not any way slip from him as
before, by reason both his arms under his arms were fast closed about his
body, ext. strength
he so held him: but the said S: so labored this Examina^t, that both his hat
fell of from his head, and his cloak from his back with struggling with him.
But when the standers by saw that this depone^t was almost overcome with
striving with him: two of them laid hold on him with him, the one, by the one
leg, and the other by the other leg, and this Examinant still at his body: who
so belabored them all for the space of an hour, or therabout, as that in the
end they were all breathles, and constrained to give place to others standing
by. Whereupon this Examinant presently stepping before him upon purpose to
see whether he either panted, or drew his breath, short, or not, found him
with his eyes shat, no panting.
and his mouth, and lips fast closed: and so far from panting, as that this
Examinant could not preceive him draw his wind: and where as they all were
very hott, and this Examinant in a very great sweet, nor rednes.
he for his part neither swet, neither yet had so much as any rednes in his
cheeks. Afterward this Examinant hearing that it was noised abroad, that the
said W. Some. had confessed that all that ever he had done was counterfeited and
that he was delivered to Ihon Cooper, and Nicholas Shepherd as his keepers:
for trial of the truth, and learning also that the said W. Some, was with his
said keepers. at Lentom: this Examinant was desirous to talk with him to the
end that he might make trial whether he counterfeited, or not: for he thought
with himself, that if he did counterfeit he could remember something that this
Examinant did unto him, considering that he never came at him but once. And to
the end no exceptions might be taken against this Examinants words, he
requested his neighbor Mr Forster a very honest man, and one fearing God, to
accompany him thither telling him before hand the end of his going: who
willingly went with him. When this Examinant came unto him, after they had
given over their work, and all the workmen were departed: he asked leave of
his said keepers that he might talk with him the said W. Summers not
secretly, but openly, which request being granted, openly before the said
Mr Forster, and his said keepers this Examinant asked him first whether he did
remember that he was ever with him in any of his fits? he answered, he did:
then this Examinant asked him if he could remember any thing that he did unto
him: he answered, he could: beiing asked by this Examinant, what it was he
did, he said, that he nipped him by the finger with his thumb nail, He
remembrance.
and with that made a sign with his own nail, upon his own finger, saiing
you nepped my fingers thus, but this Examinant aunswering it was an untruth
that he spoke, he willed him in the name of God to shame the Devil in speaking
the truth: for said this deponent) every lie is of the Devil. Whereto the
said Summers answered, that in deed he did not nip his finger: but (said he)
you did bend my finger thus: and with that he buckled his finger with his own
hand: to the end said he you might try whether I had any sense, or feeling,
or not. This Examinant likewise affirming that to be an untruth alsoo: Exhorted
him again in the fear of God to speak the truth: then after he had pawsed a
pretty space, this Examinant asked him the third time what he did, and then he
answered directly, and said, if you did not so unto me, I cannot tell any
thing that you did. When this Examinant preceived he could not remember any
thing that he did, after a short exhortation used unto him to serve, and fear
God, he went away, with Mr Forster: and when they were gone as far as a man
may rove an arrowe, his said keeper Ihon Cooper called unto this Examinant
saying, Mr Wood, Mr Wood, the lad remembers, now what you did. And this
deponent asking him what it was, his said keeper answered that the lad said he
read of a book and prayed over his sister lying on a trendle bed: but when he
this Examinant had answered that to be an untruth also: for (said he) witness
all that were in that house I touched no book in that house that day, he
answered again after a little space, that allthough he read not over her, yet
he prayed over her: whereunto this Examinant answered, that he but gessed at
that, (as he thought) because he might well know that no CHRIstian man seeing
them in such eytremities could forbear to pray for them, and thus they left
them.

12. Ihon Strellie of the county of Nottingham Gentleman, sworn, and
examined, deposes, and says that he being desirous to see William Summers of
whom he had heard strange reports of being possessed with a Devil, and
dispossessed, and as it was thought repossessed again, came to the house in
Nottingham where the said Somm: was kept about the 18 of Febrarie, where
finding him in one of his fits in the presence of Ihon Dorrell, ext: strength,
and W: 4 with holding, abundantly the svveatting, he not breathing.
Aldred preachers of the word of God with others, the said So^. amongst many
other strange things, did show himself of that great strength, that this
Examinant with 3 others could scarce hold him: but that he made them all to
sweat in great abundance, the said Some. neither sweatting, nor breathing to
their perseverance, and so for that time he left him. And coming unto him on
Mo^daie the 20. Feb. 20.
of February in the presence of the parties above named with others finding
him very well to their thinking, and exhorting him out of the word of God,
Cast against the post of the Chimneie.
he was on the sundaine throwe^ from the place where he sat with his head in
such violent manner knocked to the furthest post of the chimneie, as they
thought his nec had been broken: being of so great weight as they thought was
impossible for any natural body: Exceeding massy.
and being laid upon a bed, and liing in his fit about half an hour, many
strange things were seen, as his neck being doubled under him, neck doubled.
being (as it seemed) tormented in his inward parts, with one of his legs being
of a very massy weight: a little thing seen to move in diverse parts of his
body, swelling the body, one leg very massy.
and rising into several parts of the face, to the bigness of a crab or
wallnut, and after coming to himself again, and continuing well a small time
was on a sudden cast into the fire in the presence of them all: the running
swelling.
and being sodenlie taken out without any hurt to him, Cast into the fire.
by the fire being of weight as aforesaid, many strange things appeared in
their presence, as foaming, wallowing, gnashing his teeth, striking, roaring,
and seeming to be stra^gelie tormented in his body with the same swelling
through his body, speech his mouth wid open.
and face as before uttering in his trance diverse strange speeches, his mouth
wide open his tongue drawn into his throat, (but not speaking in that time)
and other things which be now out of memory.

13. Richard Me of Not. butcher, sworn, and examined deposes and says,
that on sondaie at night (being as he thinks) the 6. of November, he came to
the said So^. to watch with him about 9. of the clock at night, and found with
him Mr Westfeild, and others and between 3. and 6. a clock in the morning heard
a voice saying that he would have his right eye, blacknes in his eye.
and then he would have his left: And immediately a great blacknes was in his
left eye, the voice being (as he thinks contrary to his natural voice. And
this Examinant further says that a day or two before, and sundry other times
this Examinant did see a swelling in his arms, the running ^vvelling.
and legs, (they being naked) to the bigness off a wallnut, and removing from
place to place into his body, and that he felt it in his belly to the bigness
of a 6. Face turned directly, backvvards his body not mvoing eyes great as
beasts eis.
pen: brown lofe, and that it was so hard that he could not press it down
with his hand: which this Examinant assayed to do by putting his hand under
the bed clothes. This deponent also says, that he has seen him stand, and
turn^ his face directly backwards, not moving his body: and that his eyes
were as great as beasts eyes, ready as he thincketh to start out of his head.

And further says that he has seen him fallen down before them, leg crooked
with falls.
and that one of his legs would be crooked with his fall, and that this
examinant has assaied to pull his leg streygth out, Yet by no means to be
streigted. mouth stra^gelie draune aside.
but could not by any ways move it. And that he has seen him drawn his
mouth very strangely to one side, so as he imagines could not be done by
any natural course for that he did never see any do the like. And that his
tongue would be thrust out of his mouth to the bigness of a calves tongue.
tongue big as a Calves.
This Examinant further says, that he has seen him laugh very strangely,
and sodenlie strich like a swine when he is in sticking, Laughter strange and
the^ skiking.
and wallowe, gnash his teeth, foame at mouth very strangely, and be (as he
thought) senseles, and these things were done before Mr Dorrells coming unto
him, and that the said Some: Cast into the fire un hurt.
would be violently cast into the fire, standing from the fire, a yard, and
half of: and none of his clothes burnt, or hair singed.

And further this Examinant says that the said Some: in many off his fits,
ext: strength 6 or mor scarelie able to hold him
did show extraordinary strength so as sometimes 3. sometimes 4. sometimes 6,
sometimes more could scarcely hold him, and keep him down, and during his
said fits he was not prceived to pant, or blow more then if he had not
streined his strength, or strugled at all. not panting
and this Examinant further says, that from the said Summer there came a big
voice, Blasphsmie.
uttering these words, that there was no God, that he was God. that he was
king and prince of darkness. exceeding svveete smells.
And in saying of the Lords prayer, he could not be persuaded to say lead us
not into temptation, but lead us into temptation. And also he says that he
has felt such exceeding sweet smells in the room where the said Summer was,
that he, this Examinant could not endure the same for the exceeding sweetness
thereof.

14. Dead to their seeming an hour and half.
Elizabeth Milward of the town of Not: spinster, sworn, and Examined, says
that the Saturdaye in which Mr Dorrell came to the town, the said William Some:
was extremely tormented, cold as Ice face and hands blak.
in such sort as he lay for an hour, and half for clean dead to their
Judgment being senseles, speechles, and without breath to their sight, on which
time presently he was as cold as Ice, and hands black annaturallie, the rest
of his body being coveres which they could not see. And though they gave him
Aquavitae, and other confortable things to revive him, yeth they could not in
all that time: and his body so heavy as that they could not heave it up.
Massy.
And the first word he uttered was this Dorrell comes, Dorrell comes, he vvil
have me out, but I vvil come again for Noottingham and Lenton are jollie
towns for me. And she further says, that the first time she called any of
their neighbors in to help him, she heard a thumping, or knocking in his bed:
and she putting her hand into his bed, a fearful knocking.
felt the said knocking (as she thought) at a hallowe place above the chest of
his body: which knocking she heard as she went down the stayres being so
fearful as she durst not stay above with him.

15. 15.
John Pare of Plumtree in the county of Nottingham Clerk, sworn, and examined
deposes, and says that he came to the town of Nottingham on the Mondaye
which was the day of the exercise of fasting, and prayer for William Summers,
about 9. off the Clock the forenoone: and hearing the exercise in hand at the
house of one Small, went theither about 10. of the Clock to hear what was
done, and found Mr Dorrell, and Mr Aldredge, and diverse other there, where
they continued till the hour of 3. of the Clock in the afternoon in
preaching, and prayer: and that the preasse was so great that he could not come
to the sight of the boy till about the said hour of 3. of the Clock, and then
he saw the boy lie grovelling upon his face upon the bed, and a certain
swelling or rising under his clothes to the bigness of a mouse: the running
swelling.
which removed from place to place, to diverse parts off his body. and this
Examinant also says that he heard a thumping, or knocking in the boys bed in
three several places at once, a knocking in 3. several places at once.
and he putting his hand into the bed felt it sensibly knock under his hand:
and that he was persuaded it was not the boys hands: because they could not
reach so low.

16. 16.
John Clerk off the town off Nottingham Cordwinder, sworn, and examined
deposes, and says, that on Sunday being the 6. th off November (as he
remembers) coming to wards the Church, of Sint Mary's in Nottingham, and
hearing the boy (meaning William Summers) was in some torment went into the
house off Thomas Porter, and found the said boy in a fit in which he uttered
to one Edward Garland, these words, vz. Edward Garland art thou there, how
do thy children, I will have one of them, even the youngest, to which the
said Garland answered I defy the Devil: for he can have no power off me, nor
my children.

And this Examinant says, that after a little time, the boy came to his
senses, and then being asked whether he would rise, he ansa^swered, he would:
and so the clothes being taken of this Examinant saw in his breast being in his
shurt a swelling, the running swelling.
or rising to the bigness off a rat: which this Examinant took hold off: and
found it as soft to his feeling as a down pillowe, and he thincking to hold it
fast, it presently avoided, and then the boy said it was gone down into his
leg. And this Examinant says, that he saw him at sundry times, when diverse
of his members, as his legs, arms, and others were inflexible, and exceeding
heavy, above nature, as iron. Members ^ in flexible; and heavy.
And this Examinant being asked to what purpose he came to see the boie, he
said he came to be persuaded in his opinion hearing such strange things, and
accidents.

17. 17.
W. Hunt of the town of Not: baker, sworn, and examined, deposes, and
says, that he did see W. Summers in his fit liing for dead to his thincking in
which fit he did hear a voice proceed from the said Summers and his lips were
close shutt, Speech, mouth shut.
and did neither move his lips or jaws to his understanding, and he continued
so speaking by the space of a quarter of an hour. the running swelling.
And this deponent further says that in the same fit he did see a thing to the
bigness of a wallnut running in the flesh of the said W. Summers about his face,
forehead, and eyes, and so run about his face to his ear.

The several aunsweres of W. Power, Ihon Pepper, Ihon Cooper, an Nicholas
Shepherd upon certain questions propounded unto them for the discovery of
the practizes with W. Some. for the causing him the said W. Some. to affirm his
dissembling of possession.
1 William Power of the town of Nottingham Gentleman sworn, and examined
says, that Ihon Cooper being demanded by this Examinant whether the said W.
Some: was a counterfeyt, or no, did say, that when Mr Dorrell did cast out the
Devil, he had not appointed him any place to go unto: but we have sent him
into a heard of zwine at the townesend: or words to that ef^ect: which words
were spoken about amonets past.

2. Ihon Pepper of the town of Not. taflour, sworn, and examined says, that
he did hear the said Ihon Cooper say, that when Mr Dorrell had cast out the
Devil, he had not appointed him any place to go into: but now that I have
cast him out. I have sent him into an heard of swine, and now he will com no
more: or words to that effect.

3. Ihon Cooper of St Ihons in Nottingham and one of the keepers of the said
Summers sworn, and examined says that he did not know any which persuaded
the said Summers to confess himself to be a dissembler saving this Examina^t
himself threatened to whip him: he also confesses that one Wilkinson, and two
others came to the house of St. Ihones about 8. or 9. of the clock at night:
and he thincking it an unlawful hour would not suffer them to come to the
boy: but said he would indite him, if he came upon the ground, for that he
was not his friend. This Examinant also says, that he never knew one Nicholas
Air to have access to the boy, to his knowledge. This Examinant further
says, that it is true, there was an ointment brought to the said boie by
Nicholas Shepherd one of his keepers, appointed thereunto by William Gregory
the Majors Clerck: with which the said Summers was annoyted: because he might
be the more nimble to show his tricks: but words of charm he heard not at the
annoynting of the said boy. He also confesses he said that Mr Dorrell has
cast out the Devil (as he says) but has not assigned any place to go into:
but he had sent him into Collwick hill.

This Examinant also says that the said boy since his coming to St Ihons had
no fits, save at 3 times: one immediately after his coming: and the last when
some of the wives came to the house, and then he fell down: but after this
Examinant had put the said wives out of the house, and given him some words of
Correction, he presently arose.

4 Nicholas Shepherd of the town of Nottingham fletcher, sworn, and examined
says, that he never knew of any promises made, or other matter used to the
said boy to make him to say, that he counterfeyted: but that in one of the
boys fits: he himself treatned to have a pair of pincers to pinche him by
the toes, if he used those tricks: but remembers that Mr Iackson promised that
if he would declare the truth, he would be good unto him, and help him to
service in London. This Examinant also confesses that Mr Hurt, Mr Iackson, and
Mr Freeman Aldermen, and William Gregory the Majors Clerck desiring to have
the boy to use some of his tricks answered, that his leg was so sore he could
not show them: and the said Gregory commanded that some ointment might be
given him: which this Examinant did, and the boie anointed his knee, and gave
some to his sister to anoint her finger which was streyned. ()

A BREIFE OF THE FORESAID DEPOSItions, proving that William Summers of
Nottingham of the age of 20. years was possessed by Satan, and did not
counterfeit as some pretend.
1 THere seemed to run along his leg, and thence into his toe. belly throat,
tongue, cheek, eye, and other parts a lump sometimes less, sometimes bigger
then an eg: being soft, deposed by eleue^. 16. 17. 2 The lump being in his leg,
it was heavy, and inflexible like iron by 4. the 6. 12. 14. 16. 3 He had such
extraordinary strength that sometimes 3. 4. 5. 6. or more, were skarce able to
rule him deposed by 6: the 2. 6. 9. 11. 12. 13th. 4 When 4. or 5. strugled with
him so as they were wearied; he did not sweat pant, or change color. deposed
by 3. the 9. 11. 13. 5 He wallowed, gnashed with his teeth, stared with his
eyes, and foamed at his mouth excessivelie: by 5. the 2. 5. 9. 12. 13. 6 There
seemed to run under the coverlet where he lay as it were kitlings to the
number of 4. or 5 deposed by 3. the 2. 6. 10. 7 His face, and mouth fearefullie
distorted one lip toward one ear and the other toward the other deposed by 3.
the 5. 6. 13. 8 His face turned directly backward not moving his body at all,
by 2. the 6. 13. 9 His neck doubled under him. by Richard Me. the 13. 10 His
body doubled, his head between his legs, sodenlie plucked round like a round
brown loaf, cast up like a ball from the bed 3. or 4. times together, half a
yard high. deposed by Ioane Pie. 6. 11 Being cast into the fire against the
walls, and iron bars of the chimneie with great violence, and there liing some
time, he received no appearance of hurt at all, deposed by 3. the 6. 12. 13. 12
His boie seemed to be extented to the height of the tallest man when once he
ondevoured to hang himself, deposed by Ioane Pie 6. 13 He told of diverse
things done in his absence, without notice given by any person: deposed by 2.
the 6. and 13. 14 Strange speeches uttered by him in his fits, in a strange
voice, that he was his, that he was God, Christ, and a King, that he made
Baptism and I will use W: Some, tongue, and member for 3. days; EGO SVM REX,
EGO SVM DEVS: that there was no God, that he was King and Prin-ce of darkness.
Also before Mr Dor. had seen him he said Dorrel comes; Dorrel comes he vvil
have me out, but I vvil com again; for Not. and Lenton are jollie towns for
me. deposed by the 2. 7. 13. 14. 15 Being recovered out of his fits, he knevve
nor what he had said, or done by the 6. 11. 16 In his fits, strange smells
were in the place where he lay, by the 6. and 13. 17 A strange knocking
perceived about his bed in his fits, his both feet, and hands being field
immovable. by 4. the 2. 6. 14. 15. 18 He cried hideouslie sometimes like a
bull, bear, swine, and in a small voice impossible to be counterfeyt, by 3. the
2. 9. 13. 19 His leg would be crooked with his false, and remain inflexible.
by 2. the 1. 13. 20 He spoke in a continued speech, his mouth being vvide
open, his tongue drawn into his throat, neither lips, nor chaps moving, by 4.
the 6. 7. 8. 12. 21 He spoke a quatter of an hour together his mouth being
close shut. by the 17. 22 In his fits, his temples, and pulses did not beat, he
lay for dead, cold as Ice. deposed by the 9. 14. 23 His eye was black, and
changed color in his fits, by the 3. 4. 13.
FINIS.

