THE PILGRIM AND HEREMITE, In form of a Dialogue,

By Master Alexander Craig,

Imprinted in ABERDENE, By EDWARD RABAN, for David Melvill. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WISE, AND Virtuously disposed Gentleman, WILLIAM
FORBES of TOLQVHON.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
HAving collected the dispersed, and long neglected Papers, of this subsequent
Poesy, the Posthumes of a worthy Pen, for preserving them from perishing,
for the Perfections of the Departed, maker of immortal memory; who was one of
the Faithful, affectionate, (and re-affected) Favorers of the honorable
House of BAMFE, whereunto Your self, and Yours, by a faithful Affection, and
affectionate Affinity, are unseparably tied. And also, Sir, for the singular
and ever bound duty, whereunto by many Obliedgements; and unspeakable
Respects, I ever acknowledge my self to be vnterminably tied, to love, serve,
and honor, You and Yours, and to do all that my possibility can perform, to
the eternity of Your Name, House, and Honor. Herefore, Sir, I have taken the
boldness, after the Author's expiring, to publish, and present, his Papers to
Your Honors Hands, to pass under the Patrocinie and Protection of Your
honorable Name. Receive, therefore, Sir, this fatherles Orphane, under the
Shield and Shadow of Your powerful protection, and courteous acceptance: and
as he presents to Your view a wandering Pilgrim, and a retired Heremite,
both Despisers of the fleeting Pleasures, and flitting Riches of this wretched
World, whereupon most wretchedly so many do doat: So, Sir, let the same call
us to mind, what we are here, and what we should aim to be hereafter; that
as we are Pilgrims on earth, we may be Citizens in Heaven; this being our
way, but Above, our native Country; here our travel, there our rest; here
our race, there our prize; here our fight, there our triumph; here our
seed-time, there our harvest; and as wandering Pilgrimis here our Innes only,
from whence we must remove, but there our home, and mansion place, wherein we
must remain. In this estate then, Sir, let worldly things be but our Viaticum,
which we should use, as if we used them not: and let us neither be cloyed with
their love, nor clogged with their cares; but seek those things that are
above, and to temper the edge of our eager distractions, about many things
with Martha, let us with Marie consider that one thing which is necessary; and
requite, in some measure, that love which CHRIST JESUS has carried and kythed
toward us; not as this poor Heremite was with disdain of her whom he
affected, but with mutual tender affection, and a Christian care to keep His
Commandments; whereby we shall gain to our selves, more than the greatest
Conquerours, or busiest Worldlings, could ever acquire; even a glorious
Kingdom, and a Crown incorruptible. To the advancement whereof, Sir, both of
you and yours, after many and happy days here, as my earnest Petition to
GOD shall be; so in all other things I have vowed to remain

Your Honors, in all serviceable and obsequious duty, ROBERT SKENE.

THE PILGRIM AND HEREMITE,
In form of a Dialogue.
WHen pale Lady LVNA, with her lent light,
Through the dawning of the Day was driven to depa^^
And the clear crystal Sky vanished the Night,
And the red morning rose from the right airt;
Long ere the fond Child, with Whip in his hand,
From his slight sleep awoke, to lighten the Land;
Twixt the Night and the Day,
In my sleep as I lay,
Amidst my Dream this fray
And fairlie I fand:
Apparelled as a Pilgryme, with Staff in mine hand,
Forth the day as I went, vndriven bout a guide,
Me thought in a laigh Lay, a clear Stream, a Strand,
A broad Bush of Birke trees, by a Brook side:
And hoping some Heremite made there repare,
As fast as my feet might, forward I fare.
Through a Wood as I sought,
To a Bush was I brought,
Which Nature her self wrought,
Withoutten airts lare.
Through the Wood as I went, half will of waine,
A Cell to my sharp slght can shortly appear:
A quiet and a cold Cave, a Cabine of stone,
I drew me darne to the door, some din to hear.
And as I lent to my Lug, this well I heard,
How long shall I lonthed live? I love bout reward.
And when I knew by the din,
Some wight was therein,
To wax bold I begin,
And no peril spared.
As I went through the floor of that cold Cave,
I well espied in the bark where the noise sounded,
An hoarse hoarie Heremite, grieved and grave,
Whose b^yling Breast naught but black ba^le abounded,
Whose color, countenance, and pale deadly hew,
His whole hidden Harms there and griefs forth show:
Whose tumbling tears or, without
bout cease,
Like floods flowed over his face;
With many long loud alace,
And sad sighs anew.
Yet stoutly he start by, and stared in my face,
And craved how I there came? or who was my guide?
By Fortune, quod I, thus fell the case,
Through the wild way as I went I wandered aside,
And by a private plain path I came to this Wood,
Wherein I wist well some Heremite was hid.
But since I am here brought,
If that I offended ought,
By the Blood that me bought,
I Will obey as ye bid.
A Pilgryme, quod he, you seem by your weed,
And a strayed stranger, if I right weine:
But since you are here come, so GOD mot me speed,
Thou art welcome to such as you have here seen:
But yet of my treatment I trow ye shall tire,
For neither have I Meat, Drink, good Bed, nor Fire.
On raw Roots is my Food,
I drink of the fresh Flood;
On Fog and green Grass good,
All night lies my lyre.
Then held I the Heremite with fair words anew,
And for his frank offering great thanks I him gave:
And when I well tryde that his tale was all true,
The cause of his coming there shortly I crave,
The cause of my coming here, Pilgryme, quod he,
And with that the salt tears fell in his eye:
Alace its for the love of ane,
For whose sake thus I am slain:
A Martyr here I remain
By fatal decree,
In faith, friend, quod I then, I saw by thy song,
When at the cold Cave door darned I stood:
Some Saint of the She sex had wrought thee all this wrong;
And thou had long lived in love, and yet vnlov'd:
And of the long letter this last line I heard,
How long shall I lothed live? I love For bout, understand without
bout Reward.
Whereby I well knew,
That thy Dame was untrue;
Thy pale and wan how
Forth show thou wasst snat'd.
Alace! quod the Heremite, I lived once to love;
But now drowned in Despare, I see my death die:
Though both Will and Wit would, I may not remove,
I lie in the links of Love fettered so fast:
And all my Care-seeming-Sweets, are so mixed with Sowrs,
That each moment almost appears ten hours.
Thus live I here alone,
In this cold Cave of stone,
As next neighbor unto none,
But Trees, Fowls, and Flowrs.
And thus in my dark Den I mind to remain,
As bound Bead-man to Her that works all my woe;
Till Death with his Dart come put me from pain:
Else Atropus cutting quyte the Thread in two,
And on the green growing Bark of each blooming Tree.
This Diton indorsed shall well written be:
In sorrow and sight slain,
For Her here I remain,
Who lykes of another ane,
Much more than of me.
Fond Heremite, quod I then, thy love would appear
Too high to be placed above thy degree:
And thy fond foolish hope, frozen with fear,
And Fortune, thy Old Friend, thy New Enemy.
For she whom thou best love, as thy self says,
As reasonlesse, and ruethlasse, respects thee nowayes.
Thy syle is her sight;
Thy duill, her delight;
And thy pain to despite,
She pleasantly plays.
Whereby it well seems, thy labor is lost,
And unto thy grave thou it go, ere thou get her.
Mad man! why make thou thine enemy thy hospe?
Die not a fool, man; for Gods sake forget her.
For, put case, in hope to obtain thy desires,
Thou die here for want of Bed, Food, and Fyres:
Then who shall be seen,
To louk thy dead Eine?
And intombe thee, I weine,
As custom requyres?
Leave, then, thy Heremitage, and this cold Cave,
And live no more in love, since thou art not loved:
But follow me, and take part as I have:
Company and counsel may do thee some good.
For Don-Diego had died in Desert,
Were not Rodorico did him there convert.
Thus, it may fall so,
That I thy Rodorico,
May find ease to thy woe,
And heal thy hurt Heart.
Speak, Pilgrim, quod he, of things that may be,
Or that has appearance, to take some effect:
For, such is my faintness, I want force to flee,
Love, Fortune, Death, have given such a check.
Betwixt Wit and Will there is great debate;
The one with the other stryving for the state.
Flee Love, quod my Wit.
Stay, says my Will yet.
So I bide; so I flit.
So I love: so I hate.
But where thou would seem to salve all my sore,
And by thy strait statutes to stay all my sturt,
Meddle with that matter, good Pilgrim, no more,
Since all mine health hangs on her that me hurt.
The Coal^ that me burns to the bone, will I blow,
Though Liver, Lungs, and Lights, fly up in a low,
Since she does decree it,
That I die, so be it;
I long till I see it.
Let Death bend his Bow.
Uayne wretch, quod I then, cast off thy vowed Weed^,
And wander no more in this wild Wilderness:
It may be thy Mistres, that dear Dame, be dead,
For whose sweet sake daily that die in distress:
Perchance before that thou her again see,
By vote of the Wan-weird^, that buried she b^^.
Or put case, thy Dame dear,
Has chosen a new Pheare,
Thou would despare to see her.
That so lightlies thee.
Or contrarywyse, good Heremite, suppone
Thy Mistres this moment has good mind of thee;
And for thy long absence makes great moan,
And from her heart wishes her leile love to see:
Saying in her self, Would God I wist where
My poor pyned Patient does make his repare.
Wist I well, so I thryue,
That he were yet alive,
I should be no wights wyue
For ten years, and maire.
Conceit with thy self, good Heremite, I pray,
If thy Dame be dead, thou weep'st but in vain.
Thou art a stark Stock, here still for to stay,
And mourn for the loss that mendes not thy moan.
For if she some other respect more than thee,
What grace can thou get, in duill here to die:
Or would thou thy truth,
Should reap reward of rueth?
Why slipst thou so with sleuth,
The thing that may be?
Good Pilgrim, said he then, of these two I see,
As you seem to conclude, the one must be true:
She loathes, or she loves: a mids may not be,
As to my pains I may prove by signs anew.
For my beloved Love, my dear dainty Dame,
Despises those Elements which spell my poor Name.
UUoe is me, if I mint,
To forge Floods from the Flint,
My true travel shall be tint,
Such Friendship to frame.
But you would say, that Death, drierie Death!
Perhaps, has abrogate my dear Dames days:
To look for a long life then must I be loath,
Whom each froward frown else of Fortune affrayes.
And since alyke for her love I have taken such pain,
I care not a cuit for her sake to be slain.
I shall not seem for to shrink,
Of Death, for hey death, to drink;
Whose sweet Eyes, with a wink,
May reviue me again.
Let this then applease thee, good Pilgrim, I pray,
That no presence, absence, no distance of place;
No fond toys, no new frayes; no time, no delay;
No bad chance, no new change, nor contrary case;
No, not the fierce flames that Fortune can spit,
Shall make my firm fixed says or fancy to flit.
Yea, let her fleet, let her flow;
Let her do what she dow,
To gar my grief aye grow,
I shall be true yet.
Good Heremite, for truth told I often times have heard,
The leilest in love, comes aye the worst speed:
And he that deserves well to reap best reward,
For firm says and friendship, shall find naught but feide.
Take tent to the tales told of true Troyall Knight,
And he that hanged him self, if I read right.
Yea, though thy suit thou obtain,
With one word tint again:
Short pleasure, long pain,
With duile day and night.
But since thou delightest to live still in love,
Advyse thee on this well, Be never too true.
Though thou swear and say thy mind shall not move,
For Orphus, take Protus, to change aye thy hew.
Was not great Jove turned in a Shower, in a Fire,
In a Swan, in a Bull, t'obtayne his desire?
For he that loves lighliest,
Be sure he shall speed best:
And he that loves without rest,
Shall surely get ill hyre.
Wherefore, in love if that thou would come speed,
Thou must flee faith, be facile, false, untrue.
Ere thou prevayle right, so far as I reide,
There must be a sympathy twixt her and you.
For I demand, How can right Concord be,
While you are true, and she both false and slay?
She lykes well another sho,
Then choose new, and change too:
And if you well do,
Be as false as she.
Alace! quod the Heremite, too late I spy the right,
And wronged with woe, still wrongly I frame.
I know that in love, my Lady proves but light:
And if that I were wise, I would do the same.
But faith and her remembrance martyrs me maire,
Than did her presence perfect me, when I was there.
For whiles grieved, I greet;
Whiles I mourn, till we meet:
And some times my poor sprite
Dies, drowned in despare:
And whiles in a rage I reckon with my sell,
And to and fro dispute, to dash my desire:
Half dead in Desert, here why should I dwell,
And pyne with pain, wanting Bed, Food, and Fire?
Why do I lose youths pryme, without all gain?
Or why mourn I for her that keeps Disdain?
And when that I conclude,
To burn Habit and Hood,
Yet do I not dde it,
My Uow is so vain.
Cursed be that fond Uow, that ever it was made:
Cursed be the first cause of my hidden pain:
And cursed be false Fortune, that holds me at feid:
And cursed be the blind Boy, that breeds all my baine:
Cursed be the first hour, the time, and the place,
That fettred my fond Heart in her fair Face.
Cursed be my wicked will:
Nuyte spoiling me of Skill,
And took me captive, till,
That Groom void of grace.
Unsayde be that bad word, That Groom void of grace,
What but her good graces can grieve me so much?
For I may will say, if Pity had place,
Of all that on molde moves, there is none such,
Oh! had the times past in Prayer been spent,
That rueth to my ruethlesse Love had been sent.
And Cupid, I call on (...):
Thou hear'st, and can not see:
Have pity on poor me,
And grant mine intent.
Dame Nature, says the wise Clerk Empedocles,
Bestows, good Heremits, her gifts here and there,
As she well pleases, the best is but Claise:
Each man must be content, he gets no maire.
For faith does not affect thy Mistres fair,
But Beauty, which does bring thee to despair.
Of pity since no part
Is hid in her hard heart,
Yet let not the black dart
Of duile thee devour.
And deaf not the good Gods, with thy vain Suit:
What they have once done, they will not undo.
Love's like a trim Tree, which bears no Fruit,
But green leaves, and blossoms, and flowrisheth too:
Often gladning the Gardner, in hope of good gain;
Yet reapes he in Harvest no Fruit for his pain.
Right so her fair face,
With gifts of sweet grace,
Tint travel, alace,
Bont fruit makes thee feign.
Then suit, serve, pray, praise, or do what you can:
Lo, here I foretell thee, thy labor is lost.
For by the great griefs thou thol'st now and than,
To haste thine own death, thou runnest the Post.
Though surges of sorrow full swift thee assayles,
Thy lawtie in love, bout luck, naught avayles.
Though thou beat the Bush well,
Yet thy foe, without fail,
Hints the Prey by the tail,
And prowdlie prevayles,
(...) (...) So by your sweet self I preasse now to speak,
Whom by the god of Love I pray, and beseike,
Forget the same of your force,
On your Man have remorse;
Lest Death him and you divorce,
For he is sore sick.
Or if a poor man's Plaint may pearce through your Ears?
If Love any Lordship in your Breast may brook;
Have pity on his Passions, and salt tragic Tears;
Who Liberty, and Life both, has lost with a Look.
His Help must be had from Hands that him hurt:
For stern must he stay still, till you stay his stutt.
Then, choose one of these two,
Your sworn Slave for to slay,
Or revert all his wae,
Whom your Beauty hurt.
And then, with a fell Frown, which had a full force
To overruled the whole World, with Eterne Might.
Whereby it well seemed she had no remorse
Upon the poor Patient, pyned in such plight.
Faith, Pilgrim, quod shes, thou ravest in a rage,
That seek by my shame his sick sore to swage.
For, in a word to conclude,
I can do him no good;
He is reaft, by the Rood,
Of all his wun Wage.
Though sometime the day drew, I dare not deny,
That he in mine Heart had the most supreme place:
And so, till the fond Fates his wealth did envye,
I still, with courtesy, considred his case.
And trust me, Pilgrim, his Passions, and Pain,
Meant as near mine Heart, as ever did mine own.
Though his case now seem strange,
I will not my self cleange:
His bad chance, and my change,
Has bred all his pain.
And as for my Love, who lies without release,
Associate for my sake, with many sad Song;
So am I paid in mine hand, with as careful case,
For he whom I best love, has wrought me great wrong.
And like as for his love, he reapes but disdain,
The Love whom I like best, loathes me again.
And as he lives all alone,
With many great grievous groan,
So to my self I bemoane,
My hid piercing pain.
I flee to be followed, and following, am fled:
I love, and am loathed, and loath to be loved.
Here Is a strange stratageme, that my veil bred:
I frieze in the hot Flame, and frye in the Flood.
I lack whom I best love, and choakt am with store:
Yea, have so much, that my mind can crave no more.
Thus go thy ways, whence thou came,
And show thy sick Friend, his Dame
Remains yet the self same,
That she was before.
I will work thee no wrong, that no ways have wit*
But through the Fields on thy Feet friendly do fate,
To seek to thy sick man some Salve for his syte,
And to cure by thy Craft his cursed kindled Care:
Thou shall walk on thy way, and stay on the Street,
And carry him shortly his answer in Writ.
And when she the Door bard,
I stood still yet vnskard;
And through a hole I heard
This talk of the Sweet.
Poliphila, before She writ her Answer, disputes with her own Desires,
as follows:
HOw hard it is, none knows, so well as I*
Unto a doleful, and divided Mind,
To make a well-joind Answer, and Replye,
When all the chief and noblest parts are pynde.
Then, Shall I be to Cruelty inclynde?
Or pity him that prays, and pleades for Peace*
If this or that I stick in contrare case?
I love the Love that lightlies me again;
And lightly him that loves me as his life:
Yea, for my love with slaverie is slain.
His lyfe's the Thread, my crueltie's the Knyfe.
How shall I rid this strange and fatal strife?
Yet best it were, to look, before I lope:
And not to quite Assurance true, for Hope.
O my divided Soul! what shall I do?
Whereon shall now my Resolution rest?
Which is the best Advise to yield unto?
Of two Extremes, how shall I choose the best?
Come, Pithiane Prince: I pray, and I protest:
Assist me now, and make no more delay;
But guide me well, in this my wilsome way.
Then, Heremite, that do in Desert dwell,
And buyst my love, with dear and great expense;
With Toil, and Torments, tedious for to tell;
Be blythe, and let thy wonted Harms go hence:
Thou must not die, while I may make defense.
Put then a point and period to thy pain:
Thy long-sought Love and Lady shall be thine.
Yet will I write disdainfully to thee:
Thy loving Lines must have a cold Reply.
I will not seem too credulous to be,
With hasty Faith, to trust, before I try.
But I avow, I shall not sleep, nor lie
In any Bed, till I behold thy Face,
And boldly him whom I should brook, embrace.
Go, louelesse Lines, unto my Lover true.
Stay yet, lest ye procure his farther pain.
God grant nothing but Good hereof ensue.
Yet stay, for why? Ye will be quite mistane.
Go yet: but yet ye shall not go alane:
My self will follow, with convenient haste.
God grant my Uoyage be not waird in waste.
Thus ends her Disputation.
And so, in a short space, that sweet seemlie Saint,
Presents me* her Pilgrim, a baile-bearing Bill:
And as in the wild way she weind I should want,
My Bag, and my Bottle, she plenisht at will.
A King from her Finger full fair did she take:
And gave me, and prayde me, good News to bring back.
And, having no more to say,
But loath I should long stay,
She weeping went away*
And not a word spoke.
Then, when the black Night her sad Mantle show,
Ill Successor, degenerate from the Day,
UUith the third Foot in hand, I through the thrang threw.
Though clad with the dark Clouds, I went on my way.
And loath to detain the Lecture too long,
I came to my sick Friend; and this was his Song*
But, when I knew his voice,
I kept my self full close,
To hear the Lays of his loss,
The wild woods among.
The Heremite his Complaint.
SO many things before have perfect Poets pende, For to express their
piercing pains, and cause their Cares be kende*

That naught is left, alace, for most unhappy me,
In Skies above, on earth beneath, nor in the glassie Sea.
No Metaphoricke Phrase, no high Invention brave:
No Allegory sweet Conceit, no Theme sublime and grave:
But all things else are said, which I can write or say:
Thus in effect I wot not how my wracks for to bewray.
And nothing does aggrege my griping grief so much,
As that my skill should be so small, my sorrows should be such.
Yet all those Poets brave, which were, or yet shall be,
Could I but utter, as I feel, might all give place to me.
And thou whose mirth was least, whose comfort was dismayed*
Whose hope was vain, whose faith was skorne, whose truth was betraide:
Thou did declare thy duile, in brave and dainty dye:
Thou wast unhappy then, I grant, but now unhappy I.
Thy Poemes did present upon thy pleasant Page,
More Sorrows than thou ever felt into thy cunning age.
With costly Nurix rare, Sid^niane Wares divine,
Thou litst thy Lines, which makes thy Moanes miraculouslie to shine.
My Pains, like Tagus Sands, no numbers can bewray:
Or like Auroras tears, which she for Memnon sheeds each day.
As Stars in frostie Sky can not be told which shynes;
So many heaps of harms my heart without compassion pyns,
Yea, would I preasse to tell the torments that I feel,
With travel tint then might I turn Irions fatal wheel.
And to disgorge these griefs which make me sigh and sob,
Were for to weue a new Penelopeian web.
My Eyes like Fountains might in bloody Furnace frye,
Or like the Lidiane Tubs, whose doom is never to be dry.
My hot and smoothred sighs, no levill course can take:
But restless round about my heart esphearicke motion make.
My Thoughts are now of Bliss like ruin Ilion bare:
My shape, a reconfused mass, which flowrisht once so fair.
My Ship, which sometimes saild in draine of hope aright.
On Rocks full cold is rent, in black and stormy night.
And I, forsaken Soul, a lyfelesse lump of Lead,
Twixt wind and wave am cast, whereas no strength can stand in stead.
My Uentring was my Wrack; my high Desire, my Fall:
Which made the Naufrage of my Hurt, my Hope, my Hap, and all.
Alace, alace, that I impossiblie did preasse,
Above my Fortunes for to fly, so far to my disgrace.
Disgraced with Loss, with Shame, with Wrack, and endless Wrong:
These are the doleful Ditties now, and subjects of my Song.
Yet dare I not, alace, though I have cause, complain:
Which makes me sigh, and sob, and thus for love am slain.
But since it is my weird, to fall, to wail, to weep;
Then by my loss let others learn a lower course to keep.
Thus ends the Heremite his Complaint.
And when I saw that his Song received a full end,
I showde my self shortly, and kindly did kythe.
And when that sore sick man his true Bearer kende,
And saw the Face of his Friend, God knows he was blythe.
Then showde I the black Bill, subscryv'd with his Name,
Well written with the hand of his own dear Dame.
And then, with a glad ^heare,
When Hope had ceased Fear,
He read, that I might hear,
The Will of the same.
Her Answer, to the Heremite.
THy loving Lines I rashly did receive,
Wherein thy Truth, thy State, thy Wrack, I see:
But at mine hands no succor shall thou have:
Though Friend to me, I shall be Foe to thee.
And since thy death does on my doom depend,
Live loathed, or die disgraced, and so I end.
Thus she shortly concludes.
And when he read these bad and noisome News,
Which did refresh his Woes, his Hurtes, and Harms:
Whiles red, whiles pale, he changed many hewes,
And fell down, in dead-thraw, betwixt my weak Arms.
And when with my salt Tears I bathed his pale Face,
His Sprites, and his Breath, came to their own place.
He cryde then, O Death, stay
Thy date, for this half day;
That I in writ may bewray
My high great Disgrace.
The Heremite his Testament.
BUt now, and not till now, my Swan-lyke Song I sing;
And with each word my dying Eyes the bloody Tears forth bring.
Not that I loathe, alace, or shrink for to be slain:
For, what can be so sweet as death, which puts an end to pain?
My death shall be the Cause, thy Honor and Renown
Shall lose the conquered Diadem of Fames immortal Crown.
Yet since it is thy Doom, that in disgrace I die,
Or loathed live, the choice is hard whereas no mids may be.
And yet of Evils twane, the best must aye be taken:
So that I rather choose to die, than live in endless pain.
Long have I looked for joy, whence floods of sorrow spring:
The end whereof, alace, must be my latest Will to sing.
My Tones, are careful Cries; my Words are Plaints, alace:
Sad Sorrow must the Singer be, since Pity has no place.
My Pains are like a Point, amidst a Circle set:
Still in such nearness to my self, that no relief can get.
How can I hope for help, since Heavens do me despise?
And all the gods above are dead'd, with my Complaints and Cries.
Earths burden am I thus, whose sighs infect the Air,
With poisned breath, proceeding from an heart consumed with Care.
For lo, the faithless Fates unto this state me calls:
By which the stately Stars themselves misfortune tholes.
What rests then but Death? since Death must be the last,
To put a period to my pain, for pleasures hope is past.
Yet A attest the gods, since first our love began*
I have been the lielest aye, and most affected man.
I loded thee, alace, thy Soliphermis sworn:
O Poliphila false! my lawtie is forlorn.
My love, woe's me, therefore, still thy disdain has been:
The most Extremes that ever were, or shall again be seen.
Thou first betrayde mine Heart, then falsifide thy Faith:
And where thou promisde Life, by Love, thou have decreede my Death.
When that thy Cruelties I call before, and to
The Eyes of my Remembrance, I doubt what I shall do.
Whiles do I wish to live, not to envye thy love:
But that I might behold my wrack, revenged from Above.
Or that such wrongs as mine, if such, or worse, might be,
Might make me smile at thy Mishaps, as thou have done at me.
Or then that sometime thou, like that Minoniane Dame,
Might love, and loathed be, and suffer such like shame.
Or that the fatal Spark, whereon thy Loins might lout,
And mounting much, might make thee plead, for Peace thy time about.
Yet, whiles again I think, might I my wish obtain,
I could not but be kind to thee, for kindness that has been.
Thus what I would, I wish: but wot not what I would.
Twixt Heat and Cold I frieze, I frye, and fearful am, and bold.
Yea, though I be dismaide, such is my flaming Fire,
That Neptunes Kingdom could not quench the Coals of my Desire.
Yet whiles I read the Schrole of Torments which I thole,
Where no Mischance is mixed to fill a grieved Martyrs Roll.
And when I look the Lives, wherein thy Hellish Doom,
By thy Chyrographie sent, That Death should me consume,
Thus I resolve at ones, for to obey thy will,
Although my Life the Ransom be, thy Fury to fulfill.
Since Contraries, we see, are by Contraries cured:
Then, welcome, Death, to cut the Thread, which has so long endured.
For why? my Prayers are but Curses late and air:
And I beseech the gods by night, to see the Day no maire.
My wishes are, that Hills and Rocks should on me fall,
To end my endless breath, my life, my love, and all.
Yet all those wishes are but types, that I must die,
Which revelations all at once, shall now accomplished be.
Then louelesse dame, adue, whom I have held so dear:
And welcome, Death, to cut the Threede, which holds my life in weire.
And, Pilgryme, thou who took'st thy way in many airts,
For me prepare a burial Bed, for Bones, when Breath departs.
Yet recommend mine Heart, unto my sometime-Sweet;
Who shall, when I am dead and gone, for Grace and Guerdon greet.
And let that place be named, Strophonius Cave of care:
Where naught but woeful wandering ^ight^, undone w^^ duill, repare.
And let this Caberne cold, wherein I dwelt, to die,
For Misers, and unhappy men, a matchless Manston be.
Let him whose erring steps should guide him here to plain,
Take pains to recollect my rolls, and scattered Skrolls again.
That these my Waylings now, and Sorrows Children may
Extolde in after coming times, endure, and lieue for aye.
And that the wandering eyes, which read my sorrowing songs.
When I am dead, may say, that she causeless has wrought such wrongs.
The Mountains high, whose points do pierce the asure Air;
Whose echoes loud my Commerades make comfort to my Care:
Still mot your hights arise, with stately tops and stay,
To match the Alps, that ye may be as famous, fair as they,
Ye Ualleyes lovely low, with sweet and level lines,
Where Natures workmanship and pride in Floraes Mantle shynes:
Green mot ye grow for aye, and that ne spaits of rain,
No Snowie showers, no partching Sun, your stately broydering stain.
And thou, O blessed Brook, which did accept my Tears;
And harbered the^ within thy heart, so many loathsome years*
Unto the Ocean great, most swiftly mot ye slide,
To pay thy debts, bout stop or stay of contrare stream or tide.
Ye whisling winds, likewise, which swiftly did receive,
My Cogiate Sighs, and bury them within your Bosom brave.
Do thus much once for me; Take one Sigh to my Dame:
And whispering sweetly, show that Saint, thus have I sent the same.
And if she do refuse, which out of doubt I dread,
The news of No, shall be a Sput, to haste me to my dead.
Ye brave and statslie Trees, which circumcituate here,
Still bloome, and blossom, with the change of yearlie changing cheer.
Though I did ryue your Kinds, and brake your tender Barks,
By painting Polyphilaes name to your immortal marks:
Agrieue not with your wounds, for I dare well avow,
That I more cruelly have rent my tender Heart, than you.
But last, and by the laiue, thou Holline, grave and green,
Wherein my Mistress name, and mine, most lively may be seen,
I consecrate to thee my Corpse, when I am gone,
That by my loss I may enlarge thy thornie leaves eachone.
And when I shall consume, and rot about thy root,
Then shall thy Boughs and Branches bloome, and bear a fairer Fruit:
And as thou take increase, so shall Her Name, and mine,
Unto thy praise, my loss, her shame, in seemly sort aye shine.
Ye savage Citizens, which in this Forest be,
That did exchange your Cruelties, in Courtesies to me:
Well not ye be, poor Beasts, and that no shots of Lead,
No life-bereaving Bow, nor Bolt, procure nor haste your dead.
And thou sweet pyping Pan, ye Fawnes, and Satyrs rare,
Which were amidst my matchless moanes, Companions of my care:
Ye Nymphs of Hills and Dales, of Woods; of Uailes, of Floods;
I bid you all, alace, Goodnight, and so my Muse concludes.
For now the Herbinger of Death, must life and love bereave.
My Heart is faint, and lo, my Soul begins to take her leave.
And so at point of Death, whose wished approach I feel,
To end my life, I write this last Ill-faring word, Farewell.
So ends the Testament of Stophonius.
Thus the poor Heremite in midst of his pain,
Began to repeat his fair Mistres speech;
Down betwixt mine Arms fell, in dead thraw again*
UUhen no Leid for his life, me thought, could be Leach.
His Cognate Corpse as Clay were, like the Lead:
Yea, healthlesse and helpless, were Heart, Hand, and Head:
I began to bewail,
And eke for to rail,
On her whose faith did fail.
In such time of need.
Yet in the midst of my moanes, down lighted that Dame,
Companied with none, but her Palfray and Page:
And when she saw her liele Love lie dead ere she came,
Her fair Face and rich Robes, she rent in great rage.
And ^^atlings she fell upon his faint Face,
And great Seas of sault Tears she spent in short space.
And seeing her Sweet slain,
No remead did remain:
She thus began to plain,
Her bad careful case.
Polyphila her Complaint, and Testament.
O endless Night of noise, which has no Morrow!
O lowering Heavens, which harms still have threat!
Over mantling me with sable Clouds of Sorrow!
UUhereas no Star does shine early nor late.
Although I ship from Craig, to seek my Mate,
And from a glorious Garland to my Crown,
I find by death my dainty Rose dung down.
Ye swelling Seas, with waltering UUaues that roll.
To resolute the weather-beaten Shore:
They eb, they flow, and changing, Courses tholl,
And dare transcende their bounded banks no more.
But I, alace, whom Duill does still devour,
I find no entermissions to my Moanes,
But ere and late lament my grievous Groans.
How can my woeful Heart, and weeping Eyes,
Behold the dearest of my life bereaft?
How can my mind admit the least surmyze,
Of any Hope, that has but Horror left?
My Pilote now, by North, nor yet by East,
Espies no Calmes, but Mercie-wanting Storms;
Pretending Death, in black and ugly Forms.
I grouelinges on the Ocean of my pride,
Did misregard each true and loving Suit.
So mante sude for favor on each side,
Which made my Seed to yield much barren Fruit.
Though I bewail, as now, it bringes no buite.
Sighs, Tears, and Uowes, and all are waird in vain:
Since nothing can redeem thy life again.
Aye me, alace! Alace, and waile-away!
Dear Heert, poor Heart; what restes for thy behoue?
Since I procured thy death, by my delay,
And did mistrust my true and constant Love:
Now shall my death, thy present death approve.
Though whilst thou lived, to love thee I was loath;
Yet I am thine beyond the date of death.
Then let me die, and bid Delight adue;
Since my delight is with thee dead and gone.
The coming Age shall say, thy Thisv^ true,
Was constant still, and loved but thee alone.
We both shall lie under one Marble stone.
One Grave in end, shall end our fatal grief;
Which yeeldes me now, in point of death, relief.
Since yesterday may not be brought again,
And Wrongs may be repented, not recalled:
I will no more in veigh on Death in vain.
But make all Women's cowrage to be bold:
And in the Times to come, it shall be told;
Though thou till death did serve and honor me,
I after death have sought, and followde thee,
And, Pilgrim^, now, I pray, and I protest,
Before I end this last exequall Act,
Let me be bold to make this small Request;
That for thy vmwhile Friend^ some pains thou take:
First, In this place, a private Grave gar make;
And let us lie interd conjunctlie there,
Where naught but Fawnes, and Satyrs make repare;
Next, When thou comst into my native Land,
Wherein my Love, and louelesse I was borne;
If any of our Tragic death demand,
With Pity speak, I pray, and not with Scorn.
This Practicks rars, which seldom was beforne,
Which when my dear and loving Friends shall hear,
My Tragic ends will cost them many a Tear.
Thus ends her Complaynt.
And so when that rare Pearl departed out of pain,
Upon the cold dead Corpse of her leile Love,
Unto my else hurt Heart did heap Harms again,
And laid new weight on my brast Breast above.
To see him and her gasp, still no wrisht my care.
I wist not whom to help, him, or her there.
While I stood in this doubt,
The Heremite looked out,
And gave a faint shout,
Twixt hope, and despare.
This is the Worlds most wondrous worthy Might,
Most matchless of all, that may on molde move.
Hallowed be the Heavens, that showde me this sight.
And lent me this light, to look on my leile love.
Now am I glad, and vngriev'd, to Grave though I go:
Thy travel and toil does reward well my woe.
For will thou believe me,
My Maker mischieue me,
If thou can agrieue me,
I still love thee so.
I come, quod the Clear then, to cure all thy care,
Though the Faites had forsworn to fang thee my Feire.
Be biythe then, my dear heart, and mourns thou no maire,
For Peace, says the Proverb, puts end to all weire.
Go leave then thy Hermitage, and thy cold Cave,
Where Wolf, Lion, wild Bear, thy blood still do crave,
And with the good God's grace,
Thou shall in a short space,
For all thy loss stnde release,
And first Health receive.
Then frankly the Frieke fuire, with her help and mine,
And to her Palfray he past, although with great pain:
And took on that sweet Saint, that meek Iem divine;
That miracle which gods made, as next unto naine.
Then blythlie the Bairue blent, and hyde hasty Hame,
Through sheene Shawes, and donke Dailes, with his dear Dame.
And so with Adieu dry,
Through the Wood could they hye,
As we twind, they and I,
I woke of my Dream.
Here ends the fatalitie of the loyal Lover Soliphereus, and of his sweet
Lady Polyphila.
The Poem.
AS perfect Poets eye-tymes have taken pain,
And searched the Secrets of each high Engyne,
By base and lowly Subjects to exclaim,
High Mysteries, both moral and divine:
Even so into this worthless Work of mine,
Which at Friends bidding boldly I set forth;
Some things may seem obscure, though little worth.
For as the Heremite leaves his dearest Dame,
And takes delight in cold Desert to dwell:
Syn^ of his Lot, and of him self, thinks shame,
And still despaires, and still does loathe him sell:
So wretched man, exchanging Heaven with Hell,
Forgetting GOD, in Darkness does remain,
And still despaires, to get Reliefs again.
And as the painful Pilgryme, now and than,
With Arguments, and pithie reasons strong,
Would feign reduce the Heremite, if he can,
And make him to behold his woeful wrong:
And as the Woods, and savage Beasts among,
So with him bydes, and recomforts his Care:
Syne holds him up, from dying in Despare.
And as in end, he mooues him for to write;
Syne shows his Suits unto his Mistres Eyes:
Wherein, ye see, she took no small delight,
Because in him some sign of Truth she stes.
She cures his Cares, and all his sick Disease:
Yea, heales his hurt, and heartlie by the hand,
She home-ward leads him, to her native Land.
So sinful man, first by the help of Faith,
Despises Sin, repents, and sore does pray,
That GOD in Mercy would avert His wrath,
And make His bred displeasure to decay.
And when the sick converted would away,
From worldly ease, with haste he makes speed:
Then comes the LORD, to help His own at need.
He cures our cares, He helps us to be hail:
He makes our sorry Souls for to rejoice.
If we in Him confyde. He will not fail,
To free us from the force of all our Foes.
And at the last, with great disgrace of those,
That loving LORD, shall take us by the Hand,
And with Him leads us, to the HOME LAND.
FINIS.
Orpheus Fiddle.



