A sermon of blessed Cipriane touching mortality, exhorting me^ to the love of
forsating this life: and showing that notwithstanding the just and unjust dye
with out difference, yet no man ought to think, that the good and evil come
both to one destruction: Forasmuch as the just are called hence to
refreshing, and thoususte are caught away unto punishment.
Although there be many of you most dearly beloved brethren, which have a
sou^de mind, a steadfast faith, and a devout soul, which is not moved at this
great mortality, but as a strong and stable rock does rather break the
troblesom assaults, the violent and raging wafes of this world, it self
being neither broken nor overcome with temtacions, but only tried: Nevertheless
because I perceive that there are certain among ye people, The causes of
inco^stancy and departing from true religion*
which either through the weakness of mind, or litelnes of faith, or swetenes
of wordly life, or te^dernesse of kind, or (which is worse) through
thignoraunce of the truth, stand not steadfastly, nor do put forth the
heavenly and the invincible strenght of their heart, this thing ought neither
to be dissembled nor to be kept in silence, but that we (to the uttermost of
our power) should with full force, and words taken of the holy scripture,
suppress and keep down ye cowardnes, of the deintie mind, and that he which
is now begone to be the man of God and of Christ, might also be counted worthy
of Christ. For he that is a soul diour to God most dearly beloved brethren, and
being put in the celestial tents do now hope for heavenly rewards, ought to
know him self: so that we should in no wise either fear, or stay for the
storms and whirle wyndes of the world: forasmuch as the Lord has told
aforehande that these should come, instructing and teaching with thexhortacion
of his for seeing voice, and preparing and strenghtnyng the people of his
church, to all manner of suffering of things to come, has aforehande showed
and taught, that wars, and hongers, Mat. 24.
and earthquakes, and pestilences should spring up and arise every where. And
that no sudden and new fear of hurtful things should violently shake us, he
has beforehande warned that adversities and troubles shall grow up thicker
and thicker, The las^ times artroblesum.
more and more in the last times. They do now happen loo, that were aforehande
told: and forasmuch as ye things do now happen which were told aforehande,
all things that are promised, shall also follow after, by the promise of the
Lord himself, which says: but when ye shall see these things come to pass,
Luc. 21.
know ye that the kingdom of God is at hand. The kingdom of God and
e^ternal life are at hand.
The kingdom of God dearly beloved brethren begins to be at hand: the
world passing away, the reward of life, and joy of eternal health, and the
continual gladness and possession of paradise lately lost are eue^ now come:
Eue^ now do heavenly things succeed earthy, great things: little, and
everlasting transitory and fading away. What place is here left for troble and
carefulnes? Who among these things ca^ be fearful and sorrowful, except he
want both faith and hope? who fear death.
It is his pert to fear death, which will not go to Christ: it is his part to
refuse to go to Christ, which believes not yt he shall begin to reign with
Christ. Abac. 2.
For it is written that the rightful man lives by faith. If thou be rightful
and lyuest through faith, if thou beleuest truly in God, why do thou not
embrace and rejoice of this, that thou shall be with Christ, and be by the
Lords promise in saffetie, inasmuche as thou art called to Christ, and
delivered from the deuell? Luce. 2.
To be short that just man Symeon that was a rightful man in deed, Through
faith gods commandments are observed.
which through a perfect faith observed gods commandments, wha^ he had
received answer of God, that he should not dye before he had sen Christ: And
when the babe Christ with his mother was come into ye Temple, he knew through
the spirit, that Christ of whom he was told before was now borne: whom
after that he had seen, he knew that he should shortly dye. He therefore being
glad of death that was now at hand, and fearing nothing his calling hence
that was hardby, took, the child in his hands, and praisid God and cried out,
saing: O Lord now let thy servant depart in peace according to thy word: For
mine eyes have seen thy saving health. In which words he proves and
testifyeth, that than the servants of God have peace, when and wheare we may
trust to have sure rest
and that than they have free and quiet rest, when we being drawn out of the
boistous tempests of this world, attain the haven of eternal rest and
saffetie: wha^ this death being removed, we come to immortality. For this is
our peace, this is the rest that a man may trust to, this is the stable, the
sure, we have here a contynuall battle against vices.
and perpetual saffetye. Furthermore in the world what is there else, but a
daily fight against the deuell? How hard, dangerous, and continual, is this
fight against his darts and arrows? We must fight against covetousness,
against uncleanness, against wrath, against ambicion, against carnal vices: our
wrastlyng with the flickering intisementes of the world is laborious,
continual, and paynfull. The mind of man being besieged and compassed in on
every side with the assaults of the deuel, does hardly resist any
temptation. If covetousness be thrown down, lust ryseth up. If lust be
suppressed, ambicion follows, If ambicion be despised, wrath both vex,
pride is puffed up, dronkenesse calls in, envy breaks concord, zele
cutteth of friendship. Thou art compelled to curse, which gods law
forbids: thou art constrained to swear, which is unlawful. So many
persecutions does the mind daily suffer, with so many dangers is the heart
daily vexed, and does it delight us to stand here long among the deuelles
swerdes: when we ought rather to desire and wish by the means of a swift
death, to make have to Christ? According as he instructed us saying: verily
verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but ye world shall rejoice:
you shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned in to joy. Who makes
not have to com unto myrthe? Joan. 18. From hence we go to mirthe and joy.
Who desires not to be wcout sorwe? but when our heaviness shall be turned in to
joy, the Lord him self declares, saying: I will se you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. Forasmuch than as the
sight of Christ is our joy, neither can we have any joy, but when we have
seen Christ: What blindness or rather madness of mind is this, to love ye
troubles and pains and tears of the world, and not to make haste to that
joy, that ca^ never be taken from us? This thing happens dearly beloved
brethren, whi ^e love this* liffe so much.
because faith is wanting, because no man believes the things to come, which
God (that is true) has promised, whose word unto them that believe is
everlasting, and stable. If a sage man and worthy praise did promise thee any
thing, thou would verily believe his promise, neither would thou think to
be deceived and begyled of him, of whom thou art persuaded, that he will abide
by his words and deeds: but now God speaks unto thee, and do thou
unfaithful man waver with an unbelieving mind? God does promise unto the
departing this world immortality and eternal life, and do thou doubt? This
is even to be utterly ignorant of God, How p^^fitable a thing ye y^ to depart
out of this world
this is through the sin of vnbeleaue toffende Christ the mastre of beleauing
people: This is to be in the church and in the house of faith, and to be
witout faith: How profitable a thing it is to depart out of this world,
Christ him self the maistre of our salvation and profit shows, which wha^
his disciples war sorrowful because he said that he should now depart from
them, spoke unto them saying: Joan. 14.
If you loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go to the father: Whereby he does
teach and declare, that we ought rather to rejoice than to be sorrowful, when
they whom we dearly love depart this world. Of the which thing the blessed
apostle Paul being mindeful, writes in his epistle and says: Christ is
liffe unto me, Phi. 1.
and death aua^tage: He rekened it the chefest gain to be now no more tied
with the snares of the world, to be now no more in danger of any sins and
vices of the flesh, to be rid of vexing trobles, and delivered from the
venemouse jaws of the deuell, and to go furthe at the calling of Christ unto
the joy of eternal salvation. But some ar troubled, because the disease of this
sickness do indifferently come upon our men, as well as upon the heathen: as
though the christean had beleaued to this end, yt he might both be fre from
ye fealing of euelles, and inioye ye pleasures of the world, and not rather
suffering here al manner of adversity be reserved and kept unto the joy to
come. Some men ar troubled because this mortality and death is common to us
also with other. Trobles, sicknesses, and death ar common to all men
But what thing in this world have not we common with other, so long as yet
(according to thordenaunce of our furst birthe) this common flesh remains?
So long as we abide here in the world, in the equalite of flesh we are joined
together with mankind, but in the spirit we are separated. Therefore until this
corruptible may put on in corruption, 1. Cor. 15.
and this mortal may receive unmortalitie, and the spirit bring us unto God
the father, we have our part in all manner of incommodities and displeasures of
the flesh common unto mankind. Thus wha^ ye ground is barre^ through an
unfruitful blast, hunger spares no man. Thus when any city is possessed throw
the inrode of thennemy, captivity wastes all me^ together: And when the
stonyrocks burst ye shipe in pieces, ye shipwreck is common to al ye saiie in
ye shipe without exception. And the pain of thies, and ye raging agwes, and the
disease of al parts of the body ar common to us with others, so long as we
carry about this common flesh in the world. Yea rather if the christian man
knew under what condition and what law he believed, The true christian has
most troble in this world
he should know that he must be trobled in this world above other, which above
other must wrestle with thassaultes of the deuel. The scripture teaches and
warns us aforehande, saying: My son when thou becommest gods servant,
stand in rightfulnesse and fear, Eccle. 2.
and prepare thy soul to temptacion. And again: Endure in sorrow and in
fear, and through hu^blenes have thou patience, for both gold and silver are
tried by the fire. Job after the loss of his goods, after the death of his
children, Job. 1.
being thus grievously afflicted both with wounds, and with vermin, was not
overcome, but tried: which in the self grefes and sorrows that he suffered,
did declare the patience of a godly mind, saying: Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, naked also shall I go under thearthe, the Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away: as it pleased the Lord, even so has it happened,
The Lords name be blessed. And when his wife would have enforced him, that he
being through great sorrow impacient, should with a complaining and malicious
voice have spoken something against God, he answered her and said: Thou have
spoken as one of the folishe women. Job. 2.
For if we have received prosperity at the Lords hand, why should we not
suffer adversity? In all these things that happened unto Job, he sinned
nothing with his lips in the presence of the Lord. Therefore the Lord bears
him witness, sayng: have thou marked my servant Job, there is not one like him
upon thearthe, a man without fault, a true worshipper of God. Tobi. 1.
Tobias also after his noble works, after the manifold and glorious
comme^dacions of his mercy, did suffer the blindness of eyes, and he fearing
and praising God in adversity, grew up to praise by the self plage of his
body: whom his own wife also assayed to corrupt saing: Where are thy
rightfulnesses become? loo what thou suffrest. But he being steadfast and
stable in the fear of God, and armed with a godly faith to suffer all manner of
passions, gave no place in his sorrow, to the temptacion of his weak wife, but
did thothe greater patience procure the further favor of God: whom
afterward the angel Raphael praised and said: Yt is an henorable thing to
declare and praise the works of God: For when thou and thy daughter in law
Sara did pray, I offered up the remembrance of your prayer, in the presence of
the glory of God: and when thou didist simply burye the dead, and because thou
delayedst not to arise and to leave thine own dynar, and wenst furthe and
did burye the dead, I am sent to try thee. And again he says: I am sent
to heal the, Tobi. 12.
and thy daughter in law Sara: For I am Raphael one of the.vij. holy angels,
which do stand and have our conversation before the glory of God. This
sufferance the just me^ have always had, this discipline thapostles according
to ye Lords ordinance kept: not to murmur in adversity, but patiently and
ma^fully to receive what so ever do happen in this world. Whereas the Iuishe
people has in this point always offended, because they did often murmur
against God, as the Lord God does witness in the book of nombres saying: Number.
20.
let the^ cease to murmur against me, and they shall not dye. We may not most
dear brethren grudge in aduersites, but quietly and strongly suffer what so
ever shall happen, seeing it is written: that a trobled spirit is a sacrifice to
God, Psalm. 50.
and that God despises not a contrite and an humble heart. In the Deuteronomy
also the holy ghost does warn us by Moses, and says: Deu. 8.
The Lord thy God shall vex the, and shall throw hunger upon the, and thine
heart shall be known, whether thou will truly keep his commandments or not.
And again he says: The Lord your God does tempte you, yt he may know,
whether you love ye Lord your God with al your heart, and with al your soul. Thus
did Abraham please God: Gene. 22.
and yt he might so do, he neither feared to forgo his son nor refused to
kill him. Thou yt can not be content, to forgo thy son by the law and
lotte of mortality and death, what would thou do, if thou war commanded to
kill thy son? The fear of God and faith ought to make the redye to al
things. Be it that thou have lost thy goods, be it that parts of thy body ar
continually and grievously vexed with deadly diseases, be it that thy wiffe, thy
children and dear friends ar most dolefully and heauely pluct from the by
death, let not these things be stumbling blocks unto the, but batailes:
neither let the^ weaken or overthrow the faith of a christian, but let them
rather declare strenght in the wrestling: Forasmuch as all suffering of these
present euelles ought to be despised in hope of the good things to come.
Except there shall furst be a battle, there can be no victory, but when a man
in the joining of the battle gets the victory, than is there a crown also
given to them that ouercom: For in a tempest the governor of a shipe is
known, and a sowdear is tried in ye battle. The brag is but wanton, wha^
there is no danger: The conflicte and fight in aduersite is the trial of the
truth. The tree that is depely roted is not moved with the blustering winds:
and a ship that has strong ribs well joined, is beaten of the wawes and
received no leake, and wha^ the corn is thressed on to barn store, the good
and weghty corn regards not the winds, but the light chafe ar blown quite
away. Eue^ thus thapostle Paul after shipwreck, after scorges, after many
and bitter torments of the flesh and the body, he says not that he is
grieved with these adversities but amended: so that the more grievously he is
afficted, the more truly he is tried: There is given me (says he) the prick of
my flesh, 2. Cor. 11.
the messenger of Satan that does buffet me, that I should not be exalted: For
the which I have beseched the Lord.iii. times that it might depart from me:
and he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, for power through
weakness is made perfect. When therefore either sickness, either weakness, or any
destruction does violently assail us, tha^ is our strengt made perfect, than
is faith crowned, if she endure steadfast in temptacion: Eccle. 27.
according as it is written: The furnace tries the potters vessel, and the
temptacion of troble tries just men. Furthermore this difference is between
us and other that know not God: They complain and grudge in their trobles:
but as for us, adversities do not call us away from the truth, virtue, and
faith, but do strenghten us in sorrows. For where as now the bloody flixe
does scrape the guts, and takes quite away the strenght of the body,
whereas now a fire inwardly conceived in wou^des and sores does rage and burn,
whereas now the intralles do shake and pant with continual vomit, whereas the
eyes are set on fire with the violence of blood, whereas some men's fete or other
pertes of the body ar cut of that they should not corrupt the rest, whereas
through damages and hurtes of the body (after the disease once burste out)
either the going is weakened, or the hearing stopped, or the sight blinded, al
and every of those profits unto the instruction and teaching of faith. To
fight against so many violent assaults of destruction and death with a stable
mi^de, what a noble courage is it? and how worthy auaunceme^t is it for a man
to stand right up, among the myseries and destructions of ma^kinde, and not to
lie groueling on thearth with them that have no hope in the Lord? We ought
rather to rejoice, and embrace the gift of time, yt whiles we steadfastly
declare our faith, and by suffering of pains go by the narowe way of Christ
unto Christ, we may (he being judge) receive the reward of life and faith.
Let him fear to die: but he which being not renewed of the water and the
spirit, is delivered in bondage to hell fire. Let him fear to dye, who be they
that fear death.
which is not enrolled in ye cross and passion of Christ: Let him fear to die,
which from this death shall pass to the second death: let him fear to dye,
whom after ye departure from this world, an everlasting flame shall torment with
continual punisheme^t: let him fear to dye, which by his long carieng here have
only this benefit, that his sorrow and torment is for the while differred.
Many of our brethren dye in this mortality, that is to say, many of our
brethren are delivered from this world. As this mortality is a pestilence to
the Jews and gentiles yt are Christ's enemies, even so to gods servants it
is an wholesome departure. Where as without difference of mankind ye just die with
thoniuste, ye may not think yt both good and euel are destroyed alyke.

The just are called hence to refreshing, thoniuste are caught away to
punishment: Defense is quickly given to the^ that believe: but to tho^beleuers
pain. We are most dearly beloved brethren vncircu^specte, and unthankful to
Gods benefits, neither do we know what is given unto us. The virgins being
in safety, lo depte hence in peace with their glory, fearing nothing the
threateninges, deflowringes and brothel houses of Antichrist now coming. The
children escape the dangers of their slippery age, and do luckely attain the
reward of co^tine^cy and innocence. The tender matrone fears now no more
torments, which through a swift death is escaped ye fear of persecutyon, and
the hands and torments of the hang man. Through thextreme fear of mortality
and time, the luke warm are made hot, the dissolute are hard wrongen, the
slothefull ar reised up, the shrinkers are compelled to return, the heathen
are constrained to believe, the true faithful people are called to rest, and a
new and a great arinye is gathered together with a mightier force to the
battle, to fight when the filde shall begin without any fear of death,
which in the time of mortality came in to the warfare. Furthermore what thing
is this most dearly beloved brethren, how much apperteining to the purpose,
how necessary, yt this pestilence and morren, which seems to be horrible and
cruel does try the rightfulnes of every man, and examineth ye minds of
mankind, whether the hole do service unto the sick? whether neighbors and
kinsfolk do godly love together? whether the masters have any pity upon their
sick servants? whether the phisicio^s forsake the sick that humbly
requires their counsel? whether the ^ruel will cease from tyranny and wrong
doing? whether thextorcioners (at ye least wise for fear of death) will
quench their insaciable and continual burning of raging covetousness? whether
ye proud will stoop and bow down their necks? whether the wicked wilmoderate
his folehardines? whether the rich (wha^ their dear friends are dead) will yet
tha^ give to the poor, seeing themselves shall dye without heir? Certainly
although this mortality shall bring with it none other profit, yet in this
point it has much profited christians and gods servants, because we
begin now gladly to wish for martirdom, whiles we learn not to fear death.
Unto us these are no buriales but execises. They give a glorious strengtht unto
ye mind, through the contempt of death they prepare to the crown. But
paradue^ture some man may obiecte and say: This tha^ in this present
mortality makes me heavy, that where as I was prepared to confess the faith,
and had with my hole heart and full streinght addicte my self to suffer
passion, I am now being prevented with death, deprived of my martyrdom. For
answer to this, we must first consider, that martyrdom stands not in our
power, but in thestimacion of God, neither can thou say yt thou have lost
ought, which know not whether thou did deserve to receive. Besides this,
God which is the searcher of the reins and heart, and ye beholder and knower
of theyes sees the, prayseth and allows the, and he that perceyueth the to
be prepared to virtue, will for virtue render reward. Had Cain now killed his
brother when he offered sacrifice to God? and never theles God that forseeth
things old beforehande condemn ye murdering of his brother, which he had
conceived in his mind. As there the wicked thought and mischenous conceit was
manifest unto God, yt forseeth things: eue^ so among the seruau^ts of God,
which think to confess the truth, and are full purposed to suffer martyrdom,
the mind bent to goodness (God being judge) is crowned.

For it is one thing to want a will to martyrdom, and on other to wa^te
martyrdom to a ready will. Look what manner of one God fyndeth thee when he
talleth thee hence, such a one does he also judge thee, according as him
self witnesses saing: and al co^gregacio^s shall know, ye I am ye searcher of
ye reins and of the heart. For God seeks not the effusion of your blood, but
faith. For neither were Abraham, I saat, nor Iacod slain, and yet through the
merits of faith and rightfulnes they were honorable, and obtained to be chief
among the Patriarchs. Unto whose feast all that are found faithful, just,
and praise worthy are gathered together. We ought to remember that we should do
the will of God and not our own, according as God has commanded us daily to
pray. How arsewarde and peuishe a matter is it for us to desire the will of God
to be done, Seeing we do not immediately obey the commandment of God his will,
when he calls us out of this world? Against this we strive and wrestle, and
ar with heumes and sorrow after ye manner of stub burn servants brought unto ye
lords presence, departing hence compelled by necessity, and not by willing
obedience: and will we wc heavenly rewards be honored of him, to who^ we com
unwillingly? For what purpose than do we desire and pray for the coming of
the kingdom of heaven, if we have our delectacion in earthy captivity? why do
we pray and beseech with often repeted prayers, that the day of ye kingdom
might come quickly, if our desires be greater and earnester to serve the devil
here, than to reign with Christ there? Further that the tokens of gods
providence may more manifestly appear, that the Lord (which knows aforehand
things to cum) does provide for the true health of his, when a certain
companion in office and fellow priest with us being now wearied with sickness,
and trobled with death even at hand, desired a sauecondute to be given him,
there stood by him as he prayed and being now at deaths door, a yo^g man in
honor and majesty worshipful, of stature tall, of countenance so clear and
bright, that the carnal eye of man could scante abide to behold such a one
standing by him, but only because he ye should go out of ye world might now
abide to look upon such a one. And he not with out a certain anger of mind and
voice groned and said: you are afraid to suffer, depart hence ye will not,
what shall I do to you? this is a voice of one rebuking and warning, who will
not consent to the present desire of such as be careful for persecucyon, and
careless for their calling hence, but refers the hole matter unto the time to
come.

Our brother and fellow in office heard that which he might declare to other.
For he ye was now ready to die, heard these words to that end ye he might tell
them to others, he heard the^ not for himself but for us. For what should he
learn being now ready to depart? He learned somewhat, but that was for us that
here remained, that whiles we parceaue that the priest ye desired saueconducte
was rebuked, we might know what was expedient for every one of us. How often
has it ben also reveled unto us that are the lest and out castes? How often
has God vouchsaued manifestly to command us, that we should diligently
witness and openly preach, ye we ought not to mourn for our brethren, which
by ye. Lords calling are delivered from the world? forasmuch as I know, ye
they are not lost but sent before, ye they departing hence go before us, and
ought to be wisshed for as men ye are gone forth on a torney or sailing, and
not to be lamented: neither that we here should put on black gowns, Morning
for the dead in black gowns.
seeing they have received there white garments, that we should give non
occasion to the gentiles that they might worthily and justly rebuke us because
we mourn for them, as though they were destroyed and lost, which we say do
live with God, and should with the witness of our heart and conscience reprove
that faith which we profess with our mouth and doice. We are tra^sgressours of
our hope and faith, the things that we speak seem to be cou^terfaite,
feigned, paited. yt profits nothing to profess virtue in words, and to
destroy ye truth in deeds. Thapostle paul also does rebuke and blame such as
are sorowefull in the departing of their friends. ^. These. 4.
We will not (says he) have you to be ignozau^t brethren touching them that
are aflepe, that you should not be sorowefull as such that have no hope. For
if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, eue^ so God shall also brig with
him the^ that have slept in Christ. He says, ye they are sorowefull in the
departi^g of theirs that have no hope. But we which live in hope, and believe in
God, and trust in Christ that suffered for us and rose again, abiding in
Christ, and through him rising again in him, why do we our selves either
refuse to depart hence, or mourn and sorrow for our fre^des departing hence
as though they were lost? Seeing yt Christ him self the Lord and our God does
warn us saying: I am ye resurrection, he that believes in me although he die,
yet he shall live: Joan. 11*
and every on that lives and believes in me shall not die for ever. if we
believe in Christ let us give credit to his words and promises, and we shall
not die everlastingly, but we shall come to Christ with a joyful safety, with
whom we shall live and reign always. But where as in the mean time we die,
we do but pass by death unto immortality, neither can a man attain eternal
life, except he happen to go out from hence: it is no end but a passage, and
after this temporal journey is finished, a going over unto everlasting life. Who
will not make have to go to better things? Who will not desire to be changed
and fashioned a new after thymage of Christ, and to co^ spedely unto ye
dignite of ye heavenly grace? according as Paul thapostle preached safeng, our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we also look for the Lord Jesus Christ,
Phi. 3.
which shall transform our vile body, and make it like unto his gloriouse
body. The Lord Christ also him self does promise, that we shall be such,
when he prays the father that we may be with him, and live with him in
theuerlasting seats; and rejoice in the celestial kingdoms: father (says
he) I will that where I shall be those which thou have given me may be with me
also, Joan. 17.
and may see the glory which thou have given me before the world was made. He
that shall com to the seat of Christ, and to the glory of the heavenly
kingdoms, ought neither to mourn nor tament, but rather according to the
Lords promise and the beleaue of the truth, to rejoice in his translation and
journey. Thus do we find that Enoch which pleased God, was translated. For thus
in the book of Genesis Gods word testifies and says. And Enoch pleased
God, and was not afterward found, because God had translated him. This was
the reward of pleasing God, to obtain to be carried out from the infectyon of
this world. This the holy Ghost teaches also by Solomon, that they which
please God ar plucked quickly hence and spedily delivered, Sapi. 4.
least that they tarieng long in this world, might be defiled with the
handelinges of the same: He was caught away (says he) lest through malice
his understanding should change. For his soul pleased the Lord* therefore he
made have to bring him out from the mids of wickedness: Thus the soul it self
being addicte unto God, makes have in the psalms also unto the Lord through
spiritual faith, as it is written: Psalm. 83.
O Lord of hosts how loving at thy dwelling places, my soul desires and
makes have unto the courts of God. if is his part to desire to dwell long
in the world, whose delectacion is in the world, whom the flattering and
deceitful world does allure with enticeme^tes of earthy pleasures. Furthermore
forasmuch as the world hates the christian, why love thou him that hates
the, and do not rather follow Christ, which has redeemed the, and loves
the? John in his epistle cries, speaks and exhorts, that we should not
(folowi^g carnal desires) love the world, ^. Joan. 2.
saying: love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any
man shall love the world, the charity of the father is not in him, because
all that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of theyes, and
the pride of ye world, which is not of the father, but of the lust of the
world, and the world shall pass away with his lust: but he that shall do the
will of God, shall abide for ever, even as God abides for ever. Furthermore let
us most dearly beloved brethren be ready with a perfect mind, a steadfast
faith, and strong power to obey all the will of God: let us banishe the fear
of death, and think upon immortality that follows. Let us show our selves
to be that yt we beleaue: So that we neither mourn for the departure of our
dear fre^des, and when the day shall come of our own calling hence, we may
without delay and gladly go at the Lords call. This thing forasmuch as it
should be done of Gods servants always, much more at this present it
ought to be observed, Seeing the world is now in decayeing, and beseged with the
blonsteri^g te^pestes of deadly euilles: that we which do see grievous things
to be already bego^ne, and know that more grievous hang over our heads, should
count it the greatest gain if we may depart hence quickly. If the walls of
thine house were so old yt they shoke, and the roof over the did tremble, the
house being now weried, being now tired, and the buildinges falling down for
age, did threate^ an overthrow to be at hand, would thou not with all speed
get thee out? If a troblesome and stormye tempest, and the waves being lift up
with a violent wind, did aforehande show the a shippewracke coming, would
thou not sail in to some haven with out delay? Behold the world shakes and
decaieth, and does declare her own down fall, not now with the age, but
with the^de of things: and do not thou give thanks to God; and rejoice on
thine own behalf yt thou art quickly taken hence and delivered from the
dangers, shippewrackes and plages that are houeri^g over us? We ought to
consider most derely beloved brethren, and often times to think, that we have
forsaken the world, and ye we live here but for a time as strangers and
pilgrims. Let us embrase that day which may appoi^te every one of us his
dwelling place, which does restore us to paradise and to the kingdom of
heaven, after that we are taken hence, and delivered from the snares of the
world: Who being far out of his own country, makes not haste to return
home? Who making haste to sail to his friends and kinsfolk, would not
earnestly desire a prosperous wind, that he might the rather embrace his
dearly beloved? We reken that paradise is our country, we begin now to have
the patriarchs for our parents, why do we not make have and ru^ne, that we
may se our country, hat we may salute our parents? A great number of our
parents, brethren and sons do there abide us, a great company do wish for
us, which are now sure of their own immortality, and careful for our
safetye. To come to the sight and imbrasing of these, how great joy shall it
be both to us and them? what manner of pleasure is this of the heavenly
kingdoms, to be with out ye fear of dieing and to live with euerlastyngnes? How
excellent and perpetual happiness is this? There is the glorious company of the
Apostles: There are the number of the rejoicing prophets. There are an infinite
company of martyrs, that are crowned for the victory of their fight and
suffering. The triumphing virgins are there, which through the strenght of
co^tinency, have subdued the lust of the flesh and body: There are the
merciful rewarded, which have done the works of ryghtfulnesse, by geuyng
alms, and fedyng the poor: which observing the Lords commandments, have
changed their earthly patrimonies for heavenly treasures. Let us most dearly
beloved brethren with earnest desire make haste unto these, le^ us wish that we
may quickly be with them, that it may be our fortune spedely to come to
Christ. Let God se this cogitacion and thought of ours, let the Lord Christ
behold this purpose of our mind and faith, which shall give the greater
rewards of his glory to them, whose desires are more earnest to be with him.
Amen.

A book of the holy martyr G. Chpriane, conicining an exhortation to
martyrdom, divided into, xii. chapters, wherein the su^me of the hole matter is
more fully known. written unto Fortunatus.
Forasmuch as O most dear Fortunatus the heavy burden of trobles and
persecutions do lie upon the church, and now in the end of ye world the
maliciouse time of Antichrist begins to approach, thou have desired me to
prepare and strenghte^ the minds of the brethren with exhortacions of the holy
scriptures, whereby Christ's soldiers might be encorraged unto the spiritual
and heavenly fight. It behooved me to obey this thy most necessary desire, that
(to the uttermost of our little power, by the help of gods inspiracion) we
might bring forth out of gods word, as it were certain armores and defenses
for the brethren that shall fight. For it is but a small matter for us, to raise
up gods people with the trompe of our voice, except we strenghten by the
holy scriptures the faith of such as believe, and the devout virtue that is
consecrate unto God. For what thing agrees better and more with our pastoral
cure and charge, then to prepare and furnishe the people committed unto us of
God, and the armey standing in the heavenly tents, against ye arrows and
darts of the deuell? For he can not be a mete souldear for the battle, which
have not ben before exercised in the field. Or who seking a victorious crown
shall in the course or ru^nyng place be crowned, except beforehande he do
consider the experience of his strenght and co^nyng? The adversary and enemy
with whom we fight, is ancient and of long experience. For six thousand years
are fully complete, sense the deuel began to fight against man. Therefore he
has now learned eue^ by ancient exercise, al kinds of te^tacio^s, al
sottelties and deceytes to cast us down. If he shall find Christ's souldear
unprepared, if he shall find him ygnorau^t, negligent, and not diligently
watching: he encloseth in the ignorant, he deceaueth the negligent, he
begyseth the folishe. But if any man keaping the Lords commandments, and
stycking manfully unto Christ, shall stand up against him: he must needs be
ouercom, because Christ whom man confesses is invincible. But to make a short
tale, lest with long writing I should weary ye most dear brother being occupied
either in hearing or in reading, I have knit up the matter in a few words,
that unto the titles that at set abroad (which every man ought both to know
and remember) I might add the Lords words, and by authorire of ye divine
scriptures confirm ye which I had set before men's eyes: so that I may not so
much seame to have sent unto the this treatise of mine own writig, as to have
given occasion to other to write treatesis: which thing being used of every
one, is profitable for many. For if I should now give unto the a garment ready
made, the garment should be mine, which an other should we are, and
paraduenture a thing made for an other, would not serve for the proportion and
stature of his body. But now I have sent unto the the self wolle and purple of
the lanibe, by whom we are redempre and made alive, which when thou have
rereaued, thou shall make for thy self a coat at thine own pleasure, wherein
thou shall more rejoice, than in thy accustomed and proper garments: and thou
shall deliver this that we have sent unto others, that they may also according
to their own will make for them selves garments, that al men (the old
nakedness being covered) may put on the garments of Christ, being clothed word
we the sanctificacion of the heavenly grace. Furthermore in this most
necessary exhortacio^, which may stire up men to suffer martyrdom, I have
perceived this counsel also most dear brother to be both profitable and
wholesome, to cut of the lettes and hinderaunces of our own words, and to take
away the goinges about the bushe of man's talk: and to allege such things
only as God him self speaks, whereby Christ provoke his seruautes to
martyrdom. For the self commaundemeetes of the Lord as armors and weapons
ought to be put in to the minds of them yt fight. Let them be the exhortacions
of the warlike trompet, let them be the peale of trompettes that may provoke
to fight. Through them let the ears be lift up, through them let the minds
be instructed and taught, through them let the strenght boche of the mind and
body be confirmed, to suffer all manner of afflictions and torments. Wherefore
let us (which by the sufferau^ce of God have given the first baptism un to
them that believe) prepare every man to another baptism also, putting them in
mind and teaching, yt this baptism is in grace greater, in power myghtier, in
honor more precious: a baptism wherein Angels baptize, and wherein God and his
Christ rejoice: a baptism after the receyte whereof no man synneth any more: a
baptism that makes perfect the increase of our faith, a baptism that do
immediately couple us unto God, when we depart this world.

In the baptism of water is received the remission of sins, in the baptism
of blood the crown of virtues. This thing ought to be embrased and wyshed for,
and to be desired by the seruent prayers of us all, that we which are the
servants of God, may be also his friends.

The first Chapter.
In exhorting therefore and preparing our brethren, The contents of the. 12.
chapters.
through the steadfastness of faith and virtue, to attain the glory of
confessing the Lord, and to arm them to the bataile of persecution and
suffering, we must first of al declare, that the ydolles which man mateth for
himself are no gods for the things that are made, are not greater than
their matter: neither can these ydolles defend and save any man, which would
them selves peryshe from their temples, except they were (...) of man. Neither
ought thelementes to be worshipped, which according to thordenaunce and
commandment of God do serve man.

The ydolles being overthrown and the manner of the lemonies declared, The. 2.
chap.
we must show that the Lord only ought to be worshipped.

To these then must we add, what is the threatening of God against them,









and continue in faith, inthe truth, and in the perfectyon of the heavenly,
and spiritual grace, that they may artayne the victory and crown.







rightful men and martyrs after the afflictions and passions of this liffe,
and that we shall receive more in reward of our suffering, than we suffer here
in the self afflictyons.

The first chapter.
THat ydolles are no gods, and that none of theleme^s should he worshipped in
gods stead is manifest in the.Cxiij. psalm. The ydolles of ye gentiles ar
gold and silver, Psalm. 113.
ye works of men's hands. Mowthes have they, but they speak not, they have
eyes and see not. They have ears and hear not, neither is there any breath in
their mowthe. Let them be like unto them that make them. In likemaner in the
book of the wisdom of Salamon it is written: Sap. 15.
They have esteemed as Gods all thidolles of the nations, which have neither
eyes to see, neither nostrels to draw brethe, neither ears to hear, nor
fingars on their hands to feale: Their fete also are vnhapte and sloo to
walk. For man made them, and he that has a borrowed spirit fashtoned them.
But no man can make a God like unto him self: For Seeing he is mortal, yt is
also but a dead thing, which he fashioneth with ungodly hands: For he that
makes them, is more excellent than ye things which he worshippeth.

We read also in the book of Exodus: Exodus 2^*
Thou shall not make for thy self any graven image, neither the likeness of any
thing. Further as touchi^g thelementes Salamon says: Neither took they so
much regard of ye works that are made, Sapi. 1^.
as to know who was the craftesman of them: but some took the fire, some the
air, some the wind, some the course of the stars, some the great water,
some the Su^ne and Moan for gods. But though they had such pleasure in
their veauty, that they thought them to have been Gods: yet should they have
know, how much more fairer is he that made them. Or if they marueled at the
power and works of them, they might have perceived thereby, that he that made
these mighty things, is mightyer then they.

The.ij. chapter.
THat god only ought to be worshipped we read in Deuterono, Deu. ^. Exo. (...)
Thou shall worship thy Lord God and him only shall thou serve. Also in Exo
dus. Thou shall have non other gods besides me. In like manner in ye same book
of Deuteronomy: Se now how ye I, I am he, and that there is no God besides me:
Deu. 32.
I can kill and make alive, I strike and heal again: neither is there any, that
can deliver any man out of my hands. Apo. 14.
Johan also in the reuelacion says: And I sawo an Angel fly in the mids of
heaven, having an euerlstaing gospel to praethe unto them that litte and dwell
on thearthe, and to all nations, kinreds and tongues and people, saing with a
loud voice: Fear God rather, and give honor to him, for the hour of his
judgment is com: and worship him that made heaven and earth, the sed and all
that in them is. In like manner also the Lord makes mentyon in the gospel of
the first and second comau^dement saing: He are Israel, The Lord thy God is one
Lord: And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Math. 22.
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strenght. This is the first
commandment: and the second is like unto this, Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy self. In these two co^maundementes-consisteth the host law and
perphetes. And again: This is eternal liffe, Joan. 17.
that they should know the alone the true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent.

The.iij. chapter.
What God threatens to the^ ye do sacrifice to ydols, we may read in Exodus
thus: Exodus 22.
He ye offers unto any gods save to ye Lord only shall be roted out. Also in
the Deu teronomye. Deu. 32.
They offered unto druels and not unto God. Esa. 2.
In like manner in Esaias: They worshipped the Idolles which their own fingars
had made: There kneleth the man, there falls the man down before them, so that
thou can not bring him away from thence: And again, To them you have powered
out your drink offeringes, and to the^ you have offered your sacrifices: shall
not I be angry with these things says the Lord? In like manner Hieremy says:
walk not after strange gods to serve them, and worship the^ not, Hiere. 7.
neither provoke me through ye works of your hands to scatter you abroad. Io.
also in ye reuelacio^ says: Apo. 14.
If any do worship the best and his image, and shall receue his mark in his
forehead or in his hand, he also shall drin ke of ye wine of Gods wrath
myngled in ye cup of his wrath: and he shall be punished with fire and
brymstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the lamb.
And the smoke of their torments shall asce^de up evermore. Neither shall they
have any rest day or night, who so ever they be that shall worshipe the best
and his image.

The.iiij. chapter
THat God will not easily iperdon ydolaters, it appears by Moses in Exodus, ye
prays for the people, and yet obtained not: Oh Lord (says he) this people
have sinned a great sin, Exodus 32.
and made for them selves Gods of gold: yet forgive them their sin I
beseech the: if not, wipe me out of the book which thou have written. And the
Lord said unto Moses? I will put him out of my book, that has sinned against
me. In like manner when Jeremy prayed for the people, the Lord spoke unto him
saying: Iere. 7.
Thou shall not pray for this people, thou shall neither give thanks, nor bid
prayer for the^, for I will not hear them in the time that they shall call upon
me, in the time of their troble. Ezech. 14.
Ezechiell also threateneth the same wrath of God against them, ye sin
against God saying: and the word of the Lord came unto me saying: Thou son
of man, when the land sins against me, and goes furthe in wickedness: I
shall stretche out mine hand upon it, and destroy all the provision of their
bread, and I will send hunger among them, to destroy man and best in the land.
And though Noah, Daniel, and Job these.iii. me^ war among the^, yet shall they
deliver neither sons nor daughters but shall them selves only be saffe. In
likemaner in ye furst book of kings it is written: if one man sin against an
other, 1. Reg. 2.
they shall make intercession unto ye Lord for him, but if a man sin against
the Lord, who shall praie^ for him?

The.v. chapter.
THat God is soangrey with ydolatry, that he has also commanded the^ to be
slain which have entised others to offer to ydolles and to serve them we read
in the Deuteronomy: Deu. 13.
If thy brother, or thine own son, or thy daughter or thy wiffe ye lies in
thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul unto ye entise the
secretly saie^g, let us go and serve strange gods, ye Gods of ye gentiles:
you shall not consent unto him, nor harken unto him, neither shall thine eye
spare him, nor keep him secret, but shall utter him. Thine hand shall be
first upon him to kill him, and than the hands of all the people. To be short
they shall stone him and he shall dye, because he went about to turn thee away
from ye Lord thy God. And again the Lord speaks and says, that a city
ought not to be spared, althou the hole tytie shall consent to Idolatry: If
thou shall hear say (of one of thy cities which the Lord thy God shall give
thee to dwell in) that they say: Let us go and serve strange Gods, which
thou haste not known: Thou shall smite and kill with thedge of the sword all
that are in that city, and thou shall burn the city with fire, and it shall
never more be inhabited: Yea it shall never be buylt again, that God may turn
from his fearce wrath. And the Lord shall show the mercy, and have compassion
on the, and multiply the, if thou shall hear the voice of the Lord thy God,
and keape his command mentes. Mathathias being myndfull of the force of this
commandment slew him that came to thaltar to do sacrifice. 1. Mac. 2.
But if before the coming of Christ these commandments touching the
worshipi^g of God, and despising of ydolles, war obscrued and keapt: How much
more ought they to be keapt after the coming of Christ? Forasmuch as he at
his coming did not exhort us with words only, but also with deades: which
after he had suffered al manner of iniure is and reuiling words, was also
crucified, to teach us by his example, both to suffer and die: that who so
ever he be that will not suffer for his sake, should be utterly without excuse,
forasmuch as he has suffered for us. And seeing ye he has suffered for other
men's sins, much more ought every man to suffer for his own sins. And
therefore in the gospel he treatneth and says: who so ever shall confess me
before men, Math. 10.
him will I also confess before my father which is in heaven: but who so ever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father which is in
heaven. In like manner thapostle paul says: If we die together with him we
shall also live together with him: 2. Tim. 2.
If we suffer with him we shall also raygne together with him: If we deny him
he shall also deny us. Johan also says: ^. Joan. 2.
he that denies the son has not ye father, he that confesses the son,
has both the son and the father. Wherefore the Lord does exhort and
strenghten us to despise death: Math. 10.
saying: Fear ye not them that kill the body, but can not kill the soul: but
rather fear him, which can kille both soul and body in to hell fire. Joan.
12.
And again he says, he that loves his life shall lose it, and he that
hates his liffe in this world, shall preserve it unto eternal liffe.

The.vi. chapter.
THat we which are rede^pte and made alive through ye blood of Christ, ought to
prefer no thing before Christ, the Lord speaks in the gospel and says: he
that loves father or mother above me, is not worthy of me. Math. 10.
And he yt takes not up his cross and follow me, is not worthy of me. In ye
Deuteronomy it is also written in like manner: Deu. 33.
They that say to father or mother I know ye not, and ye parents yt have not
known their own sons, these have keapt thy commandments, and observed
thy testament. Romans 8.
In like manner says thapostle Paul: Who shall separate us from the charity
of Christ? shall tribulacion, or anguishe, either persecution or hungar, either
nakedness, or danger, or the sword? as it is written: For thy sake are we killed
all the day long, Psalm. 43
and are cownted as sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless in all these
things we overcome, through his help that loved us. And again he says: ye
are not your own, for ye are bought with a great price. 1. Cor. 6.
Therefore glorify and bear god in your body. And again: he died for all that
they which live, should not now live to them selves, 2. Cor. 5.
but to him which died for them, and rose again.

The.vij. chapter.
THat they which are plucte out of the deuelles Jaws, and delivered from the
snares of the world, ought not to return again to the world lest they should
lose that they war escaped, The people of the Iues before figured after the
shadow and image of us, when they hade escaped through the healpe and
deliverance of God the most cruel bondage of Pharao and Egipte, that is to
say, of the deuell: They being unfaithful and unthankful to God, did murmur
against Moses: They considering the dangers of the wilderness and labor, and
under standing not Gods benefits of liberty and salvation, sought to return
again in to Egipte, that is to the bondage of this world from which they were
delivered. When as they ought rather to have trusted and beleaued in God:
because that he which has deliuerde his people from the deuell and the world,
shall defend the^ yt are delivered. Exo. 14.
Why have thou (said they) served us thus, for to carry us out of Egipte? it had been better for us to have served ye Egiptyans, tha^ to die in this wilderness.
And Moses said unto ye people. Stand up boldly, and behold the salvation that
comes from the Lord, which the lord will do for us this day. The Lord him
self shall fight for you, and you shall hold your peace. Of this thing the
Lord does also in his gospel warn us and teach us, that we should not
return again to the deuel and the world whom we have forsaken, and from
whom we have escaped, saie^g: Luce. 9. and. 17.
No man putting his hand to the ploughe and loking back is mete for the
kingdom of God. And again he says: he that is in the field, let him not
return back: Remember Lottes wiffe. And lestany might be hindered in the
following of Christ, either through any worldly lust, or through thaffectyon and
love to his kinsfolk and friends, he added, and says: He that does not
forsake all that he has can not be my disciple.

The.viij. chapter.
We must endure and continue in faith and virtue, and in ye perfectyo^ of
spiritual grace, yt we may attain ye victory and crown. In the.ij. book of
Cronicles we read thus: 2. Pard. 15.
The Lord abbideth with you, as long as ye abide with him: but if ye shall forsake
him, he shall also forsake you. In like manner says Ezechiei. Eze. 33.
In what so ever day ye rightouse me^ shall wander out of the way, his
rightfulnes shall not deliver him. Math. 10. Joan. 8.
The Lord also in the gospel speaks and says: He that shall continue to
the^de the same shall be saffe: and again he says: if you shall abide in my
word, ye shall verily be my disciples, and shall know the truth, and ye
truth shall make you fre. He also beforeha^d warning us to be always
prepared, and to stand ma^fully in a redynes, he added and says: Let your
loins be girte about, Luc. 12.
and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men yt wait for their
master, when he will return from a wedding, that as soon as he shall co^ and
knock, they may open unto him. Happy are those servants which ye Lord wha^
he comes, shall find watching. In likemaner ye blessed Apostle exhorts us
to go forward and increase in faith, until it come to perfectyo^ saying:
know ye not that they which run in a corse, run al, yet but one receives
the crown. So run that ye may obtain. 1. Cor. 9.
And they do yt to obtain a corruptible crown, but we to obtain an
incorruptible crown. And again he says, No man that warreth unto God, 2.
Tim. 2.
entangleth him self with worldly cares: that he may please him of whom he
is allowed to be a sowldier. And though a man strive for a mastery, yet is he
not crowned, except he strive laufully. The same Apostle says also: Romans 12.
I beseech you brethren by the mercifulnes of God, that you make your bodies a
quick sacrifice, holy, and plesa^t to God: and fashion not your selves like
unto this world, but be ye changed in your shape, by the renewieng of your
spirit, that ye may prove, what thing that good, and pleasing, and perfect
will of God is. And again he says: Romans 8.
We are the sons of God: But and if we be sons, we are also heirs: the
heirs I mean of God, and heirs annexed with Christ: If so be that we suffer
together, that we may be glorified together. The exhortacion of the dyuine
preaching speaks the same things in the reuelacion saying: Apo. 5.
holdefast hat thou have, that another takes not thy crown. An ensample of
this enduring and continuing unto the end, is set forth in Exodus, where as Moses
in the sign and sacrament of the cross, lyfteth up his heavy hands to
overcome Amalech, which bears the figure of the deuell: Neither could he
overcome thaduersary, until he continued stable in the sign, with his hands
continually lifted up. And it happened (says he) that Israel had the better,
when Moses held up his hand: Exodus 17.
And when he let his hand down, Amalech had the better. And they took a
stone, and put it under him, and he sat down thereon. And Aaron and Hur stayed
up his hands, the one on the one side and the other on the other side, and his
hands were stedy until ye Sun was down. And Jesus put Amalech to flight and
al his people. And ye Lord said to Moses: write this for a remembrance in a
book, and tell it unto Jesus. For I will put out the remembraucne of Amalech from
under heaven.

The.ix. Chapter.
THat troubles and persecucions do therefore happen yt we may be tried we read
in the Deuteronomy: Deu. 25.
The Lord your God does te^pte or prove you, that he may know whether yt you
love him with your hole heart and with all your soul, and with all your strenght.
Again it is written in Solomon: The furnace proves the potters vessel,
Eccle. 27.
and temtacion of troble tries rightful men. In like manner Paul testifies
and speaks the same, saying: We rejoice in hope of the glory that shall be
given of God: Neither do we so only, Romans 5.
but also we rejoice in trobles, knowing that tribulacion brings patience,
but patience brings trial, trial hope, and hope is not co^fou^ded, because
the love God is spread abroad in our hertes, by ye holy ghost which is given
unto us. Peter also in his epistle writes and says: Dearly beloved marvel
not at this heat that is come among you to try you (that ye fall not away)
as tho any new thing should happen unto you: 1. Pet. 4.
but as often as ye are made partakers of Christ's passions, rejoice in all
things, that ye may at thappearing of his glory rejoice with gladness. If ye
be rayled upon for ye name of Christ, happy are ye: For the name of ye
majesty and power of God rests in you: the which name verily is blasphemed
of them, but by us it is glorified.

The.x. Chapter.
THat injuries and the pains of persecution ought not to be feared, and that
no man should be amassed at troubles and persecutions, which he suffers in
this world, for-because the Lord is more mighty to defend, than the deuell
is to fight against us: John in his epistell writes and says: 1. Joan. 4.
He that is in you is greater, than he that is in the world. In like manner in
the psalm: The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me. And
again in an other psalm: These boast them selves in their horses, but we will
boast our selves in the name of the Lord our God. Psalm. 117. and. 19.
They are bound and are fallen down, but we are risen and stand upright. And
yet further the holy Ghost (teaching and declaring that the armies of the
deuell ought not to be feared, al thoo he should proclaim battle against
us, but rather that we should have our trust in the self same battle, and yt
the ryghtfull by fighting against the deuell, may attain to the reward of
Gods seat and eternal life) speaks in the spalme and says: Psalm. 26.
Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid, and though there arose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in
him. One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. In like manner the holy
scripture in Exodus does declare that we do exceadingly multiplye and increase
through afflictions and troubles saying: Exodus 1.
And the more they oppressed them, the more they multiplied and grew. And in
the Reuelacion gods protection is promised unto us in our sufferinges, where
he says: Apo. 2.
fear thou none of these things, which thou shall suffer. Neither is it any
other that promyseth unto us saffetie and defense, but even very he yt by the
prophet Esaias speaks and says: Fear you not, Esaie. 41.
For I have redeemed the: I have callee the by thy name, thou art mine own.
And if thou shalt go through the water I am with the, and the floddes shall
not ouerwhelme the. And if thou shall pass through the fire, the fire shall
not burn the. For I am the Lord thy God which do keep thee in safety. Which
in the Gospel also does promise, that the help of God shall not fail gods
servants in their persecutions saying: Math. 10.
but wha^ they deliver you up, take no thought how or what ye shall speak. For
it shall be given you in that same hour, what ye shall say. For it is not ye
that speak, but the spirit of your father that speaks in you. And again he
says: put in your hearts not to study before, what ye shall answer: Mar.
13. Luc. 21.
for I will give you a mouth and wisdom where unto your adversaries are not able
to resist. Thus does God speak also to moses in exodus, which delaied to do
his commandment and feared the people, saying: Exo. 4.
Who has made ma^s mouth? or who has made the domme or the deaf, the seeing
or ye blind, have not I the Lord God? Go now therefore, and I will open thy
mouth, and I will teach the what thou shall speak.

Neither is it any hard matter for God to open the godly man's mouth, and to
enspire constancy and holdnes of speech unto his confessor: Nu. 22.
which (as we read in the book of Numbres) did make the very Ass to speak
against Balaam the prophet. Therefore let no man in persecution think into what
danger the deuel does bring, but let him rather consider what help God does
give: Neither let us be discorraged through man's malice, but let us strenghten
our faith with gods protection: for as much as every man according to the
Lords promyses, and the merits of his own faith, shall receive as much
help of God, as he believes to receive. Neither is there a ny thing which the
almighty can not bring to pass, except the faith of him that should receive
does decay and fail.

The.xi. Chapter.
THat it was told aforehand, that the world should hate us, and that it should
stere up persecucio^s against us: and that no new thing happens peneth now
unto christianes, for as much as good men have been trobled from the beginning
of the world, and the ryghtfull have been oppressed and slain of the
unrightful: The Lord in the Gospel does before warn and before show saying:
Loan. 15.
if the world hate you, know ye that it hated me furst. if you were of the
world, the world world love that were his own. But because ye are not of
the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hate
you. Remember the word which I have spoken unto you: there is no servant
greater than his Lord. if they have persecuted me, they shall also persecute
you. And again he says: Loan. 16.
The hour shall come, that every one that shall kill you, shall think him self
to do God service. But they shall do this, because they have not known the
father nor yet me. These things have I spoken unto you, that when the hour of
them shall come, ye may remember ye I told you. And again he says: verily
verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice:
ye shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned in to joy. And again he
says: These things have (...) spoken unto you, that ye may have peace in
me: in the world ye shall have trouble, but be of good cheer, for I have
overcome the world. And again when he was demanded of his disciples, what
should be the token of his coming, and of the end of the world, Luc. 21.
he answered and said: Mar. 13.
Take heed that noman deceive you, Math. 24.
for many shall come in my name saing: I am Christ, and shall deceive many. ye
shall hear of wars, and of the rumors of wars, take ye head, and be not
troubled: for these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. Nation
shall arise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be
honger and earthquakes, and pestilences through all places. All these are the
beginninges of sorrows.

Then shall they put you to trouble and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of
all people for my name sake: And tha^ shall many be offended, and shall betraye
one an other, and shall hate one an other. And many false prophets shall arise,
and deceive many: and because of the abundaunce of wickedness, the charity of
many shall ware cold, but he ye shall endure unto the end, the same shall be
saffe. And this glad tydinges of the kingdom, shall be preached through all
ye world for a witness unto all nacyons: and than shall the end come. Wha^
therefore ye shall see thabo minacion of desolatyon spoken of by Daniel the
prophet, standing in the holy place: Daniel. 9.
let him that read it, understand it: Than let them that be in Jury flee in
to the mountains: And him which is on the house top, not com down to fet
any thing out of his house: Neither let him which is in the field, return
back to fetch his clothes. Woe be in those days to women with child, and to
them that give suck, but pray ye that your flight be not in the winter,
neither on the saboth day. For than shall be great tribulacion, such as was
not from the beginning of the world to this time, nor shall be: And except those
days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the chosen
sake, those days shall be shortened. Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo
here is Christ, or there is Christ, believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false prophets, and shall do great miracles and wonders, In
somuche that if it were possible, eue^ the chosen persons should be deceived.
But take you head, loo I have told you all things before. Wherefore if they
shall say unto you, behold he is in the wyldernes, go not forth. Behold in
the serrete places, believe not. For as the lyghtning comes out of the east,
and syneth into the west: So shall ye coming of the sone of man be. For
whersoeuer a dead carcass is, thither will ye Egles be gathered together.
Forthwith after the tribulatio^s of those days the sune shall be darkened, and
the Wone shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of heaven shall move. And then shall appear the sign of the Son
of man in heaven. And then shall all the kinreddes of the earth lament them
selves, and they shall se the son of man coming in the clouds with great
power and glory. And he shall send his Angels with great power and glory and
with a great trompet. And they shall gather together his chosen from the iiij.
wyndes, and from the one end of heaven to the other. Neither are these things
which now happen to christeans, new or sodeine: for as much as good and just
me^, and such as be thoroughly bent to keep the law of God, and are afraid to
stain the innocence of life and true religion, do always walk the hard and
strait way through trobles and injuries, and through the grievous and
manifold punishementes of deadly and malicious emnities. Thus is ye ryghtfull
Abel first killed of his brother, Genesis 4.
in the very beginning of the world, 1. Reg. 14.
and Jacob is copelled to fly, 3. Reg. 19.
and Joseph is sold: and king Saul persecuteth the merciful David, and king
Achab endeavors to oppress Helias, which did constantly and manfully defend
the majesty of God. a charias the priest is killed between the temple and the
altar, Math. 23.
that he might there be made a sacrifice him self, where he had offered
sacrifices. To be short, there are very many martirdomes of the rightful,
which are oftentimes celebrate. There are very many ensamples of faith and
godliness left for them that shall come after. The.iii. children Ananias,
Ararias, Misahel, in age equal, in love of one mind, in faith stabell, in
godlynes constaunt, and stronger then the fla^myng fire, and the pains
wherewith they were tormented, openly proclaimed that they served God alone and
only, that they knew him alone, Dani 3.
that they worshipped him alone, saying: O king Na buchodonosor, we have no
need to make the any answer in this matter. For God whom we serve, is able to
deliver us from the hot burning oven O king, and to rid us out of thy
hands: but if he will not, yet shall thou know that we will not serve thy
gods, nor do reverence to ye image which thou have set up. Dani. 14.
And the godly man Daniel full of ye holy Ghost cries out and says: I
worship nothing but only my Lord, which has made heaven and earth. Tobias
also although he was under a kingly and tyra^nous bondage, yet being fre in
understanding and spirit confesses God, and do excelle^tly co^me^d god his
power and majesty saying: Tobi. 13.
I will praise him in ye land of my captivity, and will show his power among
the sinful nation. But what should I speak of ye seven brethren in ye
Machabees which do fulfill the nu^bre of.vii. for a sacrament of absolute
perfectnes. 2. Mat. 7.
These seven brethren are so lincked together in martyrdom, as in the
disposicion and ordinance of God, the first seven days do couteyne seven
thousand years: As the seven spirits and seven Angels ar assistant and
present before ye face of the Lord, And the seven fashoned ca^delstickes in the
tabernacle of witness, And the seven golden candelstickes in the reuelacion,
And the seven pillars in Solomon, upon whom wisdom does build her house:
Even so the number also there of seven brethren, does comprehe^de in them the
number of seven churches: According as we read in the first book of kings,
that the barre^ brought furthe seven: And in Esaias seven women take hold upon
one man, after whose name they require to benamed: And Paul thapostle being
myndefull of this laufull and certain number, writes unto seven churches: And
in the revelation the Lord does direct his divine commandments, and
heavenly precepts, to seven churches, and their angels: The which ne^ber is now
found in these brethren, that laufull perfeccyon might be fulfilled. With the
seven sons the mother also their beginning and rote is certainly copled,
which afterward brought furthe seven churches, herself being through gods
voice first and alone founded upon the rock. Neither is wc out mystery, ye in
the martyrdomes ye mother is found alone with her sons. For the martyrs
which in their sufferinges did testefie them selves to be the sons of God, ar
now cownted to have none other father but God. As the Lord in the gospel
teaches saying: call no man your father upon ye earth, Math. 23.
for there is but one your father, which is in heaven. O how glorious
confessions did they make? How noble, how excellent lessons of faith have
they given? The king Antiochus being angery (yea rather Antichrist re presented
by Antiochus) went about to defile with the filth of swines flesh the
gloriouse mouths of ye martyrs, which through the spirit of confession war
invincible: And when he had grievously beaten them with scorges, and yet never
the near his purpose, he commanded the frieng pannes or cauldrons to be made
hot, in to the which (after they war made hot, and set on fire) he commanded
that he which had furst spoken, and had most provoked the king to anger through
the constancy of godliness and faith, should be thrown in the fried. But they
furste plucked out his tongue, which had confessed God, and cut it of. What
martyrdom has there ben more glorious? For the tongue which had confessed the
name of God, ought it self first to go to God. Afterward they invented more
bitter punishments for the second. For before they tormented his other
members. They of a purposed hatred against God plucte of the skin of his
head with the hears and all. For seeing Christ is the head of man, and the
head of Christ is God: he that did so bocherly tear the martyrs head, did
persecute in the head God and Christ. But the martyr hoping in his martyrdom,
and assuring him self of the reward of the resurrection through the gift of
God, cried out and said: Thou through thy power destroyest us from this
present life: but the king of the world shall raise us up (that are dead for
his laws) in to the eternal resurrection of life. The third being demanded
to put forth his tongue, did it quickly: For he had now learned of his
brother, to contempne the pain of cutting of the tongue: He did also
constauntlye stretche forth his hands, that they might be cut of, and was
very happy in suffering this kind of punishment: For as much as it was his
fortune with stretched out hands, to be made like unto the Lords passion in
this suffering* The fourth also with like corrage dispising the torments and
answering with an heavenly voice to the kings confusion, cried out and said:
It is best for us being put to death of men, to have our hope and trust in
God, to be raised again of him unto eternal life. As for thee, thou shall
have no resurrection to life. The fyfthe besides that through the strenght of
faith he trod under the foot the bocherly torments of the king, and many
cruel pains: he was also strenghtened through Gods spirit to a foreknowlege
of things to come, and prophesied unto the king, that both the indig nation
of God, and also his vengeance would shortly follow upon him. Thou (says
he) having power among men (for thou art a mortal man also thy self) do
what thou will. But think thou not that Bod has forsaken our generation.
Abide the, and behold the great power of God, after what manner he will torment
the and thy seade. O what an easement was this of martyrdom, how great, how
excellent was this comfort? In his sufferinges not to think upon his own
torments, but to tell furthe the punishememtes of his tormentor? In the.vi. not
only godliness but humilite also ought to be commended in that the martyr
challenged no thing to him self, The humilite of Martyrs.
neither did he with proud words bost of the honor of his confession: but
did rather impute unto his own sins, that he suffered persecution of the
king, and as touching vengaunce yt should follow, he committed that unto God.
He taught martyrs to be shamefast, to hope in God for reuengement, and to
brag no thing in their sufferinges. Be not vainly deceived O king (says
he) For we suffer here for our own sakes, because we have sinned against our
God: But think not thou to escape unpunished, scing you have attempted to fight
against God. The wonder full mother also which was neither discorraged through
the weakness of the kind, nor trobled with the manifold lack of children,
beheld gladly her sons dieing: neither did she only consider their pains,
but also their glories, and through the virtue of her eyes, she offered unto
God, as great martyrdom, as did her sons in the sufferinges and torments of
their members. After the six war tormented and slain, there remained yet one of
the brethren, unto whom the king promised riches, Lordeshipe, and many
things: that at the lest by ouercommi^g of one, his fearce crueltye might be
comforted: and he desired that ye mother together with him, The xa^ple of a godly
mother.
would be a mean to overthrow her son. She entreated her son: But after
such sort as became a mother of martyrs, as it became one myndeful of ye
law, and of God: As it became one yt loved her sons, not wantonly but
strongly. She entreated him in deed, but that was to confess God: She
entreated him that he being a brother, should not be separate from his
brethren in the felowshipe of praise and glory: Than reconning her self to be
a mother of seven sons, if it might be her fortune to bring furthe seven to
God, and not to the world. She therefore arming and strenghtning him, and
bearing tha^ again her son wc a more happey birthe, said unto him: O my
son have pitye upon me that bare the.ix. months in my womb, and gave the
suck three years, and norished and brought the up unto this age: I beseech the
my son look upon heaven and earth, and when thou have considered all things
that are in them, understand that God made them and man's generation of
nothing. Therefore my son fear not this ha^gman, but suffer death
steadfastly, like as thy brethren have done: that I may receive the again in
the same mercy with thy brethren.

Great is the praise of this mother in exhorting to godlynes, but greater was
her praise in the fear of God, and in the truth of faith, because she
warranted neither her self, nor her son any part in the honor of the.vi.
martyrs: neither did she beleaue that the prayer of the brethren, should
profit to the salvation of him that denied. She rather persuaded him to be
partaker with them in suffering, that in the day of judgment he might be
found among his brethren. After these things the mother dyed also together
with her children. For this was now most cumbely for ber, to be joined unto
them in the fellowship of glory, whom she had borne and fashioned to martyrdom,
and yt her self might also follow them, who^ she had before hand sent unto
God. And that no man should by any deceitful occasion offered him, either to
recante, or any other way embrace the wicked gift or reward of deceyuers: Let
us also speak of Eleazarus, Eleazarus 2. Mac* 6.
who having liberty given him by the kings servants, to take such flesh
as was lawful for him to eat, should but feign himself to eat of the
sacrifices and unlawful meats that were brought in, and so deceive the king.
He would in no wise consent to this deceyte, saying: that it became neither his
age, nor his noble stock, to feign himself to do that, wherein many might be
offended and brought into error: Thinking that Eleazarus being nynety years
old, had forsaken and betrayed the law of God, and were gone to the manners of
strangers: Neither did he think it any worthy matter by offendyng God, What
they gain that deny God.
and runnyng into the danger of eternal punishment, to gain the short
momentes of this life. And he being there long tormented, and now at the point
of death, sighed and said as he dyed among stripes and torments: O Lord which
have the holy knowledge, thou know openly, that where as I might be delivered
from death, I suffer these sore pains of my body: but in my mind I am well
content to suffer them, because I fear thee. Certainly his faith was sincere,
and true, and his godlynes perfect and pure enough: which considered not the
king Antiochus but God that is Judge: and knew right well that it should
nothing profit him to salvation, if he should mock and deceive man, seeing ye
God (which is the judge of our conscience, and ought only to be feared) ca^ not
be mocked nor deceived by any means. If therefore we do live as godly me^, and
such as be dedicate un to God, if we do walk in the self same ancient, and
holy footsteps of the just: Let us go through the same ensamples of pains
and sufferinges, through the same martirdomes and passions: And let us reken
the glory of our time in this point more excellent, that where as the old
ensamples of martirs are numbered: Now after the plenteouse abundaunce of
godliness and faith, the christian martyrs can not be numbered. As Johan
witnesses in the reuelacion, saying: Apo. 7.
After this I beheld a great multitude which no man could number, of al
nacyons and kinredes, people and tongues standing before the seat, and before
the lamb, and they war clothed with long white garments, and they had palms
in their hands, and cried wc a loud voice saying: Health unto our God sitting
upon the seat, and unto the lamb: And one of thelders answered, saying unto
me: what are these which are arrayed in long white garments, and whence came
they? and I said unto him: Lord thou wotest. And he said unto me: These are
they which came out of great trybulacion, and they have washed their garments,
and made them white in the blodde of the lamb: Therefore are they in the
p^sence of the seat of God, and serve him day and night in his temple. But if
it be showed and prowed that the people of ye christian martyrs are so many, no
man should think it an hard thing, to be a martyr, seeing he may perceive, ye
ye multitude of martyrs ca^ not be numbered.

The.xij. chaptre.
What hope and reward abides for the just and martyrs after the fight and
passions of this life, the holy ghost has showed and fold aforhand by Salomo^
saing: And though they suffer torments before men, Sapi. 3.
yet is their hope full of Immortalite. And although they be punished in few
things, yet in many things shall they be well rewarded. For God has proved
them and found them mete for him self. Yea as the gold in the furnace he
does try them, and receives them as a burnte offering, and when the time
comes, they shall be looked upon. They shall Judge the nations and have dominion
over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever. In likemaner the same
Salamo^ does describe the vengaunce ye God shall take for our cause, and
sets forth the penance or sorrow of our persecutours and enemies saying:
Then shall the righteouse stand in great steadfastness, against such as have
dealt extremely with them, Sapi. 5. The late repentance of them that be in
hell.
and taken away their labors. When they se it, they shall be vexed with
horrible fear, and shall wonder at the hastines of the sudden health, groaning
for very distres of mind, and shall say within them selves having inward
sorrows, and mournyng for very anguishe of mind. These are they who^ we
sometime had in derision, and iesced upon. We fools thought their life very
madness, and their end to be with out honor. How then are they counted among
the children of God, and their portion among the saints: Therefore we have
erred from the way of truth, and the light of ryghtfulnes has not shyned
over us, and the Sun of understanding rose not up upon us. We have weried our
selves in the way of wyckednes and destruction. Tediouse ways have we gone:
but ye way of the Lord we have not known. What good has our pride done
unto us? Or what profit has the pomp of riches brought us? all those things
are passed away like a shadow. In likemaner in. 115. psalm the reward of
martyrdom is declared, Psalm. 115.
wheare he says: preciouse is ye death of his saints in the sight of the
Lord. Psalm. 125.
Likewise also in. 125. is expressed both our sorrowful affliction and also
our ioyeful reward, where he says: They that sow in tears, shall reap wc
joy. They went furthe, wandering and sowing their seades with weping: But they
shall com again with joy, takig up their lappes. And again in the 118.
psalm, he says, blessed are those that be undefiled in the way, Psalm. 118.
which walk in the law of the Lord: Blessed are those that search out his
witnesses, and and seek him with their hole heart. Fur thermore the Lord which
is the self reuengar of our persecucion, and the rewarder of our sufferinge,
says in the gospel: happy shall they be which shall suffer persecutyon for
rightousnes sake, Math. 5.
because the kingdom of heaven is theirs: And again he says: blessed shall
ye be, when me^ shall hate you, and shall separate and throw you out, and shall
curse your name as wicked for the son of man's sake, be glad in that day
and rejoice, For lo your reward is great in heaven. And again: he that loses
his liffe for me shall save it. Neither are ye rewards of Gods promise laid
up only for such as be tormented and said: For although the faithful be not
subject to the very suffering, yet if faith abide perfecre and not overcome,
if the thristian (despising and forsaking all things that at his own) shall
show him self to follow Christ, he also is honored of Christ among the martyrs
by his own promise, where he says: there is no man that forsakes house or
field, or father and mother, or brethren, or wiffe, or sons, for the
kingdom of God, which do not receive seven times as much in this world, and
in the world to come eternal liffe. In likemaner in the reuelacion he speaks
the same thing saie^g: Apo. ^0.
and I saw the sowles of them that were killed for the name of Jesus and the
word of God: And when he had made mencyon first of them that war slain, he
added saying: and who so ever have not worshipped the Image of the best,
neither received his mark upon their forhedes, or on their hands: Al which
being sen of him at once in one place, he coppleth together saying: And they
lived and reigned with Christ. He says, that they all do live and reign with
Christ: not only they that were slain, but all such also as standing manfully
in the steadfastness of their faith, and in the fear of God, have not
worshipped the image of ye beast, neither have consented unto them in their
heinous and cruel proclamacions and laws. That we shall receive more in
reward of our suffeting, tha^ are the pains and afflictions which we now
endure, the blessed Apostle Paul does prove (which being through gods
favor taken up into the third heaven and into paradise, 2. Cor. 12.
witnesses that he herd words that can not be uttered, which glories, that
he had (through secret faith) seen Jesus Christ: which having certain
knowledge of the truth, professes that which he had both learned, and seen)
saying: The afflictions of this life are not worthy yt glory, which shall be
showed upon us. Rous. 8.
Who is it now that will not labor with all his strenght to attain so great
glory, that he may be made the friend of God, and immediately rejoice with
Christ: That after these worldly torments and pains, he may come to the
divine and heavenly rewards? If the souldears of this world think it a
glorious matter, (after they have oucrcome thennemy) to return into their
country with triumph: how much more noble and excellent a thing is it,
after we have overcome the deuel, to return into paradise triumphing? And (he
being subdued, which before deceived) to bear with us the tokens of victory
into that place, from the which fynful Adam was cast out? To offer unto God a
most acceptable sacerfice, that is an undefiled faith, the sound virtue of
the mind, the bright praise of godliness? To follow him, A descripcion of the
glory of eternal liffe.
when he shall come to take vengeance of his eunemyes? To sit on his side, when
he shall sit to judge? To be made an heir an nexed with Christ? To be made
equal unto the Angels? To reiuyse together with the patriarchs, Apostles and
prophets in the possession of the heavenly kingdom? What perfecucion can
overcome, what torments can overthrow these cogitacions and thoughts?

The mind that is grownded upon godly meditacions, abides strong and stable:
And he whose heart is strenghtned with a certain and sound faith of things
to come, stands immovable against all the terrors of the deuell, and
threatninges of the world. The eyes ar shut up in the persecutions of the
world, nevertheless heaven is opened: Antichrist does threaten, but yet the
Lord Christ does defend: death is brought in, notwithstanding immortalite
does follow after: The world is violently pluct from him that is slain:
Neuerthles paradise is given to him that is restored. The temporal life is
destroyed, but yet theternall is repaired. O how great is the dignue, how great
is the saffety to depart hence Joyfully, to depart hence gloryously among
afflictyons and torments? In a moment to close up theyes, wherewith men and the
world war seen: and immediately to open again the same to behold god and
Christ? O how swift is this departure, to be conveyed from thearthe suddenly,
and to be situate and placed in the celestical and heavenly kingdom? These
things ought to be considered in our hearts and minds, upon these things
ought we to study and muse both night and day. if the day of the persecuting
of Christ shall find such a sowldear: the virtue which is ready for the
reward can not be over come. Or if he shall be prevented and called hence
before: the faith which was ready unto martyrdom, shall not be without reward.
Reward is given (God being judge) without hinderance of time. In persecution the
sowldearfare, in peace the conscience is crowned (God being judge) Amen.

The End of thebofe of exhortacion to marurdome.

Thargument of the Epistle following.
By this Epistle S. Cipriane exhorts the people that dwelt at Thibaris to
fepe and endure in the confession of Christ with a pure mind, perfect faith,
and Godly devotion.
Cipria^ unto the people of Thibaris. etc.

THad decreed, and was fully purposed most dearly beloved brethren (if the
state of things, and convenient time would have given lyberty) to have come my
self unto you (according as you have often desired) and (being present) to
have there strenghtned the brotherhed with our exhortacion to the utter most of
our power. The Image of a true bishope.
But forasmuch as thorough urgent and great busynes we are thus wtholden and
let, that we have no lybertye to go far from hence, and to be long absent
from the people, which through gods mercy is committed to our government: I
have in the mean time sent you these letters in my stead and rowme. For it is
our deutye (seeing ye Lord does vouche save often times to prick us forewarde
and to admonish us) to extend forth the care of our instruction and warning
unto your conscience also. For ye ought to know, and for a certeintie to
believe and hold, that the day of troble begins to houer over over heads,
and that the end of the world and ye time of Antichrist draws near, that we
al may stand ready to the bat tail, 1. Joan. 2.
and that we think upon nothing but only of the glory of eteruall life, and
the crown ye shall be given to the^ ye confess the Lord: Neither let us
think, that ye things coming are such as ar already passed. A more dau^gerus
and crueller fight houereth now over us, unto ye which Christ his soldiers
ought to prepare themselves with an uncorrupted faith, and strong virtue: the
lay people drank the cup of Christ's blood in Cipriaenes time (...)
To^ sidering ye they do therefore daily drink ye cup of the blodde of Christ,
ye they may also shede their blodde for Christ his sake. For this is to desire
to be found with Christ, to follow ye which Christ both taught and did,
according to the saying of John^ thapostle: he that says ye he abides in
Christ, ought also to walk after ye same manner ye he walked In like manner
exhorts and teaches ye blessed apostle Paul saying, Romans 8.
we are the sons of God: but it we be sons, than are we also heirs, ye
heirs I mean of God, and heirs annexed with Christ: if we suffer together with
him, that we may be also glorified together with him. Al these things ought to
be considered of us at this present, that no man should desire any thing of the
world, which is now in dyeng: but might follow Christ, which both lives him
self everlastingly, and also makes alive his servants that abide in the
faith of his name. For ye time is come most dearly beloved brethren, which
our Lord long sins warned us of, and told us aforehand that it would com
saying: The hour shall com, Joan. 16.
that whosoever shall kill you, will think ye he does God service. But these
thiges will they do, because they have not known the father neither yet me.
These things have and told you, that when ye hour of them is come, ye might
remember ye I told you. Let no man therefore marvel, that we are exceadingly
trobled with continual persecutions, and ofte^tymes vexed with paineful trobles,
seeing that ye Lord told aforeha^de, ye these should happen in ye last days
and wc ye doctrine and exhortation of his word instructed and prepared our
fight and warrefare. Peter also his apostle taught, that persecutions do
therefore happen, that we may betried, and that we through death and
sufferinges might also be joined and knitte to the love of God, after
thensample of the just men that went before us: For in his epistle he writes
thus, saying: Dearly beloved wonder not at this heat that is happened unto
you: 1. Pet. 4.
which is come among you to try you. Neither fall ye away as though a new
thing had chanced unto you: but as often as ye are partakers of Christ's
passions rejoice in althinges, that when his glory appears, ye may also be
merry and glad. if ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ, happy are ye:
For the name of the majesty and power of God does rest in you. Which verily
is blasphemed of them, but is glorified of you. Thapostles have also taught us
such things, as they themselves did learn of the Lords precepts and
heavenly commandments, the Lord himself strenghtning us and saying: Luce.
18. Math. 1^.
There is no man (says he) that leaves house, or field, other father and
mother other betherne, or susters, other wife or children for the kingdom of
gods sake, which shall not receive seven times as much in this world, and in
the world to cum life everlasting. And again, blessed shall ye be (says he)
when men shall hate you, and shall excommunicate and ba^nishe you, Mat. 5.
and shall curse your name as wicked for the son of man's sake: rejoice and be
glad in that day, for your reward is great in heaven. The Lord would have
us to be merry and ioyeful in persecutions: For in the time of persecution the
crowns of faith are distributed and given: than are Gods sowldears tried.
Than do heavens open unto the martyrs. For we have not after such manner
professed souldearfare, that we should think upon peace only, and should
refuse and forsake the fight: Forasmuch as the Lord, the mastre of humilite,
patience and sufferaunce has himself walked in the self same souldearfare,
ye he might first do that thing himself, which he taught to be observed of
others, and might himself first suffer for us that, which he exhorted us to
suffer. Set allwaies before your eyes dearly beloved, that he (which alone
has received al judgment of the father, and whichshal com to judge all me^)
has euennow aforehand pronounced the sentence of his Ingement and knowlage to
come, Math. 10
showing aforeha^d and witnessing, ye he will confess the^ before his father,
that confess him, and will deny the^ ye deny him. If we might avoid and
escape death, No man can escape death.
we might justly fear to die: but seeing that of necessite ye mortal must
die, let us embrace thoccasion which God by his promise has vouchesaued to
offer us: And let us so end our life that we may receive the reward of
immortalite: Neither let us be afraid to be slain, seeing yt is manifest that
we are then crowned, when we are slain and killed. Neither let any man most
dearly beloved brethren betrobled, Flight for fear of persecution
when he shall se our people driven away and scatered through the fear of
persecutyon and shall not see the brotherhede gathered together, nor hear the
bishops preach and declare the scriptures. S. Cipriane uses, this word
brother heads
We unto whom it is not lauful to kill, but must of necessite be killed, can
not than be al gathered together. Whersoeuer any of the brethren shall in those
days be for a season separate from the flock in body and not in spirit
through the necessity of the time, let him not be troubled through the
terriblenesse of that fleing: neither let him be afraid, when he departs to
hyde himself in the wilsome wilderness: For he is not alone, which has Christ
to his companion in fleing: He is not alone, which keeping the temple of God, is
not without God, whersoeuer he shall happen to be. And if the these and
murderer shall destroy the, as thou art fleyng into the wilderness and
mountains, if the wild best shall assail the, if hunger, thurst, or cold
shall pinche the, or if the tempest or storm shall drown the, when thou do
by see hastily flee away, Christ abides and looks for his soul dear
whersoeuer he fyghteth: And he gives unto him (that dies for the honor of
his name in the time of persecution) that reward, A comfort for such as are
preuely pined and murdered in presons
which he has promised to give in the resurrection. Neither is the glory of
martyrdom any whit the less, though a man dye not openly among many, when
Christ his cause was thoccasion of his death. For he is a sufficient witness
of his martyrdom, that tries martirs and crowns them. Abel.
Let us most dearly beloved brethren follow the ryghtful Abel, which began
and consecrated martirdomes, when he was the first that was slain for
ryghtfulnes sake. Let us follow Abraham the friend of God, Abraham
which delaied not to offer up his son in sacrifice with his own hands,
when through a deuouce faith he obeyed God. Let us follow the three children
Ananias, Azarias, and Misahel, which being nether feared through their tender
age, nor discorraged through captivity (when Jury and Jerusalem were overcome
and taken) overcame by the power of faith the king in his own kingdom. Which
being commanded to worship the image that Nabuchodonosor hade made, overcame
both the kings threatninges and the flaming fire, Crieng out and testefieng
their faith wc these words: Dani. 3.
We have no need O king Nabuchodonosor to make the any answer touching this
matter. For there is a God whom we serve able to deliver us from the furnace of
the burning fire, and he shall deliver us O king from thy hands: but if he do
not, let it be known unto the, ye we will not serve thy gods, neither will we
worship the golden image, which thou have set up. They beleaued that through
faith they might escape, nevertheless they added (but if he do not) that the
king might be certefied, that they war also able to die for Gods sake, whom
they worshipped. For this is ye power of faith and virtue, to beleaue and
know, that God is able to deliver from present death: and yet neither to
fear nor give place to death, that faith may be tried the better. Out of
their mouth brake forth the undefiled and in uincible strenght of the holy
ghost, ye the words which ye Lord spoke in his gospel, might appear to be
true: wha^ they shall lay hands on you (says he) be not careful what ye
shall speak. For it shall be given you in that hour, what ye shall speak.
Math. 10
For it is not you which do speak, but the spirit of the father that speaks
in you. He has promised, ye yt shall be given and offered us of God in that
hour, what we may speak: And yt it is not we yt tha^ speak, but ye spirit
of ye father: which (forasmuch as he neither departs, nor is separated from
them ye confess) does both speak, and is crowned in us. In likemaner Daniel
when he was compelled to worship ye Idol Bell (whom both the king and people
did than worship) in ye defense of the honor of his God, Dani. 14.
be brake out with the full liberte of faith, saie^g: I worshippeno thing but
only ye Lord my God, which has made heaven and earth. The ma^chabeis.
What should I speak of the bitter torments of the blessed martyrs in the
Machabeis, and of ye manifold pains of ye un. brethren, and of ye mother that
did both 01 comfort her children in ye torments, and died also hereself with
them? Are not there doctrines of great virtue and faith witnessed? And do they
not exhort us also through their passions unto ye triumph of martyrdom? The
prephetes Thapostels. what we ought to learn at the death of good men. Mat. 2.
What shall I speak of the prophets, whom the spirit has incorraged unto
ye aforeknow^age of things to come? What shall I say of thapostles, whom the
Lord has chosen? Have not ye inste, (wha^ they are slain for rightfulnes
sake) taught us also to dye? The birthe of Christ began strait ways with
the martyrdom of infantes and babes: that so many as war two years old and
under, were slain for his name sake. The age that was not yet able for the
bataile, was nevertheless mete to receive the crown: and that they might appear
* to be innoce^tes, Or, it might appear.
which are slain for Christ, the innocent infancye and childhode was killed
for his name sake. It is now declared that no man is free from the danger of
persecucio^, seeing that such lytleones have suffered martyrdom. What
reasonable cause can any christian man have, (...) have no excuse.
that will not (being a servant) suffer, seeing the Lord himself has first
suffered: And that we will not suffer for our own sins, when he (having no
sin of his own) has suffered for us? The son of God has suffered, to
make us gods sons: And will not the son of man suffer. that he may
continue ye son of God? If we be hated of the world, the hatered of the
world christ suffered first. If we suffer reuiling words in this world, if we
be driven to flee, if we endure torments, the maker and Lord of the world
have tasted of more grenouse pains: who also warns us saing: If the world
(says he) hate you, Joan. 15.
remember that yt hated me first. If you war of the world, the world would
love that which war his own. Joan. 15.
But because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of ye world,
therefore does the world hate you. Remember the word which I have spoken unto
you: there is no servant greater tha^ his Lord. If they have persecuted me,
they shall also persecute you. The Lord and our God has performed and done
whatsoever he taught: and can the disciple and scollar be excused that
learneth, and yet does not accordingly? Let none of you dearly beloved
brethren be so feared with the fear of persecutyon to come, or with the
coming of Antichrist that houereth over our heads, that he should not be
found armed at all points with thexortacions of the gospel, and with the
heavenly co^maundeme^ts and warninges. Antichrist is come, but Christ will also
suddenly come upon him. The ennemy murdereth and is very cruel, but the Lord
does by and by follow to revenge our afflictions and wou^des. The enemy is
a^gry and threatens, but there is one that can deliver us out of his hands. He
ought to be feared, whose ire and ve^gau^ce no man ca^ escape, according as he
him self warns and says: Fear ye not them that kill the body, but the
soul they can not kill. Mat. 10.
But fear him rather, that is able to destroy both soul and body in to
hell. Joan. 12.
And again he says: he that loves his life, shall lose it, and he that
hates his life in this world, shall keape yt unto eternal life. And in the
reuelacion he instructs and warns us saing: Apo. 14.
if any man worshipe the best and his image, and takes his mark in his
forehed and in his hand, he shall also drink of the wine of the wrath of God,
mingeled in the cup of his wrath: and he shall be punnished with fire and
brymstone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the lamb:
And the smoke of their torments goes up world without end: Neither shall
any of them that worship the best, and his image, have any rest either day
or night. Unto a temporal and world (...) and ^ight, men at both (...) and
prepared, and they count it great glory and honor, if it may be their
chance to be crowned in the presence of the people, and in the presence of
themperor. Behold the high and noble fight, which is beutified with an
heavenly crown, where as god may look upon us fighting: and that he casting
his eyes upon the^ whom he has vouche saved to make his children, may have
a plesaunt beholding and spectacle of of our battle. When we war and fight
with the armor of faith, God looks upon us, his angels do behold us, and
Christ does approve us. What worthy glory is it, how great felicite and
happiness, to fight there whearas God is the defe^dar, and to be crowned there
whearas Christ is judge? Let us arm our selves most dearly beloved brethren
with all our strenght, and let us be prepared and made ready to ye battle with
an uncorrupted mind, with a perfect faith, and with devout virtue. Let the
armies of God march on and go forewarde unto ye bataille, that is ^^tched
against them. Let the perfect man be armed, that the perfect lose not his
late consra^cy. Let the fallen be also armed, that the fallen may receuie
again that which be had lou. Let honor provoke the perfect, let sorrow
provoke the fallen unto the fight and battle. The blessed Apostle does arm
and prepare us to the fight saying: we wrestle not against flesh and blodde,
Ephe. 6.
but against powers, and against the rulars of this darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in heavenly things. Put you on therefore all the
armor of God, yt ye may be able to resist in the most wicked day, that when
ye have performed al things, ye may stand, having your loins girded with the
truth, The armor and weapons of Christians.
and clothed with the breast plate of rightfulnes, and shodde, that ye may be
ready to the gospel of peace: taking up the shilde of faith, whereby ye may
quench all the fiery darts of the deuel, and take the helmet of health, and
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Let us put on these
armowres, let us fortify our selves with these spiritual and heavenly
defenses, that we may be able in the most wicked day to resist, and beat
back the deuels threatninges. Let us put on the breast plate of rightfulnes,
that our breast may be defended and saved against the darts of ye enemy. Let
us be shodde through the doctrine of the Gospel, and have our fete armed, that
when we shall begin to tread and thurst down the serpent, he may not be
able to byte and overthrow us. Let us manfully bear the shylde of faith, by
whose defense, what soever the enemy throws against us may be quenched. Let
us also take the helmet of salvation to cover our heads, How every member and
part of the body must be armed*
that our ears may be defended, that they may not hear nor give head unto
cruel proclamations and laws. Let our eyes be fortiyed, that they behold not
the detestable and abominable images. Let our forehed be fensed, that the
mark of God may be kept safe. Let ye mouth be armed, that the mighty
conquering tongue may acknowledge and confess her Lord Christ. Let us also arm
the right hand with a spiritual sword, In Cipriaenes time the people received
the sacrament in their right hands.
that it may manfully contemn and despise the unclean and wicked sacrifices,
that that which has received the Lords body, being mindful of the thanks
giving, may in the same embrace her Lord, which shall after of the same her
Lord receive the reward of an heavenly crown. O how excellent and great a
day is that, that is coming most dearly beloved brethren, when the Lord
shall begin to number his people, and by his divine knowledge to examine the
works of every one, to send the gylty into hell, and to condemn our
persecutours unto a perpetual burning in the paynefull flame: but unto us to
render the reward of faith and godlynes. What manner of glory shall that be,
and how great gladness, to be admitted to see gods honor, ye thou may
receive with Christ the Lord thy God the joy of everlasting health and light?
To salute Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all the Patriarchs and Prophets, the
Apostles, and Martyrs? To rejoice in the delectacio^ of the gift of
immortality, with the just men and fre^des of God in the kingdom of heaven?
To receive that there, which neither eye has seen neither ear has herd, ^.
Cor. 2.
nor has entered into the heart of man? For thapostle teaches that we shall
receive greater reward, then either our works or afflictions here can
deserve, saying: The afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory, Romans
8.
which shall be showed upon us. When the showing of this glory shall come, when
the charity of God shall shine over us, tha^ shall we be happy and merry, being
in honor through the goodness of the Lord. But alas

(...)
