THE I WILL OF GVLLS.

As it has been often Acted in the Black Friars, by the Children of the REVELS.



LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM SHEARES, at the Harrow in Britains Bursse. 1633.

THE I WILL OF GVLLS.
I Enter severally three Gentlemen, as to see a Play. 1 HOW now gallants, what
is it? what is it?


2 The I Will of Guls.


3 The I Will of Guls, what should that be?


2 A play by the name, but come shals quarter our selves?


1 If some had had the wit to do so in time, they might have saved the
hangman a labor. But come boy, furnish us with stools.


Enter Prologue. Prol. Pardon me sir, my office is to speak a Prologue, not
to provide you stools.


1 And you were the Epilogue to sir --


2 Fie be not incivill: do hear youth, prithee what is he that discovered
your new found Land, the I Will of Guls? what is he?


Prol. A mere stranger sir.


3 A stranger? the better welcome: comes he Eastward, Westward, or
Northward hoe?


Prol. None of the three ways I assure you.


1 Prithee where is he?


Prol. Not on his knees in a comer to Apollo, praying that his play may hold in
a good hand at Passage, nor on the stage amongst gallants, preparing a bespoke
Plaudite; but close in his study writing hard, to get him a handsome suite
against Summer.


2 And where sit his friends? has he not a prepared company of gallants, to
applaud his jests, and grace out his play?


Prol. None I protest* Do Poets use to bespeake their Auditory?


3 The best in grace do, and but for that, some that I know, had never had
their grace in Poetry till this day.


Prol. Then must our Author look for a certain disgrace, for he is altogether
unfurnisht of such a friendly audience.


1 Then he must lay his trial upon God and good wits But why does he call his
play The I Will of Gulls? it begets much expectation.


Prol. Not out of any dogged disposition, nor that it figures any certain
state, or private government: far be that supposition from the thought of
any indifferent Auditor: and the argument being a little string or ^ivolet,
drawn from the full strain of the right worthy Gentleman Sir Phillip Sydnies
well known Arcadia, confirms it: only a Duke, to make trial of certain
experiments, retires with his retinue into a namelesse desert. Now as well for
fashion sake, as that all those which have to do in that desert, are guld in
the reach of their hopes; therefore he calls it, (and as he presumes, not
improperly) The I Will of Gulls.


1 Out a question he has promised thee some fee, thou pleadest so hard for
him, but and he be a right Poet he will never perform it. But what method
observes he in his Play, is it any thing Critical? Are Lawyers fees, and
Citizens wives laid open in it? I love to hear vice anatomizd, and abuse let
blood in the master vain, is there any great man's life charactred in it?


Prol. None I protest sir, only in the person of Dametas, he expresses to the
life the monstrous and deformed shape of vice, as well to beget a loathing of
abuse, as that his villainy may give the greater luster to the virtuous
dispositions of true-borne gentility.


1 All that is nothing to me, and there be not Worme-wood water and Copperes
in it, I Will not like it, should Apollo write it, and Rosius himself act it.


2 Fie upon thee, thou art too too critical: is there any good baudry in it,
jests of an ell deep, and a fathom broad, good cuckolding, may a couple of
young-setters-up learn to do well in it? Give me a Scene of venery, that will
make a man's spirits stand on their tiptoes, and die his blood in a deep
scarlet, like your Ovids Ars Amandi, there flows the true Springhead of
Poetry, and the very Crystal fount of Parnassus.


Prol. Chaste ears would never endure it fir.


2 Chaste ears? now deafness light upon them, what should chaste ears do at
a play?


3 It Is strange now, I am of neither a both your opinions, I like neither
railing nor baudry: no, give me a stately pend history, as thus: The rugged
winds, with rude and ragged ruffes, etc.


2 Fie upon it, more fustian; I had rather hear two good baudy jests, then a
whole play of such teare-cat thunderclaps.


Prol. Alas Gentlemen, bow is it possible to content you? you will have railing,
and invectiues, which our Author neither dares, nor affects: you baudy and
scurrill jests, which neither becomes his modesty to write, nor the ear of a
generous Auditory to hear: you must have swelling comparisons, and ^um^ast
Epithites, which are as fit for the body of a Com^edy* as Her^^les shoe for
the foot of a Pigmey: yet all these we must have, and all in one play, or it is
already condemned to the hell of eternal disgrace.


1 Look to it, if there be not gall in it, it shall not pass.


2 If it be not baudy, it is impossible to pass:


3 If it be both critical and baudy, if it be not high written, both your
Poet and the house too, loose a friend of me.


Prol. Nay I beseech you sir, if you be his friend, stand so to him still, for
he has too many enemies already, in whose judgments, he and his labors stand
excommunicate, as though unworthy to present themselves in this assembly.


1 Enemies? nays foot then there is some hope in his play, for Envy never
works but against desert and merit. If he be envied there is some worth in him,
and i will see out his play for that only.


2 Faith and I Will see an act or two out, but I tell you aforehand I cannot see
it out.


3 Not see it out? your reason.


2 Fore God I lay in bed till past three a clock, slept out my dinner, and my
stomach will toule to supper before five, therefore you must pardon me.


Prol. Either see it all or none; for it is grown into a custom at plays, if
any one rise (especially of any fashionable sort) about what serious business
soever, the rest thinking it in dislike of the play, though he never thinks it,
cry mew, by jesus vilde; and leave the poor heartlesse children to speak
their Epilogue to the empty seats.


3 Why do think thy audience like a flock of sheep, that one cannot leap
over a hedge, but all the rest will follow? they have more of reason in them
then so.


2 Well, I Will sit out the play, an't be but to avoid that sheepish imputation,
but see it be baudy, or by this light I and all my friends will hiss.


Prol. You should not deal gentleman-like with us else.


Prologus.
THe misery that waytes upon the pen
Of the best Writers, judge it Gentlemen,
Let them express the very soul of wit,
And want Opinions voice to countenance it,
It Is like the idle buzzing of a Fly,
Heard, not regarded: wretched Poetry!
If he write mirth, it is ribaldry, and mean,
Scorned of chaste ears: If he compose a Scene
Of high writ Poesy, fitting a true stage,
It Is counted sustian: If Poetickerage
Strike at abuse, or op^ the vein of sin,
He Is straight informed against for libelling.
Neither quick mirth, invective, nor high state
Can content all, such is the boundless hate
Of a confused Audience: Then we
That scarcely know the rules of Poesy
Cannot escape check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wise will smile to hear th'impartiall hiss.
We neither brag, nor tremble, faint nor entreat,
Our merits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bad me boldly speak,
His play shall pass, let Envy swell and break,
Detraction he scorns, honors the best,
Tanti for hate; thus low to all the rest.
Exit.

The I Will of Gulls.
ACTVS. I. SCENA. I.
Enter Basilius, Gynetia, Hipolita, Violetta, Lords attendants.

Basil. VVElcome gallants, welcome honored bloods; the reason that we have
unclothed us of our princely government in Arcadia, and have to do with this
private retirement here in this desert I Will, you shall find in that shedule,
only thus much for public satisfaction: It Is not strange to you, that the
choicest treasure Nature endowed us with, is min'd up in the veins of my two
daughters: how much their quiet, and the smooth stream of our government in
Arcadia, was troubled by the impetuous concourse of untruely suitors, is
familiar with your knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in my
absence appointed my brother, and undertook this private retirement.


Gy. Why my Lord, are you so covetous of your daughters beauties, that their
perfections shall be a means to hinder their preferment?


Basi. Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls of our age,
and to see them well set in honorable and well-befitting Marriage, is our
wishes happiness.

To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert I Will,
(The stage where I Will perform this lovers prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their hearts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreath of their conquest.

Hip. A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.


Viol. What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?


Basil. To that intent our Island is fenc't in
By sea and land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defense, which like great men,
Do over-looke Arcadia: over which,
We have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more then we are willing to discover.

Hip. Well then sister, I see we must to hap-hazard for husbands.


Viol. God send me one with a good face and I care not.


Hip. Love an't be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his forehead,
like Time.


Viol. Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his forehead, a
countrey-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake
such a peremptory challenge against all comers, considering you have been so
long troubled with ^^ Ague.


Basil. An ague? what ague?


Hip. Why your quotidian, Dametas the Court surfeit, he that dwells in your eye,
like a disease in your blood.


Viol. And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it would never
digest such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall and garbidge of gentry; fie
upon him, he becomes the great chamber worse then a Gentleman Usher with wry
legs.


Hip. He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court wore.


Viol. Had he not been of my fathers own making, I should have condemned his
tailor for an exceeding botcher.


Basil. If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjects, express
it in your obedience, we know Dametas loves us*


Viol. As Captains and Courtiers do old widows, for profit and preferment.


Basil. In sign whereof we make him.


Hip. Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him up already.


Viol. The very making of him up, has stood you in more then the whole
outside's worth.


Basil. In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express our love, and
to give the world public note of his loyalty, we create him your Guardian.


Viol. How father, my Guardian?


Basil. I minion, yours.


Viol. Do you hear father, bid him bespeake spectacles, for my fingers have
vowed to have a blind match with his eyes.


Basil. Well said Haggart, I Will make your proud heart stoop to the lure of
obedience. But come, by this time our challenge is published, and our gallants
wits sweating in the field of Invention, and it behoues us not to rest
unexercised.

So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.
Exeunt.
Enter two Captains. 1 Cap. Now Captain Observation, times bawd, thou that
have kept the Ages door, whilst up-start baseness crept into the bed of
greatness, what do thou think of this change?


2 Cap. That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to examine his
actions.


1 Cap. That's no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly be better instructed
why the Duke broke up his Court in Arcadia, and removed it into this Island.


2 Cap. I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general rumor is, that
out of the freeness of his spirit, he has sent a challenge to all his
neighbor Princes, that whosoever (within a twelve month) can defeat him of
his daughters, shall with their loves enjoy his Dukedom, the garland proposed
for the victors.


1 Cap. Your words throw sense into me, and that's the cause the Island is so
surely guarded with Watch-towers, over which our selves and other Captains
have the charge.


2 Cap. And to the end that not affection, but desert may prove victor, are the
two Ladies so narrowly observed, the one never out a the eye of her Father, the
other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Dukes chief director.


1 Cap. If inquisitiveness be not too bold a guest, what do you think of
Dametas?


2 Cap. As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.


1 Cap. Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to
make him up.


2 Cap. How did he first stumble on the Princes favor?


1 Cap. As some do upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth says,
the Prince having one day lost his way, wandering in the woods, found this
Dametas, affected his discourse, took him along to the Court, and like great
men in love with their own doings, countenanc't his defects, gave him offices,
titles, and all the additions that go to the making up of a man worshipful.


2 Cap. I cannot commend the Duke for raising him, nor yet praise him, that he
proportions not his carriage answerable to his fortunes.


1. Cap. Your thoughts and mine are twins in that: but I hear the warning
bell, some strangers are arrived.


2. Cap. Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Dametas, whose custom is
to spit and hem, whilst his Scribe Major takes their Examinations.

Exeunt.
Enter Dametas and Manasses. Dam. Manasses, how do like my play at Tennis?


Man. You play well, but you lose still.


Dam. Policy Manasses, policy; for when any man upbraides me with my
gettings at Court, I may swear truly, I have lost more then I have got by it.


Man. By the Tennis-court I think you have.


Dam. If by any Court, it is enough to save mine oath. But what do our
spruce-witted gallants say of my bounty?


Ma. Faith sir, according to the proportion of it, little or nothing, they say
it is a banckrout, and dares not show his head.


Dam. Then let em leave jesting at me, though it please the Duke for some few
good parts that he sees in me, to make me his familiar, I scorn to be
public, or every Courtiers companion: but who comes here?


Enter the two Captains, with Aminter and Iulio, two princes, one attired like
a poor soldier, the other like a poor scholar. The Captains of the
watch-towers? what news with you?

1. Cap. A couple of petitioners, ant like your worship.


Dam. Had I best take their Petitions, Manasses?


Man. O in any case, though you never peruse em, it is the only course in
request.


Dam. Fellows, deliver your petitions to my Scribe Major, and do hear? put
em up Manasses, they may be wrongs to us.


Man. And they be, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have put up for your
worship.

Puts up their papers.
1. Cap. That fellows pocket is like a Tailors hell, it eats up part of every
man's due: it is an Executioner, and makes away more innocent petitions in one
year, then a red-headed hangman cuts ropes in an age.


Dam. Now, what are you sir?


Amin. A poor soldier, ant like your Worship.


Dam. Poor soldiers do not like my worship, they are bad members.


Manas. Then if they had a woman to their Judge, they should be sure to be cut
off, for they cannot endure bad members in a Commonwealth.


Dam. What are you?


Iulio. A poor scholar, ant like your Worship.


Dam. Poor scholars do not like our worship neither, they rail against rich
Cormorants, they are bad members too.


Man. Cut them off both sir, and make the land an Eunuch.


Dam. I Will take order with em I warrant thee; and I may have my will, i will
neither ha poor scholar nor soldier about the Court.


1. Cap. The next way to make it the I Will of fools.


Dam. What Is he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know you to whom you
speak?


1. Cap. Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.


Dam. But I remember well enough I warrant you; I command you in my name and
the Dukes, to attend your guard, and you regard me no more then a careless
Lawyer does an undone clyent, but i will inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.


2. Cap. Command your slaves sir, we are gentlemen.


Dam. Why so I hope are we sir, and of the best and last edition, of the Dukes
own making.


1. Cap. Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge us of these passengers?


Dam. You are discharged, about your business.


1. Cap. Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right, And true borne
Eagles stoop to this base Kite.

Exeunt.
Dam. What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, i will have more
officers, and one shall be to keep scholars and soldiers out of the Court, for
they dare not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good clothes. But
gods me Manasses, go tell the Duke I must speak with him.


Manas. Presently sir, I Will go fetch the head to give the foot a posset: and my
master had wit to his villainy, he would make an excellent dish for the
hangman.


Amin. Right worshipful.


Dam. I sir, I know my place is worshipful; I tell thee Knave, I could hang
thee by my pattent, if it were granted once, i will tell thee how it runs, it
allows me 24. knaves, 6 knights, 10. fools, 13. fellons, and 14. traitors by
the year, take them how, why, when, and where I please.


Iulio. I do not think the Duke will ever grant it.


Dam. Why not grant it? why should you think he will not grant it? Such
another word and i will send you to Limbo instantly.


Amin. We thank you good Dametas. Discover themselves.


Iulio. I hope you will take reasonable bail for our forth coming.


Am. The case is altered with you since you came out of Arcadia.


Dam. My honorable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my self and the best ability
of my power, lies at your service.


Amin. You see how confidently we presume upon your Letters promise, in
furthering us to attain the lovers prize.


Dam. The Dukes daughters are your own, and in a word thus shall you attain
them, some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the
Duke and both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon some sudden occasion
divide the train, and having singled out the two Does, I hope you have wit
enough to strike.


Amin. To strike, how mean you?


Dam. As headsmen do, off with their maiden-heads, or if the Duke offer
resistance, off with his crown too.


Iulio. That were violence, and clean opposite to the intent of the challenge.


Damet. Come ye are shallow, to it vi and armis, to it, I Will be your second,
think of the Crown, have my Letters travaild for you, my wit wrought for you,
and my invention sweat for you, to possess you of your loves, and seat you in
the Dukedom, and come you now with it is violence, and against the intent of the
challenge? I am ashamed to hear you.


Iulio. Nay Dametas, and your resolution be so forward, ours shall over-take
you, we doubted least the preferments your Lord has heapt upon you, had
smothered your affection to usward.


Amin. That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the
hunt.


Dam. Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then --


Iulio. We have your meaning.


Dam. Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new disguise, as at
our next meeting I Will inform you. Adieu, I shall think long till I see you
again.

Exit.
Amin. As a Lawyer does for his Clyent for a second fee. Here Is no Judas?


Iulio. Yes, and a damned one too, for he would betray and sell his Master.


Amin. It Is common in such base fellows, such Court-spiders, that weaue their
webs of flattery in the ears of greatness, if they can once entangle them in
their quaint-treachery, they poison them straight.


Iulio. They are like unnecessary worms, whom the sun of greatness creates of
the gross and slimy multitude, as soon as they recover strength, they eat
into the credit of true borne gentry, undermine and work out the true
nobility, to inroote and establish themselves.


Am. And in the end, like Esops starved snake, having lapt the sweet milk of
greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends, they turn their
stings of envy into their preservers bosom.


Iul. The example lives in this Dametas, who notwithstanding the Duke has
raisd him to that height that he looks equal with himself, yet for the base
hope of incertaine government, he offers him to sale; but let his treason live
to the last minute.


Amin. For my part I Will make that use of him that Physicians do of poison, use
as much of him as serves for mine honest intent, and cast down the rest, as
unfit for any necessary employment.


Iul. Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence, either to
the Duke, or his daughters.


Amin. And let our discourse go so smoothly apparelled, that it move not the
patience of the most tender ear.


Iul. About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.
Exeunt.
Enter Lisander like an Amazon. Lisan. Arcadia, thou heaven, within whose
sphere

The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms,
Fair Violetta, fairer then the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name,
Does play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous churl,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Has made this desert I Will the unwilling chest
In which he locks her. But the fair advantage
Of this large Challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break open
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.

Enter Dametas and Manasses. Manas. This way she went sir, this way.


Dam. But I say this way, I would thou should know, we old Courtiers can hunt
a Cony, and put her to the squeak, and make her cry out like a young married
wife of the first night.


Manas. For more help, as some of them have done: But there she is.


Dam. I Will upon her presently: do hear me sir? thou vessel of infirmity,
woman, and by thy outside little better then one of the wicked, come hither
and show thy self before us, show thy self before Dametas.


Lisan. Dametas? Lisander then dissemble,

For he is the man must work thy entrance.


Dam. What art thou? speak.


Lisan. My mother is the Queen of Amazons,
My self a Virgin, married unto Arms,
And bold atchieuements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Antioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the unconstant winds,
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.

Dam. And what is your business now you are landed?


Lisan. My business is in private with the Duke.


Dam. The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.


Lisan. I beseech you sir.


Dam. It Is no beseeching matter I assure you.


Manas. No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could beseech with the
tongue of Angels, it is to no purpose with him.


Lisan. It Is strange, I have heard thy master is a very good man where he takes.


Man. True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore
look for no kindness from him.


Lisan. Good, and do thou take after thy Master?


Man. No Madam, I take commonly before my Master, for where he takes, he takes
all, and leaves nothing for me to take.


Lisan. Oh, I feel your meaning.


Man. Let my master have some feeling of yours, and heel prefer your suit.


Lisa. It Is not the Dukes pleasure Petitioners should buy their access.


Man. All Is one, it is my masters pleasure, and usual fashion.


Lisa. And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Dametas, my late shipwreck
as you see, has made a defeat both of my friends and treasure;
notwithstanding, Fortune has referv'd me one jewel, which if I might request
your Worship in love to accept, and be a means to work my admittance to the
Duke, I should become a true debtor to your love.


Dame. Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that takes bribes, yet
pressed by your importunity, and that you tender it in love, lest I might seem
too nice to withstand a Ladies favor, I Will wear it for your sake, and if the
Duke be not too busily employed, work your access.


Lisa. So doing, you shall perform the office of a deare-bought friend.

Exit Dametas.
Manas. How quickly the tide's turned! but do you hear Madam? though I take
neither before nor after my Master, yet take my counsel, and do not trust my
master: if you have a suit to the Duke, keep it to your self, for if you
trust my master with it, heel prefer it for you, but heel beg't for
himself.


Lisan. That's plain coozenage.


Man. Fie no, it is cunning in him, marry twould be thought little better then
coozenage in a country gentleman: but he returns.


Enter Dametas again. Dam. Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the
Duke for your admittance.


Lisan. And have you wrought it?


Dam. I have, marry you must think I bestowd much labor in it.


Lisan. 'Tmay be you did.


Dam, 'Tmay be you did: and look a scance like a Pothecaries wife pounding
Colliquintida; have my brains sweat for this?


Lisan. Why the jewel is right Dametas, had I but an Ass that would sweat me
such pearl.


Dame. An Ass? and sweat such pearl? I Will bar her admittance, here take your
jewel, the Duke will allow no admittance, and I will keep you back.


Lisan. Keep me back? thou could do no more and I were a poor man's
petitioner.


Dame. And I Will do so much being a rich petitioner.


Lisan. You cannot sit, you Court spaniell, you unnecessary mushrump, that in
one night art sprung out of the root of greatness, I have bought my
admittance, and I Will have it in despetto del fato.


Dame. I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks, there is
no good to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will you
follow?


Li. With all my heart sir, I Will be the blind man and poor petitioner, and thou
shall play the Court-spaniell with the silver bell, and lead me into the
Presence.


Dam. Court-spaniell? mum: I Will bosom what I think, Old Gib's not blind, I
see, although I wink.

Exeunt.
ACTVS II. SCENA I.
Enter Demetrias a Prince attired like a Wood-man, with him his Page. Them. BOy,
how do like me in this attire?


Page. As the Audience does a bad play, scurvily.


Them. Is it not strange a Prince should be thus metamorphosed?


Page. Not so strange as the Metamorphosis of Ajax, an't like your Grace.


Them. Grace you Aggot, have not forgot that yet?


Page. No, and yet it is a wonder I ha not, grace being so seldom used, I Am sure
they say none at some Ordinaries, for at sitting down they cannot intend it for
hunger, and at rising up, they are either drunk, or have such mind a dice,
they never remember, my Lord then.


Demet. No more Lord, sirrah.


Page Indeed there are too many already, but is not this strange, that rich men
should forsake their titles? master then.


Deem. Your will sir.


Page You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your friend Lisander,
and yet you cannot find him.


Them. True sir.


Page. I have seen much gold lying upon Lombards stals, and could never finger
penny of it.


Them. Very well.


Page. Nay, it was not well sir.


Them. What conclude you then?


Page. That you were best sit down, and see what you have got by your journey.


Them. I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.


Page. That's nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven it self, when he
looks but out at the prison-gate, i will stand to it, a man were as good be
hanged, so a meet a handsome hangman, and a strong rope, as be in love.


Them. Your reason for that.


Page. Mary this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, and love the beginning:
Nay further, I think a Lover cannot be saved, for he is of all religions.


Them. Your proof for that.


Page. This; he thinks with the Atheist there is no God but his Mistress,
with the Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the Papist no Purgatory but
her frowns, and with the family of love, holds it lawful to lie with her,
though she be another man's wife.


Them. So sir, what follows?


Page. Serving-men sir, the Master goes in before his wife, and the Servingman
follows his master.


Them. Sir forbear, I must meditate.


Page. As the Usurer before he parts with money, meditates upon the assurance.


Enter Lisander privately, and over-heares them. Lisan. If Violettaes presence
have not quenched
The memory of all things but her self,
I should be more familiar with that face.
Shroud and observe.
Them. I have left my country to seek my friend.


Lisan. And I my country and my friend for love.


Them. And in the search of him have lost my self
In the strange Region of a woman's eye.

Lisan. In love, and in Arcadia.


Them. As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise her face differs as far
From others, as a glo-worme from a star.
She is a Princess that my soul affects.

Page. And rich.


Them. Half heir unto this Dukedom.


Page. And she were whole heir to the four moral virtues, twere nothing:
when shall I see the time that men will love for virtue, or a rich heir marry
a poor wench without a portion? never I think.


Them. Had not my friend Lisander.


Lisan. What of me?


Den^. Left me in Thrace.


Lisan. We had never met in love,
His sillables betray him. I arrest you.

Them. At whose suit?


Page. Not at his Taylers in any case, for there is no greater stitch to a
younger brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of apparel when it is worn
out.


Them. Lisander or his ghost?


Lisan. Demetrius,
Or some illusiue tenant in his shape?

Them. Unkind, why did thou lean my company?


Lisan. For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven, ^or love: but why is
Demetrius thus disguised?


Page. For that which would make a Iackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a
tail.


Deem. Peace rogue.


Lisan. Why wagge, is thy master in love?


Page. Faith sit he has entered his action in Cutids Court, and mean^ to
proceed in the suit it should seem.


Deem. Why did not take my counsel in thy choice?


Lisan. Because I feared a chiding, for doubting their honorable thoughts
would not have not have consented to my effeminate attempts, I stole this
secret course, and manner of disguise, as best helping to access, which it
has begot, now what access will bring forth, I commit to unborne industry.


Deem. It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance of our loves
hinders the passage of our hopes.


Lisan. Indeed that is not the least hinderance, yet the Duke himself, and my
quaint disguise has removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a
woman, but has allowed me for my loves companion.


Them. Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access to my love,
as when I was in Thrace.


Lisan. Dametas is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our wits must fish
for him.


Them. Will the Cods head bite?


Lisan. Like an old Usurer at a young heirs inheritance, and I have it ready
hookt for him: and here he comes, my plot is to prefer thee to his service.


Enter Dametas. Them. Prithee do, and i will serve him in his right kind.


Lisan. Dametas, my love is yours.


Dam. Which madam I am as proud of --


Manas. As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fashion.


Li. To be round, I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman


Da. To me sweet blossom, though I be somewhat strict in mine office, I cannot
be stony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?


Them. Petition?


Manas. Your only way to move a fute by: Humbly complaining to your good
worship, O it is most patheticke, and indeed, without money, can do just nothing
with authority.


Dam. Come hither stripling, whose son were thou?


Them. I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew my father.


Dam. Did not know thy father?


Manas. A common fault, his betters forget themselves when they grow rich, then
blame not him to forget his father.


Dam. What was his name?


Them. If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menalchas, who on his
deathbed made me his heir, with this charge, to seek your worships service,
and gave me this gold as a remembrance to purchase your favor.


Dam. Gold? hem.


Man. Now does my Master long more to singer thar gold, then a young girl,
married to an old man, does to run her husband ashore at Cuckolds haven.


Dam. Well, I could do for this fatherless youth.


Man. As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him of his portion, and
then turn him out of doors a begging.


Dam. But for I have the Gardian-ship of the Princess, I dare do nothing
without the consent of the Duke.


Lisan. Come, come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.


Dam. Well then I woo not, but it is for your sake I assure you.


Man. Meaning the gold.


Dam. What shall I call thy name?


Dam. Dorus an't like your worship.


Dam. Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your Master, and love
your self: be sure to get under me, and you shall loose nothing in my
service. Madam, the Duke and Duchess expect you at the hunt, and await your
coming at Dianaes oak.


Lisan. ^e attend them presently, be a good servant Dorus.


Dam. Twill be his own another day Madam.


Lisan. In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.


Dam. My service does attend you.


Ma. As the Pursevant does the prisoner for a double fee.

Exit.
Them. Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vass lage.
Exit.
Enter Aminter and Iulio, attired like Satires. Amin. Now and Dametas be the
mettle he was stamped for, a right villain.


Iulio. And he be not, hang him.


Am. Nay he deserves hanging too if he be: but will you trust him?


Iul. Yes as far as I see him, and he that trusts him further, my trust is he
will be deceived.


Amin. Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true to no man.


Iul. Yes, for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most


Amin. That's not for love.


Iul. Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this age -- This is
the place his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.


Enter Dametas like a Huntsman. Dam. Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon
the Loombe of perfection, and in this quech of lashes Aminter and Iulio,

See and see not, all mum, you know your cue,
The game's your own, if you can hunt it true.

Enter the Duke Basilius. Ba. Dametas, were thine cares ever at a more musical
banquet? how the hounds mouths like bells are tuned one under another like a
slothfulness, the speed of the cry out-ran my sense of hearing.


Dam. Cross over the Forest to Dianaes oak my liege, and there your grace
advantaged by the height of the ground, shall not only at pleasure hear, but
be eyewitness of their musical contention.


Basil. Thanks good Dametas, be thy directions our wives convoy.


Enter Gynetia, Violetta, and Hippolita. Gyn. Where is his highness Dametas?


Dam. At Adonis bower Madam, where he expects your presence, to see the
fleshing of a couple of Spartane hounds, in the wasting blood of the spent
Dear.


Gyn. Thanks good Dametas, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet,
should they not bring 'em to that kingly sport.


Dam. Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath, which must be laid
out in the purchase of the game, I have provided you this stand, from whence
your eyes may be commanders of the sport: such sport as you little dream of.


Viol. We are your loves debtors kind Dametas.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Syl^ane commoners, to see what taskes
Our covetous Forresters impose upon them,
Who not content with impost of their breath,
(Poor hearts) pursue them smiling to their death.

Dam. It Was the end of their creation Madam.


Hip. So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannise on harmless beasts,
But Forresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors,
And to claspe up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and cloth them with their skins:
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to dye.

Dam. You are too tenderhearted to be a good huntswoman Lady.


Viol. And some of you too hard-hearted, but leaving this discourse of hunting,
have all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, spent the vigor of their wits,
that not one dares venture.


Hip. For our loves sister, you may see, the properer women, the worse luck.


Dam. Tush you shall have suitors, fear not Madam.


Hip. No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.


Viol. Then i will fear of purpose, because I would have 'em come.


Dam. And they do not, they are notable cowards.


Hip. Then let them keep away still, for I have vowed my maidenhead shall
never do homage to the bed of a coward.


Dam. Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this discourse, till
I step up to the top of the hill* and make discovery of the game.


Viol. Let your return be speedy good Dametas.


Dam. I Will put on wings and fly.

Exit.
Viol. Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good riddance.


Amin. So, he has put'em fair to the stand, lets issue and surprise them.


Iulio. Be resolute and sudden.
Aminter and Iulio issue out, and bear them away.

Viol. Murder, treason, rescue, help.


Enter first Dametas, and then the Duke. Dam. Yes much reskue, much help, much
Dametas: why so, this jest was drawn home close to the head, it cannot choose
but cleave the very white of our hopes, the Dukes wit: to thy tackle good wit,
some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is run a ground.


Basil. Tell me Dametas, was not the Dear a prodigal? did he not spend his
breath freely amongst us?


Dam. And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the hounds like
politicians nosed out the game?


Ba. True: and coming to the loss, Melampus, but where are our daughters?


Da. Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horce
cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time too.


Ba. Certain Dametas, but where are our daughters man?


Da. Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of sweet water,
and ground Iuie.


Cry within, treason, murder, reskue, help. Ba. What cry of treason's that
Dametas?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, i will haste unto their reskue.

Da. And my sword un-employd? allegiance says nay to that my ^i^ge, I am for
the adventure my self, if they be surprised (I am a mad man) your grace shall
hear more: if not (I am the more sorry) your grace shall hear more too: make
peace with your thoughts till my return, and doubt not their recovery.


Enter the Duchess with her daughters, Demetrius, Lisander, etc. Gyn. Speak,
where is the Duke?


Basi. Here my Gynetia. What mean these weapons, are our daughters ^afe?


Viol. As a thief in a mill father, we thank our redeemers*


Dam. The more my grief, were you surprised then madam?


Hip. Yes faith Dametas.


Da. And how sweet Ladies, and how were you rescued?


Gyn. Being surprised, this gallant Amazon
Pressed to their re^cue, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defense,
Wonder would have bereft you of all sense,
She rai*'d her sword with such a manly grace,
As had not her mild sex contrould my thoughts,
I could have fallen in love with her high worth.

Lisan. You over-prise us madam, not our desert,
But the weak spirits of our opposites,
Gave luster to the dimnesse of our worth.

Basil. It pleases your modesty to lesson it,
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodman's that?

Dam. My follower, my liege.


Basil. What ere he be, he has deserved our love,
Fellow be near us, and for this desert,
Performed against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy master we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.

Hip. Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain,
I have got me a servant by the match: woo't serve me fellow?

Them. In the best I can.
In heart your fellow, though in show your man.

Hip. I Will try your dutious service: I command
Your knee to ki^^e the ground, your lip my hand.

Them. Pardon me Madam.


Hip. Here Is hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.

Basil. Truce to this ayrie war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closset then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin air, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then to the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase of lovelier sports begun.
Exeunt.
Them. If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.
Exit.
Dame. Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies rescued, and the Princes like ^ravens beat
out of the game-place, my invention must turn traveller for more stratagems:
what and I should discover their plot to the Duke, attach em for traitors, and
beg their lands for my labor, though they be my friends, twere a pretty
parcel of policy.

All things are lawful that do profit bring,
A wise man's bow goes with a twofold string.
Enter Lisander and Demetrius.
Lisan. Did ever two Princes meet such strange changes in their loves? now we
have wrought our admittance, and in a manner got em into our possessions, our
hopes like false fires having brought us within ken, vanish, and leave us out
of all comfort.


Them. That the Duke should dote upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpose,
but that the Duchess should be enamourd on thee for a man, is preposterous.


Lisa. Whether my valor shown in the reskue of the Ladies, or the ardent
glances her daughters beauty steals from my eyes, give her thoughts
encouragement, I know not, but her hopes stand confident I am a man, and for
that cause am I barred from access.


De. I weigh thy combrances by my own, for though by the dukes allowance I am
her priviledg'd attendant, yet such is the devilishnes of Dametas, that I
cannot joy so much access as to confer with her.


Page I can compare my lord and his friend to nothing in the world so fitly, as
to a couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one up, despair
plunges the other down, whilst I, like a Harlakene in an Italian Comoedy,
stand making faces at both their follies.


Lisan. Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so monstrous, lets cast
our inventions in a new mold, and having so firm a foundation as this disguise
to build upon, lets draw the model, and raise the whole frame of our attempts
anew.


Them Indeed, lovers should be conditioned like tyrants, who having the aim of
a crown in their eye once, run violently over all lets that intervent their
course, and so must we.


Lisa. And so will we, my resolution is already bent, and if I shoot not, the
next level I take, Love I beseech thee break thy bow about mine ears, and
strike thy horns in my forhead, for married men to hang their cap^ on.


Them. I have met a means fit for my purpose already: Mopsa Dametas only
daughter is overshooes in love with me, and to her ^le feign extreme ardor of
affection, and make her the shadow under which I Will court the true substance of
my divine Hippolita.


Lisan. About it then, I Will sweat my invention to death but I Will overtake thee;
but here comes one of my Burres* I must bear his importunity, for no
reasonable denial will brush him off.

Enter the Duke.
Basil. Zelmane.


Lisan. My Liege.


Basil. My thoughts come like a sail before the wind, swollen big with news, and
thine ears the midwife must deliver me of this burden: my Duchess is sick,
heart-sicke for thee Zelmane.


Lisan. For me? why my Lord, I am no Rosa solis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover
sick folks.


Basil. Shall I be short with thee? My Lady's in love with thee.


Lisan. With me my Lord?


Basil. With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers, her very looks
write Sonnets in thy commendations, she carves thee at board, and cannot sleep
for dreaming on thee in bed, she is turned sunne-riser, haunts private walks,
and like a disgraced Courtier, studies the Art of melancholy.


Lisan. Now alas good Lady.


Basil. Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather lets bend our endeavors
to entangle her more. To see the kindness of fortune, who fearing we should be
acquainted with sollitude in this our 12 month retirement, has begot a
domestical merriment, and made our own thoughts Actors in it, and as bad a Poet
as I am, I Will ha one scene in it of my own invention.


Lisan. Dametas will storm at that, for he cannot abide Poetry should be
countenanced; but how is it my Liege?


Basil. It Is ready plotted already, and that the Duchess may not find thee
unprovided when she comes to court thee.


Lisan. Court me, court a woman my Liege?


Basil. Why that is the very happiness of the jest, but in any case confess
thy self a man.


Lisan. A man my Liege? I ha no color for it.


Basil. Tush, I Will furnish thee, say thou art a Prince, no matter who, and have
to do with this disguise of purpose to court my daughter Violetta.


Lis. Is this scene of your own inventing my Liege?


Ba. Mine own in faith, and to confirm't the rather, use more often and private
conference with my daughter, interchange discourse and amorous dalliance, oh
twill set my Duchess affections afire, to think her rivalld by her daughter,
and give us smooth passage to our love.


Li. How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liege, do but you work my
admittance to your daughter, and ^le bestow all the art I am worth in courting
her; and see, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comoedy, she has entered the
Duchess just at her cue, shadow your self in your Arc, and leave me to
give her entertainment.


Ba. Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.


Li. I warrant you, I Will play the Prince with much art.

Enter the Duchess.
Dutch. This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamored tread,
The deprest flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.

Ba. Absolute Poet. Penelope was a ballad-maker to her.


Dut. Oh do not fly my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you runaway
I Will tie a chain about your wast for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.

Lis. Fie Madam, this courtesy is more then needs.


Dut. Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind then senseless elements,
Thou never walk'st, but the enamored air
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind does with his velvet wing
Fan the thin air upon thy sweaty cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.

Lis. Shield this vain breath, beat at some Ladies ear.


Dut. But you are none, you are not, come you are not.
Your valor, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.

Ba. There Is a lover of a right temper, she will outface the name of her sex
instantly.


Lis. Well Madam, since your observation has discovered me, upon promise of
your secrecy, I confess my self a man.


Ba. Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.


Dut. I knew my judgment could not be deceived,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a woman's eye.

Basil. Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next?


Li. But Madam, now I am known to you, what further request you?


Dut. Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embracements, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long lain sick.

Ba. Thank you good wife; nay, and a Duchess long to give her husband the
horning, let it never grieve Butchers to do homage at Cuckolds haven.


Lis. Well Madam, to give content to your affections, and in a strong hope you
will mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but fit time and opportunity,
and master your desires.


Basil* And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.


Dut. Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss I seal thee mine.


Lis. And I confirm't with this.


Basil. Rare, rare, rare, she is his, sealed and deliverd in the presence of her
husband.


Dut. Now lest my husband should suspect our love.


Basil. Now, what for that now?


Dut. Hear a good jest, persuade him thou art a woman.


Li. That Is not to do now Madam, for he as confidently believes and ardently
courts me for a woman as you for a man.


Dut. Good, excellent, maintain that humor still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we women use,
Be mild, and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.

Basil. Excellent virtues in a woman.


Dut. I prithee do, twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous haviour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks,
And shoot em into thine; but the chief sport's this,
To see an old man with a young man kiss.
Exit Duchess.
Basil. To see an old Duchess a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs, the scene's all comicall,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women,
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit.

Lisan. To take me for a man.


Basil. And arm her self
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But sooth her humor, the revenge she would throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.
Exit.
Lis. Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like bugles
follow the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools, God forbid, not
they: but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits Laughing at this division
of their wits.


Enter Violetta and Hippolita. Hip. Woo't believe me sister? I never eat a
cherry, but it puts me in mind of a husband, it kisses my lips with such a
harmless prettiness.


Viol. Now in good deed lo I love em a lise too, I think I shall never ha my
belly full on em.


Hip. Of what, not of husbands Violetta?


Viol. No, of cherries Hippolita, but take heed of em, they be a very filling
meat, and dangerous things for us Maids I can tell you, we may surfeit after em
presently.


Hip. Surfeit after what, a husband?


Viol. I, and after cherries too Hippolita.


Hip. I warrant you sister, an old Lady in Lacedemon taught me a preservative
against that.


Vio. For the love of cherries what?


Hip. Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she, be sure
to crack a stone said she.


Viol. Then let me alone, I Will crack a couple of stones betwixt every cherry,
rather then surfeit on them.


Hip. You must take heed you crack not too many too, for you may surfeit of the
stone as well as of the cherry.


Viol. Nay and they be such dangerous things, I ha done with em.


Hip. So have I too for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of
servile liberty that we live in here in Arcadia?


Viol. For all the world as Englishmen keep their fellons, and Italians their
wives, we never stir abroad without our laylors.


Hip. And for what cause forsooth? only to keep us from marriage.


Viol. Sure it is either some high content, or extreme discommoditie, that our
father debarres us of it.


Hip. By this stone, me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the
difference betwixt a Maid and a wife.


Viol. Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the knowledge on it
last night I can tell you.


Hip. O that I had bin with thee I might ha been so too: for the love of
marriage how?


Viol. Why thus: As I lay slumbring in my bed,
No creature with me but my mayden-head.

Hip. Is that a creature?


Viol. Some maintain it is,
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss;
Others, whose speech seems near akin to truth,
Say it is a passion, bred in the heat of youth,
Some called a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition:
But in th'allow'd opinion of most,
It Is never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as Mayds do use,
Me thought I dreamt, as Mayds can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought it was too much wrong
A pretty Maid should lie alone so long;
With that a gallant comes, gallants can do
Much with young Mayds.

Hip. And with old women too.


Viol. He courted me once, and again, and thrice,
It Is virtue to say nay, to be too nice
Agrees not with my humor, yet some say,
We Mayds wish things, to which we answer nay;
Briefly, me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could ha wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we'greed,
Twere strange if earnest futers should not speed.

Hip. In what agreed you?


Viol. In our Wedding-ring,
Time, place, and hour, indeed in every thing;
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each hour an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till it was night.
At dinner time me thought I sweld with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spoke loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, there is something in a man
That wives love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.

Hip. Would I had dreamt I might have done so too.


Viol. My bed-mate turned, and as he would have spoke,
I sweat with fear, and in that fear I woke,
But seeing my kind bedfellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I wakt so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.

Hip. Otwould have vexed a Saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.

Vio. And so did mine too I warrant you, nay though I be but a little pot, I
shall be as soon hot as another.


Hip. You should not be my sister else.


Vio. Nor my mothers daughter neither.


Hip. And in good earnest we are not fath^r^ (...) amiss.


Viol. Are you avis'd of that, and In Faith tell^ what think you of your servant
Dorus.


Hip. As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the Sun in a cloud, or a wealthy
Diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world, he wears the worst
side outward, and is much better then he seems: but what think you of your
manly Amazon??


Vio. Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmanes humor would afford
project for a pretty Court Comoedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I
fear she is, my mother doats upon her for a man, and as I wish he were, and
that with such an ardor of affection, that I could find in my heart to turn my
mother out of the company, and play the lovers part my self.


Hip. How ever man or woman, the jest holds current in one.


Vio. I know not what knavish motion has had to do with my thought, but my
mind tells me that your servant Dorus and my Amazon, are other then they seem:
and here he comes.

Enter first Lisander, then Miso, Mopsa, Demetrius.
Miso. Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your fathers
charge.


Lisan. Pardon Mistress Miso, 'twas my doing and the Dukes.


Miso. But the Duchess will like neither the Dukes doings nor yours, neither
in this case I can tell you. The Duke stays your coming, and yet the
Duchess is very desirous on it, my husband is in the next Arbor to man you.
For you Lady, my presence be your privilege.


Li. Miso should be either a hang man or a Herald, for she never comes amongst
us, but she quarters our company and arms.


De. Excellent beauty, and therefore more excellent, because situate in so
fair a creature.


Mop. You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me love me, how say
you mother does he?


Mi. Mary let him choose daughter, when I was as thou art --


Hip. You were as she is? but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my servant Dorus
bears a months mind to you, be not so straight laced to him.


Mop. Straight laced? sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I Dorus? no in
sooth, I go wide open wensday, I never lace my self but on sundays, and that
for fear I should burst with cating of plum-porridge.


Hip. I mean let fall some comfortable looks on your suter.


Mop. Sgod mend me, i will let fall or take up any thing I have to do him good.


Hip. Why that is kindly said, and Dorus your love is very ambitious, to climb
so high as the beautiful Mopsa.


Mop. O are you avis'd of that, 'twould make a horse break his bridle to hear
how the youth of the village will commend me, oh the pretty little pincking
nies of Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopsa says another, and then
do I bridle my head like a malt-horse thus, set mine arms a kembo thus,
wreath my neck and my body thus, wink with one eye thus, and spread my
peacocks tay le as broad as the proudest minxe of em all.


Hip. These extraordinary graces must not want admiration, but where is your
mother?


Miso. Speak softly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foisting hound.


Mop. Godsme, my mother's stealing of a nap.


Hip. Nay, she cannot be said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes
herself would discover her theft: but Dorus since your fortunes are poor, you
should study to enoble your deserts, and beget effects worthy to court and win
your Ladies acceptance.


Them. Less madam, I choose no better moderater then your self, betwixt me and
my unworthy services, suppose your self though but a Cucko compared with this
sweet singing Nitingale, should be sued to by a Prince like me, I mean like me
in love, for love in Princes and pesants admits comparison: suppose Demetrius
should in like disguise court you as I do, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I do, for
Mopsa, kneel to you thus, as I do, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I
do, to Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsaes,
suppose he should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure you he were
Demetrius, as I do this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son of Menalchas,
could your disdain stand out like Mopsaes?


Hip. What a keenes necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust me Mopsa
your servant speaks well, and if he can prove himself the man he speaks of,
and my wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no reason to think scorn of him.


Mop. Why what should I do Madam? my mother tells me I must not say as I think.


Hip. I am no counselor, but should Demetrius in like disguise court me, thus
would I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss, and thus argue:
think not Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could so musfle thee, but
that the Sun of valor shind through them long since, and in regard of thy
serviceable duty in concealing, and unprevented policy in thus making known
thy love, sort but out fit opportunity, and in despite of al guardians strict
observance, go where thou will, the worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita,
this would I vow, and this will I perform.


De. And were I Demetrius and you Hippolita, I would deceive Dametas, outreach
Miso, forswear Mopsa, and forsake Arcadia, to share the fortunes of divine
Hippolita.


Mop. And what should I do then?


Them. I do but speak in the person of Demetrius, and under Hippolita shadow
what I intend to the rare, and never enough wondered at Mopsa, the black swan
of beauty, and madg-howlet of admiration.


Mop. Do not you flout me Dorus? and you do not, provide a Priest and i will
marry you, and my father and mother shall never know on it.


De. Manasses is the man.


Mop. And i will be the woman, whosoever say nay to it, little dreams my mother
of what we have done.


De. T'may be she did, for she sighed and groand much in her sleep.


Mop. It Is well she was so quiet, for she eat pease-poridge to breakefast,
and they will make mebreake wind in my sleep like a horse, and see as the devil
will have it she wakes, and here comes my father, no words and ye love me.

Enter Dametas.
Dam. Why God a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the servant of Dametas, and
i will prefer thee for it.


Hip. You were worse then the devil else, for they say he helps his servants,
then you may do little and you cannot help yours.


Da. Will you break your jests against the bars of your chamber window, and
clear the green? the Duke is coming to bowls, and I would not for half
mine office you should be a rub in the way of his patience: daughter and wife,
conduct her to the Lodge, Exit. And Dorus, make you haste about your business.


Them. I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly placed, You will condemn me for
my too much haste.

Exeunt.
Dam. Why so: this it is to be in authority: Inferior persons, I and the Princes
themselves, fly from my presence, like the chirping Birds from the sight of the
Faulcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blows away inferior Officers (the
Court rubbish) out of my way, and gives me a smooth passage: I am the morning
star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of the Sun: indeed I am never
out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.


Enter Duke, Duchess, Lisander, Violetta. Duke. Does our match hold?


Dutch. Yes, whose part will you take?


Duk. Zelmanes.


Dutch. Soft, that match is yet to make.


Viol. Lets cast a choice, the nearest two take one.


Lis. My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.


Viol. Come, here is agood.


Lis. Well, bettered.


Dutch. Best of all.


Lis. The Duke and I.


Duk The weakest go to the wall.


Viol. I Will lead.


Lis. I Will follow.


Viol. We have both one mind.


Lis. In what?


Viol. In leaving the old folk behind.


Duk. Well jested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hare.

Dut. Your last bowl, come.


Viol. By the faith a me, well lead.


Lisa. Would I might lead you.


Viol. Whither?


Lisa. To my bed.


Viol. I am sure you would not.


Lisa. By this air I would.


Viol. I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.


Lis. I Would love you sweet.


Viol. Sour, so I heard you say.


Lisa. A cept it then.


Viol. Of what acquaintance pray?


Lisa. Of loves and mine.


Duke. Daughter, your bowl winnes one.


Viol. None of my Maydenhead father, I am gone,
The Amazon has won one.

Lisa. Yield to that.


Viol. The cast I do.


Lis. Your self?


Viol. Nay scrape out that.


Dut. Whose is it yet?


Lisa The Dukes: play smooth and fine.
The smallest help that is will make you mine.

Viol. Me yours?


Lis. You mine, for though the cast I lose,
I ha won your love.

Viol. Much: in my the other hose.


Dut. Come, the last mark; this cast is worth all the rest,


Viol. The leader as the follower.


Lisa. Bad's the best.
I win her for ten Crowns, and there they be.

Viol. I take your lay.


Lisa. A match twixt you and me.


Dut. I Will be your half.


Duk. That were unkindly done.


Viol. Pardon me mother, I Will bear all or none.


Lisa. I ha won you Madam.


Viol. Me?


Lisa. I mean your bet.


Viol. Then take your winnings, I Will not die in debt.


Lis. Madam believe me, I am, as I protest, a Prince, my name Lisander.


Vio. Look to the Dukes standing Madam.


Dut. So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.


Lis. Thus clouded as you see for your love, my soul speaks in my tongue; I
appointed this match at Bowls a purpose to acquaint you with it.


Vio. Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here Is one would steal a piece of flesh to night.

Lis. Dear Madam.


Vio. No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can express
with your tongue, and as far as my mothers jealousy would give me leave,
answered it with kind looks: your bias stands wrong mother.


Dut. Why? it stands toward Zelmanes.


Vio. Has it stood so long?


Dut. All the game through.


Vio. Then all your game's bowld wrong: furnish you with necessaries befitting
an escape, and my will shall be as ready to take wing as yours: put in a cast
now mother, or the game is gone indeed.


Dut. Whose is the throw?


Vio. Ours, till the last bowl came;
But that has wonn't em clear, both cast and game.

Lis. Our winnings, come, a kiss and bate the rest.


Dut. What, do you kiss in eanest or in jest?


Viol. In earnest in good truth.


Duk. Troth kindly sed,
Take heed you kiss not out your Mayden-head.

Viol. In jest?


Duk. In earnest.


Viol. It Is the fashion,
Much in request among our nation.

Duk. To kiss away their Maiden-heads?


Viol. Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures nere are fairly drawn,
Until the Maidenhead be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers sed,
And so will daughters do when mams be dead.

Duke. What pawn their Maydenheads?


Viol. Yes, and lose em too.


Dut. And you'^ maintain that fashion?


Vio. Signeor Noe.

Music of bells, etc.
Duk. Lay by this homebred mirth, and prepare your ears to entertain
strangers.


Viol. Strangers? why father strangers are as welcome to me, as mine own
Countrymen, if they bring good manners and civil humanity in their company;
otherwise, they are like foul weather, come before they be sent for.


Enter Dametas, Manasses, Iulio, Amyntas. Viol. Dametas? nay then we shall have
news enough, for he never comes into the presence, but he brings a whole sack
full of lies, of news I should say.


Duk. Welcome Dametas: what officious fellow is that?


Dam. A pure well willer of your Majesty's, and a follower of mine.


Vio. O it is Manasses, and he could make arms as well as he ma^res legs, he
would grow in great request for Heraldry: What Is your news?


Manas. These Lacedaemonians, subjects to your Majesty, having a message to
deliver to your Majesty's instruments of hearing, commonly eclip'd ears.


Vio. How, has any one here clipped ears?


Manas. Sweet Feminine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with the Sissars
of attention, as I say, these Lacedaemonians have chosen me their tongue.


Vio. Of a long tongue thou speak very little.


Man. That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.


Duk What grievances oppress them? briefly speak.


Amin. Merchandise (my Liege) through the avarice of purchasing Officers, is
wrackt with such unmercifull impost, that the very name of Traffic grows
odious even to the professor.


Iulio Towns so oppressed for want of wonted and natural liberty, as that the
native Inhabitanus feeme Slaves, and the Forreiners free Denizens.


Amin. Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser can be said to be
placed in his office, he is again by his covetous Patron displaced.


Iulio. Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great men's followers, not
only not punished, but in a manner countenanced and applauded.


Amin. Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole body of the
Commonwealth runs clean against the bias of true and pristine government.


Iulio. And your honorable Brother, like a ship tossed upon the violent billows
of this insurrection, by us entreats your Majesty's Letters of speedy
reformation, for fear the whole Kingdom suffer inevitable shipwreck.


Duk. Which after short deliberation with our Council, your self shall
return. Dametas reward their travels with two hundred Crowns: in the mean
time, let them taste the best entertainment of our Court.

Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Dukes frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewarded.

Auri. Manasses, see the fellows entertained; I must attend of the Duke.


Man. Boy, see the fellows entertained; I must wait of my Lord.


Boy. Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.


Ami. So, here is Petitioners attendance right; good words, and short Commons:
But it is not their entertainment we come for. I made a simple shift to get
entertainment into the Court.


Iuli. Well Cupid, pray for our lives, for and we were gone, I know not where
thou would have two such statesmen again.


Ami. His Commonwealth could not stand without us; and that his Mother knows
well enough: and he sends no better success then we had at our hunting, he
looses a friend of me.


Iuli. 'Twill not sink in my thought yet, but that old musty slave Dametas
played the slave with us.


Ami. Would I could prove it once: but since we are again admitted our
Realm, shall we be idle? somewhat we will do, though they will give us but small
thanks for our labor.


Iuli. The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved, but we will
change a thrust or two with his intent for'em.


Ami. T'vvould put the poor Wenches out of conceit with themselves, and there
should not be some contending for them.


^. We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim (...).


^. We are in faith: Invention could not weaue, (...), Suspicion to deceive.

Exeunt.
Enter Lisander and Demetrius. ^. Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a
Lovers (...) must be ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base (...)
where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of (...), and
overpeere all hindrances:

The Ladies themselves are willing.


Lis. Ready to embarke upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.


Demet. Let me alone to work it then* But here comes my Boy.

Enter Page.
Boy. 'Twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and
war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.


Lisan. I am of thy belief in that Boy.


Boy. Would my Lord were so too sir.


Them. Suppose I were Sir, what then?


Boy. I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I believe you would
make me your heir.


Them. Is that part of your belief?


Boy. A principal point sir.


Them. Renounce it then, for I believe you will never be saved by it.


Boy. I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and
some Ladies, were never of Gods making.


Lis. Of whose then, wagge?


Boy. I Will tell you: the Minters coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes
Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.


Them. And what do Ladies?


Boy. They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many
Gentlemen.


Lisa. Ladies are good worke-women too, then?


Boy. Far better then any Tailor: they will make you an end of a suite,
especially a Court suite, when all the Tailors in a Country know not how to
set a stitch in it*


Them. I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.


Boy. I had no faith, should I say you were not?


Lisa. Well, what a Knave?


Boy. In a Knaves belief sir.


Them. Because in yours?


Boy. Do you say it, and i will swear it, my Lord.


Them. No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.


Boy. That confirms them to be good sir.


Them. Your reason for that, sir?


Boy. Because travelers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.


Them. Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this highway of circumstance; I sent you
for Manasses.


Boy. The learned Scribe attends you.


Enter Manasses. Them. Will you fall off sir?


Boy. Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.

Exit.
Lisa. Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must
borrow --


Man. Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security
and pawnes.


Lisa. It Is not money ( Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.


Man. Good counsel is worth good money Madam.


Lisa. Thou shall be well considered; there is twenty Crowns in earnest.


Man. Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if
you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest,
if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and
put me in trust to execute it.


Lisa. Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madam
Mopsa, are man and wife.


Man. Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have
a will to be Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady has not wit to be a
wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I do in this?


Lisa. Overy much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation,
the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing
that you have ^ane orders.


Man. That I have: I have taken order for the making away of a hundred
Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these
two beagles, Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of
love, you would have me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.


Iul. We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim deceiues not.


Amin. We are in faith: Invention could not weaue,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.
Exeunt.
Enter Lisander and Demetrius. Demet. Come, pass off this grovelling imitation;
a Lovers thoughts must be ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base
air where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount the clear sky of Invention,
and overpeere all hindrances:

The Ladies themselves are willing.


Lis. Ready to embarke upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.


Demet. Let me alone to work it then, But here comes my Boy.

Enter Page.
Boy. 'Twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and
war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.


Lisan. I am of thy belief in that Boy.


Boy. Would my Lord were so too sir.


Them. Suppose I were Sir, what then?


Boy. I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I believe you would
make me your heir.


Them. Is that part of your belief?


Boy. A principal point sir.


Them. Renounce it then, for I believe you will never be saved by it.


Boy. I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and
some Ladies, were never of Gods making.


Lis. Of whose then, wagge?


Boy. I Will tell you: the Minters coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes
Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.


Them. And what do Ladies?


Boy. They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many
Gentlemen.


Lisa. Ladies are good worke-women too, then?


Boy. Far better then any Tailor: they will make you an end of a suite,
especially a Court suite, when all the Tailors in a Country know not how to
set a stitch in it.


Them. I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.


Boy. I had no faith, should I say you were not?


Lisa. Well, what a Knave?


Boy. In a Knaves belief sir.


Them. Because in yours?


Boy. Do you say it, and i will swear it, my Lord.


Them. No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.


Boy. That confirms them to be good sir.


Them. Your reason for that, sir?


Boy. Because travelers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.


Them. Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this highway of circumstance; I sent you
for Manasses.


Boy. The learned Scribe attends you.


Enter Manasses. Them. Will you fall off sir?


Boy. Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking. Exit.


Lisa. Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must
borrow --


Man. Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security
and pawnes.


Lisa. It Is not money ( Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.


Man. Good counsel is worth good money Madam.


Lisa. Thou shall be well considered; there is twenty Crowns in earnest.


Man. Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if
you be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest,
if your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and
put me in trust to execute it.


Lisa. Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madam
Mopsa, are man and wife.


Man. Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have
a will to be Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady has not wit to be a
wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I do in this?


Lisa. O very much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation,
the chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing
that you have ^ane orders.


Man. That I have: I have taken order for the making away of a hundred
Maidenheads in my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these
two beagles, Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of
love, you would have me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.


Lis. You are in the right.


Man. And you in the wrong, i will keep your jest, but in any case take back
again your earnest: i will not purchase my Lords displeasure with your gold.


Lis. Thy Lord shall never know it.


Man. Oh sir! though my M^hath but bad eyes, he has exceeding long ears: and
though a Forrayner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wish any
to jest with a Courtiers steeld Sword; it is seldom drawn but it draws blood.


Lis. Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance thee: be not
an Ass, make use of thy time: thy masters service is no heritage; the world
knows he gets under the Duke, thou art a fool, and thou will loose under
him: there is a hundred Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain
courtesy with aleagence for a bribe


Man. Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give me a Kingdom?


Lis. What then?


Man. I should have more ground then half the Kings in Christendom: here is my
hand, i will do it: my M. is my M. and I love him; but my gold's my God, and I
honor it: i will do it; the time and place?


Lis. Soon in the evening at Adonis Chapel. Art resolute?


Man. As your Adamant: think you 'twas fear made me keep out? no it was hope
of these flattering sweet lipt d^abs. I fear to marry my Ladies daughter? no
nor to go to bed with her neither, Why, I have counterfeited his hand and
seal. He has been content with me, to come nearer to him, at his
entertainment of the last Ambassador, when he was heat with drinking of
healths. As I led him to his Chamber, I nimd^his Chain, and drew his Purse,
and next morning persuaded him he lo^t it in the great Chamber at the Revels.
He puts me in trust with his whole estate: he buys Manners, I purchase Farms:
he builds houses, I pluck down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the
Commons: he beggars the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.


Lis. These are notable knavish courses. What breeding have had?


Max. Very good breeding sir: My great Grandfather was a Rat-catcher, my
Grandsier a Hangman, my father a Promooter, and my self an Informer.


Lisa. Thou were a knave by inheritance.


Man. And by education too: but bawdy Informations growing stale, I gave up my
cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit for a Gown, and of Manasses a
penurious Informer, I turned Copy, and became Manasses, a most precise and
illiterate expositor.


Them. Were you a Reader then?


Man. And a Writer too Bullie, I set some of my Parishioners wives such
coppies, as their husbands might cast their caps at it, but could never come
near.


Lis. But and you used such a high and elevate style, your auditories low and
humble understandings should never crall over't.


Man. Tush, I could fashion the body of my discourse fit to the ear of my
auditory: for to cast Eloquence amongst a company of Stinkards, is all one as
if a man should scatter pearl amongst the hoggish animals ecliped Swine: no, I
had paraphrasticall admonitions of all sorts; Some against covetous Landlords,
and that would I squirt amongst beggarly Tennants; Some against Usurers, and
that would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst prodigal Bankroutes; Some
against the pride of the Court, and that honies the ear of the Citizen; Some
against the fraud of the city, and that is cake and cheese to the Country; Some
against Protestants, and that plumps the lasy Catholic; against Papist and
Protestant, and that fattens the ranke-witted Puritan; against Papist, Puritan,
and Protestant, and that tickles the ear of the luxurious Athiest.


Lis. Why you never light upon any Athiests, do you?


Man. Oh very many.


Lis. In the country perhaps, and the out-skirts of the City.


Man. In the very bosom of the City, and by your leave, here and there one in
the Court too: But we fit em all; for indeed we wandering Lights have (as
other Tradesmen have) Commodities of all sorts and prices.


Lis. How do they come by them?


Man. As many do by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke be aware of em.
Some buy em at Booke-sellers stalls, but the best they bespeake of Poets.


Lis. Me thinks Poets of all men should not edify, they are so envious.


Man. One to another, to nobody else: a Proud Poet is for all the world like a
Puncke in request, covetous of many Clients, when she has more then she can
handsomely play off: You shall have some Poet ( Apolloes Vicar especially)
write you a Comicall, Pastoral, Tragical, Musical history in Prose, will
make the Auditors eyes run a water like so many water-spouts; I had one of
them my self, and your ears be in case, I Will give you a taste on it; his
argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost sheep, and thus it is.


Lis. Prithee be brief.


Man. Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake the best men in the
parish, for commonly they sleep the beginning, because they love not division:
but to the lost Sheep. Beloved, you must imagine this Sheep was a Sheep, a
lost Sheep, a Sheep out a the way; but my dear Flock and loving Sheep,
whom like a careful Shepherd I have gathered together, with the whistle or
pipe, as it were of mine Eloquence, into this Fold of peaceful Community, do
not you stray, do not you fly out, do not you wander, do not you loose your
selves; but like kind Sheep and valiant Rams, I speak to you the better part
and head of my Flock: As I say, you shall see the valiant Rams turn all
their horns together, and oppose themselves against the Wolf, the hungry
Wolf, the greedy Wolf, the Lambes-devouring Wolf, the Wolf of all Wolfes,
to defend their Eawes and young ones. Durst you lay all your heads together,
and with the horns of your Manhood defend your Families, your own Wives, and
your neighbors children: Was not this stinging geere?


Lis. A good Sheepish admonition.


Man. The fitter for my audience; while you live have a care to fit your
audience.


Lisan. Thou speak like a Christian, prithee what Religion art of?


Man. How many soever I make use of, I Will answer with Piavano Orlotto the
Italian; I profess the Dukes only.


Them. What Is his reason for that?


Man. A very sound reason: for says he, I came raw into the world, and I
would not willingly go roasted out: so close up the stomach of your discourse
with that dry answer, and every man about his business.


Lis. You Will be mindful of tomorrow night?


Man. As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the Quarter-day.


Them. Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace
of my brain; and I must fashion it instantly, for fear it burst with heat.
Give my conceit way, for here comes one must help to proportion it.

Exit Lisan.
Enter Dametas. Dam. How now Demetrius, what wind has blown up this storm of
melancholy? thy countenance was not wont to be thus cloudy; Whence proceeds
this sudden alteration?


Them. From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-stard nativitie should
continue thus opposite.


Dam. Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what is the matter? speak.


Them. I Will acquaint your Honor: I hope no other ear overheares us. Under
Dianaes Oak I found an inscription upon a stone, which told me, that wealthy
Aristomones sometimes brought into Arcadia, had there under hid a massy sum
of treasure.


Dam. Under Dianaes Oak? Dorus shall have my daughter Mopsa: no more words
on it, and thou love me Dorus: smother thy golden hopes a day or two; thou
shall have Mopsa, but ^le have all the Gold, then marry my daughter to some
great man, though he be poor, it is the fashion: I Will be nobly allied what ere
it cost me: shall be my Son in law Dorus. have an eye to the Princess, fall
close to my daughter Mopsa,

Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, do, kiss her; thou shall pay sweetly for it:
I can gull you, know what fair words can do,
I Am an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.
Exit.
Them. So, so; how violently he devoures his bane, and steals himself into
the order of Gullerie: me thinks I see how betwixt hope and fear he sweats in
his practice, and like a foolish dreamer, casts how to lay out his wealth
before it comes in* So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as the
Devil would ha^t, here she comes.


Enter* Miso. Miso. Dorus, how now Dorus? What time a day is it with you?


Dor. What time a day soever it be with me, it is sleeping time with my Lord, I
am sure of that.


Mis. Sleeping time Dorus, what do thou mean by that?


Dor. Nay nothing, he is troubled with a kind of malady called Insurrectio
carnis.


Miso. How, a dish of Crevices? nay and that be the worst, good enough; I am
glad a falls to Fish, for he was given to Flesh a late too too bad.


Dor. Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.


Mis. I hold my Ladyship, to some stru^et.


Dor. Life a jealousy, I think you are a witch, it was so indeed.


Mis. Nay I thought as much; he was wont to kiss me, and do all ^indnesse a
man could do, till he came to the Court, and now he will not lie with me for
sooth, and why? it is the Court fashion: he will not love me, and why? it is the
Court fashion: I must not come near him at his downe-^ing, nor his up-rising,
etc. And this be the Court fashion, would I were an honest woman of the
Country again, be Courtiers who list: I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in tears, he
has not dealt by me as a husband should do.


Dor. It Is nothing to me, I cannot do withal Madam, would I could.


Mis. Yes marry may thou Dorus; thou may, and shall do withal too and
thou will: but as thou look to enjoy my daughter Mopsa, acquaint me with the
old Foxes starting hole.


Dor. That Is past my cunning, the old Fox has more holes then one to hide's
head in: But not to go long about the bush with you.


Mis. No good Dorus, I do not love a man should go long about my Bush: what
is she for a woman?


Dor. I know not what she is for a wom^n, marry I fear she is little better
then a whore for your husband; hark in your ear, she is Manasses wife.


Mis. Manasses wife? marry fire master gunner, a Puritan turned Punke: Gods my
precious. I Will slit her nose, as I am a Lady will I; is she the party you wot on?


Dor. Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.


Mis. I Will spoil their sport, saddle my Mule there, have an eye to the
Princess; shaltha my daughter, an't be but to spite him withal, faith Fox I Will
ha you out of your hole, or I Will fire you out.


Dor. Nay that will do no good, but for your own good Madam, take heed you
do not scold.


Mis. Why, may not a Lady scold Dorus?


Dor. Scold? O in no case, twill mar a Ladies beauty clean, and make her
look as hard-favoured as any ordinary woman.


Mis. Godamercy for that Dorus, I Will not lose my beauty for twenty on em: saddle
my Mule, bring me my chopping-knife, I Will geld the lecherous Goat, and mince
his Trull as small as herbs to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is it?


Dor. No this is tolerable.


Mis. Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray God her feeling
be good, for as I am a Lady, I Will not leave her an eye to see withal, and yet I
will not scold neither.

Exit.
Dor. Oh take heed of that at any hand. So, so, so; now it begins to quicken,
me thinks I see already how she runs atilt at the wenches eyes, calls the
Maid Bawd, the woman whore, and her husband Lecher; and when all comes to all,
like an Irish wolf, she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and her
Ass to their wild-goose chase, now to my sweetheart Mopsa, for she is all the
blocke's last in my eye to stumble on; and God bless my wits, for the fool
haunts me.


Enter Mopsa. Mop. Dorus, where is my Father Dorus?


Dor. Your father? O my dear Mopsa.


Mop. Nay now you flowt me.


Dor. Flout you? Oh the fair heavens! but this it is for a man to cast away
himself in violence of passion, and extremity of sighs, on a piece of beauty
that cares not for him, but it is the tricks of you all.


Mop. Tricks? no as God mend me; and I should not have a husband till I got
him with tricks, I should lead Apes in hell: but faith tell me, do thou
love me Dorus?


Dor. Do I love you quoth ye? It cuts my very heart strings, do I love you?
why it is the only mark my endeavors shoot at.


Mop. If thou do not hit the mark then, thou art a very bungler: but where
is my father?


Dor. Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of purpose, and
appointed Manasses to meet us this evening at Adonis Chapel, in the Amazons
aparrell, to marry us; I think these are signs I love you.


Mop. I but you jest, I doubt you will not marry me.


Dor. Will you meet me there?


Mop. As I am a virgin I will.


Dor. And come with an intent to marry me?


Mop. As I hope to be a wife I will.


Dor. You must take heed you keep our purpose close.


Mop. As I did the loss of my Maydenhead.


Dor. Why have you lost it then?


Mop. Many a dear day ago, yet I told no body on it but my Mother and our
Horse-keeper, and they say I am nere the worse maid for that, and I can keep
my own counsel, as I hope I shall; but will you meet me soon?


Dor. Just in the midway, as Tilters do.


Mop. I Will go before and stay, but do not deceive me, and you do, i will show my
Fathers Horse-keeper all as God mend me.


Dor. So tria sequuntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fools, and by
their absence have won a free access to an escape.

If my Lisanders hope prove like to this,
This night shall crown us Monarchs of our bliss.
Exit.
Enter Duke and Lisander. Duke. No more of these delays sweet Madam, your love
has broken day often with my expectance, I dare give it trust no longer.


Lis. I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to maintain
longer flight, I cast my self down breathless at your loves mercy: yet I
beseech your Majesty, let not your eager desires practice any present violence
upon my yielding chastity: 'twas only possession of my love you had in chase,
which with convenient time and place purchased, I put your grace in full
possession of.


Duk. Although thy breath be never but musical, yet it never raught the
string of true happiness till now: and to approve thy heart sets hand to thy
word, appoint the time.


Lis. Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood is ashamed to consent
to the betraying of my modesty) meet me at Adonis bower, where i will make tender
of subdued chastity to your high Majesty, as my first and most victorious
conqueror.


Duk. By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those joys, thy presence shall bring
to enrich me with, I Will meet thee, and make thee Queen over the most submisse
Captive that ever love took prisoner.


Lis. If you deceive me --


Duk. Not except warm life,
Deceive my veins of their innatiue heat.
Then haste slow time, exchange thy leaden feet
For Hermes wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmanes eyes.
Exit.
Lis. So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmanes answerable to your
expectation.

Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a Iubilee: my teeming hopes
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have christened, opportunity,
Unto whose shrine in honor of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice.
Love grant Demetrius meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.

Enter Iulio and Aminter. Iulio. Only our disguises hold firm, but all other
attempts meet untimely deaths, even in their cradles.


Amin. What and we should acquaint the Ladies with our intents?


Iulio. 'Twould argue a kind of cowardice in our wits, that have such
suspectles admittance to their presence, as this disguise has purchased us,
we should not have that ability of inventure to entangle them in their own
security.


Amin. Well howsoever, we must not dwell long determining for the liberty of
stay with Dametas, who out of his covetous disposition in detayning our reward
allowed us, the eldest day of our licenc't abode at Court, is run out.


Iuli. It Is very true, and for my part, I Will rather go home with a private
repulse, then managing any unlikely attempt, become sufferer under a public
disgrace.


Amin. That Is my very thought, yet that our second arrival be not altogether
empty of employment, lets practice something upon Dametas, and acquaint the
world with his coward baseness; in which, he not only detracts from his
masters bounty, but look how as a Conduit head or master-spring that is
poisoned, does his best, to infect the whole body of the Court, with the
leaprosie of his covetousness.


Iul There Is no action of his begetting can be said to be truly honorable.


Amin. How can they when their Father is a mungrell? the Duke out of his
honorable bounty commanded him to reward our travels with ^00. Crowns: and
now after two months attendance, and enforced delays, In which time an
ordinary Petitioner might have spent the value of the reward, he packs us off
with fifty Crowns, his excuse being that his master has forgot us, and what
he does, is of his own bounty, as if the Moon should brag she gave the world
light, when all the luster she has, comes from the heat of the Sun.


Iul. Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would grow to such
height, as the Dukes authority should have much trouble to prune them.


Ami. To prevent which, his Majesty shall have private note of it, knew we in
whose trust to conduct it.


Iul. It Is an office very few dare undertake, he is so riveted to the Dukes good
opinion.


Ami. Lies there no jarre twixt none of the Nobility and him, what say you of
Zelmane?


Iul. The gallant Amazon: you could not have cast your choice fitter, for her
honorable mind maintains deadly feud against his base proceedings; and here
she comes, attended by Dameta's servant, lets wait on opportunity.


Enter Lisander and Demetrius. Them. Lisander.


Lis. Demetrius.


Iul. Lisander and Demetrius? stand close, of my life we are come to the birth
of some notable knavery.


Ami. How blows the winds of our hopes?


Lisan. Fair to the point of our expectation, I have made away the Duke and
the Duchess.


Them. How made away them? poisoned them?


Lis. With a confection of love, which I have so tempred with fair promises,
as their minds are in loves haven already, Videlicet in Adonis bower, where
this evening I have given them my word to meet them; but I have so cast it,
that Manasses shall meet them in my steed.


Them. 'Twill be a rare Scene of mirth, to hear what costly discourse they will
bestow upon the fool in thy outside.


Iulio. Do you hear that?


Amin. Yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.


Lis. I have cleard the way to Violetta, but what order have thou ^ane with thy
burbolts, Dametas, Miso, and amorous Mopsa?


Them. Shot them away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it, that in the
end they shall all meet at Adonis Chapel.


Lisan. This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.


Iulio. My hopes should want of their will, and it do not --


Lisan. Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how shall we convey
our loves out of the Island?


Them. I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy this time
has cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Kalander and Philanax,
as we may pass without suspicion.


Lisan. But how for transportation.


Them. I am furnished of that too, you remember the two Lacedemon intelligencers.


Amin. Now what of us?


Iul. Hold my life, we shall be put in this Scene of Gullery.


Lisan. Oh in any case.


Them. For the love of Cupid do, inquiry is past, lets take our entrance, and
pass over the stage like mutes, to furnish out a show.


Lisan. And see occasion like a kind wench presents them in the very instant,
my honest friend welcome, have you not your dispatch with a letter to Lacedemon.


Ami. Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your Ladyship, and
know what service your honor will command.


Lisan. You have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit business of much
import unto your trust, and to prevent much circumstances take my word, your
are not ignorant of the Kings general challenge.


Iul. About his daughters.


Lis. You understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind, which is to
convey the two Ladies, whom we in these disguises have won to Lacedemon.


Ami. Were we but confirmed of your estates.


Lis. We Will give you sufficient assurance of that, and the Princesses
themselves shall confirm it.


Iulio. We crave no better Madam, but shall we not have your honors company?


Lis. No: having brought them aboard, we will make return to the Duke, to let
him understand we stole not our prizes but won them manfully at the point of
wit.


Ami. A noble resolution.


Iulio. His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest the more
applausible, where shall we receive the Ladies?


De^^. Be that our care, but on your lives be heedfull of their* safeties.


Ami. More then of our own my Lord.


Them. Enough, whilst you attend we will to the Duke, and play all Guls or none.


Iul. All Guls indeed since you had follies whip,
No Guls, to all Guls, fools love fellowship.
Exeunt.
Enter Miso and Mopsa. Miso. Look well to mine Ass there, Lord how I sweat
with anger; this sames the house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me count my
hurts, and see how I shall be revenged: it shall be so, i will have them both
carted, and Manasses shall go before like a whif^er, and make way with his
horns: where be these whores? open the door, where be these panders? O that
I were not a Lady, I could scold like a butter-vvhore.

Enter Wife.
Wi. Whose there a Gods name? Lord for his mercy is the woman mad?


Miso. Yes I thank ye fo^'t* horn mad, where is your companion, where is the
old leacherous Goat my husband? open the door I say.


Wife. Jesus for thy mercy sake, Madam what do you want?


Mis. What do I want? the chief implement a woman should have; I want that
as a woman cannot be without, I mean my husband I want.


Wife. Your husband? I savv him not as I am an honest woman.


Mis. Not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arrant whore
you did, you must have your Crevishes with a pox, cannot City Maunchet and
fresh God serve your turn, but you must have Court Cake-bread and Crevishes
with a vengeance? but come give me my husband, or I Will have him ou^ of the
flesh on thee, and yet I will not scold neither.


Wife. Pray madam have patience: what should your husband do here?


Mis. That which he should do at home with his wife, and he were worth his
ears.


Wife. Lady I protect I do not know him.


Mis. Not know him? thou lie in every ve^e in the heart, thou lie thou
know him, and as Adam knew Eve thou know him, he has been as in ward
with thee, as ever he was with me, he has, by his own confession he has, and
thou deniest it, thou lie in thy throat like a Puritanicall whore as thou
art, O that I were a butter who^e for an hour I might scold a little.


Wife. Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you.


Mis. Men bring tales to me? I de^ie thee in thy guts, I defy thee. men bring
tales to me? thou take me to be one of thine own Church do? they are no
honest men that bring tales to thee and have wives of their own, and my husbands
one of them, go thy ways now.


Wife. I beseech you Madam do but hear me.


Mis. Hear thee? I have heard too much of thee, too too much, too much,
where is my husband? bring forth my husband, i will teach him to put a difference
betwixt Joan and my Lady I hold him ten pound on it, and yet I will not scold
neither, and I had been an old hag past teaming, as his whore is a puritan, it
had bin somewhat, but being a woman of Gods making, and a Lady of his own, and
wearing mine own hair which is much in a Lady of my standing I can tell you,
to use me thus, flesh and blood cannot endure it, let me come in, open the
door let me come in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a Lady that
I might scold a little.

Exeunt.
Enter Kalander and Philanax, Demetriu's Boy. Boy. So, so, so, take your
places, for this same bald pated oak is the stage, where ye shall see the
part of a doting fool performed by an old man and a young wench.


Kal. Who worshipful Dametas?


Boy. The same man.


Phil. Has he no fellow Acters in his most lamentable, comicall, historical,
tragical, musical, pasto^a'l?


Boy. None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself, marry then he
has Signior Mattocke, a very sharp satyricall humorist, and Mounsier le spade,
but he goes somewhat more bluntly to his business, yet heel serve for mutes,
and as good as the best to furnish out the stage.


Kal. But dares Dorus being but Dametas servant so abuse his mad master thus
grossly.


Boy. O Lord Sir, there have been serving men have done their Masters far
greater abuse, yet had their wives conceald it, their ears should never have
been acquainted with it.


Phi. Is that a fashion in request?


Boy. Altogether i will assure you, but obedience, Gentlemen the Scene begins.


Enter Dametas, with mattocke and spade. Kal. Pray God it be good he stays so
long, Ridiculous enough, and good enough.


Dam. So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.


Ka. What Countryman is his Ass, he speaks so familiarly to him?


Boy. A'th City breed, marry he picks up his living ath burs and nettles that
grow about the Court gate.


Dam. Be in readiness good mattocke, play thy part sweet spade, let me see;
Dianaes oak? I held Dianaes oak divine, true pure gold, honest Dorus,
fortunate Dametas.


Kal. An excellent comoedian, what life he puts into his part.


Dam. So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very gravel
savours of treasure, this same's the bedchamber of my Lady Pecu^ia, and see,
see some of her golden hairs, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold,
honest Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, softly, softly, not too fast, let me not
devour my content too greedily, lest like a cormorant I take a surfeit on it.


Phil. Oh take heed of that master in any case.


Dam. Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by computation
have some three millions of 'em, ^ some three or four mi^lions, how shall I
employ them to make the most profit of them


Phil. That would be known indeed.


Dam. I Will put out one million to use, after the rate of seven score to the
hundredth: and yet I wont, no fie, for then you will have my humor brought ath
stage for a usurer; to prevent with scandalous report, i will put it into my
Scribe-majors hand, and he shall dea^e for me.


Kal. There Is a simple cloak* to cover his villainy.


Phil. It Is a very short one: and passing sl^te to hide his knavery.


Boy. It cannot choose but be seen through.


Dam. An other million i will lay to beslow in Offices. I will have wealth, or i will
rake it out ath kennels else, chimnies have smoakt for it already, and now i will
deal upon sea-cole and salt, now, now, now, it comes, sweet gold, honest
Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how, how shall I adore thee? O let me
do the homage of my knees: now, now, for the tongue of a Poet, though I hate
poetry worse then any of the seven deadly sins, I could wish my self a Poet
for some hour, to write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistress; and see
he very bed wherein her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice happy
Dametas, now like an over joyd lover, let me open the sheets of my heavenly
mistress with reverence, so with humble reverence, and like a blushing lover
that puts out the light ere he presumes to touch the bed of his love, so let me
darken the candles of my body, mine eyes, and first bless my hands with
touching, next enrich mine ears with hearing, and lastly make happy my eyes
with seeing, and let them convey the joy down into the bosom of my thoughts
by degrees, softly by degrees.


Phi. Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation?


Dam. Be not offended sweet mi^tresse that I presume to touch.


Phil. A fools head of your own.


Kal. Has a been at any cost of all this invocate for a coxcombe and a bell.


Phil. Beshrow my judgment but he deserves it.


Boy. And his desert were nere so much, he could but bear away the bell, and
so you say he does.


Dam. A coxcombe and a bell, oh indignity: damnable oak, vile and evil
accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas; Diana I tell thee thou art no honest
goddess to use a Gentleman thus. What Is here a writing, your help good
spectacles, lend me your help good spectacles, some comfortable news good
spectacles:

Who has his hire, has well his labors placed,
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou have.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall loose his wits and likely find himself.
Then think thy pains revvarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues,
Adonis bovver shall tell thee nevves,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry; But though I can do them
no* further disgrace, my fatal curse, A vvronged gentleman's fatal curse
dvvell ever upon them: Diana here me, and let my words find gracious
acceptance.


Kal. Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a stone upon you.


Dam. Rancor, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all poetastors.
May their intents though pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted falte and capital Trespasses,
O may their lines and labored industry,
Though worthy of Apollo's plaudite,
The cleerest thought in loyalty excelling,
Be by some Dor presented for libelling;
When they have writ a Scene, in which their brains
Have dropped their dearest sweets, and their swollen veins
Emptied the Conduit of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In stead of Plaudities, their chiefest blisses,
Let their deserts be crowned with mewes and hisses:
Behind each post, and at the Gallery corners,
Sit empty gulls, slight fools, and false Informers;
Let some slye Fox out of discretions embers,
Term them the Lands unnecessary members;
And like the Dear, when they have spent their breath
To make Kings sport, let them be torn to death,
Even by their friends; 'twould set my thoughts a twanging,
Might I but ^e one of them go to hanging.

1 Cap. A passing strange curse, and no question he has traveled far for
some of the times.


2 Cap. He must travel further that finds any reason in it.


1 Cap. No matter for reason, there is rhyme enough if that be good.


2 Cap. Some of it is no better then it should be, or my judgment deceives me.


1 Cap. Sure he had some reason to make this rhyme, and a man could pick it
out.


2 Cap. Rather then I Will be counted inquisitive, mine ears shall content
themselves with the rimes only, and leave the reason to the scanning of Poets,
whom it more nearly concerns.


1 Cap. But where is the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth, shrunk
in the wetting?


2 Cap. I were a rare jest now, if whilst the Boy keeps us here in expectation
of Dametas gullery, his Master has made an escape with the Dukes daughters.


1 Cap. That, or some knavery else upon my life: I had the boy in shrewd
suspicion at the first.


2 Cap. And this his sudden and stolen departure confirms it current.


1 Cap. Then we are sped, for in suspicions face
I see some subtle stratagem in chase.

Enter Miso and Manasses wife. Wife. Will your Ladyship believe me now? nay and
I say it your worship may swear't, though I have but a (poor as to say) hole of
mine own, I hope the spirits have more denomination over me, then to make it
a common Slaughterhouse of carnallity, where every Jack may command flesh for
his money.


Mis. No more words sweet woman, I confess I was in the wrong, this is not
the hole the Fox hides his head in, and therefore for the love of woman-hood
conceal mine errors; for howsoever I complained, it is thy forehead aches, thy
temples have the terrible blow as they say, thy husband is a bad man.


Wife. My husband?


Mis. I, I, good woman, thy husband; he is, as I say, a fleshly member, and I
fear he has overcome the foolish thing my daughter.


Wife. Your daughter? I Will slit her nose by this light, and she were ten Ladies,
it was not for nothing my husband said he should meet her this Evening at
Adonis Chapel: but and I come to the Godspeed on it, I Will tell em on it soundly.


Mis. I do good woman, tell em on it and spare not, but in any case do not
scold.


Wife. Why, may not a Gentlewoman scold in a good case?


Mis. I know not what a Gentlewoman may do in a good case, but a Lady must not
in any case.


Wife. Though I may not scold, I may tell em roundly on it I hope.


Mis. That you may do law.


Wife. And I Will not be mealely mouthed I warrant em: will you bear me company
to the Chapel Madam?


Mis. With all my heart Mistress: What Dorus has given me, I Will give my friend,
No fool to company.

Exeunt.
ACTVS V. SCENA I.
Enter the King at Adonis Bower. King. FArewell bright Sun, thou lightner of
all eyes,
Thou fall'st to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub wear trammells of thy hair,
But these are wiers for none but Kings to wear,
And my rude tongue, striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad Arts-man, does disgrace her worth:
But here is the place, upon this Crystal stream,
Where Citharea did unyoake her teame
Of silver Doves to interchange a kiss
With young Adonis, shall I meet my bliss?
The gentle minutes crowned with crystal flowers,
Losing their youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight: The bashful Moon,
That since her dalliance with Endymion
Durst never walk by day, is under sail,
In stead of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding Brook and every bushy tree,
Being tipped with silver, wear her livery;
And the dim night, to grace our amorous wars,
Has stuck nine Spheres full of immortal stars,
In stead of pearls; the way on which she treads
Is strewn with crystal deaw and silver beads: Enter Duchess.
She comes, her feet make music with the ground,
And the chaste air is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell, my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasures breast, her jealous eye
Envies the heaven of my felicity.

Dut. Zelmane, or my husband? life, or hate?


King. What makes old Autumn out a bed so late?
That snow should go a wooing to the Sun,
When one warm kiss works her confusion!

Dut. I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husbands thoughts, seeing my Love
Elect this walk, has brought him after him.

King. She dogs her sure, and she to shake her off
Has taken some other walk, I Will place mine care
In distance of her will.

Dut. Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath,
'Twould be a second Iubile of mirth.

Duk. Here comes my Love.

Enter Manasses like Lisander.
Dut. Your Love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My Sun appears.

Duk. Fie, your love speaks too loud,
Your Sunne's eclipsed, you doat upon a cloud.

Dut. See how his arms, like precious Phoenix wings, Spread to embrace me.


Duk. Now the Cuckoo sings;
Those amorous arms do make a golden space
To hug a Duke.

Dut. But I Will fill up the place.


Duk. Those fingers tipped with curious Porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchless imag'ry,
Like amorcus twins all of one mother ^urst,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.

Dut. Should touch me first; their strife is undertook,
To twine a young Bay, not a stooping Oak.

Duk. Young Bay? stale jest, that a dry saplesse rind
Should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind:
Were she but gone now.

Dut. Were the Duke away,
My hopes had got the better of the day.

Man. This is Adonis Chapel, I wonder they come not; though I bear but a
little learning about me, and a few good clothes, I would not wish em to make
Balams Ass of me: for though many fools take no felicity but in wearing good
clothes (though they be none of their own) I have a further reach in me.


Duk. I could ban my stars.


Dut. (...) my fate.


Duk. That cross me thus.


Dut. Makes me unfortunate.


Duk. Alas good Lady, how her pretty feet
Labor to find me.
Such black events.
Darken her self.
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.

Dut. That my hopes should meet


Duk. O would the friendly night


Dut. Would the Moon lose her light,


Duk. But night is purblind,
To make a Duke a slave.

Dut. To make e Duchess
Wrestle with amorous passions.

Duk. Life a spleen,
Could my rough breath like a temptstuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see,
Or use those eyes it has to pleasure me.

Dut. Or use those eyes it has to pleasure me?


Man. Who would have thought the cold had been so good a musician? how it
plays upon my chaps? and makes my teeth skip up and down my mouth like a
company of virginal Iacks, but I find small music in it, and Mopsa should
come now I could do her little good, yet and she were here, she and I would
have about at cob-nut or at chery-pit, or some what to keep our selves from
idleness, though she be but a fool, the bable's good enough to make sport
withal in the dark, and that very word has started her.

Enter Mopsa.
Mop. Whose there Manasses?


Man. Yes Mopsa.


Mop. Plain Mopsa, I might be Madam Mopsa in your mouth, goodman -- where is
Dorus?


Man. Why? because he will not be said to make too much haste to a bad
bargain, he is not come yet.


Mop. Not come? a peascod on him, but all is one, I thought at first he would
make but a fool on me.


Man. Would you have him mend Gods workmanship?


Mop. But choose him, since he has buld me with an vrchin, i will go fetch Raph
our Horse-keeper; let him that got the calfe keep the cow in a knaves name and
he will, have you your book here?


Man. No matter wench, I can do it well enough without book.


Mop. Nay and ye can do it well enough your self, I care for neither of them
both, but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says my mother, a thing
once well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and down.


Dut. Whose with my Lord the Duke? it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.

Duk. It Is not the Duchess sure, no it is amarous Jove,
That seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her; Jove if there be
A powerful Phoebus God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphnes rape,
To win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as your selves have worn, that when your same
Is sung by Poets, they may quote my name.

Dut. Sure it is my daughter.


Duk. Daughter? how her eye
Cut out new forms, new shapes of jealousy?

Dut. As sure as death it is she, for see they stand
Like amarous twins, in twisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
I Will not endure't, impatience grow strong,
And though a Prince, tell him he does thee wrong.

Duk. Do, prithee do, this sweetens all the rest,
But here would be the elixar of the jest,
If whilst we keep each other at a bay,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.

Enter Dametas. Dam. Villainous poetry, unchristian-like poetry, I am cozend of
my gold by poetry, robbed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool by
poetry, villainous Oak, accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas: whose there my
daughter and with Zelmane? a wel-willer to Dorus, a favorite to poetry, and
therefore enemy to Dametas, come hither Mopsa, a thy fathers blessing come not
near her: what Mopsa.


Mop. Yes, whose there? Dorus.


Dam. Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, did not see Hippolita?


Mop. No by my troth not. Did ye not see Dorus?


Dam. Pox of Dorus, I am undone Madam and thou telft me not of Hippolita.


Mop. Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tell me news of Dorus.


Dam. I had rather see ten Dorusses hanged, then loose Hippolita.


Mop. I had rather see ten fathers damned, then loose my sweet Dorus.


Dam. I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.


Mop. I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.


Dut. What Is here? I shall run mad for Hippolita.


Duk. And I shall run frantic and I find not Doras, I hold my life we have
some Comoedy in hand, we shall have a full Scene, for here comes more Actors.


Enter Miso and Manasses Wife. Wife. As sure as I am a sinner to God Madam,
that sames he.


Miso. What with a brace of wenches, in faith old brocke, have I ^^ne you in the
manner, is this the fruits of your lying alone, is this your Court custom with
a wannion? lend me thy knife, though I had neither house nor land to give em,
I Will bestow a whores mark betwixt you, and yet I will not scold neither.


Mop. What a goodyer aile you mother, are you frampall, know you not your own
daughter?


Miso. Mopsa? O insufferable wrong, make thine own natural child thy Bawd?


Duk. Here Is an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by.


Miso. What Mistress Amazon? ha you such a cocking spirit, honest women cannot
keep their husbands at home for you? it is not for nothing now I see, that the
Duchess looks yellow on you, but I Will tear that painted whores face of
yours, (by this light) and yet I will not scold neither.


Man. Madam.


Miso. I Will mad you with a vengeance.


The Duke and Duchess st. p both forth and restrain her. Dut. Touch not the
Prince.


Duk. On your allegiance forbear, what means this outrage, cannot our private
walks be priviledg'd from your wild contentions?


Dut. How fares the Prince?


Duk. How cheeres my good Zelmane?


Man. Zelmane? No Gods my judge my ^iege ^ am Manasses, miserable Manasses*
your husbands Scribe-major Madam.


Dut. Manasses?


Duk. A fool.


Mis. My m^n.


Wif. And my dear h^^d^a^ sweet love, what make th^^ here?


Man. May work for the Hangman, and the Duke be not the more merciful.


Duk. There Is some deceit in this: Dametas, where is Hippolita?


Da. I, I, there is some knavery in this: Mopsa, where is Hippolita?


Mi Doubtless ther^ some villainy in this: Mopsa, where is Hipolita?


Mop. There Is no plain dealing in this, Manasses, where is Dorus?


Dut. Answer directly, where is Hippolita?


Dam. Alas Madam I know not, whilst I almost mel^ed my self with digging of
gold in Diana's Oak, I left her in my wives charge.


Mis. And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband and his wife
in the manner, I left Hippolita in my daughters chamber.


Mop. And whilst ^ came to Adonis chapel, to be tossed in my marriage blankets
with Dorus, I left my little dog Pearl picking dazies.


Duk. Who sent you to Diana's Oak to dig gold?


Dut. Who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?


Miso. Dorus.


Duk. Who sent you to Adonis Chapel?


Mop. Dorus.


Duk. And who turned you into this shape?


Man. They that I fear have made Gulls of us all, Zelmane and Dorus.


Duk. We are all simply gulld, and see where the S^n scarce half ready, skips
from his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery.


Enter Lisander and Demetrius. Them. Come where is this lusty wit-master?


Lisa. The Keeper of this Love-lotterie.


Them. This gallant Iuventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the Lake,
displayes against all comers.


Lis. May a couple of plaine-witted Princes have a sight of your prizes?


Them. Where be these Ladies, ha? ha your wits had such a skir mishing, that the
two Maids have lost their heads in the conflict?


Dut. Heads? I and bodies too my Lord, and all at one shot, and which is worse,
our wits are so scattered with the terrible blow, that, to be plain, we are
scarce our own men again.


Them. Then you had some knocking.


Man. So it appears by the story my Lord.


Li. How say you my Lady, what Oule sings out of that Ivy-bush?


Them. Was your wit Knighted in this last action?


Man. I am not such a fool, I love my Lord, I am no Knight, I am Manasses,
they made a plain fool.


Them. The only wear, for the guarded fool is out of request: but faith my
Liege, how did your opposites behave themselves, did they win the wenches
fair at the point?


Duk. At the very push of invention, and went off clear untoucht.


Lis. And could you draw no blood of their wits?


Duk. Not a drop.


Lis. Nor Dametas neither, nor Manasses?


Duk. Neither, to our disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of this stratagem
deserves applause, and I hold it a credit to rest captive to such valiant
conquerours.


Lis. Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.


Them. It merits commiseration Madam and my Liege, not to detract from our
worth: your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.


Dut. Were you the man?


Lisan. No he was the man, marry I was the woman in the Moon, that made you
walk all this last night like the man in the mist, I could say somewhat to you
Madam, as for Dametas and his man, let them stand like fools as they are.


Dut. Can it be possible?


Them. No, no, we are Guls, innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are ours
we have won them away to Dargison.


Lis. Come we have won the conquest, and that is sufficient.


Them. You are a Manasses it is not sufficient: aha not Hercules for Iole, Jove
for Danae, Apollo for Daphne, Pan for Sirne; nay the whole pack of their
piperly godheads could a discharged a stratagem with more spirit of all merit;
an ambling nag and a down a down we have borne her away to Dargison.


Enter Iulio and Amyntas. Dut. 'Twas the most rarest, divinest, Metaphysicalst
piece of invention, that -- what say you my liege?


Duk. I give your deserts their full merit, you have gotten equality.


Iulio. All the wenches gave you.


Them. Alas that spirits under the Moon could have detaind her, but know that
her cherry red lip, a down, a down.


Amin. Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.


Iulio Your merit stood of the upper staire of admiration.


Them. Why thou have a pretty relish of wit now, that can see the broad eye of
my desert at a little hole of demonstration.


Iulio. Your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own
phrase) Metaphysicall piece of service, but you had some help in it
questionless.


Amin. I do not think but the Ladies had some handin't.


Them. A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very little
finger.


Iul. I thought as much by making of the jest.


Amin. I cannot detract from the Ladies worth, for I know them for excellent
worke-women.


Them. Worke-women fit to make Tailors men.


Amin. I by my faith do I, nay your best tailors are arrant botchers to them,
you shall have a Lady make an end of a suit, a Court suit, especially when all
the Tailors in a country know not how to set a stitch in it.


Dor. Some ordinary suit perhaps.


Amin. Your best Court suits that are, are finished by Ladies, I have known a
suite my self lien a making and m^ring ^, ^, and five year together, and then
a Lady has dispatched it in a month with a wet finger, such a finger might the
Ladies have in your plot.


Them. Never wet a finger by this Sun.


Iul. Then she helped you with one dry jest or another, but and we may be so
bold: faith whereare the Ladies?


Them. Sure enough I warrant you, some fools now would have kept them here, and
have bin guld on them again, and laughed at age, but to prevent all danger, we
have shipped them home for Lacedemon.


Iulio. To Lacedemon? your sun of wit shines but dimly in that me thinks, to
whose charge have you trusted them?


Lisan. To them we durst, nay you must think we are no fools,


Iul. Fools? nay deep wit, and policy forbid.


Them. We had no sooner their surprisall, but we had disguise ready, a ship
ready, a couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedemon Intelligencers.


Iul. Durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty caskets?


Them. Durst? our health, our lives, why they were my tenants; nay you must
think we sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.


Amin. If in any thing your wits deserve the babble it is in that.


Iul. None but fools would have committed such inestimable peers to a couple
of strangers.


Amin. And in a ship too.


Iu. And under sail too.


Dut. And unfurnisht of friends too.


Duk. And without shipping to follow them too.


Iul. You were no fools in any thing but that, and in that not to flatter, you
express the true shape of folly, and merely merit the name of fools.


Them. What will you say now when these fellows surrender us our loves?


Amin. We Will discharge you and set their names down for Guls in your steed.


Them. You know the Proverb, when the sky sals we shall have Larkes.


Lisan. And when you can bring proof that we are consend of our Wenches
we will be the Woodcocks.


Iulio. Why then we have once spring'd a couple of woodcocks.


Enter Violetta and Hippolita. Amin. Do you know these? who are the fools now?


Them. Hippolita?


Lis. My Violetta?


Them. What a strange change is here*


Hip. Yes says Gallants, you have very strange carding and you knew all, but I
hope you will offer up your cards, and yield the set lost.


Them. Gulls?


Lis. And abused? I Will lose my life before I Will lose my honor.


Them. Honor and life before I Will lose my love.

draw.
Du. Nay Gentlemen, we bar all violence; the liberty of our challenge was to
all alike equally free, and since these by fair play have won em, it stands
with our honor to see them peaceably possessed of em, then surely take em, for
though you wear the breeches, give us leave to stand a little.


Hip. Why father, is it not time that we were sped?
It Is a great charge to keep a Mayd^^^-head,
Lose it we must, and to prevent ill course,
Better to giv't, then have it taken perforce,
If you be pleased let envy do her worst,
Spit out her poison, or contain't and burst.
VVelcome to all, to all a kind goodnight,
They truly live, that live in scorn of spite.

FINIS.
DAVID'S DESIRE TO GO TO CHVRCH: as it was published in two Sermons in St Mary's
in Oxford.

The One the fifth of November in the Afternoon to the University 1609. the
Other on Christmas Day following to the Parishioners of that place.

By JOHN DAY Bachelour of Divinity, and one of the Fellows of Oriell College.

Basil in Psalm. 115. Audite vos Ecclesiam relinquences, and in domibus
communibus diversantes, miserabilia pretiosi corporis fragmento, quod preces ac
vota in medio Jerusalem reddere oportet, hoc est Ecclesiae Dei.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes.

1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Mr Dr BLENCOW Provost of Oriell College, the
Fellows, and Students there:
WITH THE RIGHT Worshipful, the Worshipful, and the rest of the Parish of St
Mary's,
GRACE BE WITH YOU and peace from Godour Father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.
THE EPISTLE Dedicatorie.
RIGHT Worshipful, and you the rest Beloved in our Lord. That which the
Apostle said concerning Wives of being subject to their 1. Pet. 3. 1
Husbands that even they which obeyed not the word might without the word have
been won by the conversation of the wives, while they beheld their pure
conversation which was with fear: may with good congruity be said to
Protestant-Christians, of often freque^ting Church Service, that even they
which obey not the word (I mean Roman-Catholickes) may without the word be
won by the conversatio^ of such Protestants, while they be hold our pure
conversation which is or ought to be with fear. Howbeit such has been the
coldness of a many in this kind, the aversenes of others unless there be
Sermons to, the connivence even of Pastors, I, and soothing their Flock in
this sin, that the People who by their conversatio^ should have converted
others unto us, are themselves now in these days co^verted unto them, and a
many of us the Ministers that hoaped of much interest of bringing souls unto
God, stand now in doubt of loosing the very Etiam de sort nunc venio in
dubium miser, Terent. A delp^. Act. 2 sc. 2.
principal it self. I pray God 2. Tim. 4. 16.
says the Apostle in a case of less moment, that it may not be laid to their
charge. Doubtless among all the oversights to be laid to the charge of us
Protestants, this of freque^ting Gods house no better is not the least,
especially now in these times when the Lord our God has done so
miraculo^slie so much for us, and when his honor (as it were) lies at the
stake, and the fruit that we bring forth makes his name (I would I might not
say) blasphemed among the Papists.

The consideration hereof Right dear and dearly Beloved Christians, has
caused me as at the first to preach these two Sermons, the one to the
University, the other to your selves: so now to set them forth only and wholly
to your selves, that as one of them was the very first Sermon that ever I
preached unto you since I came to be your Pastor, so it might remain unto you
for ever as a testimony of my care of you, and not perish with me when I am
gone as did a many good words in this kind with my worthy Predecessor Mr
Wharton.

Were this your Parish of that nature that others be, and the Pulpit not so
often, and necessarily to be supplied by the University as it is, perhaps I
would speak thence unto you more often then I do, but since I cannot what I
would, I will now do what I can, even preach unto you Evangelizo manu and
scriptione Raynold. de Romans Eccles. Idol Epist, ad Commit. Essex.
by writing, and it grieveth me not (as Phil. 3. 1.
speaks the Apostle) to write the same things to you, and for you it is a sure
thing.

When our Savior was risen again from the dead and Mary Magdalen, and the
other Mary came to see the sepulcher, and by reason of the Angels countenance
that had descended from heaven, it should seem they were some what frighted,
Fear ye not Mat. 28. 5
says the Angel, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crueified: he is
not here for he is risen, as he said, Come see the place where the Lord was
laid, And go quickly, and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead:
and behold he goes before you into G^lile: there ye shall see him: lo I have
told you. I doubt not Beloved, a many of you are as desirous to find Jesus as
ever those women were, especially in this age when so many Romish Sable
Catholics, so many English Brown Schismatrickes so verefie our Saviors
words, Mark. 13. 21.
Lo here is Christ or lo he is there, as it is in Saint Marks Gospel. I know I
am not fit to be likened to the Angel, but yet may I say what did the Angel
Lo I have told you, and as our Savior Mat. 11. 14.
said in another case of John the Baptist, And if ye will receive it, this is
Elias: so I in this case, And if ye will receive it, this is the truth I have
here delivered in these Sermons.

Wherefore as the Prophet Esaias Esaias. 30. 21.
said to the Jews, Th^^e ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is
the way walk ye in it, when thou turnest to the right hand, and when thou
turnest to the left: so assure your selves that now in this Age when there is
so much turning on the Right Hand, and on the Left, this is the Word your cares
have heard, and I ingenuously profess that after so many years spent in this
famous University in reading Old and New writers (you know whose Mat. 13. 15.
precept it was) if either of the other ways, or any other had appeared unto
me better, for the better directing of your Souls, or doubtless I would have
proclaimed it to you upon the house top, having had so many opportunities, or I
would at leastwise at this time have utterly abstained from printing This: a
labor (believe me) not the least, and now as the world goes not so
necessarily to be undertaken.

J had purposed to have put you in mind, of the place of abode God has given
you, even in the eye of this University (the University the eye of the Land)
as though his meaning were you should be examples to all about you, how they
also like you should frequent his House: of Church Service and of Sermons how
they are both (if well performed) like Rahel, and Leah (but Leah without a
blemish) which twain did build the house of Israel and multiplied the heirs
of the promised land: of being to be as loath to loose the one at any time
whatsoever, as a many are or seem to be, to loose the other, the profit being
incomparable that accreweth unto us by either: of being much more hard to Pray,
then it is to hear a Sermon, and therefore how it behooves us to come the
oftener to show our willingness to undergo the greater pains in Gods Service:
but I am now, even very October. 15. 1612.
now, surprised with the news of her death, who was unto me in her life the
only Jewel of this world. I had thought that She also should have had the
pervsing of these Sermons, and have seen in St Anstens Mother (twice mentioned
in the former of them) the true similitude of he^ self. But God has now
disposed otherwise, and given her the place already, which this Book would but
have guided and directed her unto, and well am I worthy to loose the benefit of
so good a Reader as She would have been, who have suffered it so long to lie
hidden by me as it has. O my dear and worthy Mother what shall I say
concerning thee? I might say of thee as Mu^icbri babitu, vnili fide, anili
securitate, materna charitate, christiana pietate. Aug. Confesl. 9. c, 4.
St Austen of his Mother, Thou were of a womanly carriage but of a manly faith,
thou were fraught with an aged tranquillity of mind, with motherly love and
Christian affection. I might say of thee as Nazianzen of his Nazian Epitaph.
Patris.
Mother: As the Sun beams are fair and clear in the morning and grow
brighter and warmer toward noone, even so my Fathers wife, showing forth the
pleasant first fruits of godliness at the beginning, afterward shined out
with greater light. I might say of thee as did St O vera matter, adamante
fortier, me^e dulcior, flore fragrantior Am bros. de Jacob. and vita beata. l.
2. c. 12.
Ambrose of the Mother in the Machabees, O truest Mother, stronger then
Adamant, sweeter then Honey, more fragrant then the Rose. But I will now say
nothing of thee, only this will I say of my self, I that have said so much
upon the seven and twentieth Psalm the fourth verse, the subject of this
book: must turn me now unto another Text, and meditate another while upon the
I went heavily as one that mourns for his Mother. Ps. 35. 14.
five and thirty Psalm the foureteenth verse, the project perhaps of another
book.

Pardon me Beloved if I have as you see thus left you a while, and paid this
tribute of these few lines to the true Sovereign of my Love, I now come unto
you again, and speak again unto you but in that which heareafter follows,
and which in part you have heard already, in part you shall now hear.

Your no less loving, then JOHN DAY.

DAVID'S DESIRE to go to Church.
IT is 2. Sam. 7. ^
recorded of king David, Right Worsh: Men, Fathers, and Brethren, beloved in
our Lord and Savior, that when he sat in his own house, and the Lord had
given him rest from all his enemies round about him, how he desired as S.
Stephen speaks Acts the seventh, at the six and fortith verse, that he might
find a tabernacle for the God of Jacob. I will relate it to you in David's
words, Lord says Ps. 132. 1.
David, or whosoever else was the author of that Psalm, Lord says he, remember
David, and all his trouble: how he swear unto the Lord and vowed a vow unto the
Almighty God of Jacob, I will not come within the tabernacle of my house, nor
climb up into my bed, I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, no^ mine eye lids
to slu^ber, nether the temples of my head to take any rest, until I find out a
place for the temple of the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob.
All this in the second of Samuel the seventh chapter and second verse, is thus
epitomized: The king said unto Nathan the Prophet, Behold now, I dwell in a
house of Cedar trees, and the Ark of God remains within the curtains. His
meaning was that since al fell out so favorably, with such correspondence to
his desires, since he had so much rest from al his enemies, and God was the
author of all this, he would now be grateful again to that God, not so much
in words which are but wind, as in very truth and real deeds, such as might be
testimonies thereof both to the time then present, and to after ages that were
to come. Behold now, I dwell in a house of Cedar trees and the Ark of God
remains within the curtains. It was as if he had said, God has bestowed a
house on me, I will bestow a house on him too, he has given me rest from all
mine enemies, I will give him a kind of rest too, he shall not be from 1.
Chron. 17. 5.
tent to tent, and from habitation to habitation as he has been hitherto. A
princely mind and meditation, a resolution fit for him who was to be the man
after Gods own heart* as Samuel the Prophet Sam. 13. 14.
avouched of him.

The former part of this day now newly spent and gone, has by the silver tongue
of one of the chiefest and M. D Riues Warden of New College
sweetest singers in this our Israel put us in mind of like benefits received
on our parts from God above: of setting at home here in our own houses, every
of us under our own vine: of a singular rest given unto us from all our
enemies round about us. This day* this very day, it was more then miraculous
that God did for us, it was in truth a heap of miracles, as first the
preserving of our bodies and goods, secondly the prolonging of our lives,
thirdly the saving of our whole Realm, fourthly the protection of true
Religion, and all these then and at that time when safety it self might
safely have sworn that she for her part could not have saved us. David on a
time near to danger spoke most significantly when speaking of it unto
Jonathan, As the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives 1. Sa^. 20. 3
says he, there is but a step between me and death. Anacharsis the Scithian
speaking of those that sailed by sea, and hearing that a ship was but four
fingers thick at the most, then are there but four fingers, Diog. Laert tit.
in Anach
says he, between them and death. At another time being demanded who were
more in number the living or the dead: tell me first, Diog. Laert Ib.
quoth he, among whether of them you reckon those that travel by sea: his
meaning was that howsoever they seem to live, to move, and have a being, yet
they might with good congruitie be accounted even for dead, for nothing so full
of casualties as the Nihil tam capax fortuitorum quam mare. Tacit. Annal. l. 14.
sea and that in the turning of a hand.

Upon how ticklish terms we stood this very day when time November. 5 1605
was, the more we muse of it the more we may, and how might al and every of
these speeches here rehearsed have bin verified of us. A step of that wretched
miscreant might irrecoverably have laid all our honor in the dust, a very
finger of his might have done it. Our adversaries abroad that saw the case
wherein we stood, how did they newse it to one another that we might be now
accounted dead. A Discourse of this late intended treason. Fol. F. 3.
Terrible Blow was now at hand, we had all and every of us but one neck, and
that neck of ours was now on the block. The horror whereof if we would conceive
let us but imagine another Fauks in some one of the vaults here abouts, as many
barrels, as much powder, and that which then matched both barrels and powder.
Doubtless we are never better affected unto God the^ when we pray: we are now
in the house of prayer, and prayer you know was the last, the very last thing
we did, yet should we all of us now miscarry and in this very in stant of time
be snatched out of the world and have the sudden death of those of who^ El^hu in
Job Job. 34. 20. Tremel.
speaks momento moriuntur, they are gone in a trice, or as speaks the 1.
Cor. 15 52.
Apostle S. Paul, In momento, inictu oculi, in a moment in the twinkling of
an ^i^, how vnpreparedly might we all go to appear before that throne where
this day we should receive every of us our last doom. And yet we are but a
handful to the Sea the B. of Lin^. Answer to a nameles Cathol. p* 360. 361.
house full of the^ that should have miscarried, and yet they though well
affected no doubt as men in civil affairs might be, yet somewhat perhaps
behind our selves in respect of the souls business we are about.

But it is not now of this point I point now to speak, my intent and purpose
is to speak of the Thankfulness and Gratitude we are to perform to God for
this, not so much in words which are but wind, as in very truth and real
deeds, such as may be testimonies thereof both to these times now present, and
to after ages that are to come. What has the Lord preserved our honor? We will
also preserve his. Has he made our households like Ps 107. 4*
flocks of sheep? We will endeavor in like manner to furnish also his house: be
it early, be it late, it shall not for our parts, be so naked as it has
been hitherto.

To the producing of which effect in every of us here present, be we of the
one Corporation or of the other, of the one or other sex, I have at this time
brought unto you a certain passage of David's Psalms, that as David is the man
who puts us in mind of this gratitude, so he might instruct us in the manner
to how this gratitude should be performed, not in finding out new places for
the Temple of the Lord, new habitations for the God of Jacob (there is no such
necessity now a days) but in maintaining the old places, the old habitations
of the God of Jacob, and that by tendering there our continual presence at the
usual times of Divine Service.

The words I have chosen to this purpose are in the fourth verse of the seven
and twenty Psalm, and parcel of the words this very night to be read at
Evening Prayer: which will cause me also in reading them to follow the
tra^slatio^ we the^ use, not that which is usual in our Bibles though the
difference in this verse be but small. The words are these:

One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

IN which words without curiosity of giving every hen her own egg, as Pliny
Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 15.
tells us of one that was able to do it with his hens, may it please you to
observe with me two special points as here they lie, First a Petition of the
Prophet David's, Secondly the Reason of that petition. The Prophets Petition in
these words One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life: the Reason
of it in these, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his
Temple. The Petition we shall best consider of, if so be we consider therein
the Matter of it, and the Manner of making it. The Manner of making it in these
words, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require: the Matter of
it in these. Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my
life. But it is with this Matter and Manner here as it was with Thamars Genesis
38. 28.
twins, the Manner shows it self first, but the Matter must first be
handled. First and foremost therefore of the Matter, Even that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life. Wherein for our better
proceeding I shall observe unto you three points, first, what kind of house this
was, secondly, what it was to dwell in it, thirdly, the convenience of dwelling
there. And of every of these in their order, and every of these in these words,
Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. First
therefore of the house, Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord.

As the Lord God out of the whole mass of mankind has reserved to himself
some whom he calls his Elect, of times and seasons some his Saboths, and
solemn Feasts, of servants and attendants some his Ministers, and Priests, of
goods and wealth that men enjoy, some his Tithes and Oblations, so out of the
habitations of the sons of men some he has reserved which he calls his House
and Temple. Now what kind of house this was, what better instruction may be had
then from the owner of it himself. The owner of it was the Lord, who though
he Esaias. 66 ^
said when time was, Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my foot stool,
where is that house that you will build unto me, and where is the place of my
rest? that is, as St Steven Act. 7. 49.
interprets it, what house will ye build for me, or what place is it that I
should rest in? Yet a house he had, and a place there was, not so much to rest
himself in, as where his people might rest there hopes to hear daily and duly
from him. The very first me^tio^ of this house is made in the book of Exodus,
where he calls it a Sanctuary, when speaking unto Moses, They shall make me,
says he, a Sa^ctuary ^ Exodus 25. 8.
that I may dwell among the^. True it is that long before some speech there was
of Gods house, as in the book of Genesis, how fearful Ge^. 28. 17
says Jacob is this place? This is no other but the house of God: and V. 22.
again a little after, This stone which I have set ^p as a pillar shall be Gods
house: but where mention was first made that it should immediately be gone in
hand withal, and a special name given unto it whereby perpetually it should be
called, that as I said was first in Exodus where the Lord himself calls it by
the name of a Sanctuary. It is called in the same place an Exodus 25. 10.
Arc besides, and a V. 19.
Tabernacle, which three names howsoever severally distinguished among them
selves, are but the diverse appellations and names of this house, as first for
the Sanctuary, Psalm the seaventy third at the fifteenth verse, Then thought
I says the Prophet to understand this, but it was to hard for me, until I
went into the Sanctuary of God: secondly for the Arc, Psalm the hundred
thirty second at the eight verse, Arise O Lord into thy resting place, thou,
and the Arc of thy strength: thirdly for the Tabernacle, in the Ps. 27. 5.
next words to this my text, He shall hide me in his Tabernacle, yea in the
secret of his dwelling shall he hide me. Now as in a material and worldly
building we then know it best when we know the several rooms of it, and to
what use each room serves, so let us see in the sacred Scriptures and other
writers besides what is said of these three rooms, in regard whereof this
house of God was called by these names.

First then concerning the Tabernacle we shall find it recorded Act. 7. 44.
Exodus 25. 40. Heb. 8 5.
that it was the Lords own invention, and how he showed a pattern of it in
the mount; Joseph. Antiq. l. 3 c 9.
that after it was once reared it saved Moses his long iournies up to mount
Sinay, the Lord as it were taking the pains to come down to him: lastly, that
the cloud of the Lord was Exodus 40. 38.
upon it by day, and fire was in it by night in the sight of all the house of
Israel throughout al their iournies, whereupon an ancient Father, Clem. Alex.
Orat. Adhor. ad Gentes.
this cloud, says he, waited on the Hebrews like a (...).
handmaid, and as for the fire it was, says the same Father, a (...).
token of grace and fear too, if so be they would obey then was it light to
lead them, if not but they would be waiward, then was it fire to consume them.

Secondly concerning the Arc we shall find it recorded in holy scripture that
it was styled and called by Gods own peculiar Ios. 4. 13. 2. Sam. 6. 2.
name: that when it was borne on the Priests shoulders, the feet of them that
bare the Arc were no sooner dipped in Iordans water but Jordan was driven Ios.
3. 15.
back, the mountains skipped like Ps. 114. ^.
rams, and the little hills like young sheep: that it was the cause of the
falling down of Josh. 6. 4.
Iericoes walls: that when it was brought into Dagons house, 1. Sa^. 5. 3.
Dagon was overthrown: that V. 9
when it came into Gath, it made havocke of Gods enemies, Ps. 78 67.
it smote them on the hinder parts and out them to a perpetual shame: that when
it came to Ekron, it did as much unto the 1. Sa^. 5. 11
Ekronites: that when the milch kine brought it home it 1. Sa^. 6. 12
guided the kine in that their journey, it was as the rudder in a ship which
though it be behind, yet directs all before: lastly we shall there find that
when the men of V. 19.
Bethshemeth pried into it over boldly, it slew above fifty thousand at one
time, so exasperated was the Lord against them. All that afterward happened by
it, as the 2. Sa^. 6. 7.
slaying of Vzzah but for touching it, the blessing of V 11.
Obed Edom for entertaining it, and some other things besides, I now omit at
this time as being done by all likelihood after the composing of this Psalm
and therefore not likely that the Prophet here had any relation to these events.

Thirdly concerning the Sanctuary we shall find it recorded there, what
precious Jewels that had in it being the cabinet as it were and casket of them,
as first, this aforesaid Heb. 9. 4.
Arc and all the sacred things therein contained, the golden pot wherein was
Manna. and Aronsrod that had budded, and the Tables of the Testament: secondly,
the golden Heb. Ib.
Censer: thirdly, the mercy seat of Exodus 25 17.
gold: fourthly, the V. 18.
Cherubins of gold too: fifthly, the V. 38.
dishes, cups, coverings, and V. 31.
candlestickes of gold. We shall find it recorded there that the Lord from
thence gave forth his Exodus 25. 22. Numb. 7. 89
Oracles, and told all things unto Moses concerning the children of Israel. We
shall find it recorded there that the high Priest went into it Heb. 9. 7.
Levit. 16. 33.
once every year to make an atonement both for himself, for the Priests, and
for the People. Lastly we shall find it recorded there that it was Heb. 9. 3.
called Sanctum Sanctorum, that is, The holiest of all, for so is the Hebrew
phrase in stead of the superlatiue, like as our Savior is 1. Tim. 6. 15.
called in holy Scripture, Rex Regum and Dominus Dominantium, that is, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, according to that dialect.

And these are the excellent things recorded of that house, whereunto as this
our Prophet no doubt had special reference here in these words, so they may
serve us as a draught in some sort to know what manner of house this was.
There are that Joseph. Antiq. l. 3. c. 8.
compare this house to this great world wherein we live, for it being divided
say they into three parts the Outward Court, the Inward, and the Sanctuary:
two of them signify the Earth, and the Sea, wherein al kind of creatures are,
and such were the Outward and Inward Court: the third part which was the
Sanctuary signifies Heaven say they which was reserved for God alone in like
sort as the Heaven is not to be come unto by men. In my conceit it may more
fitly be compared to the little world of man, as man in holy These. 5. 23.
Scripture is said to have a Body, a Soul, and a Spirit: the Soul being taken
as Dicitur anima dum vegetat, spiritu^ dum co^templatur, Aug de Sp. and Anim.
l. 1 c. 13.
sometime it is for the will and affections, the Spirit for the understanding.
First then concerning the Tabernacle, that J resemble to the Body, my reason
is, for that so oftentimes in holy 2. Cor. 5. 4 2. Pet. 1. 13. 2. Pet. 1. 14.
writ we find this Body of ours resembled to a Tabernacle. In this Body is a
Soul, and in that Tabernacle an Exodus 40 3.
Arc, which Arc containing principally the Two Tables of stone the ten
Commandments, what may we better resemble them unto then to the will and
affections over which they bear the sway. The Sanctuary I may well resemble
unto the Understanding, though as the chiefest room in this house it passed
indeed all understanding. Nor may it seem strange that the Temple here should
thus be compared unto man, seeing man so often times in holy Scripture is
called the Temple of God. Know ye not 1. Cor. 3* 16.
says the Apostle, that ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you? If any man destroy the Temple of God him shall God destroy,
for the Temple of God is holy which ye are. And again in another 2. Cor. 6. 16.
place, ye are the Temple of the leving God: where upon Tertullian very
elegantly, Being all of us, Tertul. de cul^^ F^. Eius templ^ Aeditunt, and
Antis^es P^^diciti^ est.
says he, the Temple of God, the Parson and Prelate of that Church is
Chastity, which will not suffer any unclean or profane thing to be brought
into it, least that God that does inhabit it should utterly leave the place by
reason of such pollution. But thus much of his house. Now let us see what it is
to dwell in it, Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord.

Hannah the mother of Samuel when she had been long barren, and it was often
cast her in the teeth* she vowed a vow and 1. Sa^. 1. 11
said, O Lord of hosts, if thou wile look on the trouble of thy handmaid, and
remember me, and not forget thy handmaid, but give unto thy handmaid a man
child, the^ will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there
shall no raiser come upon his head. Her meaning was that he should be brought
up in the house of the Lord in Shil^h, there to do the Lord* that service that
Eli the Governor should enioin him. Al things happening to her desires, that is,
the Lord looking on her trouble, and remembering, and not forgetting her, and
giving unto her a man child indeed, she gave him indeed unto the Lord, he
became a Nazarite, and a Levite, and dwelt in the house of the Lord all the
days of his life. But this is not the dwelling here meant in this place. This
kind of dwelling was for Prophets indeed, and for the Children of the
Prophets, howbeit David though he were a Prophet, yet had he besides an other
calling, and by reason of that calling could not thus dwell in this house. The
dwelling then that David meant was in all public assemblies both at Morning
and Evening Sacrifice to tender his presence to the Lord, to sort himself with
those who Ps. 121. 1
gladded him so much when as they said unto him we will go into the house of
the Lord, to be always praising of the Lord in those Assemblies according unto
that in an other of his Psalms, Ps. 84 4.
Blessed are they that* dwell in thy house they will be alwaie praising thee.
And this because he could not now perform by reason of his banishment how
dry was his soul within him, and what bitter moan does he make, Psa. 42. 2.
My soul says he is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall
I come to appear before the presence of God? I, for his banishment had berest
him of the exceeding solace he there took, ^e prefers before himself those very
fowls of the heaven, before which our Mat. 10. 31.
Savior in another case would have preferred him so much, The Sparrow Psa.
843.
says he has found her a house, and the swallow a nest where she may lay her
young, even thy altars O Lord of hosts, my king, and my God. I know there are
of the Calvin and Tremell in hunc loc.
Interpreters that take these words otherwise, but since our Church thus
reads them. I for my part am contented in this case no^ to vary from the
Church. But to return unto my purpose.

To approach continually then unto the Temple, and thither continually to
repair was the dwelling no doubt here meant; to dwell, to reside continually
there, not to come for a spurt, or a fit, as you heard this word Dwelling
descanted upon by Mr Doct. King. Vicechancelor of Oxford and Deune of Christch.
in a latin Sermon at the beginning of the Term, upon Ps 91. 1
one of the worthiest amongst us in another dialect not long ago. And thus
dwelt Anna here the daughter of Phanuel, who is said in the second of Luke 2. 37
Luke for the space of fourscore and four years not to have gone out of the
Temple; not that she was there always, but often says Lyra and Beda in bu^c
loc.
Lyra, and venerable Bede to the same purpose, not that she was never absent
no not an hour, but for that she was often in the Temple. And the same S. Luke
speaking of our Saviors disciples after they had seen him ascended into
heaven, They returned Luk 24. 52.
says he to Jerusalem with great joy and were continually in the Temple
praising and lauding God. Thus S. Austens mother in her time to might be said
to dwell in Gods house, whereunto she came so duly and truly twice a day,
that she in thy Scriptures Aug. confess. l. 5. c. 9.
says S. Austen, might hear O God what thou said to her, and thou in her
prayers what she said to thee. In a word, such were the Christians the same S.
Austen speaks of in another place whom he calls the Emmets of God, Behold the
Emmet of God Aug. in Psalm. 66.
says he it rises early every day, it runs to Gods Church, it there
prays, it hears the Lesson read, it sings a Psalm, it ruminateth what it
hears, it meditateth thereupon, and hourdeth up within it self the precious
corn gathered from that barn flower. And thus much for the dwelling here, now
concerning the convenience of dwelling in this place in as much as he desired
it for term of life. All the days of my life.

Many and manifold are the cares that are taken by mortal men concerning
their habitations if so be they have purse-opportunity either to purchase, or
to rent them. Some like the City best, some the Horat. Epist. l 1. Ad Fuscum.
Virg. Georg. l. 2.
Country, some one Her Car^ l. 1. Od. 7:
Coast, some an other, and yet when all comes to all, nor City, nor Coast, nor
Country whatsoever that continually can content them. Variety of houses in
every age has been a great salve for this soar, that as he Terent. Eunuch.
Act. 5. sc. 6.
said in the Comedy when they are weary of one house they may presently
walk unto another. Even Princes themselves have this variety how well
acco^modated soever their Palaces be, and no house of theirs so gorgeous, so
glorious whatsoever, but should they be tied unto it continually, it would
seem a Prison rather then a Palace. It seems it was not so with the Lords
house in this place, for a Prince here is so desirous to live therein
continually, as that he wished there to dwell all the days of his life: and
therefore in one of his Psalms, I will dwell Psa. 23 6.
says he in the house of the Lord for ever, and again in another Psa. 61. 4.
place, I will dwell for ever in thy Tabernacle, He could have been contented
it seems to have set up his rest there, like as the Lord Ps. 132. 15
speaks of Sion, This shall be my rest for ever here will I dwell for I have a
delight therein. This it was in effect that Zacharias John Baptists father did
aim at long after when speaking of the effect of our redemption by our
Savior, that we Luke 1. 74
says he being delivered out of the ^a^d^ of our enemies might serve him
without fear in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life. And here Beloved let us admire the great goodness of our God and his
exceeding mercy toward us, who speaking to us when time was in so great anger
and indignation, Genesis 3. 17
Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou ^ate of it all the
days of thy life (for in that he spoke it to our first father Adam he spoke it
to us to) does sweeten as it were this curse again by taking us into his own
service, and in that service to remain with him all the days of our life.
Wherein what do we else but even set at his own table, either as 1. Sam. 20
27.
David did at Saul's, or 2. Sam. 9 7.
Mephibosheth at David's. It was a vain hope of Lamech therefore who upon the
birth of Noah his son, this son Gen 5. 29.
says he shall comfort us at touching the earth which the Lord has cursed: it
is the son of God only that so can do, and so shall it be done unto us if so
be we endeavor to serve him all the days of our life. I end this point with
the words of Peter which he spoke unto our Savior, somewhat vnadvisedlie I
confess in the case he then spoke them but for our purpose very fitly, Master
Mat. 17. 4
says Peter it is good for us to be here, right so say I, it is good indeed
for us to be here, and therefore let us here be all the days of our life. And
thus much of the Matter of the Prophets Petition here, now as touching the
Manner of making it which I told you was in these words, On thing have I desired
of the Lord which I will require, wherein I consider these points: first that
he made it his Chief Desire and that in these words, One thing have I desired:
secondly, his Constancy in it and that in these, I desired of the Lord: not I
desired of thee o Lord as if he had spoken it in private, but I desired of the
Lord in the third person, and therefore speaking no doubt to others, even to
all who should ever have the pervsing of this Psalm. And of each of these in
their order, and first of making it his Chief Desire, One thing have I desired.

David's desire for it was One thing here, is not so to be understood as if it
therefore were but One, or the only thing he did desire. This very Psalm
dispelleth that conceit for there are even in this Psalm diverse and sundry
desires besides: as first to have Psa. 27. 7.
mercy upon him, and to forgive him; secoudly, not to v. 9.
hide his face from him: thirdly, to v. 11.
illighten his understanding that he might tread his ways aright: fourthly, to
v. 12.
deliver him from the malice and malitiousnes of his Adversaries: over and
above a thousand desires and petitions besides, both in this his book of
Psalms, in the book of Sam^^^ and else where. It is nor therefore to be said of
this One as speaks the Apostle to the Ephesians. 4. 4.
Ephesians, of one body, one spirit, one hope of our vocation; or in the words
immediately following, ^ one Lord, one Faith, one V. 5.
Baptism; or as it was said of our Saviors coat that it could not have bin
Tun^^a unless it had been D. Playfers Pathway to Perfection page 130.
Vni^a, that is, one or else none; or, as Ruff^ Cypr. in. Symb. sine Ruff^.
speaks of that Son in the firmament which is so only one that there cannot
be another, or a third to bear Q^i ^^^ v^^^ dicitur vt alius vel tertius oddi
^^^ possit.
him company: no it is not such a one, the meaning therefore is that he
principally desired this one thing, that he specially and chiefly would require
it, like as our Savior y says of Mary's ^ Luc. 10. 42.
choice One thing is needful: Mary has chosen the good part, and yet was
Martha her sister to have a child's part to: For if so be a cup of cold water
only give^ to one of our Saviors little ones in the name of a Disciple
should not loose a Mat. 10. 42.
reward, how great a reward was hers to be that gave so great entertainment
to our Savior and that in the name of a Savior to? For that she believed in,
him now it is more then manifest, in respect her Brother Lazaru^ had now been
Ioh. 12. 2.
raised from the dead. But thus much briefly for the emine^cie of the Prophets
desire here in this place. Shall we now see his constancy in it? Or was it with
him as with the Poet, Herat. Ep. ^. 1. cp. 1.
quod petij ^ spo^nit, was the wind afterward in another quarter? No, in no
wise, and therefore to the preterperfectence he adds the future here, which I
will require: Virg. Ae^. l 4.
Men's immota manet, his mind was steadfast, it was like Queen Elizabeth's
Semper eadem, Ever and never but the same. Which I will require.

It was our Saviors question concerning the Mat. 11. 7
Baptist what went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the
wind? And what Greg. in Evang H^^^ 6.
says S. Gregory is understood by this reed, but only a carnal mind which
accordingly or as it is hoysed up by favor, or by slander depressed down,
yeeldes presently it self or to the one or to the other. The author of the
imperfect work upon Matthew gives the reason, A reed Chrysostom. Ob. Impers. in
Mat. Ho^. 26.
says he, is a void and empty thing, having in it nor strength, nor vigor,
and therefore is it driven with every wind, right so a carnal man says he
that has no pith of faith within him, no strength nor virtue of truth
whatsoever temptation comes upon him, it not only bruseth, but breaks him to.
The Baptist by our Saviors testimony was no vegitable of this nature, he was a
huge high oak rather as Et quantu^ vertice ad auras Aethe reas tantum radice in
tartara tendens Virg. Aen. l 4.
deep in the root as he was high too, able to withstand any tempest whatsoever.
And as it was with John the Baptist so was it before with this our Prophet,
whom no adversity could drive from the love he bare to this house. He was
affected it seems to this desire as was Cic. de Clar Orat. and de Orat. and
Orat ad Brut.
Demosthenes to Action, or S. Austen to Humility, he gives it the first and
second, and third place too, he has and will desire it. For as the learned
Aug. ep. 56
Barth. Traheron upon John. Ioh. 1. 15. and v. 30.
Interpreters gather of those words of John the Baptist, This is he of whom I
spoke, that he had before made many Sermons concerning Jesus, so in that the
Prophet here says, One thing have I desired, it may probably be gathered that
he had desired it often times before, so that he is nothing like the inconstant
man. The inconstant man, D. Hals Charact. l. 2.
says a worthy writer of our age, treads upon a moving earth and keeps no
^ate. It is a wonder if his love or hatred last so many days as a wonder. His
heart is the Inn of all good motions, wherein if they lodge for a night it is
well, by morning they are gone, and take no leave, and if they come that way
again they are entertained as Guests not as Friends. It was not thus with this
our Prophet, He was like the round world rather even so sure that he could not
not be Ps. 93. ^.
moved: He was like those heavenly Orbs above that keep an Arist de C^^. l. 2*
c. ^.
uniform course and station: in a word, He was like unto his Pattern whose
image he was, the eternal God, o^ whom it is said in Malachy, I am the Lord* I
change not, Malachy the third, at the sixth verse. And this was the Prophets
Constancy, a virtue so verious, that as it was said of the Stoics that they
were Mares Philosophorum, the Male Philosophers of all the rest (but it was
said but by a Sen. Qu^d in Sapient. no^ cadit iniu^a,
Stoicke) so no virtue without this virtue but is as it were a Widow.

M. D. Eeds his IterBore^le.
Viduata Philemone Baucis, one that has lost her true Philemon indeed.
Witness the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and what
are they without this Constancy? Witness the four Virtues Quae quasi
origines and cardines sunt ^mnium Vi^tutum, Aug. de Spir. and anim. l 1. c. 4
Cardinal, Justice, Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude* and without Constancy
what are they? The Intellectual and Moral Virtues are as Thomas Th. Aquin. 2^
2ae. in Pr^l.
Aquinas tells us reduced to these seven* and therefore if these without
Constancy are no more, no more are they. Nay are they not harmefull rather,
sure I am St Peter says that better s 2. Pet. 2. 21
it were not to have known the wai^ of righteousness, then after we have
known it to turn from the Commandment given unto us. Howbeit here we must
have special care that we take not Quid pro Quo, one for another as many do.
It is easily done, and often, and never more often then now a days. The Pastor
of souls, Greg. Past, Cur. Part. 2. c. 9.
says St Gregory, is to know (and so is the Flock to) that vices a many times
do bear themselves as virtues, Thus Covetousness cloaks it self under the
name of Thrift and Parsimony, and contrariwise riotous spending under the name
of Liberality. To much pity a many times is thought to be Piety, and
unbridled Anger the virtue of Zeal. A headlong Action is accounted quick
dispatch, and to be to too tardy in performing ought a high point of singular
wisdom. The vice that bears it self as the virtue of Constancy, no vice any
virtue more, is the vice of Self will and Obstina^ie, a sour and a sullen
vice, and that which has blasted so many hundreds of our age both on the right
hand of us, and on the left, Schismatics and Papists. But utterly to avoid
this mock virtue, this Virg. Aen. l. 7.
Alecto in deed in another likeness, the safest and surest way, is to have
good ground for what we do, not a particular spirit with the one, or the
Religion of our Fathers, and Mothers, and Forefathers with the other. It is a
good thing, Gal. 4. 18.
says the Apostle, to love earnestly always in a good thing. And this good
ground the Prophet had, the Law of the Lord was his direction, and for he was
so stable and s^edfast in the same, the virtue which he had was not vice in
virtues robes, it was virtues own self the virtue of Constancy. And thus
much of his Constancy in this his desire, come we now to the Manifestation of
this his desire to the world which ^ told you was in these words, I desired of
the Lord.

There is a piece of a verse in Ovid more canonical with a many, (...) I am
more powerful then all the verses or chapters either concerning the contrary
throughout the whole Bible*

Ovid. Trist l. 3. Eleg. 4.
Been qui latuit, been vixit.
He that lurks well, lives well, as if the Lord had sent us into the world to
play all hid. I grant the times may be such, as may cause us to betake our
selves to such a kind of retired life, or to play least in the worlds sight,
even as those Christians of old time, of whom the Apostle to the Heb. 11. 38.
Hebrews, They wandered in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens, and caves of
the earth: but to do it now in these days, or to keep our Consciences to our
selves, or not at al to employ the Tale^ts that God has committed to our
charge, is ungratefully to liken these times to the ticklish times of Nero,
wherein sloth Tacit. vi^. Agric.
says Tacitus was a virtue and to do^ nothing the greatest wisdom of all.
Such wyzards in the end will play but wyly beguily with themselves, who while
they proceed in silence as Qui dum iuuenes ad se nectutem, s^nes prope ad ips^s
exactae ae^atis terminos per silentium veniu^t. Tac. Ib.
speak^ the same author from young men to aged, from aged to the grave, are
like to make the next step from thence to hell if so be they be not there
before. Mat. 25. 30.
Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. True it is, it is the Heart that God requires for his
service, but he requires withal the Tongue to, and if we think this tongue of
ours is not to be employed in public Assemblies as well as at hoame, let us
remember what was said to Meroz by the Angel of the Lord, Curse ye Meroz Iud.
5. 23.
said the Angel, curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to help
the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. Our Prophet you see in this
place was far from this sin, he proclaimed to all the world of what religion
he was. He stuck not to tell it unto others, and to acquaint all men living
with the desire of his heart, especially al such as should have or the hearing,
or seeing, or singing, or saying this Psalm. He does Pers. sat. 2.
Aperto vivere voto, he regards not who hears him, he believed, and 2. Cor. 4.
13.
therefore spoke, he spoke, and in speaking proclaimed it to the world. And
thus much of the manifestation of this his petition to the world, and
consequently of the Petition it self, namely of the Matter of it, as also the
Manner of making it. We are now to come to the second point to wit the Reason
of this Petition, which I told you was in these words, To behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. Wherein I thought to have observed
to you these points: First, his Contemplation, and that in these words, To
behold the fair beauty of the Lord: Secondly, his Action, and that in these,
To visit his Temple: Thirdly, the ioining of both together and that in the
particle [ And] To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and, to visit ^i^
Temple. His Contemplation in respect of the Soul, his Action in respect of the
Body, the Joining of both together in respect of both combind together, Body
and Soul. But this were to enter a new Ocean, a word of exhortation therefore
and so God willing an end, One thing have I desired of the Lord etc.

OF all the days in the week there is special notice taken of one day as
very dismal to the Irish, and in a manner fatal to the^. This day Staniburst
de Reb. Hibern. l. 3.
they say is Tuesday, for upon a Tuesday they lost Limmirick, upon a Tuesday
they lost Wexford, upon a Tuesday they lost Waterford, and upon a Tuesday
again they lost Divelin. I and at a fifth time too upon a Tuesday it was, that
they had a great overthrowe the Earl of Tumond that the^ was being chief of
all their troops* But whatsoever may be said of that day concerning the Irish,
sure I am that of this day a Tuesday too when In the year of our Lord 1605.
time was, and of another day in this Month, it may be said of us English,
that we have received two as great Blessings from the immediate hand of God, as
ever did nation in this world or ever is like to do to the worlds end. I mean
the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign of happy memory, the Seauententh of
In the year of our Lord 1558.
this Month, and that which this fifth day we have celebrated, the Continuing
of King James his. Which two days the Seauententh and Fifth might they parley
with one another as Plutarch Plut. Quest Romans qu. 25.
reports the Holy day and the Worky day once did, and the Seauententh should
say as did the Holy day, unless I had been so happy, thou had never been*
how might this Fifth reply agai^^, but if so be I had not been, thou had
never been so happy. For indeed had not this day been, what should it have
profited us to have lived in prosperity some forty years there abouts, and
at the last to have been a byword to all the nations of the world. Would it
not have been said of our Land as was sometimes of Jerusalem, but of Jerusalem
overthrown, Ier. Lam. 2. 15.
Is this the Country that men call the perfection of beauty, and the joy of the
whole earth? Might not our Mother this little Island have said, Ier. Lam. 1. 15.
The Lord has trodden under foot al my valiant men in the midst of me, he has
called an Assembly against me to destroy my young men, the Lord has trodden
the wine press upon the Virgin the daughter of England. Might not the
Survivers of us have said, but alas who should have survived? but yet if any
should, might they not have said with the Ier. Lam. 4. 20.
same Prophet, The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken
in the nets, of whom we said under his shadow we shall be preserved? But
thanks be to our God, there are eve^ in that Prophet other words which better
fit us, and may be said and spoken of us; which this our Island may also speak,
and we the Inhabitants may speak also, Ier. Lam 3. 22.
It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his co^passions
fail not. I will speak it Beloved again,

Virg. Aeneid. l. 3.
Et repetens, iterumque, iterumque monebo and Matt. 11. 15.
he, that has ears to hear let him hear, It is the Lords mercies that we
are not consumed because his compassions fail not.

Such the mercies of the Lord toward us and his compassions so great, what
greater recompense to be made him then to perform that very thing which the
Prophet in this place does desire, Even to dwell in the house of the Lord all
the days of our life. What will ye say in these Churches? or in such as are
inferior unto these? I, even in these Churches, or in such as are inferior
unto these, even where* soever the Lord shall place us, and the lot of this
world shall hereafter fall upon us, the meanest of which and respect their
beauty with the right eye of understanding in deed, and not Salomons Temple in
all its glory, much less this Tabernacle here, arrayed like one of them. For
what was all they had but shadows of what we do, that House in truth, and in
the eye of faith, was but a Cottage unto ours. Wherefore as Hieron. ep. ad
Laetam et ep. ad Saluinam ex Turfull. ad Martyr.
St Ierom in another case, Si tanti vitrum qua^ti margaritu^, If so be glass,
says he, be so much to be esteemed, of what estimation is a Pearl to be, so
say I in this case, if this our Prophet were so inamored with so very a Glass
as that was (I speak it by way of comparison) how should we be with our
Pearls, and that so orient as ours are. Nor let me now seem contrary to my
self for that I call that Tabernacle a Temple of glass in respect of our
Churches, seeing it is in that respect that I only call it so, as a candle in
respect of a lamp, says St Ierom, r Hieron. Apol aduers^^ louin.
is nothing to be decou^ted of, a lamp in respect of a star why it gives no
light at all, compare the star, with the Moon and the star is obscure, set
the Moon, again by the Sun, and the Moon shines never a whit, lastly compare
the Sun and Christ together, says he, and what is the Sun but mere
darkness: and so was the candle of this Tabernacle in respect of our Lamp,
the lamp of this Tabernacle in respect of our Star, the star of this
Tabernacle in respect of our Moon, the Moon of this Tabernacle in respect of
our Sun, in a word the Sun of this Tabernacle in respect of our Christ, or
which is all one in effect our Christian Congregations. And do we yet doubt to
make them our chief desire* In making them our chief desire we may happily
get more by it then indeed we do desire. You know what was said to Solomon
when he asked wisdom of the Lord* Because, 1 King. 3. 11.
says the Lord, thou have asked this thing and have not asked for thy self
long life, nor riches, nor the life of thy enemies, behold I have done
according to thy words, and I have also given thee that which thou have not
asked, both Riches, and Honors, and so forth. Thus fell it out with St Austens
mother too, she desired that she might but see her Son a Christian
Catholic before her death (mark I pray you the phrase of those times, a
Christian Catholic, whereupon Baron. Annal. Tom. 1. fol. 310.
Pacianus, Christian is my name, says he, Catholic my surname, and St Austen
elsewhere, by the goodness of Christ, Aug. ep. 107.
says he, we for our pares are Christian Catholics, not the only style now
adays a Catholic Roman, or no Catholic) but she but desired to see him a
Christian Catholic before her death, and my God, Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 10.
says she to her Son S. Austen* has given me more abundantly then I
desired, even to see thee his servant, and to contemn all the felicity of
this world besides. God indeed is no nigard he gives sometimes before we ask,
sometime more then we ask, always as much, and that or in the same kind that
we ask it, or else in some other much more behoofull and necessary for us.

But we must be Constant in this desire. But alas when he that wrote of
Constancy became Just. Lips.
himself so inconstant, and so many hundred^ after him as little constant as
he, and some even of our own seluc^ as constantly in constant as they, what
shall I say of Constancy when so many flockmeale fall away. Beloved, I will say
as once our Savior said Ioh. 6. 67
What will ye also go away? Why but whether? Or to whom? Here are the words of
life eternal: -- Horat. Epist. l. 1. ep^^t (...).
Quod quar it is hic est,
Est Vlubris animas si vos non defi^^t aquus.
not the meanest Church in this our Land but will afford you much more comfort
in the service of our God, then the goodliest Synagogue this day or at S.
Omets, or at Rome. Nor would I have you think I speak altogether
unexperienced in this comparison.

Virg Aeneid. l. 11.
Vidimus o Gives Dio^^dem; Arguaque castra,

I have seen Beloved; seen I have, though not the Popish Mufftie apud Turcas
Sacer do^^^ supremus vt apud nos Romans Pont. Busbeq. ep. 1.
Mufftie him self, yet his Pavillions and his Tents, I mean a many Assemblies
and Congregations of his, where I am sure but as few words as Porpheries
Pradicables with understanding* if the Apostle S. 1 Cor. 4. 19.
P^ule were not mistaken* would to those Assemblies hauedone more good; then
those many thousands ^^at then were uttered by so many Black Birds there, so
many Parrets, so many Crows, and Pyes, not understanding what they said or
sung, the similitudes are Aug. in ps. 18. Exp^s. 2
S. Austens. And now I have said thus much let me go a little further* and
speak unto you a little more concerning those our Adversaries, upon whom had I
look with a carnal eye, I should say I confess, as did those Spies Number. 13.
32.
we be not able to hold out against them for they are stronger then we all the
people that we saw there are men of great stature. Giants they are, the sons
of Anak, and we to them but Grasshoppers. But the Lord that gave me at that time
an others gates eye to behold them with, puts another message into my mouth,
and as a learned Divine M. Gossen in his Trumpet. of war, p. D. 5. b.
speaks of Caleb that he had not asheepes cye as the other Spies, but the eye
of a Lion, and how he passed by that people with an honorable scorn: right so
say I with Number. 14. 9.
Caleb, Rebel not you against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of that
Land for they are but bread for us, their shield is departed from them, and the
Lord is with us fear them not.

The greater cause have we to proclaim this desire of ours unto the world
mauger all the banded Forces of all the Romanists whatsoever, who what have
they Pamphlet^ed against our Howlets 9 Reasons why Catholics may not go to
Church answered by D. Fulcke and M Wyburne.
Public Service, or our Religion therein contained which has not been fully
answered, or at least wise may be, and that in the turning of a hand. Their
Proofs are Darmans proof of certain Articls in Religion reproved by M.
Nowell.
reproved, their Disproofes confuted, their Rocks undermined, their Stapletons
Differences and Fortress of the faith, answered by D. Fulke.
Fortresses overthrown, their Heskins Parliament rep^^l^d by D. Fulke.
Parlaments repealed, Dormans Disproufe M Nowels Repr^n^e confuted by M. Nowell.
their ^i^tons Challenge answered by D Ful^e, and Oliver Carter.
Chalenges answered, their M^rtials Reply to M Calfeth answered by D Fulcke.
Replies reioined unto, their Harding^ Reioynder to M. Jew, answered by M.
Deering.
Reioinders disiointed. True it is they rest not satisfied, nor is it likely
they Sanders Rock of the Church undermined by D Fulcke.
ever will, Rana, says St* Austen, est l^quaciss^ma vanites, nothing so full
of tattle as Folly, and that, says he, was signified by the Frogs of Egypt.

But happy it were with us had we in this point of Church Service the Romanists
only our only Adversaries. Cassius and his Accomplices we could deal withal
well enough, but what shall we do when our own Mothers Children lift up the
heel against us, and so vilify our Church Service especially in their
practice, that unless there be a Sermon with it, we shall seldom or never
have their company. 2. King. 6. 21.
Shall I smite them Fathers and Brethren? shall I smite them? They are flesh I
confess, of our flesh, and bone of our bones: Why, but shall I let them go
then, and die in their error? that were a cruel kind of compassion, let their
error die in them rather, Moriatur error, vivat homo, says St Austen, slay the
Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 31.
error, save the man. And will you the^ behold their error? O, say they,
unless there be Sermons, what beauty is there in our Churches? why should we
take so much pains to go so often unto them? The Scriptures that there are
read we can read our selves at home, we can pray those Prayers at home too,
have we but the Psalter and Bible in our houses, what beauty have we not that
there is to be had? So say they indeed that little know or what is Beauty, or
what is Service, or what are Sermons, or the Minister of God, or intruth these
Churches. For if fo be they did, would they thus speak? would they huddle up
together so many Soleci^mes? would they first compare their Houses to the
proper and peculiar House of God? themselves unto his Ministers? their private
prayer to the Public? and debase Public Prayer so much as to make it so
much inferior unto Sermons? why what other Gospel preach our Sermons then
that which our Service delivers to them? If in their own house where Mat. 18.
20.
but two or three be gathered together, the Lord (it may be) is in the midst,
how much more when we are such troops and multitudes in Church Assemblies? when
we there set by Marc. 6. 40.
rows, by hundreds, and by fifties? If he or she may compare themselus, I,
their very Children to the Priest, or Minister, because they can read as well as
he, so many a Butcher among the Jews was as able as the Priest himself to
have killed a Calfe, or an Ox, and was it as lawful therefore and fit for him
to have sacrificed the same? Lastly, if so be the Lords House be of no more
value with thee then thine own, take heed the Lord another day leave thee not
altogether to thine own, when there shall be no Prince in this our Israel, but
every man doing that which is best in his own eyes, when there shall be no
Priest, but every man of a Religion that he has forged in his own brain, and
which is the consequence of both these when we shall be no People neither, but
Virg. Aen. l. 1.
Relliquiae Danaum, the Relics, and Remnant of a People, when a man shall be
more precious then fine Gold, and above the wedge of the gold of Ophir, I mean
in respect of the rarity of them as speaks the Prophet Esaias, 13. 12.
Esaias in another case.

But I am persuaded better things of you Beloved though I now thus speak, the
rather for that a many of you (I may say it of my own experience) visit so
well the Lords house at the usual times of Divine Service, so that I may now
say as said the Apostle in his 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4.
Epistle to the Thessalonians, We are persuaded of you through the Lord that
you both do, and will do the things which we warn you of. Rev. 22. 11.
He that is righteous let him be righteous still, and he that is holy let him
be holy still. Gal. 6. 9.
Let us not be weary of welldoing for in due season we shall reap if we faint
not. And that shall be, and it shall be then; when we shall not hereafter on our
deathbeds depart as one Vt n^n ex vita sed ex domo in domum vid^retur migrare
Corn. Nepos in vita Atti^
speaks out of this life, but out of one house into another, that is, when
upon the parting of Body and Soul we shall be sped from this House of Prayer
here on earth, to that higher house above, the House of Praises in Heaven,
where Ambros. Te Deum.
with Cherubins and Seraphins continually crying Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of
Saboth, we shall all of us be satisfied with the Ps. 36. 8,
plenteousnesse of that house. I will end with that of Austen who ending a Tract
of his with the words of this my Text does thus descant thervpo^, Let thy Soul
Aug. in Evang. Joan. Tract 3.
says S. Austen say, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will
require, even that I may dwell in the ^^^se of the Lord all the dates of my life
to behold the fair beauty of the Lord. Fear not says S. Austen, that thy
continuance there, will br^^d a fulsomnes in thee. Such a pleasure of beauty
shall it be that it shall be^ always in thy ^ie and ye^ shall thou never be
satisfied with it. Or rather to speak the Truth says he, thou shall ever be
satisfied and never to. For if I should only sar thou sh^l^ never be satisfied,
then mights thou fear some hunger to ensue, if I should say only thou shall be
satisfied, then might thou on the contrary fear there should be some
fulsomenes, where nor fulsomnes shall be, nor hunger, I faith he for my part a^
ignorant what to call it. But howsoever I am ignorant, yet has the Lord
sufficient to give and to bestow on vt, which we are ignorant how to call, and
yet believe that we shall receive it.

The same Lord so bless us, and the seed that has been sown, that with you
of the poorer sort the Mat. 13. 22.
Cares of this world, with you of the wealthier, the deceitfulnes of your
riches, with either of you of either sort the lusts of other things 1. Sermon.
grow not up like thorns and choke it.

Erratum.
Page 28. lin. 10. amend it thus: Secondly, his Constancy in it and that in
these, which I will require: Thirdly, his Manifestation of it to the world, and
that in these, I desired of the Lord: not I desired of thee O Lord.

DAVID'S DESIRE to go to Church.
One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple. Psalm. 27. ver. 4.
IT is not long since Right worcester and dearly beloved in our Savior Christ, that
my course coming in order to execute the Priests Luke 1. 8.
Office before the Lord in this kind, I made my choice of these few words to be
entreated of at that time. When by the assistance of the same Lord having
multiplied the self-same words into as many more words as took up the space
of a whole hour, there was yet behind some overplus, such as at that time
could not be disposed of, and therefore reserved by me till some fitter
opportunity. Which opportunity now come by reason of the Solemnity of this Day
which requires at our hands a more then ordinary respect, I am now come with
that overplus and as it were the Ne velut semesas verborum nostrorum epulas
reliquisse videamur. Ambros. de Panite^t. li. 2. c. 1.
fragments that were left, that nothing be lost as speaks our Savior, John
the sixth at the twelfe verse.

When first I handled then these words, you that were present may remember, you
that were not are now to know, that I the^ divided the same into two especial
points. First into a Petition, secondly, into the Reason of it. The Petition in
these words, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. The Reason
of it in these, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple:
Entreating of the Petition, I observed the Matter of it, and the Manner of
making it. The Manner of making it in these words, One thing have I desired of
the Lord which I will require: the Matter of it in these, Even that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. Jn the Matter of the
Petition I handled these points, First, what kind of house this was; Secondly,
what it was to dwell in it: Thirdly, the convenience of dwelling there. In the
Manner of making it, these; First, that it was his Chief Desire: Secondly, his
Constancy in it: Thirdly, the Manifestation of it to the world: and thus far
I then proceeded.

That which remained then behind, and with the which I am now come, and of the
which you are now to hear, is the Reason of the Petition, and it is as I said
in these words, To be hold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his
Temple. In which words may it please you to observe with me these two points:
First, what this Fair Beauty was: Secondly, the Power and Force that this
Fair Beauty had. What this Fair Beauty was we shall thoroughly observe if so
be we do observe how it consisted in two points. First, in regard of the
Parties that were present in that house: Secondly, in regard of the Things
performed by those Parties. The Parties present in that house was first the
Lord himself: Secondly, the Priests: Thirdly, the People. The Things
performed was the public solemnity of the worship of God, both in the Word
and Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises. And of every of these
in their several order, and first of the Presence of the Lord.

Anaxagor as being demanded to what end and purpose he was borne, his answer
Lactantius ^st. l. 3. c. 9.
says Lactantius was, to behold the Heavens and Sun in the firmament. Which
answer of his says Lactantius is of all men much admired, and accounted to be
a speech well befitting a Philosopher^l, says he, for my partam quite of an
other mind, and persuade my self that the party not knowing in that case
what to say, thought good to say somewhat yet least he should have been
thought by his Oppone^t to have been put to a non plus. For indeed to say the
truth says Lactantius, in so few words then uttered, how many solecismes shall
we find, and those no, mean ones neither? As first in that he referred the
whole duty of man only to the eye of man, to the mind of man nothing at all,
and how if Anaxagor as had bin blind says he, should he thereupon have had in
this world nothing to do? Again says Lactantius the other parts of the Body
had they no offices to perform? Besides that the chief Soveraignety seems
rather in the ears says he then in the eyes, because Learning and Wisdom
may be obtained by the ears only, by the only eye they cannot be. That which
Lactantius there aims at, namely that the Creator of Heaven should have been
respected not the Creature which was Heaven, at least wile before the Creature,
is respected no doubt by our Prophet here, in regard of whom it principally is
that he acknowledges here so fair a beauty. For what is it that makes the
Court more glorious then all places and assemblies in the Land besides, Is it
not the presence of the King? Doublesse where the King is, there is the Court,
as it was told Commodus the Emperor Heredian l. 1.
there was Rome where the Emperor was. Now that the King of Kings here was,
witness that of the Book of Numbers wherein it is Numb. 7. 89.
said that when Moses went into the Tabernacle to speak with God, he hard the
voice of one speaking unto him from the mercy seat that was upon the Arc
between the two Cherubins. Hence that of this our Prophet in another of his
Psa. 80. 1.
Psalms, Here oh thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a
sheep, show thyselfe also thou that set upon the Cherubins. And again in
another Psa. 99. 1.
Psalm, The Lord is King be the people never so impatient, he sets
between the Cherubins be the earth never so unquiet. And as in these two
Psalms he is said to set, so in other places of holy Scriptures he is said to
dwell between the Cherubins, both these terms Setting and Dwelling
signifying unto the^ his presence there. Not that he sat or dwelt there in
truth and in very deed, as we in our tongue understand or Setting or Dwelling,
yet that he was as really there present in that place, as themselves were in
the seats they sat on, or in the houses where they dwelt. Concerning the
Priests that here were present though the beauty they had was nothing
comparable to this beauty, yet considered in it self it was a Beauty no
doubt exceeding grati^ous and glorious too. They were the Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
holy one of God, and had as Moses says the Vrim and Thummim, that is, Light
and Perfection, the one signifying their Knowledge, the other their Life and
Conversation. Of Priests were two sorts the High Priest and the Rest that were
inferior unto him. Concerning the glory of the High Priest we shall the
better conceive what it was, if so be we call to mind what the son of Syrac
said concerning one of them namely Simon the soon of Onias. He was, Ecclus.
50. 6. 1
says the son of Syrac, as the morning star in the midst of a cloud, and
as the Moon when it is full, and as the Sun shining upon the Temple of the
most High, and as the Rainebow that is bright in the fair clouds, and as the
flower of the Roses in the spring of the year, and as Lillies by the spring^
of waters, and as the branches of the Frankincense tree in the time of Summer,
as a fi^e and incense in the Conser, and as a vessel of massy gold set with
all manner of precious stones, and as afaire Olive tree that is fruitful, and
as a Cypress tree which grows up to the clouds When he put on the garment
of honor and was clothed with all beauty he went up to the holy Altar and made
the garment of holiness honorable. Conceruing the glory of the other Priests
which were inferior unto him we may make an estimat by that which there
follows. When he look the portions out of the Priests h^nds he himself
stood by the hearth of the Altar compassed with hi^ Brethren round about as
the branches do the Cedar tree in L^^^nus, and they compassed him as the
branches of the Palm tree. So were all the sons of Ar^n in their glory and
the oblations of the Lord in their hands before all the Congregation of Israel.
In a word, the Jews they were Levit. 20. 24.
separated as Gods peculiar people from all other people besides, and the
Priests as more peculiar unto God were Nu^. 8. 14.
separated from the Jews.

Concerning the presence of the People, if so be in civil Societies whereas they
are orderly pyld together and they are not a tabble or a rout, it is no small
beauty which in such Societies is to be seen, how much more was the beauty
in those Assemblies in so peculiar a People as that was. One Tim^the^^ a
Captain^ of Athe^s being demanded by Themistooles what was the greatest joy
that ever he had in all his life, It was, Aelian. l. 13. c. 43.
says he, when in the Olympian games beginning to play my Prize, the whole
Theater there present behold me with their eyes. And famous is that of the
Senators of Rome, who when the Gauls had taken their City, and now were
entered into the Senate, They Live. Det. 1 l 5.
seemed unto them at the first like the Images of the Gods, of such a goodly
presence they were. The order observed in these Assemblies as it was far
beyond those, so was the Beauty no doubt far faierer, a wortheir object to the
eye. It is well seen o God, Ps. 68. 24.
says David, how thou go, how thou my God and King go in the Sanctuary.
The Singers go before, the Minstrels follow after, in the midst were the
Da^sels playing with the Timbrels. Nor was it prejudicial to this beauty that
there was perhaps in those Assemblies much cockle among the wheat, the bad
among the good, all as speaks the Romans 9. 6.
Apostle St Paul, not being Israel that were of Israel, nor all of them
Children because they were the seed of Abraham: seeing it was in respect of the
better part that this beauty here was thus accounted of. Like as we say in our
Creed, The holy Cathalike Church, notwithstanding there are too many neither
Catholic therein, nor Holy. But thus much of the Persons, the Parties here
present.

The Things performed in these Assembles wherein this Beauty did consist, was
as I said the Public Solemnity of the honor and service of God, both in his
word, and Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises: and indeed
admirable was the beauty in every of these particulars being beheld with
spiritual eyes* As first and foremost in the word, to consider how the eternal
God at Heb. 1. 1.
sundry times (...) in diverse manners spoke unto them by the Prophets.
Secondly, in the Sacraments, to consider how the same God did bind himself
unto them, even as the Debtor binds himself by bond unto his Creditor, or
man to man by way of Indenture. Thirdly in the Sacrifices to consider what was
due unto the sins themselves committed: I say themselves committed, and yet
Ovid. Met l. 15.
Placidum pecus, inque tuendos
Natum homines,
the mild and gentle Sheep, Animal sine fraud, dolisque,
the innocent and harmless Ox, they forsooth must die the death. Fourthly in
their Prayers, how they needed not now make such Apologies as Abraham did unto
the Lord, Ge^, 18. 27
Behold now I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and I am but dust and ashes:
and again, V. 30*
Let not my Lord now be angry that I speak: and yet again, V. 32.
Let not my Lord now be angry and I will speak but this once: no they might
now talk their fill with him, every Morning, every Evening, both at their
Morning and Evening Sacrifice. Lastly in their Praises to consider how they Ps.
150. 1.
praised God in his holiness, praised him in the firmament of his power, praised
him in his noble acts, praised him according to his excellent greatness, praised
him in the sound of the trumpet, praised him upon the Lute and harp, praised
him in the Cymbals and Daunces, praised him upon the strings and Pipe, praised
him upon the well tuned Cymbals, praised him upon the loud Cymbals. Indeed it
was a good thing as Ps. 147. 1.
said the Psalmist to sing praise unto their God, yea a joyful and pleasant
thing it was to be thankful. And thus much of the Fair Beauty in respect of
the Things performed in those Assemblies: now as touching the Power and Force
this Fair Beauty had, which was as you may remember the second point to be
observed.

Concerning the Power and Force of this Fair Beauty here specified, we shall
take a scantling thereof, if so be we do consider how it ravished this our
Prophet, Body, and Soul. First his Soul, and that by way of Contemplation, To
behold the Fair Beauty of the Lord: Secondly his Body, and that by way of
Action, To visit his Temple: Thirdly in that it caused him to join them both
together, and that in the particle, And To behold the fair beauty of the Lord
and to visit his Temple. And of every of these in their order, and first that
his Soul was ravished by way of Contemplation. To behold the fair beauty of
the Lord.

Great is the Power of Beauty though it be but worldly beauty such as is the
beauty of women, Is not the king 1. Esd. 4. 28.
says Zorobabel great in his power? Do not all regions fear to touch him?
Yet I saw him and Apame the kings concubine, the daughter of the famous
Bartacus, sitting on the right hand of the king. And she took the crown of
the kings bead, and put it upon her own, and stroke the king with her left
hand, Yet in the mean season the king gaped and gazed on her, and if she
laughed at him, he laughed, and if she were angry with him he did ^latten her
that he might he reconciled with her. The sons of God Genesis 6. 7.
says the Scripture saw the daughters of men that they were fair and they
took them wives of all that they liked. Behold Ge^. 12. 11
says Abraham to Sara I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon,
therefore it will come to pass that when the Egiptians see thee they will say
she is his wife, so they will kill me but they will keep thee alive. Now if so
be in worldly beauty which is but a superficial color only covering the
blood, skin, and bones, things most hideous to be beheld, and that which
Diseases some times, always Age ^ F'evit vt in speculo ruga^ adspexit aniles
Tyndaris. Ovid. Metam. l. 15
does deforme, the power and force thereof is so great, what may we think of
this Beauty which was ever the self same, as fresh in David's times as it was
in the time of Moses, and in the times of the Prophets after, as in David's long
before, nay much more fresh and glorious, having a most beautiful Temple to
adorn it, the Temple of Jerusalem. Howbeit here we are to note that the beauty
here specified was not outward so much as within, and therefore needed an
inward eye, the eye of Contemplation. The Kings daughter Ps. 45. 14.
says the Prophet is all glorious within, quite contrary to worldly beauty.
Worldly beauty as you hard even now reaches no further then to the skin, to
the outward Superficies, It may be fair without and foul within, much like to
the Egiptian Temples which were mavelous beautiful without, but within
instead of a God, they had a Crocodile, or a Cat, or some strange serpent more
me^^^ for a cave, or a den, I for adunghill says an ancient Clem. Alex Padag.
l. 3. c. 2.
Father then for a place so gorgeous. It was not so with this Temple. There was
beauty without in deed, but more, much more within, and therefore not to
beseene with corporal eyes so much, such as are common to us with Flies, and
G^^ts, as with the eye of understanding, even with those ^^s as speaks (...).
Theod. Graee Affect. C^r^^ Ser. 11.
Theodoret, which faith has put into our heads. And thus much for the Prophets
eye, the Eye of Contemplation: not the eye he beheld when time was the beauty
of 2. Sam. 11. 2.
Bathsheba with, no he was now blind on that side, but the eye of the mind,
and of the soul, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord. The thing I noted
here was that it ravished his Body to, and that by way of Action, and that in
causing him to take the pains to go himself in person thither, and therefore
now concerning his body: To visit his Temple.

The word Temple in this place does not argue that this Psalm was made after
the building of the Temple, and that consequently it was none of David's, the
Temple in David's time not being built, for even long before this time it was i
said of Eli the Priest, ^. Sam. 1. 9
that he fate upon a stool by one of the posts of the Temple. It is by a kind
of figure then that it is ^earmed here the Temple, like as S. Jerome upon
Ezechiel, we in steed of the city Noe Hieron. in Ezech. l. 9. c. 30.
says he, have translated it Alexandria; for that it was afterward so called;
and S. Aug. de Consens. Evang l. 2. c. 17.
Austin to this purpose, we hear that Christ's disciples were bidden to the
marriage at Ca^a in Galylie, not that they were his disciples then and that at
that time, but that they were afterward so to be. But now concerning the
Action of visiting the Temple.

The verb To visit being a freque^tatiue intimates unto us the frequency of
the Prophet David's going to that Temple, his frequencie of going thither the
fervency of his desire. Concerning his freque^cy of going thither it was well
observed by the Arist. Eth. l. 1. c. 7.
Philosopher that a habit is not gotten (...) only action, no more then one
fair he speaks* in an other case, or one fair day makes a summer. It ^as well
observed by him in Ethic. l. ^. c. 4.
another place, that it it not the multiplicity of actions neither that does
denominate the party virtuous but if he do them virtuously: as aiust man if he
do just things justly, a temperate man if he do temperate things temperatly. In
regard whereof the Vid. Jew. else Defense of the Articles. Art. 5. Div. 5 and M.
Hooker Eccl. P^^. l. 5. Sect. 62.
Canonists were wont to say that God was the rewarder of Adverbs, not of
Nownes, and our Savior to this purpose, Mat. 6. 22
If thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be light, but if thine eye be wicked
the^ all thy body shall be dark: that is as S. Austen August. de Sermon. Dom. in
Mont^. l. 2
interprets it, such shall be thy deeds as thy intention is to do them. These two
points the one of Multiplicity the other of Quality are both of them intimated
here in this single sole word of Visiting: To Visit implies both; First it
implies a Frequency of going to the Temple, as if the P^ophet had meant his
feet should even wear out the very steps of the door. Secondly, it implies his
Feruenty of spirit which manifestly shows that what was done was done
religiously. And this it is that must be done, and it must be done thus, that
must be held to be such an action as the Prophet protests here he would
perform. If either of these two want, or Frequencie, or Ferven^ie, it makes us
like a bird that has but one only wing, well we may hop to Church, but fly
thither we cannot, we shall never be able as speaks the Esaias. 60. 8
Prophet, to fly thither like a cloud, and as the Doves to their windoes.

The ioining of both these puts me in mind of the third point, namely how
this our Prophet ioin^th likewise together, Contemplation and Action both, and
that in the pa^ticle^ [ And] To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to
visit his Temple: so that he seems not to say as Match* Comment. l. 2. c. 2 and
l. 3. c. 3.
Macha^^l in another case, Divide and Imper^, divide them and master them both:
but as it was Quintil. Inst. l. 6. c. 4.
said of the Ship rather, Si dividis, per d^^: If ^^ once divide it, you ma^re
all. And there fore what the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. ^.
says of m^ried folks, Defraud not one another except it be with consent for
a time that you may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and again come
together that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency, may not ^^fitly be
applied as to the two lives the Contemplatiur and Active in general, so to
this Contempletion and Action of the Prophet here in particular. Our Souls and
Bodies are Car^ atque Anim^ velut quada^^ lege sociantur co^^ugii. Ambr. de
Abrah. Pa ^iarch. l. 2. c. 6.
Man and Wife as it were, so loueli^ linc^t together that till death it self
depart them, no Divorce betwixt the both. With consent indeed they often times
1. Cor. 7. ^.
defraud one another, that so they may give themselves to fasting and prayer,
and what is this but the Life Contemplative? But afterward they come together
again, and are careful for things convensent for them, and this is the Life
Active. These two several lives the Active and Contemplative have had their
several welwillers from the beginning of the world to this day, while some
preferring the one Life, some the other, have wholly addicted themselves or to
the one, or to the other. Much I confess may be spoken in the behalf of
either of the^, but when all comes to all, the Life that ioines them both
together and unites these two Roses, the White as it were and the Red, is the
Life in my opinion best accepted with God and man. I appeal in this case to
Antiquity it self, which took such strict order that very Monks who had
be^aken themselves to Contemplation, should not be Vid. A^gde Opere Monach.
Tom. 3.
labourlesse notwithstanding; I they were to work with their own hands, and
that to get their own living. Howbeit the Action here meant by the Prophet in
this place, is not an Action of this nature, it was to use his feet not his
hands, especially his hands in a Mechanical kind of sort. It was indeed to use
those feet of his to the often coming to the Temple, and not upon the wagging
of a straw, or to absent himself from thence, or to make of his own house a
Chapel of ease. Hence it is that he so often Ps 26. 12.
voweth unto God the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving in the Congregation,
that he so Ps. 134. 2.
earnestly exhorts others to sing praises to the Lord in his Courts, in his
Ps. 134. 3.
Sanctuary, before the Ps. 30. 5.
Memorial of his Holiness, and so much complains of his own uncomfortable
exile, See M Ho^ker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. Sect. ^4.
wherein although he sustained many most grievous indignities, and endured the
want of sundry both pleasures and honors before enjoyed, yet as if this one
were his only griese and the rest not felt, his speeches are all of the
heavenly benefit of Ps. 27. 4. 42. 4. 84. 1.
Public Assemblies, and the happiness of such as had free access thereunto.
And as the Prophet here in this place thus ioineth them together, so doubt
less no good Professor that lived in those times but also did the like,
joining and coupling both together, least with idle Contemplation without
coming at all to Church Assemblies he might vanish away in his speculation, or
coming to Church Assemblies without the benefit of Contemplation he should be
like to those who Esaias. 29. 13.
came near to the Lord with their mouths, and honored them with their lips,
but their heart was far from him. And thus much of the Reason of the Prophets
Petition in this place, the Beauty of the Church that so much moved him to be
so desirous to go to Church. Now to apply what has been spoken, and to make
such use of it as is fit, and to come to the mark it self whereat I first
aimed when I first made choice of this Text. To behold the fair beauty of the
Lord and to visit his Temple.

Little wrong was done to Saul by the woman of Israel when they made it the
burden of their song, 1. Sam. 18. 7.
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand. The unlike deserts
of these two Princes, M. D King on Jonas. Lect. 1.
says a worthy Divine of our days, might justly admit an unlike commendation.
Our Savior in the Gospel indeed Luke 5. 39
prefers old wine before new: but in the same Gospel if we mark it, he
prefers the New Luke 7. 28.
Testament before the old. There is no greater Prophet then John, Mat 11. 11.
says he, among them that are begotten of women, nevertheless he that is
least in the kingdom of God is greater then he, the kingdom of God being
there taken as the kingdom of heaven, Matthew the third at the second verse,
and the Gospel of the kingdom, Matthew the fourth at the three and twenty
verse, and the word of the kingdom, Matthew the thirteenth at the nineteenth
verse, in a word, as our Savior meant when he said, The kingdom of God shall
be taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation which shall bring forth the
fruits thereof, Matthew the one and twentieth at the three and fortieth verse.

These things thus, Beloved, it shall be no disparagement to the Temple here in
this place, if so be we prefer before it the Beauty of our Temples. The
Beauty I told you of this Temple consisted in two points, First in regard of
the Parties that there were present: Secondly in regard of the Things performed
in those Assemblies. The Parties present were first the Lord himself, then the
Priests, the^ the People. The Things performed in those Assemblies was the
Public Solemnity of Gods worship both in the Word, and Sacraments, and
Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises: and does not the Church of God whereof our
Assemblies are every of them parts and parcels, of the self same nature the
Church is, eve^ the meanest Assembly that is (so it be a Congregation) does not
the Church I say so far *excel that Synagogue as the Sun in his brightness
the meanest star? Begin we first of all with Gods presence, and is it not
more in Christian Assemblies the^ it was to the Israelits in that Temple: At
sundry times and in diverse manners Heb. 1. 1.
says the Apostle to the Hebrews God spoke in the old time to our Fathers by
the Prophets, in these last dais he has spoken to us b^ S^nne: and never spoke
Prophet ^e the Son, John the seventh ^e six and fortith verse. O but you ^ay
God him self spoke to Moses, ^es hard his Numb. 7. 89.
own voice: I grant he did; and was not the same voice of the same God hard
also in the new Testament first upon the baptism of our Savior, Matthew the
third at the seave^teenth verse, secondly, at another time John the 12 at the
eight and twenty verse? True it is, it was at those times, it was then, it is
not now, howbeit as S. Austen in the matter of the Tongues, To one that should
say Aug. de Temp. Ser. 188.
says he if thou have received the Holy Ghost why then speak thou not as
did the Apostles with diversity of tongues, thou may answer him again, yes,
I speak with diversity of tongues, for I am in the body of Christ that is the
Church, which speaks with such diversity: right so may we say in this case,
no particular Church whatsoever but in regard this was spoken to our Savior
Christ the head thereof, but has the benefit of those words, and may be said
to have hard the voice of God.

Now as we have God the father here, the first Person in Trinity, so have we
here God the son to, even as he testified of himself, where two or three
Mat. 18. 20.
says he are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of the^.
Not as he was in the midst between the two thieves, giving influence to the
one, and none at all to the other, Luke the three and twe^tith at the three and
fortith verse, but as he was in the midst of the Luke 2. 46
Doctors, or in the midst of the Luke 24. 36.
eleaven Apostles, or if not so personally for he is now at the right hand of
God, and there sets as speak the Mark. 16. 19.
Scriptures, yet as he was in the midst of the candleslickes Revelation the
first at the thirteenth verse.

Over and besides the Son of God, we have God the holy Ghost to, of who^ our
Savior himself said, that he should abide with us for ever, and is therefore
called by Tertullian, The Tertull. de Vir. V^land.
Vicar of Christ upon earth. True it is they had in their Temple this Trinity
as well as we, the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, for they were but one God
both then, and now, and ever; but come to the manner of their being there, and
being with us in our Assemblies, and it was a ridle to the Jews, we that have
plowed with Judge. 14. 18.
Sampsons heyfer, that is, with the holy Scriptures, have easily found it out.
You shall hear Dichers and Delvers says (...). Theodor. ad Graec. In^id. Ser.
5.
Theodoret of the Christians in his time, and he spoke it not in skorne
neither, reasoning about the Trinity.

Over and besides the Holy Trinity, we have the Angels to, here present, in
regard of whom the Apostle in his Epistle to the 1. Cor. 11 10.
Corinthians, The woman ought to have power on her head, that is, to have her
head covered, because of the Angels. Nor are they present only as Spectators,
but they assist us after a sort, I they solace themselves in the beauty of this
house according to that of St 1. Pet. 1. 12.
Peter, The which things the Angels desire to behold: speaking of the mysteries
published in the Gospel. The word (...) Bezain 1. Pet. 1. 12.
Beholding there used, being the same that was used of himself when he looked
so diligently into the Luke 24. 12.
sepulcher, and the Apostle alluding thereby as it is thought to the figure of
the Cherubins that were so fashioned by the hand of the work man, as if they
had Exodus 25. 20.
looked into the Arc.

Concerning the other Parties that were present, namely the Priests and
People, how infinitely in each of them do we Christians out strip the Jews?
First concerning our Priests they are not in deed so gorgeous in attire as
they were, but being Ministers of better things, how are they more beautiful
notwithstanding? How beautiful Romans 10. 15.
says the Apostle are the feet of them which bring glad tidings of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things? And St Chrysostom, he compares the^ in one
Chrysostom. de Eucharist. in Euc^^.
place to the Angels, in another Chrysostom. de Sac^^d. l. 3.
place he prefers them far before the^. To them says he that inhabit the
earth and are conversant therein, is committed the dispensing of those things
which are in h^ave^. They have that power given unto them which he never gave
to Angels, no not Archangels themselves.

Concerning the People, they indeed were a Nation, but they were but one
Nation, we the whole world. And therefore as our Savior Mark. 28. 19.
said to his disciples, Go and teach all Nations, so they went and taught them
severally; See Eusebius. l. 3. c. 1. and Hiero^. Ca^al. script. Ecclesiast.
S. John the Asians, S. Andrew the Achaians, S. Matthew the Ethiopians, S.
Philip the Phrygians, S. Bartholmew the Indians, S. Thomas the Parthians, and
so forth, their sound Romans 10* 18.
says the Apostle went out through all the earth, and their words into the end
of the world. Or if so be they went not to all places in their own proper
persons, as S. Austen Aug. ep. 80
seems to be of opinion, yet has every Nation now, or at the least wise has
had the benefit of that doctrine which the Apostle delivered to those nations
that in their own persons they then visited. We may well add unto this point
that peculiar honor and testimonial that is given unto Christians in that
they are said so 1. Cor. 3. 16. 2 Cor. 6. 16
many times to be themselves the Temple of God, I every of them in particular
in regard of their 1. Cor. 6. 19.
bodies to be the Temple of the holy Ghost. But thus much of outstripping them
in regard of the Parties present: that we no less outstrip them to, in regard
of the Pub like Solemnity of Gods worship, namely in the Word, and Sacraments,
and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises, remains now to be declared, and
first concerning the Word.

First then concerning the Word, they had Moses I grant, and they had the
Prophets. Moses as speaks Theodoret, who was the Theodoret. ad Graec. Insid.
ser. 2.
Ocean of Divinity, and instructed mouth to mouth as it were by God himself;
the Prophets, who were the floods and so many rivers as it were derived from
him. Moses he delivered them the Law, the Prophets they were the Interpreters
of that Law. Both Moses and Prophets so complete at that time for the salvation
of the Jews, that that of Abraham unto Dives concerning the salvation of his
Brethren then living, Luke 16. 29.
They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them, was an argument that
would not admit of any reply that Dives made. For when he answered thereupon,
v. 30.
Nay Father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead, they will amend
their lives, the Patriarch holds himself to his first resolution, v. 31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rise from the dead again. Now if they were then taught so wholly and
perfectly by Moses and the Prophets alone, how much better is our case who
have the Apostles, and Evangelists annexed unto them? Moses and the Prophets
indeed being a light as S. Peter 2. Pet. 1. 19.
speaks, that shines in a dark place, but the Apostles, and Evangelists as
the day star arising in our hearts. And thus much of the Word.

How far we outstrip them in the Sacraments S. Aug epist. 118* and de Doct.
Christ. l. 3. c. 9.
Austen will bear us witness, who speaking of theirs, and ours; we, says he, are
not pressed with the heavy burden they were, but our Lord and his Apostles have
delivered unto us a few Sacraments in steed of many, and the same in performing
most easy, in signification most excellent, in observation most reverend, and
he names in that place Ba^tisme and the Sup^er. True it is the Apostle 1. Cor.
10 1.
says, they were all under the clowd, and all passed through the sea, and were
baptized unto Moses in the clowd, and in the sea; and again, v. 3.
they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual rock that followed them and
the rock was Christ, howbeit this which the Apostle says is in regard of the
substance and effect of the Sacraments, the signification of our Sacraments is
much more clear the^ theirs was.

In our Sacrifices we are farther before the^ then in our Sacraments, having
had in our church the self same Sacrifice really acted, whereof al their
Sacrifices were but shadows. For if the blood of Bulls, Heb. 9. 13
says the Apostle, and of Goats, and the ashes of an Haifer sprinckling them
that are unclean, sanctifies as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much
more shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purg your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God? And again a little after, The law, Heb. 10. ^
says he, having the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offer year by year
continually sanctify the comers thereunto. v. 4.
For it is impossible that the blood of Bals and Goats should take away sins.
Now if so be we would know the virtue of our Sacrifice, though it were but one,
their Sacrifices being many, with one offering, v. 14.
says the Apostle, has he consecrated for ever the^ that are sanctified. And
he had said a little Heb 9. 27.
before As it is appointed unto men that they shall once die and after that
comes the judgment, so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of
many. And comparing his Priesthood with theirs, Among them, Heb 7. 23
says he, many were made Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by
the reason of death, but this man because he endures ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood. And again a little after, Heb. 7. ^^
Such a High Priest it became us to have which is holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, which needed not daily
as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for his own sins, and
then for the Peoples, for that did he once when he offered up himself.
Comparing then those Sacrifices with this of ours, I may say of them as did
Theodoret of the like offered by the Gentiles, they were such kind of
Sacrifices as were fit for (...). Theodor et. ad Graec. Infidel. Ser. 7.
Hucks^ers and Butchers to make.

Lastly concerning Prayer, wherein I comprehend with the Zanch. de Redemp. l.
1. c. 19.
Learned not only the asking of things needful for us, and deprecation of
things hurtful, but the confession of our sins, the praises of God, and giving
thanks for benefits received at his hands, how far we outstrip the Jews,
witness that of the Prophet Malachie, who co^paring both together theirs and
ours, From the rising of the Sun, Malac. 1. 11.
says he, unto the going down of the same, my name is great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offering. Now what is this Incense but Prayers, for so the Holy Ghost himself
interprets Ince^se, Revelation the fifth at the eight verse. And that this Pure
Offering is the same, witness that of Tertullian Tertul. advers. Marcian. l. 4.
a Pure Offering, that is, a Pure Prayer from a conscience that is pure, for it
so be, as speaks the same Father in another Tertul Exhort. ad Cast.
place, the Conscience blush, Prayer it self will blush too. I but you will
say, since these our Prayers must needs taste of the caske from whence they
come, and the caske is very impure be it the Conscience, or the Heart of man,
how can they be the Pure Offering here spoken of in this place? I answer
according to Scripture that there is in heaven a certain Rev. 8. 3.
Angel, it is indeed our Savior Christ, that goes and stands before the Altar
having a golden Censer and much odours given unto him that he should offer with
our prayers. Howsoever then as proceeding from our selue, sthey are tainted and
corrupt, yet are they sweetened by our Savior, provided that they be
infirmities only that taint the^ not loud crying sins, for if they once come
to that pass, then farewell all approaching and appearing in Gods sight. When
you shall stretch out your hands, I, says the Esaias, 1. 15
Lord, will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers I will
not hear: the reason he gives immediately, for your hands are full of blood;
and yet immediately after that too, as if he were loath to give even such an
utter repulse, Wash you, v. 16.
says he, make you clean, take away the Evil of your works from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, and so forth, Come now and let us
reason together, says the Lord, though your sins were as crimsen they shall
be made white as snow, though they were red like scarlet they shall be as
wool. And to this end and purpose has the Church of God for this sixteen
hundred years and upward been in her several Congregations continually on
her knees. We come by troops, Tertul. Apol. l. 1. c 39.
says Tertullian, that being banded as it were together, we may be supplicants
enough, not so much to beseech, as to beseige God with our prayers. This force to
God is most acceptable. The sound of men, women, children, and infants, Basil
Hexam Hom. 4.
says St Basil, praying in the Church together, seems like the sound of the
waves beating against the sea shore. Hieron. in 2. Prooem. ad Gal.
St Ierom, he likens it to the noise of Thunder, and in another place
discoursing of the Funerals of Fabiola, The Psalms, Hieron. ad Ocean. Epitaph.
Fabiol.
says he, did sound a loud, and the Haleluiah that was sung did shake at that
instant the golden feelings of the Temple with the noise it made.

But of all the Beauties in our Church nothing so beautiful indeed as the
Beauty of our Savior. He was, says Aug in Ps. 44.
St Austen, a beautiful God, he was the word that was with God, he was
beautiful in his mothers womb, where he lost not his Divinity, and yet he
took Humanity on him. He was beautiful being borne an Infant, because when he
was an Infant, when as he sucked the dug, and was carried in his mothers arms,
the heavens spoke, the Angels praised him, the stars directed the wise men to
him, he was adored in the manger being to be meat convenient for the mouths of
gentle Beasts. And this is that fair beauty which we celebrate this day. This
day it was that having made for himself a Tabernacle, as speaks Theodoret, in
the womb of the Virgin, he issued forth from thence both (...). Theodoret. de
Graec. Affect. Ser. 6.
a visible man, and a God to be adored. Borne of the substance of the Father
before all worlds, but assuming that of the Virgin Mary which did appear to
the world. Borne, says the same Father, as it were this day, and yet from all
eternity. Borne of his Father, Aug de Temp. Ser. 12
says St Austen, without a mother he created every day, borne of his mother
without a Father he has consecrated this day, so that where as, says he, in
the worlds beginning man was made to the likeness of God, the case is altered
now at this time, for this day God is made to the likeness of man. Nor let it
seem incredible, says the same August. de Temp. Ser. 181.
Father, that he should be borne of a Virgin, who out of the Virgin earth made
the first man that ever was.

These the Beauties of our Church, and of every our several Congregations,
what remains but our desires in respect of them be such as was the Prophets
concerning the Temple, namely to behold there these fair beauties, and to
visit these places, that if so be that Beauty were so powerful with the
Prophet which was so far inferior unto ours, ours with us should be more
powerful as being far more beautiful and so far superior unto theirs.
Let it ravish then our Souls by way of Contemplation, and like a load stone
draw our Bodies to by way of Action to these places, and let us join here Body
and Soul by Contemplation and Action both. Let us not take as Gods name, so
not his beauty in vain, if so be the Lord will not hold him guiltles that takes
his Exodus ^0. 7.
name in vain, how will he judge those another day that so much contemn this
his Beauty?

And to the better effecting hereof let us come often to this House, and as the
word used here is a frequentatiue, so let our deeds be frequent to. To come
not at all with the Popish Recusant, or but monthly with the false hearted
Protestant, or in the forenoone or afternoon only with the half Christian, or
when Service is half done with the careless Gospeller, or when there is a
Sermon only with the Precisian, are vices all of a quality, though not al of
the self same quantity, all able to drown us though not all after one sort.
The Precisian he is drowned as it were in rose water, Moses and the Prophets
are nothing with him here, unless forsooth they be interpreted: The careless
Gospeller in a bole of water, a little serves his turn: The half Christian in
mud and water: The false hearted Protestant in a river of water, but the
Recusant he that will never be here, and that utterly shunneth these
Assemblies, he is drowned in a sea of water, drowned in deed as are the rest,
but the manner of his drowning more dreadful, so much the farther from all
hope as he will needs be far thest from all help. If now you demand of me how
often you should come hither. I answer even as often as this Beauty here is to
be seen in the Public Service of our God. Whether on the Saboth day, or on
Nostridies festi in 40 praecepto nomine Sabbathi comprehensi. Zanch. de Redemp.
l. 1 c. 9.
Holy days, or even on the week days to, specially Masters and Mistresses of
families, unless as Zanch. ^b. qu. 2.
Za^chius well states the question, our sickness is such as that we cannot come,
or our affairs of such importance that we may not defer them till an other
time. He that at every time else comes when ever opportunity is offered, it is
a sign he is enamored with this Beauty of the Lord, and he that with this
Beauty is so enamoured in this world, shall an other day behold his fairer
Beauty, and visit his other Temple in the world to come. Of which Beauty, and
which Temple to speak in S. Austens August. de Tripl. Habitac. c 4.
phrase, whatsoever a man shall say it is as it were but a drop in comparison
of the Sea, and a spark in respect of a fire. For how, says the same Aug. in
Ps. 85.
Father, should it possibly come into the tongue of man, that could never come
as yet into the heart of man. It being an invincible truth which the Apostle 1.
Cor. 2. 9
S. Paul delivers, The things which eye has not seen* neither ear has
hard, neither came into man's heart, are, which God has prepared for them that
love him.

The same God so bless us and the seed that has been sown, etc.
FINIS.

