PARADISE WITHIN US: OR, The happy Mind.

By Robert Crofts.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet. 1640.

To the Readers.
FOrmerly having studied out of many good Authors diverse notes concerning this
Subject of Man's Happiness; And since (for private use) written the same
together in a Book Entitled VIA FOELIX, The happy Way* in three general
Partitions, The first of Terrestrial, The second of Moral, And the third of
Divine happiness on Earth. And further, divided the same in diverse particular
Sections: I have new lately for some Reasons abstracted and new studied out of
the same, (but in a different manner and method, and with diverse alterations
and additions,) Three little General Treatises, The first of Earthly
happiness Entitled, The Terrestrial Paradise. The second this of Moral
happiness, Entitled, Paradise within us. And the third of Divine happiness
on Earth, Entitled Heaven within us. The first and the third I have lately
published, This having Relation to both the other, I thought not amiss to be
impressed last of the three. Having been encouraged in the former, I do
intend hereafter to Review, new study, and publish the Rest; Being a far more
particular and large discourse of this Subject Happiness on Earth, and
Physically, Philosophically, Historically and Divinely digested. But, not
entertain you with a Prolix Preamble, Forasmuch as the Preface to the Readers
In the Terrestrial Paradise may in diverse respects be applied to this Book
also, without any further Introduction, I proceed.

THE CONTENTS OF the Book.
DIVIS. I. THE felicity of a virtuous Mind. II. How to gain the same. III. How
the body works upon the Mind, And how we may and ought thereby to mainetaine
and increase the Felicity thereof. IV. Directions concerning Phlegmatic
Complexions, and such as are of slow, dull, lazy, heavy minds, exciting to
Quickness, Liveliness, and cheerfulness. V. Concerning Sanguine
Complexions, And such as are of Intemperate voluptuous minds; Also of conceited
and vainglorious; Exciting to Meekness and Humility, also to moderate
delectation. VI. Of Chollericke Complexions, and such as are of haughty
Ambitious, Angry, Rash, violent, furious minds, exciting to Mildness,
Meekness, Moderation, and Tranquillity, to affable, sweet and pleasing
conditions. VII. Of Melancholy Complexions; Of Covetous, fearful, Sad,
sorrowful Minds, exciting to moderate desires, and contentment, to fortitude,
cheerfulness, Joy and happiness. VIII. Of mixed Complexions, and various
minds; of such as are of Envious, malicious, Revengefull, Cruel, obstinate,
froward, sullen, desperate minds; exciting to love, kindness, Clemency,
humanity and to all virtue, pleasantness, delights and felicities. IX. That by
virtue the mind becomes apt, and well prepared to enjoy the choycest and
sweetest felicities on Earth. X. That by virtue also, the Mind becomes apt and
well disposed to know, attain, and enjoy (as far as the same is capable) the
felicities of Heaven on Earth.
PARADISE WITHIN US, OR, The happy Mind.
THE I. DIVISION. Showing briefly, The felicity of a virtuous Mind.
THE happy Mind, which in this compendious Treatise J intend to discourse of,
is; That true Joy and Tranquillity of spirit which is said to be the fruit and
Crown of virtue or wisdom, and by some Philosophers, The sovereign Good of
Man.

It is an equal, firm, amiable, pleasant and joyful estate of the soul,
whereby the same becomes free from Sloth, from intemperate desires and from all
ill passions and perturbations; And possessed with true wisdom, lightsomnesse,
tranquillity, affability, pleasantness, and well prepared to enjoy (either in
contemplation or action) the most delightful felicities both Terrestrial and
Heavenly. So that while we can maintain our minds in this estate, we may
sweetly enjoy even a Paradise of happiness within us.

Who traceth right in Virtues ways
most certainly shall find
A Paradise of sweetest joys
within his happy Mind.
But let us view the same more plainly.

The fountain and object of this happiness in the Mind which we now seek for,
is; Virtue, or true Wisdom, the Compound, light, and directresse thereof, is
Reason.

Virtue in general is described to be, A laudable, pleasant, and constant
habit in the Mind, which being wrought in us by divine Reason impresseth in our
understanding a perfect knowledge of the true good, according whereunto as it
is requisite and expedient we must Love or hate, take or leave; The same being
the never erring directrix of our affections and actions, and always rewarding
us with internal Tranquillity, Joy, and happiness.

More particularly, Virtue is usually divided into four principal Parts;
namely, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice: To which, all other
virtues are subordinate and may be reduced. And from which (as from the maine
branches thereof) they (as lesser boughs) do spring and proceed: All which
with their peculiar definitions, descriptions, differences and kinds are at
large described in the Ethics, and are the subject of Moral Philosophy.

A million of good and happy effects does virtue produce in such as do
conform themselves thereunto; The same instructs us to over-sway and command
all the Inclinations and Actions of the minds irrational parts, bridling and
cutting off all both the excesses and defects of passions and affections,
keeps them within the circle of mediocrity, directly between too much and
too little; Expels out of the mind all vices, as Covetousness, Ambition,
Intemperate desires, Choler, Sloth, Melancholy; all base fear of danger and
of death; and armeth with resolution and comfort, even against all manner of
Tribulations.

The same also accomplisheth us with true and habitual Wisdom, Verity,
Sobriety, Magnanimity, Confidence, Patience, Persevera^ce, Honesty, Gratitude,
Humanity, Liberality, Clemency, Courtesy, Affability, Cheerfulness,
Pleasantness, and all good and amiable conditions.

It is a light unto our life, showing us that which is good and comely, and
teaching us how to perform all good and laudable Actions. It gives us also a
will to all manner of goodness, and to declare the same by a sweet and loving
Conversation.

Virtue also advances the mind and infuseth thereinto, a generous desire of
aspiring even to the highest part of that which is most excellent, most
profitable, and most honorable; exciting the same to go on constantly,
freely, fearelessely, and cheerfully (though through many dangers and
difficulties) to all good and worthy Actions; Makes a man truly worthy of
honor; always fills the mind with good and high resolutions, and with
inward delectation and happiness.

So as, there is nothing Terrestrial that merits to be in equipage with
Divine virtue; The same is a daughter of Heaven, If we could truly know the
excellency thereof, we should presently commit our selves to her perfect
guidance; we should incontinently embrace the same with dearest affections, And
know that the Incirculing Arms of the whole world embraces nothing that is
nigh so excellent as Divine virtue,

The same being a divine and Immortal quality in us, always excites our minds
to some good Action or other by an earnest desire to make the same agreeable
unto God himself, and to obtain an Eternal guerdon given by him in the world
to come, knowing there are inestimable Treasures, Crowns of Glory; A Paradise
of delights prepared in the Heavens, to reward such as live a good and virtuous
life on Earth.

And when we find within us that we have done well, the same tickleth our
affections with sweet and pleasant delectation, So that when we find within us
this heavenly Temper of a virtuous disposition, and seeing that thereby we often
avoid evil and vicious Courses, and often accomplish good and worthy Actions;
our minds are thereby filled with joy and pleasure, even as the Sun is with
light, the choysest flowers with fragrant smells, and the gay apparelled
Springtime with greenness.

There is a Congratulation, a pleasing contentment in well-doing, It is a true
and essential Reward of a good man's Soul, which never fails him.

So as the privilege that virtue has in rewarding her followers, is much
greater then the world can afford, for the world at the best can give but
fleeting, but transitory delights and the windy praises of men; But such as are
truly virtuous have greater Rewards even within themselves, for (besides that
virtuous men usually live more healthfully, prosperously, honorably,
pleasantly and every way even outwardly more happily then vicious men) their
virtue does always inwardly afford to their Mind and Conscience most sweet
joys and pleasures, and has also eternal glorious rewards assigned for the
same in the Heavens.

And albeit the body have its distinct pleasures apart from the mind, yet
cannot the same be either truly pleasant or laudable if not contained within
the precincts of virtue, which is the proper object of the minds happiness;
Because the same will otherwise breed much more displeasure then content. But
being limited within the bounds thereof are laudable and good to be enjoyed;
So as it is indeed this virtuous habit of the mind only that well prepares the
same and makes us truly enjoy all Corporal and Terrestrial happiness also,
for virtue i^ the Rule and guide of all sensual and external pleasures, so as
thereby and within the limits thereof we may and should freely and cheerfully
(as in my former Book J have dilated) enjoy the good and lawful pleasures and
felicities of the world, even a Terrestrial Paradise of delights, and
Happiness within us.

Yea, by the guidance of this divine and immortal quality of virtue we may and
should be directed the way to GOD himself, to Heaven, and even in this life
thereby we do become most apt and well prepared to enjoy a Paradise of
heavenly delights also within us.

For why; Wisdom which is compounded of all the other virtues of the
intellectual soul, shows and persuades us to love and embrace that which is
truly good, and principally that which is most good; But the most excellent good
is God himself, wherefore true Wisdom or Virtue referres it self and all its
faculties and exercises to him and to his Glory; he being the Fountain or
rather the Ocean of all true pleasure and happiness: To whom, and to which,
True Wisdom also persuades and directs us the way which is by divine Grace,
and chiefly the principal and fountain of heavenly Graces; Namely, Faith,
Hope, and Charity.

This habit of virtue also does well prepare the mind, and makes the same apt
to receive, conceive and retain all heavenly graces and happiness, all divine
Illuminations, and Consolations. So that if our faith and hope be high and
heavenly enough, and our Minds pure and divine enough, we may by Contemplation
(in some measure beforehand) enjoy heavenly delights and pleasures within us.
But of this more hereafter.

Let us therefore spare no labors, no endeavors to gain this excellent
treasure of Virtue, Let our desires and our designs be wholly employed in the
acquiring of it, since by the guidance thereof we are directed the way to
mount up to heaven and in the mean time thereby enjoy a marvailous deal of
happiness on Earth, even a Paradise of delights and pleasures both
terrestrial and heavenly within us.

Since that in virtue is such Mines
of most excelling Treasures
And choice delights, let our designs
be bent to gain her pleasures.
Let her delights allure and win us
still to acquire, to find
This pleasant Paradise within us,
this joyful happy Mind.
THE II. DIVISION. How to gain this felicity of the Mind.
IN the acquisition of virtue which is this hippinesse of the Mind we seek
for, These three things are especially requisite. First, Education to incline
us. Secondly, Reason to direct us. Thirdly, Exercise and Custom to conform
and confirm us.

First, concerning Education.

Youth may be compared to a Field, which if well manurd and sown with good
seed, brings forth good fruit; But if neglected, therein springs up many
ill weeds; Even so, if we be well educated, if the seeds and fundamental parts
and habits of virtue be well sown in our hearts at first, the same is likely
to spring up and become deeply rooted and even natural in us; Whereas
otherwise without this good education, vice and wickedness is like to spring
abundantly in our depraved and corrupted Minds.

Education therefore is very necessary: In youth our natures are easily molded
to what frame our Parents and Tutors will, whose opinions (like Oracles) do
then altogether sway our minds, yet weak and not allured to Vices nor troubled
by Temptations. And if we be in our tender years taught to be virtuous and to
abhor all vices as Prodigies and things unusual, The same will then be so
ingrafted in our nature as virtue will be even habitually lovely and pleasant
to us, and Vice hateful and loathsome, Insomuch as even till old age many men
do retain in them the same love to virtue and hatred to vice as they did in
youth, which then also is much increased by Reason and good Custom.

It is good therefore, that vices be named to children and youth in a shameful
disdainefull manner, and to hide from them the shameless practice thereof, by
many in our dissolute age, even without infamy, yea with applause by some
vicious minded men. Also to let them think (as it were to be wished) that all
men hated Vice and wickedness, and often to discourse of the punishments and
miseries inflicted, and due for the same. Also to show and often commend unto
them the amiablenesse, pleasantness, excellency, and Rewards of all virtue and
goodness.

It is certainly better, that children be Instructed rather mildly and by
Encouragements (if it may be) then with trouble and severity; for whatsoever we
do for fear of punishment, our nature (with a kind of loathing) uses to be
averse from the same things afterward, and the hatred received against the
same in youth may be retained even to old age. But in this Discipline of Tender
Youth, rewards, Praises and encouragements for well doing do sweetly kindle in
us a desire to learn and to do well in all things, and this learning and
virtuous disposition so gained, is willingly loved, easily retained, and
increased in aftertimes by Reason and good custom so that as their years
their virtue increases, and replenisheth their minds with internal Joy and
happiness.

Secondly, Reason ought to direct us in this acquisition of Divine virtue, for
Reason is the light and life of virtue, and as our eyes do serve to guide our
bodies, so have our souls great need of Reasons light to discern virtue from
vice, True good from deceit and forgery.

And even in Reason, virtue appears easy, amiable, and pleasant; And vice
painful, loathsome and displeasant; (It is only an evil Custom that makes
vice seem pleasing, and virtue displeasing) for the essential part of virtue
is said to be truth and of vice false-hood, and it is more easy and pleasant
in Reason to tell truth then a lie; and so of all particulars in Reason Vice
appears painful, hateful, hurtful; and virtue easy, lovely, pleasant and
beneficial, as I shall show more plainly in the ensuing Divisions.

Let therefore Reason inform our Judgments, and both of them guide and
instruct our wills; for the will has not any light from her self, but is
illuminated only by the shining Rays of the understanding; That is by reason
and judgment; yet the act of the will is from it self though it be directed
by the understanding.

Wherefore, if the will of man do conjoyne it self with reason in the
persuite of virtue, then with great facility it is able to govern the sensual
Parts as a Lady and Mistress within the precincts of divine Virtue.

But if our wills disdainefully contemn Reasons Councels, and if in stead of
mounting aloft to the divine excellency thereof, it descends toward the
ignoble part of intemperate sensuality, and if it dedicates, and conjoyns it
self thereunto, it then becomes like her brutish Companion, and in stead of
being the Commander, now becomes the slave of the body and consequently both of
them ignoble and brutish; whereas otherwise, if the Will do choose to obey
Reason rather then Passions, and so prefer Heaven before the Earth, the same
does make not only it self but even those sensual parts (which it then
commands as a Mistress) to become Divine and celestial, and the whole Mind
to be filled with true joy and felicity.

For certainly, if we will be guided by the divine light of Reason, we shall
plainly see; That virtue is inwardly most excellent, pleasant, lovely and
delightful; always crowning the followers thereof with true pleasure, even
with a Paradise of delights and happiness.

Then also should we plainly see (of which more hereafter,) That vice and
wickedness (however painted over with the gay outside of ostentation and
hypocrisy, of seeming felicity) is indeed most deceitful, inwardly all
deformed and loathsome, always ingendring and breeding discontent and sorrow;
Rewarding at last the followers thereof with a multitude of griefs,
perturbations and miseries.

Insomuch, that if we would indeed be directed by reasons divine Councels, we
should greatly detest and immediately forsake all vice and wickedness; we
should then presently be enamored with divine Virtue; embracing the same with
swift desires, with open arms, and Rejoicing therein with most pleasant
delights and happiness.

Thirdly, Exercise and Custom is necessary to conform and confirm us in this
virtuous and happy Way; for continual use of the Mind in virtues divine
Paths does deeply impresse the same therein; so as it becomes thereby more
excellent, and even habitual in us: And to such as are truly accustomed to
virtue, the same becomes most easy, pleasant and delightful.

Wherefore we are; First, to avoid Sloth and Idleness in our selves;
Secondly, the idle, unprofitable and dangerous Company of vicious men, both as
hindrances to this virtuous Exercise and Custom. Thirdly, in all our
endeavors herein we are to make a good use of all accidents, of our own
experience and of the examples of others. Four^^ly, in all respects well to use
and employ our time herein. And fifthly, to go on with due Perseverance
toward the perfection of virtue and happiness; of all which more plainly, yet
briefly.

First, let us contemn Sloth and Idleness as an hinderance to this virtuous
exercise; for why, such as lead their lives in lazy slothfulness, do much
endamage not only the health of their bodies dulling and putrefying the same
but also their minds, which are thereby also soon corrupted with sottish
dullness and evil thoughts, even as water in a standing Poole soon becomes
muddy and noisome; for when the mind is not busied in some laudable thoughts or
actions, either (...) lazy dullness, evil desires or sullen sadness, commonly
creepes in and hinders the same in all goodness, in all happiness; And on the
contrary, let us endeavor with an active, quick, stirring and lively Spirit
to go on in all virtuous and happy ways.

Secondly, we are to avoid all dangerous, idle, and unprofitable company as an
hinderance to this good use and exercise of virtue and happiness; The rather,
because evil examples are notable Corrupters of civil demeanours and
dangerous depravers of a good disposition, and on the contrary let us frequent
and be inwardly familiar with, only such company as are good and virtuous.

Thirdly, let us endeavor by all accidents, by our own experience and by the
examples of others, to avoid all vices and miseries and to embrace all virtue
and happiness in all our endeavors while we go on in these virtuous Ways
and Exercises. Then which there cannot be a more familiar, plain, easy and
useful doctrine.

Fourthly, in general. Let us still remember to employ our time well in such
things as are good and profitable; The rather considering, that nothing is more
precious then time on which depends the accomplishment of all our affairs
and actions, and which if we neglect can never be recalled.

And lastly, let us forward all good beginnings in this exercise with due
perseverance. So will this excellent Treasure of Virtue, this happiness of the
Mind which we seek for, be in good time so deeply impressed in our Minds as
the same will even become natural, habitual, very easy and pleasant to us.

By this discourse we may perceive; That next under GOD, all good beginnings
in this blessed way of Virtue, proceed from Education. The happy progress and
ample increase thereof, from Reasons, Precepts, and the confirmation and full
accomplishment thereof from use and exercise.

So then, let us go on in this happy way of virtue, which certainly will
lead us in good time, to that Paradise of perfection, whose entertainment, is
true pleasure, true happiness.

So if our souls were truly wise
to seek out virtues ways.
We then should find a Paradise
of pleasant sweetest joys.
THE III. DIVISION. How the Body works upon the Mind, and how we may and
ought thereby to mainetaine and increase the felicity thereof.
A Well tempered healthy body is an occasion of a long and happy life, wherein
we may enjoy this Paradise within us which we seek for; And the mind thereby
will become well prepared and fitted for all virtuous Dispositions, exercises,
and Contemplations, and to enjoy all the felicities thereof, both earthly (...)
heavenly.

Let us therefore by all means seek to preserve the welfare of our bodies,
since the same is so great a furtherance to the felicity of the mind; And the
rather because otherwise, if the body be unhealthy and distempered the same
will be a burden to the mind whose Instrument it is, and so hinder it in the
performance of all excellent matters, and in the possession and enjoyance of
all delights and happinesses both earthly and heavenly, and instead thereof
cause therein much distemper, perturbation, discontent, evil and misery.

Because this matter is of great consequence, I shall briefly endeavor to
show how the body thus works upon the mind.

That the humors of the body are an occasion of Passions and perturbations of
the mind, is a received ground among all Physicians and Philosophers. It is
well known in Philosophy, that the affections of the mind, do follow the
apprehensions of the fancy; And Physicians do well know, that the
apprehensions of the Fancy are conformable to the dispositions of the body
and the humors that are predominate therein.

They tell us and Experience also teaches us, that the Choleric humors if
excessive, being fiery and impetuous, make the ^pprehension to be swift and
violent, exciting to Anger and Rashness; The Melancholy being cold and dry,
bring fear, sorrow, and dark thoughts. Phlegm being cold and moist, makes
the apprehension to become dull, slow and without vigor; And too much blood
being hot and moist, excites to sensual Lusts, Prodigality, Riot, and the
like; A mixture of excessive inflamed and corrupted Choler, Melancholy, and
other humors, causes the Fancy to apprehend things, as having enmity,
excites to hatred, Revenge, Frowardness, and to desperate mischiefs and
miseries.

So that it is apparent, the body works upon the Mind, and the excessive
distempered humors thereof, do also annoy and distemper the Mind, But how?
Not by depriving it of any power or faculty given it of GOD (as some say) which
remains without diminishing, but by corrupting the next instrument whereby the
mind works, and consequently the action it self, which comes to pass by
reason that the evil humors of the body, do send up gross and malign fumes
into the brain, annoying the animal Spirits which are most thin and subtle
vapors proceeding from the blood, and the Instruments whereby the mind works
and performs the actions thereof.

Those Spirits are a medium betwixt the mind and the body as some say; Others,
that they participate of both, and being refined, enlivened, and quickened by
the reasonable and divine Soul, they become of a middle nature between Air
and Flame; being pure and undistempered they cause in the mind Tranquillity,
Joy, and good desires; The Ayrie part raising quick pleasing and delicate
conceits in the Fancy, and the Flame inciting noble and active desires in the
soul.

But these Spirits being distempered, dulled, and corrupted by the malign
fumes proceeding from ill humors; The dispositions and actions of the mind
also by reason thereof will become corrupt and evil; for these animal Spirits
(being the medium betwixt the body and the mind, participating of both, and the
next instrument whereby the mind and body work upon each other) being
corrupted and distempered; the mind therefore grieveth and distempereth it
self at the distemper of these Spirits, and so of the body; And therefore,
cannot please it self or effect any excellent matter, having such distempered
corrupted Instruments to work withal. So that although the Spirit be willing,
yet the Corruptions and weakness of the flesh will pervert the actions
thereof, and the dull distempered body cannot be capable to effect or know the
good dictates, operations, and Inducements of the soul; But both being annoyed
by evil humors and those distempered Spirits, become out of Temper and
Corrupted.

It being apparent, that the body thus works upon the mind, it is of very
great Consequence that we take diligent care of the good temper, health and
welfare of our bodies.

The usual directions prescribed to mainetaine our bodies in good health and
due temper, are a convenient proportion and moderation in these which
Physicians call the six non-naturall Things, according to Galen's Division.
Which are, 1 Air. 2 Meat and Drink. 3 Sleep and watch. 4 Labor and rest. 5
Emptiness and Repletion. 6 The affections and passions of the mind, All which
are by diverse Authors at large treated of and described.

But for as much as neither the matter of Diet nor the quantity thereof, nor the
use and observation of those other non-naturall things, ought to be the same in
all sorts of people, but very different according to the diversity of Ages,
Complexions, Constitutions, and the like. It is therefore good that every man
be well skilled in the Temperament of his body and mind, that he may be a Rule
unto himself in that which is best for him; Hence that Proverb has its
probability; Every man is either a Fool or a Physician.

Let therefore every man survey himself, and if he find the plight and state
of his body to be in equability and of a perfect Temper: Let him cherish and
preserve himself in this good estate, which is to be done by a due order, apt
proportion, and convenient moderation of these things before mentioned; Namely
(with little alteration according to that in Hippocrates Aphorism) Air, Meat,
Drink, Exercise, Sleep, Venus, and affections of the Mind.

But if our bodies do any way decline from a good Temper and Disposition; Then
had we need to recure the same by all good endeavors and Remedies.

To rectify therefore and remedy the ill Temperament of our bodies; Let us
observe these directions. First, to forbear and disuse such things as are an
occasion of the distemper or any way hurtful. Secondly, to enjoyne our selves
to a contrary order of Usage and Diet. Thirdly, to evacuate and empty the body
of ill humors, and of such things as are an occasion of the distemper. Of all
which, I intend briefly to discourse in the ensuing Divisions in a mixed way
according to the four several Complexions, together with directions
concerning the diverse passions and affections of the mind, incident to each
Complexion or humor abounding, tending to the eschewing of the infelicity or
misery of the mind, and to increase the felicity thereof.

But in the observation of the following Physical directions we are to observe
this Caution; That seeing the many and several Rules and observations therein
(though briefly) prescribed, we do not too scrupulously and precisely tie our
selves to such a multitude of particulars, nor perplexe our selves in the
observation thereof, for why; those good effects for which they are severally
prescribed, may be happily effected if we do but observe some part of those
directions, so much only as we may with convenience. And J have the rather
collected and mentioned so many and diverse particulars, and many such as are
very common and easy to be attained and observed, to the intent we may use
such and only such of them as we can with most convenience attain unto and
think most-necessary.

Besides, Physicians say; that sometimes to digress herein is not amiss; So
as the same be but seldom, and so as we usually apply our selves to a temperate
and convenient Diet, otherwise by a continual and constant too precise and
strict (though good) diet and custom, the stomach will not be able to endure
occasional errors; And sometimes Changes and Varieties though in some
respects inconvenient, do whet and provoke the stomach to good digestion. Yet
certainly it is very good to know even precisely what is most fit and
convenient for us. And as at a mark most usually to direct our minds
thereunto; And also as near as we may conveniently without too much niceness
to observe the same, and to apply our selves most willingly thereunto, knowing
the good effects thereof which are many and of great consequence both to the
welfare of the body and happiness of the Mind.

For by such a due convenient order and diet, many Diseases and Infirmities may
be prevented; And such as have already seized upon us may by this means be
cured or at least mittigated; Thereby also the body becomes in good state and
temper, and is made healthy, agill, and apt to perform all the motions and
offices belonging thereunto.

Sound and quiet sleep is thereby also caused, and likewise a good stomach,
so as meat and drink becomes most pleasant to us also well digested, and good
blood humors and spirits engendered, Life it self is thereby prolonged. And by
reason thereof usually ensues a quiet and happy dissolution.

The Senses and Memory are thereby also made sound and clear; The affections
and passions well tempered, and the whole mind made free, cheerful and apt to
perform the exercises and functions thereof, And during life to enjoy all good
pleasures both Terrestrial and heavenly.

He then who would
this happy mind enjoy
Should keep his body
well without annoy,
So may his mind become
prepared well
For virtues happiness
therein to dwell;
The sweetest joys
he is fit and apt to gain,
A Paradise of pleasures
to obtain.
THE IV. DIVISION. Directions concerning Phlegmatic Complexions, such as are
of Slow, Dull, Idle, heavy minds, exciting to Quickness, Liveliness and
Cheerfulness.
FOrasmuch therefore as the disposition, welfare and felicity of the mind does
very much agree to and in some sort depend upon the Temperature of the body, as
has been declared, I shall in the following Divisions briefly discourse of
the principal passions and affections of the Mind, observing a method therein
according as the same are most incide^t to the four several humors and
complexions, prescribing some mixed directions both Physically and
Philosophically; and sometimes perchance also Divinely, for Divinity does
likewise much increase the Moral happiness of the Mind.

First, concerning such in whom the humor of Phlegm does abound, which is a
cold and moist humor: These men if they adict themselves to virtue and
goodness, are commonly gentle, quiet, free from choler and anger, civil,
honest, and harmless people: But if to vicious Courses, they become
Careless, Inconsiderate, lazy Drones, Dull, Sottish, Heavy, Ignorant,
Forgetful, Low-spirited, and of weak apprehension; full of base sordid lusts
and affections; Hating the most excellent virtues, and also virtuous men,
because their Sottish Lazy dullness, and Carelessenesse makes them incapable or
unfit to conceive or equal the others virtues and worth.

Wherefore such as are of a Phlegmatic Complexion; To keep themselves in as
good temper of body and mind as they may, to prevent or mitigate cold and moist
distempers, as Rheums Distillations, Catarrhes and a multitude of maladies
proceeding from thence, to which they are most subject also To rectify, refine
and reduce to a better temper, their over-cold, moist and gross humors and
spirits, and to quicken, revive, elevate and cheer their slow, dull, heavy
minds, making the same apt to enjoy all happiness; Let them observe such
directions as follow.

First Physically, Let them if it be requisite in the Spring, and Autumn,
purge out those over-cold and tough humors in the body by such means as are
appropriated for this purpose, and as the learned Physician shall advise them,
and also diminish and consume the same by avertors and Correctors of such
Phlegmatic humors, and extenuating and digesting the same by the distilled
waters of such Herbs as heat and dry, but especially by avoiding such a cold
and moist kind of diet as is hurtful to this Complexion, and using a contrary,
good, and Temperate diet and Custom.

Let them therefore as much as they may, in a convenient manner without too
much niceness and perplexity eschew such cold and moist things as are
hurtful, Such as are cold water, and herbs which are moist and cold in
operation, as Lettuce, Sorrel, Endive, Succory, Cucumers, and the like; also
Fish, cold raw milk, and all kinds of crude raw over-moist cold diet; Let them
also avoid unusual cold and moist Air, much sleep, Idleness, sottishness
and lumpishnesse.

Also, they are to apply themselves to a contrary order of Diet and custom,
such especially as is moderately hot and dry.

Let them sometimes (especially, in winter) use spices, as Nutmegs Cloves,
Macis, Ginger, (especially green Ginger and condite in honey) Cassia, Cinnamon
and the like, stamped into Powder reduced into Syrrups, or otherwise.

Raisens also and Currants do moderately humect and calefie, as also Honey;
likewise Almonds, Nuts and Filberds, so as they be eaten sparingly are good for
them.

Anacardus is very good to dissolve Phlegm, that is cold moist and viscous,
Insomuch as it is said, It restores them that are stricken with an Appoplexy,
and that the same effect may be brought to pass with Oximell, Scillet, and
Aquavitae, wherein a few grains of Rocket may be steeped.

Embrocations and brothes profit much if they be made of the flowers of Meliot
and Camomill, also Marjoram, Origan, Bettony, Sage, Lawrell-leaves, Fennel,
Parcelly and such like. Confection made with Baulme, Hyssope, Savory, Stychas;
also Bettony, Cowslips, Marjoram, Penny Royal, young Cresses, Germander,
Angelico, Vervin, Setwell, Mirrhe, Pepper-wort, Basill-rootes and all such
herbs and roots as are hot and dry in operation, are good for this purpose.

Also, it is good to eat such Diet as is easy of digestion, dry and warm;
not too fat and foggy, Meat roasted rather then sod, Bread white and well
baked; To use commonly such Beer as is clear, somewhat stale and well hopt,
their Wine to be pure, thin and piercing, as White Wind and old Sack. It is
good for them to eat bur sparingly, especially at Supper, and to eat a Crust
or some other hard and dry morsel at the end of a Meal after Drink.

It is also good for them to use commonly in a warm and clear Air; Not to
sleep too much; To rise early, especially in the Spring and Summer; To stretch
the Body every morning, often to use exercise and moving of the Body;
Especially, such exercises as quicken and recreate the Spirits as well as the
Body. Dancing, Shooting, Riding Bowling, Tennis, Stoole-ball, Running, and all
stirring Exercises; It is good for them to endeavor by all means to be of a
quick and stirring disposition of Body and Mind, and often to sollace the same
with active and pleasant Sports, Recreations, and Contemplations.

These, or some of these Directions if but observed in a convenient manner
without perplexity or much niceness, may do them much good, for by these
means the superfluous humidity, and moisture of the Brain, and the Cold, Raw,
Crude, Phlegm in the stomach will be dissolved and consumed, and consequently
the obstructions and distempers caused thereby will be removed; The passages of
the Spirits made free, and the Spirits themselves rarefied and brought to their
right quality; Also the memory and understanding cleared; In sum: The whole
Body and Mind made free, clear, quickened, reduced to, and maintained in a good
temper and disposition, and so apt and well prepared to enjoy all true
happiness.

Secondly, Philosophically; For Remedies against those Slow, Dull, Careless,
Sottish, lazy Humors and Dispositions, Let us first consider the miseries
thereof briefly; The same are the fountains of Poverty, of base-mindednesse,
and contemptible conditions. If we could truly consider how much happiness
we may attain unto in a life time by being Diligent, Careful, Active,
Considerate, and industrious, and how much misery we may bring upon our selves
by Sloth, Sottishness, and Carelessenesse; The same would plainly appear to
be a very great hinderance of happiness and a very great mischief and misery.

Idleness and Sloth do very much annoy both the Body and Mind; for want
reason thereof the Body for want of exercise commonly becomes filled with
putrified and gross humors, with Crudities, Obstructio^s, Rheumes and very
subject to all the Diseases springing from thence. The same dulleth the
spirits, causing Melancholy, Sadness, Peevishness, sullen fits, and a
multitude of evil thoughts, fears, and perplexities, all which are familiar
to idle slothful persons.

Sloth and Idleness is the bane of all goodness, profit and worthy actions,
causing grief, irkesomnesse, and hindering all true joy and pleasure in all
good ways.

Let us therefore detest the same, let us scorn to live in the world like
heavy, lumpish, careless, slow, lazy sotts and blocks, as if we were borne
to no other end, but to come into the world, stay there a while, eat, drink,
sleep, grow sick and dye.

And let us endeavor by all means to stir up our minds to the Contemplation
of high and notable things, To have variety of noble and excellent thoughts
within us. To apply our selves to the acquisition of all heroical virtues,
especially those of Prudence and Fortitude, to scorn and despise low unworthy
matters, and to dedicate our selves to worthy, difficult and notable actions.

To esteem our selves free and at will, To endeavor on good grounds to be
resolute, wilful, magnanimous, and to stand upon our own bottomes; To arm
our selves against the worst of fortune; To endeavor to imitate the best and
worthiest men in their most sublime and excellent actions; Greatly to desire
and endeavor to be quick and high spirited; Me thinks such Considerations and
endeavors should presently rouse up our dull, careless, gross, sluggish
Minds, and make them quick, active, lively, and sprightfull.

Thirdly, to these I might add some Divine remedies and directions. To
instance briefly.

This Sacred Science of Divinity teaches us; That if we will exalt our selves
we must first be meek and humble. Let us then deny our selves (like King
DAVID) as Worms and no men, as miserable wretches deserving the miseries of
Earth and Hell. But let this denial of our selves make us look to our
Savior: and (as he councels, Rev. 3.) Buy of him fine Gold, white Raiment, Eye
salve, etc. All divine and heavenly Graces; So then being reconciled to GOD in
CHRIST our Savior, trusting and relying on him, and endeavoring to go on in
his divine Paths, though we be in our selves like the Laodiceans, poor,
blind, wretched and miserable; yet in him we way and ought to think our
selves, Rich, free, happy, blessed creatures; little lower then the Angels,
Psalm. 8. Partakers of the divine Nature, 1 Pet. 1.3. That we are the Sons of
God himself, heirs of a most bright, glorious, eternal, heavenly Kingdom.
That we are the worlds Masters, and that the Devils are our Slaves and
vassailes. That our Bodies shall shine eternally in heaven, and be made
Spiritual and glorious bodies, like to that of the Son of God, Phil. 3.20.
That our Souls shall be united to God, made one with him as members of
himself; Like him as St. John signifies, 1 Ioh. 3.2. and with him shall
reign eternally in Heaven, tryumphing, and enjoying infinite pleasures and
happiness for ever.

How may such thoughts raise our Minds and even strike quickening flashes of
Heaven in us beforehand (if we could truly think of their excellency) and
make us of a sprightfull, Angel-like, Divine and heavenly temper on Earth.

So let us advance our Minds
to high desires,
To sprightfull quickness,
to Celestial fires,
Divinest Raptures;
Let such thoughts possess
Us, with a Paradise
of happiness.
THE V. DIVISION. Concerning Sanguine Complexions, and such as are of
conceited, vain glorious, and of Intemperate voluptuous Minds, exciting to
Meekness, humility, and to moderate delectation.
SUch men as are of a Sanguine Complexion (which humor is hot and moist) if
they accustom and betake themselves to good courses, they are commonly
cheerful, merry and pleasant therein. And so if they use their natural good
parts well, adicting themselves to virtue and goodness, They usually become
most excellent therein, and gain to themselves much worth and happiness.

But if they (neglecting virtue) give themselves to vice, they commonly become
very phantasticke, selfe-conceited, bragging, and vainglorious; also very
Luxurious, Intemperate, profuse Prodigals, and lewdly voluptuous.

Wherefore, to keep themselves in good temper both of body and mind; to
prevent and mittigate such diseases as usually arise from superabundant corrupt
or inflamed blood, also to allay excessive and extravagant passions and
affections, incident thereunto, and to bring both their bodies and minds to a
good temper and disposition, and so to maintain the same therein, let them
observe such Directions as ensue.

It is good therefore (especially for men of this Complexion) if their blood
abound or be corrupted, and if Age, weakness or other cause hinder not
(especially in the Spring or Autumn) to be let blood, and to keep a good Diet
after the same; for hereby the old corrupted moisture of the body being
evacuated, in stead thereof new and purer is introduced and bred.

Let them commonly use a temperate, cool and loose diet, oftentimes forbearing
such as nourishes plentifully, or if they do eat such, as Flesh, Milk and
Eggs, let them eat good store of Bread therewith. Also let them eschew too
much Sack, Ale, and such like too sweet and too strong Wine and liquors which
heat and nourish much.

Let their Exercise be not too violent, nor too remiss, their sleep also
indifferent.

Herbs cold in operation are good for them (of which diverse are particularly
mentioned in the next Division) to prevent and allay the inflammations of Blood,
and the diseases and passions incident thereunto.

It is good for them also (in the Spring especially) to correct and cleuse the
blood with Fumitary, Seen, Succory, Endive and others. To use cooling and
opening Clisters, Potions, Julips, etc.

By which, or some of which means if but observed only with convenience, the
distempers and passions which usually arise from overmuch, inflamed, and
corrupted blood may be happily prevented, removed, allayed or mittigated; And
both the body and mind made well disposed to perform all the offices and
functions belonging thereunto, to enjoy all good pleasures and felicities; and
so to be maintained in such good temper and disposition.

Further, concerning the dispositions of the Mind most incident to this
Sanguine humor, and to direct and rectify the same; Forasmuch, as the spirits
issuing from hot and lusty blood (which in virtues ways excite the mind to
vainglorious, bragging and fantastic conceitednesse; Let us therefore
consider.

That this vainglorious selfe-conceited humor, is the mother of Pride,
Arrogance, Scorn, Contempt, slander, detraction and of sundry other vices and
ill conditions.

And that if these kind of men be conceited of doing well in a course of evil,
it establishes them Cock-sure therein: So as they cannot be crossed with a
greater infelicity, then in settling their happiness in such vices, wherein
indeed consists their misery, So as they will not imagine themselves to be
miserable, nor credit those that do persuade the same, until they do indeed
bring upon themselves the smart and miseries incident to such vices as they
accustom themselves unto.

Further, that every Repulse, contempt, injury, slander, disgrace and
contumely, does much more vex these selfe-conceited men then others.

This Condition also hinders good Actions; for when we once think our
selves wise and good enough, we then become Fools, as King Solomon speaks;
for then we commonly neglect to seek for more wisdom and goodness, thinking
we are well enough already; when indeed a truly wise man knows, that there is
infinitely more Wisdom beyond him then in him. Nor can there be any men more
unlikely to attain to any excellency, then such whose minds are possessed with
the cunning seizure of false Persuasions, blinding and debarring them from
seeing and seeking the means to attain thereunto.

Wherefore it shows most notable wisdom and modesty in a wise and good man to
suspect himself, to be easily confuted of his errors, and to thank you for
telling him thereof; To think and know that there is far more Wisdom and
goodness beyond himself then in himself, and with a longing desire still to
seek for more. Happy indeed is such a man; Our Savior says it, Blessed are
the meek in Spirit (says he) for they shall inherit the Earth, Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. It
seems the felicities of Earth and Heaven do most properly belong to such as
are meek in Spirit; such as (seeing their own frailties and emptiness) do
still long after and seek for more virtue and goodness.

Further, to direct and rectify the Mind herein; Forasmuch as such men in whom
this Sanguine humor does abound, if they let loose their appetites to run
after vice and evil ways, their hot, moist and lusty spirits will excite them
to Intemperate-voluptuousnesse in all Luxurious, riotous, and prodigal
courses; Let us consider the evil and miserable effects of such vicious
Courses and dispositions.

It is wonderful truly to think how many infelicities and miseries do hereby
come to men's Bodies, Minds, Estates, Fortunes, Credit, etc. Insomuch, as many
thousand persons, yea whole Families, Cities, and Kingdoms, have by reason of
such ill courses come to Ruin.

Let us think of the Vanity, emptiness, unprofitablenesse, deceipts, and
miseries thereof. They pass away as a vapor, a dream, a shadow, and are
gone; Their duration is but a moment in respect of Eternity; They do notably
cozen and mock us; They have stings in their tails, their choysest Flowers
bring forth but Thorns.

To the body these Intemperate voluptuous and luxurious courses, do often
cause many evil corrupted Humors, strange Maladies, Griefs, and distempers.
From whence spring the common Diseases of our Times, but from
Intemperate-voluptuousnesse.

To the Mind also, These vices do often so besot the same, as it becomes very
unfit for any good thoughts or actions either Humane or Divine; And the Spirits
being thereby distempered, the Mind becomes prone to evil thoughts and
desires, and the Passions so enthralled that a multitude of perturbations,
discontents, and vexations are thereby caused.

So that indeed, what are these Intemperate evil pleasures, but fugitive
follies mixed with many Maladies, Distempers, Cares, Fears, Jealousies, and
disturbances? In the end, what do they bring forth but Diseases, Passions,
and perturbations, as Melancholy, Sadness, Sullenness, Discontent, Grief and
Sorrow; which like so many stings does annoy both Body and Mind? Happy are we
if we can avoid the same.

And further let us consider; That we may enjoy much more happiness in the
temperate virtuous use, desire, and enjoyance of earthly Pleasures, then in the
intemperate vicious use thereof, as I have elsewhere showed and dilated.

For the Temperate man, his body is commonly clear and free from unnecessary
Crudities, Rheumes, noysomnesse, ill Diseases and distempers, and so most
Healthful, agill, lightsome and expedite to perform all the motions and
exercises appertaining thereunto.

His mind also, is commonly free from Sloth, dullness, evil passions and
perturbations; His affections well tempered, and his whole Soul apt,
perspicuous, free, and cheerful in the performance of all the actions and
exercises thereof.

There are no men in the world, that live more healthfully, prosperously,
pleasantly, joyfully, and in all respects happily then Temperate virtuous men.
They seem to go to Heaven all the way of their life, as it were in a fair and
pleasant day treading on Roses, and Violets, and environed with a Paradise of
pleasures and happiness.

He then who has a
meek and temperate Mind
Within himself, does
sweet contentment find:
His life's composed of
golden days and hours,
His ways are strewn with
sweetest pleasant flowers
Of happiness, In these
sweet Paths still treading
(As in a Paradise)
to Heaven leading.
THE VI. DIVISION. Of Choleric Complexions; Such as are of Haughty,
Ambitious, Angry, Rash, violent, furious Minds; exciting to Mildness,
meekness moderation, contentation, tranquillity, and to all Affable sweet,
pleasing Conditions.
NOw concerning such men in whom the humor of Choler does abound, which is hot
and dry; Such men if they adict themselves to good courses and to follow
virtues lore; They commonly become zealous, resolute, courageous, active,
stirring, subtle, and politic in all good ways. But if they give themselves
to vice and walk in her paths, they usually become very proud, haughty, and
ambitious; notable Flouters, Gibers, and adding to other men's miseries, very
rash, haire-brain'd, and violent, often throwing themselves unadvisedly upon
evil actions, and as suddenly again wish they had not, Variable, Unstable,
unconstant, unquiet, seditious, testy, quarrelsome, notable maintained of vice
and wickedness; Cursers, Swearers, Roarers, Tyrants, angry and furious.

Let such meant heretore as are of this Chollericke humor and Complexion, (To
maintain their bodies and minds in good temper, to prevent or mittigate hot
and dry maladies and distempers which are most subject to men of this
Complexion; Such as are inflammations of the Heart, Liver, Humors and Spirits,
and diverse Diseases and distempers which usually spring from thence, and to
allay the unruly, violent, rash, Chollerick passions and perturbations of the
mind most subject to men of this humor, to reduce the same to, or mainetaine
the same in a good and laudable temper and disposition* And so to make the same
fit and apt to perform all good offices and actions, and to enjoy all good
pleasures and happiness) observe such directions as follow.

Let them in a fit season purge out those evil, excessive Choleric humors
of the body by such medicines as are usually appropriated for the same purpose,
and let them allay the heat thereof as much as they may conveniently by all
cool and moist things.

So let them also eschew such things as are hot and dry, such Spices, herbs
and diet as is before prescribed to be used by cold and moist complexions.
Also hot waters and strong hot Wine and Drinks, long watching, excessive
exercise, and sweating. Also, anger and all perturbations of the Mind, which
do much heat and distemper their bodies are also as much as may be to be
avoided by them.

But on the contrary let them commonly use a cold and moist kind of Diet,
Meats of good digestion; Solid meats which are not too hot and salt, are not
amiss for them. Fishes are cooling and good for them, especially fresh fish.

It is said, that in the Spring or Autumn, sometimes to dip their bread in
cold water is good to cool the heat of their stomach, liver, and humors.
Reasonable small Beer, fresh and cool, is best for them to use as ordinary
drink. And sometimes especially in the Spring it is good to allay the heat of
their Wine, with water, borrage, and the like.

Vinegar is very cool in operation, therefore sometimes (although tart) is not
amiss for them. Julip of Roses and their Conserves, two or three hours before
meals, especially in the Spring time are good to be used by men of this
Complexion; as also Syrrup of the infusion of Roses, of Water Lillies, and
water of Borrage, and Sychory.

All cool Herbs are good for them, as Endive, Sorrel, Lettuce, Succory,
Buglosse, Borrage, Fumitory, Violets, Roses, Strawberry-leaves, Primrose,
Burnet, Germander, Orage, Mallows, Spinach, the herb Patience, Purslane,
Water lillies, Dragon-woort, and the like.

Also, Straw-berries, Cherries, Goose-berries, Sanders, Camphire, Mellons or
Citrons, Cucumers, the juice of Apples, especially baked or roasted after the
same is cooled, stewed Prunes and the syrrup thereof, also Whay, especially
clarified and in the Springtime; and so likewise all cool distilled Waters,
Syrrups, Julips, etc.

They may allow themselves a larger quantity both of meat and drink then the
Phlegmatic, so as their diet be not too strong hot, hard and dry, but rather
cool, moist and soluble, for a plentiful diet does allay their too light,
wandering Phantasticke, passionate and unstable Spirits, and provokes them to
sleep, rest, and quietness.

So also to rest and sleep as much as they may and quietly is very good to
cool and allay their hot and turbulent Spirits, for sleep does moisten and
cool the body, and consequently thicken and allay the extravagant lightness,
wandering and heat or the Spirits.

Therefore to make them rest-and sleep well; Violets, sod Lettuce, Syrrup of
Roses, Saffron, Baulme, Nitre, Watergruell, Apples eat before going to bed, and
as some say a good draught of cold water in the Spring and Summer, sometimes
are good to make young folks and such as have strong, hot, Chollericke
stomachs, to sleep well and soundly.

Voluntary ecstasies and fixed profound meditations, joined with a quiet mind,
do thicken and allay the Spirits.

So as by these, or some of these remedies (observed only with convenience and
without too much niceness and perplexity) the excessive heat of the Heart,
Liver, Choler, Blood and other humors will be allayd and qualified; And
consequently the Stomach, Brain, Spirits, and in sum the whole body and
mind become of a good temper and well disposed to perform all goodness, to
enjoy all happiness.

Thus much concerning Physical Remedies.

Now further concerning the dispositions of the Mind most incident to this
Chollericke humor, and to direct and rectify the same. First, inasmuch as the
spirits issuing from this hot and impetuous humor of Choler, (which in
virtues ways excite to Resolution, fortitude, to active, speedy, worthy
desires and actions) being corrupted by vice excites the mind to that haughty
top-lesse and towering vice of Ambition, which is most commonly resident in
great and fiery spirits, let us endeavor to rectify our minds herein by such
considerations, as follow.

Let us first think of the vanity of this vice of Ambition, which makes a man
plunge himself into a multitude of restless cares, pains, and perplexities
to gain only the windy praises and aerie estimation of men, whose minds are
most unconstant and wavering.

But the miseries of this vice are many, Ambition has been the cause of much
Sedition, Wars, Strife, Murder, Ruin and Destruction of Empires, Kingdoms,
Cities, and Multitudes of Families and persons.

The same is the fountain of Pride, Ingratitude, Insolency, perfidiousnesse,
Envy, Mutiny, Contention, Sedition and Treason.

A multitude of vain plots, purposes, Cares, Jealousies, Envies, Perplexities,
Immoderate and unsatiable desires, fears, griefs, and discontents, spring
from this Founiaine. It often brings men to a great and miserable downe-fall.

Let us also consider; That there are no men who live more pleasantly and
happily on Earth, then such who are free from such vain, Empty, Haughty,
unsatiable and perplexfull desires; such as are meek and moderate therein;
Contented and pleased in all estates and conditions. Such virtuous men are
indeed truly honorable truly happy.

But now concerning such dispositions of the mind as are more properly incident
to this Chollerick humor, such as are Anger, Rashness, fury; and the rest
which spring from thence, Let us consider the miseries and evil effects
thereof.

But in this ensuing discourse against Chollericke angry passions, I do not
mean a moderate necessary Anger, which is used only with reason and
discretion for some good purpose and presently extinct again, according to
that divine Council, Be angry but finne not, Let not the Son go down upon
your wrath, etc. But J mean in this following discourse only vicious, (as
unnecessary, customary, Immoderate) passions in this kind, (and such as
proceeds from envy, malice, revenge, and the like.) Let us know that a
multitude of evils and miseries proceeds from such vicious, Chollericke
passions.

First to the body; for as Choler heated, stirs up anger and fury, so these
Choleric passions again (by reason of the near relation between passions
and humors) do stir up and so increase the Choleric humors in the body,
inflaming the same, as also the Blood, Liver, Heart, and vital Spirits;
hinders also rest and sleep, spoils the stomach and distempers the whole
body.

Swollen veins, imperfect, loud and distractive speeches, fiery eyes, deformed
and furious looks are the outward Symptoms of these Chollericke passions; To
look in a glass when a man is thoroughly angry and Chollericke, is enough to
make him ashamed of himself, he should see himself like a Madman.

And also to the Mind. These Chollericke passions hinder the divine virtues of
Patience, Meekness, Affability, Courtesy, Contentedness, and all pleasing
quiet amiable conditions, all virtue, true pleasure and happiness.

The same are most pernicious both to our selves and others; A chollericke man
is like one that burns himself in his neighbors house. He fireth his own
Mind with trouble and vexation, while he endeavors to trouble and vex
another. And in this mad fury he will admit of no reason, no admonition; He
then cares not to loose friends or procure Enemies.

These Inconsiderate, Rash, Chollericke passions do blind the mind and prepare
the same ready to run and throw it self into all vices, evil actions, and
consequently, Miseries; As into Riot, Prodigality, excessive Gaming, ill rash
Bargains, Swift revenge; Into Cursing, swearing quarrelling, fighting,
stabbing, and the like. We often see and here (Histories are replenished with
Examples) of the evil and miserable effects of these passions. As of quarrels,
Contentions, Hatred, Strife, Murder; And Ruin of whole Towns, Cities,
Commonwealths, and Kingdoms by reason thereof.

These Chollericke passionate men are commonly all in extremes, which are
commonly very hurtful; When the kind fit takes them they are often so overkind
as they wrong themselves. And in a fit or anger or quarrelling they are usually
so extreme, as they are sometimes beaten, often anger and loose their friends,
and also many times do or suffer some rash and sudden Mischiefs.

These kind of passions also deprive men of justice and patience; Yea, of
reason it self, which usually comes in the Rere, and is joined with
Repentance; Their repentance also is sometimes a Rage against themselves even to
desperation rather then mixed with good Resolutions, and thereupon joyful
hopes, as the same ought to be.

Yea, these passions prepare the Mind to a wild madness and fury, destroying
Wit, Reason, Art, and all goodness. There is little or no difference between
a Mad man and a Chollericke man in his fits. And if these chollericke angry
passions by often use and reiteration grow from a disposition to a habit, the
same becomes Madness.

Further, let us avoid the occasions and causes of these Rash, angry, violent,
Chollericke passions. Such as are too much self-love, Pride, and Presumption,
bereaving us of humility and of reason, which ought to bridle and moderate the
fury of these bedlam passions. Let us also by a manly and stayed mind eschew
niceness, Curiosity, and Impotency, which most commonly possess Women,
Children, some old men, and hasty fools. Those who will fret, be angry and
take pepper in the nose at every trifle; Also, let us avoid all Immoderate
doting on Earthly things; The losses whereof, or crosses wherein extremely
frets and vexes such as love them too much; and sets their passions on fire.

And on the contrary, let us endeavor by reasons light to resist and withstand
the beginnings of these passions, and to quench them as we would a fire
kindling within us. Let us watch over our Dispositions; Give Reason leave to
interpose and resolve; Divert our thoughts to some other business or occasion;
And let us by all means endeavor to be of a sweet, pleasant, amiable,
meek, courteous, mild, unpassionate Temper.

They are much deceived who think that Meek, Courteous, and mild dispositions
are contrary to Fortitude; Meekness (as one faith) is a virtue that belongs
to the courageous Part of the Soul, whereby we become (contrary to the
weakness in fearful women and old men, hardly moved to Anger and Choler;
for these passions most commonly reside in frailest, weakest, most fearful
and worst Spirits, In frail Women, weak Old men, in Covetous Ambitious,
vainglorious, Cowardly, dissolute vicious men.

There is no heart more worthy and courageous, then such a one as can repress
these furies; No worthier Trophies then those which may be procured from
within our selves; No triumphs more glorious, then when our Reason can lead
our conquered affections as slavish servants and servile Captives, which
otherwise will insult over us like bloody Tyrants, and violently take away the
peaceful Tranquillity and pleasures of our Souls, That Paradise within us
which we seek for.

Let us further consider, that all accidents whereby these passions are
provoked, proceed from divine Prudence which may move us to be patient and
contented; Let us also endeavor as near as we may to resemble the divine
Nature in all meekness and goodness, Learn of me (says our Savior) for I
am Meek. Also, the heavenly glory and rewards which he has prepared for us
should make us scorn to be of so weak, so frail, so unworthy a temper as to
be furious, passionate, and too much perplex our selves for mundane Trifles.

Let us then in opposition to these Choleric passions, by all means
endeavor to be of quiet, peaceable, courteous, mild, affable, meek, and of
all sweet and pleasing conditions, which (like the Adamant) attract the love of
all good men by their amiable and pleasing Graces.

This mild, affable, unpassionate, pleasing, peaceful temper (as one says)
resembles the highest Region of the Air wherein are no Clouds, no Tempest, but
all fairness, Serenety, and Peace. The same is the Character of a pleasant
and happy Mind.

Who does this Peaceful
pleasing Mind possess,
Is fit to enjoy the
sweetest Happiness.
His life resembles
a fair lightsome day,
In which he rides to
Heaven all the way,
As in a Paradise;
His mind enjoyes,
Most pleasing sweetness
in these happy ways.
THE VII. DIVISION. Of Melancholy Complexions; of Covetous, Fearful, Sad,
Sorrowful minds, Exciting to Moderate desires, and contentment; to Fortitude,
Cheerfulness, Joy, and pleasantness.
THe humor of Melancholy though it be cold and dry of it self, yet commonly
retains in it some heat and moisture of the other humors. Men of this
Complexion if they adict themselves to seek and follow Virtue and Piety
(especially if their Melancholy be with blood and other good humors
moderately humected and allayed) commonly become of excellent wisdom, Sharp
Judgments and seem to do many things so notably as if they were furthered by
some divine Jnstinct or motion, Insomuch as oft-times even their Solitariness
and melancholy dispositions become most profitable, sweet and pleasant to
them. But otherwise if vice possess them they commonly become very Covetous,
nigardly, fearful, sad, lumpish, dejected and sorrowful.

Therefore to maintain themselves in good Temper both of body and mind, to
prevent and mittigate such diseases a usually arise from this melancholy,
heavy, cold, dry, thick humor of the spleen, which if excessive and corrupted
takes away the stomach, color and sleep, thickens the blood and causes
diverse Maladies both of body and mind; Let them therefore (and also to bring
and mainetaine their bodies and minds in good temper and disposition, fit and
apt to enjoy all true happiness) observe such and the like directions as
follow.

Let them in due season purge out of their bodies the excessive Melancholy
humors, let them avoid such things as increase the same, such as are an
over-ful stomach, by Intemperance causing Crudities; Also such meats as breed
gross and thick blood, as does Beef, Bacon, Venison, Hare, Salt, pickled, Raw
Fishes and all gross meats to tender stomachs and idle persons; Also to
Students and such as usually live, a sedentary life. Let them also eschew
Idleness, too much solitariness, fears, unsatiable desires, sadness and
sorrow as much as they may.

But let them usually eat such Diet as is easy of digestion, warm, sod,
young, moist, and of good nourishment. Let their Drink be well sod, hoped, and
brewed, indifferent in strength and age; Let them sleep somewhat more then
ordinary. Let them as much as they may keep their bodies laxative and often
avoid excrements.

It is good to keep themselves cleanly and decent, their hands and faces
washed, head combed; To wear clean Linen, comely Apparel, and to be
neately dressed, for slovenlinesse dejects a man, but decency and cleanliness
does revive and quicken his Spirits.

Borrage, Buglosse, Baulme, Burnet, Succory, Endive, in Brothes or otherwise
are very good to revive and comfort the Spirits; As also Roses, Violets, and
their leaves, Syrrup of Lemmans and Oranges, Juice of Apples, Sanders,
Camphire, Saffron, Wood of Aloes, Cittron Bark, Baulm mint, Orange flowers,
Rosemary, Mint, Betony, Blessed thistle, And Cordialls of all sorts are good
for them.

Sometimes two or three cups of pure Wine is good against this heavy and sad
kind of Melancholy, but excess overwhelmeth the Spirits and causes a
multitude of vapors ^o ascend into the brain, as it cannot well concoct but
only does refrigerate the same, which then remain raw and crude postering the
brain, so as from thence (by reason thereof) distills much cold, raw,
unconcocted humors into the stomach distempering the body and mind, and
encreasig Me^ancholly, discontent and sadness. As for example, A man that is
Potshot at night, look upon him next morning after ^^e vapors of the wine or
^^rong liquor are pestred and ^ooled in his brain and distil^d, you shall see
him like the ^icture of ill Fortune, sad, sullen, ^^mpish, quarrelsome and
Melacholly; And perchance ready ^o go to the Tavern again to drive it away.
But indeed this is the way to increase the same, and in tract of time by much
excess to make a man become excessive and even habitually Melancholy and
discontented. But so much as the brain can well digest the vapors thereof
without any remaining raw and crude (which may be about three or four usual
Cups of wine or strong liquor) is an excellent cordial against this ferall
melancholy and sadness, and does much quicken and revive their dejected, sad,
heavy, cold and melancholy Spirits.

Let them also use moderate exercises and stirring, be always busy, about some
good and (if it may be) pleasing employments either of body or mind, Let them
also use good and temperate Recreations, Pastimes, Music, Melody, Mirth,
Banqueting, good company, and all lawful and good pleasures in good sort, and
at convenient times, to sollace, cheer and revive their sad and Melancholy
Spirits.

Now concerning the dispositions and passions of the mind most incident to this
Melancholy humor; And first of Covetousness, which is commonly noted to be
most resident in such as are of Melancholy, cold and dry Complexions, as
appears in old men, who are naturally of a cold, dry, Melancholy Temper; Let
us therefore consider briefly.

Covetousness is esteemed the most unworthy low and sordid vice of all other,
insomuch as many covetous men to gain a small value of Riches, voluntarily
plunge themselves into any base offices and actions.

It is the root of evil St. Paul says, From thence often proceeds deceit,
Contentions, Lying, Swearing, Perjury, Oppression, Injustice, Symony, Usury,
Thefts, and sometimes hatefell Murders, and Villainies.

This low and greedy vice banisheth out of the mind the most excellent high and
generous desires and virtues, and dejecteth the same to a low and dunghill
disposition, to become even a slave to Riches.

It is an insatiable desire, and causes a multitude of unnecessary
discontents, Cares, Pains, Plots, Ravenous desires, much envy, grudging,
Pinching, Pining, many fears of losses and Crosses, and extreme griefs to
part with their Riches and desires.

So as these evil effects of Coveteousnesse do almost continually perplexe
such asare possessed therewith and hinder them in all true pleasure and
happiness.

Let us also consider, that he indeed is most truly rich and truly happy who
is most virtuous, most moderate in desires and most contented; He possesses
and enjoyes even all the world within himself, there are no men live so
happily on Earth as Contented virtuous men.

Fear, also, being a Principal Passion most incident, to this melancholy
humor (for this passion commonly most resides in such as are of Melancholy,
cold and dry constitutions, as in old men, etc.) Let us consider briefly the
evils and miseries thereof, But first let me tell, I do not mean herein that
modest and good fear of doing evil, which keeps us from Rashness,
Impudency, and all manner of vices, nor that filial and loving fear which we
owe to God, our Parents, and superiors, which does or should proceed
principally from love, and excites to all manner of goodness. But herein I
mean only against that unnecessary, Melancholy, sad, cowardly, slavish,
foolish and vicious fear.

This evil melancholy passion of fear, is a perturbation and sorrow of the
mind arising from the apprehension or doubt of evils to come, perchance of that
which never shall be. It often draws from Imaginary evils, Real and bitter
sorrows, and is overgreedy by thought and opinion to overtake, nay out run
the^. So that indeed it is a strange prodigious Indiscretion, an Inconsiderate
passion filling the mind with grief and many times only by appearances.

It makes a man to become a base Coward, and to be trampled upon by every
insulting Companion, yea to shrink at every idle Reproach of base dissolute
fellows, Insomuch that a fearful man rather then he will endure the common
silly jeeres and Impious Reproaches of some deboist and idle Companions (which
a good, virtuous, courageous minded man can exceedingly contemn) he will
basely and weakly be lead by them to any vice, Impiety, and dissolute Courses.

The thoughts of dangers, difficulties, losses, Crosses, sickness and death,
do almost continually distemper and perplexe fearful men.

Let us also consider that this melancholy passion of fear may justly bring
upon us those evils which we fear in distrusting divine Providence, so that
fearing to become miserable makes men oftentimes to become that which they
fear and so turns their Immaginary false fear into certain miseries.

How many languish in fear of losses, Poverty, of disgrace etc. And so live
miserably and need not, how many loose their friends by distrusting them and
game diseases by fearing them; yea some have dyed even for fear to dye, so
that fear seems to serve to no other end but to make men find that which they
fly from.

Fear hinders a man in all good, great, and excellent undertakings and
Actions. Also in all joy and happiness both earthly and heavenly.

It dejects and debases a man below the nature of beasts, who by reason of
their weakness and want of reason are free from this folly and never afflict
themselves with evils past or fears to come, but freely enjoy all pleasures
incident to their nature save only when they feel present pain.

Let us not then so abuse that Divine and heavenly light of reason which God
has given us, so as thereby to become more slavishly fearful and worse then
beasts, which we ought rather to employ in the search and Enjoyment of
fortitude, Magnanimity, and all felicity.

But if any man be so borne to a fearful nature that yet notwithstanding by
Prudence and wisdom he can acquire true valor and fortitude, and when there
is need thereof, temper his natural fears therewith, he is not only free
from baseness but worthy of exceeding admiration, who can change a weak
passion and commonly bad, into true virtue.

Let us therefore by Prudence endeavor to arm our selves with fortitude
against all unworthy fears. Let us consider that it is notable folly to fear
that which cannot be avoided, to make our selves miserable beforehand, or to
fear that which it may be will never come, or if it do may be converted to
our felicity, for oftentimes that which we most fear, brings indeed most
happiness.

Nor is it amiss sometimes to Imagine the worst of evils beforehand, but to
this intent only to endeavor to prevent or contemn not fear them. Let us
therefore endeavor to prepare our selves with fortitude and Resolution against
the greatest miseries that may happen, to imitate the best and most Courageous
men, to be as valiant as David to kill Goliath if he were now here, not to fear
ten thousand people, Psalm. 3. Nor though the Earth should be remooved and the
mountains into the midst of the Sea, Psalm. 46. Though we were even at deaths
door, Psalm. 23. So let us endeavor not to fear any danger in a good cause;
like St. Paul to be persuaded, that neither life nor death Angels nor Devils
shall ever be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ. Fear not
little flock (says our Savior) it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you
a Kingdom, what a gross absurdity is it for a Son of God, an heir of heaven
to be afraid.

Let us further consider the nobleness and excellency of that heroical virtue
of fortitude, which is the Contrary to, and remedy of this timorous passion.

True fortitude is placed between the two extremes of Cowardlinesse, and
Rashness; These excellent virtues namely, Magnanimity, Confidence, Patience,
Noble resolutions, Constancy, and perseverance, are the parts and Branches
thereof.

It is (as the most difficult) the most glorious virtue and produced most
excellent effects, It is an Immortal good, seated in the soul Arming the same
against all perils and miseries, taking away all unworthy fear of dangers,
difficulties, sorrows, and of death it self, advances the mind in a generous
manner (Prudently without fear, Cowardlinesse and perplexity on the one side,
and without Impudency, Rashness, and Carelesseness, on the other) to aspire to
and accomplish that which is most excellent and Commendable, and finally
Crowns the mind with Triumph, joy and happiness.

Sorrow also is a passion most proper to this melancholy, cold and dry humor.
It is a weak and languishing feebleness of spirit dejecting both body and
mind, causing all other perturbations, and is directly opposite to and
hinders alloy and Cheerfulness.

Yet truly some sorrows, some Crosses and afflictions in this world are in
diverse respects even necessary and good for us. The same makes us wiser,
better, more circumspect and diligent in all good and virtuous ways, Quickens,
refines, and Illuminates all goodness, yea all ensuing joys and happiness in
us. It is a fit mixture of Crosses, adversity and sorrows that makes even
Prosperity, joy, and felicity vnwearisome, and most sweet and pleasant to us.
However we should rejoice to know that all sorrow will have an end either in
heaven or before, and that joy after sorrow past is most delightful, yea that
sorrow it self may be converted also to the increase of our heavenly joy and
happiness as well on Earth as in heaven eternally, as I have elsewhere showed
more plainly. Of all which, See Terrestrial Paradise, Section, ij; And Heaven
within us, the xj. Division.

Yet indeed, we ought as far as we can possible by all good means to avoid
this melancholy passion of sorrow and all the occasions thereof. The rather
because it is the misery of all evils, all vices and evil passions commonly
end in this of sorrow and sadness.

It defaces and dejects both body and soul. It hinders sleep and rest,
causes an ill stomach, ill digestion, and consequently makes a man look
pale, lean, dry, withered and hinders the whole health and welfare of the
body, and of the mind also, weakening and quelling the same, causing therein
many other perturbations, as fears, cares, distrust, sometimes desperation,
and many mischiefs.

The same is most contrary to nature and reason, which excite us to joy and
cheerfulness (J mean herein only of worldly sorrow) It makes the mind
unapt to perform all goodness and worthy enterprises, or to receive any good,
any felicity, for even pleasures and good fortunes are often displeasing to
sorrowful men, to whom every thing is unsavory as dainty meat to a corrupted
stomach, and curious Music to a distempered mind. It makes life it self
tedious and irksome, and often causes death before the time.

Let us therefore even scorn to be of such a Melancholy, sorrowful, weak,
dejected, and pernicious temper; Let us by all means endeavor to avoid the
same.

Let us as much as we may possible by all pleasant and joyful thoughts banish
this displeasant passion of sorrow out of our minds. Let us often be thinking
of such delights and customs as are most pleasing to our minds: And sometimes
let us recreate the same with change of delights and Novelties.

Sometimes it is also good to delight the mind in variety of pleasant
conversation, with moderate and lawful sports and Recreations, with
Banqueting, Mirth, Music, and with all good and harmless pleasures in a
good manner, to drive away these melancholy sorrowful dispositions.

There are abundance and variety of delights and pleasures within this vast
palace of the universe, to recreate and please all our senses and spirits,
Even a Terrestrial Paradise of happiness, of which J have taken a brief view
in a former Book; And also we may by faithful and heavenly Contemplations
enjoy even a Paradise of heavenly delights on Earth, within us, of which more
hereafter. Let us then endeavor (by enjoying so many and such excellent
delights and felicities both earthly and heavenly within us) to possess our
minds with true Peace, Joy, Lightsomenesse, Mirth and Pleasure; Then which
nothing is more excellent, wherein consists this happiness of the Mind; This
Paradise within us, which we seek for.

So if we could this
joyful lightsomenesse
This mirth and pleasure
in our minds possess
A pleasing Paradise
then should we find
Within us in this
happy pleasant Mind.
THE VIII. DIVISION. Of mixed Complexions and various minds, of such as are of
envious, malicious, revengeful, cruel, obstinate, froward, sullen, desperate
minds, exciting to love, kindness, clemency. humanity, cheerfulness, and in
general to all virtue, joy, pleasure, and happiness.
SUch men as are of mixed Complexions, if they be of a perfect and good temper,
That is of an equal mixture, a convenient agreement and proportion of the
quality and quantity of each clement and of pure humors and spirits, wherein
no excess, no disorder, or disagreement is to be found faulty or
blameworthy, such men if they give themselves to good and virtuous Courses,
are most fit and well disposed for all virtue and goodness, to undertake and
accomplish all worthy and excellent matters; To attain and enjoy all true
pleasure and happiness.

Let such men therefore (by a good diet and due observation of a convenient
proportion and moderation or these six Non-naturall things before mentioned in
the third Division) cherish and mainetaine themselves in this good Temper both
of body and mind; And by all good endeavors, still go on in this happy way of
virtue, which leads us to the Paradise of joy and felicity.

But if such men shall give themselves to vice and wickedness, especially if
to Intemperance and Prodigal dissolute courses. They do oftentimes in tract
of time (notwithstanding their excellent temper) become most unhealthy, and
distempered in body, and their minds most prone and forward to all the worst
and most pernicious vices and misecries, for as one well observes; That
notable wickedness commonly proceeds not so much from a weak, frail, dull,
lumpish, and distempered nature, as from an excellent nature that is corrupted
by evil company, evil manners, Intemperance, and custom in dissolute and
vicious courses.

And we may observe that many men, by Intemperate, Luxurious dissolute
Courses, from perfect well tempered men, do become of body fat, gross, lazy,
dull lubbers, stuffed with corrupted phlegm and evil melancholy humors; And
yet notwithstanding inflamed with hot blood and very Chollericke; Also the
conditions of the mind very various, and vicious. But most properly disposed to
and possessed with Envy, Malice, Hatred, Revenge; And such vices and evils as
proceed from thence; Also commonly, very froward, sad, surly, sullen, testy,
quarrelsome, obstinate, and strangely Melancholy and discontented.

Yet sometimes indeed though seldom, when the Sanguine humor is predominate
or heated by Wine or sudden pleasing objects, they become very, merry, loud,
familiar, pleasant and joviall. But this humor lasts not, and as soon as
the heat or the liquor and the vapors thereof are refrigerated and pestered
in the brain and the former pleasant objects (either removed or after a little
while thought upon) being past they become worse then before, more Sullen, Sad,
Surly, froward, malicious, obstinate, and discontented. Insomuch, as in
process of time by long use and custom in vicious Courses, even among their
Cups, Lasses, and Joviall Companions, they oftentimes become extremely vexed,
sad, sullen, froward, quarrelsome, and discontented. Yea, insomuch as sometimes
even in laughter, their hearts are sorrowful (as King Solomon speaks) and the
end of their vicious dissolute pleasures becomes as bitter as Worme-wood, and
sometimes turned even to desperate grief and misery.

These mixed distempers of body and mind, are by some Physicians called,
unnatural Melancholy, arising from a mixture of excessive corrupted and
distempered humors, as either from Choler, Melancholy, and blood adult and
Corrupted, or else from abundance of unnatural and unnecessary humors in the
body, caused, contracted, corrupted, inflamed and distempered by intemperance
and disorderly courses; insomuch as a Medley of diseases and perturbations are
oftentimes thereby occasioned.

For Remedies whereof; First concerning Diet, we can safely prescribe neither a
hot, cold, moist, nor indeed any kind of diet or usage therein to do such men
good without some hurt to some of their infirmities and ill humors, only we
are to tell them, That there is nothing better for them then a spare obstemious
Diet, for much Diet of what kind soever, does nourish and increase some of the
ill humors of their bodies.

But a very spare diet both of meat and drink, as one temperate meal or two
in a day at the most, and those of such kind of diet as is wholesome and not
too much nourishing, is most good for them; for by this means (if observed
commonly though perchance not always, but only with convenience and without
too much niceness) the Crudities, Rheumes, and superfluous ill humors in the
body, will in good time by little and little be consumed, or at least well
mittigated, drayned, and cleared, obstructions opened, and the passages of the
spirits also made clear and free. So as the mind likewise will be less
clogged with the gross vapors proceeding from fullness, and repletion, and
from those multitude of Corrupted humors in the body, and so made free and
expedite to perform all the functions thereof, so as not only the passions
and affections will be molified and better tempered, but the whole soul made
more free and cheerful in the performance of all the Actions and exercises
thereof.

In sum, by this most excellent medicine of a spare diet, A most corrupted
body and mind full fraught with evil humors and dispositions may be cured,
cleared, and reduced to a good temper and disposition, at least in a good
measure.

And indeed it were very good for such men also speedily to purge and evacuate
those ill humors out of their bodies, which do so annoy and distemper them,
for purging is especially to be used by such as have distempered their bodies
by intemperance and ill Courses, for all excess does add to the ill humors
in the body which disperse through the same; And after in time increasing and
contracting do fill and corrupt the body, causing therein many infirmities and
diseases.

So as such distempers of the body as have their beginning from repletion
(which are indeed almost all the diseases of our times) are to be remedied by
evacuation, and principally by purging medicines, emptying the body of
unnecessary phlegm and seriosity, or thin waterish humors, and of
superfluous corrupted Choler and Melancholy.

The best time of purging is in the Spring or Autumn, and it were good for
such as live very intemperately to purge once at the least, or twice every
year.

And for the manner of an exact purge, Physicians say it is not amiss that the
body be first opened with a Clister, And if much blood and sanguine humors
abound and be corrupted to begin with Phlebotomy (if age, weakness, or other
occasion hinder not) opening the Cephalica vein in the Arm, and then the
humors to be made pliable to nature. This being done now to expel, concoct,
and purge the humors soundly which molest the body, with such apt medicines as
are appropriated to evacuate and purge such several humors as do abound
therein.

If the stomach and body be very much stuffed, foul, and corrupted, it will
not be amiss to use a vomit, and after the same presently to take such things
as will strengthen the weakened parts, comfort the brain, Heart, Liver, Spleen,
and disperse the Relics, such as are Triacle, Methridate, and diverse others.

If Intemperance and disorder have been long used or if the disease be old, it
is not amiss to purge three or four times gently, because ill humors which
have remained long in the body cannot so well be expelled by a sudden
purgation at once as by degrees.

It is good also for such as abound with Phlegm to purge the same by degrees
at three or four several times rather then suddenly at once, because clammy
Phlegm will not easily and presently follow a sudden Purgation; But choler
being more thin and moveable is more easily purged.

But forasmuch as there are many and diverse matters to be observed herein, as
the humor which abounds; The nature of the Disease; The strength age, and
Complexion of the person; The operation and force of the Purgation, and the
particulars thereof, aptly to be sorted and appropriated to the nature of the
disease and humors abounding; Also how much, how often to purge, how far to
proceed, and by what ways and passages; all which, requiring a large
discourse, I refer the same and such as have occasion to use them, to the
advice of some honest, skillful, practical Physician, whose directions and
assistance is most convenient, and ought to be had concerning these matters.
So may these Cures and Remedies be happily effected (they being careful that
universals be in right manner sorted with particulars) and the body and mind
reduced to its natural good Temper and disposition.

Concerning other Evacuations and particular Cures and Remedies of the many and
diverse several Diseases incident to man; Since they are too large to be
treated of in, this brief and Compendious Discourse, And are amply dilated and
treated of by diverse, in great volumes, and less necessary to be vulgarly
known, then the former prescriptions, I omit. The rather because I conceive,
That if the body be well purged of such ill humors as abound therein, and
afterward a good and apt diet be observed, it is sufficient for the cure of
almost all Diseases, especially such as are bred by Repletion (which are the
most common maladies of our age) unless they be inveterate and uncureable.
However such directions and remedies may do us much good, and make the Temper
of our bodies and minds much better then otherwise.

All these Rules and prescriptions are very good to be known and observed
as well by the healthy as the diseased, and in their due use and observation may
cause much benefit and happiness.

Neither do we want Remedies though the body be incureable, we may remedy the
miseries thereof by the mind which is its Governor, and ought as much as it
may to comfort the same: for as the body works upon the mind as has bin
showed. So much more does the mind work upon the body.

For the reasonable soul being Immortal and Divine, does guide and govern
the Animal Spirits which are the organs thereof, as the fabric of the parts
of the body is the organ of these animal Spirits.

And these spirits like a quick, light flame do continually work on the body
as the soul does on them, they make the body lively, and lighter, partly by
refining the moisture thereof, and converting the same into themselves, and
also by infusing themselves into all the parts thereof, enliving, lightning,
quickening and spiritualizing the same.

The Divine and reasonable soul therefore ought as much as it may to
spiritualize, quicken and comfort the living Spirits; in such sort, that the
body being guided by these spirits, these wholly dependant on the reasonable
soul, and the soul being guided by divine grace which is as it were the life
thereof, and by faith having its Conversation in heaven with God, (viewing and
enjoying thereby in some measure already his heavenly glory and felicities,
expecting the same hereafter to be revealed infinitely, and to enjoy the same
in perfection eternally) even forgets the grief of the body, or rather,
does convert even the senses and spirits thereof into the purer parts of the
soul, which in faithful contemplation being possessed with heavenly Joy in God,
the whole man is as it were spiritualized and transported with divine pleasures.

However if by reason of our frailties and weakness we cannot attain to such
Divine ecstasies and transportations, yet we may know that our Corruption shall
put on Incorruption, and our Mortality shall inherit Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.
That our frail bodies shall be changed and made spiritual bodies like the
glorious body of the Son of God, (Phil. 3, 21) With whom we shall enjoy
infinite happiness for ever. How may such faithful Contemplations comfort us
in greatest maladies and distempers, yea even in death it self, since the same
is a passage to heaven, when ceasing to be as men we shall begin to live the
life of Angels, with God himself in heavenly glory and happiness.

But to Return;

Now to remedy such passions of the mind as are most incident to these mixed
distempers of the body, which being composed (as in a medley) of all the
superfluous humors adust, corrupted, and distempered, do cause the mind in a
mixed distemper also to apprehend all things in a bad manner, as having Enmity,
and so does edge and eneager malice, and provoke Revenge and Cruelty.

For remedies hereof, Let us consider that these evil dispositions of Envy,
hatred, malice, Revenge and Cruelty (being seldom one without the other) are
Compounded of many other vices, and are the occasions of many evils, and even
of destroying all humanity and goodness.

Envy and malice are strange passions, Gnawing the heart and turning the good
of another to the envious man's hurt. Good and prosperous men as also their good
deeds, goods, and prosperity are eye sores to envious malicious Spirits,
causing in them despite, grief, and even gnashing of teeth. While the envious
mischievous man looks obliquely upon the goods of another he loses that
which is good in himself, or at least takes no delight in it; But fretteth to
see another man do well and prosper. So as he suffers in himself the evil
which he wishes to another.

It appears therefore, that envious, malicious, spightfull people, do more
hurt and vex themselves then others, for a thousand vexations do gnaw and
possess the hearts of those that are infected with those evil dispositions;
and many times hateful Injuries, mischiefs, and villainous practices are
wrought and executed to satisfy these detestable vices and passions.

Revenge also is often accompanied with hatred, Malice, Envy, slandering,
lying, Backbiting Cruelty, murder and a multitude of mischeifes.

These evil dispositions proceed from the inward malignity of the soul, which
unnaturally and mischievously feeds on and delights in the hurt of another
man.

They are most detestable vices and as it is observed usually inhabit in weak
Cowardly spirits, savouring of a vile and abject mind; yet we may observe that
such kind of men though not daring to be truly valarous have yet even for
fear an itch to be esteemed so, for knowing in themselves this base
Cowardlinesse, they endeavor by all means to hide the signs thereof, and
cunningly can feign bold and bragging speeches, challenging as it were all
dangers when they see they are far from them, but if near them they can put
up Injuries with their fear, yet when they get advantage without danger to
themselves to hide their fear they become very Spightfull, Jnjurious,
Revengefull, and cruel bloudsuckers. For we ever see the most unworthy men of
basest and lowest temper, to be most malicious, revengefull, and cruel; A
truly valorous man does always fairly exercise his strength against a
resisting enemy, whom he has no sooner at his mercy but he is satisfied.

Seldom do these evil dispositions find harbor in well bred generous minds,
who commonly are of such an excellent temper as they can scorn the causeless
and womanish brawlings of hasty fools and men of unworthy temper. A truly
worthy heroical Spirit is far above such men's envy and malice, and he
regards their detraction, lying, slanders, spite, and brawling, as he does the
barking of a Dog: It is for men of lower, baser temper, to be vexed and
distempered at such trivial matters, and we ever see the basest, most cowardly,
worthless and weakest spirits to be most envious, malicious, cruel, Insolent
mischievous and revengefull.

It is indeed, true magnanimity to contemn Injuries, There is nothing that
shows so great, so worthy, and victorious a mind as a courageous insensibility
of reproaches, detraction and injuries; to disdain the carping censures and
bitelesse barkings of the Curres of the world, I mean such men as are of base
unworthy, envious, malicious, vicious, dissolute minds. But all good and
virtuous men while we do well will love us, and hate to abuse us.

It is an excellent revenge and grievous to malign Spirits (as to fools) to
contemn or make no account of them or their words. It is a weakness of mind
not to know how to contemn an offense. For a man to be malicious, envious
detractive, reproachful, brawling, and Revengefull is to confess himself
grieved, touched, guilty, impotent and Inferior. Magnanimity and true valor
is seldom troubled with such evil dispositions. A high and generous mind is
not subject to Injury, it revengeth not Injuries because it feels them not.

It is a fair and honorable way and has often bin practiced by the greatest
Princes and Captains, such as have bin of most high and noble minds, to avenge
the Injuries of malicious, Envious, people only by contemning them, nay more
by doing good to such as have Injured them, insomuch as by reason thereof they
have made many of their enemies to be ashamed of their folly, to stoop to
their virtue and nobleness; and we should know that by how much the more we
have suffered, so much more commendable and honorable it is to be gracious,
and pardon.

So that it is the property of great and noble minds to contemn malice and
injuries, to be of a mild, courteous, and gracious temper, ready to forgive and
pardon. And it is a great point of magnanimity in this matter to surmount the
common nature of men, by a wonderful divinity of the soul (leaving vengeance
to whom it belongs) to learn of our Savior to bless them that curse us, to
do good to them that hate us; To love that which is good even in our enemies,
pitying their vice, and evil dispositions, and endeavoring to make them
worthy of love by all good ways and offices.

Some enemies (as well as friends) are necessary, they make us more circumspect,
more diligent, wiser and better, we may and often do extract, abundance of good
even from their malice and reproaches; Therefore, also we should rather
endeavor to love, then hate them, because they are necessary and often do us
good.

It is revenge enough for us to know that envious, malicious, spightfull people
do most of all torment their own hearts by these turbulent passions; for vice
suffers not the mind to rest but fills the same with distempers and
vexations.

But the best revenge against envious, malicious people is; To endeavor to do
so much the more well, as they seek to injure us, by which means in the end we
shall surely make them Liars; So may their reproaches, Impudency, Insolency,
malice, and injuries, in good time turn to our good and their own shame, by
this means also their vexations are doubled, for we cannot anger our malign,
malicious enemies worse then to do well and prosper.

Let us then by all means avoid those evil and vicious dispositions of Envy,
Hatred, Malice, Cruelty, Revenge, and the like; Let us give even our enemies
their due praise and honor, Rejoicing at the good of all men, which truly
shows a virtuous and divine disposition. And to be pleased and rejoice at
another man's good is to increase our own.

Let these gracious and noble virtues of Humanity, Clemency, Affability,
Charity, kindness and all good dispositions, still possess us; which
excellent virtues do furnish us with such a modest, generous pleasing and
gracious behavior as wins unto us the love of all good and virtuous men;
Yea, makes us agreeable unto, and beloved of God himself, and possess our
minds with sweet and pleasing Joys and Happiness.

Further, whereas these mixed evil humors of the body, and dispositions of the
mind, composed of sundry various distempers, vices, and evil passions do
oftentimes (as has been showed) cause the mind to become exceeding sad,
sullen, discontented and obstinate in all malign dispositions, yea sometimes
by long custom to become even wilfully and desperately discontented, raging
and miserable, let us consider that these (being a mixture and compounded of
all the other various perturbations of the mind) are the greatest, yea even the
final end and sum of all the former mentioned miseries. And in the furthest
degree hindering this joy and happiness of the mind which we seek for. And
it is the misery of miseries to be wilful and obstinate therein.

It is also in the furthest degree remote from nature and reason which excite
us to nothing more then to the willing desire and diligent Inquisition, search
and enjoyance of pleasure and happiness; And in truth there be so many
thousand delights on Earth to please all our Senses, which we may enjoy, yea we
may enjoy such and so many heavenly pleasures even on Earth, as truly if we
were wise and divine enough, would fill our minds with such joy and happiness,
as that we should rejoice evermore, as S. Paul exhorts us, we should be
unexpressably pleasant and joyful, we should as far as our minds are capaple
enjoy the pleasures of Earth and Heaven within us. But of these more in the
ensuing Divisions.

To conclude then, in general let us endeavor by all means to drive away and
banish out of our minds all evil passions and perturbations, All Sloth,
Laziness, Dullness, Sottishness, and base mindedness; All Intemperate,
Riotous, dissolute pleasures, and selfe-conceited vainglorious dispositions;
All Pride, Ambition, Choler, Anger, and Rashness; All Melancholy,
Covetousness, Fear, Sorrow, and Sadness; All Envy, Hatred, Malice, Revenge,
Cruelty, Sullenness, Obstinacy and Desperation. And on the contrary as much as
we may possibly, let us possess our minds with liveliness, quickness,
perspicacity, and gallantnesse of Spirit, with moderation Temperance, Humility,
Meekness, Tranquillity, Mildness, with Contentation, Fortitude,
Cheerfulness, with Humanity, Affability, Love, kindness, and with all Joy
and Happiness.

Me thinks if we could truly consider, and think of the many and diverse sorts
of delightful felicities both earthly and heavenly which we may enjoy, it were
enough to make our minds immediately leap out of all ill passions and
perturbations, into most sweet Peace, Joy, Mirth, liveliness, and pleasure; So
as to enjoy even a Paradise of delights and happiness within us.

There is so many
pleasures, which we may
(As Well Terrestrial
as divine) enjoy
That who enjoyes all
such felicities
Enjoyes an Earthly,
heavenly Paradise.
THE IX. DIVISION. That by virtue the Mind becomes apt and well prepared to
enjoy the choicest and sweetest felicities on Earth.
SO then, having briefly endeavored to show the felicity of a virtuous mind;
The way to gain the same, to eschew such Maladies, distempers, passions and
perturbations as hinder this happiness, also to embrace such amiable and
delightful virtues as may increase the same; Now let us also further and more
plainly view how that by virtue our minds become most apt and well disposed to
enjoy the felicities of Earth and Heaven.

And first concerning Earthly felicities, to instance briefly and to begin
with Riches and honor.

First, no men on Earth are more like to attain Riches and honor then virtuous
men, by reason their minds are free from Sloth, dullness, Carelessenesse,
Intemperance, Riot, and such dissolute Courses, as usually are the occasions of
dishonor and of declining in estates and fortunes. And no men living are more
likely to gain Riches and honor then the industrious, diligent, temperate,
frugall, unpassionate, courteous, affable, and every way virtuous man.

Secondly, no men do enjoy more felicity therein, then virtuous men for why,
by reason their minds are active, perspicuous, free, and filled with the
delights and felicities of virtue, the same becomes well prepared to enjoy
these earthly Treasures and felicities, and we know that a free and cheerful
mind enjoyes all things with far greater happiness then a dull, sottish,
turbulent, vicious, passionate, discontented Mind.

Yea, (which seems a Paradox) it is certain that even Covetous and Ambitious
men take not so much pleasure in Riches and honor, which they so much esteem,
as the contented virtuous man; for Covetousness and Ambition do not only
blind and draw away the mind from all the choycest earthly pleasures, yea and
heavenly also; But which is most strange even from the pleasures which
otherwise they might enjoy in Riches and Honor, for Covetous and Ambitious
men, regard not so much what what felicity they may derive from that which they
possess, but still think how well they should be if they had some great
matter which they have not, the want whereof, almost continually vexes them,
(for Covetousness and Ambition are unsatiable desires) they regard not, so
much what they have as vex and perplexe themselves for what they have not,
still thinking they want although they possess abundance. The cares which they
take in getting and keeping and the fears and griefs of Crosses, of loosing
and parting from what they have do almost continually perplex them, So as even
Riches and honor to Covetous Ambitious men seem to be rather a burden, a
grief, then a pleasure to them. But the contented virtuous man although he be
but of low degree and possess but a mean estate, yet he enjoyes far more
happiness therein, then the other in abundance, he it is whose free cheerful
and happy mind most sweetly enjoyes within it self the choicest felicities
that may be derived from Riches and honor.

So also of pleasures. Virtuous men their free and happy minds are most apt and
well prepared to enjoy the sweetest delights and pleasures on Earth.

They enjoy much more pleasure in a little of these Earthly felicities then
vicious men in abundance and varieties, who are seldom satisfied or contented,
for if they should glut themselves with all sorts of Earthly pleasures, yet
would they still be gaping after and unsatiably wishing for new contentments,
and if they do enjoy their gluttonous, Intemperate, Luxurious pleasures to the
full yet soon after they remain more melancholy and discontented then Monks,
for all vicious pleasures most certainly will end in sadness discontent,
shame and misery. But virtue teaches us to be sweetly pleased yea even with a
little according to Nature, Reason, and moderation, and gives such a free and
happy mind to the followers thereof as they enjoy all earthly good pleasures
with much greater delight then vicious men, and with contentment.

Virtuous men do far more sweetly in their minds contemplate all good
pleasures then vicious men and so more delightfully enjoyes them; for why,
Slothful, Dull, Heavy, passionate, distempered vicious minds do not imagine,
conceive nor enjoy nigh so much pleasure in any thing as active perspicuous,
free, cheerful virtuous minds; for such minds are much more capable then the
other to enjoy within themselves by contemplation (and consequently in Action)
the most delightful felicities on Earth.

Such minds do far more excellently and pleasantly then the other,
contemplate and enjoy the sweetest delights that may be derived from the happy
society of Parents, children, husbands, wives, lovers, friends, from Riches,
Honor, Sports, Recreations and pleasures of all sorts whatsoever.

Such a virtuous, free, lightsome, perspicuous, cheerful, happy mind, can
most pleasantly and sprightfully glide through the world and sweetly enjoy the
most delightful felicities thereof; for by contemplation it can assemble
together even in one subject within it self all whatsoever is most pleasant
and delightful on Earth. And thereof make an Electuary of pleasure compounded
of the quintessence of all the choycest delights that ever the world produced
or Imagined to charm and please the mind of man, As of all the sweetest Quires
and Consorts of Music both of voices and Instruments that ever nature
invented or imagined to ravish our spirits, Of all the most glittering, amiable
and glorious sights, shows, Triumphs, and beauties of the world, Of all the
most pleasant sweetes, perfumes and flowers that ever the earth yielded forth
to delight us, Of all the choycest liquors, Wines, Banquets, dainties, and
delicates that ever man Enjoyed, even of all what pleasures the world has
hitherto produced to charm and delight our Spirits, yea or Imagined either; as
of the Graces, The Muses, The Nymphs, The Fayries, The Sirens, of Adonis
Orchards, The Hesperian Gardens, The delights of Arcadia, of Arabia foelix, of
the Elizian Shades, of Mahomets Imaginary Heaven, or whatsoever is delightful,
In sum, It can by contemplation enjoy a Paradise of delights within it self.

J might instance also concerning particular pleasures, as of eating. It is
well known by Physicians that Intemperance therein destroys health, makes the
body to become full fraught with crudities and noisome humors. And so in time
thereby the stomach and appetite becomes corrupted and spoiled, Insomuch, as
at last even dainties become displeasant to Intemperate men, but Temperance
keeps the body healthful and agill, and makes the stomach well prepared to
relish and digest both meat and drink; Insomuch as ordinary fare to the
temperate man becomes more pleasant then choycest dainties to an Intemperate
Corrupted stomach.

So might I instance concerning other pleasures in particular, But in general;
Vicious men their minds, (and perchance bodies) being distempered by sloth,
passions and perturbations, even pleasures are often to them as sweet meat to
a sick man, or music to a discontented man, distasteful, displeasant, and
irksome. But virtuous men their Minds being (as has been showed) free from
such distempers, passions, and perturbations, and possessed with lightsomnesse,
Tranquillity, Joy, and happiness, becomes most apt and well prepared to enjoy
the sweetest and choycest felicities on Earth.

And indeed there is no earthly pleasure either laudable or truly pleasant
which is not contained within the precincts of Virtue, because otherwise the
same will cause much more displeasure then content; For all vice ingenders
offense and discontent, and in the end will certainly turn to Sadness,
Sorrow, and Misery. But all pleasures being enjoyed within the limits of virtue
(which ought to be the rule and guide thereof) are good and laudable; And so
we may and should freely and cheerfully enjoy even a Paradise of delights and
felicities within us, As I have showed and written more of this Subject in a
former Book Entitled THE Terrestrial Paradise, OR Happiness on Earth.

So that of earths felicities
our minds within us may
A sweet and pleasant Paradise
of happiness enjoy.
THE X. DIVISION. That by virtue the mind becomes apt and well disposed to
know, attain, and enjoy (as far as the same is capable) the felicities of
Heaven on Earth.
REason (which is the light of true wisdom) is according to some Philosophers)
compounded of all the virtues of the intellectual soul; And by some, said to
be the only Governesse and Directresse of all divine virtues; The same is also
an Attendant and a furtherance to all divine Graces.

Although Faith be the principal and fountain of heavenly Graces and
infinitely above our Reason, yet this divine Grace of Faith disdaines not to
make a good use of Reason, for the furtherance and advancement of all heavenly
Graces; yet only so as her handmaid, to rule, control, and govern her as a
Mistress, how, and when she pleases.

Divine Reason therefore (which is the Compound, the light, and directrix of all
Virtue) may be said to be also a daughter of Heaven, the handmaiden of divine
Faith, and serves greatly to advance the honor and excellency thereof, for
the same often shows, directs, and teaches us to receive, entertain and
embrace this her heavenly Mistress, and to enjoy in her the delights of heaven
(in some measure) on Earth.

Let us then briefly see how this Divine Reason (which is the sum and
substance of Virtue) directs, well prepares, and disposes our minds to see,
attain and enjoy this heavenly happiness on Earth.

Reason is of such force as that it can pass from things known to things
unknown, It can abstract from visible things, things invisible, from
Corporeal Jncorporeall, Generals from particulars, High and mystical from
plain and trivial things. By Reason therefore it is that we can in some
measure spell Heaven from the Earth, and so already in some degree enjoy
heaven, yea and God himself of whom it is said, He is a Sun whose
glory still does shine,
He is a Mine of
all excelling Treasures,
He Is such whose essence
no one can define,
He is a Paradise
of heavenly pleasures


Let us therefore even by the light of Reason look upwards and take a view of
heaven, and of God himself; we need mount up but eleven steps (according to
Astrologers) from the Earth thither.

The first stayre is the Sphere of the Moon, The second of Mercury, The third
of Venus (names which they assign unto the heavens) The fourth that of the
Sun, The next of Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. Then of the fixed Stars, The ninth
Primum Mobile, The tenth the Christalline heaven, and the highest and infinitely
most excellent is the Imperial, which is Gods habitation, This is the place of
our Eternity, of our heavenly Kingdom.

So that we can by our bodily eyes from the earth look up to the Moon, The
Sun, The Starry heaven, and therein sweetly please our selves in view and
Contemplation of their glorious aspect, their amiable, silver, bright,
caelestiall Rays; from thence higher even by the light of Reason we can see
beyond the Spheres to the Imperial heaven, contemplating with Admiration and
Reverence the Sovereign Lord and Creator of all these, God himself; and so by
and through these lower Glories, The firmament, Sun, Moon, Stars, and all
the Caelestiall Spheres we may in some measure spell, learn, and espy
infinitely more excellent heavenly glory, delights and felicities.

The Heavens declare the glory of God, etc. Psalm. 19.

The Earth also in some sort shows us his excellency; When therefore in reason
we consider the motions, the ends, and the causes efficient of all the
Creatures of the Earth, Their multitudes also, (for all mutitudes proceed from
one unity, and the utmost unity is GOD,) Likewise the marvailous Providence,
Art, and wisdom which may be observed in all things, as in the making of every
least Creature, insomuch as all the world (but GOD) cannot make the meanest
therein, much less the most excellent, such as are the admirable divine
Immortal souls of men; As also his continual preservation of all things,
without whom the Sea would overflow the Land, one Creature devour another, The
earth without him could not bring forth fruit, Nor man generate man; without
him our clothes could afford us no warmth, nor meat, nourishment; neither
indeed could any thing without him, live, grow, or subsist; When also we
consider the course of nature, The due order and subordination of all
Creatures, which do give their influence one to another in an excellent
manner, and all for the use of man; Also the many- and diverse pleasures and
felicities of the world, so full of excellency, sweetness, and delight; And
lastly the wonderful miracles which have been done in all Ages in the world;
We cannot but in reason confess, and in some measure espy the heavenly
Fountain, the Cause, the Creator, the Preserver, and Lord of all these, and
admire his infinite Power, Wisdom, Glory, and Excellency.

And more particularly, as from the pleasures and felicities of the Earth, we
may by reason espy and contemplate the infinitely more excellent felicities of
heaven. If therefore we think of the most pleasant and sweetest delights and
felicities that ever the world produced or can invent, to please, to delight,
to charm, The Senses, The Spirits, The Mind of man, Reason will tell us, if
there be so much excellency in Creatures, much more is there in the Creator,
GOD himself; If we enjoy and contemplate so many, diverse, sweet and pleasant
delights in these little drops proceeding from the ocean of Gods excellency
while we are here on Earth, Reason tells us much more excellent and more
pleasant may we and shall we enjoy in God himself in heaven.

Also, from the mind of man we may in some sort even by reason, espy God
himself and his heavenly excellencies and felicities. To instance in some
particulars.

And first from the excellency of the mind of man, which is of such an
admirable quickness sprightfulnesse, lightsomnesse, and capacity as that it
can glide through the world and think of the most excellent things therein
even in a moment, and by contemplation enjoy the same within it self, yea it
is already capable in faithful contemplation to eye Eternity, to mount up to
Heaven, to GOD himself, and in some degree to possess and enjoy him and his
heavenly felicities within it self; So that the mind of man seems to be far
more excellent then the world, being of such an admirable, quick, perspicuous,
lightsom, and heavenly nature, even while it remains on Earth.

When therefore the mind of man considers its own excellency, it may even by
Reason look further to its Fountain and Creator GOD himself, whose Image it
is in some measure, so far as it is good and happy; And (knowing the cause is
infinitely more excellent then the effect) as in a Mirror see and contemplate
his infinite excellency who is the efficient cause of this and of all other
excellency and happiness, and so be excited to love him with dearest ardent
love, and rejoice in him with sweetest and highest pleasure, who is our Minds
only true Joy and Happiness.

Also further, when the mind of man considers its own excellency, even by
reason it often does or may look upwards to Heaven, wihther its future,
eternal, and heavenly nature and desire directs it, and contemplate, if in
this short transitory, mortal life, it be of such excellent wisdom, Agility,
Sprightfulnesse, Perspicuity, Wonder, Joy and happiness, how much more wise,
lightsome, quick, perspicuous. Angel-like, divine and happy shall the same
be, when it is disburthened of this corrupted, heavy, earthly body which
clogs it, when also it shall leave the world, and ascend to Heaven to God
himself, with him, and in him to live, and partake of his infinite sweetness
and heavenly pleasures for ever.

Also the mind of man from its Conscience can even by reason in some sort know
and espy heavenly happiness; Conscience is called by some, A little God within
us, to direct us to do well, and to cheer and rejoice us therein; Also to
divert us from evil, and to cause trouble and sorrow in us when we eschew
goodness and do evil; This divine part of the mind called Conscience, does
as it were by an heavenly instinct tell us, That there is a most powerful,
glorious, wise, just, good, loving, and in all respects infinitely excellent
Creator and Governor of all things, who dwells in the Heavens, who gives us all
the good we have, And that he has also prepared for Pious and virtuous men
eternal heavenly rewards after this life, checking us with thoughts of Atheism
and Blasphemy when we go about to think and believe the contrary, But
rejoicing us when we do well, when we love, desire, seek and contemplate this
our gracious and infinitely excellent God, and his heavenly felicities;
wherefore seeing God has imprinted in us such a feeling of himself as no
Conscience can deny him, but rather that every one acknowledges his infinite
Glory, Power, Excellency, and heavenly felicities, it is great reason that we
should believe and endeavor to seek, see, and enjoy the same.

Also from the desire of the mind of man to this eternal heavenly happiness
in God, and the satisfaction and contentment which it receives in the faithful
Contemplation thereof even on Earth, Reason in some sort sees and espies the
same.

For the mind of man is of so large and excellent an apprehension and desire,
as it is already in some measure capable to view and long after eternity and
heavenly happiness, Of so generous a nature it is, as nothing will satisfy
the desire thereof but Infiniteness, but Eternity, but Heaven, but God
himself. There was yet never any man (though possessed with all sorts of
earthly felicities) but his mind has still desired new pleasures, it never can
be satisfied until it can enjoy God himself and his heavenly felicities;
which often does or may cause our minds greatly to desire and long thereafter,
And to pray with King David, Show me O God, the Joy of thy Salvation.

This also, may in some sort even by Reason make us perceive and Enjoy this
infinite Eternal heavenly felicity, since without the same our divine heaven
borne souls can never be satisfied, and after the same since we do (even
according to the nature of our souls) greatly long and desire.

Also, forasmuch as when our minds once come to be truly raised (in divine
Contemplation) to heaven, to God himself, The desires thereof do remain even
satisfied, contented, and most sweetly pleased on Earth; For then knowing, that
when God pleases and thinks good, we shall eternally enjoy this heavenly
happiness in perfection, Of which in such divine Contemplations we begin to
taste already, and in this heavenly elevation seeing our minds raised above the
world, above our selves, and beginning already to live an heavenly Angellicall
life with God himself, our desires remain sweetly pleased and satisfied with
heavenly delight and happiness.

Thus does divine virtue or Reason, which is the Compound, light, and
directresse thereof, prepare our minds to see, know, attain and Enjoy heavenly
delights and happiness on Earth.

I might instance also, concerning diverse particular virtues, But in General,
let us yet further consider; The minds of vicious men being dulled and annoyed
by Sloth, Intemperance, or distempered by passions and perturbations cannot be
well capable, nor well prepared to perform the functions and exercises thereof
or any good Action or office proper thereunto, Such as are Prayer, Study,
divine Meditations, Contemplations, and all lofty and excellent matters, or to
receive, retain or enjoy divine wisdom, Grace, Jlluminations, or
Consolations. But virtuous men their minds being free from Sloth and evil
desires, from distempers, passions, and perturbations, and on the contrary
being Active, quick, lightsome, well disposed and possessed with sweet
Tranquillity, Joy, and happiness, become free, cheerful, sprightly, apt and
well prepared for the performance of all excellent and divine Studies,
Exercises and Contemplations, And to know, receive, retain, entertayne and
enjoy all heavenly Inspirations, Irradiations and Consolations.

Insomuch as it is said, that many of the Ancient fathers and other divine
Saints of GOD, have by reason of Temperance and other virtues, attained unto a
very high Pitch of heavenly wisdom and Grace, and that by this means they
came to so great a measure of holiness and familiarity with God, as they
became admirable to all the World, and that his divine Majesty vouchsafed very
graciously to descend down unto them, Illuminating them wonderfully with
divine Graces and heavenly consolations, Insomuch as they were possessed with so
great Joy and solace of mind, with such heavenly delights and happiness, as
they deemed themselves in Paradise.

Insomuch as truly, by divine Virtue, The Mind of Man becomes most apt, well
prepared and disposed to enjoy (as far as it is capable) the felicities of
Heaven on Earth, To mount up to heaven in faithful Contemplations and to
entertain it self with Angels, and with God himself, To enjoy within it
self as much heavenly pleasure and happiness as it can think of; Nay more,
(as some have enjoyed) such and so much as the mind that enjoyes the same is
not able to conceive or receive it, Such as St. Paul says has not entered into
the Heart of man; Such as even overcomes the heart and mind, brings the same
into a divine ecstasy and Transportation and makes it even besides it self
with heavenly admiration and pleasure, yea even beyond and above it self, of a
future and divine nature, of a Super-humane and heavenly temper on Earth.

But concerning this Subject of heavenly Joy and happiness, I have now lately
also published another Treatise, Entitled Heaven within us, OR, Divine
happiness on Earth.

A Paradise of heavenly Joy
So may we gain, that even
Within us we already may
Possess delights of heaven.
To Conclude; In sum,

By virtue our minds become apt, well prepared and disposed to Enjoy a Paradise
of delights and felicities, both Earthly and heavenly within us.

So if we could fair
virtues Beauty spy,
With love we should be
inflamed presently,
Her sweetness would attract
us with such Charms
We should embrace the same
with open Arms.
Who loves her lovely self
loves not in vain,
Millions of pleasures they
shall surely gain.
She free's our minds from
sloth and evil passions
From ill desires, from
fears and perturbations;
She Crowns the same with
lightsome pleasantness
With peace and Courage,
Joy and happiness,
She does direct us
and prepares the way
Both unto earthly,
and to heavenly Joy.
So he that is wise
A Paradise
of sweet delights does find
In virtues ways
Which he enjoyes
within his happy Mind.
FINIS.

