A Postill or COLLECTION OF MOST GODLY DOCTRINE UPON EVERY gospel through the
year, as well for Holy days as Sondayes, dygested in such order, as they be
appointed and set forth in the book of Common Prayer. Very profitable for
all Curates, Parents, masters of housholdes, and other gouerners of youth.

CHRIST.

The harvest is great, but the laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord
of the harvest, to send forth laborers into the harvest. LVC. X. LONDINI,
ANNO DOMINI. M.D.L.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

A PREFACE TO THE GODLY READER.
FOR AS MVCH (DEARLY beloved in our savior Jesus) as faith (which is the gift
of god without the which we can not please god) comes by hearing of the
word of god, it is expedient, Ephe. 2. Heb. 11. Romans 12
and more then necessary, that we earnestly embrace the same word of god,
least the Lord be wrath with us, Psalm. 1.
and we perish from the right way.

We may not at our pleasure (as the world does) trifle with it, neglecte it and
contemn it, which is the lively food of the soul, as Christ himself by the
same bears winesse, saying: Mat. 4
A man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God. What manne neglects the food and norishmente of his
body, which is mortal, vile earth, and worms meat? Nay, how do all men
diligently awayte the time, season and oportunitye to prepare the food and
noryshmente for the body?

The husband man ploweth, sows, barroweth, weedeth, reapeth, moweth, dries
his corn, and gathers it into his barn in season.

The marchaunte marketh the oportunitye, and takes the wind that serves for
his vyage in due time.

The Passinger leeseth not the tide, but takes it when it is offered. The
lawyer observes the term. Every man in his science, occupacion and craft,
applies the time and season when it serves them best for their purpose: but
(Lord) how dulle, negligente and careless be we of this time, that gods
word speaks of, 2. Co. 6
saying: Behold, now is the accepted time, behold, now is the day of
salvation. Full truly therefore is this saying of Christ verified upon us.
Luc. 16
The children of this world are in their nation, wiser than the children of
life. Almyghtye god has now vysyted us with his holy word, but yet we
provoke him to lamente our miserable state no less then the Jews did, upon
whom, he says by his prophet Esai. Esaias. 1.
I have nourished and brought up children, but they have done wyckedly
against me. The ox has known his owner, and the ass his masters cribbe,
but Israel has received no knowledge, my people has no understanding. Alas
for this sinful nation, a people of great iniquitye, a froward generation,
unnatural children.

Now least any manne flattering him self, would apply this lamentable prophecy
only unto the Jews, let him note this sentence which touches the cause of our
blyndenesse to be twice rehearsed, namely, Israel has received no knowledge, my
people has no understanding. If it had been spoken only of the Jews, yt had
been enough to have said, Israel has received no knowledge, But because it
should be truly applied unto us also, god says: My people has no
understanding. Luc. 10
Why? Verily CHRIST him self shows the cause, saying: The harvest is
great, but the laborers are few.

Wherefore (christian reader) it has been thought good, to commend this small
volume of godly and sincere doctrine, into our mother and English tongue that it
might be a spur unto the dull shepherds, and help unto the simple and
godly minded curates, and comfort to the fathers of the household, parents,
and gouernoures of youth. Truly it must needs be a spur unto the idle, dull
and negligent curates, because the doctrine hereof is so brief, simple and
plain, that a cyllye woman or poor prentyse, occupyinge them selves the
whole week in their vocacion, only with the studyinge and learning of this
book upon the sunday and hollye day, shall within one year be better able
to teach hereafter their own housholdes, then many curats do now instruct
their congregation committed to their cure and charg. At whose hand, without
fayl, Ezec. 3. and.33.
the Lord will require the blood of every one of their flock that perishes
for lack of godly teching.

Also the profit that the godly minded curates (although they be but meanly
learned) shall hereby obtain their flock and congregation in short time (by
the grace of God) shall better declare in their life by good fruits, than here
can be expressed with words.

Finally, the honest householders, (for whose sake principally this book is
put forth,) which will take pains to practice the doctrine hereof upon the
sondayes and holy days in teachinge their familyes, and lookinge to them so on
the working days with discipline, that they exercise the same in their life,
shall find more faithfulness, quietenesse, and obedience in their families,
then their policy and worldely wisdom otherwise is able to bring to pass
with all that they can do.

Let not parents and masters hereafter find fault with the pride,
stubburnesse, slouthe, and falshed of their youths and servants, if they
them selves be styffe necked and slow to learn the word of the Lord, and
negligent in teaching their families to serve God. But let them know, that the
untowardness of their youth and servants is the just plague of god unto
them, because they teach them not to know, fear and serve God.

What mean they that murmr? would they have their children and servants
obedient, faithful and diligente to serve them? Yea verily, it is mete they
should so be. Then let they them selves begin first to be diligent in
learning the word of God, faithful in teaching it, and obedient in doing it.
Tit. 2.
For S. Paul says: Speak the things that become wholesome learning, that the
elder men be sober, sage, discrete, sound in the faith, in love, and in
patience. When they have learned this, than let them be diligent to show the
same by example, and to teach their cure, that which follows.

First, that their wives be in such apparel as becomes holiness, not given to
much wine, sobre minded, discrete, chaste, howsewyfly, good, obedyent to their
own husbands, dilygent in teaching their children, that the word of God be
not euel spoken of.

Secondarily, that young men be sobre minded.

Thyrdly, that servants be obedient unto their own masters, and please them
in all things, not answeringe again, neither pickers, but they must show al
faithfulness, that they may do worship to the doctrine of God our savior in all
things.

Thus did Adam (after he was called to repentance) teach his children,
first to know their savior and to serve god in true faith: as witnesses the
oblation of his obedient son Abell. Gene. 4


Also Seth and Enos did the same, and therefore it is written of them, that they
began to make inuocacion in the name of the Lord. Gene. 5
Likewise Henoch of whom it is written, that he walked with God.

Noe thereby was not only saved from drownyng, Genesis 7.
but also has obtained this godly title, even to be called, The preacher of
righteousness. 2. Pe. 2. A notable title.


What need I to speak of Abraham, Loath, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, etc. which in
steed of preachers retained the true faith, suerly grounded upon gods word,
and by good example and doctrine have taught the same to their families and
posterytie? A noble example to all gouernoures, parents and masters is set
forth in Tobie, Tob. 1.
which (as it is written) taught his son from his youth up, to fear god,
and to refrain from evil. And to the end that no man should want the godly
lessons that he taught, lo here they follow. Tobi. 4.
Have god in thy thought all the days of thy life, and beware at any time thou
consent not unto sin, and lest thou let slyppe the commandments of the
Lord our God. Give alms of thy goods, and turn never thy face from the
poor, and so shall it come to pass, that the face of the Lord shall not be
turned away from the. Be merciful after thy power. If thou have much, give
plenteousely. If thou have little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that
little. For so gatherest thou thy self a good reward in the day of necessitee.

Last of all, he departed this life in peace, but yet before he should
depart, he called unto him his son, and his sons vii. children, saying: My
children, Tob. 14
hear your father. Serve the Lord in truth, seek after his will, and do the
thing that pleseth him. Command your children that they do right, give
alms, be mindeful of God, and ever to be thankful unto him in truth, and
with all their power. Prynt this godly example in your hearts, and for want of
a curate, let this book be your teacher, if you can not read, let your
child, servant, or prentyse read. And hear you and learn to enter in at this
straight gate, and to walk in the narrow way that leads unto life, which
these godly fathers entered and walked in. So doing, you shall be suer (as Toby
departed in peace) to have a quiet household, obedient children, and faithful
servants, yea and that which is great deal better, the quietness and peace of
conscience, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with God the father and the
holy ghost, be al thank, praise, and glory. Amen.

Pray ye the Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his harvest. So
be it.

The Gospel on the first sunday in Aduent. Mat. 21.
AND when they Mat. 11 Luc. 19.
drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto mount Olyuete, then
sent Jesus two disciples, saying unto them: Go into the town that lies
oueragaynst you, and anon ye shall find an ass bound, and a colte with her:
lose them, and bring them unto me. And if any man say ought unto you, say
ye, the Lord has need of them: and straight way he will let them go. All
this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
saying: Es. 62. d Zac. 9. b Io. 12. c
Tell ye the daughter of Sion, behold, the king comes, unto the, meek,
syttyng upon an ass, and a colte, the fool of the ass, used so the yoke. The
disciples went and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the ass and the
colte, and put on them their clothes, and set him thereon And many of the
people spread their garments in the way. other cut down branches from the
trees, and strawed them in the way. Moreover, the people that went before and
they that came after, cried, saying: Hosanna to the son of Dauyd. Lu. 19. f
Io. 12. b Ps. 118. Mat. 11
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. Lu. 19. t Io. 12 b Ps.
118. Mat. 12
Hosanna in the highest.

THE EXPOSITION.
Seeing, that now from the beginnynge of the world, among all Gods elect,
has been hitherto observed, and in this latter dais, through the synguler
grace of God, indespite of the deuell, by noble victory has been recovered
and won, Genesis 15 Abac. ^. Ioh. 3.
that only faith by Christ makes a man ryghteous, good, and blessed. It shall be
therefore very expedient, that we (whom God has called to thoffice of
preaching the Gospel) faithfully and with all seueritye, and treuth, do often
handle earnestly, and beat into the heddes of men, the doctrine of faith with
repentance. For suerly the deuel, the very enemy of this doctrine, slepeth
not, nor can by any means leave of his perverse malice and deceitfulnes. For it
is trewly always his propertye, to sow cocle, (that is to say, false
doctrine) among wheat: Mat. 13:
and when he has done harm amongst the god wheat, privily to wipe him self
away. Therefore when we shall preach or speak any thing of faith to the
people, we must wiselye, plainly, and circumspectly declare, what manner of
faith it is, that scripture so greatly commends: Whence it comes, what it
works in us, what her fruictes be, and what things be contrary to the same,
or else our adversaries shall always be ready to slander and misreport us:
saying, that through such learning, we give occasion to sin, and forbid
good works to be done. Therefore yt I may briefly set forth unto you an
exaumple of this thing: ye shall understand, that faith is a true trust,
Faith.
and perfect hope in God. That God by Christ forgeueth sins, and iustyfieth
us, and will grant eternal life of his only grace and mercy, without any our
merits or works. And such faith have we not of our selves, Romans 12
but receive it by the word of God and the holy ghost. And when it is so by ye
word of God, and the holy ghost made lively and effectual in us,
Righteousness of faith. Gal. 5.
then thorough Christ it makes us good, just, and blessed, as the prophet
Abacuc witnesses, saying: The just man lives by faith. And such a faith can
not stand without hope and love, it must needs break out, and by good
conversation and godly works be made apparaunt, not after the nature and
custom of hypocrisy (which is contrary to faith) but of a voluntary will, and
an unfeigned heart. Lo, Mat. 7.
this is the faith that we here speak of, which is commended by the
testimonye of scripture. Ephesians. 4.
And in likewise ye must instruct of the repentance Repentance.
of a christen man. That penance is nothing else but with all thy heart to be
sorry for thy sin, to leave sin, and by faith to cleave to rigteousnes. But
of these things we shall speak mor at large an other time, let us now see what
is to be noted in this Gospel.

First of all let us considre, what may alure and prouok us to the same faith,
here mentioned of. Which thing surly ye peacible coming of our lord Jesus
Christ to Jerusalem, The coming of Christ to Jerusalem.
does goodly perform and bring to pass. For what kind of goodness or mekenes
is not served therein? Other princes and Lords, as often as they newlye enter
into there kingdoms and Dominions, lord, what a po^pe and great company goes
before them? as it is written in the 19. psalm. Psalm. 19
Some in charettes, and some in horses. They than put etc. But Christ although
he was constituted lord of heaven and earth, as it apeareth in the last chap.
of Math. yet he porely rode upon an ass back, accompanied with a simple and
despised company. Which thing not only of the world had no comendacion, but
also gave to every body occasion of laughyng and jesting. What manner a man
Christ is
Nevertheless if all this were printed in our hearts, yt would teach us what a
manner of man Christ was and what became every christian man to look of hi^.
He is verily such a one, that escheweth, shunneth, and chaseth away no man from
him, but alureth and calls every man to him. For certainly to that intent he
came into this world, that through his only deserts and merits he might
redeem all. And therefore he shows him self unto us with so great humanity,
not only in words and learning, but also in works and miracles. And here I
think yt the prophet Esa. in spirit saw this great clemency and goodness of
Christ, when he cried so depely in his heart, saying. Esa. 64
Break the heavens and come down, Ye and the evangelist also did diligently
bring in the testimony of Zachary, to set before our eyes the mekenes of
Christ, with ye which he goes about to help every man saying, Zach. 9
Ecce rex tuus uenit tibi mansuetus etc. that is Lo, here thy king comes
unto the etc. all these words be spoken with a great vehemence. For when he
says notablye this word, lo, it can not be, but that he goes about to show
a thing of great weight And here in sight was nothing else done, but that
Christ in his lowly entryng into Jerusalem, would comme^d toward us his most
bounteful will and great benefit, as though he should say thus.

Act. 15.
Thou my despised company have hitherto lain oppressed under the heavy yoke of
the law, which, seeing thou coldest by no means fulfill, was another help to the
nor to none other. Moreover before my adue^t or coming. you had nothing else
but promise But now be of good comfort, I will make an end of al thy misery
and wretchedness. I will take away the curse of the law, and will forgive the
thy sins, and shall obtain for the everlasting life.

Verily all this can I do, Christ, King. Mat. 11
seeing I am king and lord over sin, death, the deuel, and hell. And this
not only I can do, but will do, cum sim mitis. etc.

On this wise does the aforesaid prophet Zachary show forth unto us this
work of Christ. Now he that of this place so learneth to know Christ, that
with all his heart he may say with the people: Blessed be he that comes in the
name of God, And so believes that here Christ with all his goodness of his only
grace is given to him, he being delivered from sin, is made just and good,
according to this scripture: He ye believes in him, shall not be left
comforteles, but shall have everlasting life.

Secondarely, Good works.
this gospel teaches us the very true good works of a christen man, by the
which the same faith is made clear and apparaunt, in that that this place
settethe forth unto us the compassion and teres of Christ, at his entering
unto Jerusalem. Would god that all the world knew what scripture calls good
works. And trewly it is very expedient, that the ministers of the word of god,
should earnestly and diligently, (but yet wisely) exhort the people to good
works, seeing that all the world is now given holy to naught and myschife For
as admonitions, wherewith the people are stirred to do good, be necessary, so
affiaunce in the deserving of works, and in our own justice, is noisome and
perniciouse. As concerning good works these be they, as often as by very love
thou doeste considre the necessity, pouertye, infirmity, miserye and
adversity of thy neighbor as thine own. And in all things in thy mind,
thou art ready to help him. As we se in saint Paul, where he speaks to the
Gala. in the 6. chap: Gal. 6.
Let us always do good toward every man, and cheiflye toward them, that be
joined in the fellowship of faith with us. And in the 6. chapter of the first
epistle to Tim. he says: 1. Ti^. 6.
Command them that be rich in this world that they be not high minded, and
that they put not their hope and trust in their uncertain riches but in the
living God. And that they do good, and be rich in good works, and liberal in
giving and dealing their goods. Here we may se, that saint Paul does not
only move us to good works, but also shows namely unto us, which be good
works, (that is to say) to do well to every manne, and willingly to give and
to be liberal. And here well may be alledgyd the saying of Esaie the prophet
in the 58. chap. Thou shall not despise thine oune kind and flesh. Esa. 58.
If thou will dilligentlye mark this place, and harken unto such things as
the prophet speaks of in the same, doughtles thou shall soon perceive what
he calls good works, yea and all the prophets do so instauntlye stir us unto
these works, that they dare say plainly, that no kind of worshipping god does
prevail, wherein the love of thy neighbor is not found. And Osee in the 6.
chap. says, Ose. 6.
Complacitum est mihi in misericordia, and non in sacrificio. That is, I am
well pleased with mercy showing, and not in sacrifice doing. In this place to
be merciful, signifies to do good to my neighbor, as it appears in ye 6.
of Luke. Luc. 6:
Now therefore like as Christ became servant unto us in learning, in life, in
miracles doing, in his death, in his resurrection, (and to be short) in
every point of humantie, so he would that we should become servants one to
an other, What is to be merciful.
in body, power, strenght, and in all our riches. Nevertheless in such wise,
not that we should put our confidence in these works, and withstand the wrath
of God therewith, but to testifye and show forth our faith in light. For
saynct Paul by such works declared his faith, and let pass diverse other
of his good works: what think you of that, where he did socoure and help:
that poor and miserable Onesmus? For willing to reconcile, (he would reconcile
him to Philemo^) he calls hi^ his own heart: is not this a great part of
love? Unto Philem.
And afterward he excuses Onesimus of his fleyng and ronnyng away, as very
necessary to this purpose, that after his such lapse and fall, he might be
not only a minister or servant, but as a brother unto Philemon. Forthermore
the same good saint Paul took on him self the harm, which the same fugitive
servant had done his master, and would all the loss (whatsoever it were) to
be laid on his neck Be not these good works? But by it that other works do
appear great and good, yet may they not well be called good works, when
they, which have need of them, be not releuyd by them. Good works must always
serve thy neighbor, and him that has need. Christ in the midst of his oy
lamented and wept
And that Christ teaches us in this story, when in the midst of the peoples
joy, which reioysed and wished all things prosperous unto him, as to the son
of Dauyd, and to their power gave him the most honor they could, he wept
very sore and bitterly. What should stir or move him so to weep think you?
Verily as he him self witnesses the misery and wretchedness of the people
entered into his heart, for seeing that by all the time that he was so conuersaunte
amongst them, they would not understand nor receive knowledge, it was
necessary that they in body, soul, honor, and all their goods should perish.
All this knew Christ, and therefore wept so sore. And besides this, he
faithfully gave monicion unto them before, whereby they might learn to avoid
such inconvenience: but all was in vain. Now like as Christ does not disemble,
but by all means goes about to preuente the loss of his people, so should
we when we are come to the knowledge of God, take upon us the care and
necessity of our neighbor, whether it be bodily or gostlye, great or small,
and to procure not only, that there rise or grow no hurt unto them or theires,
but also that they feel our help at need. As saint Paul to the Galat. in the
9. chap. Galat. 9
says: Alter alterius one ra portate, and sic perficietis legem Christi. That
is, One of you ease and help an other, and so ye shall fulfill the law of
Christ. Let it be by us at all time fulfilled, that God the father by our
works without seasing end may be glorified. Amen.

The second sunday in Aduent, Luc. 21.
AND there shall be signs in the son and in the moon, and in the stars, and
in the earth Mat. 24 Mat. 13 Joel. 2. Ezec. 38
the people shall be at their wits end, through despair. The sea and the
water shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for lokyng
after those things which shall come on the yeerth. For the powers of heaven
shall move. And then shall they see the son of man come in a cloud with power
and great glory. When these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads, tor your redemption draws nigh.

Mat. 24 Mar. 13
And he showed them a similitude: Be hold the fig tree, and all the trees, when
theye shoot forth their buddes, ye se and know of your own selves, that
summer is then nigh at hand. So likewise ye also, when ye se these things come
to pass, be sure that the kingdom of God is nigh. Verily I say to you, this
generation shall not pass in all be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass,
but my words shall not pass.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel first of all is declared unto us, Christ cares for us.
the great carke and care, that Christ takes for us. And although he speak
here of many and horrible signs and tokens, that shall be before his coming,
yet he would not that his elect should be destitute of comfort. But very
gentely taught them, how they should behave them selves, when the tribulacion
of this time shall come upon them. Neither would he keep close from them what
should follow after this tribulacions, verily the end of the cursed and wicked
world. Mat 24
And although these signs at the first shall be terrible, and bring much
sorrow and tremblinge with them, yet shall they not all hurt the elect:
because they shall have knowledge of these things long before. The joy o^ the
elect.
And they shall look about and lift up their heads, as they which know by those
signs the day of their redemtion from al euel to be at hand: And that Christ
then shall take from the tirannes, 1 Cor. 15
Princes, Lords, Kings, and Emperoures, their power, and yield it up to his
heavenly father. Further, seeing that they know (according to saint Paul's saying)
that all things work for the best to gods elect: Romans 8.
They do verelye also perceive, that all these signs must be referred
thereunto. Likewise it is no small comfort, that we have of Christ's saying in
an other place, Mat. 10
All the hears of your head be numbered. In contrary wise the dispisers of
gods word, shall with a great boldness set at naught these signs, and
shall often have in their mothes, Peace and quietness. 1 Tes. 5.
Also, this proverb: What and heaven fall? But at the last they shall run
into great fear, for because they be drouned in yt volupteousnes of this
world. They have no hope in Christ and therefore they ca^ not lift up their heds
unto this savior and redemer. Wherefore it shall not here need so long
explicacio^ of ye signs and to ke^s, as shall need dilligent admonition to
faith, through which we abide in Christ, and Christ in us. For where this thing
is so brought to pass, there is another signs, tre^blinges nor fears. No
another sin, the deuell, hell, another death, ca^ hurt us. Will thou briefly know
who abides in Christ, Ioh. 15
and in whom Christ abides? S. John speaks that plainli, saying: He yt keeps
his commandments abides in Christ, and Christ in hi^. What is that
commandment? 1. Ioh. 3
That we should believe in ye name of his son Jesus Christ, and one to love an
other. Nevertheless brieflye to speak of those signs yt S. Luke makes mencio^
of, whereby al me^ may understand how much they are now done already, and how
much they shall be done herafter. First of all he says, that there shall come
mani falls prophets, False prophets
which shall deceue many. Oh what an horrible thing is that? yt they shall come
in the name of Christ? But here considre the care yt Christ takes for the,
and execute his commandments then shall there be no ieoperdie at al. Believe
them not (says Christ) nor give no faith to them: Antichrist.
here may well be noted Antechrist with his false doctrine, and his outward
worshipping of God, of the which S. Paul speaks in the second chapter of
the second epistle to the Thessalonians.

Secondarely, the words of the Evangelist does show: that surfete and over
great covetousness of riches, with great violence shall invade. The car of ye
belli
In the which place again Christ takes care for us, and says: Beware. etc.
Thirdly, the Gospel shall be preached every where, as we do now evidently se,
so that we must needs confess and knowledge, that these many years
hitherto the Gospel has not been so purelye preached, as we se in these
latter days. Item the son, moon, and the sterres, shall be destitute of their
natural light. The course of ye law
And hereto shall follow the sorowfulnes of the people, for the fear, and
lookinge for those things which shall chance to all the world. The rombling
and noise of the sea and floudes, the mouinge of the celestial powers, and
diverse other signs, whereof Christ makes mention. Now thou perceiuest what
shall signs necessarily happen, and moreover thou have hard, that to those
that abide in Christ, Romans 5.
they shall bring no fear at all. Forthermore see in this case, that thou
take hold of Christ by faith, as such a Lord and master, 1 Pet. 5.
that has taken charge over the, yea and shall abide with the to the end of
the world, Mat. 28
so shall there be nothing that shall hurt or fear the.

The second aduente of Christ.
Also Christ in this gospel shows the majesty of his last coming, for
none other cause, but to comfort his people, and to the wicked he brings an
horrible fear, when he says: And then they shall se the son of man come in a
cloud, with a great power and clerenesse: as though he should say. Thou my
despised company, have suffered grief and pain in this world, thou haste
been made the ofscouringe of al, for my word, in the desence thereof thou have
suffered many ieopardies, of goods, honor, life, 1 Cor. 4
and so forth. Therefore now behold him, in whom thou have laid or set
all thy trust or hope. What think thou now by my power? where be they that
have persecuted the? Ps. 72
whreunto is their power come? where is now seen the pomp and magnifice^ce
of thy enemies? Al they by co^fusio^ and shame ar destroyed, Romans 8.
being damned both body and soul for ever. And like as thy misery shall now
have an end, so shall their perpetual infelicitye and condemnacion now begin,
and last for evermore. Fear thou not this my power which thou now seeste, it
shall make more for the, then against the Likewise let not my majesty (be it
never so great) trouble the: The greater it is, the more socoure shall thou
have at my hand. And now suffer a while, and let us se what the enemies of
the word of God can do. Lo, Psa. 43
thus it is manifest, that the majesty of Godds judgment to us that believe
his word, and for the same always be counted and taken as sheep appointed to
the slaunghter, brings not fear, but rather a comfort. To us (I say) that
believe in him, for we shall hear that joyful voice, Mat. 15
Come hither the blessed children of my father. And now may we plainlye se
what it is that saint Paul says: 2 Timothy 1
I know in whom I have beleuid, and am sure that he is able to keep, that I
have committed to his keeping, unto that day. In contrary wise, Ioh. 19
the enemies of the word of God, shall se whom they have persecuted, and whether
Christ shall wink at all those ylles that has chaunsed to the elect people
of God. There shall be wepinge and gnashing of teath: there shall be hell and
everlasting death. Thirdly, we have in this gospel a perfect admonicion, that
we shall abiecte and cast away al fleshly trust and security, Carefulnes
hurts.
and to give dilygence to have perfect knowledge of our selves and to be
always ready against the glorious adne^t or coming of our lord Jesus Christ.
For because he has moved and kindeled our hearts and with these words, Look
up, and lift up your heads, has put away all fear. He will also that we
be warned to prepare our selves against these times, and this he does by a
rude and homely similitude, saying: Ye se the fig tree, and all other trees,
when they bring forth their fruicte, and the^ you say: somer draws nigh. So,
when ye shall see al these things done, know you for certain, that ye kingdom
of heaven is at hand. And note well now, that he would us to understand and
perceive, that when al these things shall be brought to pass, that then Christ
shall make an end of the world, But the wicked shall boldly despise and say:
God sees not us, Ezec. 9.
he has forsaken the earth etc. yet shall christian men give head, and look
for these times, Luc. 11.
as a faithful servant does look his master, when he shall return from the
marriages: And that thou may know that he greatly desires, that we should
be mindful of this day, he makes an end of his sermon, with this word:
Watch ye. How must we watch? Verily it is nedeful that we have a lively and
feruente faith, Mat 25
which by love should be effectual: like unto the five wise virgins. For
trewly to watch, is to be diligente, in faith: To watch. To sleep
and the works of God, as in the contrary wise to sleep, is nothing else, but
to despise the word of God, to abide in infidelity, and plainly to do no
good at all. Now how many is there amongst us all that does look for that
helthful and glorious coming or aduent, or watches therefore? Verelye all the
world slepeth and routeth. 1 Tes. 5.
Night and darkness has over compassed all that ever is.

Wherefore thou that art the minister of the word of God, follow Christ, set
it forth with all instancye and feruentnes. Call to repentance. Correct the
evil. Comfort the good: and beware, lest God require the blood of the
sinner at thy hand: Ezec. 5.
For trewly it is not all in vain that God has so purposed and decreede in
his mind: He has spoken it, and therefore it must needs be: Heaven and
earth shall pass away, but his word shall ever abide. If thou do thy
duty, and ceasest not with all thy mind to admonish and warn, although it
were so that the more part would not believe or obey, but like the Sodomytes
encrese sin upon sin, yet would there be found some good ground that would
receive the seed of Gods word and bring forth fruit. Thy diligence and
labor can not lack his reward, Mat. 25
as scripture witnesses saie^g: Well good servant and faithful, because thou
haste been faithful over a little, I shall set the over much: Enter into the
kingdom of thy Lord.

The third sunday in Aduent. Mat. 11.
WHen John being in prison herd the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, Esa. 35.
and said unto him. Art thou he that shall come, or do we look for an other.
Jesus answered end laid unto them. Go, and show John again, that ye have
heard and seen Esa. 6. c
The blind receive their syghte, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor receive the glad
tidings of the Gospel. And happy is he, that is not offended by me.

And as they departed, Lu. 11. d
Jesus began to say to the people concerning John: What went ye out in the
wilderness to see? A reed that is shaken with the wynd? Or what went ye out for
to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they that wear soft
clothing, are in kings houses. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet?
Verily I say unto you, and more then a prophet. For this is he, of whom it is
written. Mal. 3. Mar. 1.
Behold, I send my messanger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before the.

THE EXPOSITION.
First of all in this gospel we are taught, The office of a preacher
what besemeth the ministers of the word to observe, as well in their living
as in their learning. For Saint John is here so set before our eyes, that
no man can deny, but that he was a good preacher as for the office of a true
preacher is this together with the faith that is in Christ, What penance is
i^ scripture.
earnestly also to teach and instruct of penance. Penance, I call, when a man
with his heart is sorry for his sin, willinge to amend, and after that to live
justly, as scripture speaks of this penance: Flee from evil and do good:
Psalm. 30 Ephe. 4
and, He that has stolen, let him steal no more It is always necessary that
I acknowledge my syn and corrupt nature, if the preaching of Christ shall any
thing profit me. Now seeing that I must come to such knowledge of corrupt
nature and hatred of my sin, then must needs the minister of Gods word
set before me, ye law, and fear me there with: Esa. 40
showing unto me, that all flesh is as hay, and the glory thereof like the
flower of the field: that is, That I am a great damnable sinner, and that of
my self I can nothing do, and so much the less should glory or magnify my
self. Knowl^^ge of sin, is sprituall poverty
And where such knowledge of sin is, there the gospel is sown with fruict, in
the which through Christ allonly is given unto us, remission of syns. And
peradventure this is ye pouertye that Christ speaks of in this gospel. These
two things shall thou find in S. John: First he speaks of penance and
cco^cludeth every man to be under sin, lest they should glory in the selves. And
for that cause does baptize in water, as a token of penance. Romans 3.
And after he has brought the people into the knowledge of their sin, he
teaches the Gosspel, John. 1.
saying: Behold the lamb of God, that takith away the sin of the world. And
in this wise uses saint John the office of a good preacher, and continues in
the same, in so much that he sends his disciples to none other, but to
Christ: not that he doughteth of Christ, but that they should also learn that
Christ is the only savior of the world, and the very samet, hat saint John
testifies of. Christ also praises him for his co^tancy and stablenes, saying
He is no reed that wauereth hither and thither with the wind, nor is of that
sort that to day teaches this, and to morrow in contrary wise. And to this
purpose it pertains also, that John is more then a prophet: Which thing
again must be referred to his office. The prophets before him did only
prophecy that Christ our Lord and save our should come, John poynting with
his finger, did show him then present. The life of saint John.
Will ye hear any more of the life of John, then is mentioned in the third
chapter of Matthew? Hear what Christ says here. He is not clothed in soft
garments: as who says. His life is not set in voluptuousnes but is mortefied
from all carnal concupiscence and pride, and lives justly to Gods word.
Neither sytteth he in the palace of a king, but in fetters and cheynes. Now,
like as Saint John did sincerely execute his office, and kept him self in
good conversation, so likewise it becomes the ministers of the Gospel to do.

Also in this gospel the person of Christ is so touched and set forth, The
goodness of Christ
that thou may know well him to be gentel, meke, and lowly: For he did not
hardly entreat or drive away the discipls of John, although they were of small
faith, but gentely, in word and deed did instruct them: And said. Go your
way and tell John what ye have seen, The blind does see, and the lame does go
etc. As who says: John knowech very well by the prophet, what works Messiah
shall do, and yet go you and show unto him what ye have seen, that afterward he
may tell you, whether I be the same Messiah that the prophecy speaks of, or
whether any other be lokid for. Esa. 35.
This be the words of the prophet. God hi^ self shall come and redeem us. Then
shall the blind see and the defe here. Then shale the haiting lepe like the
heart, and dume men shall speak.

And Christ further says: Poor me^ do hear ye glad tidings of the preachers
of the gospel. (As he should say again.) Hitherto ye have had Moses and the law
But Moses could not give you the spirit, wherewith ye might have fulfilled the
law: And now ye hear of an other manner lernyng (that is ye gospel verily)
by the which they that be poor in spirit, and knowledge their sins, do freely
through Christ receive remission of sin, without merit of works, and
shall be pertakers of the kingdom of heaven, with the children of God, so yt they
believe in Christ. Romans 1. The very poor
And in such wi^e also speaks S. Paul: The gospel is the power of God, to
every man that believes to be saved thereby. And Christ speaks by these
words: Tell John. Lo, yt is preached to the poor people, that is to them that
be contrite in heart, and be destitute of all help and comfort A joy full
mesage trewly, that through my benifyte they shall hereafter have a mercyful
God, remission of all sins, justice and everlasting health, by very grace and
mercy, without any merit of works. And now if John hear of these things
again, yt must plainly be manifest unto you, whether I be Messiah or not. And
he knows well enough, where to such message is sent unto him, namely that he
should show it to men. Lo in this wise Christ teaches Iohnes disciples, not
with words alonly, but with deeds also, that they might believe and obtayn
everlasting life. Now if any man were taught outwardely by this word of
Christ, and inwardly by his spirit, that he might knowledge the same Christ
to be the very messiah and savior, (as S. John witnesses in the 17. chap.)
shall by him have eternal joy.

Thirdely, To avoid offenses.
in this gospel Christ teaches us to avoid slander, and says Blessed is he
that is not offendid by me, (that is) in this despised personage that I am in.
Although I come into this world under the slander and ignominy of the
cross, Mat. 17
yet am I the very same that my father in heaven spoke of, in this wise. Here
is my well-beloved son, in whom I am very well pleased: Hear him.

And in like manner, although my word seem very simple and foolish to the
wise men and iustifiers of themselves, in this world, yet is it such a
learning and so much to be made of, that all that believe thereon, shall be saved.
For my word is not mine, John. 3.
but his that sent me. etc. Of this strength of the word of God and of the
gospel, speaks S. Paul in his epistle to the Corinthia^s, saying: I notify
unto you my brethren, 1 Cor 15.
the gospel that I have preached unto you, the which ye have received, and in
the which ye now stand in, and by the which also ye shall obtain
everlasting life. etc. Do thou not se here now, yt by ye gospel me^ shall be
saved? If the^ the preaching of ye gospel makes men blessed, of necessity
therefore must the doctrine of the gospel be much more precious the^ that, of
the which these hipocrites, and they yt by their own works would be justified
before God does boost so greatly of. Mat. 9.
But it chanseth so often times, that old musty vessels receive the new wine
of the gospel. The Jews were in this opinion that Christ should have his
dominion after the manner of kings and princes of this world, and because
that in his such power, he appeared not a man of nobility to the world,
therefore they set little by his doctrine, and believed nothing less then that
such a one should be the true Messiah. I pray you what think you you a carnal
man should do, sei^g yt Christ so despised of ye world, is so hardly known? In
this case no better council may be had, then so have respect to his word,
and thereto to be fully fixed, noting and markinge his works, according to
scripture. And in so doing, thou sha^t not ligtely be offended in our lord and
saueour Jesus Christ. Considre also, Double slander
that slander may be taken two manner of wais. One wais faith may be
slau^dered, when for the wholesome doctrine of the gospel, they teach the
phantesies of men: Of this slaundre (for the most part) scripture speaks of.
An other ways chariti is flau^dered as saint Math. in the 17. chapter says,
as often as I provide not for my neighbors necessity, or do trouble common
peace. Math. 17. And to be brief. Christ will no man to despise his doctrine,
although it be littell set by with the pharisees and wise men of this world.

The Gospel on the fourth sunday in Aduent John. 1.
AND this is the record of John, when the Jews sent prestes and Levites from
Jerusalem to ask him. What art thou? And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him: What then John. 5.
art thou Helias? And he says: I am not. Mat. 11 Deuteronomy. 18
Art thou that prophet? And he answered: no.

Then said they unto him: what art thou that we may give an answer to them
that sent us. What say thou of thy self? He said. Mat. 4. Mar. 1. Luc. 3.
I am the voice of a crier in the wilderness. Make straight the way of the
lord Mat. 4. Mar. 1. Luc. 3.
as said the Prophet Esayas.

And they which were sent, were of the Pharisees, And theye asked him and
said unto him: Why baptisest thou than if thou be not Christ, nor Helias,
neither the Prophet? Ihon answered them saying: Act, 19.
I baptize with water, but there stondeth one among you whom ye know not, he it
is, which, though he came aft^r m^, was before me, whose shoo latchet I am not
worthy to unloose.

These things were done in Bethabara beyond Iordane John. 3 and. 10. d
where John did baptize.

THE EXPOSITION.
Like as in the gospel before, The constancy of John.
we hard of the great commendacions of S. John for the constancye that he
had, so in like manner the euangeliste in this place does extol him: For when
he was demanded of the priests, whether he were Christ or not, whereby he
might have been had in great name and honor, yet would he in no wise, that
any man should otherwise think of him, then he was in deed. And confessed
that he was not Christ, knowledging that the honor of that name was meet for
no mortal man, but for Christ alone, for whom he came to prepare his way
before. And moreover he would not be taken for Helias, for they demanded of
Helias Thesbites, 4. Re. 1
that was taken up in the friery carte: And although he did walk in the
spirit and virtue of Helias, yet was he not the same Helias that they asked
for. Neither would he be counted a prophet, because all prophets must be
referred to the old testament: And he belonged to the new: as scripture also
witnesses, saiynge: All the prophets and the law, Mat. 11
until Iohnes time did endure. Now like as it is to be noted, with how noble
a constancye S. John was endued, so is it likewise to be considered, how
hardely the same good man was temptyd and opposed.

Theye that were sent, were of the high priests and Levites, The te^ptacion
of John.
chiefelye pycked out of the sect of the Phariseis, which far passed all
the other sects. And they that sent them, were of the city of Jerusalem, and
the chief senatoures of ye same, being the head city of all injury. I pray
you, who would not have been moved with the authority of such great men? so
noble imbassadours and with so high commendacion of honor, as they gave to
S. John. But S. John knew that they sought their own glory, as it appears in
the 5. chapter of John, and therefore he answered that he was not Christ, nor
Helias, another yet a prophet, but the voice of one that cries in the
wilderness etc. This is written for our learning that we should also persevere
and continewe in the knowledging of treuth, seeking no man's glory, but
Christ's, nothing at al regarding ye promises, flatteringes, or thretninges of
the world, for S. Paul says in the 10. chapt. to the Romans: If thou believe
with thy heart, thou art made righteous, And if thou knowledge God with thy
mouth, thou shall be saved.

Secondarely, this gospel shows us of the calling of S. John to his office.
The calling of John.
Another should we think that unadvisedly or by chance it might so be, but
rather for that cause, that we should learn thereby that none of us do
intermedle or take upon us the office of a preacher, but he that is of God by
lawefull means called thereto. For the fruicte of this calling, is, that the
word of God be purely and sincerely delivered out, as thou may se in Aaron,
Esaias, Christ, the Apostels, and other faithful ministers. How often times
does Christ in the 5. John. 5.
and 6. and all other chapters of S. John say, Romans 1.
that he is sent from the father of heaven? As we do also se in S. Paul, where
he names him self the servant of Jesus Christ, and the Apostell, (but yet
called) And in contrary wise, it is great hurt and damage amongst christian
me^, when a minister not called, will take upon him to declare the gospel:
Ier. 25.
Where as ye calling is false, and not of God, there must needs the doctrine be
wrong and out of course. And of this thing thou have a dreadful example in the
religious persons of our time, yt live under the dominion of ye bishop of
Rome. They came in at ye wi^dowes and back doors, and therefore (as S. John
says in ye 10. Ioh. 10
chap) these be thieves and spoilers. And likewise does not S. Paul in ye Acts
of ye apostels speak of ye same? Act, 10.
saie^g And amongst your selves shall rise such, as shall speak peruersly, and
decline from ye right trade. Here thou have yt devilish calling of the^ that
teach not ye right way. Thou see the fruits of this manner of calling But
John that he might show his calling to be of God, said. (For they looked for
an answer,) I am the voice of one that cries in wilderness etc. As though he
should say: Ye know by the prophet Esaias, Esa. 40
that one shall come before Messiah to prepare his way. And ye can not be
ignorant in that, that he that shall come in that place, shall be called ye voice
of one that cries in the wilderness. Even the very same voice am I. And for
that cause am I sent from God, nor of my self do I any thing that I do.
Now even as the minister sent from God must preach the word of God,
according to the example of S. John, so likewise must he be received and
taken in the steed of God.

Flesh.
Thirdely, we may see in this gospel what ^he flesh may do that is not
renewed by the spirit of God. I call the flesh the hole nature of man, which
of him self brings forth none other fruictes, then sin, John. 3
as scripture says in the 3. chapter of John. That that is conceived and
borne of flesh, is flesh. Of this thing thou haste here a goodly example.
There came to John that passed all other of the Jews in learning and
behauioure, and they had herd who sent him to preach and baptize: and that of
the prophet, that with them was chiefest: yet did they not understand S.
John. Whereby thou may perceive, that the knowledge of God and Christ our
savior comes not through our power and strength, but by the spirit of
Christ. It is the gift of God, lest any man should glory thereof in him
self. Thy wisdom is very foolish before God, for so scripture says. I
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, 1. Cor...
and cast away the understanding of ye prudent. If than, another wiseme^, holy
men, preests, nor levites without the spirit of our lord Jesus Christ can
attain to the word of God, doughteles neither can thou not without the
grace of God be brought to believe,

Fourthly S. John puts a difference between his baptism and the baptism of
Christ, when he says: I baptize in water and preach penance, The difference
between the baptime of John and the baptime of Christ.
But Christ does not only paptise in water, but also forgeueth syn, and sends
the holy ghost. Mark here that S. John puts no difference between y^ outward
sign of water that he ministers, and the same that Christ uses. The
exterior sign, both of Christ and S. John is al one, for S. John preaches
the word of God and baptiseth with water, as also the Apostels do. John. 3.
But S. John makes a distinction between his person and office, The office of
Christ.
and the office and person of Christ. For Christ (as is said before) besides
that, that he preaches and baptiseth, does also by his own power, forgive
sins, and send the holy ghost, that shall lighten and renew our hearts which
John cannot do, but by his misterye. And this is the cause why he does so
greatly commend and praise Christ, for that he is the very lamb of God,
that takethe away the sin of the world. And likewise yt is he, that was
before me, and shall come after me: as who says: He is more then John, and
forgeueth sin, also I am not worthy to lose the latchet of his show Is not
this the very way to know, praise, and describe Christ? And yet when we are
baptized, we be baptized both with the baptism of John and Christ also, The
law is first preched
that is, It is necessary, that that old Adame be laid under feet (as it is
signified by that outward sign) before Christ does baptize in fire and the
spirit. Moreover we must also come to the knowledge of sin by Iohnes
preaching. And when we be brought in this wise to the knowledge of our sin,
then Christ fyndeth place for the exercising of his office, to remitte sins,
and give into our hearts the holy ghost, which he will do according to S.
Iohnes words: This is he, that baptiseth in the holy ghost. And yt is
necessary that by faith we attain that, if we will be made new creatures.

The end of this Exposition. Follows.
The gospel on Christemas day. Luc. 2.
ANd it chaunsed in those days, that there went out a commandment from
Augustus the emperor, that all the world should be taxed. And this taxing
was the first, and executed when Sitenius was lift^an^e in Syria And every
man went unto his own cu^e to be taxed. And Io^eph also ascended from Galile
o^re of the city called Nazarethe, into Iewry, unto 1 Re. 20
the city of Dauyd, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house
and lynage of Dauyd, to be taxed with Marye his spoused wife, which was which
child.

And it fortuned, that while theye were there, her time was come that she
should be delivered. and she brought forth he first begotten son, and
wr^pped him in swad^inge clothes, and laid him in a maunger, because there was
no come for them in the Inn.

And there were in the same region shepcherdes, watchynge and keeping their
flock by night. And lo, the aungel of the Lord stood hard by them, and the
bryghtenes of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. And
the angel said unto them: Be not afraid. For behold, I bring you tidinges
of great joy, that shall come to all people: for unto you is borne this day in
the city of David, a savior which is Christ the Lord. And take this for a
sign, ye shall find the child wrapped in swadlynge clothes and laid in a
maunger. And stra ght way there was with the aungel a multitude of heavenly
soldiers, praisinge God and saying: Glory to God on hye, and peace on earth
and unto men a good will.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel first of all is treated the helthfull birth of our Lord Jesus
Christ, The nativity of Edriste.
which is the well hedde of our salvation, and of eternal life. Wherefore it is
necessary that even as the evangelist has described the same nativity or
birthe, so likewise, that every manne do receive it into the inward parts
of his heart, and often times to reuolue it in himself, whereby he may by the
meditacion of such things be kendeled, lyghtened, and made joyful, and that
they may take and keep in their hertes, the child newelye borne, by the word
of faith: For the lower and poorer that this birth appears to the world,
Esa. 9.
so much the holsomer and more profitable it is to them, that receau it by
faith. And that it was so small of estymacion with the world, it may be
gathered of that, that Joseph and the virgyne Mary ascended from the city of
Nazareth unto the city that is called Bethlehem in the land of Judea, none
other wise, but as the other subjects did, to give obedience to their
superioures, and to yield tribute as the other did. Who would (I pray you)
believe, that Mary should be the mother of God, which went unto the profession
no otherwise, then the other plebeial one and despised sort of women did. And
likewise the evangelist says: that in the town of Bethlehem she was had in
no respect or regard of any person, in so much that she was fayn (that
scripture mygt be fulfilled) to wrappe her well-beloved son Christ (which she
there brought forth) in cloutes, and lay him in an ox stal. What singular or
particular kind touch herest thou here to be showed toward Marye and her
son Christ? The poverty o^ Mary.
Nothing here is else but bare poverty Mary is despised, Joseph is despised, the
child is despised. Nor thou can here hear of any man that took any care or
thought for them. But thou may well hear that there was no place for the^
in ye inn. And now mark well how glorious and how greatly magnified was the
same birth in heaven, althoghe it was not so esteemed on earth. The Angel of God
stands by, and is present with the shepehardes that watched the night watch
over their flock, and shows unto them great joy that should befall to all
people, The showing of Chrystis nativity
that Christ our Lord and souiour was born in the city of David etc. Now thou
see, who was messau^ger of the same glorious nativity, and how noble a
message he brought, and yet do thou but slenderlye esteem, that thou must
call this child Christ, Lord, and savior? How cold Christ have been more
noblier described, or the sum of the gospel more brieflyer comprehended?
Forthermore, The sum of ye gospel.
how could this matter have been better or godlyer handeled then it was
handeled of the aungeles? yea and when when those poor and simple shepeherdes
were in so great fear, how cold they have been better comforted then of the
aungel? And he says unto them: Fear ye not. O joyful and sweet message,
that for all the great weight of syn, brought into this world with us, we should
not fear: why so? Because there is to day borne unto us such a savior, that
shall take away the sin of the world, and through his passion and death
shall obtain for all them that believe in him everlasting life. Wherefore it
is bery meet, that this nativity, of ye which we receive so great profit and
joy, should be glorious in our sight. Our birth is unclean, subdued to syn,
Our nativity is unclean
and cursed. But Christ's is pure without syn and holy. Therefore now if the
comdemnation of our nativity must be taken away and changed, it must needs
be by the pure and undefiled nativity of our lord Jesus Christ, What? and can
it be corporally communicate to al men? No. But spiritually we must attain to
it by the word. What word is that? The same word, when the angel says To
you, to you, this day is born a savior. By this word is comunicate unto us the
nativity of Christ And if thou wylt hear the same also of the prophet, Esa. 9.
he says on this wise. A child is borne to us, and a son is given to us. In
the child is signified ye humaninity of Christ. And in ye son is signified his
Godhed. Such a child is born yt is in nature both god and man To whom is he
borne? To us, to us, the prophet says. Here we should now open the eyes of
faith, for many there be, that although they believe that Christ was borne, yet
believe they not that he was borne for their sake. And therefore set they their
minds so much upon their own works, with the which they trust to obtatne
both righteousness and salvation, even as though with our own merits we might
stand in the judgment of God. Therefore good sir deceiu not your self: for
the matter stands not in that case, but as David says: Goodlord, Psa. 24
enter not into judgment with thy servant, for all lyuers shall not be justified
in thy sight. The frut of faith.
Here be no works required able to co^treuaile, but grace and mercy is to be
looked for. And therefore he that believes ye Christ is borne and given, and
that he was incarnate, died, rose again and is ascendid into heaven for our
justification, he is clean from sin, righreous, blessed, the brother of
Christ, and the son of God. And that faith, doughtles lyk a good man, herafter
he shall declare with good works, that is with the love of his neighbor, and
with honest conversation.

Secondarelye it is to be noted in this gospel, what persons they were that
this wholesome birth of Christ was showed unto. Poor men receive the Gospel.
Vereli poor and despised shepeherdes. But why was it not showed to ye rich
men me^ of great power, and the holy me^ of Jerusalem? Because that God has
chosen such as to the world appear folish, 1. Cor. 1.
to the intent to shame ye wordly wise men. Rich me^, gentlemen, and me^ of
great power of this world, have no respect or regard to this child Jesus, but
have their peculier and private God, in whom they put the whole and some of
their trust, that is, in pride, in their great strenth and power, in riches
and in their mighty god mammon. Mammon.
And in like manner these work masters (as they be called) have their private
god, yt is, ye trust in their own works and merits, Of the which false god
Esaias says: Esa. 2
They have worshipped the works of their own hands. And I pray you what
should the birth of Christ have profited those men, if it had been showed unto
them? Mat. 7.
Holy things may not be cast to dogs, nor perles to swyne: He that puts
his trust in any other creature then in Christ, to him Christ is unprofitable.
Likewise, he yt by any other means seeks his iustificacion, but by Christ, to
him also is Christ unprofitable, as S. Paul in many places witnesses his
eristle to the Galathians saying: Gal. 2
If Iustificacion come by the law, then died Christ in vain. And because
Christ here requires such a heart, that should not put hope or trust in any
wordely goods or in his own power, and righteousness, but should holy stycke
to his passion, Mat. 5.
death, and merit: Therefore he chose none but poor folks, and not such as
were pore in this world after the flesh, but poor in spirit, that is, they
that know all their own sins, frailnes, misbeleue and corrupt nature and
abid only in his word. And to them also says he in an other place: Mat. 11
Come to me al ye that be laden and I shall refreshe you. Also, If any man
thirst, let him come to me, John. 7
and I shall give him drink. These and such like words, the rich men and they
that will be justified by their own works, do not receue nor regard, of the
which the blessed virgin Mary in her song sings, Quod dimittantur inanes.
They are sent away empty. Luc: 2
Therefore this birth of Christ and ioiful messa^ger is showed only to the pore
shepards.

Thirdely we may learn of this gospel, yt when this helthfull birth of
Christ is laid forth unto us by the ministers of the gospel, (which for the
more part in scripture be signified by angels) and we thereby assertained, Mal.
2.
that our salvation consists in the same: we may in no wise so do, that
we should be forgetful of so great a benefit, or be found unkind therein,
Thanks. giving.
but rather should with continual thanks giving, praise and extol the same, and
always sing with the angels: Glory be in heaven unto God etc. Here God is
praised of the Angels and heavenly company, chiefly for this cause, that he of
his only grace and mercy, has given his only begotten son, a savior to the
world, that through him, the way should be to everlasting life, for all men: and
that by his goodness, syn, death, the deuel, and hell, shuldde taken away. Is not
this benefit worthy of praise and co^mendacio^? Yes trewly no man can give
worthy thanks therefore: Neueuertheles yet we must persist to say with the
prophet David: Ps. 146
My soul praise ye Lord, I will praise the Lord in my life, I will sing to my
God as long as I live. And considre here that this honor and thanks giving
can not be yielded to God, where this our Christ is not, or not thoroughly
known. And that no peace or good will can abide with us, without Christ. Joel.
17
And in contrary wise, where Christ abides, and by his word is well known, there
also the heavenly father is known, praised, and extolled, as such a father,
that has given us his only son Christ for a savior into al ye world. And
there also is found the true peace, when we believe that God the father will not
us to be damned, but of his ineffable grace will receive and give us
everlasting life by Christ. Who I pray you, would not be of good chere when
he hereth the angels bring this peace and quietness of heart to us? And besides
all this, God reioyseth in us through his son: And again, they that believe,
does rejoice in all his works, singing without end:

Glory be in heaven to god, peace in earth, and good will to men.

The gospel on the first sunday after Christemas. Luc. 2.
AND his father and mother meruailed at those things, which were spoken of
him. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother. Behold, this
child is sent, to be the fall and vprysinge again of many in Israel, and for
a sign which is spoken against.

And moreover, the sweard shall perse thy soul that the thoughts of many
hertes may be opened.

And there was a prophetisse, one Anaa, the daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of
Aser, which was of great age, and had lived with her husband seven years, from
her vyrginitie. And she had been a widow above four score and four year,
which departed not from the temple, but serves God with fastinges and prayers
night and day. And she came forth that same hour and praised the Lord, and
spoke of him, to al them that looked for the redemption in Jerusalem

And when they had performed al things, according to the law of the Lord, they
returned into Galile, to their own city Nazareth And the child grew, and
waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom, ^ Reg. 2.
and the grace of God was upon him.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel we have sufficient testimony of Christ, that he is ye true
Messiah, and ye blessed sede of Abraham, in yt which all people should be saved.

Simeo^s testimoni of Christ
First we have the great testimonye of Simeon, which of long time had looked for
the consolation and comfort of Israel, and was informed by ye holy ghost, yt he
should not se death before he saw Christ. And when Joseph and Mary had in the day
of purificatio^ taken ye child Jesus, and set hi^ before the lord in Jerusalem
and according to the custom, made their host and oblacion: Lo, Simeon also
through ye holy ghost came in to the temple, and took the child in his a^mes,
and called him ye savior sent from God, ye light of the gentiles and glory
of the people of Israel. What it is to bless.
And afterward wished al things prosperous and joyful to the child and his
parents: and that is signified by that yt he did bless them, as it appears
in ye 24. cha. of genesis And the^ said he to Mari: Lo, this child is set to ye
fall and vprisinge of many in Israel. And for a sign which shall be spoken
against. Of these words of Simeon it is manifest, that Christ is ye true
Messiah and savior of ye world, promised in holy scripture, or else why would he
call him ye light, savior and glory of Israel, if he could not help, save, and
iusti^i? John. 1.
Yea and if he well not ye very savior by whom we take our salvation, verily he
might seem but a despised savior. And besides this, he should not have been
called the light of ye Gentiles if he should not have lightened al me^ Yea and
likewise, if Israel should have had no cause to glory or reioise of this child,
he should not have bi^ called the glory of the people of Israel. Moreover mark
here now whether yt al men shall know this same savior and light. Lo (says
Simeo^) he is set to the fall: how to the fall? Esai. 8.
Because that many shall be offended in him, when they shall se him go in manner
of a bondma^ or servant, and not after the fashion of kings and princes: And
especially such as does not believe, but put their confidence in their own
works, and will attain to ye righteousness before God, by their own works and
merits, and not through his only grace: Of the which also S. Paul speaks in
ye 10. Romans 10
cha. to the Rom: They yt know not the righteousness of God, and seki^g their
own, be not subdued to Gods justice: And they be such, yt when they hear the
righteousness of God commended, yet will they not believe, nor in a manner can
believe, because those things that they do of their own will, be to be rejected
and cast away. Wherefore they do persecute this doctrine, and be offended in
Christ, and do still remain in their misbilfee, lest they should at any time be
saved. There be nevertheless amongst those also very many, to whom Christ is set
to their vprising, but that is to those all only, which of them self do
despair, and knowledge that there is no name under ye sun, Joel. 2. Act. 4.
given to me^, where through they shall be saved, but only in ye name of Christ.
And such be by Christ reserved to everlasting joy, as ye prophet Esai says:
Esai. 28.
Lo, I will set in Sio^ in ye fou^dacio^, a corner stone, and every man yt
believes in him, shall not be lost. Now, if thou desire that Christ may not be
set to the to stumble at, but to thine vprising, go to and cast away al ye hope
of thine own merits, and embrace Christ as ye savior of this world: Mat. 16
And the^ shall not hell gates prevail against the. And if you se the more part
of me^ not willing to receive this doctrine, but defe^ding ye righteousness of
their works, The sword should perse Maryes heart.
and reiecti^g ye justice yt comes by faith, the^ remember those words yt
Simeo^ says that Christ shall be set for asign or token, which shall be spoken
against of meny. And think you that it was spoken in vain, that a swearde
should perse through Maryes heart? Simeon knew well enough that our Lord Jesus
Christ should suffer much pains for his doctrine. And therefore said unto
Mary, that with her well-beloved son she should suffer also great sorrows, that
the secret thoughts of many should be opened, which, although they were
taken for the most holiest of al, yet should they be of all the most wicked.
Thou have now here the testimony of that just man Simeon, that Christ is the
son of God, the very true Messiah and sauyoure of all the world.

Seco^darely we have here the testimony of Anne the prophetise concerning
Christ. Ann propheceeth of Christ
And besides that that the evangelist does describe and set forth her
conversation, he says further also, that she, when the very hour came,
knowledged the Lord, and spoke of him to every man, that longed for the
redemtio^ of Israel. Observe and mark now the order of this testimony. First
she prayseth and commends God for none other cause, but that she knew in
this child, not only the great kyndenes of God, but also that all prophecies
were fulfilled, and that the same acceptable time was come, Ephe. 5.
wherein Christ should be borne, and to the which also God willed her to be
reserved and kept. And trewlye all christen people ought to give thanks unto
God the father, for his such great benefit, that through this child he
willed us to be saved from all evil. And certainlye this Anne knows and
knowledgeth that of our selves we can nothing do. And therefore praises God,
that he has voutchsaued to send us our savior from heaven. And that al other
should know the same, she speaks of him to all that longed for the
redemption of Israel.

But what speaks she of him? Doughteles nothing else, but even as Simeon did
before. Simeon told that the same child was the light and savior of the
Gentiles: Anne confirms the same and says: He is now present before our
eyes, and even at hand, The saying of Anna.
whom they looked so long for. She freely confesses, her prayers, fasting,
widowhed, and honest conversation, to be of no respect, except by this child,
through grace, she be made righteous and holy, and delivered from everlasting
death. Of this place it becomes all women, widows, and maidens to take
example, and follow the steps of Anne in the knowledging of Christ, in good
and honests life, and in the true worshipping of God: She perceued very well
that it was necessary for her, through the trust yt she had in this child, to
be saved: that is, to be justified by true faith in Christ. And here may it
well be understand, that faith must be lively and effectual. And this certificat
or knowledge of faith must we al have, or else trewlye the same faith that
makes us just and righteous, Right faith.
is not in us, but rather a false persuasion and opinion of Christ.

Christ was very man.
Thirdely, this gospel confirms the article of our faith wherein we knowledge
that Christ was borne of the virgin Mary. For as I must believe yt this is true,
so must I also faithfully believe, that Christ naturaly, as al other me^ does,
i^cresed in age, wit, strength, wisdom, and spirit, not that the holy ghost
was not at the first in him, but yt the more he was in age, the bigger he was,
and the bigger he was the wiser he was. And the wiser he was, so much the
stronger he was in spirit before God, in himself, and before al men. And to
be short: In that that the Euangeliste says: The child increased and was
strengthed in spirit, full of wisdom, and the grace of God was in hi^. he
shows that ye same child every day more and more did grow in goodness and
wisdom. And we should highly wish that our children might be like brought up,
The bri^ging up of children.
that they might more and more increase, and do that is just and good. This
child Jesus increased and was strengthened in spirit. And we suffer our
children to fall and run into their own carnal lust and desire: Nor we do any
thing care or provide, that by the word of God, they may be brought to faith
and honest living. Christ incresed in wisdom, And our children increase in
folishnes. And will thou know the cause thereof? Their parents be in the faut,
that will not instruct and bring up their children in goodness and virtue, another
teach them the word of God. And therefore the grace of God cannot be in them.
To conclude. As Christ is very God, so by this gospel it appears, he was very
man, and sent from his father into this world, yt we by him might enjoy
everlasting life.

The Gospel on New years day. Luc. 2.
AND when the eihht day was come that the child should be circumcised his name
was called Jesus Gen 17 Mat. 1. Luc. 1.
which was named of the Angel before he was conceived in the womb.

THE EXPOSITION.
First, because saint Luke the Euangelyste has so dilligently set forth
the nativity of Christ: Now he goes about to declare what profit and
commodity it has brought unto us. That is to say, that through Christ, the
burden and yoke of the law is taken away, and a free heart and willing spirit
is given unto us, Gal. 4. Esa 44
which, not constrained with the fear of pain, should keep the commandments
af God, and do that is just. For it is very evident, and can by no means be
denied, that seeing the law is spiritual, it does not only require outward
works, but much sooner the inward affections of the heart. No man by his own
power can fulfill the law, as S. Peter witnesses in the Acts, cap. 15.
saying: Why tempte ye God, laying the yoke upon the disciples necks, which
our forefathers, Gala. 3.
nor we, were able to bear? Now therefore it is necessary, other the law to
be fulfilled, or else us to be damned, as scripture says: Cursed be every
man, that abides not in all things written in the book of law. Go to then,
here of this place I perceive, that the law requires a perfection: And again.
In my self I feel nothing. whereby I may fulfill it: Romans 10
what shall I now here do? Thou must by faith obtain Christ, which has for
the satisfied the law, and delivered the from the curse thereof. He is the
end of the law, Gala. 4
as S. Paul says, In whom every man that believes, shall be saved. And in an
other place, When the time was fully come, God sent down his son borne of a
woman and subdued to the law, Abrogacion of the law.
that he should redeem such, as were in danger of the law, and so we should be
made the children of God. And hereto it pertains, that Christ suffered
himself to be circumcised. This thing betokens, that Christ came to fulfill
the law for us, and to make us free from the curse of the law, that by the
doctrine of the gospel, he might communicate unto us the holy ghost that we so
by, him renewed, might hereafter, not constrained, but freely and louingely do
those things, that God requires of us.

And secondarely it is to be understand and known, that circumcision was a
token and sign of the promise that God made unto Abraham, Signs cofirme faith.
yea and to his seed also, as apeareth in the 17. chap. of Genesis. Another was
this sign given that men thereby might be justified, but that they, which
should hear of the promise of God, should be confirmed in faith, and that the
Jews might be known from the other Heythen and infideles. For trewly every
sign has his promise, whereunto it is meet, that all men stick and believe,
As in the 6. chap. of Genesis it is promised to Noe, that he shall not perish by
the floude: And in token of that promise, he had a ship, which he was
commanded of God to build And in the 9. chap. of the same also, it is
promised, that the world after that, should never be drowned or destroyed by
floude. And in token thereof, God gave unto him the rayn bow. And in like case
it is here. God promised himself to be the God of Abraham and of his sede. And
therefore gave unto him the token of circumcision, wherewith he does confirm
and certefie his faith, that he should in no wise doubt, but suerely believe,
that God would keep his promise. But thou must so understand these things that
we shall receive these promises, The word.
not through the outward sign, but by the word, in the which the sign is
contained, Faith.
and our faith has gotten it: Always the spiritual thing must be joined to
ye corporal, and internal things must be added to ye exteriors The outward
circumcision Circumcision.
is nothing without the circumcision of ye heart, which is made by ye spirit,
and is signified by ye outward circumcision. And Deuteronomy. in the 10. chap. it is
said: Circumcide the foreskin of your hearts. If then the exterior
circumcision did profyt ye Jews, it must needs be, that they the^ should holy
stick and abide in faith and the co^maundeme^ts and promises of God, seeing that
the same exterior sign does but confyrme and strength them: as thou may see
in Gedeon in the 6. chap. Iud. And in like manner we say of the signs of the
new testament as if when I am baptized, I have no respect but to the water,
That outward dippi^g in water profits nothing at al: The sacrament of ye new
testament Baptime
But if I regard and have respect to ye co^maundeme^ts, and promises of god,
(with ye which this water is sanctified) and believe ye same, and so by this
means am baptized wtin through the holy ghost, the^ trewly this baptism is very
profitable unto me: Yt has the word and promise of God, and is not without a
cause called of S. Paul, the fountayn of the new birth, Likewise when in ye
supper of our Lord, I regard not the commandment and promise of Christ, nor
come by faith to receive yt, The supper of ye Lord.
then the eating and drinking of ye sacrament of ye body and blood of Christ,
not only profits me not, but rather makes to my damnacio^ as S Paul speaks,
of such, as unworthily receive the same. And when I behold ye commandment,
word and promise of God. 1 Cor 11
then does the eatinge and drinking of ye sacrament of ye body and blood of
Christ profit me much, because in ye word I fi^d remission of si^nes and in ye
sacrament or outward sign, I find the confirmacio^ of my faith: And it is to
be noted, that christian me^ in the steed of circumcision, have baptism,
begone of S. John, and confirmed by Christ: as yt apeareth in the last chap.
of Mark. The baptism of children.
And like as circumcision was communycate to ye children, so must baptism be
conferred to our children, although the fantastical anabaptists teach
otherwise.

Thirdly we learn by ye name that was given unto Christ, and showed before of
the angel, that in matters of faith, and in such as co^cern our iustyficatio^,
our works and merytes be of no strength before God, but alonly grace and mercy
which God in Christ has showed to all the world. For the name of Jesus, if
thou wylt interpret yt, signyfyeth a sauyoure. Jesus only justifies.
Nor think thowe yt to be a poor and bare name, but yt is the thing yt
self, the work and executyon, as sayncte Paul says: 1. Cor. ^
Jesus is made the wisdom of God to us, our ryghteousnes, santyfycacyon and
red emptyon as yt is written. He that glories or rejoices, let his glory and
reioysynge be in God: And also in the Acts, yt is written: Act. 4.
There is none other name under heaven given unto men where through theye
must be saved etc. And is it not written also in ye 1. chapt. of Math? He
shall rede^me his people from their synes, The name of Christ.
Now tha^ if we be iustyfyed by the merit, passion, and death of Christ,
whereto comes ye glory of our works? Here must I not glory of mine own
works, but all my joy must be in Jesus Christ, And hereto pertains all such
places, as be red in the old testament, and the new, of the name and merit
of Christ: And although it be very necessary and instantlye required of a
christian man, that he should declare and show forth his faith, with the
works of Charity, and other godly exercise, yet by no work can he be
justified, but allonly by the merit of Christ.

Forthlye this gospel teaches us, that the word of God and his works do
strive with our reason: If we go about by reason to know the mystery of the
circumcision, it would seem a very jest, that God should adorn with his
commandment, so vile a membre. The works of God be contrary to reason.
But what should thowe think seeing it is so? Verelye God choseth not those
things that be pleasant, or in great estimacion with us, but such things as
be despised and abiecte before our eyes: And that for this cause, because that
our reason should be subdued to the word of God and his works, and that we
should commend and accept such things as he has chosen, and not those things
that seem most pleasant and goodly to our sight Circumcision was a thing
that was small of estymacion, The word of God sa^tifieth al things.
but when the cu^maundement and promise of God came, yt was made a noble
helthful and a godly work: And likewise it is but a trifle to be baptized and
washed in water, But if the commandment, promise, and word of God be joined
thereto, it is surely a thing wonderful preciouse and helthfull. And although
to the world it appear but a tryfull to be baptized, yet baptism that is
brought in the steed of circumcision, must be accepted of us as an high and
precious work, because it has the commandment and promise of Christ, To whom
be all honor and praise. Amen.

The gospel on Epiphany day. Math. 2.
WHen Jesus was borne at Bethlehem in a city of Iewrye, in the time of Herod
the king, Behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying:
Where is he that is borne king of Jews? For we have seen his Nu. 24.
star in the East, and are come to worship him.

When Herod the king hard these things, he was troubled, and all the city of
Jerusalem with him. And when he had gathered all the chief prestes and scribes
of the people together, he demanded of them, where Christ should be borne. And
they said unto him: at Bethlehem in Iewry. For thus it is written by the
prophet: Mich. 5 Ioh. 7.
And thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah, art not ye least amongst the princes
of Judah. For Mich. 5 Ioh. 7.
out the of shall I there come unto me the captain, that shall govern my
people Israel.

Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them
diligently, what time the star appeared, and he had them go to Bethlehem,
and said: Go your way thither, and search diligently for the child. And when
ye have found him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him
also.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe Evangelist S. Math. after that he had written of the promise made to
Dauyd, and the other fathers, and had brought in the Angel, Joseph, and Esai
the prophet, as most suer witness of the birth and nativity of Christ. Now in
the golpel of this day (while he describes certain circumstances) he proves
that this child is Christ, and the very true Messiah, Christ ye true Messiah
of old time promised to our forefathers, and now exhibited to the world, that
all things might be brought to pass in him. The cyrcumstances be, the place
and time. In Bethlehe^ Judah, The place.
(says the euangeliste) Jesus is borne. Here now thou have the place. And it
is not unknown to al me^, yt this city was ordained for ye birth of Christ,
and of long time before prophesied by the prophets, that so it should be.
Wherefore of this place we may boldly conclude, that this child newly borne, is
the true Messiah. These be the words of the prophet: And thou Bethlehem of
Iewrye, Mich. 5
art not the least etc. Out of the shall rise to me a gouenoure, that shall
govern my people of Israel. Now there is two Be^thlehemes, one in Galilee, in
the trybe of Zabulon, and the other in the land of Iewry. Seeing the evangelist,
with express words does speak of Bethlehem in the land of Iewrye, and full
well agrees with the prophets, I pray you how durst the Jews deny, that
Christ was the very Messiah Now like as the place, so does also the time very
well agree, The time.
as in the 59. cha. of Genesis by the patriarch Jacob, it was determined by these
words: The scepter shall not be removed from Judah, nor a ruler of his
posterite, til he come that shall come. Of this prophecy yt appears, that
Christ must needs have then be borne, when ye kingdom of the Jews was so
taken away, that no king or ruler of the tribe of Judah, should reign any
longer. And that did chance at the time of Herod, which was not of the tribe
of Judah, nor yet born of ye Jews blod, but was an Idumee a stranger, and made
king by the Romans Wherefore, another yet of this place can the obstynate Jew
deny, but that Christ is the son of God and the true Messiah: And it were to
be highelye wished and desieed of us, that the Jews allonlye and no christyan
man did withstand and speak again this natyuyty: For although we often
times say, and confess, that Christ the son of God was borne of the virgyne
Mary, yet when we will not know nor understand, wherefore yt was done, I
cannot see what profit we shall get thereby. Thou must know and confess,
that to the, to the (I say) and to thine redemption and salvation he was
borne. Esa. 9.
And that the father in this his son allonlye will be known and gloryfied. If
any chrystyan man does put his confidence now in the merits of his own
works, and trusts to get everlasting life thereby, he trewlye does as
greuouslye and dispytefullye withstand this natyuytye, as though any Jew had
done it. But he that believes, that by the only merit of Christ he is
iustyfyed, he shall have everlasting life. Ioh. 3.

Secondarelye, we learn out of this gospel, that Christ came into this
world, not only for the Jews, but also for the Gentyles. And so yt is
declared by these wysemen that seek Christ, that the preaching of the gospel
should be taken from ye Jews, and given to the Gentyles: The calling of ye
Heithe^
And yt for this cause, yt although they hard ye gospel first of Christ and
afterward of his dyscyples, yet did they dispyse and persecute yt, and with
slanderous words rejected it from them. For I pray you, which of all the
Jews ran to seek this child? although it was openly said, that their king
was the^ at hand, and present with the^. The heythen which never had god, came
from the Est, seking and enquiring so long for this child, until they had
found him: And that the Jews, through their misbilefe be now abiected, it is
by the just judgment of God, and it may be well of every man said: Ps. 118.
Lord, thou art just, and thy judgment is ryghteouse. And in contrary wise:
The cause that we miserable hethen be taken and called to the gospel, is the
very grace and mercy of God. And if therefore we did our duties, we should
never cease from geuinge thanks, for the great clemencye of God, that he has
had toward us all. And that we ye wretched and sinful gentiles, through grace
are called to ye knowledge of ye gospel, it apeareth by ye words of Esai,
saying: I am sought of the^, that never asked for me, Esa. 65.
and am found of the^, that never sought me, And I have said, Lo I, lo I am
found of a nation, that never called on my name. Thou herist that they shall
find him, that never sought him: is not this plainly spoken of us the gentiles?

Therefore of this place we may learn and know, that everlasting joy, comes
not by the merytes of our own works but through grace, and according to the
saying of saynct Paul, Ephe. 2
we are saved by grace, through faith, lest we should glory.

A carnal man.
Thirdelye, we perceive by this gospel what a miserable and wretched thing the
carnal man is, in whom the same old Adam, through the spyrite and faith is
not yet mortified: The Kings come from the east to Jerusalem, inquiring for
the king of Jews newly borne, and show that they saw his star in the East,
and that they came to worship him, that is, to give to him reverence and
honor: Worship
Here it had been meet, that the whole city of Jerusalem should with all
reverence and joy have sought out this king, and have received him, sei^g that
they had looked for his coming so many years before. They knew by the prophecy
of Jacob, Ge^. 49
that at the same time he should suerly come. But what do they? Not only Herod
was so sore moved therwt when he had herd thereof, but also all Jerusalem
with him, that is, the more part of the citizins and especially such, as with
good Simeon and Anna did long for the redemption of Israel. Whereto now were all
the pomises? how well do they now remember the prophecy of Jacob? And what does
it profit them, to be under the law of Moses? Herod thinks he had good and
just cause to be moved therewith, although yt was but in vayn, and not
necessary But what cause does the Jews pretend? to whom by this king, sure
redemtion was promised? The fruit of ye flesh.
Here thou may perceive the nature and custom of the flesh: such is our
strength and power. The flesh can do none otherwise, yt is subdued to
sin, and brings forth none other fruit then sin, whether it be
outwardlye, as manifest offenses and crimes, or inwardlye, as be such works
that seem good, wherein the flesh deliteth and flattereth himself. And
always such things as it should love, it hates, and those things that be
to be hated, yt loves. And in things concerning Gods honor and our
salvation, it always follows the contrary. And therefore it is necessary yt
the flesh and nature be renewed in us, through the holy ghost, and brought to
the fear of god and love of his neighbor, or else the flesh will always be
flesh, that is, hardened and blinded.

Romans 8.
Fourthly, this gospel teaches us, in that that the wiseme^ were by ye aungel
admonished to tourn into their country by an other way, yt God our father in
heaven will mercifully co^serue, keep and defend, not only from inward and
spiritual ieoperdies, but also from the outward and bodily periles, al such as
knoledg, honor, and worship his well-beloved son Jesus Christ, and setting all
their hope and trust in him, and afterward by love, thanks geui^g, and good
co^uersacion, show forth and declare their faith, as these wiseme^ did, The
angels seru to the elect of God.
by their gifts. Is not ye love of God toward us a great thing? ye so great,
yt ye angels must desce^d from heaven and minister to ye elect of God in their
necessities. And not only the angels, but other creatures also ar necessary
means to man to ye obtaini^g of salvation. First of all the sterre is compelled
to serve the wiseme^, and the^ the priests and seniors of ye people, were
constrained to serve the^ likewise, when they showed to them where Christ should
be born. And at last also the aungel waits upon them, and will not suffer the^
to reuisite the wicked Herod, which not only bare an envious heart toward the
child newly borne, but also was of a cursed stomach toward the same wise men.
Hereto may that be applied that is spoken of the angels in the first epist.
H^b. 1.
to the Hebrews, Are they not al ministering spirits, sent to minister for
their sakes which shall be the heirs of salvation? And in the 33. psalm. The
aungel of God shall come down, in the midst of the^ that fear him, and shall
deliver the^. Ge^. 19. Ge^. 14.
And likewise ye aungel delivered Loath from the fire of Sodom. And did not the
aungel of god also lead forth the children of Israel out of Egypt? Act. 14.
And likewise delivered Peter out of his bonds? Wherefore if we would diligentli
give head and with those wiseme^ know Christ, worship him, honor him, and
offer the sacrifyce of our lips to him, as Oseas the prophet says. Ose. 14.
Trewly we should find also before God the same comfort, help, and socoure,
which not only those wiseme^, but also all gods elect from the beginning of
the world has obtained, in so much that god himself would serve us by his
angels. To who^ be given all honor etc.

The first sunday after Epiphany ^ay. Luc. 2.
ANd when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom
of the feast day. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned
home, the child Jesus abode still in Jerusalem, and his father and mother knew
not of it: but they supposing him to have been in the company, came a days
journey and sought him amongst their kynsfolkes and acquayntaunce. And when
they found him not, they went back again to Jerusalem, and sought him. And it
fortuned, that after three days, they found him in the temple sittyng in the
myddest of the doctors, heryng them, and posing them, Mat. 7. and 13. Mar. 1.
Luc. 7.
And all that herd him, were astonished at his understanding and answers.

And when they saw him, they meruailed. And his mother said unto him: Son,
why have thou thus dealt with us. Behold, thy father and I have sought the
sorowyng. And he said unto them. How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not,
that I must go about my fathers busynes? And Luc. 9. and 18. f
they understood not the saying which he spoke unto them. And h^ went down
with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obediente unto them. But his mother
kept all these sayings together in her heart. And Jesus prospered in
wisdom, and age, and in favor with God and men.

THE EXPOSTION.
ALthough S. Luke has passed over many things, as the fledi^g of Christ into
Egypt, yet with great diligence has he discribed the childhod of Christ. And
because yt is a great thing and a matter of high wisdom and estimacio^, yt
Christ being but 12. yers of age so boldli disputed with ye chieffest learned me^
of Jerusalem, S. Luke therefore has set forth these things so goodly and that
for our eruditio^ and comfort, to teach us, first ye Christ came i^to this
world to teach And although ye at such time as he began first to dispute, he
had not yet taken ye office of preachi^g (which before he was 30. yers of age
happened not) yet he would in his so doing signify unto us, what his office and
ministry should be, The office of Christ. Ioh. 5.
until the time of his passion, that is, yt he would be co^uersau^t in scripture
and set forth the same, and teach holsom doctrine. And moreover that he would
not wrap himself in civil and worldly business, but be occupied in those
things that concerned the glory of his father. The Jews trewly, in their
minds thought (in the which opinion they yet stick in) that Christ in great
pomp and power should exercise his kingdom in this world: But he is not found
in Kings courts, but in ye temple where he sercheth ye law of God, and would yt
afterward of him should be herd, Ioh. 18.
yt his ki^gdom was not of this world. As though he should say: Ioh. 18.
It must needs be true, Psalm. 2,
that I am constitute king over the mount of Sion: And this my kingdom is
spiritual, and not carnal. The scepter of my kingedome, is the holy gospel,
wherewith I rule them, that my father has given to me, as it is said in the
second psalm. of me: Preaching his precepts. Here thou herest that I am sent
to teach. John. 6
Because Christ now is a doctor, and in his doctrine is contained everlasting
life, yt is mete therefore, that we should receive allonly his doctrine, and
believe the same, and not be pulled from it, by any man's tradicions and
dreams. We be warned in many places of scripture, that we should give ear and
harken unto Christ, seeing that he is the very truth. Esaias in the 55. chap.
says. Incline your ears and come to me, harken, and your souls shall be
saved. If I should now then forsake Christ, the fountain of life, and give my
self to them, that teach the contrary from him, then must I needs run into
error and perpetual damnacion. Therefore if I hear him with the ears of mine
heart, and receive his doctrine, then without dout, he will teach me
outwardely by his word, and inwardly by the holy ghost, Esa. 45.
and so through his merits I shall be pertaker of the heavenly joy.

Secondarely, Bringi^g up of children.
this gospel teaches how fathers should bring up their children, in honest
conversation and the fear of God. And that we may be learned by that, that
Joseph and Mary took the child Jesus with them to Jerusalem, to the Easter
feast, that he might with all the other Jews, Deu. 15
worship God according to Moses precept, in offering, sacrifice, doing, and
eating, and in the seventh day should hear the law of God. This although it
was not necessary for Christ's person to do, yet would he live under the law as
the other did, until he had fulfilled the whole law, and abrogated the same. And
in that he taught us, that like as he took the nature of man upon him, and
was made man (and that for our sakes) so in age, wisdom and grace, he daily
increased more and more, and after the manner of other children was brought up
under his parents, and after man's custom was so diligently instructed. And
seeing that this child did so obey his parents, to the worshipping of god, it is
convenient that our children be likewise brought up in the fear of God, and
honest and good conuersacio^ before the world. Thou will not believe how nedful
and necessary thing it is to instruct children, and bring them well up in
their youth, yea and if the thing had been of small estimacion, think thou
that God would so ernestly have commanded the Jews, to bring up their children
in the fear of God? No man knew better then he, Pro. 22.
that a young man, ye a when he draws to age, will not leave of his old
manner and toys. And therefore he says in the 6. chapter of Deutronomy: The
words that I have this day commanded, they shall be in thine heart, and thou
shall show them to thy children, and thou shalt be occupied in them, sitting
in thy house, walkinge in the way, and slepinge, and wakinge. etc. And if
these things be not exercised in thy youth, trewly when they come to age, they
will hardelye obey. But thou will say again: I am no preacher. Thereto I
answer with saince Augustine, saying: That yt the preacher is in the pulpit, is
every householder in his house. And like as a preacher shall give account at
the last day of all his flock, so shalt thou give account for thy wife,
children, and household to the high judge. Wherefore look well about, that
thou be not found negligent in this behalf.

Thirdely, The cross of Joseph and Marye.
in this gospel is laid before our eyes the cross of Joseph, and of Marye,
in taking care for their child so lost. For she knowledged that she had
sought him with much heuinesse: And this was not the first sorrow, for she
had proved before what sorrow was, when she was feign (because of Herodes
crueltye) to flee into Egypt. But this leasing of her child was more
greuouser then the fletinge into Egypt, Math. 2
where she had her child with her. Wherefore if Christ did not spare his
well-beloved mother, but will teach that we must come into heaven through many
tribulacions, verelye he will not suffer us to be without vexacion and
trouble. Act. 14.
What think thou that Mary conceived in her mind, when she had lost her
well-beloved son? Doughteles she thought on this wise. Alas, God committed this
child to me, that I should take the charge of him, And how is it that I have
thus lost him? Verelye it is through my fault. And paraduenture God now will
not let me^ any longer take charge of him: Such thoughts without doubt did
very sharply perse through Maryes heart. And here now she had not only
the loss of her son, but also the loss of faith, while she took this
care, thynkinge: God is angrye with the, and now paraduenture will let the no
longer norishe his son. Psa. 24
These be ye great weighty temptacio^s, that God suffers his elect sometime
to fall in, lest they should glory in them self, and not learn to know,
that al perseueraunce and continuau^ce in faith and virtue, comes of him.
Christ is found in his word.
And Mary finds comfort no where, but in the temple, where she found her
son, not ydel, but having the word of God before him. And she receives no
comfort with her kinesfolkes and friends, nor in the city of Jerusalem, but in
the temple So likewise we, as often as we fall into tribulacio^ yea into such
deep temptacions, that no man under stands, but he that by experience has
learned, we should seek for help and comfort no where, but with Christ, which
never offers himself to be seen but in the temple, that is, in his word,
although that oftentimes, for a while he will be hid from our eyes. Believe
allonlye and despair not, Esa. 57
for the scripture says: He will not be angry for ever.

The obedience of children.
Forthly, we learn here the obedience of children toward their parents: For
although Christ said to his mother, that he must be busied in his fathers
business, yet he submitted himself, when he had done his fathers business, and
went home with his parents. Here do we learn not only, that obedience should
be given to our parents, but how and in what manner, and how long also it
should be given. As long as thy parents be no hinderau^ce to thy faith in
Christ, but studieth to set the forward therein, and agrees therein with the,
then in no wise must thou deny thy dyligente attendaunce toward them. Thou have
besides this for an example the commandment of God: Exo. 20
Honor thy father and mother. And to this commandment is added a promise,
which none of the other has. Whereby it appears, that it is greatly required,
that this commandment be observed. But if thy parents will call the from thy
faith in Christ, to old abuses and men's tradicions, then know thou, that
obedience is no longer to be given to them, in as much as pertayneth to
religion, but we must follow the saying of Christ: Mat. 10 Luc. 14
He that hates not his father and mother etc. is not meet for me. And in this
wise did Christ For when he must be in his fathers busynes, then did he
forsake Joseph and Mary. But after that busynes done, he comes, and is subdued
to his parents again.

The second sunday after Epiphany day. Io. 2.
ANd the third day was there a marriage in Cana a city of Galile: and the
mother of Jesus was called there. And Jesus was called and his disciples unto
the marriage. And when the wine failed, the mother of Jesus said unto him: They
have no wine. Jesus says unto her: woman Luc. 2.
what have I to do with the? mine hour is not yet come. His mother says unto
ye ministers: What so ever he says unto you, do it. And there was standing there
vi. water pottes of stone, after the manner of purifienge of the Jews,
contayninge two or three firkynnes, a piece.

Jesus says unto them, fill the water pottes with water. And they filled them
up to the brim. And he says unto them: Draw out now, and bear unto the
gouernoure of the feast And they bare it. When the ruler of the feast had
tasted of the water that was turned into wine, and knew not whence it was, but
the ministers which drew the water knew: he calls the bridegroom and says
unto him. Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine and when me^ be
dronken, then that which is worse, but thou have kept the good wine until now.

This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galile, and she ^ed his glory
and his disciples believed on them.

THE EXPOSITION.
First, in this gospel it apeareth manifestlye, that matrimonye pleases God
greatly. in so much yt Christ was not only present at this mariag, Mariag
but with his miracle did adorn the same. And how should not the creature and
ordinance of God, please him? Genesis 1.
It must needs be very good that he himself made. This is very necessary to
be known of every christian man, that will give him self to that state of
life. Genesis 3.
In the first book of Moises it is showed, that for the transgression of our
first parents, a great yoke and pain was given to matrimony. Man (says God
in that place,) shall eat his bread in the sweet of his face, and woman in
sorrows and pain shall conceue and bring forth children, and be subject to her
husband etc. And that sorrow saw Saint Paul, when he said: Yet shall such
have the affliction of the flesh.

Now then if this kind of life so compassed with many troubles and vexacions,
were not again decked with consolations and comfortes of God, who I pray you
would love it? or who would judge matrimonye to be a good thing, ye and who could
suffer so many bruntes of all manner adversities?

Wherefore we may here learn, that saying God himself did ordain matrimony,
and by Christ did so noblye set it forth, that trewly there is nothing
under this cross, but the very grace and mercy of God. And if therefore under
this cross, and carkes, and labors of this life, is hidden so great grace
of almighty God, no man should be afraid or abashed of that state of life, what
bruntes or sorows so ever he shall think to abide, but rather shall by all
means give his dilygence, that in this cross or sorrow, In the cross we
should look to the good will of God.
he have a respect to the good will of God, by the which if any afflictions
be sent, they are both sent and driven away also. And for that cause we
travail in this world, that our will may be broken, Mat. 19
and Gods will (which always is good) be fulfilled. Therefore if any manne
think himself not mete to keep him chaste, and will avoid the horrible
saiynge of saint Paul, 1 Cor. 6.
that hoore hunters shall have none inheritance in the kingedome of heaven,
let him marrye. And if then he can not live a quiet and easy life, yet
this may comfort him, that he leads that state of life that was ordained by
God, and highelye magnified and confyrmed by Christ. And if the gift of
chastity be given unto the, think not by and by, that thou must run to
some cloister, but tarry under the obedience of thy parents and magistrate,
keeping that great gift with thanks giving. For to live chaste, is good, 1. Cor. 7
and so likewise to live in wedlock is good, and may very well be called also a
chaste life, as it appears in the epistle to the Hebrews Heb. 13. Job. 31.
and the 31. of Job. But to wythdraw your self from the obedience of your
parents and magistrate is not good.

Secondarly, we se here in this gospel, how great care God takes for them,
which according to his commandment, take this kind of life upon them, and
submit the^ self through faith to God, God is careful for us.
which will not let them be overthrown in any necessity or temptacion, how
great so ever it be, nor shall be left without comfort. But her is required
faith, which if it be true and perfect in us, then will not Christ forget his
promise, that he has showed us in this liuelye and effectual exaumple. What
is here done? There lacks wine. And like as there lacks wine here, so is
there in wedlock mani things that want and be desired and coueted for.
Carefulnes in matrimony.
Now we lack this thing, and now that thing. And sometime we have not money
ready at hand, and afterward we lack clothes: and now is meat scarce, and
then an other time, there is no plenty of drink And many such other things.
But Christ looks upon our indigencye and need. And like as in this marriage
he makes of water wine, and in so doing, declares his carke and care toward
us, so will he also take care of us, that live in that state of life, if we do
with hartye faith cleue unto him.

And he will not only remedy our poverty, whatsoever shall chance, but of his
great goodness will also norishe the wife, children, and all the hole household.
For trewly he has promised, as in the 6. cha. appears, and likewise with many
exaumples confirms his promise, so that we may not be waueri^g but needs
believe the promise of God in all things.

Who I pray you, holy Jacob, when he passed over the flod of Jordan, and went
to Mesopotamia? Genesis 32 Genesis 35
And who was aid to Joseph in Egipte. or to the Israelites in the wilderness?
Verily thou should not abstain from wedlock, for hunger or for poverty as
many one does now adays, but be bold, and give you unto it in the fear and
love of God, and labor diligently, according to thy vocation and calling, as
it is by God commanded the, and thorough the benefyte of Christ, put all thy
trust in god, and then verily shalt thou see by experience that god will have
no less care for the, then he had for the same his well-beloved patriark, and
all other his elect, from the beginning of the world.

Thirdly, we be taught by this gospel, that for as much as Marye did with a
good zeal of mind, show unto her son, that they had no wine, and
nevertheless had but a sharp auswere again, There is no res pecte of persons
with God.
that there is no respect of persons with god, and that he takes not in
regard any carnal affinity, or co^sanguinitie, without faith and love. What
profit took some of the Jews, because that they were of the lynage of Christ?
And what won they by that, that they boasted them selves, to be the children
of Abraham? Ioh. 8.
Trewly god (as touching faith and our salvation) will not considre whens I
came, nor of whom I was borne, but he will search whether I have a true and
perfect trust in him, as the prophet Jeremy says in the 5. chapter. Iere 5.
Lord thine eyes will have respect to faith. And se what was done in the
eleventh chap. of S. Luke. Luc. 11.
A certain woman amongst the people with a loud voice, said: Blessed be the
womb that bare the, and the breasts ye norished the. And what answered Christ
again? Yea but rather blessed be they, that hear the word of God, and keep
the same. As though he should say: Iwys my mother shall not be for that blessed,
because she brought me into this world, but for that, that she has believed: as
also Elizabeth (by inspiration of the holy ghost) witnesses saiynge to Mary:
Luke. 1.
Thou art blessed, which haste believed. If you now likewise couetest to be
blessed as my mother is, then go to, her my word, and with a steadfast faith
keep it etc. In this manner also spoke Christ to his mother in the temple, as
it appears in the second chap. of S. Luke. And in like manner when it was
told unto Christ, that his mother and brethren were without the doors, and
sought him, he answered: Mar. 3.
Who is my mother, and who be my brethren? He that does the will of god is my
brother, my sister and my mother. Here it appears, that none has preogatyue
above other before god. For and if I believe in Christ, then shall I have
everlasting life. And if I believe not, Faith makes us ye brethren of Christ.
I shall be damned, although I were Christ's mother or brother.

Forthly, we have here a godly exaumple in Mary, what faith should do in prayer,
namely if at any time thou calest upon god the father in thy necessity, and he
by and by does not hear the, yea and if the very thing it self so appear,
that there is no hope or help to be looked for, In our prayer shall not
disco^fort
yet shall thou not despair therein, for in such silence that we think our
selves forsaken or destitute, is sure comfort. And under this negative, No,
No, is hid the true affirmative, Yea, Yea. This propertye has god amongst al
other things, that so long will he differ his help, until it seem that al is
lost and undone. Nor there shall apeare any hope at al, where through his help
should be manifest and known to the world. He might have forbidden and stopped
Sennacherib, Esai 10.
and the Assirians, that came to destroy the city of Ierusasalem, before they
had beseged and set their defense and power to the city, but he suffered the
Jews not only to be beseged in the city, but also to be driven to al
extremities, so long, that they thought all undone and destroyed, and lo,
merueilously of god by ye angel they are delivered. Exo, 15.
The Isralites also were not delivered from Pharao, until they were chased with
a great number of horsemen, and enclosed with in the hills and read sea, where
was so great trembling and fear, that they thought it impossible, any of them
to escape the wrath of Pharao. But god by and by laid a block in Pharaos way.
Al these things knew Mary well inoghe. Yea and although Christ said: Woman, what
have I to do with the? yet was she not astonyed by and by, although Christ
sharply did answer, but said to the servants and ministers: What soever he
says to you, do the same. And therefore she obtained the thing that she
desired of Christ. Which reigned with the father and the holy ghost, world
without end. Amen.

The third sunday after Epiphany. Matthew. 8.
WHEN he was come down from the mountain, much people followed him, And
behold Luc. 5. Mar. ^.
there came a leper, and worshipped him, saying: Master if thou wyl^e, tho^
can make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying: I
will, be thou clean: and immediately his leprosy^ was cleansed. And Jesus says
unto him: se thou tell no man Leu. 14.
but go and show thy self to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses
commanded to be offered for a witness unto them.

THE EXPOSITION.
The goodness o^ Christ
IN this gospel we se first of all, how great goodness, mercy, and love God
had, not allonly toward the leprouse man, but also toward the capitayn being
a gentyle, yea and how ready he is to yield himself wholly for us al, if we
knowing our own disease and sycknes, will seek him the faithful physicion for
the soul, and long for his help and grace. They be al lively examples that be
here laid before us. First, the benefyt of love and benevolence of Christ is
conferred to the leper. For at his instaunce and desire, Jesus put forth his
hand and touched him, saying: I will be thou clean. O what great clemencye
here is. As soon as the lepper had spoken one word, and asked health, Christ by
and by was ready and help him. Further mark, that this word, I will, I will.
is another vain nor ydell, but full of comfort: For such promise as he made
to the leper by the same word, he would generally to be a promise to us all,
whereby he certefieth and strengneth our hearts also, that we should not
dought but yt he is ready in all necessities, without any denay to give us his
continual help. And hereto may be applied that is said by S. Mark, Cap. 1.
that Jesus had compassion upon this man. For in this compassion we may see,
that Christ has pity upon our misery, The pitefulnes of Christ Heb. 4.
and that we have such a bishop, which in his heart is moved and stered with
our miserye. Now as the goodness and love of Christ does appear and shows
himself toward the lepoure, so likewise the most gentell heart of Christ is
showed and commended toward us, in that he did so soon promise at the first
desire of the Centurion, to come and help his servant. And although Christ
came not but to redeem the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 15
yet in this doing he would show unto us, that after his resurrection, The
calling of heithen.
he should call ye Jews and gentiles to the fellowship and communion of one
faith, as he says here: That many shall come from the east and the west, and
shall rest with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. Seeing
now that God the father of heaven has so plenteouslye on every party showed
and given unto us, through Christ, his grace and mercy, yt is mere that we
know this grace, and attain unto it by faith, wherthrough we may be, by him
kept and reserved both in body and soul for ever.

Secondarely, Exaumples of faith.
we have in this place two goodly examples of faith: One of the lepour and
the other of the Centurion or captain. And it appears manifestly by the
lepoure, that he had a right and true faith, in that, that he draws near
Christ asking his help, and knowledging that he cannot help himself. And
although by Moses law he was set aparte from the communion of men, and must
therefore esc^ewe their company, yet he ronneth to Christ faithfully believing
in his mind, that he is lord over the law and the leprye. Wherein he expressed
the nature and property of faith, which hastes not but only to Christ, and of
hi^ in every necessity she looks for his comfort and help, norwyl suffer her
to be stayed nor let by no means, from ye fruicio^ of this Christ, As it is
written in S. Mat. of the blind men, Mat. 20
which, the more the people did for bid them to cry, the louder they cried. But
how came this lepoure by such faith? He had herd that Christ was a man of
great humanity and gentelnes, and that he was very diligent and ready to help
and give health to the sick, and so by such heari^g he conceived such a trust
of Christ, that he would as verily help him, as he had helped many other diverse
times. Faith.
And this is the true fath, when I believe that god the father, through Christ,
will make me whole, righteous, and blessed, by his grace and mercy, without any
merit of mine own works. And such a faith was in the Centurion. For by
hearing the gospel, he learned and knew, that Christ was lord over syn, and al
sickness and diseases: He did not only believe that Christ could help if he
were present, but also if he were absent and spoke but a word. And therefore
would not ye Christ should enter into his house as he offered to do, but in
speaking of a word, believed, that his servant should be healed. I, (says he)
have servant under me, to whom if I say, come hither, they come: And if I
bid them go their way, they do by and by depart: How much more must those
things needs be done, which thou commaundest, that art not such a capitayn
^as I am, but lord of heaven and earth. This faith did Christ commend, and
said: that he had not found so great faith, no not in Israel. Now if thou will
be made clean from the leprosye of false doctrine, and steadfastly abide in the
gospel even to the end, go to then, Christ will be prayed unto.
and call upon Christ that he may give you his spirit and grace, and he shall
say unto the: I will: I will give the my spirit. Forthermore, if thou wylt
thyselfe, and all thine to be saved, body and soul, seek out Christ, and
despair of thy self, then shall he say unto the: Be yt unto the, as thou
beleuest.

Thirdely, we learn of this lepour, that whatsoever we ask in our prayer, To
commytte al things unto God.
we should remitte all to the goodness and will of God, consyderinge that we
be so ignoraunte of our own salvation, that we know not what we should
pray, as we ought to do. The leapoure asks of Christ to be made whole,
but under that condition, that it be not contrary to the will of God, and the
salvation of his soul. Wherein is meet, that if the bodily health be
occasion to do those things that be repugnant to the will of God, that then
he had lever still to continue in his sick and diseased body and to have
the favor and grace of God, then to be whole and lusty of body, and fall into
the wrath of God. Mat. 16 Iere. 33.
But every man can not know these things The flesh always trembles and fears
the cross, and goes about to repel and put from him all manner of
vexacions and tourmentes, nor cannot attayn to the knowledge to think that God
many times does send tribulacions to his elect, wherethroughe the wanton and
rebellious flesh may be suppressed and thrown down, and be subdued to the
spirit. Wherefore these and such other examples be to be observed, that we
may learn thereby how we should use our self in prayer. Mat. 28
The mother of Zebedeus children desired of Christ, that one of them might sit
on his right hand, and the other on his left, in the kingdom of Christ. But they
had a check therefore, because their peticio^ was contrary to the will of God.
For the kingedome of Christ must not be bodily, Luc. 22.
but ghostly. And moreover, Christ in the garden desired his father to take
away that bitter passion from him, but so, that he remytted all to his fathers
will, saying: Nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will. And this it is
that he taught us to say in our prayer. Now how we should prepare our self
to the will of God, we have a godly exaumple of David, in the 15. cha. of the
second book of Kings.

An other man's faith.
Fourthly, this gospel teaches us whereunto an other man's faith profits.
Verily that he pray for other, that be yet out of belefe, and to bring them
to the knowledge of faith, as the Centurion prayde for his servant. But that
by my faith any other man should obtain righteousness and salvation, Abac. 2.
it can not be, because scripture says: The just man lives by his faith.
Mark here that he says, by his faith. For by this means he requires of
every manne his own faith. And in the epistle to the Romans he says:
Cap. 1.
The Gospelle is the power of God to salvation.

but he adds: for every man that believes. Saint Paul requires therefore in
every man his own faith. Out of this follows also, that the infantes that be
baptized, be not baptized in the faith of the church, but must have their
proper and peculyar faith. The church may pray for the infantes, that God
may stir up, and make through the holy ghost in them a peculier and
propre faith. Ioh. 3. Mar 16
For it is necessary that every infant have for himself his own faith. For
these sentences be ever sure and permanent: he that believes in him, shall not
be damned. And again: Ephe. 2
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved etc. But thou wylt say again:
How can an infant believe, when as yet he has no reason? I answer. Faith is
the gift of God, as S. Paul witnesses in the second chap. to the Ephesians.
Now if god do work faith in old men, and reason leads nothing thereto,
doutelesse he can also make faith in the infantes. Were not S. John baptist
and Ieremye the prophet sanctefied in their mothers womb? Surly there has
been faith in them, Heb. 11:
for without faith no man can please god or be hollye. If then there was faith
in S. John and in Jeremy, before they were borne, and that by the operacion of
the holy ghost, then must it needs follow, that god can stir up faith in
every infant. And to make short An other man's faith may pray and make
intercession for me, but mine own faith makes me just, blessed, and the son
of god, through Christ. To whom with the father and holy ghost be all honor.
Amen.

The fowerth sunday after Epiphanye. Math. 8.
ANd when he entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. And behold there
arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much that the ship was covered with
waves, Mat. 4. Luc. 7.
but he was a sleep. And his disciples came unto him and awoke him, saying:
Master, save us, we perish. And he says unto them. Why are ye fearful, o ye
of little faith? The^ he arose Job. 26 Ps. 107.
and rebuked the wyndes and the sea and there followed a great calm. But the men
meruailed, saying: What manner of man is this, that both wyndes and sea obey
him?

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel ye person of Christ is to be considered and looked upon, which
is so diligently handled and touched her, ye no man can deny, but ye he was
more the^ a man: Christ very God.
For in that he sat in ye ship and was carried upon ye water, and did sleep, be
but man's works and common things, but to command the winds and the sea to
obei to his word, and to make the^ quiet and calm, it passes man's power, yea
and the nature of man also, and cannot be in no ma^s power, but only in gods.
And seeing yt Christ in this place is described for such a one, ye does things
impossible, and beyond nature, it must needs follow, that he is very God. And
these works should be looked upon, with the eyes of faith, and to consider by
the^, what a man Christ was, and what becomes us to look for of him in all
our necessities. This person without dought is a man of great power, that with
one word did cease so horrible and cruel a tempest: But afterward is
confessed, that al power was given to this person in heaven and in earth: Mat 28
if the^ Christ be very god and man, yt is mete for us, faithfully to believe in
him, to commit all our carke and care to him, and to call upon his help and
socoure, in all our necessities and tribulacions. Christ ca^ and will help us.
For he is he that can help, as he in this miracle (and many modone since
the beginning of the world) has migtely declared: And moreover he not only
can, but will also help, as in this place he would us to considre and mark
well. And although he do not with express words (as he did in the last
gospel) say: I will. yet he declared in the thing it self, that he will
help, when he did so soon at the request of the Apostels, cease the tempest.

Out of this is place to be noted, that Christ does call and alure us many
ways to him. Sometime by express words speaking, as in the 11. cha. of Math.
Come to me all you that labor and be laden, and I shall refreshe you. How
Christ does alure us to him.
and sometimes by preuy steringes and prouocacions through his miracles and
works, as in the gospel of this day. Let it be what ways soever he
thinks best, verily this may we well learn of yt, that Christ will help
and comfort us, in all manner of peril and ieoperdy, both of body and soul,
so that we will tarry with him in the ship, that is, Whal is to be in ye ship.
if we be joined wholye to him by faith. And if sometime he seem to tarry
longer then thou art able to abide, or that to thy reason he seem heavy in
sleep, and to have vterly forgotten the, yet let not thy mind fall or
despair, but cry to him with the Aposteles, or else with Dauyd, and say:
Arise good lord, why do thou sleep? Psa. 45
And then thou shalt also know, that yt was not said in vain of David in an
other place: Ps. 120
Behold, he that keeps Israel, shall neither slomber nor sleep.

Secondarly, this gospel teaches us, how to know the true faith from
fained faith, namelye by the cross and persecution. Doutelesse the Apostels
were in that opinion, when they entered the ship with Christ, that they had
very perfect faith, and could by no manner temptacion or persecution be brought
from the same. But what did they, when necessity and lykelehod of death drew
near unto them? By the cross faith is proved.
What constancye was there now in them? None at all. There was nothing but
great fear, tremblinge and disperacion. They remembered not that they had with
them in the ship the lord of wyndes and of the sea, but (as we may see in
saint Mark the Evangelist) they verily thought that God cared nothing at al
for them, Mar. 4.
and that he had clean forsaken them, that he also being a sleep, regarded not
what became of them. Wherefore they say: Master, do thou not care that we
perish? Lo, here thou hear of nothing, but unbelief. Here it is to be
noted, Why god proves his elect.
that all the temptacio^s of the elect, be so ordained of God, that they shall
work to them all for the best, wherewith he does chasten and bridle the
fersenes and securitye of the flesh, and does teach them, that they be not
proud or high minded, but to know, that all that they can do, must be referred
to god. For we know how bold and rebellious the flesh is, if it be not made
low, and with such scourges and stripes brought to patience and humility. Mat
26
Did not also S. Peter boldly say of him self, that he was ready even to dye
with Christ? And did not the children of Zebedeus stiffly affirm that they
could drink of the same cup that Christ should drink of? Trewly there was
presumption, Mat. 20
but a proved faith, there was not. And in like manner be all we affectianate,
without that through the inspiration of the holy ghost, our infirmity be
strengthened. We do speak very highely, and with great expectacion of the
gospel, of the cross, of patience, and such other like, but when we se the
cross even at hand, when we should then strive and wag battle with sin,
death, the deuel and hell, then be we very could and cowardes and unprofitable,
and then do we with the deed perceive, that we never had true faith, nor
ever were sincerely in our minds affectionat toward the gospel. Now they
that in the cross, in persecution, in tribulacio^ and in peril will so soon
flee from Christ and deny him, and will not suffer so small ieoperdye or peril
for his sake if need were, and so continue always in the same, they never had
one crome of sincere and true faith, but rather a shadow or vysard of faith.
Therefore they shall say in the latter day when God shall say: John. 2. Mat. 26
Get ye hence from me ye wicked and cursed into the everlasting fire. But they
that in their own conscience knowledge, that they do nothing of their own
strength before god, and confess their infirmity, nor do seek or look for
constancye and perseverance in the cross and persecution any other ways, then
of god through Christ, they shall never be separated from Christ. And although
their faith has been many times feeble in the time of the cross and
persecution, yet have they not altogether fallen into despiracion, but has
asked patience and peseueraunce of god. And so thereby thorough the help of
Christ, and the virtue of the holy ghost, they have overcome all their
temptacio^s So likewise did the Appostels, when they were with Christ in the ship
for when their faith was so weak that they wear not able to strive with
temptacion in ye very point of death, they then wakened Christ, and called upon
him for his help, of whom also in their such necessity, they had no small
comfort. Wherefore I have told you, that it is as necessary for faith to be
proved by the cross, persecution, and all kinds of trowble, as silver to be
tried and pourged with fire. For if she continewe and abide steadfast in
persecution, then is she a right faith and not feigned, Mat. 5.
and shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. Blessed be they (says Christ) that
suffer persecution for righteousness, for they shall have the kingdom of
heaven. But if faith be slipper and inconstante and deny Christ, for the
favor of the world, then shall she have perpetual damnacion.

Christ suffered the infirmity of his disciples.
Fourthly, this gospel comfort us, in that, that christ did so meekly suffer
the infirmity of his disciples, and did not by and by reiecte them from him,
although their faith were not yet perfect. He reprehendeth their
incredulity, but does not cast them utterly from him. Now if Christ then so
patiently suffered his disciples, when they were weak, and did not repel them
for their infirmity, until they were made more steadfast and stronger, suerly he
will also suffer our imbecilitie and febelnes, and will turn it into the
strength of faith, if we will knowledge our sins and corrupt nature, and
will continuallye in our prayer call for his help, saing: Good lord, increase
our faith. Luc. 17.
This exaumple of christ is laid before us, that we should follow it, and
receive them that be weak in the faith, and not despise and reiecte them,
but patiently to suffer the^, until they come to the knowledge of faith, as
saint Paul in many places teaches, and especially in the epistle to the
Romans To. 14. Luc. 12.
Neither is it spoken in vain that christ said to Peter: When thou shalt
hereafter be converted, confirm and stre^gthen thy brethren.

The fyfte sunday after Epiphany. Matthew. 13.
AN other similitude put he forth unto them, saying: Mar. 4.
The kingdom of heaven is lykened unto a man, which sowed good seed in his
field. But while men slepte, his enemy came and sowed cares among the wheat,
and went his way. But when the blade was spronge up, and had brought forth
fruicte, then appeared the tates also. So the servants of the houshoulder
came and said unto him. Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field?
from whence then has it tares? He said unto them, the envious manne has done
this. The servants said unto him, will thou then that we go, and weed them
up? But he said, nay, lest while ye gather the tares, ye pluck up also the
wheat with them: let both grow together until the harvest, and in time of
harvest I will say to the reapers, gather ye first the tares, and bind them
together in shynes to be burnt, but gather the wheat into my barn.

THE EXPOSITION.
The ki^gdome of heaven.
THis similitude, Christ himself, at the request of his disciples has
expounded, and in his exposition has sufficiently declared, what in ye church
or christianite (which after the manner of scripture he calls the kingdom of
heaven) should happen: and namely that, that always the evil shall be admyxte
amongst the good, until Christ in the last judgment, shall send forth his
angels, together and divide the sheep from the goats. We will now show
somewhat, what is to be chiefly noted here in this gospel, concerning the
dortrine of Christ. For it must needs be all good, holy, and helthfull, that
comes from the mouth of Christ.

We cum through Christ only to the father.
First, in the exposition of this gospel, Christ says, that the son of man
sows this good sede, and the field is the world: Also the good seed be ye
children of the kingdom: Wherein he teaches nothing else, but that is in the
14. chap: of S. John spoken more plainly in this wise: No man comes to my
father, but by me. And also in an other place I am the way, Ioh. 14
the treuth and life. And because through Christ allonly we be made inheritours
of the kingdom of heaven (as the gospel witnesses) yt is therefore very
necessary, that we give unto him that honor, and knowledge him for such a man
that has made us christians. And trewly, to knowledge, that Christ by his word
and spirit, does make us christians: 1. Cor. 1
And like wise that he is our righteousness, satisfaccion and redemption, is
nothing else, but freelye to confess, that we naturallye be sinners,
unrighteous, the children of the deuell, and in the danger of eternal
damnacion, Ephe. 2
and that we can obtain salvation by none other means or ways, but by christ
allonly. Where is now here the glory, wisdom, merit, and fre will of man?
Here must we needs say with Daniel the prophet: Dan. 9.
To the good lord righteousness, and to us open confusion. And this is the
very christian confession, if we confess our selves si^ners, unrighteous, and
prove to eternal damnacion: and Christ to be our goodness, righteousness, and
salvation: for as S. Mat. in the first chapter witnesses, 1. Tim. 2 John. 3
Yt is he alone that delyuereth us from sin, And reconcileth us to his father
in heaven. And by his spirit does regenerate us into a new creature: And
verily if he (he I say) had not renewed my corrupt nature, and if I had not
received of his goodness, John. 1.
I had been utterly damned and cursed for ever. How could I withstand, if God
would enter into judgment with me, and I should not pretend and aledge the
merits of Christ? There doughteles shall not my merits prevail, no another
once be seen or apear Wherefore it is necessary, that of this similitude I
learn to know, what the truth of the word of God is, namely to repute
Christ allonly to be the very same, that makes me the son and inheritoure of
the kingdom of heaven. For thus says the euangeliste: Ioh. 14
No man knows the father but the son: and no man knows the son, but the
father, and to whom the father will show it. And although works must needs
be done, yet is it so, that by them we shall not obtain righteousness before
God. For if our righteousness were founded and builded upon works, it could
not be, but uncertain and sone ouertourned with a little blaste of wind: In
so much that no man loves so much as he ought to do, nor any man does as
many works and deeds, as are required of him.

The deuel is enemy to Christ, and to all yt believe in him. Mat. 7
Secondarely, this similitude, and Christ in the exposition of the same teaches
us, that satan ye deuel is a perpetual enemy, not only of Christ the sower,
but also of al them that believe in Christ. Christ makes men good, and shows
a narrow way and a strait, that leads to life: The deuel makes me^ naught
and evil, and shows a broad and large way to damnacion: and yet he
coueteth always to be there, where the children of God be, not for any love
he hears to them, but goethe about by all the means he can, to pull them
from Christ and his word, and to bring us to men's traditions. And because he is
full of subtlety, he knows very well, yt he must work wililye and craftily to
deceive men. And therefore in the night, and when me^ be in sleep, he sows his
tares and cocle: That is, he tourneth him self into an aungel of light (as S.
Paul says) and comes not, 1 Cor. 11
but with great hypocrisy and holiness. He takes upon him the name of Christ,
boasts and glorifieth himself of his works: In so much, yt he shall bring
the elect into error, if it be possible: But as Christ says. Mat 24
He is an utter enemy to his doctrine and name. And there is nothing hid under
that holiness, but utter destruction, which the prophet David perceived very
well, when he prayed God yt he would keep him from the pestilence that walked in
darkness, and from ye sickness yt destroys in ye none day: Look through out ye
same. 91. Psalm. And in the 10. chapter. of John, Christ says: that this
thief, how honestly so ever he go, he comes for nothing else, but to steal,
slaye, and destroy. And hereto it may be referred also, Mat. 7
that in an other place he is called a raueni^g wolf, yt is hid in false
prophets. Wherefore seeing it is so, every one of us with great diligence should
beware, lest he suffer him self to be drawn from God and his word, or else
the deuell will so long lay wait for the, until he has transformed the
into the child of darkness. Nether is he weried with any labor, taking no rest
day nor night, always ready and at hand, quick and dilligent to our
destruction and condemnacion, 1. Pet. 5
as S. Peter witnesses.

Thirdely, Christ teaches us in this place, Always the evil is admixt with
the good.
that the wheat always grows nigh the tares, that is, the euel shall be
always mingled amongst ye good unto the end of the world. I call them euel,
that be occupied in false doctrine and unbelief, as all hypocrites and
heretics be, which will for the more part cloak their erroures with scriptures
falsely alleged, lest their deceit should be espied out. And of these speaks
S. Paul to the Corinth. saying: 1 Cor. 11
There must also rise sects among you, whereby they that be approved, shall be
made manifest. Now if there shall be amongst the true christian men, How he
r^tickes should be handled
false chrystians, How shall I behave my self toward them? Shall they be
clean cast out of our coasts, or put to death? No, not so, but thou may (if
thou know such tares) common with them in scripture, instruct them and
admonish the, out, twice or thrice, until thou se that they be fallen into a
false and reprouable opinion, and that they will not amend, and leave their
opinion, and the^ thou may eschew them, Mat 18 Tit. 3.
and repute them (as Christ and S. Paul has taught the) as hethens,
publicans, and open sinners, and other commandment thou haste none. And when
harueste comes, that is, the end of the world, then shall they have their
judge the word of God, that shall judge them. But and if of thine own pryuate
person, Ioh. 12.
or as a christian man thou will do somethynge else, that should profit in
this behalf, go to then, and pray to God earnestlye in thy mind, that he
will voutchsafe to bring them to the true knowledge of faith, and of his
great goodness will keep and conserve us, from all error and false doctrine.

The payns of hypocrisy.
Fourthely, in this similitude also is showed the punishment of hypocrisye, and
the reward of true doctrine and faith. The son of man (says he) shall send
forth his angels, which shall gether out of his ki^gdom al occasion of slander
and offendicles, and ye workers of iniquity, and shall cast the^ into the
burni^g furnace, there shall be waylyng and gnashing of teeth. Here thou see
the reward of hypocrisy: The reward of faith.
Now harken to the reward of faith. Then the goodme^ shall shine as the son,
in the kingdom of their father. This text is clear of it self, God grant,
all only that we may be numbered amongst the good and faithful, and not
amongst the hy^ocrites. And as for the reward, I remit it to Christ.

The sunday called Septuagesima. Mat. 20.
FOr the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an hosholder, which went
out earlye in the morning to hyer laborers into his vinyeard, and when the
agreement was made with the laborers, for a penye a day, he sent them into his
vineyard. And he went out about the third hour, and he saw other standing
idle in the market place, and said unto them: Go ye also into the vineyard, and
what soever is right, I will give you. And they went their way. Again he
went our about the sixte and nynthe hour, and did likewise. And about the
eleventh hour he went out, and found other standinge idel, and said unto
them: Why stand ye here all the day idell? They said unto him: because no man
has hired us. He says unto them: Go ye also into the vineyarde: and
whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.

So, when even was come, the lord of the vyneyarde says unto his steward: Call
the laborers and give them their hire, beginning at the last until the
first. And when they did come, that came about the eleventh hour, they
received every man a penny. But when the frste came also, they supposed that
they should have received more, and they likewise received every man a penny.
And when they had reseaued yt, they murmured against the goodma^ of the house,
saying: These last have wrought but one hour, and thou haste made them equal
unto us, which have borne the burden and heat of the day.

But he answered unto one of them and said: Friend, I do the no wrong: did
thou not agree with me for a penny? Take that is thine, and go thy way: I will
give unto this last, even as unto the. Is it not lawful me to do as me
lysteth with mine own goods? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? Mat. 19
Mat 10 Luc. 13.
So the last shall be the first, and the first shall be last. For many be called,
but few be chosen.

The sunday called Septuagesima. Math 20.
The grace and mercy of God.
THis gospel does chiefli commend and extol ye grace and mercy of God, by ye
which he calls a sinner, and makes him just and good, in that, that the
householder gave like reward to them that came last into his vineyarde, as to
the^ that came first: wherthrough is taken away al presumption of the^ that
puts trust in their works, seeing that reward is not distributed according
to ye merit, but according to yt will and pleasure of ye householder. Who dare
now bost of his works? All is in ye good will of this householder. He gives so
much, Ephe. 4
and to whom it please him. Therefore every man should submit himself, and
knowledge the vncleanlines of his works, and to put his whole trust in the
grace and mercy of God. Presumption is even grafte in us, and therefore we
trust, that by the merits of our works, we shall be justified, which yet by
no means be sufficient. But god is (as S. Paul so calls) the father of
mercies, 2 Cor. 1.
as for this opinion must we cast out of our minds, and only have respect to
the meek and gentell will of the householder: He has mercy upon whom he list,
and who^ it please him, Romans 9
he does harden. And to be short, when by his word he calls me into his
vineyard, he makes me righteouse and blessed, Then must I give thanks to him
allonli, seeing that by his grace and no merit of mine, it was so done.
Likewise when god gives this grace to me through Christ, that in this divine
vocacion or godly calling, I can persevere and patiently suffer the cross, and
other afflictions, I should not adscribe the same to mine own strength, but
give thanks to god the father by Christ, for his such great goodness and
clemency, with the which he has looked upon me, a miserable sinner. For like as
he by his word called me to faith, and commanded me to go into his vineyard of
christianite, it is necessary, Romans 11 Phil. 2.
that he give also to me his grace, wherthrough I may abide and persevere even
to the end. If therefore I be joined to everlasting felicity, without any my
merit, but by the grace of god, not of mine own strength, and am so
sustained in ye same, what is it I pray you, yt this householder owes to me?
Nothing at all, except of his very liberality he will give me somewhat. Then
if he owe ought to no man, and yet so plenteouslye does distribute the
treasure of his grace, trewli there is no cause, whi I should discorag in my
mind, or despair, although I were the greatest sinner under the son. for
therefore came Christ, that he would save sinners. And besides this, Christ
came for sinners Luc. 23.
he can of the thief that hang on the gallows, make a good and righteous man.
In contrary wise, I have no cause to presume, seeing that in matters concerning
righteousness before god, no merit of works, but only grace does prevail, and
must always say: Luc. 17
And if I had done all that ever were commanded me, yet am I but an
unprofitable servant, for I have done but that I ought to do. And now if
also by Christ I am justified, and endued with the excellent gifts of the
holy ghost, yet should I not be to bold and look over high, saying it is
so with all men, that he that stands to day, must beware yt he fall not to
morrow. But we must always ask of God, that he will voutchsafe to reserve
us to everlasting life. 1 Cor 10 The election of God.


Secondarilye, Christ puts a difference in this gospel between the
election of God, where with he has predestinate all the elect people to
everlasting life from the beginning of the world, and the vacation of faith,
which is by the outward word. Outward word.
And trewly if we do well considre and way the matter, it is no small matter.
The election of God, abides steadfast and immovable: Nor any man that by this
election is predestinate to salvation, can be damned or perish, 2. Ti^. 2.
as Christ himself witnesses in the 10. chap. of John: The sheep that my
father has given me, no man shall take out of my hand. And in likewise S.
Paul speaks of this election in the 8. chap. to the Romans saying: The elect
remain co^stante.
Those that he knew before, has he ordained also before: and those that he
has so ordained, he has called. And those whom he has called, he has also
made righteous, and who^ he has made righteous, he has glorified also. Here
we hear that the elect be only justified and glorified by Christ. And this is
confirmed by that noble example written in ye Acts of ye Apostles, when Paul
did preach the gospel of Christ at Antioche, Act. 13.
in ye which sermon, S. Luke concludes on this wise: And there believed as many
as were ordained to life. In this example yt is manifestly showed, ye
iustificacio^ lies not in our works, but in ye grace and mercy of God. This
doctrine of ye election and predestinacio^ of god, is very horrible to the^ that
be drowned in wordely wisdom, and to their power do resist the gospel. For as soon as they hear of this doctrine, by and by they despise and hate it, saing:
If it lie not in mine own power to be saved, Romans 8.
I will do what pleases me, and will not fear any thing at al. And again, to
them that be ordained to life, yt is a very helthfull doctrine, and full of
comfort They as soon as they hear that those be only saved that be
predestinate of God, they meken and submytte them self, they despair of them
self, they call for grace and mercy, and by all means makes have to Christ.
And that is even the very way to give to God his honor. Futhermore they
learn, that God of his grace makes a man not only good, righteous, and
blessed, but that also in all temptacions and tribulacions, he will comfort
and preserve who^ he has made righteouse. But trewly there be very few of
those, and therefore yt is said of Christ, that there be many called, but few
be eletcte. In Zodome there was not one found, Genesis 19
but only Loath and his householde: And before the floode, Noah only and his
children found grace. Genesis 9. Nu. 14. Ios. 14
And into the land of Chanaan, came no more but only Joshua, and Chaleb.
Wherefore thou should not marvel, that so few beeleue the gospel lin their
heart, and follow it. He that is not predestinate of God, may not abide nor
hear of it: John. 5
And much less can receive it. Nevertheless it is through our faut, that we
be damned. Of electionat this time, this shall be sufficient.

What means he when he says? Many be called. Doughteles he speaks of the
outeward calling to faith, which is by the word of God. And it was commanded
to the Apostels, after the resurrection: Go your way through out the whole
world, and preach the gospel to every creature, that he that believes, and
is baptized, shall be saved. And he that does not believe, shall be damned. And
hereof scripture speaks in the book of Psalms: Psa. 18.
Their voice shall sound over all the world, and their words went to the
ends of the world. And although this calling pertains unto many, yet
sumtyme it fails, and all that be called, abides not, not that any lack
should be in ye word, whereby we be called, but yt we so greatly given to our ill
affections and lusts, be not drawn inwardly by ye holy ghost, and therefore do
we despise and set little by this outward calling, which is by ye preaching of
ye gospel. Yea and also, there be some found, yt as soon as they begin to hear
the gospel, they show and set out themselves, as though they had eue^ devoured
the whole gospel, yet it is proved afterward, when ye time of persecution
comes, ye the seed of this calling, Mat. 13 Romans 10
fell not into a good and fruteful ground, but upon the stones, and so withered
away. And S. Paul says. But euer^e man has not obeyed to the gospel. When
Christ now says: Many be called, he speaks of the outewarde calling of
the world, by the which the gospel is offered to the whole congregation, or
to eueri man. And when he says: Few be elect or chosen, then yt is to be
understand of predestinacio^. And nevertheless the preaching which is by the
outward word, is as well to be often times iterated and repeted, as that
whereby we be taught. That by the holy ghost, we be drawn. For in the tenth
chap. to the Romans it is said: Faith by hearing etc. The nature and custom
of them that iustifi the^ selves.


Thirdely, we learn by the grudging of them, that labored the whole day for
their wages, the custom and nature of them, that iustifi them selves. They be
in like manner affectionate as these laborers were, which of very pride and
high stomach, do despise the latter co^mers, so sent into the vineyard by the
householder, as though there had been no covenant of wages before. They think in
themself to be far better then these miserable si^ners, because they lived
outwardely an honest life, and had done, (but yet without faith) many works.
But hypocrisy never does otherwise: for he can not only be content with his
false outward shining, where with he blyndeth men's eyes, but he dispiseth all
other the^ himself, and gives the^ opprobriouse words. So did the Pharisey
despise the wretched publican, which was not so bold to lift up his eyes in to
heaven, to say: Luc. 15.
God have mercy upon me a sinner. Luke the 18. chap. Likewise the elder
brother, disdained his younger brother that was lost, when he returned and came
to himself again. Mar 14
And in like manner Judas despised that simple and wretched woman, which in the
house of Simeon the leper powered out upon Jesus head, a box of costly ointment.
And also the Jews despised Christ, when he did eat and drink amongeste
the publicans and sinners. But what said Christ to that? Verily I say unto
you, that sinners and whores shall enter into the kingdom of heaven before Mat.
21
you. What? does not the houshoulder here think so to? when he says: Shall I
not do with mine own what pleases me? And in this, we miserable sinners have
one special thing and prerogative, before those great high and holy men, that
when we do good works, we have no respect thereto, nor do them for that cause,
that therefore we may ask heaven of God, as dew debt to us, but we believe
in him that makes the sinner righteous, and our faith is imputed to us to
iustificacion. Romans 4
And forbicause the iustifiers do ask their reward as debt and covenant,
and not of grace, therefore yt happens to them, that they be made of the
first, the last: Nor yet shall they leave or forsake their pride so grafte in
them, which always follows them, but always they shall judge and condemn,
and often times have in their mouths, and call here tyckes, heretics, until
they them selves be condemned.

The sunday called Seragesima. Luc. 8.
WHen much people were gathered together and were come to him out of all cities,
he spoke by a similitude. The sower went out to sow his seade: and as he
sowed, some fell by the way side, and yt was trodden down, and the fowls of
the air devoured yt up. And some fell on stone, and as soon as it was spronge
up, it wythered away, bycase it lacked moystenes. And some fell among thorns,
and the thorns sprange up with it and choked it. And some fell upon good
ground, and bare fruit and hundredth fold. And as he said these things, he
cried: He that has ears to hear, let him hear:

And his diciples asked him, saying: what manner of similitude is this? And he
said: Unto you it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God, but to
other by parables: that when they see, they should not se: Mat. 12 Mar. 4
and when they hear, they should not understand.

The parable is this: Esa. 6. c Mat. 13 Mar. 4. Ioh. 12. Act. 28. f Romans 11
Mat. 13 Mar. 4.
The feed is the word of God. Those that are beside the way, are they that
hear, then comes the deuell, and takes away the word out of their hearts,
lest they should believe and be saved. They on the stones are they, which when
they hear, receive the word with joy, and these have no roots, which for a
while believe, and in time of temptacion go away.

And that which fell among thorns, are they, which when they have herd, go
forth, and are choked with cares and riches, and voluptuous living, and bring
forth no fruit. That which fell in the good ground, are they which with apure
and good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit through
patience.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe similitude of the gospel of this day, Christ himself has sufficiently
expounded. I would wish, that all we might receive the grace of God, not only
to understand the same, but to have it written in our hearts, that we might
oftentimes think thereon. For seeing that Christ himself with a loud voice
said: He that has ears to hear, let hi^ harkin. we may well perceive, yt it
is not given to every man to hear the word of God, and keep the same: For as
S. Paul witnesses in the third cha. of his first epist. to ye Cor: Plant we
may, The outward word.
and water may as well as we can, but ye increase comes of no man but of God.
And yt we may learn, how god by ye outward preaching of his word, does also
inwardly through the holy ghost work in our hearts, there are four ki^des
of herers laid here before us.

First of all, Christ speaks of the seed that fell by the ways side, and
was trodden under foot, and the fowls of the aier eat it up. And he calls
the seed, the word of God, and the birds he calls the deuel, which by
innumerable means pluck and rote up the word of God, out of me^nes hearts. And
he speaks as though he should say on this wise: False christians
Many there be that hear the gospel, and will in any wise be called christian
men, and moreover they use the sacraments and liberty of a christian man, but
trewly they shall obtain of me nothing else, but the vain name that they so
greatly glory in. And out wardly they show a certain grauiti and face of
holiness, but inwardely they be filled with all malice. And why so? Because they
have received the word of God under a pretext, as it were under a shadow or
visarde, it never descended into their hearts, neither were they kindeled any
thing therewith, whereby a man might perceive it to have been any thing
lively or effectual in them. There have entered in false doctors and sect
masters, which through their deceitful exposition of scripture, have suppressed
and trodden under foot the good seed of the word of God. Iere. 5. and. 27
Of whom the prophet Jeremy says: That they shall speak their lies in the name
of the lord. 1. Ti^. 1.
And S. Paul called the doctrine of those men, idle speech. They have adjoined
themselves to such doctoures, forsaking the fountain of the water of life,
and follow with all desire, and covet to drink the troubled and muddye water
infected with man's tradicions and heretical lerning. And afterward comes in
the deuell which is signified by the birds. And because his ministers the
false techers have with their false preachi^g prepared to hi^ his ways, he goes
forth and enters privily i^to their hearts, so that they being brought from ye
true doctrine of Christ, shall both body and soul run into ye snares of ye
deuel. And those deceits and snares, The deuell of noone days.
be ye very deuel of yt none tide, that ye 90 psalm. speaks of: And now
forasmuch as we have perfect knowledge, yt the deuel lays netes and snares for
us, as well by his false prophets, which by ye perverse exposition of scripture
go about to deceive us: As also by his own gyles and inspiracio^s, yt shall be
very necessary, that we so establish our lives, yt by no means we be brought
from the true and simple doctrine of Christ. For as soon as we begin to despise
and set little by that word of god, that is showed unto us by Christ: We must
abide in the word
The^ by and by with great violence we run into the snares and gynnes of the
deuell. And if we steadfastly believe in ye word of god: Then neither false
prophet, another ye deuell himself shall deceive us. And the^ without dout he is
greater yt is in us, then he yt is in the world. 1. Io. 4

Secondarylye, Christ speaks of the seed that fell upon the stone, which
although it sprange up, yet because it lacked moisture, it withered away. And
so he declares, that the seed that fell on ye stone be they, that when they
hear the word of God, they receive it with joy, To fall from the word in time of
persecution.
but they have no rotes because they believe but for a while, and in time of
temptacion and tribulacion they fall clean away. Wherein Christ shows that
his gospel shall never be preached without adversaries, that shall strive
against it. And likewise, that the perfect and true faith cannot be known,
but by tribulacion and temptacious, so proved and tried, as gold and silver is
by fire. If thou wylt then search and know, what faith I have, and whether it
be a true or a feigned faith, mark well and behold my life, when I chance to fall
into temptacion and tribulacion. And if then it be a pure and right faith, and
by the word of god in my heart made liuelye and effectual, then must I
needs say with saint Paul: Romans 8.
I am sure, that another death, nor life, nor angel, nor rule or power, another
things present, or things to come, another high, nor low, nor any manner of
creature, shall separate me from the love of god, that is in Jesus Christ. Yea
and I will freely confess, commend and preach the word of god, though I should
dye an hundredth times, Mat. 10
or forsake all that ever I have had in this world. For it must needs be in
such case, that other I forsake all and bear the cross of Christ, or else
cease to be his disciple any longer. And in contrary wise, when my faith is not
pure, but feigned, trewly the^ will I not so hate my self, yt for the gospels
sake I should run into danger of my body and life. But then will I set
most by, and love my body, be it never so rotten and full of worms. Wherefore
I am constrained to hear Christ in an other place, Mat. 16
saying: He that finds his life, shall lose it.

Cares, riches, and voluptuousness be let and hi^dera^ce unto faith.
Thyrdely, Christ speaks of other seed, that fell amongst thorns, and so
sprung up, was choked amongst the thorns. And that he expounds on this
wise. The seed that fell amongst the thorns be they, that have herd the word
of god, and then thorowgh the cares, riches, and voluptuosnes, of this world,
be so over grown and choked, that they can not bring fourth fruit. Thou herist
here repeted, that such hear the word of god: if then they hear the word and
yet be rejected of Christ, I pray the, what is the cause, or what lettyth,
why they be not saved? verily even that, be cause they received not the word
of god ernestly, and in their hearts: and for that they be found neglegente
in faith, love, and honest conuersations, and fall from god the creator unto
creatures. Mark here, how finely Christ has painted and set out the minds
and hearts of rich men: First of all he gives unto them cares, for we commonly
se that the more they have, the more the covet: as it is said in the 5. cha.
Ecclesiastes: The covetous man is never satisfied of money etc. And he gives
also unto the^, the love and affection of riches, and desire of this worldly
life. As though he should say: To have great riches does not damn a man: for
there has been sins the beginning of the world, many devout and holy men,
that has had great riches, and yet nevertheless have obtained everlasting
life. But to set heart and mind in riches, and through them to seek the
pleasures of this life, and not to know, that we be but servants and
stewardes of such riches, to thentent, that the poor and nedye may be helped
thereby, that is the very thing that condemns a man. Wherefore seeing it is so
with rich men for the more part, that they with all their diligence seek
and follow the pleasures of this life, and do not mortefye the flesh by the
spirit, but pass over their life in all security and wealth of this world.
Mat. 19
Christ says also in an other place: Sooner may a camel run through the eye
of a nedle, then a rich man enter into heaven. And to be brief, Such rich
men, What condemns the rich me^.
and men that abuse their riches in this world, have but small praise in
scripture, and in many places we hear of their condemnacion, not because they
have much riches, or that they be men of great power and might, but for that
they do abuse their such gifts, and take their lusts and pleasure in it, and
do not make friends to them, of their wicked mammon.

Fourthly, Christ speaks of the seed that fell in the good ground, and
sprang up, and brought forth fruict an hundredth fold. And that he declared on
this wise: That that fell in the good ground, be they which with good heart and
mind, Good ground
do hear ye word of god, and keep the same, and bring forth fruict in
patience. And there be two things to be noted in that: Few christian men.
First, that there be merueilous few christian me^ in this earth: But of them
that in body and soul go to the deuel, there is a great number, how highly
soever they pretend ye name of christians, or boaste of ye gospel, as Christ
does witness in the 7, chapt. of Matthew, saying: The gate is larg, and the way
is broad that leads to perdition, and many there be that enters into the
same. But the way that leads to life is strait, and the gate very narrow,
and few have found the same. And the other thing yt Christ shows us, is
this: that although the more part of men be evil, and so abide, yet the
word of god shall not be preached in vain. In some corner there shall be found
good ground, The word of God is not preached in vain. Esa. 55.
wherein the good seed of the word of god is, sown, shall spring up and bring
forth fruit plenteously, whereof god speaks by his prophet Esaias in this
wise:

Like as the shoures of rain and snow descends from heaven, and retourneth
not thither again, but sinketh into the earth, and norisheth the same, and
makes it bring forth seed unto the sower, and bread to the eater, so shall the
word that comes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me empti, but shall
do all that I will, and shall prosper whersoeuer I shall send it. And although it
seem, that ye gospel is preached in vain, yet must we believe that amongst so
great a company of misbelieuers, God has some elect, that gladly here his
word, and keep the same, although (as we have said) the number of those be
very small.

The sunday called Quinquagesima. Luc. 18.
Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said unto them. Mat 18. Mar. 8.9. d and
10. Luc. 9. c and. 17
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all shall be fulfilled, that are written by
the prophets of the son of man. For he shall be delivered unto the gentyls,
and shall be mocked, and despitefully entreated, and spitted on, and when they
have scourged him, they will put him to death, and the third day he shall arise
again. And they understood none of these things. And this saying was hyd from
them so, that they perceived not the things which were spoken. Mat 16 and. 17.
b Mar. 9. Luc. 2. g and. 9. f Mat 20 Mar. 11
And it came to pass, yt as he was come nighe unto Hierico a certain blind man
sat by ye way side begging. And when he herd the people pass by, he asked
what it meant. And they said unto him yt Jesus of Nazareth passed vi. And he
cried, sayi^g. Jesus, ye son of David, have merci on me. And they which went
before, rebuked him yt he should hold his peace. But he cried so much ye more
Mar 10
thou son of David have merci on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded hi^
to be brought unto hi^. And when he was cum near, he asked him, saying What
will thou that I do unto the? And he said: lord, that I may receive my sight.
And Jesus said unto him: receive thy sight: thy faith has saved the. And
immediately he received his syghte, and followed him and praised God. And all the
people when they saw it, gave praise unto God.

THE EXPOSITION.
The passion of Christ is often rehearsed.
IT is not without great cause, that Christ so often times did show and speak
to his disci-disciples of his passion and death that was to come, and that not
only in the gospel of this day, but also in diverse other places. And (to let
pass the other evangelists) I pray you, how often times is it spoken of in the
gospel of S. John? Ouerlooke the same evangelist through out, from the
beginning to the end, and thou shall find, that the same faithful teacher
Christ, with all diligence did instruct and strength his Apostels, against the
slander of the cross. Wherefore we should considre the same, and mark
wherefore Christ did it, and why he made so many words thereof to his
disciples.

First, yt is manifest and very plain, that our nature flesh (when it is not
inlyghtened by the holy ghost) cannot abide steadfast in time of persecution:
The flesh has persecution
for the flesh loves herself, and bitterly hates persecution, and deliteth
more in long and merry days, the^ to abide trouble and vexacion with a quiet
mind. As Nicodemus when he came in ye night to Christ for fear of the Jews,
Mat. 20
hard by and by of him these words: That that is borne of the flesh, is
flesh. And although the children of Zebedeus said: Mat. 10
they could drink of the cup that Christ should drink of. And Peter also
might well say, Luc. 22.
that he was ready even to dye with Christ, yet without the holy ghost it is
impossible, and is a high presumption so to say. And saying that our Lord
Jesus Christ knew very well, the same frailenes of the flesh, not only in his
disciples, but in us all, he uses the office of a good and faithful master,
and instructs us with the wholesome doctrine of the word of God against
persecution to come, that when it should come upon us, we should be ready,
and not despair. As though he should say. I know very well that yt is
hard for a man to stand styflye in persecution, and to suffer all
adversities with a pacient mind, but the prophecy must needs be fulfilled
of me. Does not Zacharias say of me? Zac. 13.
I will stryke the shepeherde, and all the flock shall be sparsed abroad.
Wherefore now I show you before, because it must needs be, that when so ever
it shall be done, you may remember this, and not be offended therewith, but
rather believe that it is my fathers will in heaven, which will deliver you
through my death, from sin, death, the devil, and hell. And although I shall
dye the vylest death, yet will I rise the third day, and comfort you. Thou
seyste here, how Christ comfort his Apostelles, whereby, they may learn to
have respect only to the good will of god in all tribulacions. In necessities
we must have respect to ye good will of God.
And this was not only done for the apostels sake, but for us also to learn,
and follow the same. In persecution and tribulacion we may not think, that the
wicked be as fierce in crueltye toward us, as the Jews were in persecuting
Christ even to very death, but we must look to the good and merciful will of
God the father, whose will is, that we for his sake should be despised, and
suffer persecution in this world.

The use and profit of ye passion of Christ.
Secondaryly, Christ's intent is, to show in this gospel the use and profit of
his passion, in that, that he says: Al things shall be fulfilled, that be
written by the prophets of the son of man. If then it be necessary, that al
these things must be done, trewlye there is no small profit hid under this
passion. And this profit does S. Paul very cu^ningly show unto us, Cap. 5.
in his epistle to the Romans, saying: Like as by the sin of one,
condemnacion came on al men: so also by the righteousness of one, came
iustificacion of life upon all men. And in this place Saint Paul conferreth
Adame and Christ together, Adam and Christ.
and shows what we have obtained at both their hands. of Adam, we receive
death, and of Christ, life. Adam by sin brought in death, and Christ with
his death, has changed death into life. By the fall of Adam and his
disobedience, we are made the children of the deuel: and by Christ, we are made
the children of God. For Christ only for us has broken the hedde of the
serpent, Genesis 3.
that is, the devil. Well then, is not this a wonderful profit of the
passion of Christ, that through the same we be received into favor? And is it
not to be taken as a great benefit, that hereafter by the passion and death
of Christ, we shall no more be the children of the devil, but the children of
god? And hereto pertayneth all that is said of the passion of Christ, in the
53. chapter of Esaias, and the 13. chapter of Oseas. It is very necessary,
that the ministers of the word of God, Harken well.
do diligently and constantly adioyne this utility or profit, with the
doctrine of penance, and often times to repete and beat in the same in their
sermons. There is no greater or sweter comfort, neither in heaven nor in earth,
wherwt the troubled conscience may be better pacefied, then is the passion and
resurrection of Christ. And for that cause Paul said unto the Cor. That he
knew nothing, but Christ, and that he was crucified. 1. Co. 2.
And to the Gal. God forbid that I should rejoice, Gal. 6.
but only in the cross of our lord Jesus Christ, by the which ye world is
crucyfyed to me and I unto the world. Let other rejoice in their works, we
will rejoice in the merits of our lord Jesus Christ. Yet nevertheless doing
(through the grace of the holy ghost) that which is commanded us of him to be
done.

Thirdelye, it is not to be omitted, which be the enemies and the dispisers of
Christ
but diligentely to be noted and marked, that Christ so specially did show, of
whom he should be condemned to death, that is, of his own people, of the
chiefest of his priests, of the phariseis and scribes. And S. Luke adds of
the gentiles also. But S. Math. shows by name, that we may plainly know
what they were, that have not only from the beginning persecuted Christ,
and his doctrine, but also shall persecute even to the very end: That is, these
most holy, highest learned, and greatest me^ of power in this world. For they
be so depely drowned in their carnal wisdom and learning, that theye can
by no m^anes attain to, and understand the word of God, which is contrary to
their reason. Yt must needs chance to those men, as Jeremy the prophet
says, in his 10. chap. Every man is become folish and destitute of wisdom.
Look on the text of this place, and upon the 44. chap. of Esaias. And
moreover they must needs discharge Dauyd, and make him no liar: who
complayneth of the great men of power of this world, and says: Psalm. 2.
The kings and princes of the earth, have risen up, and gathered together
against their lord and against his Christ. In such prophecy are comprehended
al men of great power, learned men, wise men, and the holy men of all times, to
the end of the world. The cause of the blindness of ye great learned men
For trewly ye gospel rejects and conde^neth al color and ypocrisy, and
requires only the faith and goodness that comes from the heart. And therefore
they must needs with a deadly hatred persecute the same, when they repute and
take their outewarde shadow of holiness, to be righteousness before God.

Fourthelye, we have in this blind manne an example of faith, and how we
shu^de pray. For doughteles he had herd of Christ, that he was a man of
great humanitye and gentleness, and would deny his help to no man. How we should
pray.
By this hearing he received faith of Christ, and trewly believed ye Christ
would work mercy with him, as he had done also before time with many other. And
having this trust of mind, he asks health. And although for his crienge he
was of the great multitude blamed, yet he left not of his purpose, but still
cried until he hard that joyful voice: Thy faith has saved the.

Wherein we may considre and learn, that faith must work all things, as
it is said in the 19. Faith brings all thing to pass.
cha of S. Mark: All things be possible to him that believes. Also if ye had
faith as a mustarde seed, and would say to this tree, root up, and grow in
the sea, yt should be done. He that now will ask any thing of God, he must
not come void and emptye (that is, without faith.) For as much as thou
beleuest, so much shalt thou obtain thy peticion. And without faith it is
impossible to please God. Heb. 11. But and if thy faith be so far tempted, yt
thou shalt hear thine enemies say by the: Psa. 5.
God will not help or save him: Yet leave not of thy purpose, but cry: Jesus
the son of Dauyd, have mercy on me. Cry with heart and mouth, that he may
remember his mercy, which thing by the often calling thou shall bring to
remembrance, and he will hear the, as he has herd this blind man.

The first sunday in Lent. Math. 4.
THen was Jesus Mar. 1. Luc. 4.
led away of the spirit into wyldernes, to be tempted of the deuel. And when
he fasted forty days and fortye nights, he was at the last an hungered. Bud
when the temter came to him, he sayied: If thou be the son of God, command
that these stones may be made bread. But he answered and said: It is written
Deuteronomy. 8. Luc. 4. Sap. 16
man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God.

Then the deuel took him up unto the holy city, and sets him on a pinnacle of
the temple, and says unto him: If thou be the son of God, cast thy self
down hedlynge. For it written Psa. 9.2.
He shall give his angels charge over the, and with their hands they shall
hold the up, least at any time thou dashe thy foot against a stout And Jesus
said to him: It is written again. Deuteronomy. 6. Luc. 4.
Thou shall not tempt the lord thy God.

Again, the deuell takes him up, into an exceeding high mountain, and shows
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and says unto
him: All these will I give the, if thou will fall down and worship me. Then
says Jesus unto him: Avoid Satan, For it is written: Deuteronomy. 6. and.10. c
Thou shall worship the lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.

Then the deuell leaves him, and behold Luc. 4. c 1. Re. 7.
the aungeles came and ministered unto him.

THE EXPOSITION.
First of all, in this gospel is showed unto us, The te^ptacion of Christ is
our victory.
how Christ was led through the holy ghost into wilderness, and tempted of
the devil. And also how strongly he overcame and trod under foot the devil
that cruel enemy to christian men. And if we would behold these things with the
eyes of faith, we should prove by experience, that Christ suffered all these
things for our sake. For there was nothing done of him, more or less, wherein
he did not service to us wretched sinners.

His temptaeions, fastinges, victory, yea and his very passion and bitter
death, was service unto us, Luc. 22.
as he in S. Luke says, that he came to minister or serve other, and not that
other should serve or minister to him. Wherefore I must here in this place take
Christ as a gift, and that he with all that he has done, is given to me by the
father, so that hereafter he may be mine. And furthermore I must put him
before mine eyes as an exaumple and take my cross upon me, Mat. 10
and follow his steps. 1. Pet. 2. Christ suffered for us, leauinge to us
exaumple, that we should follow his steps. Yea and when thou hear, that
he was led by the holy ghost into wyldernes, to be tempted of the devil: Yt
is ye will of god that we be tempted
Thou shalt learn thereby that god of his good will, sends al temptacion to
his elect that they may in time of temptacion know, whereof they need, and with
great constancy ask of god, both help and comfort. Every man's necessity
should provoke him to pray: as the prophet says: When I was troubled, then I
cried to the Lord, and he herd me. And again, when thou hear, how mightily
Christ overcame the devil, and how with scripture he overthrew his subtle and
malicious counsel, thou shall remember to learn, that no temptacio^ may be
overcome, but by Christ. And also, that a christian soldier should have a
strong armoure (which is the word of god) when so ever he shall fall into
battle with the deuel. Ephe. ^
And what claim or right could that enemy make to me, if I had none other
weapon in time of temptacion to defend me withal, but this only sentence of
scripture, conceived through faith? Ioh. 16.
Have good hope and trust, for I have overcome the world. Yet we will somewhat
se in this place with what crafts and deceites of temptacion the deuell comes
with all to Christ.

First, The care for the belly
he compasses him with the carke and care of the bellye, and that he
attempteth with a wonderful pollecye. He says on this wise. If thou be the
son of God, Genesis 6.
make these stones bread. As many as do believe, may be called the children of
God. And the deuel says as it were on this wise If thou be the son of God,
as thou do boaste thy self, where then is the care that God takes for the?
why does he not provide to the meat, drink, and all other necessaryes to live
by? what has God to do with the think thou? He takes much care for the in
deed: Tarry a while, until a roasted chicken fly in to thy mouth. And by this
means goes the deuell about to bring Christ from the co^fide^ce and trust
in God, and to burden him with incredulity and vain carefulnes, that yet he
might so move him to forsake God, and make of his belly an idol: Christ
ouercometh the deuel Deuteronomy. 8.
But what does Christ? He gives no place at al to these diabolical
instructions, but strongely does persevere in that faith and trust, which he
received of his heavenly father, and says. Man lives not only by bread, but by
the word that proceeds from the mouth of God. As though he should say: I know
very well, that when there is plenty of bread the life must be sustained
thereby: But that is not because of the bread, but for the word of God, where by
the bread is sanctified, and power given to it, to feed and replenish men. And
if there be no plenty of bread, then must we needs live by the word of God, if
then faith do wholye depend and hang of this word, and be wrapped therein,
then must there needs be also bread, yea, and the same must come from heaven,
as in the old time Manna was given to the children of Israel in wilderness. Ps.
77
Lo now in this wise does Christ overcome the deuell, and that for our
comfort, that we should apply our selves, and provide, (as often as we fall
into such temptacio^s) that incredulity reign not amongst us, but to
remember the exaumple of Christ, confirmed with so many promises of god,
wherethrough we may withstand the carefulnes of the belly, and overcome the
deuell and all his council, and tread him underfoot.

Secondarly, To tempte God.
ye deuel would feign persuade Christ to tempte god, and without any cause why,
to cast him self down from the pinnacle of the temple. And to bring that to
pass, he allegeth (although it be falsely) a place of scripture, assayi^g yet
by that means, if he might with his outward appearaunce, and under such a
lambs skin, overcome Christ, and move him to do contrary to the word of
god. And note well here, that the deuell has mo ways then one to circumuente
and begile men, and as he is craftye and subtle a thousand fold, so has
he a thousand ways, to bring men in his snares. He knows well enough,
wherein we be most weakest, and if he bring not his purpose to pass one way,
he assaieth an other. He takes great delight and pleasure in our destruction
and co^demnacion. And by cause he could not bring Christ to that point, to
make his belly a god, he yet had great hope to bring that his other porpose
to pass, to move him to tempte God, and so set him up upon a pinnacle of the
temple layng: If thou be the son of God cast down thy self hedlinge: for it
is written. Psalm. 9.
He shall give his angels charge over the, and with there hands shall they hold
the up, that thou dashe not thy foot against a stone. But wherefore did the
deuel leave out, Vt custodia^t te in omnibus vijs tuis? that is to say: That
they shall keep the in all thy ways? Because it was contrary to his purpose,
and made nothing for his intent. Whereupon Christ obiecteth against him this
answer, Deuteronomy. 6.
saying: It is also written. Thou shall not tempt thy Lord god: As though he
should say: God does mightily defend his, and will not leave them in any
necessity. And moreover (as thou thy self do knowledge) he has given in
commandment to his angels, to take the charge, not only of me, but also of
all his elect, that they may walk without any offense or slander. Wherefore
should I cast my self into the water, when I may pass by a bridge or ship?
And so. why should I cast my self down hedli^g from the temple, when I may
easlye go down by a ladder? The wise man says: He that loves ieoperdye,
Eccle. 3. No man ought to put him self in ieoperdy
shall fall into the same. Lo here now again the devil is overcome by Christ
and that with no small arguments of scripture, wherewith he does confute him.
Let us now know and perceive, that all these things be done for our
instruction, that we may learn likewise, to overcome the deuell, when need
shall require.

Thirdelye, the dyuell is not yet contented, nor leaves of Christ, but takes
him up, upon a great high hill, and shows to him all the kingedomes and glory
of the would, saying: All these things will I give un to the, if thou wylt
fall down and worship me. The dyuell is lord and prince of ye world.
And of this place we learn, that the deuell is the Lord and Prince of this
world, as Christ also names him in the 12. chapter of John. Moreover all
those that so depend and hang of wordly and transitorye things, that they
set by nothing else, nor be mortyfied to the world and their concupiscence,
do in no wise appertain to the kyngedome of Christ, but to the kingdom of the
devil. For what so ever it be yt I put my hole trust in, besides god, or do
prefer and love it more then god, verily of the same I make to me an ydol. And
if my heart be fully fixed unto yt, What is ye worship of the devil
and is given to honor, voluptuousnes, riches, power of the world or any such
other like thing, then be those things my ydoll, and in them I worship the
deuell. Yea and to be more plain with you, if I outwardly should be good and
honest, and would account the same outewarde goodness for righteousness before
god, then trewly should the same be mine Idol, as Esaias witnesses, saying:
Esai. 2.
They have woshipped the works of their own hands. And saint Augustine
says: My God is my love. I pray you what is it else to love creatures above
god, then to worship the deuell? But harken here now greatly this ydolatry and
blasphemy displeases god. Get the hence (says he) thou Satan, these thy
suggestions can not be borne or suffered of any good heart, for it is written:
Deuteronomy. ^
Thou shalt worship thy lord god, and him only shalt thou serve.

Lo, in this wise is the deuell no we thryse overcome, and driven away of
Christ, only by the word of god. Now as it is necessary for us, through
Christ to overcome all temptacions, the world, sin, death, and the deuell,
so must we also be well instructed and stre^gthned with ye word of god, wherein
is promised to us, both comfort and help, in our Lord Jesus Christ. And if we
be not with this swearde of spirit (which is the word of god) well armered,
then doughteles will he bring us out of the right way, and lead us about so
long, until he bring us into his snares, and so entangle us, that we may
scarsely get out again: from the which, I beseech god the father of his great
goodness and mercy, to keep and preserve us, through his son our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The second sunday in Lent. Math. 15.
ANd Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyrie and Sydon, and
behold, a woman of Canaan (which came out of the same coasts) cried unto him,
saying: Have mercy on me (O lord) thou son of David: My daughter is
piteously vexed with a deuel. But he answered her nothing at all. And his
disciples came and besought him, saying: Send her away, for she cries after
us. But he answered, and said: I am not sent Luc. 19.
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came she and
worshipped him, saying: Lord help me. He answered and said: It is not mere to
take the chyldrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. She answered and said:
Truth lord, forth dogs eat of the crummes which fall from their masters
table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her: O woman, great is thy faith, be
it unto the, even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole even at that
same time.

THE EXPOSITION.
An exau^ple of ^aithe and the calli^g of ye heithe^
First of all, this gospel lays before us an example of faith, in the woman
of Chanane, and shows us also, that the Gentiles and Heithen shall be called to
the knoweledg of faith. Romans 1.
A true and perfect faith is nothing else, but to know that Christ is the
lord and the son of David: For if I knowledge him as lord, then do I also
believe, that he is naturally the very son of God, yea and god himself.
Moreover God ye father of heaven will not be known in any other, but in this
Christ: as S. John witnesses in the 14. chapter, saying: He that sees me,
sees my father. And also in this wise to call Christ the lord, is not so
small a trifle, as yt seems to the world, but trewly it is the work of the
holy ghost, as S. Paul says: 1. Co. 1^
No man can say, that Jesus is the lord, but through the holy ghost. And
when I knowledge Christ to be the son of Dauyd, then must I believe, that he
came into this world for my sake, And that he was given to me, with all his
goodness, merits, passion and death, that by him delivered from sin, I may be
made the son and heir of all the goodness of god, Genesis 22 Psa. 131
as do clearly declare the promises made to Abraham and Dauyd. Such a faith
had this woman of Cananee, although she had it not of her self, but because
she herd of Christ, and of her such hearing, she received faith. First she
knowledged Christ to be the lord, which had power (seeing he was god) to
deliver his daughter from the vexacion of the deuell. And therefore she put all
her trust in him, as one that could and would help. Or else I pray you why
would she follow him, and make exclamacion, if she had not believed that? Yt
must needs be, that this woman had a true and perfect faith in Christ and
looked for all manner of goodness of him.

The property of says.
Secondarely, it follows now, what the nature and property of faith is, namely
in all temptacion and affliction, to seek remedy and help none other where, but
at God, through Christ. For the faith that we have spoken of before, did
provoke the woman to draw near to Christ, to open her necessitye and grief,
and to call for his grace and help. But what does Christ here? The faith of
the woman does not dysplease him, although she was no woman of Israel, Ioh. 10
but a Gentile, for he would also bring them into his flock. Yet because the
woman's faith should be proved, and made more clear, Christ kept scilence,
and gave none answer to her first peticion. And what think ye that the
woman thought in her mind then? Do ye not believe that she was heavy and
sad? But yet she remembers the great humanitye of Christ, that she had hard
so much commended. And she did not forgette the benefits, that he had given to
men of his great goodness vnmocicioned or desired. And therefore she departed not
at ye first check, nor did despair of her daughters help, but stiffely
sticks to him, and craves for a gentel and meek answer. And in the mean
time, thappostels come, and entreat for her, saying: Lord, send her away,
for she excedingelye cr^eth after us. But what does Christ now? Does he
grant to the woman her desire? No, but seems to continewe still in his
first mind, that all men would judge, that he would not help her at all.
But why do we not briefelye show, what was his answer? I am not sent
(says he) but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. By these words he
seems in a manner to conclude, as though it were not convenient for him to
help this woman of Canane, seeing that he was not sent, but to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel. And this answer in a manner is more bitter and
harder, then was his first silence: Yet the woman does not so dispayr, we
ought not to apoynte time and place to Christ.
but as she always did trust in the goodness of Christ, and would not in
any wise be ryd from him, so likewise, she would not prescribe or appoint the
time and place, or any thing else wherein she would that Christ should help
her, having a perfect trust and hope, yt yet at the last he would help her, how
difficulte and hard so ever he did show himself unto her. And yet she leueth
not of, but comes again, and falls down to his feet, and says: Lord,
help me. And what then? Christ does not only persist in his first sentence,
but now he calls her a dog, as though she were unworthy to be numbered
amongst his. The constancy of ye woman.
And this is a vehement and wonderful great temptacio^, and yt is necessary for
them yt ar like tempted, to have a great faith, and strongly to persist in the
same, if they will not be ouerthrown or brought into desperacion But what says
ye woman now to this? She freely and plainly grau^teth, ye Christ in calling
her a dog and si^ner, said right. Nor she does desire yt the bread should be
taken from the children, and given to her, but only yt she may have the cru^mes
and leauyngs that the dogs take, which fall under their masters table. As
though she should say: My most beloved Lord, if thou wylt consydre and have
respect to my person, my deeds, my merits, and to my sins, then do I
perfectely know that I shall get no help at thy hand. And moreover I know
very well, that I can not be of the number of the children, yet nevertheless I
desire and covet thy goodness, grace and mercy, beseching and praying the, that
of thy great and abundaunt pity, thou wylt look upon me a wretch, comfort me in
this affliction, and deliver my daughter from the deuell. And because I cannot
obtain yt with any of mine own merytes, I desire the for the glory of thy
name, that thou wylt show thy mercy unto me. Lo, now is the heart of Christ
won, and can no longer forbear. Now must he needs open and show his mind
to the woman for he says on this wise. O woman, thy faith is great, be it to
the as thou wylt. And in like manner did Joseph in Egypt, Ge. 45
after he had long showed himself very hard and cruel toward his brethren,
yet at the la^te with great tears weeping he said: I am your well-beloved
brother Joseph, be not afraid etc. And this we learn, that God in every
temptacion and necessitye will help, although sometimes he will defer for a
time his aid and socoure. God helps in every necessitye.
This alwais considering that after the nature and custom of faith, we should
only seek help and comfort at him, and not to leave of until we shall be hard.

Exaumple of love:
Thirdely, is showed unto us in this gospel, an example of love which seeks
not her own, but rather the commodity and profyt of her neighbor. And that
chiefly does the mother of this maiden, when in great weeping and praying, she
shewith unto Christ the necessity of her daughter. And does as faruently as^
help for her, as though she her self were vexed of the devil. And so she
fulfilleth the commandment of S. Paul, where he says: Ephe. 5.
Ye fathers and mothers love well your children. And we se also the same example
of love in the Apostels, which so diligently did make intercession for this
woman. and that it had been also great pleasure unto them, if she had been
heard of Christ at the first. And mark diligently, that here in this place
the living prays for the lyuinge, that thou may learn, that the
inuocacion of the holy men that be dead, is not grounded upon this place.
Trewlye yt can not be denied, but that the Apostles prayed for this woman, but
that was done in their life time, and not after their death. The ^^tercessio^
of ye liueli saints.
Who did ever forbid the to pray for thy neighbor, or that in thy mind thou
should not bear his necessitye? Do we not always instantly require these
works, and say, that such works only be good and christian works? Yea
faith and love is the whole content of this gospel, that we teach. And
moreover we know very well, that he lied not, that said:

In these two commandments, Mat. 22
all the law and the prophets do depend. Wherefore every good christian
manne shall know, that faith without love and without works, that should
follow faith and should be done to my neighbor, can not stand. Or if such
works follow not, Ioh. 2^
that then it is (as S. James says) a dead faith.

The third sunday in Lent. Luc. 11.
ANd he was castyng out a devil, and the same was domme, and when he had cast
out the dyuell, the domine pake, and the people wondered. But some of them
said: Mat. 9. Mat. 7 Mat. 6. Mar. 3.
He casts out dyuels through B^lzebub the chief of the dyuels: And other
tempted him, and required of him a sign come heaven. But he knowing their
thougtes, said unto them. Every kingdom divided against it self, is
desolate: and one house does fall upon another. If Satan also be divided
against himself, how shall his kingdom endure? Because ye say yt I cast out
devils through Beelzebub? If I by the help of Beelzebub, cast out devils, by
whose healpe do your hyldren cast our them? Therefore shall they be your
judges, But if I with the finger of God, cast out dyuels, no done the kingdom
of God is come upon you.

Mat. 12
When a strong man armed, watches his house, the things that he possesses,
are in peace. But when a stronger then he comes upon him, and ouercometh
him, he takes from him al his harnes wherein he trusted, and deuydeth his
goods. He that is not with me, is against me. And he that gathers not with
me, scarereth abroad.

Mat. 12
When the unclean spit it is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seekynge rest. And when he finds none, he says: I will return again unto
my house, whence I came out. And when he comes, he finds it swepte and
garnished. Then goes he and takes to him seven other spirits worse then
himself, and they enter in and dwell there. And the end of this man, is worse
then the beginning. And it fortuned that as he spoke these things a certain
woman of the company lift up her voice, and said unto him: ^appye is the womb
that bare the, and the pappes that gave the suck: But he said. Yea happy are
they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe miracle of Christ mentioned in ye gospel of this day, is a lively doctrine
and sermon. All thing is subject to the dyuel with out the knowledge of
Christ.
For we do not only learn thereby, ye Christ is endued with singular humanitye
and pity, and that he is ready to give his diligence and labor to al me^, but
also, that al things be subdued to the dyuell, where Christ is not known. And
to this knowledge can no man come through any works or man's wisdom, except
the father of heaven draw hi^ thereto as s^ripture witnesses, saying on this
wise: Ioh. 10
No man knows the son of God, but only the father, and he to whom God will
open yt. Yet has God left unto us in this world certain means, whereby he
leads us to that knowledge, that is by his word and gospel that he gave to
his son, The gospel:
to teach and show unto us, which he will also to be preched in this world
for ever. And moreover also, by that he gives us the holy ghost, Act. 10
as we se in the acts of ye Apost, that every man that hears it and
receives it in faith, shall not perish but shall have everlasting life. And in
like manner must ye gospel or miracle of this day be taken, Ioh. 5.
in the which Christ is so set forth unto us, yt it is very he, ye of his
mere grace and mercy has delivered from ye devil this man, miserable, poor,
and destitute of all help and man's comfort. We may well say, that this
man was miserable and wretched. For besides that he was blind (as saint Mat.
says) he was also dumb, deaf and possessed of a devil. Mat 14
What can we else learn hereby, but yt all things be subdued to ye devil, where
Christ comes not? And in contrary wise, that the devil as soon as Christ by
his word is come unto us, is compelled to avoid and depart. And there is it
manifestly declared, The dyuel must obey to Christ Ioh. 12.
ye Christ speaks of Ioh. 12. Now is the judgment of this world, now
shall the prince of this world be cast forth. Therefore if we will be
partakers of the goodness of Christ, which this gospel shows unto us, then
must we needs knowledge before, that we be blind, deaf, and dombe. And
moreover yt is meet that we believe the preaching of Christ to be true, To
be possessed of a dyuell.
namelye, that only he does heal us from al diseases, both bodily and ghostly.
Which of us al (if in our hearts we ponder and trewly look upon our birth and
nativity) will not knowledge and confess, that he is possessed of a devil? Psalm.
50
Were we not conceived and borne in sin? And does not sin pertain to the
kingdom of the deuell? And to be in the kingdom of the devil, wh^t is it else,
but to be possessed of a devil? And in like manner, it is to be said of our
blindness, deafnes, and dumnes. To be blind.
We be blind and se nothing (that is) we believe not how Abraham saw Christ and
his Apostels Io 4. To be dumb.
And we be also dumb to confess Christ of the which confession the apostle
speaks of, saying: If a man believe from the heart, he shall be made righteous.
Romans 10
And if he knowledge god with his mouth, he shall be saved. And Christ in the gospel
says: He ye knowledgeth me before men, I will knowledge him before my father
that is in heaven. To be deaf.
And we be also deaf, and hear the trewthe of the gospel vnwyllyngly and
against our minds. And yet must we needs hear it, if we desire to be brought
from the kingedome of the deuell, to the kingedome of Christ. Who can take
from us so many defautes? The only mediatoure between god and man, our Lord
Jesus Christ, through whom (if we believe) we shall be saved both body and soul.

Secondarilye, we learn by this gospel, The world does mock all Christ's
words and deeds.
how Christ's words and deeds be taken and interpretyd of the perverse and
misbeleuing world. Al was euel that good Christ did, how good so ever it were
And if he had not done that miracle before the faces and in the sight of the
unbelieving Jews, doughtles they would boldly have denied any such to have
been done. And because they can not deny it, they say, that Christ did that
miracle through Beelzebub the prince of dyuels. And is not this wonderful
blasphemy against god, that so godly, precious, and so noble an act and
miracle, should be adscribed to the power of the devil? Mat. 7
An euel tree brings not forth good fruit. Genesis 4.
But Caim will always hate his brother, although there be no cause why. Yea,
there was nothing done by Christ (were it never so good and godly) but cursed
incredulity did ever detract, mock and reprove it. Is it not a great token of
godly love, if a man should eat and drink with publicanes and sinners, Mar. 2.
whereby they might be converted from sin, and repent? Yet for that deed
was Christ hated and slaundred, as though he had committed some great
mischefe. Yea, and was it not to be highelye praised, that Christ with so
great diligence, did preach the word of his heavenly father? And yet for that,
found he no favor with the obstinate Jews, but was compelled to hear: He
is a disturber of the people. And such other like. Ioh. 7.
What happened to the Apostelles after the resurrection of Christ? what
happened to Paul when he said? I have wished my self to be cursed from
Christ for my brethren? Romans 9
He did with so fervent desire wish the salvation of his kinsfolks after the
flesh, that by some means they might be brought to the faith, but he profited
not: For the Jews called him a sedicious person: Act. 26.
and Festus said, he was mad. And in like manner was yt with Christ at this
time, he did a noble act, that might have allured the Jews to believe, but
they not only do not believe, but despises and slaundreth his work. Some ask
signs, and be not content with that is done. And some say again, that by
the virtue and power of Beelzebub the prince of devils, he casts out the
devil. But to be short, whatsoever Christ does, works or teaches, it is
very contrary and repugnant to the world, and can not be void from blame and
slau^dre. 1 Pet. 2.
So that Christ shall always be a stone and rock to be stombled at.

Christ defe^deth his doctrine.
Thirdely, we se in this gospel, how Christ with great diligence and fervent
zeal of love, did defend his doctrine and godly works. And although in the
end he answered them that asked signs from heaven, and remitted the^ to the
sign of Jonas the prophet, yet did he most chiefelye stop their proud
mouths, that did adscribe his doctrine and works to the deuell, and not to
the power of God. He could in no wise suffer that, that the Jews against
their own conscience should lie, and say, that he cast forth dyuels through
beelzebub the prince of dyuels: seeing it is manifest in the fourth chapter of
Mark, that he did yt with the finger of God, that is, The finger of God.
with the power and virtue of God, and the holy ghost. And this properly is the
sin in the holy ghost, when against thine own conscience, thou do blame
and persecute the plain manifest and open known verity. The syn in the holy
ghost.
Of the which sin Christ says, that it shall not be forgeuen in this
world, nor in the world to come And as Christ does here in this place, so
does he in the eight chapter of S. John, when the Jews said, he had a devil.
He lets pass, that they called him a Samaritane, and pourgeth that, that
they said he had a dyuel. But here we will note certain arguments, as
briefelye as we can, with the which in this matter, Christ did confute the
obstinate Jews.

First, Christ proves by two similitudes that it was impossible, that one
devil should expel an other. For if yt were so, then should the devils varye, and
dissente between themselves, and so should their kingedome be desolated. Every
kingdom divided in it self, must needs fall, and cannot endure. And likewise
a house, wherein the dwellers does discord and varye, can not stand.

Secondarily, Christ proves with a plain example, that ye Jews did grievously
blaspheme and slau^dre him, saying: If I do cast forth ye devil by ye power of
Beelzebub, by whom the^ do your children drive the^ out? Therefore shall they be
your judges. The Jews shall be judged of there own children
They will not say that one devil drives out an other, but that yt is done by
the power of god. And if it be done by the power and virtue of God, how can
your blasphemy stand? But ye should perceive and knuwe thereby that the
kyngedome of God is come to you, whereunto the dyuell must needs give place.
And then should ye not lade your selves with so great and horrible blasphemye
against God.

Thirdelye, he makes an argument of a familiar similitude, and says. When a
strong harnessed man keeps his house, all that he pocesseth is in peace: But
when a stronger comes upon him, and overcomes him, he takes from him all
his weapons, wherein he trusted. etc. And so he concludes on this wise. God
overcomes the devil and we in him.
The dyuell is invincible, except he be overcome by the power and virtue of
god. And I (as ye se) have here overcome the devil, and have compelled him to
give place to me. And this have I not done by Beelzebub (as ye do say and
slaundre me) but by the power of God And seeing yt is so, ye be very wretches
and naught so to slander my work.

Fourthly, he does with a goodly sentence stop and restrain the foul mouths
of the Jews, and says: He that is not with me, is against me. And he that
does not gather with me, scatters abroad. Now it is clear, that the deuell
is against me, seeing he does good to no man, and I do profit every man. And
moreover he gathers not to life as I do, but labors in as much as he
can, to destroy all men. Wherefore he shall not depart from the man at my
desire, eycept he be expulsed by the power and virtue of God.

Fyftely, he answers to the Jews with an horrible thretnynge, as though he
should say: Look well about you, and considre what shall become of you. Now
is the devil cast forth, and the kyngedome of God is preached unto you in
every place, through my gospel: But and if ye reiecte my gospel, and make your
selves unworthy of everlasting life, and will again let the deuell have
place in you, ye shall well perceive and understand, that the end shall be worse
then the beginning. The end shall be worse the^ was the begi^ni^g when we
despise ye word of God.
And whereas before, one dyuell only in incredulitye and hypocrisy did deceive
you, now shall come 7. other worse dyuels, that shall besege round about your
hearts, and shall so keep you in bondage, that ye shall never be able to come
to eternal life. And I will that ye have admonisshing before, that when so
ever it shall so happen, ye do remember, that I have told you thereof before.
Lo, in this wise does Christ stop their mouths, that did blaspheme the
open known truth, And that he does with invincible arguments, teachinge us
in the mean time, that every christian man be ready to defend the truth, as
often as it shall be depressed and laden with slander and lies. And specially it
shall beseme them, that be ministers of the gospel, which of their profession
ought to defend and favor the truth, and for that intent be called to the
same office, that they teach other.

The fowerth sunday in Lent. Ioh. 6.
After these things Mat 14 Marc. 6
Jesus went his way over the sea of Galile which is the sea of Tiberias Mat. 4
^u^. 6
and a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he
did on them that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountayn, and there he
sat with his disciples. And Easter, a feast of the Jews, was nigh.

THE EXPOSITION.
IT is greatly to be wished and desired, yt as ye text of this gospel is plain
and easy, so it might be imprinted in men's hearts, that not only they should
speak highly thereof, but also learn and prove by experience, how great a
thing it is, if we be well instructed with the promises and miracles of God
against the detestable carefulnes of the belly.

Christ will norishe the beleuers
First of all, in this place is laid before al christian men a noble example,
that God ye father through his well-beloved son Jesus Christ, will norishe and
defend them, both in body and soul, if they will put their whole confidence
and trust in him. Whereby we may mark and note, that god from the beginnynge,
with promises and exaumples, has defended us against the abominable carke of
the bellye, which reigns almost over all the world. And chyefly for this
cause, that he might lay before our eyes our incredulity and unbelief, well
known of him, and deepelye grafted in us. It is an excellent thing, and not a
little to be commended, if a man can mortyfie him self, concerning the
carefulnes of worldly riches, and no longer to be vexed or troubled with the
care of meat, drink, and cloth, but put al his hope and trust in the promises
of God and stedfastelye believe, that God will mercifully look and provide for
our necessaryes, although it appear far otherwise in the syghte of men. And
therefore ye we should leave that pernicious in Christ defedeth us against the
care of the belly with promises and miracles
credulitye, and conceive true faith in god, is given unto us of God so many
promises, confirmed with many noble miracles, that needs must he be blinded,
and given into a wrong opinion, that is not by them sterid to faith, and can
set a part the carke of the belly. And moreover he suffers that such
promises be showed to the people in sermones, whereby, through the remembrance
of them, we may be allured to the faith that is in Jesus Christ. Who is so
hard or dull hearted, that ca^ not be moved to faith, if he will remember what
great care Christ took for this multitude? And how he pitied them, when there
was no mention made of meat nor drink? Wherein he shows, that he knows
what we have need of, before we ask any thing of him. And in that he lift up
his eyes (as the Evangelist says) and beheld the multitude, is signified that
Christ has in his mind compassion on us, and that his help shall always be
ready at hand for us. And so must we understand when scripture says, that god
does look upon us with his eyes, that he mercifully will defend us, against al
peryls of body and soul. Psalm. 10 His eyes looks upon the poor. And in an
othee place: Look upon me Lord, and have mercy on me. Wherefore seeing that
Christ shows in this miracle his such great goodness, clemencye and
carfulness for us, that mercifully he will provide for us, both in body and
soul. It were very unmeet that we our selves should take like carke, and not
wholly to trust to him, yt is able to perform that he has promised. Nor is this
to be understand, as though we should not care for our health, but rather that
before all things we considre, how to please God through Christ, that we may
be made pertakers of everlasting health, which Christ in the gospel requires
of us, Mat. 6
and says: First seek the kingdom of god and his righteousness, and al these
things shall be given unto you. As he might say: It is necessary that ye
believe, for and if ye do not believe, yt is necessary that ye always lack,
although all the world with all his riches were yours. Psa. 33
as David says: Rich men have lacked and have hu^gred. Here a man might
withstand and say: If the matter be so, and that God will feed and norish me,
then will I be idle and will no longer labor. Not so my dear friend, ye shall
not so do, for labor is not forbid unto the, but the care and carckefulnes
therevppon is forbidden. Thou shalt eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face,
but yet shall thou not put thy trust in thy labor, but in God allonly. If thou
do this, thou shalt not need to care for thy living. Labor diligently, and
by thy faith (according to thy calling) leave the care to God and he will
norishe the through Christ.

Secondaryly, we have here a godly exaumple of the love of god in Christ
toward us. First, in that he did not only feed the good and just, The example
of the love of God.
but also the euel men, which were not the less part amongst this five M. And
in that also, that he so mekely suffered the weakness of Philip and the other
Apostels, he does teach us, that every Christian man should show forth his
faith, by works of love, and thereby to provoke other to do the same. And
such love must always be perfect. Imperfecte love does never good, but to
his friends, Gal. 5.
which the Publicanes and sinners do also, for they love, the^ of who^ they be
loved again, as Christ says, in the 6. chapt. of S. Luke. our love must be
perfect.
Perfect love does not only good to his friends, but to his enemies also. Wherein
we may se the example of Christ and of the heavenly father, Mac. 5.
which suffers his sun to shine upon the good and bad. and sends rain to
the just and unjust. Of this perfection of love Christ speaks in an other
place, saying: Ye shall be perfect, as your father in heaven is perfect. In that
place Christ comme^deth the love of his father toward us, as a most
perfect love. Wherefore? Because he has received us into his favor and grace,
Romans 5.
which were yet his enemies, and says, that we also must be perfect in
brotherly love, which comes from faith. Therefore if thou be a christian man,
and wilt with good works manifest thy self to have a Christian man's heart, go
to then, and instruct them that be weak, and leave them not, until thou have
brought them to the knowledge of the faith. And moreover do good to all men
without any respect, as well to thine enemies as to thy friends: to the bad as
to the good. And then thou have testified with works of love, that thou art a
good tree, in that thou bring forth good fruit.

Thirdely, this gospel shows, Giving o^ thanks to the bene^ (...) Chri^.
how Christ did not distribute and give this bread and fisshes, to the
multitude, before that he had given thanks in his heart to his heavenly father:
of whose liberality and plenteousnes all creatures be sustained, and norished
up. Wherein he teaches us that we likewise should give heartily thanks, for the
great henefites both bodily and ghostly, that we dailye receive of God the
father, through his well-beloved son Jesus Christ. And if thou wylt know the
very true thanks giving. What is thanks giuinge
This it is. To knowledge that all that ever we have, comes of God through
Christ, of his mere grace and goodness, and not of our selves. This is the true
ways, to give thanks. And for the more part continual praise and
commendacion follows such knowledge. By what means can I give praise, honor
and thanks to God, except I knowledge his benefits? Now if I have this faith
and knowledge, that God through Christ has destroyed the kingdom of the
devil, and made me inheritoure of his heavenly kingdom, doughteles I do also
give thanks with all Gods elect for so great a benefyte, as the nature of
such that believe, is set forth at large, in the 25. chapter of Esaias the
Prophet, and in Daniel the second chapter. Neither shall I do it once, but
al days of my life without end, I shall say with Dauyd: Psa. 145
My soul praise the Lord, I shall praise the Lord in my life time and shall
sing unto the Lord as long as I shall live. Psalm. 33
And: I will give praise to the Lord at all times, his praise shall always be
in my mouth. Likewise when I knowledge that God in outeward and worldely
things will of his mercyfulnes norish me (but so that I must needs labor to)
then must I well remember, that it is not to be adsc^ibed to my labor, but
must give hearty thanks to God through Christ. How often times does that
just man Dauyd confess that God has provided al things necessary to him
from his youth to his age? Psalm. 36
Eccle. 1.
To whom does Solomon ascribe his great wisdom? From God is all wisdom
says he. And whereby comes his riches and great substance? By his
labor? No. Pro. 10.
But he says the blessyng of god makes rich men. Lo, now in this wise must
we knowledge, that all that we can or may both in bodily and ghostly
things, comes only of god, which through Christ will give to us all goodness.
Wherefore it is meet that all the days of our life we give to him thanks
therefore.

Fourthly this gospel teaches how we should diligently keep such gifts as
we have received, Not to mispend the benef^^es of God.
and not misspende them, when Christ commanded his Apostels to gather the
fragmentes, that they should not perish. If you have received more riches of God,
then ye necessity of thine own house requires, look thou keep them well,
Mat. 6.
not to get the great riches and treasure here in the earth, where the moth and
rust shall destroy it, and thieves steal it away, But spend it not in any
evil use, or waste it in voluptuousnes, furfetynge, dronkennes, and
superfluous apparel, as it is spoken of in the 15. cha. of Lu. of the
prodigal child. And such as is left to the, more then for thine own
necessitye, like a faithful steward and householder, distribute it amongst the
poor at time conueniente. Do thou think that that is given to the more
then for thine own necessity and sustentacion, that thou have it to thentent
thou may mayntaine thy vuluptuousnes and pride? Thou art deceived if thou so
believe Thou art ordained a servant over all things, Luc. 12.
and for that cause have thou all that thou have, that thereof thou might
help the poor and needy, and make the friends of the mammon of iniquitye: that
when need shall be, they may testify good of the, whereby thou may find grace
and favor with God. Luc. 16.
What happened to the rich man, that despised the poor Lazarus, spoken of in
the gospel? He should not have been damned, because he was clothed in purpure
and sylke, and faryd so daintily, if he had had faith, and had eaten with
thanks geuinge, and not have forgotten the poor miserable Lazarus, the which
sat at his gateful of sores, desiryng to be fed of the cromes, that fell
under his table. But what happens? He utterly forgot the poor Lazarus, and
took no care at all for him. Besides this, he does misuse his goods and
riches. And therefore well worthy to be damned. And to be short. If thou haste
more then for thine own store, help thy neighbor therewith, and mispend it
not in riot, and voluptuousness.

The fyfte sunday in Lent Ioh: 8.
Ioh. 10.
Which of you rebukes me of sin? if I say the truth, why do ye not believe
me? He that is of God, hears Gods words. Ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God. Then answered the Jews and said unto him: Say we
not well that thou art a Samaritane Ioh. 10.
and haste the devil? Jesus answered: I have not the dyuell, but I honor my
father, and ye have dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise: there is one,
that speaks and judges.

Verily, verily, I say unto you: if a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death. Then said the Jews unto him: Now know we that thou have the dyuell.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets, and thou say: If a man keep my saying he
shall never taste of death Act thou greater then our father Abraham which is
dead? and the prophets are dead. Whom make thou thy self?

Jesus answered: If I honor my self, mine honor is nothing. It is my
father that honors me, which ye say is your God and yet ye have not known
him. But I know him: And if I say I know him not, I am a liar unto you. But
I know him, and keep his saying.

Your father Abraham was glad to se my day Genesis 17 and. 23.
and he saw yt and reioyseth. Then said the Jews unto him: Thou art not yet
L. year old, and have thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them Verily,
verily, I say unto you: yete Abraham was borne Exodus 3.
I am. Ioh. 10
Then cook they up stones to cast at him. But Jesus hyd him self, and Luc. 4
went out of the temple.

THE EXPOSITION.
OFtentimes have I said before, and it will be said to the end of the world,
that the word of god can not be preached in this cursed world, without
persecution and grievous adversaries: seeing that christ is set for a token,
which shall be spoken against. Luc. 2.
Neither should a man marvel that such persecution should chance to the
ministers of the word, saying that it hapened so to Christ himself, which is
the very truth, and did so diligently and most singulerly of all men, teach
the word of his father. In so much that he was put to the vileste death, that
might be. And that yt so was, yt appears very plainlye in the gospel of
this day: He was not only taken and reputed for a Samaritane and a false
doctor amongst the Jews, Persecution.
but also they take stones, to stone him to death withal. Wherefore, saying yt
such dissension between good and wicked men shall continue unto the end of
the world, we will considre how a Christian man (and chiefly the minister of
the word of god) should behave himself. We must always no doubt suffer
adversities, yet nevertheless, we must always resist the blasphemers of
gods word. First Christ stops their mouths that persecuted his
doctrine, with his clean and perfect living, when he spoke unto them with
gentle words in this wise: Which of you can rebuke me of one sin? you do
reiecte my learning, and will not receive yt, what reasones or causes have you
of your such counseyle and doing? if I taught otherwise then I do, or if I
did otherwise then I teach, then had ye a good cause to forsake my doctrine.
But now can ye show nothing at all, wherein my lyuinge does dissente from my
learning. Howebeit, your obstinacy is so great, that ye will not believe. Lo,
here the Jews be reprehended and know not what to say thereto, or whether to
turn the^. For the life of Christ was without fault as Esaias witnesses in
his 53. Esa. 53.
chap. There is no deceit found in his mouth. So should every christian man be,
and specially the minister of the word of god, that a man might not (in deed)
blame his life and conversation, and chiefly for that cause, that the enemies
of gods word do look more to the life of the preacher, then to his
doctrine. Yea and how can I blame other, when I am not blameles my self? or
when the hearer thereof shall say unto me: Physician, help thy self. Luc. 4.
When I shall reprehende adultery in an other man, it is necessary, that I be
fautles thereof my self. And when I shall speak against surfeting and
dronkennes, then must not I my self be a glotton. And if I shall rebuke theft
then must I beware, least I my self at any time be accused of theft. Or else
S. Paul gives me a check in his Epistle to the Romans saying: Romans 2.
Look wherein thou iudgest an other man, thou condemnest thy self. in so much
that thou that iudgest, do even the same. And more over the holy ghost shall
send such an other like song into mine ears, saying: Wherefore do thou
show abroad my rightousnes and have my testament in thy mouth, Psalm. 49
and thou hate my doctrine, and do cast my saiyngs behind the? When thou
saw a thief, thou rannest with him: and with adulterers thou had thy
portion. And very truth it is, that before god we be all sinners and unclean,
and must therefore continually ask forgiveness for our daily fautes, yet must
the outward conversation of a christian man be unreprovable, and chiefly of him
that preaches the word of god, least the enemies of the word, 1 Timothy 3
through our dishonest conversation may take occasion, not only to slander but
also to persecute the gospel.

Secondarely, We should not be ignorante of Christ's gospel.
Christ does commend his doctrine, as it, which is the very trewthe, and
therein he signifies again, that the Jews without annye cause or mattier
does reiecte his doctrine saying he teaches nothing else, but the plain
truth, received of his heavenly father. And where as before he withstode the
Jews with his most pure and unclean life, now does he obiecte unto them his
doctrine, which trewlye came from his father in heaven, and not (as the Jews
did lie and feign) from the devil. But and if the preache^ can not do this,
what shall he do? He must needs be assured of the doctrine, that it is of God,
how so ever his life be. For through false doctrine, many be brought to the
devil. My unclean life condemns no man, but my self. Wherefore, if I should
needs choose one of the two, and might none other wise be, I had lever have an
vnchrifte to my teacher and preacher, that would instruct me in the right and
true doctrine, then a good and devout man, that would lead me from the word
of god to men's tradicions, and hypocrisye of works. And therein Christ
agrees with me, when he says, that we should hear them that sit in Moses
chair (that is, Mat. 23
those that teach the word of god as Moses did) but we should not do
according to their works. Here he does reiecte the evil works of the
preacher, and not his doctrine which is of god. Wherefore think you did Paul
rejoice so much, Gal. 1.
that he had received his gospel and preaching, by the reuelacion of Jesus
Christ? Dougheteles he would the Jews to understand, that the doctrine he
taught, was not his, but gods. Now seeing we be assertained that the doctrine
is not ours but gods, we must with all diligence, study and endeavor to
defend and knowledge the same, against all adversaries and slaunderers thereof,
even to blodde shod and death, as in this place Christ defendid all that was
laid against his doctrine, and that he was not possessed of a dyuell, nor did
speak any thing through the dyuell And as much as touched his personage, he
let pass and meddled not there with. Therefore we must be assured of our
doctrine that we receive, teach, or preach nothing else but that is very
trewthe. As Christ also says of his fathers doctrine: Ioh. 12.
Thy word is truth.

Thirdely, Why ye Jews would not hear the word of God.
Christ shows a reason in this gospel why the Jews can not hear the word
of god and believe him, saying: He that is of God, hears the word of God: and
because ye be not of God, therefore ye hear not his word. Se here what great
difference (in as much as concerns iustificacion) is between the judgment of
the flesh, and the judgment of Christ. The Jews judged this, that seeing they
came of the seed of Abraham, and the patryarkes, and that they had
circumcision, therefore they must needs be gods people and children. But how
does Christ judge? he says: They be not of Abraham nor of the Patriarchs, but
the children of the devil. And that he proves on this wise. Because they do
not hear the word of god and believe it as Abraham did, but does rather despise,
set at naught and persecute the same. Where is now the boasting pride and
arrogance of the Jews? what preuailet now their circumcision? Or what helps
it the^ to be under the law and borne of the fathers? Verily all is not worth
a straw, neither is there left any hope at al, We must hear gods word
if the word of god be not heard and steadfastly believed. No nor Abraham
himself should have been numbered amongst ye children of god, except he had
received the word of god, and believed the same, as it is witnessed in
scripture: Abraham believed in God, and that was accounted to him for
righteousness. Ioh. 17
Moreover scripture says: There is none other way to salvation, but to believe
in him, whom God has sent into this world. If now thou will know the
children of God, How ye children of God, are known from ye children of the
dyuell.
from the children of the devil, mark this. The dyuels children can by no
means abide or hear Gods word, how good, just, and holly so ever they
apeare or seem to us. They will not have their works rejected and condemned,
although they deserve none other but condemnacio^. The children of God do
willyngly hear gods word, and receive it in their hearts, and believe it,
considering that all their felicity and salvation is set therein.

The power of Gods word.
Fourthly, this gospel declares unto us the power of the word of god, in that
that Christ says: If a man keep my word, he shall never se death: and that
has he confirmed with an oath. And think thou that that pleased the Jews?
No, no, because they ascribed his doctrine to the devil before, they could in
no wise be pleased with such a noble commendacion of his doctrine, but were
thereby the more steryd to envy and hatred. And let them be angrye as long
as they will, Christ nevertheless goes forth and cease not to say the
treuth, how wroth so ever they be. Therefore we (se^tynge all men's wroth
apart) shall considre of this text, what our heavenly father by the words of
his well-beloved sone Jesus Christ will work in them, that hear and believe the
same, he says, They shall never se death. O the excelent and noble power of
gods word. From Adame, by right inheritance, Death through Adam. Romans 5.
we took our damnacion and death: so, that no man in the world by any his
works could avoid this sentence, The wrath of god has fallen upon us all.
And now comes Christ and will teach us how we shall be delivered from the same
sentence, that is, by his word In the which is showed unto us his passion and
death, considering this always, that we trewlye understand and keep this
word. There is great power and strength in this word, Mine. for by that he
excludes the law of al me^, and of Moses also, and gives justification only
to this gospel. And if we would well look upon the matter, The difference
between the doctrine of Moses and Christ
we shall perceive great difference, between the doctrine of Moses and
Christ. Moses does only show sin, in that yt he commands and forbids
those things, which of mine own power and strength I can another do, nor
leave undone: And yet does he give the holy ghost, wherewith I might do, that
he would to be done. But Christ in his word does grant the holy ghost,
that I may freelye and willynglye do those things, that be both good and
righteous: yea, and by the gospel he gyuethe me remission of sin,
ryghteousnes, inheritance, the kyngedome of heaven, and everlasting life, and
that without any my merits or deserts, of his only grace and mercy. And
this can no man, nor Moses ^y their laws do. Neither does Christ ask any
thing of us again, but that we keep his, his, his, word I say. And how should
it be kept? We must in our hearts hear it, What it is to keep the word of
God. Mat. 10
receive it, and keep it. The world goes about to take it from the, when she
brings the to the trust in thine own works. But thou must be strong bold
and hardy, and suffer not Christ and his word to be taken from the, but receive
it into thy heart, and keep it: which if thou do, thou shall live for ever,
although thou cast of this corruptible body. Mat. 22
Abraham with all the Prophets be dead, but yet they live with god, because
they believed in Christ (which was before Abraham) and did ascribe their
righteousness to him. And if thou do not receive his word, thou shalt dye for
ever. But paraduenture thou wylt say again: Yt were good for a man to hear
and believe this word, saving that so many wise and holy men have resisted it.
But what is that to the? Do thou not know that Christ is set as a token yt
shall be of many spoken against? Thou art not better then he. If the Jews would
have stoned him to death, for his doctrine and wholesome sermons, as this gospel
shows us, then must not thou look to be safe and sure from aduarsities,
but must suffer as he did, seeing the servant is not above or more the^ his
master. And to make an end: In the only word of Christ is given unto us
remission of sins, righteousness and everlasting life if we believe therein,
and will in no wise be pulled from it. which I pray almighty god, through Jesus
Christ, to grant to us forever. Amen.

The gospel on Palm sunday is the same, which is before on the first sunday
of Aduent.

The gospel on Easter day. Math. 28.
Woodcut illustration depicting the Resurrection, with Christ floating above
the tomb. Upon an evening of the Mat. 15 Luc. 24 Ioh. 20
Sabathes, which dawneth the first day of the Sabbaths, came Mary Magdalene,
and the other Mary to the sepulcher.

And behold, there was a great earthquake. For the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and
satte upon it. His countenance was like lyghtenyng, and his tayment white as
snow. And for fear of him the keepers were astonyed, and became as dead men.

Mar. 16 Luc. 24
The angel answered and said unto the women. Fear yt not: for I know that ye
seek Jesus which was crucified: he is not here, he is risen, as he said: Come
se the place, where that the lord was laid, and go quickly and tell his
disciples that he is risen again from the dead. And behold, he goes before
you into Galilee, there ye shall se him. Lo, I have told you.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe Eua^gelistes have with great diligence written of the resurrection of
Christ: The resurrection an article of faith.
and not without great and evident causes. For it is an article of great
gravity, and in the knowledging of our faith, one of the chieffest: 1 Cor. 15
to believe that Christ rose from death, and is become the first fruits of
them that sleep. And that it is an article of great weight, and not easy to
be understand (in especial of a fleshly man) so many acts and ensamples in
this history declares it, that further proof or more evident declaracion does
not need. Is it not written in the Gospel of S. Luke, Luc. 24
of the women, that when they had declared to the Apostels, that, which they
had seen, their words were counted as words of no reputation or treuth? Did
not Christ himself show them before, Luc. 18.
that all that was written by the prophets of the son of man, should be
fulfilled, and that he should be delivered unto yt heithen, and should be
mocked, and when they had scourged him, that they should put him to death, and
that upon the third day he should rise again? Yet this notwithstondinge, they
did not believe, but through saying, touching, handelynge, and finally through
many words and great miracles, at the lane were brought unto the faith. Yea,
the angel here was not believed until such time, that Christ himself came
and confirmed the Apostels in the faith. Therefore this article of the
resurrection is not so hard to be taken and understood, but it is as
needful and necessery to our justification and salvation. For without we do
comprehend and believe this article, we shall never be holly, just or blessed.
Romans 4
And this proves S. Paul to the Romans, brilfely, but with words of great
efficacy and power, saying: Christ was given for our sins, and raised up for
our righteousness. Through the resurrection of Christ we have obtained the
justification of God. Esai. 53
Wherein he shows two things. First, he ascribes to the passion, death and
blood of Christ, remission of sins, which undoubtedly by none other work or
deserving may be taken away, as Esai witnesses: He is wounded for our
offenses and smitten for our wickedness. Secondarylye, he assigns unto the
resurrection of Christ, our iustificacion, Wherout it does follow that the
death of Christ, how profitable so ever it be profits me nothing, except that
the same savior and my Lord Jesus Christ had risen from death. Therefore if
I desire to be discharged and loused ^rome those sins that do stir and
prick me, How a man shall be deliuer^d from sin.
so ^s it requisite and needful, that I believe that to be done allonly
through the passion and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, without any work or
deseruyng of man. And furthermore: If I be made righteous, the same
righteousness is obtained through the resurrection of Christ. Now, seeing that
our salvation comes and is brought to pass through the death and
resurrection of Christ, so is it very necessary, that I with a pure faith and
confidence do understand and believe it. For very little profyt comes of an
historical belief. For the dyuell knows and believes it, and yet it
profits him nothing at all. Ye, how mannye be there amongst us, that be
named Christian men, which do confess and knowledge, that Christ rose from
death, and yet shall be damned? We do confess and knowledge the resurrection,
but the merits thereof, we do clean take away, and condemn. How so?
Through trustinge in works, to the which we ascribe ryghteousnes. The and
me has God served with his resurreccion.
And therefore if thou will go the high way, and pull nothing from the
merits of Christ, thou must believe not alonly that Christ dyed and rose
again, but that he dyed and rose for the (for the I say) and all sinners did
he pleasure and service therewith. For through his death he took away thy
sins, and by his resurrection he has justified the. Yea, through his
resurrection, he entringe in his kyngedome, myghtelye has declared, that all
power in heaven and in earth is given unto him, and also that he has overcome
sin, death, hell and the devil. And finally, that there is nothing, which
is not subject unto him, and that he, as a Lord of heaven and earth, mercifully
keeps and saves his, and makes they in partakers of his kingdom. Only
requiryng of us, that we believe in him, and dye, as concerning our sins, and
walk in a new life. Unto this pertains the syxte chapter to the Romans,
Romans 6
in the which Paul touches this article of the resurrection very highely,
amongst other things, saying: If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall live also with him, and are sure, that Christ raised from death, dies no
more: death shall have no more power over him. For as touchi^g that he died, he
dyed concerning sin, once: But as touching that he lives, he lives unto
god. Likewise ye also, count your selves to be even dead, as concerning sin,
and to live unto God, through Jesus Christ our lord.

God serves us by his angels
Secondaryly, we se here in this gospel, that for because this article of the
resurrection is so hard of the flesh to be received, how mercifully and meekly
God through his angel handeleth and entreats the women, that brought spices
and anoyntementes to the sepulcher of the lord, plainly and manifestly
showing by words and signs, that his only son Christ was risen. Who would now
(I pray you) despair of such a gentle and mercyful father? which so patiently
suffering our inftrmitie, and so louingely exhortinge and instructing us? Whom
would not this great and inestimable charity provoke to believe? The women that
bought this anoyntment and came to anoint Christ, surely had an honest intent.
And their going and hasting to the sepulcher, does plainly show the hartye
love that they bare unto Christ, yet not withstanding, they did it after a
fleshely manner, and utterly without any right faith. For if they had had
faith, they would have remembered the words, that Christ spoke, how that he
should rise the third day, and go before them into Galile. But these words
they forgatte, and prepared them selves to anoynte Christ, Mat 2^
which was not commanded unto them to do. But so man's reason is often wont
to do. The curiositye of men.
For it does often that, which it should not do: and that, which it should do,
it ouerpasseth and leaves undone. In so much that our lord god, to oppress
this curious rashness and curiousnes, Deuteronomy. 1^
commands in the law that we should not do that, that seemed to us good Yet
notwithstanding, so good is our god, that he does not for this curiosity and
unfaithfulness reject these women, but through the aungel entyseth and leads
them from this carnal and fleshly serving of god, unto his word. Which thing
is here done after this manner. When these good women went toward the
sepulcher, and said one to an other: Who shall roll us the stone from the
grave? Lookyng back, they saw that the stone was rouled away. And they going
into the sepulcher, they saw a young man sittyng on the right hand, which had a
long white garment upon him, and they were abashed. But he said unto them:
Be not ye afraid: Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified, he is risen he
is not here. Behold the place where they laid him. etc. Here may thou hear
and se, that god sent not his angel alonly to roll of the stone from the
grave, but most chiefly to inform and instruct the women, and to manifest
and show unto them the glorious brightness of his resurrection, What ye
shininge vesture signifies.
which the angelical shynyng vesture did signifye. Here mark, how diligently
it is written here, how and in what manner a man must be justified and saved.
First, there is written, how the women were sore abashed. Such troblinge and
abashing, the preaching of the law brings forth, Romans 3.
when my sins thereby be made evident and plain. Yea trewelye, whom should
it not make afraid so many commandments in the law enjoined to us, and are
impossible of us to be brought to pass, or done, and yet nevertheless, that
sentence remains immutable? Cursed is he that continues not in all the
words of the law, Deu. 27
to do them? Next now follows the angels (who represent and signifye the
preachers of the gospel) with their comfort and consolacion, Angeles are
preachers.
saying: Be not afraid. O joyful and glad tidings that we shall not discomfort
us for our sins. But from whence comes these joyful and merry tydinges?
From Christ our lord, which was delivered for our sins, and rose for our
iustificacio^, With such preachinge of the resurrection, the Angel comfort
these women, brings them in remembrance of the words that they had afortyme
hard of the resurrection. Moreover, he does confirm his words with a sign, A
sign.
when he shows them the place where Christ was laid. Do ye think that this
was not a gentle way to instruct these women, patiently to bear their
infirmity, and by that means to make them to believe the resurrection? Like as
Christ through his angels and miracles did instruct these women and the
apostels, so will he likewise do daily unto us through his word, so we as
obedient children, obey and believe his word, and seek our salvation none
other where, then alonly in the merits of Christ.

Thirdelye, it follows now that the women were enjoined by the angel, to go
and declare the rysynge of Christ, not to the disciples allonlye, but also in
especial to Petre, Women becam apostelles.
which for the deniynge of the Lord, was in great fear and heaviness. Here
out we may learn how necessary the preachinge of the resurrection is. And
contrary wise, what a miserable calamitye it is, where the glory of the
resurrection is not known. For the apostels, which were in so great heuines,
and fear of death for their sin, could by none other means receive comfort
and tranquillity of conscience, then by hearing the tidinges of the
resurrection of Christ. And who can deny that they, if they had been demanded
as he was, had not al don as Peter did? Did they not forsake Christ? Fled not
they from him? If they fled, then did they sin, Man. 26
after the saying of Christ: This night shall ye all be offended in me.
For he that is offended in Christ, must needs syn, Mat. 11
for it is written: Blessed is he, that is not offended in me. Then go to. If
there was syn, so was there likewise fear and panges of death. So that it is
necessary that these troubled consciences must needs receive comfort
through the preachinge of the passion and resurrection of Jesus Christ. As if
the angel should speak to the women: Get you hence shortly to the troubled
apostels, and say unto them, Christ is a conqueror over sin, hell and the
devil. Moreover bid them be of a good cheer: for Christ is risen from death,
and the prophecy of Oseas is fulfilled, saying: Death is swallowed up in
victory. Ose. 31.
Death, where is this stinge? Hell, where is thy victory? Tell them also, that
Christ himself will go before them into Galilee, where they shall see him. and
have these things declared of him: and that they pluck up their hearts and
doubt not of his resurrection. On this wise does the angel teach the women
to preach, instructing them, what they should say to the apostels. Mark, how
that at priestly officeis here enjoined to the women. But who did consecrate
them Priests? the bishop of Rome? No. Who then? God, through his son
Christ, our Bishop. For who so ever believes in Christ, All Christian me^
be priests. 1. Pet. 2
and through his word has received the holy ghost, pertayneth to those
people and flock, of the which S. Peter speaks without any difference of
kinds, be they men or women, saying: Ye are that chosen generation, that
kingely preesthod, that holy nation, that peculier people, that ye should show
the virtues of him, which has called you out of darkness into his marvelous
light. Luc. 2.
Did not Anna the prophetisse exercise this priestely office? Did not the
four daughters of Phylip prophecy? Act. 12.
And as touching that, 2 Co. 14
S. Paul does not permit a woman to speak in the congregation, thereout it
does not follow, that it is not laufull for women to confess Christ, but that
every thing should be done in good order. For it is meet and conueniente for
women, to hold their peace when men be present that exercises the office of
teachinge. But if such men should fail, who would forbid women to teach?
For suerly the angel that commanded the resurrection to be declared to the
apostels by the women, was no fool. Finally, we altogether (whether we be men
or women) must confess, that we be regenerate into a living hope, through the
resurrection of Christ Jesus, from death. For in this confession and knowledge
(as S. Peter says) consists and stands our justifying and salvation. 1
Pet. 1.


The first sunday after Easter. John. 20.
THe same day at night, Luc. 24
which was the first day of the Sabathes, when the dotes were shut, where the
disciples were assembled together for fear of the Jews, came Jesus, and stood
in the midst and says unto them: Peace be unto you And when he had so said,
he shows unto them his hands and his side.

Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the lord. The^ said Jesus to them
again Peace be unto you. As the father Esa. 61 Mat. 11 Luc. 4. Io. 17.
sent me, even so send I you also. And when he had said those words, he
breathed on them, and said unto the^: Because the holy ghost. Whose so ever
sins ye remitte, they are remitted unto the^. And whose soeuers sins ye
retain, they are retained.

THE EXPOSITION.
The weakness of ye disciples
First of all, here we may mark and se an exaumple of incredulity in the
apostles, and how meekely Christ suffers their imbecility and weakness, and
does not straight ways cast them of. The women showed them that Christ was
risen from death, and that it was showed and told them by the aungel, Luc. 24
but (as S. Luke witnesses) they took their words for a jest, and did not
believe them. Yet this notwithstanding, at the hearing of it, they were gathered
together. But how? Very privily, and with the doors shut. Why so? For fear
of the Jews. The fear of ye disciples
Lo, behold and mark, here ye have excellently set forth the power and might
of the flesh. For the Apostles, though the women had showed them, yet did
not they believe, that Christ was risen from death. Moreover they were stryken
with so great fear, that they gathered together privily, and there abode with
the doors shut to them. Who dare now be so bold, as to say, that the
flesh can do any thing, in things pertaining to our iustifiyng? They that be
after the flesh, are fleshly minded, Romans 8.
as Paul witnesses. Now if a fleshly man be fleshly minded, he can not
lightly believe in Christ, which rose from death, and was the first of the dead
that rose, as the same S. Paul likewise declares in the acts of the
Apostles. Act. 26.
And in this point must the holy ghost work. For when he thorough the word is
given us, and has made us new creatures, then shall we no more fear men as
the apostles here do, but we shall fear god, not as a servant fears his
master, but as ye well-beloved son, which diligently will take heed and
beware, that he does not that thing, that shall provoke his father that is in
heaven to anger. Such fear does Christ teach us, saying: Mat. 10
Fear not them that kylle the body, but rathet fear him that has power to
kill both body and soul for ever. Boldness of them that he lightened with the
holy ghost. Actu. 5.
Surely all they that be lightened with ye holy spirit, ar bold, and do without
any fear persist and persevere in the knowledging of the truth and the
gospel. Yea very then, when they suffer and are rebuked for the truth of the
gospelles sake, as the Apostels did: as the acts of the Apostels witnesses:
They departed from the presence of the counsel, rejoicing, that they were
worthy to suffer rebuke for his names sake. Now because that the apostles had
not so great strength and faith, Christ comes and appears, commending and
announcynge his peace unto them. And also gives them his holy ghost, which
afterward upon Witsondaye, should be confirmed in their hearts, that nothing
should be left behind, where through their faith might be increased. The
increduliti of Tho^.
Here we must needs bring in saint Thomas with his incredulity, which
would not believe, unto such time he saw and felt. How goodly I pray you did
he take heed unto Christ's words, and keep in remembrance yt Christ had said,
namely yt he should be delivered unto the Gentiles, Luc. 18.
and they should mock him, and put him to death, and that the third day he should
rise? Yet nevertheless Christ did him like service, as he did the other. For
eight days after he came and said unto Thomas: Ioh. 20
Reach hither thy hand, and put it in my side, and be not unfaithful, but
believe. Here is the heart of Thomas opened, so that he cries out and says: My
lord, my god. Out of all these things it must needs follow, The corruptnes of
the flesh.
that we (concerni^g our nature and kind) ar evil and very mischievous, and
ever prone to incredulity and misbeliefe, and that we cannot with our own
power attain unto faith, except through the word of god, the holy ghost be
given us, and that he likewise as Christ served the Apostels, may serve and
asiste us also.

Fruit of the resurrection.
Secondarily, we have in this gospel the fruit and commodity of the
resurrection, that is to say, peace and tranquillity of our consciences, which
is he^ three times pronounced to ye Apostels. To have peace Peace.
with god is no other thing, then to believe ye Christ died for us, and rose
from death for our iustificacio^ in so much that now sin can neither accuse
us, nor condemn us. But who gives such peace? Christ our lord. Whereby? By
his word, in the which the merit of his passion and resurrection is freely
offered and given unto us. Likewise in the same word the holly ghost is given
unto us, which works faith in us, which faith comprehends the mercy of god
in Christ, and to Christ she casts up her eyes, in him she puts her
trust and confydence, and finallye, she knows all her sins to be forgyuen
by Christ. Wherefore then should not the conscience have peace? If she knew
and took God first for a straight judge, now she knows him and takes him
for a loving and merciful father, that mercifully will defend and save her,
and that by Christ. This peace does S. Paul praise and wishes to all christian
men, when he writes in his epistles: Grace and peace.
Grace and peace from God the father, and from our lord Jesus Christ. By
grace (if we do believe) we obtain remission of sines, whom the peace
aforesaid follows. Where out mark, that they that intend to obtain
remission with their works, have not this peace, as witnesses scripture: The
wicked me^ have no peace, Esa. 45
says the lord: But how may this be? Because they go about to obtain
remission and peace with God, through deserving of works, which is impossible.
So long as no man can do so much as he is bound for to do, so long must he
needs doubt and be uncertain, whether he please and be acceptable unto God or
no. And in so doubtyng, I pray the, Where doubt is cannot be a pacefied
conscience. Romans 5. 2 Tes. 4 The sendynge of the apostels.
how can thy heart and conscience be pacefied and at rest, when thou art
doubtefull, whether thy sins be forgiven the or no? Wherefore it is faith
that gets this peace, which cleaves and hangs to the resurrection of
Christ, and not to deserving of works. Thirdely and last of all, here we may
se and consider, in what manner of wise the apostels were sent forth to preach
the gospel. As the father sent me (says Christ) so do I send you. But
how was Christ sent? That he should preach repentance and remission of
sin. That self same preachinge (for as much as it is contrari to our reason
and capacity which always trusts in the deserving of our works) did so
stir up against Christ all Jerusalem and Iewry, that they named not him all
only a false deceiuer of the people, and possessed with a devil, but also
after so great benefits done unto them, most dispitefully crucified him,
and put him to death. Nevertheless yet must we confess, that this poor,
despised, scourged, and crucified Christ, had authority and power of the
father, to forgive sin. Luc. 14
After this manner wise also are the apostles sent forth that in the name of
Christ they should preach repentance and remission of sins to all people,
Luc. 22.
beginning at Jerusalem. etc. Further more that they should have likewise power
also as Christ had: That is to say, power through the word to forgive and
retain sins. Also, as Christ was despised and persecuted, that they even so
should of the world be despised and persecuted. But thou will say. Can the
priest torgiue sin? Does not that al only pertayn unto god? I answer:
Truth it is, that through Christ we have remission of sin yet
notwithstanding, there must ministers be in this business, by whom this precious
treasure must be published, opened and distributed. The minister of the gospel
(as concerning his own power) does not forgive sin, but through the
commission and word of Christ. Who does forgive syn.
Therefore when thou heareste the gospel out of the mouth of the preacher,
and beleuest the word, whether it be openly or privately ministered, thy sins
be forgiven the. And thou have not here respect unto the person that
denounseth the remission of sins, but unto the commandment and word of
Christ. The commandment and word of Christ forgyueth sin.
And thou do not here receive and hear the preacher, but Christ himself as
he says: He that receives you, receaueth me. And although ye precher be he ye
alo^ly with the mouth absolueth the, and declares and promises the remission of
sins through the word, yet Christ is he that fulfilleth it, which has
committed this thing to the minister here to be done with his word. Here to
pertains that Christ faith: Whose sins so ever you remitte, they are
remitted unto them: And whose sins so ever ye retain, they are retained With
the which words he declares him self, how and in what manner should be
understand the promise made unto Peter. Mat. 16
Peter in the person and steed of all ye apostels said: Thou art Christ the
son of the living God: Likewise in the person of Peter was given power to
all the Apostelles, to open and shut heaven, which thing so to be, is here
by this gospel manifest and plain. Finally, the Apostelles are sense to
preach repentance, and to forgive sins, and that not of them selves, but
by the power of Christ, and by his word.

The second sunday after Easter. John, 10.
I Am Eze. 24 Mic. 4
the good shepehard. A good shepeherd gives his life for the sheep. An hired
servant, and he which is not the shepeharde, neither the sheep are his own,
sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flies, and the wolf
catches and scatters the sheep. The hired servant flies, because he is an
hired servant and cares not for the sheep I am the good sheeph^rd and know
my sheep, and am known of mine. As my father knows me, even so know I also
my father. And 2 Timothy 2 Mat. 11 Mar. 10 Luc. 10.
I give my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are not of this
fold, them also must I bring and they shall hear my voice, and there shall be
one fold and one shepeharde.

THE EXPOSITION.
The good shephard The hierynge.
IN this similitude first of all, a good shepeherd and a hired servant be
compared, and the nature and property of both be described. But this is to be
noted, that this present gospel is part of the similitude, which Christ in the
10. chapt. of John, put forth to the Phariseis, of the door, the sheepefolde,
the shepharde and the porter. For the Phariseis herd and taught the law, but
they understood not Moses, which did not all only require of them the outeward
works, but rather the affection of the heart. Whereof it came, that they could
not teach the rightousnes of faith, that was accepted before god, nor yet
could print it rightly in peoples hearts. Then for as much as in the steed of
this righteousness, they taught the righteousness of works, and sought
salvation by an other mean, then by the seed of Abraham, promised unto them,
willing other also to seek the same. Therefore Christ said not without a cause
in the beginning of this similitude, that they entered not in at the door, but
that they were thieves and murderers. For there cannot be begone or raised
up in the church greater mischief or murder, then to teach to trust in
works. Phil. 3. Dogs
Of the which doctoures Paul speaks, when he says: Beware of dogs, beware
of euel workers. He calls the false prophets dogs, that for their own
lucre and advantage, will not teach the people the righteousness of faith, but
the righteousness of works, against the wholesome doctrine of Christ. And
Christ called them hired servants. Wherefore? Forbycause they care not for
the sheep. because they regard not the health and salvation of the sheep,
neither will danger them selves therefore. And so it is written in the
prophet: Soph. 3
Her prophets are light persons etc. For the hired servant tarieth while he
finds advantage, but when he perceyueth none aduau^tage, he flies away, ye
though the wolf should eat up all his sheep. But Christ does not so, for he
says: I am a good shepehard. etc. Surely all only Christ is the good
shepeharde, for he has got and obtained for his sheep through his death, the
pasture and feeding of everlasting life. Out of this office of Christ, we may
know, what mind Christ bears toward us. For he bears us such affection,
that he will save us, and not destroy us. How does he confirm that unto us?
In feedinge, and dyinge. Feedyng is in the scripture a common term, Feding
and is as much to say, as to teach gods word rightly, without mingling
therewith false doctrine. as thou seeste in the last chapter of John, where
Christ says: Peter feed my sheep. And in the acts of the apostels: Act.
1^.
The holy ghost has set you to be bysshoppes, to feed the congregation of
god. With this feedinge, with this doctrine, has god first served his
sheep, and afterward, with his death and shedinge of his precious blood that
they being saved for ever, should not be a pray to the wolves. Who to dye,
would not believe such a shepharde? Who would desire other feeding? Now compare
Christ and the hiered servant together. Christ seeks the commodity and
profit of the sheep: The hierelynge seeks his own wealth and commoditye.
The one has the word of life, the other of condemnacion. The one quickens,
the other slays. The one refreshes and comfort, the other charge and
troubles men's consciences. The one abides with the sheep in all need and
necessitye, and the other flies away. Briefly, Christ is allonly the good
shepeharde, which thorough his doctrine and death, has made us just,
righteous and hollye.

Secondarily, we have here in this gospel a marvelous comfortable saying, in
that, that Christ repeteth that he is the good shepeharde etc. In the which
words he declares, what thought and care he takes for his sheep, that they
be well kept, and have good feeding. And that we should undoubtedly be suer,
that he cares for his sheep, he joins and adds, that he knows us none
otherwise, then the father acknowledges him, and he the father. For Christ
and the father be one substance undivided, so that Christ can not be separated
from the father, nor the father from Christ. For if Christ could be separated
from the father, then could there not be one god. And that means the father,
Mat 17
when he says: Here is my well-beloved son in whom I delight, hear him. Which
is even as much to say. as to hear and obey Christ my son, is to hear and
obey me. Likewise here the son means the same thing, when he sayethe: Ioh. 1^
I and the father are one. Also to Phylippe he says: Ioh. 14
Phylyppe, he that sees me, sees the father. Hereoute thowe may lyghtelye
gather, how that Christ acknowledges the father, and likewise how the
father acknowledges Christ. Now If Christ knows us, as he knows the
father, and the father knows Christ, so must we needs be one body and one
substance with him: Yea even his brethren. Then when I am one body, and one
substance with Christ my lord, when I am Christ's brother, will not he
defend me? will he forsake and leave me without comfort? No suerly, but will
know me, and stand by me, until the consumacion and end of this world. So
that and if I as a sheep were in the midst of the wolves, there were no
ieoperdy, only if this Christ would acknowledge us. But how can I bring that to
pass, that I may be the brother of Christ and grafte in him, and that I may
know him, as he knowethe me? Or how does he acknowledge me? Before the
foundation of the world was laid, he did elect me, and predestinate me to
salvation, 1 Timothy 2
of his great mercy, without any deserving of works. And after that he
became manne, he called me through his word to the same salvation, so, that
if I now believe in him, he and I be one. This to believe from the botome of
our hearts, What is to know Christ.
is to know Christ, in the which knowledge consists our ryghteousnes and
salvation, as yt is written in the gospel of John: Ioh, 17
This is the everlasting life, that they know the, that thou only art the
true god, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ. The calling of ye Heithen
Thyrdly, we have here the calling of the Gentyles, how that they shall come
to the knowledge of their sins, and to the grace and mercy of the gospel,
that the church gathered of the gentyles and of the Jews, shall be made one
flock, and have one shepeharde. But here mark and take heed, in what manner
this calling shall be. Christ alone must bring it to pass and perform yt, as
he says: I have yet other sheep that be not of this fold, and those same
must I bring also etc. Christ must bring the gentiles, whereout it follows
necessarily, that the gentiles of them selves, without they be brought by
Christ, can not come. And if they can not come of them selves, it is manifest
and plain, that we through grace and mercy be justified and saved, as says
S. Paul: By grace are you saved through faith, Ephe. 2.
and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of god, not of works, least
any man should boaste him self. Now, if we are called to righteousness and
everlasting life by grace, why do we then boast us of our works? Whereunto is
now free will become? why do not you leave Christ his honor? Will thou
become a thief, and privily steal away christ's honor? Is it not sufficient,
that the pharisees, those glorifiers in works, are called thieves? If ye are
wise, take counsel with the scripture, and believe the same, if ye will be
saved, which says: No man knows the father, Ioh. 14
but the son, and to whom the son will reuele it.. Mark diligently that he
says: To who^ the son will reuele it. And in this gospel he says also. I,
I, I my self must bring them. When Christ does bring us through his word
and spirit, then do we hear his voice, then do we willingly obey him, and
mortefie the old Adame in us. To make short, we live according to gods will
and pleasure. Some there be that suppose, that by this sentence (There shalhe
one flock and one shepard) is promised through out all the world, Unity and
concord in ye doctrine of Christ's faith is not to be looked for
unity and concord in the doctrine and faith of Christ, but they be
deceived. For this saying is fulfilled, when both the Jews and gentyles are
called by the word of god, into the communion of one church: And in the end of
the world, finally it shall be fulfilled, when the faithful, as well of the
Jews as of the gentiles, shall be disseuered and divided from the kiddes, that
is, from the unfaithful, and taken into the kingdom of Christ. Which God
the father grant us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen

The third sunday after Easter. Ioh. 16
AFter a while ye shall not se me, Ioh. 7.
and again after a while ye shall se me: for I go to the father. The^ said
some of his dysciples between them selves: What is this, that he says unto
us, after a while ye shall not se me? and again, after a while ye shall se me:
and that I go to ye father^ They said therefore, what is this that he says
after a while? we can not tell what he says. Jesus peceaued that they would
ask him, and said unto them: Ye inquire of this between your selves, because
I said: After a while ye shall not se me, and again After a while ye shall se
me. Verily verily I say unto you, ye shall weep and lament, but contrary wise,
the world shall rejoice. Ye shall sorrow, but Ioh. 2^
your sorrow shall be turned to joy.

A woman when she trauayleth, has sorrow because he thow^ is come, but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguyshe for joy
that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therefore have sorrow, but I
will se you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man
take from you.

THE EXPOSITION.
Christ shows his passion and resurrection to his disciples.
IN this gospel diligently we shall note four things. First, how Christ
showed before unto his disciples his passion and resurrection. Furthermore in
what wise through his resurrection, he should reign in his kingdom, and go to
the father. This sermon and teaching must needs be very necessary, when
Christ so oftentimes and with so many words repeteth it, and shows yt his
disciples. Yea truly it is very needful, considering the infirmity of our
flesh, and the hard understanding of these articles. Wherefore Christ, after
the manner of a faithful master and instructours, ceasseth not contynuallye
to inculcate and drive into the apostles hearts such artycles, that in all
points he might truly and iustelye execute his office. And this is the
exposition and meaning thereof. After a little while I shall be delivered unto
the Jews, and they shall condemn me, scourg me and at the last crucify me. And
likewise as Jonas was three days and three nyghtes in the belly of the whale,
Mat. 21
so shall I be three days, and so manny nyghtes also in the heart of the earth.
And that is the same that I say unto you: After a little while ye shall not
see me: and yet after a little, that is, the third day when I am risen from
death, ye shall see me: But that shall be no great while, for I must go to the
father, and receive my kingdom, which is spiritual. With the which, he
instructethe and teaches his dysciples, what manner of kyngedome he shall
have, and in what wise he shall enter into it. The ki^gdom of Christ Ephesians. 14
The kyngedome of Christ lies herein: That Christ has ouercomme sin,
death, hell, and the dyuell, and has all the auctorytye and power of the
father, in heaven and in earth, that hereafter he being ordained the most
mighty king upon the hollye hill of Sion, Psalm. 2.
should strength and rule his faithful and elect, through the holy ghost. And
into this ki^gdom he has entered through his passion, death, and sheding of his
blood, as the prophet Dauyd shows before. Psa. 109
He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up his
head. The Apostles knew yet but little of the spiritual kingedome, and
thought it should have been temporal, until such time that they received the
holy ghost, which opened their eyes, and instructed them, what manner of
kingedome it should be, and how we should come unto it, and abide in it. And if
we desire to enter into this kingedome, and will overcome sin, death, the
devil and hell, it is most convenient and necessary, that we know Christ
our Lord and savior, our king and bishop, and that by his blood we
are reconcyled to the everlasting father. And we must do also as Paul
monissheth us, in the epistle to Timothe, saying: 2 Timothy 2
If we be dead with him, we shall live with him also. If we be patient, we
shall also reign with him. If we deny him, he shall deny us.

Secondarily, here is laid before us in the apostles, an exaumple of our
ignorance. An exau^ple of our ignorance.
For as the apostels could not understand and perceive the mystery of the
gospel without the holy ghost, so likewise we can not attain or get us
iustificacion and salvation of our own power, or free will Note and perceive
now this ignorance of the apostels, out of the text. Christ said: After a
little while, and ye shall not se me, and again, after a little while and ye
shall se me. for I go to the father. Which are to be understand of his death
and resurrection, and of his spiritual kingdom. What is to go to the rather.
For to go to the father, is none other thing, then to fulfill and accomplish
al things, and through the holy ghost to lighten and illuminate men's hearts,
and to save them (or as the prophet says) to give gifts unto men. Psa. 67
But how did the Apostles understand these things? They said amongst them
selves, What is it that he speaks? After a little while, and ye shall not se
me: and again, after a little while and ye shall se me, for I go to ye father?
We know not what he speaks, after a little while, and ye shall se me, for I
go to the father. We know not what he says. The apostles confess, that they
understood not what Christ spoke, though diverse and sondrye times before, he
had declared and showed them of his passion, resurrection and kingdom. Wherefore
I greatly marvel, what those creatures think that so sharply and earnestly
defend our free will, and the power of our flesh, seeing that they have both
read and heard in this text (and such other like) of the ignorance of the
apostles. I think that they must have wonderful gloses, to healpe them
withal. But rather I think that they are in like case with the apostles here,
that they cannot tell what they say, even as S. Paul has written of them,
saying: Some have erred, 2. Tim. 1
and have turned unto vain iangling, willing to be doctoures of the
scripture, and understand not what they speak, neither what they affirm. The
sum and effect of all this, is nothing else, but that the flesh can do or
bring nothing to pass, concerning righteousness and our salvation, without
it be given thorough the help of the holy ghost, and the word. For it is
written in the prophet: Esa. 45
All men shall be learned of God. Of God he says not of them selves.

Thirdly, while the apostles understood not these words, and were in mind to
axe, Christ prevented them, saying: Ye demand and enquire amongst you, for
because I said: After a while, and ye shall not se me. etc. Verily verily, I
say unto you, you shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice, and ye
shall be sorry. Note here with what mildnes, gentleness and familiarity, he
behaueth himself toward his disciples. He does not reject or despise the^ for
their ignorance, but most familiarly instructs them and shows them, how
his words be to be understand, saiynge unto them, that they should be sorry
and lament and why? because they should se their lord and master taken of the
Iues, and crucified, The cross and persecution.
herefore shall they morn and lament. But specially this shall grieve them,
that the world should reiose both at theirs, and their masters misfortune.
Therefore like as Christ here shows before to his disciples, that he should be
put to death, and should suffer, and that they should morn and lamente, even
so^t came to pass and chanced. Supposest thou, that his passion was easy or
a triflinge matter, when Christ hanging upon the cross, must he are the
Jews iestinge and scourning him, saying: He trusted in god, Mat. 27
let him deliver him now, if he will? I resite not here whereof he
co^plaineth in the psalm. saying: Psalm. 21.
But as for me, I am a worm and no man: the scorn of men, and the outcast of
the people. All they that se me, laugh me to scorn. etc. I think that the
apostels were stricken with great heuines, seeing this shame and despysinge of
Christ. Now although Christ chiefelye speakethe here of the time of his
passion, which should be a great cause of sorrow and heaviness to the
disciples, yet notwithstanding here he shows what fortune and chance all
faithful men shall have in this world. For christian men shall suffer
persecution, and the wicked shall have good days and prospere. Prou. 3.
Therefore the wise man says: My child, despise not the chasteninge of the
lord, neither faynte when thou art rebuked of him. Is not this a ientle
teachinge of the apostels? Now further, that thing that Christ does to his
apostels, he will have it done likewise dailye to us, thoroughe his word and
spirit, requirynge only of us, that we suffer patientely to be warned and
taught.

The sorowfulnes turned into ^oye.
Fourhely, here is to be noted, that though Christ showed before to his
disciples, how they should have sorrow and anguishe through his passion, yet
because they should not be left without comfort, he said: Your mourning
shall be turned into joy and gladness. That is. The world will think, when
they have put me to death, they have won all, and that my days be paste.
But yet on the third day, I will rise again, and come and comfort you in
your great heaviness. And though hereafter ye shall chance to suffer slaundre
and rebuke for my gospel, yet that passion and sorrow shall be short, and not
endure long. But the joy that shall follow the same heaviness, shall be
everlasting. Take here an exaumple of this thing. A woman when she trauayleth
has sorrow, for her hour is come: but when she is delivered of the child,
she thinks no more of the anguisshe, for joy that a man is borne into the
world. So likewise ye be now full of sorrow, but I will see you again, and
your hearts shall rejoice, and that same your reioysynge no man shall take
from you. This similitude put forth of Christ, is very full of great
comfort and consolacion. First yt declarethe, that the professoures of
Christ, so suerly shall suffer persecucion, as it is suer, that a trauailyng
woman shall not be delivered without pain. How be it, in that point the
word of God shall be a great comfort to every Christian man. Furthermore
note, Of the sorowfulnes of ye apostels
that this persecution shall be for a time, and not everlasting. And finallye,
that the reioysynge of this world does not continue long, as Christ says
in an other place: Luce. 6.
Woe unto you that laughe here, for ye shall weep and wayle. How be it, in
the mean while, a christian man shall not be without joy. But what joy
shall it be? I will (says Christ) visit you again, and your hearts shall
reioise, and that reioysinge shall no man take from you. The peace of
conscience.
This is the very joy, and this is the quietness of conscience, to know that
God by Christ is merciful, and will reserve us to everlasting life.

The fowerth sunday after Easter. Ioh. 16.
But now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you ask me whether I
go. But because I have said such things unto you, your hearts are full of
sorrow. Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expediente for you that I go
away. For if I go not away, that comforter will not come unto you. But if I
depart, Ioh. 14 and.15. Act. 2. a
I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will rebuke the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not
on me, Of righteousness, because I go to my father, and ye shall se me no more.
Of judgment, because Ioh. 12.
the prince of this world is judged allreadye.

I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye can not bear them away
now. Howebeit, when he is come, which is the spyrite of truth, he will lead
you into all truth. He shall not speak of him self, but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to come. He shall
glorify me for he shall receive of mine, and shall show unto you Mat. 11 a 11. ^
Luc. 10. Ioh. 3.
Al things that the father has, ar mine Therefore said I unto you, that he
shall take of mine, and show unto you.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this present golspel, The promise of the holy ghost.
we are admonished of three things. First, we have here of the promise of the
holy ghost, which Christ going to the father, should send unto his
disciples, Moreover, what he should do and bring to pass when he came. It is
now our part, to note well this promise, which pertayneth as well to us, as
to the Apostles. Faith cowlde not be confirmed in the apostles without the
virtue of the holy ghost.

So likewise, the holy ghost could not be sent, if Christ had not gonne
to the father. The flesh can do nothing but sin.
Here learn that our flesh can do nothing but sin, if it be not lightened
through the holy ghost, and that yt is nothing but hypocrisy, though we do
outwardly never so many good works, Luc. 18.
as we may see in the Pharisye, which thanked God that he was not like other
men. Item, All they that say unto me: Mat. 7.
Lord, lord, shall not enter into the kingedome of heaven, but they ye fulfill
my fathers will. Likewise learn this, that we cannot receive this spirit by
our good works, but by the merits of Christ, as Christ says here: It is
better for you that I go: for if I go not away, the comforter comes not unto
you. as though he would say: Christ gives ye holy ghost.
If the infirmity of your flesh shall be changed into the strenthe of the
faith, the holy ghost must needs bring that to pass in you. Now if this
holy ghost shall be given unto you, so must I needs promote you there unto, and
obtain it through my deserte and benefit. Wherefore it is very necessary,
that I suffer and dye, and that after my resurrection, I ascend up in to
heaven, that the holy ghost may visit you, lighten you, and lead you into all
trewthe: Than the same spirit shall work and bring to pass in you and
through you, that thing that he was sent for. Will you know what that is? The
holy ghost shall rebuke the whole world. Romans 3.
harken to. He shall rebuke the world. Here is the glory of the flesh, the
liberty of fre will, and what so ever is man's wisdom, utterly cast in the
duste. Why should the holy ghost rebuke us, if we were not worthy of rebuke?
They are all gone out of the way: they be all together become unprofitable:
there is none that does good, no not one. Ye and as S. John the baptist said:
Esa. 40 Mat. 3.
All flesh, is as hay, and all his glory, as the flower of the medowe. This
seemed to be rigorously inoughe (and more then inoughe spoken) to the bysshopes
and to those gloryfiers in works at Jerusalem, and also to the papistry of
our time, if the holy ghost did fear them. But he sets nothing at all
for our anger. For he was sent to rebuke, which also he does busily. And
blessed is he, that is rebuked of him, that by that means he may learn to
know his sins: For that done, the holy ghost leads us further into the
faith and knowledge of god, so that we being delivered from sin, through the
deserving and merits of Christ, are made the children and heirs of god.

Why ye holy ghost does rebuke the world.
Secondarily, we may note here, wherefore and for what cause the holy ghost
will rebuke the world: Truly for sin. But you will say: Is the world
ignorant, that adultrye, murdre, theft, and such like trespasses are sin?
No. But they are ignoraunte, that good works without faith are sin, and that
allonly unbelief, is the occasion of their damnacion. Wherefore it is
necessary and needful, that the holy ghost come, that he may fullye learn
and teach us, what sin is. Wherefore let us considre what Christ calls
sin. Sin is nothing, but infidelity.
For they do not believe in me (says he). Here thou hear, that the greatest
sin under heaven is, that we do not believe in Christ. If incredulity be the
greatest syn upon earth, then must it needs follow, ye faith is the most
glorious and highest thing upon earth, which no man can deny. Faith hangs on
Christ, and as a faith full man knows yt he is saved by Christ, so surely does
he good works which are accepted before god for his faith, as says ye prophet:
Thou o lord, Iere. 5
lokest alo^ly upon faith. But incredulity trusts in his works. Wherefore
what so ever goodness an unfaithful man does outwardli, it is not accepted
before god, for it comes not of faith. For Christ says: He that believes not,
is all ready judged. The world, Ioh. 5.
nature, flesh, or reason, does not receive nor understand this. wherefore it
is needful that the holy ghost come to rebuke and teach. Moreover the holy
ghost shall rebuke the world of righteousness. How shall we understand that?
The world and reason adscribeth righteousness to our works, and both think
and judge, that righteousness comes of men's works outewardelye done, as the
Pharisie boasted himself to be righteous.

But ever this chaunseth so, Luc. 18.
that they that will mayntaine their own righteousness, Romans 10
be not subject unto the righteousness of God. Therefore yt is necessary,
that the holy ghost teach and show us, what manner of justice that is, that
pleases god. From whence justice comes.
The justice that pleases god proceeds hereoute: that I believe that Christ
went to the Father. that is as much to say: That I believe that he died for
me, that he rose and ascended unto heaven, for to send me and all his elect his
holy ghost, to open us the filthiness of our works, and to instruct us in the
knowledge of god. Behold, thus ye holy ghost shall learn us ye rightousnes of
faith. Furthermore, Judgment.
the holy ghost shall rebuke ye world of judgment: for as much as they judge
not right in things pertaininge to righteousness and salvation. Which thou
shalt understand on this wise. The devil, sin, death, hell, are
constrained to give place unto Christ and his word, for by him they be
overcome. But how does the world know this? Truly the world ever regards
works, and ever suffers the devil to blind them, so that they know not,
nor yet can divide nor separate the righteousness of faith, from the worlds
righteousness. And so remains Christ the stone that men shall stumble at,
Luc. 2. 1 Pet. 2.
and a sign which shall be spoken against. For the thing which we should adscribe
unto Christ, that is to say, whereas we should confess, that the prince of
this world is judged through Christ and his word, we adscribe yt unto our
righteousness. For the which cause, yt is needful that the holy ghost do
rebuke us, whereby we may learn to judge right. And here have thou now the
right cause, why the holy ghost shall rebuke the world.

Thirdly here is to be noted, that Christ shows us here the infirmity of the
apostles, saying: The weakness of ye apostles
I have yet much to say unto you, but ye can not now bear it away. That
is as much to say. If I should make many words with you of incredulity, of
righteousness and of judgment, and of my spiritual kingdom, that after my
resurrection I shall enter into, you cold not understand it, nor comprehend
it, for because you are yet carnal and fleshly, and my spirit is not as yet,
confirmed in you. For they that shall understand and give faith and credence
unto my doctrine, the spirit must work inwardly in the^, with ye outward word
yt shall be expressed with the mouth, Mat. 3.
or else that sede shall not fall upon a fruictefull ground, or so that yt
shall be other trodden of men, or else devoured and eaten of the birds of the
air. Wherefore it is needful that the holy ghost come. and when he comes,
he shall lead you into all trewthe. The gospel is the truth.
The gospel is a doctrine of Christ, whole and sound, which does not allo^ly
teach the outward honesty, but shows also the righteousness of the heart
inwardly: wherefore it is called in the scripture the truth: The doctrine of
men be lies.
And contrary wise, the doctrine of men, teaches hypocrisy, fynallye, neither
understands nor teaches any thing of the righteousness of the heart. Wherefore
this doctrine, and also the doctoures and teachers thereof, are called, false,
and liars, as yt is written in the Psalm: There is no truth in the their mouth.
Psalm. 5.
that is, there is no suer and certain thing amongst them. And again, thou
shall lose and destroy all those that speak lies. Now seeing that ye holy
ghost shall lead us into all truth, and not into lies, Let every christian man
guess in his mind, whether the fathers and the counsels have had the holy
ghost, whose ordinaunuces and laws, The cou^seiles did err
have been commanded unto the church, instead of the gospel. For if they had
had the holy ghost, they would have concluded nothing against the word of god.
The holy ghost leads us not into lies, but into all truth, How goodlye have
they used this text, in the defense of man's traditions? Saying the holy ghost
teaches none other thing, then that christ taught. Further, he teaches only
the Apostles, and the elect of god, to perceive and receive the doctrine of
Christ: which of our selves we cannot understand, If they had eyes they
might perceive, that the plain text recites the same. He says: He shall not
speak of him self, but that he has heard, he shall speak. Item: He shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and show it you. Briefly Christ
speaks here of the infirmity and weakness of his disciples, which should be
strengthed and comforted by ye holy ghost, and is to be understand of us every
one.

Mat. 7. and 21. c Luc. 11. Jacob. 1. Ioh. 14 and 15. b 1 Ioh. 3 and 5. c
The fyfte sunday after Easter. Ioh. 16.
Verily, verily I say unto you. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in my name,
he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask, and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full.

These things have I spoken unto you by proverbs. The time will come, when I
shall no more speak to you by proverbs but I shall show you plainly from my
father At that day shall ye ask in my name And I say unto you, Mat. 13
that I will speak unto my father for you. For ye father himself loved you,
because ye loved me and have believed, that I came out from god I went out from
ye father and came into the world. Again I leave the world, and go to the
father. Ioh. 20


His disciples said unto him: Lo nowtalkest thou plainlye, and speak no
proverb. Now are we suer, thou know all things, Ioh. 21
and nedest not that any man should ask the any question. Therefore ^eleue we
that thou came from God.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN the first part of this gospel, With promise and commandment we are called
unto prayer.
we have a commandment and a promise, whereby we are allured and entised to
prayer. And truly, forasmuch as in all trouble and misery, wherewith a christian
man is oppressed, there is no greater comfort here present in this world, the^
with continual and daily prayer, to open and show our necessity unto god.
Wherefore it is very necessary, that we do note and print in our hearts this
gospel, whereby we may be the more inflamed and stirred to prayer. Who would
reject and despise prayer as a thing not necessary? saying that it is here in
this gospel, so diligently and highly commended and commanded to us of
Christ? Ask (says he) and you shall receive. This commandment of Christ
binds us as well, as the first commandment in the first table of Moses.
And this to be true we may more euidente and plain see, in an other place,
where Christ says, Luc. 18.
that we ought always to pray, and not to be weary. Here diligentely note,
that he says: we ought always to pray. Therefore as we through a syngular
and special commandment of god are egged and entysed to pray, so likewise,
this present gospel allurethe us thereunto through a great and excellent
promise. Here is promised to us which be Christian men, that our prayer shall
not be in vain, but shall be suer to be heard. Wherefore else would he confirm
and bind this promise with an other? Verily, verily I say unto you (says
he) If you axe the father ought in my name, he shall give it you. also, Ask
and ye shall receive. Here thou hear, that we shall not pray in vain. Who
would now be slothful and loath to prayer? Christ constrains us through his
commandment. And furthermore that we shall not think to pray in vain, he
(as I said before) entiseth us here, with a great and high promise. Wherefore
two things are here to be considered and noted. The first is, that we shall
pray in none other name, the^ all only in Christ's name. Then we pray in Christ's
name, Christ is our mediator only
when we come unto god in the faith of Christ, in such mind and confidence,
that he all only is our mediator, by whom all things be given unto us and
that without him, we can deserve nothing, the^ wrath and indignacion. Can there
be (I beseech you) any saint in heaven or in earth, that prays for us unto
god the father, as Christ does? For by his merits and aduocacion we do not all
only obtain righteousness and remission of sins, but also we be made his
brethren, and pertakers of his preestly office, so that we our selves may go
unto Christ, and call upon him, and seek his help in all our necessity and
need. And that is it, that he says here: And I say not unto you, that I will
pray the father for you, for the father him self loves you, for because you
have loved me, and believe, that I am come out from god. Al Christian me^ are
prestes.
Saying therefore that we have such a mediator, yea seeing that we our selves
are admitted, unto this prestly office by Christ, why do we not with true
faith and confidence call upon him in our necessity? An other thing to be
noted is this. We must considre, that in no wise we do pray that, What we
ought to desire.
that shall be against the glory and will of god, or contrary to our salvation.
For it is apparaunt, that he will not hear such prayer, in so much as in ye
Pater noster, he teaches us daily to pray, that his will be fulfilled.
Finally, when so ever we pray unto god in our urgent necessities, we shall
look upon the merits of Christ, (not upon our worthiness) which commands
us to pray, and promised us to hear us, when so ever we call upon him. For all
the promises of god in Christ are suer, and need not to be doubted at. For S.
Paul says, that all the promises of god, ar ye, in him, and ame^. 2 Cor. 11


Secondaryly, it is to be noted, that forasmuch as we are fleshly, and know not
often times what we have need of (as S. Paul says to the Romans) Christ
voutchsaueth here to learn us, Romans 8.
what our prayer should be. And as he himself faith: we ought to pray, that
our joy may be perfect. But what manner of joy is this? Truly it shall never
be temporal nor wordly, but spiritual. Of the which, Phil. 4.
S. Paul writes, saying: Rejoice in the lord always and again I say,
rejoice. But whence comes this reioysinge? Of faith. And how is that brought
to pass? That is brought to pass, when I hear the gospel preached, in the
which remission of sins is given to all mortal creatures, by Christ. Which
preaching, if I will have it profitable and fruitful unto me, I must needs
believe it, which thing, I cannot do, except it be given me through the word by
the holy ghost, which must work this faith in me. And when this word and
the holy ghost work this faith in me, I shall not dout but believe ye Christ
has all only forgeuen me all my sins, so that they can neither accuse nor
condemn me. And further, that he has pourchased me a merciful father in
heaven, that will acknowledge me for his son, and bring me into everlasting
life. And hereoute comes tranquillity of conscience and that spiritual joy,
Tra^quilitie of conscience. 2 Pet. 3.
of the which this gospel to day speakethe of, and it is very needful and
necessary, that this joy grow and increase, even as our faith ought to
grow and increase, if yt shall be perfect: which thing doubteles God shall
bring to pass, if we daily pray unto him for it. He will that we shall
pray always. and not with out a cause, For we have nothing to give him But
he as a merciful god, creatoure and father, forgiueth us al things. And for as
much as he commands us to pray, that our joy might be perfect, let us
obey him, that we may say with the virgin Marye: Luce. 2.
My spirit reioyseth in god my savior. Thirdelye, Christ sh^weth us here
the ignorance of his disciples, and witnesses, that hitherto his learning
has been unto them as a proverb, and that if they should understand that
doctrine, it is needful that he speak no more through proverbs, but plainly
to show the^ of his father. that Is. it is needful that he send them the
holy ghost, to make them apt to understand his words. Such ignorance and
blindn^s has not been all only in the apostles, before the ho^y ghost was
confirmed in them, but also has been grafte in all mortal men, so that there
is not one that understands, no not one that does good, Psalm. 13 Ioh. 3.
without they be transformed into a new creature, through the holy ghost. We
think our selves sub^ile and wise, as thapostels say here in this gospel:
Behold, now thou speak plain, and show us no proverb. now we know
that thou know all things. But this is such an other folyshe presumption,
as was in Saint Peter, Mat. 26
which promised that he would go to prison and to death with Christ, and yet
that night before ye cock crew, he denied him thrice, which presumption
brought him to confusion. Wherefore all this is written for us, that we should
not rashely presume, but rather to meke our selves, and to confess, that we
as concerning godly things, are rude and ignoraunte, and that we can not
perceive the mystery of the gospel, with out the holy ghost. For the wisdom
of the flesh, is foolishnes before god. And as much the more we go about to
boaste our selves of our subtilty and wisdom, concerning godlynes, so much
the more we declare and show forth our folysshnes.

The sixte sunday after Easter. Ioh. 15.
But when the comforter is come Ioh. 14 and. 17. Act. 3. d
whom I will send you from the father, even the spirit of trewthe, which
proceeds of the father, he shall testifye of me. And ye shall bear witness
also, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

THE EXPOSITION.
After that our lord Jesus Christ in the last supper had promised his
disciples with diverse promises, to send the^ the holy ghost, now he names the
same spirit by his propre name, and declares unto us, what utility and profit
he shall bring into the world, and says on this wise: When the comforter whom
I shall send you from the father, even the spirit of truth. etc. First we
se here how Christ names the holy ghost by his propre name, The co^fortet.
and calls him a comforter. Who has made our conscience so suer, that we
believe, that by Christ we be made the sons of God? and cry Abba, dear
father, but allonly this same comforter? Romans 7 Gal. 4.
Who makes us without any fear or abashement at the confession of this
faith? Who comfort us, and aideth us in all our calamities and miseries,
which we must suffer here in this world for his names sake? None other but
this spirit of truth, which proceeds from the father, and is the same good
spirit, for the which the prophet David so earnestly prays to obtain, in
the 50. psalm For this we se in the examples of the apostles, that when the
holy ghost was not yet confirmed in them, they left their master and fled
from him: they also denied him and lockte them selves up, now here, now there,
in corners. But after that the holy ghost was confirmed in their hearts, they
confessed Christ boldelye, and bare witness that he was risen. In so much,
that in persetution and tribulacyon they reioysed, and took great pleasure:
as we read in the acts of the apostels. Act. 5. The holy ghost makes us
faithful
Now forasmuch as this holy ghost (by reason of his office) makes true men and
faithful, and boldeth and comfort us in confessing and showing of the
truth, so likewise by his office, he shall testify of Christ. Then if he shall
testify of Christ, he shall teach no other thing, then the same that Christ
taught and preached before, that is. he shall instruct the apostles, and make
the^ meet to receive the doctrine of Christ, and write the gospel in their
hearts, for as much as of their own power, they can not perceive the
learning of Christ. The wisdom of the flesh can not bring it to pass,
but the holy ghost must needs do it, as the lord promised by his prophet
Ieremye, saiynge: Ier. 31.
I will plant my law in the inward parts of ^heym, and write it in their
hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And from henseforth,
shall no man teach his neighbor, or his brother, and say. Know the lord.
But shall all know me, from the lowest unto the highest, says the lord.
Hereof it is evident and plain, that without the holy ghost, we can neither
say the truth, nor yet believe the truth.

Secondarily, we be taught and learned, The office of ye apostels
what thoffice of the apostles is, which is no more but to testifye and bear
witness of Christ. To bear witness, signifies in scriptures, Testifiing.
to speak and teach, not that we think good, but that God commanded. And
therefore is Christ in the psalm called a faithful witness in heaven. Psalm. 88.
And likewise Esaias says: Behold I shall give him for a witness among the
folk, for a prince and captain unto the people. Now forasmuch as the holy
ghost, and the apostles must testify of the self same thing, it is to be
thought, that their witness must be both one. And that the holy ghost bare
witness in the apostles, it is apparaunte, according to Christ's saying: You
be not they that speak, but the spyrite of your father, The papists saiynge.
that is in you, speakethe. Where be they now, that hitherto have taught and
preached, that Christ has reveled to the apostles, and to the fathers a
higher thing, then is contained in the gospel? Whom shall I believe? Christ?
or else their chatteringe and unprofitable ianglinges? Christ says: the holy
ghost shall bear witness of him, and make the folk mete to receive and
understand the gospel. And plainlye that we shall be taught none other thing
of him, then that he himself taught. And these ianglers chatter, that we must
teach higher things, then is contained in the gospel. After my judgment,
it is best, that we obey and believe him, that has this testimony and witness
of the father: Mat. 7.
This is my dear son in whom I delight, hear him. And he that is not
content with the doctrine of Christ, of the which not allonlye the Apostels,
but also the hollye ghost bears witness, let him chose himself an other
kind of learning, and bide the adventure of yt. I had lever be suer, then
doubtefull herein.

The world persecuted the gospel,
Thyrdelye, we be taught in this gospel, that the doctrine of Christ, of
which, as well the holy ghost as the apostels, shall bear witness, shall not
please this world. For the world shall curse and abhor all those, as
heretics, that shall confess this doctrine. And when they have tourmented
and persecuted with all kinds of tourmentes, the apostles and faithful
men, they shall think they have done a high service unto God. But what
says Christ? All these things shall they do unto you, because they
neither know the father nor me. Behold the fortune, that this holy and
precious word of the gospel and the faithful shall have in this world If
thou will confess Christ, look for no merye nor quiet days, For Paul
says: 2. Ti. 2.
All they that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. And
in an other place he says: If I should please men, Gala. 1.
I were not the servant of Christ. Seeing than that for the confessing of
Christ, I must suffer persecution, it is needful, that I be well instructed
and armed with the word of God, and that we know it to be the will of God,
that with such temptacion, our faith should be proved. And when we know
this, we shall not lightelye be offended, but what so ever the world for
Christ's name puts unto us, we shall patientely suffer it. For this is our
comfort, that they that persecute us, neither know Christ nor the father,
though they think and boaste them self never so high. Moreover let us not
be ignoraunte, Romans 8.
that the persecutions and tribulacio^s of this world, be not to be compared to
the joy and bliss, that is prepared for us. And therewith let us comfort
our selves that we may live with a quiet mind in this present world,
through Christ our lord. Amen.

The gospel on Whytsonday. Ioh. 14.
Woodcut illustration of the feast of Pentecost, with the Holy Ghost
(represented as a dove) descending upon Christ's disciples.IF ye love me,
keep my commandments, and I will pray the father and he shall give you and
other comforter, that he may bide with you for ever, even the spirit of
truth, whom the world can not receive, because the world seethe him not,
neither knows him. But ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be
in you. Mat. 28
I will not leave you comfortelesse, but will come to you.

Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but ye se me, for I live,
and you shall live. That day shall ye know that I am in my father, and you in
me, and I in you. Ioh. 15. 1 Ioh. 5. 2. Ioh. 1
He that has my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves
me. And he that loves me, shall be loved of my father: and I will love him, and
will show mine own self to him, Act. 15
Judas says unto him, not Judas Iscarioth, Lord what is done that thou wylt
show thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto
him. If a man love me, he will keep my sayings: and my father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. He that loves me not, keeps
not my sayings: And the word which ye hear is not mine, but the fathers
which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with
you. But the comforter, which is the hollye ghost Ioh. 15. and.16. Act. 2.
whom my father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Let not your hearts be grieved, neither fear. Ye have heard
how I said unto you: I go, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would
verily rejoice, because I said: I go unto the father. For the father is
greater then I, Ioh. 13 and 16..
And now have I showed you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye
might believe. Hereafter will I not talk many words unto you. For the prince
of this world comes, and Ioh. 12. and.16.
has naught in me. But that the world may know that I love the father. And
as the father gave me commandment, even so do I.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe apostels were ever of that mind, The ignorance of ye flesh
before the holy ghost was confirmed in them, that the kingedome of Christ
should have been temporal and wordly, wherein he should have mightily reigned, as
in times paste did David and Solomon. Truly when Judas, not the Iscariot,
according to this saying, did ask Christ in his last supper: Lord what is
the cause then, that thou will show thy self unto us, and not unto the world?
Christ did lead him with the other disciples away, from this hope and trusting
of a temporal kingedome, to those things that were more necessary, which was
ye fulfillyng of his word. And therefore he does teach in this gospel.

First of all, he teachethe here what the fruit of our love toward god is,
which must needs flow out of the heart, and cannot stand without faith.
For how can I love him, Love toward God.
of whom I hope and look for no goodness? For in that I look for goodness of
Christ, that I hope and trust in him, and set al my consolacion and comfort
in him, that faith (I say) only brings to pass, which receives the word,
and thereby knows, that the father will be known and glorified in this
Christ alone. Ioh. 1.
And that is the meaning of this sentence: Who so ever believes not that he
receives of his fulness, and that by Christ he has a merciful father in
heaven, and remission of sins, righteousness and salvation, and moreover yt it
is God through Christ, that keeps us and defends us from the ieopardyes
and periles of this world, he loves not Christ, but rather his own propre
works, righteousness and wisdom. Moreover, where Christ is neither loved nor
known, there (of a suertye) is his word neither observed, nor kept. And
contrary wise: Where the same merciful father, with all his benefits done
unto us, is known, and all our hope cast in him by Christ, yt is not
possible but that there shall be true love toward Christ. True love wylleth,
that god wills: lives according to his godly will: has great delight and
pleasure to hear, what god desires of us, and when he hears it, he
fulfilleth it in work. And such faith and love did Moses require of the
people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.
saying: Hear o Israel, the lord our God is one lord only, and thou shall
love the lord thy god, with all thy heart with all thy soul etc. Faith.
Chieffely here note, that Moses, as a law gyuer, requires faith and hope of
the heart toward the only god, that he is the same, that keeps and
preserves the people; and will be to us a merciful father. And after that he
requires love toward god (though he cannot give it by the law) that we
should love god with all our heart, with all our soul with all our might. And on
this wise Moses draws us from all creature, and directs us to god only.
Moreover he desires such manner of love, Love toward God.
that not constrained, but freely and volutarily shall serve god, and keep his
commandments, and fulfill his will, as ye nature of love is. Which more
plainly we find in the gospel, Mat. 13
that ye seed that fell in a good ground, gave fruit. etc. Here thou hear
that ye word of god, taken with the heart through preaching, brings forth
fruit. By ye word we receive faith: from faith comes love toward god and our
neighbor, and of love, comes ye fulfilling of gods co^maundeme^ts. Finally:
Faith and love bring a godly and a christian co^uersacion and life. Wherefore
Christ in the gospel of this day, constrains no man by the law, but
exhorts them to faith and love, as they that willyngly would keep his word
and fulfill his comaundment according to saint Paul's saying: 1. Tim. 1
how that the law is no^ g^uen unto the righteous, but unto the ungodly,
disobedient, and sinners.

Secondaryly, this gospel teaches, The ki^gdome of god ioin the hearts of ye
faithful.
where Christ will have his kingedome and dominion, namely in ye hearts of ye
faithful. Likewise he promises us here not only that if we show this love
outwardly with ye word, that ye father shall love us, but also more greater and
more excellent things. that is to save* that he with the father, and the
virtue of the holy ghost will come unto us. O comfort O grace. It was out
dewty to (...) unto him, seeing that our nature is so corrupt, and wants so
much ame^demente. But behold, God will come unto us.
so merciful is our god, that he preuenteth us, and promises to come unto us,
by Christ. And what will he do with us? He will make him a dwellinge place with
us. If we considre the disposition of our nature and first nativity, we
shall find, that our heart is the dwelling place of the devil: Which alas is
to true, in so much that S. Paul says: Ephe. 2.
that naturally we were ye children of wrath, even as well as other. And for
this original sin, that is grafte in us, god by right might condemn us
wretched creatures. But yet considre how mercifully and goodly he handles us,
which not all only forgiueth us our original and actual sin (as they call
it) so mercifully through Christ, but also he gives unto us Christ himself.
And so he gives him unto us, yt he with him voutchsafeth to dwell in us,
whereby Satan is expulsed and driven away, 1 Cor. 6.
and our hearts made the dwelling place and temple of the holy ghost. He now
that here in this world shows us so great grace and favor and voutchsafeth
to have his kingdom in us, and which does daily deliver and defend us from
all false doctrine and temptacion of the devil, and finally, Mat. 17
from all evil, without doubt, in the life to come, will grant us also
everlastingly to live and reign with him without end. So that in any wise, we
take heed in the mean season, that we love and believe his word, and fulfill
his will. To this pertains the saying of S. Paul, where he says, that we
are the temple of god. 1 Cor. 6.
And also in an other place, that god lives, dwells and moves in every one
of us, Act. 17.
as it is written in the acts of the apostels.

Thirdely, this gospel learneth us, wherefore, and for what cause the holy
ghost shall be sent, which Christ before, with so many words promises to
send, for thus he says: That Comforter, The office of ye holy go^
even the holy ghost, whom my father shall send in my name he shall teach you
al things, and bring all to your remembrance, what so ever I have told you.
Whereoute it is evident and plain, that the holy ghost is sent into the world
to teach. Now if we cannot know god in Christ, without the holy ghost must be
present and learn us, so must it needs follow, that we, as of our selves,
can do nothing, Ioh. 3.
in those things that pertayne to godlynes and salvation: And yt (without we
are lightened of this spirit) there is nothing in us, but darkness, The flesh
is darkness. Ioh. 1.
as S. John the Evangelist witnesses, saying: The light shines in the
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. Where is now (I beseech you) the
glory of the flesh? what can our reason and our wisdom bring to pass?
Think you that the holy ghost was promised to the apostels, and all gods
elect without a cause? But I would have the verily believe, that Christ did
well perceive and know, that no mortal man could have come unto the knowledge
of god, then by this spirit. Wherefore else would he have promised and sent
it? Now for as it is expediente and plain, that the office of the holy ghost
is to teach, not part or half, but al. Print this in thine heart that
follows: He shall bring in to your remembrance, all that I have spoken. For I
hear not in this place, that he shall teach any other thing than Christ
taught before, but only that he shall bring into the disciples remembrance
the ^^ataynge which Christ had preached? The holy ghost does in spite.
Hereto pertains, that the foresaid spirit shall be sent in Ch^istes name.
Moreover, if the holy ghost shall teach no new thing unto thapostels, but
make them meet to take and understand the preachinge of the gospel, who then
has given such power to the Romish spirituality to ordain and make in the
church so many traditions of men, against this text? Let a christian man learn
here also, that the doctrine of Christ is sufficient to our salvation, as S.
Peter said unto Christ: Thou haste the words of everlasting life. And in no
wise forget, that no mortal man can understand this doctrine of Christ,
except it be written in the heart of man, through the holy ghost: as the
prophet Jeremy clearly shows in the 31. chapter.

The peace of Christ.
Fourthely, Christ promises his peace unto his disciples and all his elect, in
this gospel. And there is a notable and vehement significa^^o^ in this word.
My peace: For Christ shows here a difference between his peace, and the
peace of the world. The peace of the world, The peace of ye world.
though it be an excellent gift, and a gift that all only comes of god, for
the which, according to the doctrine of S. Paul, a Chr^stiane man is bound
to pray, yet notwithstanding, yt is temporal, and not song durable. And it may
often chance that outwardly I shall feel peace, and inwardly warr^ in the
conscience. But it goes not so with them a^^ peace. For though that it have
outwardly resista^ce and is tempted, yet nowithstanding, it remains
immovable, and not due not ^uer^^^e, because it knows, that with Christ, the
prince of the world has no ^ight in him. (...) Christ, that god in heaven is
a merciful father (...) him. Y^ knows that nothing can chance unto him,
against the good will of god, and that persecution shall not endure for ever.
Ioh. 14
Finallye, Act. 14.
that through such like tribulacion he shall have a celestial entringe into
glory. This peace Christ left and did give us. Furthermore, as Christ gave us
this peace of his great mercy and grace, without any deserving, so that it is
necessary, that we comprehend it in our hearts with faith. For works can do
nothing in this behalf, as witnesses S. Paul saying. Romans 5.
Because therefore yt we are justified by faith, we have peace with god.

Fiftely, this gospel teaches us, The word of god does comfort us in
persecucion.
yt in persecution and tribulacion is nothing so suer and comfortable, as to
be furnished and armed with the word of god. And for that cause, Christ showed
before unto his disciples, yt he should suffer his passion, and thereby enter
into the glory of his father, saying: And now I have told you before yt come,
that when it is come to pass, ye may believe. Romans 15
And in like manner says S. Paul. What so ever things are written before
time, are written for our learning, that we thorough patience and comfort of
the scripture, might have hope. Therefore in as much as the confession and
knowledge of the word of god and the gospel, cannot be brought to pass in this
world without persecution, seeing that the devil is so plain an enemy and
aduersarye thereof, it is meet and couenience to al true Christian men, to
be so instructed and armed with the word of god, that our house builded upon
a rock, do not fall in time of persecution and storms of temptacion, Mat. 7
and great winds. Which God grant to us every one. Amen.

The gospel on Trinitye sunday John. 3.
THere was a man of the pharyseis, na^^ Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. Ioh. 7.
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him: Rabbi, we know that tho^
(...) a teacher come from god: for no man cou^^ do such miracles as thou
do, except god were with him. Jesus answered and lord unto him. Verily
verily I say unto the, except a man be borne from above, he can not se the
kyngedome of god. Nicodemus says unto him: how can a man be borne when he is
old? can he enter into his mothers womb and be borne again? Jesus answered
Ioh. 4. and. 7. Tit. 3. a Romans 8.
Verelye verily I say unto the: Except a man be borne of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of god. Ioh. 4. and. 7. Tit. 3. a
Romans 8.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh and th^^ which is borne of the
spirit, is spirit. Maruayle not thou that I said to the: ye must be borne
from above. The wind blows where it lusts, and thou hear the sound
thereof Eccl. 11.
but can not tell whence it comes, and whether it goes. So is every one
that is borne of the spirit.

Nycodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be? Jesus
answered and said unto him: Art thou a master (...) Israel and know not
these things? Verily verily I say unto the: (...) speak that we do know, and
testifye that we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have told you
earthly things, and yet believe not, how shall you believe if I tell you of
heavenly things?

Ephe. 4
And no man asc^nded up into heaven, but he that came do^^^ from heaven, even
the son of man which is in heaven.

And as Moses lift us the serpente in wilderness, Nu. 21.
even so must the ^onne of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him,
perish ^o^, but have eternal life.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel we have and excellent disputacion of the righteousness of the
flesh, and also of the righteousness of the spirit. Christ teaches us the
one, and Nicodemus defends the other: But so, that in the mean while, he is
content to be taught and informed of Christ.

First of all let us considre the person of Nicodemus, as it is here
described of the euangeliste, The description of Nicodemus.
how unwisely and vndiscretelye he speaks of regeneracion. Whereout we may
note, what reason and man's strength can do, in understanding of divine and
heavenly things. The evangelist says on this wise: There was a man of the
phariseis named Nicodemus, a ruler among the Jews. Herein he declares that
Nicodemus, as conceri^ng his outward conversation, led an honest and a
worshipful, life, which could not be reprehended or rebuked, so that he was
taken and counted one of the chief rulers amongst the Jews. Here also thou
haste the description of the person, which after worldely fashion and manner is
taken and counted both wise and righteous. Yet this nowistanding, The flesh is
fearful.
there is not so great strength or boldenes in Nicodemus, that he durst
speak unto Christ openly, though he knew him to be a teacher sent from
god, whose wondres and miracles, he could not deny. Why does not reason here
step forth boldly, and openly profess the doctrine of Christ? For so
Christ would have it, according to that he spoke: Whosoever knowledgeth me
before men, Mat. 10
him will I knowledge before my father which is in heaven, and the angels.
But reason can not do this, for it passes and excels far his capacitye
and conning. He will not be charged with the hatred of the world for the
truths sake. For the which cause, Christ will have us mortify this old
Adame in us, and become a new creature. But what knows or understands the
flesh and our nature here of? Truly nothing at all. as it is plain and
euidente here declared by this Nicodemus. For Christ speaks of a new and a
spiritual nativity, but Nicodemus contrary wise understands a carnal and a
fleshly nativity. How can a man (says he) be borne, when he is old? can he
enter into his mothers womb and be borne again? We are all Nicodemes,
ignorant of godly things.
Here you hear in what wise this wordly righteous man answers to godly
things. Yea, Christ himself must open and declare unto him in what wise a man
must become a new creature, and be borne again, yet he understands it not,
but demands again, saying: How may these things be? What other thing can a
man se and perceive in this Nicodemus, then ignorance and incredulity?
Wherefore if his outward co^uersacio^ had been a great deal more glorious the^
it was, yet could it not have pleased god. and why? Because that god does not
regard ye outward fashions of men, but judges according to the heart and faith
of a man, as the prophet Ieremye declares, saying: Thou o lord, look only
upon faith. Iere. 5. To. 14.
And S. Paul to the Romans, says: What soever is not of faith, that same is
sin. Mat. 5.
For first we must get the inward righteousness, if the outward shall please
god. For if we want righteousness inwardly, Christ may straight way say unto
us, as he said to the Iues: Except your righteousness excede the righteousness of
the scribes and phariseis, ye cannot enter into ye kingdom of heaven. Therefore
likewise as Nicodemus had here but a rude and blind understanding, in those
things that pertain to ye grace of god and our salvation, even so be we
every one, rude and ignorant, and ye very old Adam, yea nothing but flesh and
carnal, according to ye saying of Christ: That (says he) which is borne of
flesh, is flesh. What ye scripture calls flesh.
If it be not renewed and lightened with the spirit. I understand by flesh the
whole universal nature of man, both body, soul, reason, understanding,
freewyl, wtoute the holy ghost. For such a man, yea such a body of sin, ca^ do
nothing but sin, how excellently so ever he shines outwardly. though outwardly
he garnisheth himself with never so many works. Which thing S. Paul
expresses with manifest words, Romans 8.
to the Romans. And here also it is plain and euidente by this Nicodemus,
which in the sight of the world, was holy and righteous.

Secondarelye, The new birthe is necessary.
Christ teaches us in this gospel a new nativity, which Nicodemus could not
comprehend or understand, and so speaks of it, that it may apeare to be a
thing necessary to salvation. He says on this wise: Except a man be
borne a new, he can not see the kyngedome of God. To se the kyngedome of
God, is to be justified. Now mark and considre what Christ speaks of this
iustifiyng, and contrariwise what Nicodemus thinks thereof. To see what ye
ki^gdom of god is
Christ concludes, that no work, no reason, no outward conversation, can
iustifye and save us, except allonlye that the man be borne a new. Contrary
wise thus thinks Nycodemus. that if our outward conversation, life, and
working be allonly confirmable unto the law, that for those works, god is
constrained and bound to iustifye and save us. But herein he erreth greatly.
Not Nicodemus, but Christ hat here the victory, forasmuch as all men are
liars, and all only god is true. Psall 115 Romans 3.
Wherefore let us sharply mark and considre, in what wise this new
nativity and regeneracio^ is so brought to pass. He says on this wise:
Except a man be borne of water and of the spirit, he can not come into the
kingdom of god. Here thou hear, Baptism.
that this regeneracion and new nativity, begins in Baptism. For baptism
is a sign of mortefiynge our flesh, as S. Paul says: We be buried with him
by baptism into death, Romans 6.
etc. and this is one part of this new nativity. Furthermore, in baptysme the
hollye ghost is given us, which, we being so mortefied, does reuyue and
regenerate us again, rules, draws, pulls and changes us, and so works
in us, that we sauoure and understand now no more carnal, but spirytual
things. We desire not wordly things, but heavenly things, and live to
righteousness. And this is the other part of this new natyuitie. Where out yt
appears, What it is to be borne again.
that to be borne again, is no other thing, then to dye, as concerning syn,
and to line to ryghteousnes, through the spiryt and faith And where so ever this
is, there is the kingdom of god seen, and the entering thereunto opens. But I
beseech you, what glory has here the righteousness of Nicodemus? Truly before
god it is but durte and dung, Phil. 3.
eue^ as S. Paul did reckene and count all his righteousness that came of the
law, he being a Jew and circumcised, for dunge. For not that, which comes
of our reason, but that the spirit works in us, pleases god. For that,
that is borne of the spirit, is spiritual, and of great reputacion before
god. Therefore S. Paul to the Ephesians says on this wise: Ephe. 4
So then as concerning the conversation in times paste, lay from you that
old man, which marreth himself through deceiuable lusts, and be you renewed
in the spirit of your mind. How can reason do or comprehend these things? when
in earthly and bodily things he is so rude and ignorant, that he cannot tell,
namely, from whence the wind comes, or whether it will? Briefelye, to bring
to pass this new nativity, we must needs have the holy ghost, though
the papists extol never so highelye, the righteousness of the flesh.

Thirdely, this gospel teaches us, Thoroughe Christ we have obtained the
holy ghost.
who has obtained and given us this spirit, by the which we are new
regenerate and borne again, truly Jesus Christ the son of man, which
allonly descended from heaven, and ascended up into heaven. But wherewith has
he obtained and deserved this? Even therewith, because that he was exalted on
the cross, like as the serpent was in ye wilderness. But what serpente was
that? In times past the children of Israel murmered against the lord in
wilderness then was the lord angry, and sent fierye serpents among the people,
which bote the people, so that there dyed much people in Israel. And Moses
praiynge then for the people, the lord said unto him. Number. 21
Make the a brazen serpent, and set it up for a token. Whosoever is bitten, and
looks on it, shall live. The serpent is ye figure of Christ.
This figure applies Christ unto himself,, as though he would say: I shall
be crucified and put to death, and with my death, the wrath of my heavenly
father shall be pacefied for the sins of the world, that whosoever is bitten
with sin, and looks upon me, which am crucified, that is, whosoever
believes in me, shall not perish, To believe in Christ.
but have everlasting life. Behold, on this manner Christ is set forth
unto us, as he that only forgiueth us our sin, and gives us the holy
ghost, makes us new creatures, the sons and heirs of god, so that we
believe and set our confidence and trust in him. God grant unto us, that
we may have a true and perfect faith. Amen.

The gospel on the first sunday after Trinitye sunday. Luc. 16,
THe was a certain rich man which was clothed in purple and fine white, and
fared deliciously every day. And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus,
which lay at his g ateful of sores, desiryng to be refreshed with the cromes
that fell from the rich man's board, and no man gave unto hi^. The dogs came
also and licked his sores. And it fortuned that the beggar died, and was carried
by the angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried. And
being in hell in torments, he lift up his eyes and saw Abraham a far of, and
Lazarus in his bosom, and he cried and said: Father Abraham, have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus, that he may dip the typ of hi finger in water, and cool my
tung, for I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said: Son, Gal. 6^
remember that you in thy life time, receauedst thy pleasure, and contrary wise,
Lazarus received pain. But now he is comforted, and you art punished: Beyond all this, between us and you there is a great space set, so that they which would go
from hence to you, cannot, neither may come from thense to us. Then he said: I
pray the therefore father, se^d him to my fathers house, for I have five
brethren for to warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
Abraham said unto him: They have Moses and the prophets, let the^ hear them.
And he said: nay father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead,
they will repent: He said unto him: If If they hear not Moses and the
prophets, neither will they believe though one to se from death again.

THE EXPOSITION.
First of all, A description of the rych man. 1. Ti. 6. Mat. 19 What it is to
be rich.
this gospel treats of a rich man, in whom was neither faith nor
charity. This word, rich, is here taken as Paul took it, when he said to
Timothy: Charge them that are rich in this world, etc. And in the gospel of
Matthew: Yt is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a nedle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. In this place, a rich man
signifies him, whose heart is set upon riches which thinks on nothing, then
upon riches: reioiseth in nothing, then in riches. Finally, whose heart
deliteth in nothing then in that devilish mammon. And s. Paul chiefly for this
cause, calls these rich me^, the rich men of this world, for that, that
they be given to transitory and worldely things, more then to celestial
things. Otherwise if riches of themself had been evil, Abraham, Solomon,
Naaman Sirus, had been damned, which were very rich, but they did not abuse
their riches. Therefore this rich man is d^scribed, not as a good, but as an
evil tree. Now if ye will hear the fruits of an euel tree, Lo: He clothed
himself with purple and costly linen etc. Doubtless he should not have been
damned for his clothing, if he had not had so great pleasure in them, and
sought wordly honor and glory therein, utterly forgetting the poor Lazarus.
We read of Joseph when he was in Egipte, Genesis 41
how excellently he was clothed in rich apparel, and a chain of gold about
his neck, and yet pleased god, for because his heart was not set upon pomp
and riches. And that this rich man had his heart and mind fixed upon gorgious
raiment, and delicate meats, that that follows plainly approves yt, where it
is said: He fared deliciously every day. The wise man says: Eccle. 3.
There is a time of mirth, and a time of morning. And a christian man, so
ought to weight upon time, that he ever remember the saying of Saint Paul,
Romans 12
which says: Be merry with them that be merye, and weep with them that
weep. But when a man begins to make of eatinge, gluttony, and of
drinkinge, dronckennesse, in so much that his heart forgets God, and
seeks therein but his own pleasure and voluptuousnes, it is not possible,
but that he shall forgette his poor neighbor, and take little thought for his
necessitye. Now to forget god and his neigbour, brings everlasting
da^nacio^. Such an ungodly engorger and glotto^ does this gospel here set
forth, which takes so great pleasure in his vesture, and in eatinge, that he
forgets God, and cares not for the poor, and has so little charity toward
his neighbor, that the dogs has more pity, and does more good unto this
poor Lazarus, then he did.

Secondarily, To be poor what it is in scripture.
a certain poor man Lazarus by name, is here described. The scripture calls
him a poor man, not only which has nothing of his own, but him also which
with his heart forsakes all wordly things, and cleaves allonly unto god, so
that a rich man may have this pouertye in his heart, being always ready, when
it shall please god, to forsake all that he has. Such pouertye had not that
rich man in his heart, to whom Christ said: Go thy way, and sell all that
thou have, Mat 19 Mar. 10 Luc. 18
and give it to the poor, and come and follow me, for he when he hard that he
should forsake his riches, did morn, and was very sad, for he was a man that
had great possessions, and it grieved him shrewdly to forsake them, and he had
rather to have kept them still. But here we see this Lazarus both inwardely and
outwardly poor, and is a good tree, as the fruictes in him greatly do declare.
But what were his fruits? He lies at the rich man's gate, full of sores, and
desired to be filled with the cromes that fell from the rich man's table. Behold
is not here a singular fruit of faith, to have in such extreme miserye and
calamity, so great patience? He cries not, he howleth not, but holds his
peace, even as Job did, when he said: God gave it, Job. 1.
God has taken it away, the name of god be blessed. Is not this also a
singular virtue and fruit of an excellent faith to be commended? for as much as
he desires not of his deinty dishes, but all only ye cromes yt fell from the
table. Truly an unfaithful heart could never have done this, for ye more it
has, the more it desires to have. The prophet David says: Psalm. 33
that the rich men shall want and suffer hunger, but they that seek the lord
shall want no manner of thing. But how can a rich man hungre? Thus truly.
for as much as there is no measure in his covetousness, and because he ever
fears, that he shall never have sufficient.

Here have we now a very saint, a faithful heart, which in so great misery
and calamity, in such great pain and necessitye, with patience ouercometh
the deliciousnes and glory of princes.

The reward of Lazarus and ye rich man.
Thyrdely, we se here in this gospel the end and reward, as well of this rich
manne, as of the poor Lazarus. Both changed their lives: Lazarus is carried
of the angels into Abrahames bosom. The rich man was buried in hell. I beseech
the now which of these seem unto the rich? Which of them gat the better?
Truly this is no little change. For he that was rich, now is poor: and he
that was poor, is now made rich. Who had not rather now (if he had
choice) to be this poor Lazarus, then the rich man? Who had not rather
be with Lazarus in Abrahames bosom, then in hell with this rich manne? To
be carried into Abrahames bosom, To be in Abraha^s bosom.
is to sleep in God, in the power of God, and there to be kept and preserved
until the day of judgment, tarriyng with a suer hope and confidence, the
coming of our lord Jesus Christ. For as it is written: Sap. 5. To be buried
in hell.
The sowles of the righteous are in the hands of god. To be buried in hell is to
dye in desperacion, and to be kept in terror and fear of everlasting death,
unto such time, as that last sentence of Christ be spoken: Go you wicked in
to everlasting fire. In this flame and heat of desperacion, is this rich man
tourmented, desiring that his tung might be cooled by Lazarus. But he must
hear these words: Remember son, that thou received thy pleasure in thy
life. And: There is a great space set between us and you, so that they which
go down from hence to you, can not neither may they pass over from thence
unto us. Here is no help nor comfort left to the rich manne, And sueclye
the saying of Christ is fulfilled: Woe be unto you that laughe here, Luc. 6.
for you shall weep and wayle. Lazarus on the other side, is recreated with
perpetual comfort and sola^e, which in his life time, before had none. These
things O thou rich manne, considre in thy heart, and see that thou make the
friends of the wicked mammon, least that like thing chance unto the, as unto
this rich man,

Fourthely, this gospel teaches us, All that is necessary to our salvation,
are sufficitly in holy scripture
that al things that are both necessary to be known and don, are contained in
holy scripture, wherefore we ought allonly to credit and believe the same holy
scripture When the rich manne was utterly destituted of comfort and healpe,
he would gladlye have sent Lazarus unto his brethrene, to warn them hereof,
least they likewise should chance to comme into that place of tourmente.

But it was told him: They have Moses and the prophets, let them harken unto
them. For Moses did witness of Christ, saying: Who so ever will not harken
unto this prophet (namely Christ) shall be punished. For the prophets bear
witness also of Christ. And therefore, whosoever hears Moses and the
prophets, which bear witness of Christ, the same hears Christ him self.
Seeing now that Christ allonly is to be heard, where is become now men's
tradicions? and our new found doctoures, that teach Diriges (as they call it)
and masses for sowles departed? All these things must fall, for we may not
harken unto men, but unto Christ, of who^ the heavenly father bears witness,
saying: This is my well-beloved son: Here him. To whom with the father and the
holy ghost, be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

The gospel on the second sunday after triuitye sunday Luc. 14.
Mat, 22 Apo. 16
A Certain man ordained a great supper, and bad many, and sent his servant
at supper time, to say to them that were bydden: come, for all things are
now ready. And they all at once began to make excuse. The first said unto
him: I have bought afarme, and I must go and see it, I pray the have me
excused. And an other said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove
them, I pray the, have me excused. And an other said: I have married a wife,
and therefore I can not come. And the seruante returned and brought his master
word again thereof.

Then was the goodman of the house displeased, and said to his seruante: Go out
quickly into the streets and quarters of the city and bring in hither the
poor, and the feeble, and the halt, and the blind. And the servant said:
Lord, it is done, as thou have commanded, and yet there is room. And the
lord said to the servant Go out unto the hye ways and hedges, and Genesis 19
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you,
that none of those men which were bydden, shall taste of my supper.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this similitude, The grace of God.
first of all is praised the great godnes, grace and mercy of god, which he
has so mightily showed us, by his son Jesus Christ, without any deserving
of our works, in that, that he compares it here to a supper. For all suppers
are most chiefly prepared and ordained for mirth, and not for heuines, that a
man should eat, drink, and be merye. Likewise, as a supper here upon earth,
is ordained and prepared to make men merye and light hearted, even so this
great supper of the grace of god and the gospel, has god prepared for our
great consolacion and comfort, wherein we should rejoice and be merry and glad.
For what other thing is the gospel (by the which the great goodness and mercy
of god is showed us so gentely and sweetly through Christ) then a good and merry
tidinges? The gospel.
It could be no lie that the angel showed unto the shephardes when Christ was
borne, saying: Behold, Luce. 2.
I bring you tidinges of great joy, which shall happen unto all people
Neither does the prophet David monish us with out cause to rejoice in these
days of grace, saying: This is the day which the lord has made, Ps. 117
let us rejoice and be glad in it. Now seeing that god our merciful father
has so louingely prepared for us this supper Supper
through Christ, without any deserving of our part. Without dout, it is a toke^
of his great love toward us, specially if we considre, that not allonly the
Jews, but also all the heithe^, publicans and siners ar called hereunto. And
therefore Christ might well say: Ioh. 3. The love of god.
That god so loved the world, yt he gave his only son. Here thou hear, that
allo^ly love moved god by Christ, to prepare this supper of ye grace of the
gospel. Then if love moved him to prepare this supper, so it is a greater token
of love, that he has called us thereunto. For what should it avail me, that
this great supper is highely praised and commended, if I were feign to sit
without the door, and were not called nor letten in? And that we should pe^ceaue
that Christ has not allonly prepared this supper, but has bid al men
thereunto, the eua^geliste says here, that the lord of the supper sent his
servant to them that were bidden, to tell them that it was supper time, and to
bid them come, for all was ready. This seruante signifies thapostels, which
Christ first of all sent to preach to the Jews, and after when they had
despised the preaching of the gospel, and made them unworthy thereof, they were
sent to ye Gentyls. Thappostels calls us to this supper.
And what did they preach? They said: Al things are ready, now come. Christ has
showed us the will of the father, Christ has suffered death for our sins,
and is risen for our rightousnes, ascended up into heaven, and has gotten us
ye holy ghost wherefore al things pertaining to our salvation are ready This
did the holy apostels so diligently prech so yt Esaias did not speak in vain
of them, when he said: Esai. 52
O how bewtiful are the feet of thembassadour that bri^geth good tidings and
precheth health What ca^ we desire any more? Health is obtained us of mere grace:
By grace we be called unto salvation. This allo^ly is now required of us, yt we
come. Therefore let us not despise this supper, but rather let us have us to
Christ, yt we may get righteousness and salvation.

Secondarily, First ye gospel was preched unto the Jews. Mat. 15
we se in this similitude the calling of the Jews to the grace of the gospel,
and in what wise they be rejected for there incredulite. For they were the first
that should be called, as Christ himself witnesses, saying: I am not sent
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And Paul with Barnabas in
the acts of thapostles, said: Act. 13.
It behooved first the word of god to be spoken unto you etc. But how did the
Jews hear the calling? They begone all to excuse the^, contrary to the counsel
of the prophet David, saying: Ps. 49.
To day if you will hear his voice, harden not you hearts. They will not follow
this faithful counsel, but they excuse themselves and will not come. The
first says: The Jews in obedience and incredulitye.
I have bought a farm, and must needs go forth to look upon it, I pray the
hold me excused. The other said: I have boughte a yoke of oxen, and must go
forth to prove them, I pray the hold me excused. The third said: I have
married a wife, and I cannot come. as though he could not be a married man and a
christian. but this it is. From ye beginning has ye Jews ever be^ stubborn and
disobedient wretches. How often times (I pray you) did they murmur against god
i^ ye wilderness? How often did they provoke god unto anger? Act. 7.
does not s. Steue^ bear witness yt ye Jews were both the betrayers and
murderers of Christ? sayi^g Ye stiff necked, ye have always resisted the
holy ghost. Now if he that bought the farm, set more by the farm, than he
did by the supper, for bying of the farm he should have been damned. For he
yt has much riches is not damned, but he whose heart is set upon riches. ^.
Co. 6.
For as Paul says, we should be as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things. Abraham bought a piece of land of ye children of Heth, for his sepulcher
and other uses, Ge. 24:
was he damned for so doing? No, For to bye land and oxen, or other cattle,
pertayneth not to the ki^gdom of Christ, but belongs unto the politic order,
and may therefore lawfully be done. But if I would so stick and cleave to
wordly things, that I should forget heavenly things, that should damn me.
After this manner we speak of mariag: To have a wife is a good thing and
lauful. But if I love mi wife better tha^ god, it is to my damnacion. Therefore
S. Paul teacheh us, ^ Co. 7.
that they that have wives, be as though they had none. that is, in the
acknowledging of the gospel, I shall not permit my wife to be an impediment
unto me, but rather for the gospels sake (if need require) I shall be ready to
forsake wife children and all. Finally, those men outwardely appear here to be
good men, but while they will not believe the gospelle of Christ, this
sentence goethe upon them: None of those men that were called, shall cast of
my supper.

The calling of yt heithens
Thirdely, we se here, that while the chief in Jury did despise this supper,
how god called thereunto all sinners, whores and publicanes, out of every
street of the town, that they should knowledge there sins, and are grace and
pardon of Christ. Also we see here the gentyles, that were not named the people
of god, now to be called to this excellent and great supper. Here is two
things also to be noted First, that it has pleased god to call the pore and
the weak: that is, those that be of a contrite heart, and a lovely spirit, and
by the preaching of the law, be come unto the knowledge and repentance of
their sins. For by those words (compel them to come in) properly we
understand the preaching of the law For such be let into this supper: that
is, they be comforted through the gospel, Luc. 1.
as the virgin Marye says: He fills the hungry with good things and
lets the rich go emptye. The second that thou shalt mark is, that after
the resurrection of Christ, all prophecies, Osee. 2.
both of the rejecting of the Jews, and of the calling of the gentiles, must
needs be fullfilled. To go into the streets of the town is none other thing,
then to preach the gospel to al men, as Christ says in the gospel of John:
Ioh. 10.
I have yet other sheep that be not of this fold, and those must I bring.
The calling of the gentiles, well considered in faith, causes a man to have
great comfort. For who would now be discomforted, when we hear that god all
only for incredulity, has rejected his people, which did excel us with
so great privileges, and received us sinners unto his mercy and grace, that
never did good at al? Wherefore good people let us beware, that we now being
called to this supper of grace, be not loath to come thereunto in which supper
we shall everlastingly see and taste how good and sweet the lord is. Psalm.
35. and.85.
Which god the father grant us, through his son our lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The gospel on the third sunday after trinity sunday. Luc. 15.
Mat. 9. Mar. 2.
THen resorted unto him all the publicanes and sinners for to hear him. And the
phariseys and scribes murmured saying: He receueth sinners and eats with
them. But he put forth this parable unto the^, saying: Mat. 18
What man of you having an hundredth sheep, if he lose one of the^, does not
leave nynty and nine in the wilderness, and goes after ye which is lost until
he find it? And when he has found it, he lays it on his shoulders with joy.
And as soon as he comes home, he calls together his lovers and neighbors,
saying unto them. Rejoice with me for I have found my sheep which was lost.
I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents, more then over ninty and nine just persons, which need no
repentance Either what woman having ten grotes, if she lose one, does not
light a candle, and sweep the house and seek dilligently till she find it?
and when she has found it, she calls her lovers and her neigh boures
together, saiynge: Rejoice with me, for I have found my grote which I had
lost. Likewise, I say unto you, shall therbe joy in the presence of the
angels of God over one sinner Luc. 5.
that repents.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis gospel teaches us first of al, how that publicans and sinners drew nigh
unto Christ to hear him. And although they were received and defended of
Christ, Psalm. 5.
yet he is not such a God, that has pleasure in sin. Therefore it is
convenient, that we learn to know a difference between sinners. Vnshameful
sinners.
There be sinners of such unshame fastenes, that they live in open sins, and
in such wise increase therein, that they forget god and all honesty, and glory
and rejoice in most abominable things, and seek praise in wickedness. And
these villanes, for the great crimes and gross sins, Pro. 2.
which they do use and daily commit, even the world counts and takes
them for knaves and vagabundes, not worthy that any divine scripture should make
much rehersall of them. There be also other sinners, which outwardly feign
holiness, but ar in their hearts most mischievous wretches. Against whom both
the prophets and the gospel cries out. Esaias. 3. Esa. 52.
Esaias accuses them for this mischief because they call good, evil, and
evil, good, and make light, darkness, and darkness light, etc. and David
witnesses of the^, that in their hearts they think, that there is no god,
Psalm.
though outwardly they appear never so good and holy. Does not this apeare
also in the gospel? Christ says: Mat. 5.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kingdom of heaven. And such hypocrites
here in this gospel Christ calls just, not that be fore god they be just,
but that they think themselves to be just, and need not repentance. Si^nes
that acknowledge there sins.
There be also sinners, which knowledgynge their offenses be sorye for their
evil deeds, and draw unto Christ, for to ask pardone and grace. Such a
sinner and publicane was Zacheus, which joyfully received Christ our lord into
his house, and at the hearing of his word, said: Behold, I give half my good
to the poor: and if I have defrauded any man, I restore him four fold. Of
such says Christ in on other place: Mat. 9.
I am not come to call the just, but sinners to repentance. Such publicans and
sinners draw now nighe unto Christ. And why? To hear his word. For they
feel their sin, they knowledge their sin, they seek grace, that they might
be delivered from the borden of sin. Now forasmuch as grace, remission of
sines, rightousnes and salvation, is offered and given unto them, through the
word of Christ, without any work or deserving: Moreover, for as much as
the doctrine of Christ is the doctrine of life, it becomes them to draw
nighe unto Christ, and to here him. To hear Christ's word I say, not the word
of the law only that makes a fearful conscience. The knowledge of sin.
Where out learn, that if Christ shall be profitable unto the, thou must
first become such a publicane and sinner. that is, that thou may knoweledge
thy self to be a sinner

Secondarily, this gospel describes unto such publicans and sinners, what a
meek and merciful Christ he is unto such sinners, which repents them of
their wicked deeds, and intend to lead a holy and a good life. Christ is a
comfort to al sinners. Mat. 10
The phariseis did not allonly say of Christ: This man does receive sinners
and eats with them, but also Christ himself, excuses this his dead, (which
not a little did anger the phariseis) that he lawfully might do it. now seeing
that Christ receives sinners, and rejects no man, so that if he will be
penitente and ask grace, yt must needs follow, that for sinners he came into
the world, and to be the savior alonly of sinners: Now for as much as he is a
savior which forgiueth sin without any work or deserving, allonly of grace,
who (I pray you) would not believe in him? Who would not trust to receive all
goodness of him? If thou do diligently consider, both those similitudes
wherein he declares and proves his great charyty toward us, thou shalt
find, how plentyfullye thou may hope of ye great goodness and benignity
of Christ. The lost sheep.
First he compares him self to a man that has an hundredth sheep, which
man, if he should leese one of them, he would leave the four score and
nynety, and go seek the one lost, unto such time that he has found it: And
when he has found it, he would lay yt on his shoulders, and bring it home
again, and therefore rejoice amongst his neighbors. Even as though he
would say: You Phariseis do judge evil of me, because I receive sinners, but
I would you should know it, that for sinners I am come into the world: For
they can not help them selves. For the sin that is grafte in them, is so
great, and wayeth so heavy on their shulders, and their nature is so
corrupt, that they be a great deal more inclined to sin, then to goodness.
Finally, their free will, reason, wisdom, Genesis 6.
makes them a great deal worse, rather then better. For as much as
whatsoever is borne of flesh, Ioh. 3. Romans 8. 1 Cor. 2.
is flesh: and a fleshly man can understand nothing but fleshly things, and
cannot perceive godly things. Wherefore I, like as a good shepharde over my
elect and chosen sheep, seek them through my word, and take their sins
upon my shulders, and so bring them to the knowledge of their own sin, and
worshipping of one God. Furthermore, for as much as my father has no pleasure
in the death of a sinner, Ezec. 1
but rather that he convert and live, truly it cannot be possible, but that the
angels in heaven rejoice with me, because I have found the lost sheep, and
turned the sinner from the way of iniquity, to the following of the gospel.
And you pharyseis likewise would I bring to such a point, but ye will not be
called sinners, but just men, wherefore I am constrained to forsake you, and
healpe them that knoweledge them selves sinners. In likewise he compares
himself to a woman that has ten grotes, which leesinge one of them,
seeks so long that she finds it, etc. And he concludes both these
similitudes, saying on this wise: That their is more joy in heaven upon one
sinner that has repentance, then upon four score and ninetye just, that
think they have no need of repentance. Behold, thou haste here a Christ
that seeks the, finds the, receaueth the, justifies and saves the. Believe
in him, and thou art safe.

The nature of ypocrisye.
Thirdelye, we see here in this gospel the disposition of fained holiness, and
hypocrites. For such men do not allonlye trust in their own works, but
also count them selves holy, and contemn and despise other. I would have
the considre the cause, why these phariseis murmr so against Christ. They
say, that this Christ receives sinners, and eats with them. O thou most
envious and unreasonable Ipocrite. It were thy part to extol, magnify, and
praise this excellent and precious work of charity of Christ toward the
sinners, and behold thou art against it, and rebukest yt, as though yt were
not well and righteouslye done. Think thou, that it is not well done, that a
sinner is turned to repentance, and brought unto the knowledge of god?
Christ our savior cares not for meat and drink, but he regards much
the tournynge of a sinner to repentance. Such exaumples of charity should
thou follow also, if thou would be a right just manne, both in teachinge,
informinge, exhorting praying and deseching, so that righteousness, not
allonlye in the, but also in other, might be found. But the case stondeth thus:
Thou art against the gospel, and the gospel against the. Why ypocrisye is
against the gospel.
If thou ask why, I answer the: The gospel can not suffer, that thou
should hope and trust in thy works. Again I say: Ipocrisy cannot leave
the confidence in them. Hereout springs the strife between Abell and Cain,
between Jacob and Esai, between David and Saul: Also, that the workemenne
murmured against the householder, forbicause the last received equal reward
with the first: Item, Mat. 20
that the eldest brother disdained the yo^gest that was lost. To be short:
Christ receives and keeps company with those sinners that knowledge their
offenses, and ask grace, and he will not have them lost. And again, he
codemneth hypocrisye, for because she fained righteousness, when in deed she is
neither right nor just. Therefore all these hipocrites murmr against
Christ and his gospel, but yt helps nothing. For Christ follows the same
way, and proceadeth where he began. To whom with the father and holy ghost
be honor and praise. Amen.

The gospel on the fowerth sunday after Trinitye sunday. Luc. 6.
BE you therefore merciful, as your father also is merciful Mat. 7.
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged. Condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven, Pro. 11.
Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, and pressed down, and
shaken together, and runnynge over shall men give into your bosoms. Mat. 7.
Mat. 4
For with the same measure that ye mere with all, shall other men meat to you
again.

And he put forth a similitude unto Mat. 15
them: Can the blind lead the blind? Do they not both fall into the diche?
mat. 10
The disciple is not above his master. Every man shall be perfect, even as
his master is. Ioh. 13.
why seeste thou a mote in thy brothers eye, but consideress not the beam that
is in thine own eye? Either how canste thou say to thy brother: mat. 7.
Brother, let me pull out ye mote that is in thine eye, when thou see not the
beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out the beam out of
thine own eye first, and then shalt thou se perfectly, to pull out the moat
that is in thy brothers eye.

THE EXPOSITION.
Faith makes us acceptable unto God.
HItherto through many instructions and examples, we have sufficiently proved,
how that we attain and get remission of sins, rightuosnesse and salvation
only through faith. And moreover that no work (how holy or precious so ever
it may be) can make a man acceptable before god, except only faith, which we
have declared and taught you out of the holy srripture. For this faith so
comprehends the goodness and the love of god through Christ, that utterly he
can trust to none other thing, then to the merits of Christ, through whom
also he hops to obtain salvation. Heb. 11.
By faith (says the apostle) we have an entrance unto god. And likewise as a
true and living faith, which knows that he has a merciful father through
Christ, hanleth himself toward his god and father, so must yt likewise
break forth toward his neighbor, to help him in all need and necessity,
that he may be known thereby unto ye world, to have a right and a good faith,
and not fained. The works of charity be contrary to hipocriticall and fained
works, for it is the nature and disposition of hipocrisy, ever to seek his
own advantage, and not the profit and vtilitye of his neighbor, in so much
that Christ himself for this cause said unto the pharise is, for that, that
they condemned for a light matter, his disciples: Ose. 6
Go your way (says he) and learn what it is: I will have mercy, and no
sacrifice. Therefore likewise as Christ sometime reaches faith, and adscribeth
righteousness allonlye there unto, yea, and commends it as a fountain
whereout all goodness flows, John. 6
so other whiles he teaches the fruits of the faith, not that we are justified
by them, but that they be suer tokens and testimonialles of that faith, which
we ought to have in our heart, as saint Peter says: 1 Pet. 1.
Brethren, give the more dilygence to make your calling and election sure.
Nevertheless sometime Christ teachethe these works of charity with long
process, some time with short and few words. He declares yt shortelye,
when he says: Thou shalt love the lord thy God, Mat. 22 Luc. 10. Mat. 6.
with all thy heart, with all thy strength. And in an other place: What so
ever you would that men should do unto you, the same do unto them
likewise. But in the gospel of this day, he teaches the works of charity
in many words and plentyfullye: For he thought it not sufficient to speak
yt generallye: Be merciful. but he declares the same mercifulness here by
parts, namelye, Judge not (says he) etc. To be merciful, To be merciful
in this place signi ieth, to help our neighbor of our goodness and
charity, of what so ever need he is oppressed withal, Luc. 10.
as we see in the Samaritane, which did so great mercy on him, that fell
amongst the thieves. Out of which words yt follows, that they be good
works, wherewith we help our neighbor in all need and necessity. Which
deeds of charity, we will by order recyte one after an other.

To judge To condemn.
First of all Christ says: Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: Condemn
not, and ye shall not be condemned. With the which words, Christ teaches
every christian man, to look upon his own works, and not upon the works of
his neighbor, and though his neighbor sin and err, he shall not therefore
suddenly or rashly despise hi^. For it may chance that he that stands to
day, may fall to morrow, 1 Cor. 10
and he that falls to day, may rise to morrow. Furthermore, it is not a point
of mercy, that you should judge or co^de^ne thy neighbor, as soon as he of
infirmity sins. For the hipocrites, and those that glory in works, were
wont to do so, which for the most part, damn that, that of it self is nothing
damnable. Therefore we shall not follow the ypocrites, but yt, that our father in
heaven teaches us, which although lawfully may judge and co^de^ne us for our
sins, yet nevertheless, rather would show us his mercy, in and through his
well-beloved son our lord Jesus Christ, so that we are now become the children of
god by adoption, if we do believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ. Ioh. 1.
Wherefore if god (when I was an enemy unto him) received me into his grace,
Romans 6
why should not I likewise show charity and mercy unto my neighbor, with
teachinge him, enforminge him, exhorting him, and prayinge him? For he does
not say: Judge, and condemn a sinner, but help him, do good unto him. Here
is now a difference to be had, A diffe- between ye office and the person
between a man having an office, and a pryuate person. For it is for bidden a
private person to judge, or condemn, but the magistrate and the judges by the
virtue of their office ought to judge and punish the euel doers, yea, with
extreme punishmente. Likewise a preacher, as co^cerni^g his own person, shall
not judge, but by reason of his office the word of God shall do yt. For Christ
says: The word that I have spoken, Ioh. 12.
shall judge him at the last day. Here of knows nothing the Pharise, but
with a proud heart judges and condemns al men, ye in those things also that
he himself is culpable in. Romans 2.
Wherefore Christ calls him here a leader of the blind, that leads
himself into the diche. Also, a disciple that will be above his master: And,
one that sees a mote in his brothers eye, and considers not the beam that
is in his own eye. And so according to his own judgment, he shall be
condemned.

To forgive.
Secondarily, Christ teaches us here to forgive and we shall be forgiven, with
which words he teaches us an excellent work of mercy, so that we must
needs look again upon our celestial father. but how so? Because that he
has pardoned and forgiven us all our offenses and trespasses, of his mere
grace, without any deserving, and that through his only son Jesus Christ, so
that we now being cleansed from our sins, are become heirs of his kyngedome.
Now for as much as according to this exaumple, our heavenly father
requires the same thing of us, that is, that we heartily should for give them
that trespass us, why be we then in this behalf so negligent? why do we hate
and envy one an other? Yt is to no purpose, and if thou should complain, The
envious man harh no excusacion.
and say: This man has done me great iniurye, he has hurt me, and such
like. This is no lawful excuse. For we have provoked god unto anger with
weightyer and greater sins, then we can be provoked withal, and yet
through Christ he pardons and forgiueth us all. Yea if Christ would handle us
according to our wickedness which we have committed against him, and according
as we have deserved, when should we come unto salvation? Romans 2.
Choose now one of these two: Either do well to thine enemy, and forgive him
with all thine heart, that thy sins may be forgiven the through Christ, Or else
envy thy neighbor, that thou may ever lastingly be damned. This sentence
agrees with that, which we have in our Pater noster.

Thirdely, Christ says: Give, and to you it shall be given. wherewith he
exhorts and warns us to do well to the nedy, that is, to our neighbor. And
for as much as our life without this mercy, wherewith we help our
neighbor, can not consiste nor stand, and rather to be a devilish life, if
it be forgotton, therefore does Christ exhort us unto this trade of love,
goodness, mercy and charity, alluring us thereunto with this promise, saying: A
good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and runnyng over, shall men give
into your bosoms. Again: With what measure ye meet, with the same shall it
be measured unto you again. Here thou hear, that thy giuyng shall be rewarded
an hundredth fold. And so says Solomon: Pro. 19.
He that has pitye upon the poor, lends unto the lord. Therefore if thou
wylt do good works that pleases god give unto the poor, distribute thy goods
unto the needye, lend him that wants, do well to thine enemy, Romans 2.
and thou shalt heap coals of fire upon his head. The time shall come, that
thou will wish that all thy good had been given unto the poor. For those
goods that are given to the poor, are not lost, but are lent to the lord,
which in time to come shall liberally recompense them. And hereto pertains it
that is spoken in an other place: Gather your treasure together in heaven: And
also: Mat. 8.
Make you friends of the wicked Mammon etc. Luc. 16
Finally: As we do behave us to our neighbor, so shall god do to us. To whom
with the son and the holy ghost, be all honor for ever. Amen.

The gospel on the fyfte sunday after Trinitye sunday. Luc. 5.
IT came to pass that when the people preaced upon him, to hear the word of
god, he stood by the lake of Genezareth, Mar. 4.
and saw two ships standing by the lake side, but the fyshermenne were
gone out of them, and were shashynge their nets. And he entered into one of
the ships which pertained to Simon, and prayed him, that he would thruste
our a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out
of the ship. When he had left speaking, he said unto Simon: Launche out
into the deep, and let slyppe your nets, and make a draught. And Simon
answered and said unto him: Master, we have labored all night, and have
taken nothing. Nevertheless, at thy commandment, I will lose forth the
net. And when they had this done, they enclosed a great multitude of
fishes. But their net brake: and they beckened to their fellows which were in
the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and
filled both the ships, that they sunk again.

When Simon Petersawe this, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying: Lord, go
from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was astonyed, and all that were with
him, at the draught of fyshes which they had taken: and so was also James and
John the sons of Zebede, which were parteners with Simon. And Jesus said
unto Simon: Fear not, from hence forth thou shalt catch men. And they
brought the ship to land Mat. 4
and forsook all, and followed him.

THE EXPOSITION.
HEre is commended in this gospel unto us, the great diligence which Christ
took in the office of preaching. And also the great desire that the people
had, that followed him, to hear the word of god. Which thing is not written
alo^ly for the^ that execute the office of preaching, The diligence of prechers
but also for the hearers, that both parts should have an example laid before
them to follow. When Christ saw now the greedy desire of the people to hear ye
word of god, and that the people preaced so on him, he went in to a ship that
was Simons, (for he stood by the lake of Genezareth) and taught the people out
of the ship. But what did he teach and preach? Christ taught ye word of
God. Luc. 7.
Truly ye that the people came for to hear, which was ye word of god. And as
Christ was ever ready to preach and teach, though he had had no more audience
the^ one Magdalen, yea suerly like as he never left occasion, but rather
always sought means for to teach, So likewise is every preacher bound to
execute diligently his office to teach and instruct the people, gladly and
willingly, and not alonly for that cause, yt he is thereto here in this gospel
induced by ye example of Christ, but also by commandment, that Christ gave
unto Peter, sayi^g: Feed my sheep, Ioh 21.
for feedi^g in that place signifies to teach, which we find likewise in the
tenthe chapter of John. To teach.
Now if Christ will have his, (whom often times he compares unto sheep) to
be taught, so is it needful, that it be done with great diligence, so
that they be not seduced with the inuencions and dreams of me^, but be taught
sincerelye and purely through gods word. Unto this, now refer, the first
epistle of Paul to Timothe, 1 Timothy 3
where (amongst other virtues that should shine in a preacher or Bishop) he
requires of them, Mat. 15
to be apt to teach. Also, the servant that hid his masters talent, and
won nothing. Therefore let the punishment of this servant fear us, that
have the office of preachinge, that we with all diligence do that, that is
enjoined us, least we also with like punishment be rewarded. The diligence of
ye hearers.
Furthermore, let the hearers follow the exaumple of them that followed Christ,
to hear gods word, that they likewise be glad to hear the same, and suffer
themselves to be instructed and taught. For what profits, if the preacher
preach and teach perpetuallye, if there does no man hear him or receive his
word? For it is as well commanded the to hear, Luc. 11.
as the preacher to teach. For if they be pronounced blessed, that hear the
word of god and keep it, so must it consequently follow, that they be damned,
that do not hear it and keep it. Wherefore this text serves both for to
teach, and for to hear, namelye, to alure the preacher with great dilygence
to teach, and likewise the hearer to hear.

God fedeth us by a certain mean.
Secondarylye, Christ shows us in this gospel that when his word is both
hard and received and so therewith the soul feed, that he likewise will give
the necessaryes for the body. But mark this. that Christ feeds and
norisheth us here by a mean. For he says unto Peter: Lanche out into the
deep, and let slyppe your nets, and make a draught, as though he would
say: I will feed you and give you that you lack, but every manne shall do
the thing that he is called unto, that is, they shall labor. Gene. 3. For if
you labor Labor.
and put your confidence in me, I will see that your laborure shall not be
lost. And this considers Peter, saiynge: Master, we have labored all the
night, and gatte nothing, but at thy word, I will lose forth the net. Who
does not perceive in these words of Peter, that all our counsels,
thoughts, and all our merits, what so ever we intend for to do or leave,
are all in vain, and to none effect, except that they be taken in hand, and
begone in the name of god? For before they had labored all the night, and
took nothing. And that happened upon them, which is written in the psalm,
where the prophet says: Psa. 126
It is but lost labor, that ye rise up earlye, and take no rest, but eat
the breaded of care fulness. For look to whom it pleases the lord, he gives
yt in sleep. But when Christ said: Let slyppe your nets, and the
disciples regarded not their own labor, but having respect to the word of
Christ, then took they a great multitude, in so much that they were feign
to call to their felows (which were in an other ship) for help, and filled
both the ships full. Deuteronomy. 4.
Who would not now believe Christ, which not all only will, but can help us
Therefore believe now, and he will see that thou shalt lack nothing, another
for body nor soul. As touching thy soul, he will keep it by his word, and
thy body with corporal meats and norishinges, which thing thou may
evidently perceive by this miracle. To this pertayneth that Paul says to
Timothe: 1 Timothy 6
Godlynes is profitable unto all things, as a thing which has promises of
the life that is now, and of the life that is to come. And Christ says in
the gospel of Mathewe: Mat. 6.
Seek ye first the kyngedome of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, so
shall all these things be mynystred unto you.

The calling of the apostels.
Thyrdelye, Peter was not allonly here comforted, which for simplenes,
ignorance or fear, bad Christ depart from him, because he was a sinner, but
also the other likewise which were called to the apostolical office. For
Christ said: Fear not, as though he would say: When a man feels and
knoweledgeth his sin, there should he not fly from me, but run to me,
forasmuch as I am come into the world for sinners. For they that be hole,
Mat. 9.
need no physicion, but the sick. Wherefore my Peter, take heed, that thou
biddest me not go from the, but to tarry with the. For I am no tyraunte,
which for cruelnesse kill and destroy men, but with mercy and goodness I will
alure me^ unto me, and truly I will not allonly forgive you and pardon you your
offenses, for because you knowledge them, but also I will make you fishers of
men, that hereafter ye shall become mine apostels and disciples. And likewise
as hitherto ye have taken fyshe with bodily nets, so ye shall hereafter get and
take me^ with spiritual nets, out of the stormy sea of this world, and
bring them into my kingedome. And Christ has here respect to the prophecy of
Jeremy where he says: Ier. 16.
Behold I will send out many fishers to take them. Mat. 13
And in the gospel of S. Matthew we have, that the gospel is compared to a
net, cast into the sea, wherewith are taken al manner of fishes. And
likewise as Christ comfort here Peter with the other, because they were
abashed and afraid and were comforted, so we shall learn hereoute, how a
sinner can get no consolacion and comfort by nothing, but all only by Christ.
Also by the calling of Peter, James, and John, we learn that no man ought to
thrust himself into the office of a precher except he be called. For those
three apostles were before in the common calling, which every man is called
unto. That is, Genesis 3.
that in the sweat of their face, they should eat their bread, And therein
like good and simple men, they would have remained, if they had not been
otherwise called.

Fourthly, we have in this gospel, The power and strength of the gospel. The
obedience of the apostels.
what strength and virtue the word of Christ has, and also the obedyence of
the aforesaid Apostels. For as soon as Christ had said: From hence
forth ye shall be fysshers of men, incontinent when they had brought their
ships to land, they forsook al, and followed him. Here we must needs
grant, that Christ did not speak yt allonlye in their ears, but also in
their hearts. for else how should they have so soon followed him? For it is
not so light a matter nor so easy, to forsake father and mother, land, house
and money, that a man can do it of his own self, It is the work of the
hollye ghost, Ioh. 6.
and comes not of the flesh. Wherefore seeinge that the words of Christ are
spirit and life, ye may well perceive this calling not to have sound
alonly in the ears of the apostels, but also in their hearts, or else they
would not have forsaken their parents, wives and children so lightly, and have
taken Christ for their savior and Lord. To forsake all.
But what is that, to forsake all things? It is none other thing, but so to
be affectioned, that gladly (whenever god will) a man be ready to forsake wife
and children, father and mother, and all that in the world is, and to follow
Christ. Remember also, that the following of Christ consists not always in
the outewarde work, but most chieflye in the heart. For we see many
christian men, that do abide and live still with their wives and children,
which are not called to follow Christ, as the Apostels were, and yet
natwithstandinge are so minded, that at all times they be ready and willing,
when it shall please God, to forsake al, another suffer them by no means to be
called from the acknowledging and confessing of the gospel, and the
righteousness thereof, which is in Christ Jesus, which also follow Christ as
well as those apostels did. But they that be not called there unto, to forsake
wife and children, and go run over all the wide world, to be a charg and a
burden to other men, as do the Anabaptists, 2. Cor. ^
may be counted rather to be folowers of the devil, then of Christ our
savior. To whom with the father and the holly ghost, be all praise and
honor Amen.

The gospel on the sixte sunday after trinitye sunday Math. 5.
FOr I say unto you: Except your rightousnes excede the rightousnes of the
Scribes and Phariseis, ye can not enter into the kyngedome of heaven.

Ye have hard that it was said unto the^ of old time: Exo. 20 Leu. 18. Deuteronomy. 5.
Thou shall not kill: whosoever kylleth, shall be in danger of judgment. But I
say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be in
danger of judgment. And whosoever says unto his brother, Racha, shall be in
danger of a counsel. But whosoever says, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
hell fire.

Therefore, if thou offerest thy gift at the aultare, and there reme^brest that
thy brother has ought against the leave there thine offering before the
aultare, Job. 42
and go thy way first, and be reconcyled to thy brother, and than come and
offer thy gift.

THE EXPOSITION.
Forasmuch as our lord Jesus Christ deuideth his righteousness, from the
righteousness of the scribes and phariseis, Two rightousnesses. The rightousnes
of works.
it is to be noted, that there is two righteousnesses, yt is to say, the
righteousness of works, and the righteousness of faith. The righteousness of
works is, when I intend and go about to do works without faith in Christ,
thinking that by such outward works, the law is fulfilled. And such
righteousness did the Jews use for the most party, and in especial the
scribes and phariseis. For the flesh, wherein is graft hipocrisye, is so
affectioned and of such nature, that nothing can please yt so excellentlye,
as the outward shine of works, and it can have none other judgment herein,
then that such works are acceptable before god, and that the same are
rewarded with everlasting life. Hereof comes this damnable and detestable
trust in works, with the which the holy prophets have so warred and
foughten: Esai. 1. and. 19
and especial Esaias, complaininge on the Jews, because that they did
worship the works of their own hands. And in an other place he says: This
people draws nigh me with their mouth, and praises me highely with their
lyppes, where as their heart nevertheless is far from me. But how does Christ
like this righteousness? Truly he thrusts it into the deep pit of hell, in so
much that he denies his disciples the entringe into the kingedome of heaven,
except their righteousness excede the rightousnes of the scribes and pharisees.
How could this rightousnes of the Jews be more contemptuously depressed? If
our spiritual men in time paste, and so likewise now a days, were, and had
been so judged and condemned unto hell for their hypocrisy, good lord, I
think for very pure anger, they would spewe out tier. But the spirit of
Christ which is sent to rebuke the world of this in credulity, sets little
by their threatenings, and anger. Righteousness of faith.
The righteousness of faith is, when I hope and trust in Christ, and not in
works, but in such wise, that I open and declare my self in the meanewhile to
have this trust and confidence, through fulfilling of his commandments and
good works. And such righteousness, is the work of the spirit, and can not
be comprehended nor understand of the flesh. And forbicause she gives god his
honor, and looks and trusts allonly in his grace and mercy which is given
us, in, and by Christ, therefore she pleases and is so acceptable before god,
that she is suer to have everlasting life. Good works.
Mark that this inward righteousness can in no wise consiste or be without
charity and good works, and without an honest life or conversation. For it
is the same good seed, that fell in the good ground, and brought forth much
fruit. Again contrary wise, the outewarde righteousness, as a work of the
flesh, may be done without the righteousness of faith, as we see in the
phariseis, Mat. 24
which be likened unto painted sepulchers, that apeare beutyfull outward, and
with in are full of dead men's bones and filthiness. But thou will say unto me:
Does not Christ himself here call the righteousness of the phariseis, a
righteousness? Yes, Act. 10.
but because god has not respect of persons, that is, he cares not so much
for the outward shininge of things, as he does require the heart, faith and
spirit, therefore he attributes and gives everlasting life unto the inward
righteousness, forasmuch as the same never seeks nothing so much, as the
glory of Christ. And to the hipocrisye of the phariseis, he has assured
everlasting damnacion.

Secondarily, Christ proves by a declaracion of a commandment taken out of
the law, yt the exterior and outward rightousnes is not acceptable nor of valu
before god, without we have joined theru^to ye inward rightousnes, which
proceeds from the heart. Ye have hard (says he) how it was said to them
of old time: Thou shalt not kill, for whosoever kills, shall be in danger of
judgment. But I say unto you: Whosoever is angry with his brother, is in
danger of judgment. etc. Likewise also Saint Paul says: Romans 7
The law is spiritual that is, the law cannot be fulfilled, except the
spirit, faith and the heart, be joined with the outward works, seeing that
the law requires not allonly the outward fashion, but also the affection of
the heart. Therefore Christ in this command mente that pertayneth to man
slaughter, makes four degrees, wherein he counts giltye, not allonly
those, that kill and slaye with the swearde, but also all them, that with
thought and word sin against their neighbor. Anger.
The first degree is the anger of the heart, which Christ does lyken unto the
outward work of man slaughter. And forasmuch as this anger is grafte in
every one of us, no man can keep this commandment and precept, except he be
newborn again through the spirit. The second degree is, Racha, Racha.
by which word is signified, tokens of wrath and hatred: that is, when I
behold my brother with a lowrynge and a grimme countinaunce, or passing by,
do disdain to speak familiarlye unto him. And those outward misfashioned
manners do condemn even as much as the deed it self. The third degree
is, if I call my brother; Fool: Fool.
By which word is signified and understand all manner of opprobrious and
ignominious words, and those words if they come out of rancoure and malice,
they condemn me as well as man slaughter. But it is possible also, that such
injurious words, often times proceed of a faithful heart, as we see that the
pharise is were called fools often times of Christ, Mat 14 Manne slaughter.
and that is another hurtefull nor damnable. The fourth degree is man slaughter,
even committed with the deed, that is, when I not being content with mine
injurious and opprobrious words, and strange vncorteous countenance, but go
farther to handstrokes, and with my hand (as did Cain) I kill my neighbor
against the commandment and precepte of god. Genesis 4.
Now for as much as god in his precepts does not allonly forbid the outeward
ungracious works, but also the inward mischief and affection of the heart,
how is it then possible, that the outewarde righteousness can save and
iustifye? Surely hereto pertayneth the saying of S. Ioh. He that hates his
brother, 1 Ioh. 5
is a murderer. that is, It is not sufficient that thou haste not killed thy
brother with thy hand, but thou must have a louinge and gentle heart toward
all men, not to do and wish well allonlye to thy friends, but also to thine
enemies. Finallye. If I desire to be saved, so it is needful that I be just
and righteous, both inwardely and outwardely, or else outewarde righteousness
profyteth the nothing at all.

Thyrdely, Christ exhorts and allureth us here in this gospel to ye love of
our neighbor, forasmuch as he has referred this precepte, (Thou shall not
kill) to the love of our brother, and that two manner of ways. First, for as
much as he teaches that no work (how good or precious so ever it be) can
please God, except that thou do first desire thy brother, whom thou haste
offended, to pardon and forgive the. Therefore he makes mention of all
oblation commanded of God in the old law, which is now abrogated, and was
then a high excellent work. This is the meaning of the words of Christ. If
you do observe with never so great diligence, all gods service, which
heretofore has been commanded you through Moises which now after my death
shall cease and take no more effect, yet in that shall ye not please god,
except you be reconciled to your brother, whom you have offended. For it is
not seruinge of god, when thou offendest thy neighbor, but that is called
seruyng of god, when thou offendest not thy neighbor. For that that, thou
do with hinderaunce of thy brother, cannot please god. Therefore God through
the prophet Oseas speaks, Osee. 6.
saying: I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. Truly, oblacion was commanded
in the law by god, yet did he not set by yt, if thou did offend thy
neighbor, except he that had offended his brother, did first reconcyle
himself. And as Christ speaks of oblacion unto the Jews, as unto those
which as yet were under the law, so likewise, gods service in the new
testament, is to no purpose, except thou be reconciled to thy brother, whom
thou have offended.

Secondarily, Christ warns us here to agree with our adversary, quickly,
while we are in ye way with him. etc. That is, if any man offend the, and he
that has offended the, desires the to pardon him, forgive him gladly, as
Christ did, saying: Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And
if you be not desired thereunto, yet be always ready to forgive, or else thy
conscience in the day of judgment shall accuse the, and so thou shall be cast
into prison. Luc. 24
Verily I say unto you (says Christ) thou shall not come out thence, till thou
have paid the uttermost farthing, that is, Thou shall never come out. For this
word, until, so signifies in this place. Therefore let every christian man well
considre and take heed, that he be found in brotherly love, so that his
works, which he serves god withal, may be acceptable and pleasant before
god, through Christ our savior. Amen.

The seventh sunday after trinitye sunday. Mark. 8.
IN Mat. 15
those days when there was a very great company, and had nothing to eat, Jesus
called his disciples to him, and said unto them: I have compassion on the
people, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to
eat: and if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they shall faynte
by the way. Esai. 14 Tob. 13.
For diverse of them came from far. And his disciples answered him. Where should
a man have bread here in the wilderness to satisfy these? And he asked them:
how many loaves have ye? They said: seven. And he commanded the people to sit
down on the ground. And he took the seven loaves: and when he had given
thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples, to set before them. And they did
set them before the people. And they had a few small fysshes. And when he had
blessed, he commanded them also to be set before them. And they did eat,
and were sufficed. And they took up of the broken meat that was left, seven
basketes fulle. And they that did eat, were about four thousand. And he
sent them away.

We have treated of this gospel upon the fourth sunday in lent, out of the
syxte chapter of John, which shall agree well hereunto also, that allonly
excepted, that there is five loves and two fishes, and five thousand men,
And here seven loves and a few fishes, and four thousand men, which Christ
did feed. This thing also is to be noted, that there Christ spoke allonly unto
Philip, and here unto all the apostels. Look upon the exposition.

The gospel on the eight sunday after trinitye son. day. Math. 7.
Deuteronomy. 13 1 Ioh. 4
BEware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep clothyng, but inwardly
they are rauenyng wolves, ye shall know them by there fruits. Luce. 6.
Do men gather grapes of thorns? or fygges of thystles? Even so every good
tree brings forth good fruits. But a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruits.
Mat. 12
A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruits: neither can a bad tree bring
sorthe good fruits. Mat. 13 Luc. 3. c
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is heaven down, and cast into
the fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Not every one that says unto me Mat. 25 Luce. 6. and. 14.
Lord, lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the
will of my father which is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have here in this gospel a good admonition yt we should beware of false
prophets. For yt is commonly seen, that those be alwais mixed with the good and
faithful preachers. And in this admonityon Christ him self does like a good
shephearde. The office of a good shephard
For a wise and a diligente shepharde does not only lead his sheep into an
wholesome pasture, but also dilligentlye takes heed that they be not taken and
devoured of the wolves.

In like manner must a dilligente preacher do. He must instruct and bring
up the church committed unto his charge, with the wholesome doctrine of
Christ, and take heed, that he instructs not the people with none other
doctrine but only with the puer word of god. For Christ said unto Peter: Ioh
21.
Feed my sheep. and not satisfied with the once rehersall thereof, he repeted
the same commandment, whereby it might be perceived how feruentely he desired
the wealth of his sheep. This done, the pastor ought diligently to look
about him, that the flock of Christ be not seduced and deceived by false
prophets, which teach perverse doctrine, contrary to the wholesome doctrine of
Christ. But that point belongs not allonlye to the pastor and preacher, but
also it behooves every christian manne to be so instructed in things
pertainyng to faith, that he by the word of god may judge, whether he be right
taught or no. For thi^kest thou yt this power to judge every preachers doctrine,
was given the of Christ in vain? 1. Tes. 5.
Or think thou that Paul commanded the Thessalonians in vain, to prove
all things, and keep that, which was good? Ioh. 4.
And also S. John writes, that we should prove the spirits whether they be
of God. Wherefore seeing that many false prophets are gone into the world,
believe verelye, that this liberty to judge, is given the for somewhat. For the
devil is subtyle, and is an extreme enemy of wholesome doctrine, and such a one,
that has in his kyngedome nothing then lies, Ioh. 16 1 Cor. 11 Ma. 24
and murdre, which he brings in under a color of holiness. For he can
change himself into the fashion of an angel of light, so that (if it were
possible) he should deceive and seduce the very elect of God. And no man
knows this better then Christ, which teaches us so earnestlye to beware of
them, which also painteth the minysters of Satan in their own colors.
Wherefore, let us take to heart this his faithful monition. But how and
with what colors does he describe them? Prophets. To prophecye.
He calls them prophets, whereby he declares, that they shall use the
office of preachinge. For to prophecye, signifies other while, to teach and
to interpret holy scripture, as we find in the 14. chapter of Saint Paul,
in the first epist. to the Corinthians. More over he says: Sheeps clothi^g.
They shall come in sheep clothinge, That is, they shall come in great and
angelical meekenes, and without all pride, having outwardly the shine of
holiness, but inwardly they are ravening wolves, even the destroyers of the
lords flock. Now forasmuch as we shall have such in the ministry of the
word of god, whose outward conversation shall apeare as most simple and holy,
therefore it is necessary, that we note and printe in our minds this
doctrine of Christ, whereby we may avoid them, and daily pray unto god, that
he will vouchsafe to retain us in wholesome doctrine, and preserve us from the
vain jangling of these false prophets.

Secondarily, it is to be noted, that Christ does not all only instruct us
to beware of false prophets, but also tells us how we shall know them.
Ye shall know them (says he) by their fruits. Which thing, that he
might drive into us the better, he puts forth a similitude, and says on
this wise: Do men gather grapes of thorns? or fygges of thystelles? As
though he would say: How possible it is to gather grapes of thorns, or
figs of thystles, so possible it is, that a false prophet, in whom the
knowledge of god is not, should teach any good thing, though he never so
much gloryfye him self in the knowledge of the word of god. A false prophet
may boaste and gloryfye him self of the gospel, but the true doctrine of
the faith, he shall never attain nor follow. All that they have taught with
their vain ianglinge, are but leaves, and remain leaves, having only an
outeward shining. And for to know these false prophets, and their spirit, It
is needful to have the holy spirit and perfect knoweledge of God. Wherefore
we christian men, which in this dangerous time are assaulted with this
pestiferous and strange learning, must so endeavor our selves, Faith charity.
that faith and charity, wherein consists the hole sum and foundation of
our doctrine, may ever be our rule, whereby we may discern and judge all
manner of doctrine, that shall be laid before us. For faith cleaves
allonlye to the word of god, and says with Saint Paul. I know nothing
but Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1
and him crucified. that is, I seek remission of sins, righteousness and
salvation allonlye in the passion and merytes of Christ. And charity, with
the deed and work, witnesses such faith to be in the heart. And what so
ever is contrary to this doctrine of faith and charity, comes of the
devil, though they that teach so, in their so teachinge, lead never so
relygious a life. For the tree is evil, and so likewise is the fruit evil:
Shall we judge now some trees by their fruits? The papists have a long
season had the handlyng and administracion of the word of god and the
sacraments, The papists.
with so great shine of holiness outwardli, ye they have nigh subjected unto
them the whole world. But now that the gospel is broken out and come to light,
through the greatinercy of god, it has given us power to know the tree by the
fruicte thereof, through gods word.

Now we have the word of god, which we set against their doctrine, concerning
works, and we find their learning to strive and be repugnant with the manifest
word of god, and to bring nothing to pass, but hipocrisy. Therefore
according to their fruits, we reprove and abject the whole papasie with all
that belongs unto it, yea if the devil rage never so much: We reprove and
detest also those spriteful me^, which with their Masses and supersticion have
abused ye supper instituted by Christ, contrary to the manifest words of
Christ. Yea, we reprove them for the fruicte of their doctrine: For besides
the false expoundinge and laiyng out of Christ's words, they have brought the
sacraments into great abusion. What shall I say of the anabaptists? I would
to god the ungracious fruit of their doctrine were not so manifest. To make
short, we have the clear and manifest gospel, by the great grace of god in
our hearts received, wherein by his mercy we shall abide, when all the false
prophets shall go to the devil.

Thirdelye, Christ expounds these words (by their fruits ye shall know
them) even as he would have them understood, making a difference between
hipocrites and those that fulfill his fathers will, and declares both their
rewards. The iustifiers and glorifiers in works cry ever, Lord, Lord and
that more is, they glorify in the gospel, and in the holy ghost. yea and are
so bold, that they dare say: Lord have we not prophesied in thy name: have
we not cast out devils in thy name? etc. But it is but hypocrisye, and
remains hypocrisye, for the which they have no reward. For Christ says:
Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. And faith in this
present gospel: Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn
down, and cast in to the fire. Behold with what reward the fruit of false
doctrine shall be rewarded with all. And again considre what manner of folk
shall enter into the kingedome of heaven. Those (says Christ) that fulfill the
will of my father that is in heaven. But what is the will of the father in
heaven? That we should believe in him, Ioh. 17
whom he has sent. Here thou do hear, that the kingdom of god is
promised not to fained works, but to those that have faith in Christ. We do
not speak here of an historical faith (as the call it) but of that faith that
comes by hearing of the gospel, the which also the holy ghost works in
us. This faith like as it obtayneth the grace and mercy of god in Christ, and
sets all his trust in him, and finallye seeks his rigteousnesse allonly
in the merits of Christ, so likewise it works and does good works through
love, and causes us to mortefye the old Adame in us, and dye unto all
creatures, he prays, prayseth and comendeth god, with giuinge thanks, in
what so ever state and degree he is in. Finallye, he lives according to the
will of god, and through Christ shall he obtain everlasting life. Which
god grant us all.

Amen.

The gospel on the nynthe sunday after trinitye sunday. Luc. 16.
ANd he said also unto his disciples: There was a certain rich man, which
had a steward, and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his
goods. And he called him, and said unto him: How is it that I hear thus of
the? Give account of thy stewardeshyppe: for thou may be no longer
steward. The steward said within him self: What shall I do? For my master
takes away from me the stewarshyppe: I can not dig and to beg I am
ashamed. I wot what to do, that when I am put pute of the steward ship,
they may receive me into their houses:

So when he had called all his masters detters together, he said unto the
first: How much owe thou unto my master? And he said, an hundredth tons
of oil. And he said unto him: Take thy bylle, and sytte down quickly, and
write fyftye. Then said he to an other: How much owe thou? And he said, an
hundredth quarters of wheat. He said unto him. Take thy byll and write ^oure
score.

And the lord commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely.
For the children of this world are in their nation wiser then the children of
the light. And I say unto you: Make you friends of the unrighteous Mammon,
that when ye shall have ^eede, they may ^^ceaue you into everlasting
habitacions.

THE EXPOSITION.
THere be three things in this gospel to be noted. First, Worldly wisdom.
we rynde in the similitude of this gospel, how the wicked steward is praised,
not for his iniquity and deceitfulnes, but as a wordely child, which
handlethe himself wiselye. For the children of this world, in all that they go
about, seek their own profit and ease, and not the vtilyty and profit of
their neighbor. They give great diligence, that they the^ selves may be full,
and have sufficient, and care not how they get it, other by right or by wrong,
so that they have it, and may be suer that they do not lack, not considering
ye need and poverty of his neighbor. This word Ma^mon, signifies here,
goods and riches, and ar called wicked, not ye of the^ selves they be euel,
but forbicause ye through great abuses they be both kept and spent, and not
distributed to ye profit and use of ye poor and needy. And therefore Christ
fetteth before our eyes ye wisdom and craftines of this world, not that he
praises or comme^deth ye disceitfulnes, where through ye goods of this world
be gathered together and gotten, but yt we thereby ar admonyshed, ye wc like
study and dillige^ce, we do endeavor our selves to obtain and get celestyal and
heavenly riches, when we perceive and mark yt the children of this world seek
with so great study, that which is transitory and earthlye. And if they
despise and scorn our eternal and celestial goods, that we seek here,
well let them seek their treasure here on earth, and let us gather our
treasure in heaven. And then hereafter it shall be tried, which have kept the
better treasure. Moreover this admonicion, that we with all diligence should
seek eternal riches, is uery necessary, for we be very flow and negligent,
and should very lightely forsake the faith and fear of god, if we were not
with such godly exhortacions well instructed and armed. Slothefulnes is
pernicious.
For what greater ieoperdy can be unto a christian man, then to be negligent
and slack in the word of god? We must ever wake and stand in awe and fear
with continual prayer, that our faith may be increased and daily wax more
and more. And in any wise let us beware and take heed, that we be not
careless, Ma. 24
and to say with the wicked: Pax and securitas, there is no ieoperdy. Let
them, that despise gods word, do so, which say in their hearts, that there
is no god. And do thou according to the doctrine of the prophet David, 1 Tes.
5 Psalm. 2.
saiynge: Serve the lord with fear, and rejoice before him with reverence,
which if thou do, thou shall not leese the great benefit, that thou have
gotten through the gospel. Surely thou shalt go and abide in the right way,
and thou shalt avoid all danger to fall into the broad way, Mat. 7
that leads to damnacion, according to the saying of the wise man: Who so
fears god, walks in the right pathe: Pro. 14
and he that regards not him, goes out of his ways. Then if those go the
right way that fear god, then take earnestlye to heart this exhortacion of
Christ, and all security or rechelenes laid a part, with all diligence do
that, that is commanded the of Christ, least the children of this world be
found in their kind, more dilligent, then the children of light.

Secondarely, we see in this gospel, that our study and diligence to get
everlasting treasure, lies herein, that we do make us friends of the wicked
Mammon. To make friends of ye wicked ma^mon.
But how does this agree with our doctrine? For we have taught hitherto, that
allonly through faith we be justified and saved, shall the works do it now?
No, not so: The words sound as though it should seem so, but well expounded
and understand, they pull nothing from faith. Christ speaks here of good
fruits, and will not that the tree that bears those good fruits, should be
reproved and cast away. For how would you have good fruits, if there were not
first a good tree? And how would you have fruit, if the tree did not bear
it, and bring it forth? Therefore it is necessary, that the tree be good,
before it brings forth good fruit. What good works do pleese God.
And so likewise we speak of good works: No work, how precious or excellent
so ever yt be, can be acceptable or pleasant before god, except the person
which does ye work, be first justified and acceptable before god. If thou
will be just and acceptable, thou must believe. And if thou beleuest, then
art thou justified. For faith apprehe^deth you mercy of god in Christ, through
the which we obtain righteousness, without any work or deserving. And therefore
when the person is accepted and justified before god, then likewise are the
works accepted, not that the works be of them selves of such reputacion and
worthiness, but forbicause they be wrought of that person, that is justified
and accepted before god. Wherefore when Christ does admonish us, for to make
us friends of the wicked Mammon, and to do good works, does not regard so much
the work, as he does the fountain, from whens the work flows. He does hate
and sets so little by hipocrisy, that it is to be thought, that he teaches
not works without faith. For what be works without ^aithe, but hipocrisy?
Those works, which the Jews did observe in the law, which also were
commanded of god himself, did not please god when they were done without
faith, much less shall those works please god, which be invented and made of
men. Although Christ said: Make you friends of the wicked Mammon, teaching us
therewith the works of charity, yet does he not adscribe righteousness to the
same, but he will that our faith be declared by them, and brought to light, for
it is needful that the tree be known by the fruits. Faith is known by
works
Consider also, that Christ in these words (Make you friends of the wicked
Mammon) did look upon y^ works of charity, namely that then our goods ar good
and right, when they be turned and distributed to the use and help of the
poor and needy: and contrary wise, they are naught and wicked, when we seek in
the^ only our pleasure and voluptuousnes. Therefore says Solomon: Pro. 14
He that dispiseth his neighbor does amysse, but whosoever has pity on the
poor, is blessed.

Thirdly, we have here the reward that is give to the faithful, which works
through a lively faith works of charity, for as much as ye poor, whom we have
succored and helped with our goods, shall receive us into everlasting
tabernacles. This text ye papists apply unto saints yt ar departed out of this
world and go about to stablishe therewith that ungodly doctrine of inuocacion
unto saints. But take heed of this opinion, for it is against ye first
commandment of god, and against ye gospel also, Ioh. 16
which teaches us to pray unto the father in the name of Christ. And it is
against ye doctrine of S. Paul, which techeth us that we have but only on
mediator. 1 Timothy 2
Furthermore this gospel speaks not of ye dead, but of those saints that be
a live. And those should we make our fre^des and do our charity upon. Wherwtal?
With ye wicked Ma^mon. That is. Let us think yt our goods and riches are not
given us of god for our pomp and volupteousnes, but that thereby we are ordained
and deputed to be gods ministers, to deal and give it out to the poor and
needy, and to serve them in their necessitye. Which if we do, they at ye dai
of judgment shall bear witness of our charity done unto the^, by which means we
shall be received into ye everlasting tabernacle This exposition the bare text
gives it self. For ye that Christ will do for the poor, he says that his
christians do it. As in an other place he says unto yt apostels: Luc. 20.
In that day ye shall sit upon the twelve seats, to judge the twelve tribes of
Israel. Finally what soever we do unto the poor by faith, shall be plenteously
recompensed and rewarded us of God, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

The gospel on the tenthe sunday after trinity sunday. Luc. 19.
ANd when he was come near, he beheld the city and Ioh. 11.
wept on it, saying: If thou had known those things which belong unto
thy peace, even in this thy day, thou would take heed. But now are they
hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon the Iere. 52 Ma. 14
that thine enemies also shall cast a bank about the, and compass the
round, and keep the in on every side, and make the even with the ground, and
thy children which are in the And Mich. 3. Mar. 13 Luc. 21.
they shall not leave in the, one stone upon an other, because thou know
not the time of thy visitacion.

mat. 21 Mar. 11 John. 2
And he went into the temple, and began to cast out them that sold
therein, and them that boughte, saiynge unto them: It is written: 3 Re. 8 d.
e. f.
My house is the house of prayer: but ye have esa. 51.
made it a den of thieves. And he taught daily in the temple.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel we learn, how we must receive Christ two manner of ways: One
way, as a gift, an other, as an exaumple. Therefore when I take and receive
him as a gift, Christ is given unto us.
must I understand and know, that this his weeping has done me service, and
that he is so given me, that he with all that he has is mine own. And also
I must know and believe, that he cares for me, and has compassion with me,
and pytieth me in my calamity and misery. For there is no greater comfort to
us, neither in heaven not in earth, then to know (when we are assaulted with
temptacion) that god cares and provides for us. If thy sins bite the, if
thy conscience accuse the, if thou fear the wrath and vengeance of god,
return and look upon Christ, by whom thou art promised remission of sins.
Esai. 53
For it is he that alone has taken away our infirmitye and sins, and
bears our pain. And in any wise take heed, that thou take not him for so
cruel, that will not be entreated or pleased, and which will not be spoken
withal, but rather persuade thy self, that he is such a one, that is not
allonly displeased with those, that neglect him and seek and other way to
salvation, but also that he was sorry and wept for them, as we may lightely
perceive out of this his compassion, that he is ready and pressed to help every
man, so that we acknowledge our sins and hate them, desiring to be delivered
from them. For it is he, he alone (I say) through whom the father will help
troubled consciences, and say in our hearts: Be of good comfort, thy sins
be forgiven the: which also in worldly tentacion and trouble does the same. For
if in my trouble and misery I call unto god through Christ, I am suer that he
will help. For Christ has said: What so ever ye ask the father in my name,
Ioh. 14
it shall be given unto you. And in an other place he says: Be of good
comfort, I have overcome the world. that is, Ioh. 16
Through me ye shall not allonly overcome the world, and that that is in it,
but also ye shall overcome death, the devil and hell. And in like wise, when I
have comprehended Christ as a gift, Ioh. 11.
I must learn thereby, to serve my neighbor both with body and goods, even
as Christ here both with his weeping, passion and death, has served us. As
saint Peter says: 1 Pet. 2.
Christ has suffered for us, leauinge us an ensample to follow his
footesteppes And these be the very true works which scripture does allow,
the which also we must do, to manifest and declare our faith withal.

Secondarily, in this gospel Christ does morn and weep for the Jews, because
they knew not what was for their peace, wherewith he declared and showed unto
us, the blindenes and wickedness of the flesh. Whereof (I beseech you) can a man
glorify, seeing so many excellent sermones, so many and great miracles done by
Christ at Jerusalem, and those in a manner all done in vain? Where is here free
will with his power, which the prudente and wise men of this world, has
attributed unto yt? Wherefore would not they believe his word, and know him to
be the son of god, and the true Messiah? Surely it was hidden from their
eyes, though notwithstanding, they did both hear his words, and saw his
miracles. Wherout it follows, that our flesh while it is not lightened with
the holy ghost, and a new heart given unto it, Eze. 36.
is very blind, indurate, and wicked, which can in no wise know god in
Christ. The bli^dnes of ye flesh. Psalm. 51
This blindness believe verily, is not in our outward vesture, but is graft in us
in our mothers womb. Wherefore, if we will enter into the kingedome of heaven,
we must be new borne again through water and the holy ghost. John. 3.
Such like maliciousnes and blyndenes we see in them, that sold and boughte
in the temple, which Jesus drove out. Who amongst them knew them selves?
or amended their lives, though they were never so much admonyshed and
taught, that the house of God was a house of prayer? They were fleshelye, and
therefore as yet they could not understand nor judge right, the words and
acts of Christ.

Thyrdely, here is declared unto the Jews, the reward and punishemente of
their blindenes and infidelity. The punishment of incredulitye.
For thy enemies (says he) shall cast up a bank about the and thy children,
and shall not leave in the, one stone upon an other, because thou haste not
known the time, wherein thou have been visited. O marvelous grievous
ponyshment. First the Jews are ponished, for because they would not know
Christ, and this is a spiritual punishment For they have eyes and see not,
ears and hear not. Esaias. 6.
so that Christ might well say: Ioh. 9.
I am come to judgment into this world, that they which se not, might see, and
that they which see, might be made blind. But who is able to search the depth
of his incomprehensible judgment? No man, but allonly god: Romans 12
for we may not, nor can not. Now after this spiritual punishemente follows
bodylye punishemente, in that he says, how the Jews shall be beseeged on
every side, that there shall not be left one stone upon an other. And even as
it was told them of Christ, so was it brought to pass. Surely it was such
an horrible and cruel punishment, that it is lamentable to hear. Which if
thou will know, read Josephus de bello Iud. Now ye have hard of ye punishment
where with the Jews have bin punished with all, Mat. 7.
for the dispising of ye gospel. What thi^kest thou shall chance and happen
unto us, which so long a time have hard the gospel, and yet have not amended
our ungracious living and conversation, but rather have trodden under our
feet, neglected and dispysed that precious perle? Wherefore if we turn not,
he has whet his sword, (says the prophet David) he has bente his bow and
made yt ready: Psalm. 7.
He has prepared him the weapons of death and ordained his arrows to
destroy. Here thou do hear that not allonly the Jews, but all those that
will not turn to amendment of life, shall he punished. Sometime does God
prolonge the punishemente, but the longer he suffers, the greuouser at the
last does he punish. Therefore let every manne turn from his wicked
way, and believe the gospel, lest we perish both body and soul.

Fourthlye, Christ commends in this gospel his office, in that, that ye
next day following he went into the temple, and drove out the buyers and sellers,
saying: Esa. 56.
It is written, My house is a house of prayer, and ye have made it a den of
murderers. And also in that he declares his office, The office of Christ.
that he daily taught in the temple. It became Christ to do all these
things, for he was sent into the world to teach the will of his father, by
preaching. Because for as much as gods word and the out ward worshipping
of god in ceremonies, (which shortly after should be abrogated and taken away)
was very much let and hindered in the temple at Jerusalem, through the
covetousness of the scribes and phariseis, therefore would Christ not only
teach, Abuses to be taken away
but also root out all the abuses which did hyndre the true worshipping of
God. And what so ever Christ does here, by scripture he approves it, that he
may do it by right. For why may not Christ, in so much as he is lord both of
the bodily temple and spiritual also, drive out such villains? Now, that
Christ did here with the hands and with the doctrine, that may we not do,
but all only with the doctrine and word of god. For we may do nothing but to
teach the gospel. but if that should be hindered, and those doctoures (which
seeking nothing but their own profit, through teaching the tradicions of men)
should defyle the temple of god, which is the heart of faithful men, then
must we hold our hands (I grant) but not our mouth, and make such
dreamers ashamed, to the intent that the gospel may have his right course
and florishe amongst us. Hereto pertains the saying of saint Paul to
Titus: Tit. 1.
A bishop must be such a one, that cleaves to the true word of
doctrine, that he may be able to exhort with wholesome learning, and to
improve them that say against yt.

The eleventh sunday after trinitye. Luc. 18.
ANd he told this parable unto certain which trusted in them selves that they
were perfect and despised other. Two men went up into ye temple to pray, the
one a Pharise, and the other a Publicane. The Pharise stood and prayed thus
with himself. God, I thank ye that I am not as other men are; extorcioners,
unjust, aduouterers, or as this publicane: I fast twyse in the weke Deu. 26
Eccle. 7
I give tithe of all that I possess. And the publicane stondinge a far of,
would not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying: God
be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man departed home to his house,
justified, more the^ the other. Mat. 24 Luc. 14
For every one that exalts himself, shall be brought low: And he that
humbles him self, shall be exalted.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel we find two rightousnesses, that is to say, rightousnes of
faith and of works, which is here described in these two persons, so that we
may clearly perceive, yt not ye rightousnes of works, but the righteousness of
faith, is commended and allowed. Therefore we will entreat of the things that
be here to be noted of, by order.

The description of the pharisey
First, we must considre that hipocritical person, which came with the
publicane up into the temple for to pray. For he is excellently set forth,
and described with glorious high works and many, which notwithstanding how
excellent so ever they were, they did not please god, because they were done
without faith. Who would have reproved the prayer of the pharisey, if it had
come out of a perfect heart and a true faith, and had sought therein the
glory of god, and the vtilitye of his neighbor? For we ought to commend
and praise such a work, for godly and christian, forasmuch as Christ him
self has commanded it, saying, that we ought always to pray, and not to
leave of, Luc. 18.
but this prayer was not done in spirit, and in the truth. Ioh. 4.
The glory of god was not taught therein. Wherefore we may lyken it to the
same thing whereof Esaias speaks saying: Esa. 29.
This people draws nighe me with their mouth, and praises me highely with
their lyppes, where as their heart nevertheless, is far from me. And that
this pharisey did not seek the glory of god, the words of his prayer plainly
declares yt. For he says thus: Giving of thanks
I thank the god, that I am not as other men. Thanks geuynge, wherethrough we
praise god for the benefits which we receive, whether they be bodily or
ghostely, is a good and a christian work. For how can we be called christian
me^, if we do not knowledge the benefits of god done unto us, and for ye same
give thanks? Do not we find such fruit of faith in the apostle S. Paul,
through out all his epistles, that is, evermore giving of thanks? But
undoubtedly, the thanks giving of this pharisey, is not good, but very
blasphemy toward god, because he seeks not the glory of god therein, but his
own glory. I am not (says he) like other me^. What manner of giving thanks
shall we call this? how can thou perceive here that he gives god his honor?
Where can we know here, yt god allonly is he, which justifies us through
Christ? For here we se how ye pharise has no need of god, for he is righteous
of himself. O notable pride. But it is so, ypocrisy ever hangs upon pride,
where with he extolleth him self, and dispiseth other. This pharisey thi^keth
not sufficient, yt he praises himself, but he dispiseth al other, and most
highli slau^dreth the^. He calls the^ robbers, unrighteous and aduoutrers.
Also this goodly pharisey is allonly good, and thinks he has satisfied and
fulfilled the law, for because outwardly he seems to have fulfilled yt, and
for the same thinks himself righteous before god. And in the mean while
considers not, Romans 7
the law (as Paul says) to be spiritual, that is, that the law requires
not allonly the outward work, but also to be fulfilled with the heart,
affection and spirit. It may well be, that he stole nothing, nor with
violence and force took any thing from his neighbor, with his hands. And
likewise, although that he had fulfilled the same with his heart, have we
nothing therefore to say? Yea surely, in this giving of thanks he has stolen
and robbed god from his glory. And again, though outwardly with the deed he
has not ben an aduoultrer, Mat. 5.
yet he may have been one in his heart. All this he does not believe, but
puts all to this poor publican, whom all manner of wais he thinks worse
the^ him self. Thus wha^ he had boasted him self, he goes forth further and
glorified him again, that he is no glotton nor no dronkard, but that he
fasteth twice in a week: Also that he gives the tenthe of his good to the
poor. Call you not that glorifying? But where remains the saying of Jeremy:
Let him that rejoice, rejoice in god? Ierm. 9
The Pharsye does not thus, but he must glorifye himself in his own works.
Behold, here thou haste the person of this righteous and honest Pharisey
described.

A description of the publican
Secondarely, we will entreat of the publicane, which is described far
unlike unto the pharisey For he, as the Euangelyst writes, stood far of,
and durst not lift up his eyes, but knocked on his breast, and said: God, be
merciful to me a sinner. Here thou hear no glorifiynge, no pride, no
dispisyng of other men, but allonlye disablinge of himself, in so much that
he judges himself unworthy, to lift up his eyes toward heaven, or to stand
in ye midst of the temple, as the pharisy did. With these gestures this
miserable publicane sufficientlye does declare, what he thought of himself in
his heart. but why do not we considre it out of his words? God (he says) be
merciful unto me a sinner. The confession of sinners.
Here do I hear the true confession of sinners, which is so necessary, that
without that, no christian man can with any fruit hear the comfortable
tydinges of the gospel. For the preaching of the gospel promises us remission
of sins through Christ, but not to them that justify themselves, but unto
them that from the ground of their hearts knowledgeth themselves to be
sinners. For so says Christ: I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners. Mat. 9.
For if I knoweledge not my self to be a sinner, how can my sins be
forgiven me? Hereto pertayneth, that S. John baptist and Christ, first of all
preached repentance. For through the preachinge of the law, our sins be
declared and showed, that we may be brought through it to the knowledge of
our selves, and acknoweledge that we have need of help and comfort. In this
wise also S. Paul says, Romans 3.
that both the Jews and gentyles are under sin. And to conclude. Knowledge of
sin, is the first degree to come unto righteousness, and where this knowledge
is, there is the gospel preached with fruit. Like as Christ says: The
gospel is preached unto the poor, Mat. 11
that is, unto contrite hearts that knowledge their offenses, is preached the
gospel. And where the gospel is so preched, the hearer learneth how that all
only through Christ of mere grace, we be justified and saved. Wherout he
begins to pray with the publican: God, be merciful to me a sinner. For
none other work can help him. Here you have now the description of the
publicane, which knowledged his offenses, and asked mercy.

Thirdely, let us see and hear, what sentence and judgment Christ did give
over them both. Of the publicane he says: He went down into his house
justified, more then the other. For wosoeuer exalts him self, shall be
brought low. And he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. But how
comes that to pass, that so righteous a man, is here condemned? and contrary
wise so great a sinner received and saved? So yt is, This publican knowledging
his offenses, perceaueth and feleth his vicious and sinful nature, and out of
this knowledge he fyndeth himself so unprofitable and miserable, that he
cannot in any wise aid and socoure him self. Wherefore he is not pufte up,
he trusts in no works, he dispaireth of himself, he mekeneth himself, yet
notwithstanding, upon that hope and confidence, that god will be unto him a
merciful god, and forgive him his trespasses, he asks mercy and grace. And
this hope and confidence meruailously pleases god. Wherefore this publican is
pronounced just, that by this exaumple, the righteousness of faith might be
known. And contrary wise. Righteousness of faith,
Because the pharisey not knowledging himself to be a sinner, but proud and
pufte up for his works sake (which notwithstanding were done without faith)
and dispisinge other men, and exaltinge himself, of very right he is
brought low. And forbycause that he before the world took the highest place,
Luc. 14
now with shame he must give place unto the publicane, and sytte beneth. For
god will not regard his fained ypocriticall works. Notwithstanding, we do
not reiecte good works, so that they come freelye out of faith, and are
fruits of a good tree, but if they proceed not of faith, we improve them,
saying with saint Paul: What so ever is not of faith, that same is sin.
To. 14.
though the outward appearance shine never so excellentelye. For we know, that
hypocrisye pleases not god, as scripture testifyeth, saying:

The joy of hypocryte continues but the twinklynge of an eye, Job. 20.
and the praise of the ungodly is short, though his pride ascends up to
the heaven, and his hedde reaches unto the clouds, yet he shall perisshe at
the last, like donge, in so much that they which have seen him, shall say:
Where is he? Let this be sufficient for this gospel.

The gospel on the twefte sunday after Trinitye sunday Mar. 7.
ANd he departed again from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came unto the
sea of Galyle, Mat. 15
through the myddest of the coasts of the ten cities: Mat. 9.
And they brought unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his
speech, and they prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had
taken him a side from the people, he put his fyngers into his ears, and
spitte, and touched his tunge, and looked up to heaven, and sighed, and said
unto him: Ephata, that is to say, be opened: And straight way his ears were
opened, and the stringe of his tunge was losed, and he spoke plain. Mar. 1.
And he commanded them, that they should tell no man: But the more he forbad
them, so much the more a great deal they published, saying: He has done
all things well, he has made both the deaf to hear, and the du^ to speak.

THE EXPOSITION.
An other man's faith
First, in this gospel is praised and commended an other man's faith, which
afther she herself had known Christ to be a savior, puts al her trust in
him, and willingly she breketh forth through charity, taking thought for
other men, prays for the^, seeks Christ for the^, yt they also might come
into ye knowledge of faith, and to embrace Christ to be their allo^ly savior.
This we see in those men, that brought unto Christ one that was deaf and
dumme, prayed Christ that he would vauchsafe to lay his hands upon him. Laying
on of hands.
The layinge of hands upon, was a custom used in the old Testament, and
remained likewise by Christ and his apostelles, in so much that often times,
when they healed the diseased, or would give the holy ghost, Luc. 4.
the laid their hands upon them: as we read in the fourth chapter of Luc.
that Christ laid his hands upon those that were sick, Act. 14. and.8.
and healed them. And also in the acts of the apostels is written: They laid
their hands upon them, and they received the holy ghost. So these men because
they had often seen Christ lay his hands upon those that he healed, they
prayed him likewise, that he would vouchesafe to lay his hand upon this
deaf man. Here note that these men had true faith and confidence in Christ.
For if they had not had faith, why would they have brought that poor man
unto Christ? or why would they have prayed him, to heal this manne? For to
bring the sick impotent men unto Christ, and not believe that he could
heal them, were not called, seekinge of Christ, but rather a mockinge of
Christ. Undoubtedly they had a very true faith, and did knowledge Christ to
be the savior both of body and soul. And that thou may easyly perceive,
in that, they praying unto Christ, obtained their peticion, and through their
prayer and means, the deaf was restored unto health. Further thou shall note,
that this deaf is come to faith and health, thorough an other man's faith,
but not thereby justified and saved. For to iustificacion and salvation, every
manne must have his own faith. An other man's faith may pray for me,
that God through Christ will make me faithful, but to get remission of
sins, I my self must believe and have a perfect faith. For it is written:
He that believes in me, (he says not he, John. 6.
that trusts in an other man's faith) has everlasting life.

Secondarely, for as much as we have hard, How Christ behaved him toward
us.
how every man is bound to believe and hope in Christ, therefore let us
likewise hear on the other party, how and in what manner, Christ behaueth
himself, toward those that believe. And here he is described how familiar,
friendely and merciful he is, which when this sick man was brought unto him,
and their desire and prayer ended, straight ways he took him a side from the
people, and makes answer with the deed, that their prayer was hard. And so
in likewise how the prayer of all those that pray unto the father in his name,
shall be heard. But what did he, when he took him aside from the people? He did
spitte (says he) and touched his tung. but why did he not make him hole
allonly with a word, of whose power and virtue Centurio spoke, Ioh. 14 Mat. 8.
saying: Speak but allonly a word, and my child shall be hole? Truly he did
know, that in the latter days there should come, which should despise his flesh,
John. 6.
and should sai: The flesh profits nothing which allonly may be understand of
our flesh. And therefore that we may learn that god and man is one Christ, and
his flesh profitable and holsom, whereof it is right well spoken: It is my flesh
which I will give for ye life of ye world. Christ would not heal this deaf man
allonly with word, but would add thereunto both spittle, hands, and fingers.
Which things wha^ he did add there unto he looked up into heaven and sighed. Psa.
110
O how happy are we yt ar so received of Christ yt he for our sake looked up
unto heaven and sighed, and as a true high priest and bishop, prayed to his
celestial and heavenly father? Christ also did pray for Peter, Luc. 22.
and for all thapostles, that their faith should not fail, and was heard. And
now likewise if he for our sake sigheth and prays, we need not to care, for
he will bring it to pass. And that he will do the same for us, he does
testifye it with the deed, so that we knowledging our weakness and corrupt
nature, believe and hope, yt he likewise as he did help this deaf man, will help
and have mercy upon us. After this ho^som handlyng of this man, his voice
bursteth out, and said: H^pheta, that is, be opened. Can Christ's mercy and
benigniti be more plainly described unto us? He takes the deaf aside from the
people, wherein he shows that he would help him: He speaks a word, and
helps him: thereby declaring how he could help him. Now seeing he can help us,
and will help us, what great blyndenes is than in us, that we seek or cry
unto any other for help? Is it possible, that the oppressed being in
necessity, can be helped by any other means, than by god through Christ?
The prophet David says: When I am in trouble, Psa. 120
I call upon the Lord, and he answers me. Thou turnest the same clean
contrary, and say: When I am in trouble, I call upon the saints. etc.
What if it chance like unto the as to the foolyshe virgynes which desiered
oil of the wise virgins? Mat. 25.
Shall they save the, which could not help them selves, but allonly were saved
through the grace and mercy of Christ? I do not speak this to dishonor the
saints, but to stablishe the glory of Christ, which will give his honor and
glory to none other. Esai. 4^
It is Christ alone that can help us, and will help us, which forgiueth
sin and justifies sinners. Now if thou can not abide to hear the truth,
nor to confess it, thou art strycken with the same disease, that this deaf
and dumme man is strycken withal. Therefore get the unto Christ, and disclose
unto him thy sickness and disese, and he shall help the. Which if thou do,
not doubting of his benignity, truly he will make the hole, even as he made
this miserable creature hole. How was that done? Immediately (says the
Evangelist) his ears were opened, and the bond of his tunge was lowsed, and he
spoke right.

Thirdly, we find here an excellent fruit of faith, in those that out of this
miracle acknowledged and confessed Christ to be their savior. For they said:
He has done all thing well: The praise of Christ.
The deaf has he made to hear, and the dumme to speak. Think thou not
this to be an high praise of Christ? They say: He has done all things
well. Of whom under heaven might this be said? Our first father Adame so
behaved himself in Paradyse, Romans 5.
that through his disobedience, death and damnacion entered into the world.
And we following our fathers footesteppes, daily provoke God to anger, that
if he were not so mylde and merciful, he might by right thrust us recheles
and disobediente children, into everlasting damnacion. Phil. 2.
And for that cause was Christ sent into the world to help us, and was
obediente to the father unto death, yea the death of the cross, and has
taught us faithfully the way of truth. He has allured us and intised us unto
him through works and miracles, John. 8.
wherein he sought nothing else, the^ ye glory of ye father, and our salvation.
And to be brief, he left nothing undone in his office, but did all ye pertained
other to ye glory of his father, or to our salvation Therefore by right we
must adsribe unto our selves all confusion and shame, and to Christ all
glory. For that same thing, which we through our inobedience and sin had
lost, Christ through his death and merits has recovered again. Hereby we
are reconciled unto the father, and of deaf men be made to hear, and of dumme
men and spechles have obtained our speech. The cause why Christ commanded
the people here, that they should not manifest nor publyshe this miracle, and
yet other where commanded the same to be showed, we can not, nor will not
reason of yt why he did it, he knows himself best. For if it had been meet
for us to have known it, he would not have hid it from us, For yt which
cause we will not examen his judgment, but rather call upon him for grace,
that we may be able to here his word, and to understand yt with our heart, and
before the world (which is so froward and synful) freely to confess it. Which
god through Christ grant us, Amen.

The gospel on the thirtenth sunday after trinitye sunday. Luc. 10.
ANd he turned to his dysciples, and said secretly: Mat. 13
Happy are the eyes which se the things that ye se. For I tell you, that many
prophets and kings have desired to se those things which ye see, and have
not seen them: and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not hard
them.

And behold a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying: Mat. 22
Master, what shall I do, to inherit eternal life? He said unto him: What
is written in the law? How read thou? And he answered and said: Deuteronomy. 6
Mat. 22 Mar. 12
Love the lord thy God, with all thy heart and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. And he
said to him. Thou haste answered right: This do, and thou shalt live. But he
wyllyng to iustifye himself, said unto Jesus. And who is my neighbor?

Jesus answered and said: A certain man descended from Jerusalem to Hierico,
and fell among thieves, which robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and
departed, leaving him half dead. And yt chaunsed that there came down a
ce^ayne Priest that same way, and when he saw him, he passed by. And likewise
a Leuite, when he went nyghe to the place, came and looked on him and passed by.
But a certain Samaritan, as he iournied, came unto him: and when he saw him,
he had compassion on him, and went to, and bound up his wounds, and poured in
oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to a common
ynne, and made provision for him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took
out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him: Take cure of him,
and what so ever thou spe^dest more, when I come again, I will recompense the.
Which now of these three thynkest thou, was neighbor unto him that tell
amongst the thieves? And he said: He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus
unto him: Go and do likewise.

THE EXPOSITION.
Whithe apostels were called blesed.
IN the beginning of this gospel, we see how the Apostles were pronounced and
declared, blessed. And though at that time yt was allonly spoken to
thappostels, yet notwithstanding yt is universally spoken unto all the world.
And for as much as they be so counted, let us therefore search out the cause why.
He says on this wise: Blessed at the eyes, which see that ye se. Though
Christ speaks here simply of his person, his office and miracles, yet
notwithstanding, if we will esteem and count blessed the apostels and those that
saw Christ, that is, knew Christ, so is it very needful and necessary yt
they have ye inward sight of the heart, which is faith. For what had profited
them the outward and bodily seeing of Christ, if they had not had in likewise
the inward seeing? For if the outward seeing might have attained and gotten
salvation, so had Pilate, Annas, Caiphas, and Herod been saved, forasmuch as
they both saw Christ with their bodily eyes, and also spoke with him. It saves
nor helps no more a man to se Christ with his bodily eyes, then it did the
Jews their boasting in their father Abraham. Ioh. 8.
Here be requiered greater things. But which are they? A pure heart, that
believes the word of god, and Christ the truth, and the same Messiah that was
promised unto us, and also to believe and knowledge him the savior of the
world. And such faith and confession had the apostles when the holy ghost
was not yet openly given, but hid. For Christ asking them: Will ye also go
away? Ioh. 6.
Peter answered in the name of them all: Lord to whom should we go? thou haste
the word of everlasting life, and we believe and know, that thou art Christ
the son of the living god. Does not this seem unto ye an excellent and
glorious confession? which confession pleased Christ so highly, that he said:
Blessed art thou Symo^ Bar Iona, for flesh and blood has not reveled this
thing unto the, but my father that is in heaven. Wherout it is evident, that ye
apostels saw not Christ allo^ly with their bodily and fleshly eien, but also saw
hi^ spiritualli, whereby they gat and obtained blessedness. In yt they saw
Christ, they are to be preferred before kings and prophets, forbicause they
knew Christ not only through his word, but also they saw his personage and
miracles, and were a live at that time, in the which his divine and godly grace
through the gospel was diclared unto the world. For Abraham desyered to see
this day, and saw it in spirit, and reioysed therein. John. 8.
But he could not come thereunto, to see him bodily. And because we in these
days can not see Christ, bodily to be conuersaunte amongst us, to preach and
to do miracles, to eat and drink amongst us, let us therefore endeavor our
cogitacions and thoughts, to se and know him spiritually. And in so doing, the
sayi^g of Christ unto Thomas shall be perfurmed in us, where he says: Blessed
at they that see not, Ioh. 20.
and yet believe.

Secondarely, when Christ had pronounced his disciples blessed for their
faith sake, behold, there stood up a scribe and tempted him and said:
Master, what must I do to inherit everlasting life? In the which properly
is discribed unto us, the nature of hipocrisy. For hipocrites ever treat of
works, yea they trust in works, and therefore ever they be speaking of them.
Does yt not seem unto the a folishe thing, to dispute of the frutest, before
the tree be planted? What preuayleth it, to know what is written and commanded
in the law, If I know not how to fulfill it? For that knowledge does not alo^ly
not prevail, but also works anger and wrath according to the saying of S.
Paul. Romans 4
Wherefore it is necessary for them that desire to be saved, to in quiernot
only what manner of work they should do, but how and when the law is
fulfilled. For the law is spiritual, Romans 5.
as S. Paul writes to the Romans. And if the law then be spiritual, so can
it not be fulfilled with outward works, which have outwardely a shine, but it
is necessary that it be fulfilled in the spirit and inward affection.
Furthermore, for as much as the spirit and the affection pertain necessarily
to the fulfilling of the law, to what purpose is this question of the scribe?
Yet thou shalt note, that he answered both wisely and truly to that question,
that Christ objected against him: In the law is written: Thou shalt love thy
lord god with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength, with
all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. This only wanted and lacked
which Christ brings in: Do this (says he) and thou shalt live. And
forbicause he did not enquire by what means or how that same might be
fulfilled, it appears thereby, that he was one of those scribes that
justified himself, and so still remained. And though he of presumption and
pride, which ever does follow hipocrisy, enquired no more of that thing that
he co^moned of, yet must not we leave there, but are bound to know what is the
law and what it works, and what the gospel is, and what it brings to
pass. The law The law.
is a doctrine that teaches me what I am bound to do and to eschew, and
undoubtedly the effect thereof is nothing else, then that it shows us our
offenses, and our sin. For whersoeuer the law is preached, there I do hear
what thing I am bound to do and to leave, but in deed I perceive, that of
mine own power I can not do nor bring to pass, that thing, that is
commanded me to do, and by that means meeked and brought low, I come to ye
knowledge of my corrupt nature and syn. Also I find, that without the holy ghost
I can not fulfill the law. Hereto then pertains the gospel, The gospel.
that glad and joyful tidings of Christ, which declares and shows me, how
that my sins be forgiven me through Christ, which gospel bri^geth with him ye
holy ghost, and a working faith in me, so that now I shall fulfill the law, not
by coaccion, but willynglye. But this scribe cares not for these things, Mat.
7.
wherefore Christ would not cast yt which was holy unto dogs.

Thirdely, when this scribe justifying him self, asked Christ who was his
neighbor, Christ by a symilitude lays it before his eyes plainlye, that he
might understand yt, and says on this wise. A certain man went down from
Jerusalem unto Ierycho etc. In thend of this similitude this scribe knowledgeth
himself, that he was neighbor unto him that fell amongst ye murderers,
which holy him yt was wounded, and had compassion upon him, where Christ
teaches us, not only who is my neighbor, namely he that needs of my help,
whether he be friend or fo, but also mihtely concludes, yt this scribe had not
kept this second commandment in loving his neighbor, wherout it must needs
follow and was evident, that he had not observed the first commandment, wherein
he is commanded to love god. For why else would Christ have said: Go thy way
then and do thou likewise? If he had done it, there had been no need of a
commandment, to have done yt again. Wherefore in conclusion. Though this
scribe outwardely appeared never so virtuous and just, yet is he here
overcome, that he neither kept the first nor the second commandment.
Wherefore let us take here an example, not of the scribe, but of the Samaritan,
whom the love of god so allured to do this benefyte upon him that was wounded.
But note this also, how privily he touches this scribe, in speaki^g of the
Priest and of the Leuite, that passed by this wounded man, without showing of
any mercy unto him. For therewith all, Christ accuses all the priests at
Jerusalem, that they had neither the love of god nor of their neighbor,
without there chanced thereby some profit. Even like as they be painted and
set forth by the prophet, saying: Soph. 3^
Here judges ar as wolves in the evening, which leave nothing behind them
till the morrow.

The gospel on the fourtenth sunday after Trinity sunday. Luc. 17.
ANd it chanced as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through Samaria and
Galilee. And as he entered into a town, there met him ten men that were
lepers, which stood a far of, and put forth their voices and said: Jesus
master have mercy on us. When he saw them he said unto them, Luc. 14. Mat. 8.
Go show your selves unto the priests, And yt came to pass, that as they
went they were cleansed. And one of them when he saw that he was cleansed,
turned back again, and with a loud voice praised god, and fell down on his
face at his feet, and gave him thanks. And the same was a Samaritane. And
Jesus answered, and said: Are there not ten cle^sed? But where are those nine?
There are not found that returned again to give god praise, save only this
stranger. And he said unto him: Arise, gooe thy way, thy faith has made the
hol.

THE EXPOSITION.
First, this gospel declares unto us marvelous excellent examples of faith
in these leepers, which together with one voice cried and called upon Christ
for help. And these examples are meruailouslye well joined to that doctrine
that Christ taught before, teaching us (as S. Luc. testifies) to say and
confess: Luc. 17
We be unprofitable servants, yea though we do all that is commanded us to
do. Out of which words we may gather, that seying there is no work
sufficient before god without faith, that there is no work at all, whereby we
can get or obtain any thing of god, in especyall if it pertayne unto
salvation. For that that he gives, he gives of his mere mercy, wherefore if we
will obtain any thing of him, we must gape after mercy. For if we regard our
works and have confidence in them, yt is impossible but we shall doubt,
whether he will help us or not, for as much as no mortal manne does so
much as he is bound to do. Is yt not blasphemye to god contrary and
repugnaunte to the faith in Christ, to doubt, whether we be heard or not?
Wherefore we may see in these ten lepoures, that they believed and doubted
not, but that freely without any deseruynge, Christ would restore them to
health. Which if they had doubted, surely they would not baue hasted unto Christ
with so great desire, neither would have cried out so loud before they came at
him. But this is the matter: They had herd how meek and merciful Christ was,
and that he mercifully helped every manne, that desired help of him. Through
such fame and speaking of Christ, they conceived a certain hope and trust to
be restored unto health. And so was it brought to pass. When Christ is found
through faith, ye men stand still and seek none other.
And when as he entered into a certain town, there met him ten Leperous men,
which stood still for joy according to the nature and disposicion of faith.
They stood, as though they would say: Here is he that can help us, and will
help us, what will we go any further? Let us open our infirmity to this
merciful Lord, and suerly he will not suffer us to go away without comfort.
Romans 8.
And after follows their peticion, which was not done privily, but with a
loud voice, wherout we may note, how they hoped for great comfort of Christ.
But what say they? Jesus master, have mercy upon us. How could they have made
such an excellent prayer, if they had not been instructed by the holy ghost?
For to acknowledge Christ to be their governor and master, is to profess
that he was sent from God, and his doctrine to be such, as is worthy to be
received of all men. And to desire of him to show his mercy upon us, is
nothing else, but to confess that we of our own righteousness, goodness and
works, can obtain nothing, but must receive al thing through grace. We give
unto God his own honor, when we knowledge him true in his saying, where he
says: Without me ye can do nothing. Iho. 15.
Now forasmuch as these Lepres have so great hope and trust in the goodness of
Christ, and doubt nothing, but that he will help them, We must needs confess,
that they had a true faith. Wherefore let us here consider, that we learn
likewise to seek and call upon Christ in our trouble and necessity.

Secondarily, we see in this Gospel, yt if we seek Christ with a true faith, he
will show him self as good and merciful toward us, as he has done toward
these Lepres. First he beholds them. Blessed are we if Christ with his
merciful eyes looks upon us, Christ showed himself unto us
and fyndeth faith in our hearts. For where that chaunseth, we be sure to have
salvation, both of body and soul. And that the beholding of Christ signified
no wrath, but grace, the words that follow declare it, for he says: Go your
ways, and show your selves unto the priests. For unto those were given power
by the law, Leui. 13
to discern and look upon Leepres. Now when Christ perceived the faith of
these Lepres, he says not that he will help them, but as though they were
already helped, he bids them to go and show them selves to the priests,
whose office and duty was to judge and discern Lepre. What do now these
Lepres? They do even as Abraham did, Genesis 12
when God commanded him to go out of his country and from his kynred and from
his fathers house, he asked not where he should become, but obayed unto God,
and in his so going, conceived a sure confidence, that God would not led him
amysse. And in likewise do these ten Leepres. They believed that this word of
Christ (Go your ways) was not spoken in vain, but undoubtedly would bring
them their health, as it did. For thus says the text: As they went, it came to
pass that they were cleansed. Who would not now hope I trust in the goodness of
Christ? which healpeth so willyngly, so louyngly and so gladly, so that for
his benignitee, familiaritee and mercy sake, all the whole world is bound to
have unto him, to ask mercy. But we, alas, The world is indurated.
are so ungracious and indurate that no benevolence or gratiousnes (although it
be never so great) can move us to seek Christ. Wherefore it is said in a
certain place: If you had faith like a grain of Mustardsede, Luc. 17 Mat. 17
and should say unto this Mulbery tree: Pluck thy self up by the roots, and
plant thy self in the sea, it should obey you. As though he would say: In you
shall be the fault, and not in me. If you can believe, my help shall always be at
hand. But let every Christian manne learn hereout, how he should behave
himself toward Christ our Lord, and so he needs not to care.

Thyrdly, we see in this gospel the geuyng of thanks of this Samaritane, which
when he perceived himself to be clean, he returned again, and with a loud
voice magnifyed God, geuyng him thanks for the great benefit done unto him.
And again we see here the ingratitude and unthankfulness of the other nine,
which fell from their faith, and gave no thanks to Christ for the great
benefit done unto them. Wherout we learn, Mat. 20
that there be many called to the faith, and but few which persevere therein
unto the end. It is a marvelous thing and wonderful to say, that these ten
men had faith, and thereby obtained health, and yet was there but one of them
that perseuered therein, and was saved. Who would not now fear him self, and
stand in dread, to see these nine Jews that first believed, Mat. 10 and. 14.
and so shamefully fell again from it. This is a true saying, where Christ
says: Whoseeuer perseuereth unto the end, shall be saved. There are many of us,
which hear the word of God, and receive it with joy, and show them selves
as though they would devour the whole Gospel, and yet for all that, in the
end they do not alonely forsake their faith, but also against their own
conscience, Gala. 5.
they do persecute the manifest truth. Unto whom might very well be spoken:
Ye ran well, who was a let unto you, that you should not obaye the truth?
Mat. 10
Briefly: Christ is true in that he has spoken, saying: There be many called,
but there be but few chosen. Wherefore by right the ingratitude and
unthankfulness of these nine Jews, ought to fear us, and not only to fear
us, but also to constrain us daily and hourly to pray unto God, that we may
obtain through Christ this constancy and perseverance. Also the thankefulnes
of the Samaritane, may provoke us to laud and praise God for his goodness, that
we receive of him. Forasmuch as our merciful God meruaylously deliteth in
rendryng and geuyng such thanks, as he speaks through the Prophet David:
Psa. 49
Who so offers unto me thanks and praise, he honors me. Why (I pray you)
does Christ ask after these nine that were clean, and does not return again
unto him, to give him thanks? Truly therefore, that their ingratitude and
unthankfulness highly displeased him. And wherefore think you does the
Evangelist so diligently discribe, that this Samaritane, which criyng out, did
fall down upon his face at Jesus feet, and magnifyed God, and gave him
thanks? doubteles that he therewith would commend, publishe and show us the
constancy of his faith, and how highely the sacrifice of giuinge thanks and
praise, pleases god. Now forasmuch as the kingdom of god is taken from the
unthankful Jews, and given unto us Gentiles, we knowledging this benefit, let
us daily give thanks unto God through Christ, that he will vouchsafe to
make us constant in faith, and bring us to everlasting salvation, through
Christ our lord. Amen.

The gospel on the fyftenth sunday after trinity sunday. Math. 6.
NO man can serve two masters: Luc. 16.
For either he shall hate the one and love the other, or else lean to the one
and despise ye other: Ye can not serve God and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you:
Luc. 12. Psalm. 55 1 Pet. 5.
Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat or drink, nor yet for
your body what raiment ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth than
meat? and the body more of valewe than raiment? Behold the fowls of the
air: for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor carye into their barnes,
and your heavenly father feeds them. Are ye not much better then they?

Luc. 12.
Which of you by taking careful thought, can add one cubyte unto his
stature? And why care ye for ray^ente? Considre the lylyes of the field, how
they grow. They labor not, neither do they spynne. And yet I say unto
you, that even Solomon in all his royaltee, was not arayedlyke unto one of
these. Wherefore if god so clothe the grass of the field, which though it
stand to day is to morrow cast into the furnace, shall he not much more do
the same for you, O ye of little faith?

Therefore take no thought, saying: What shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed? After all these things do the
Gentyles seek. For your heavenly father knows that you have need of all
these things. But rather seek ye first the kingdom of god, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

THE EXPOSITION.
The true service of god is repugnant with the false service.
CHrist teaches us first in this gospel, how that he can not suffer ye false
service of god (wherewith in the steed of god, the creatures ar worshipped) to
stand with the true service of god, concluding it on this wise, that it is
needful for us, other to be in all things christian men, or else whole heithen
and infidels. For if I will be a christen man, I must with all my heart set my
trust and confidence in Christ. And if it be not done with all ye whole heart but
partly, that is, if I think I must trust and put my confidence in creatures, I
have here the sentence given upon me, that I am no christen man, but rather an
ethnicke and infidele. Seeing tha^ that Christ requires of us our whole heart,
it is meet that we go about to learn, how we might truly please and serve him.
To serve Christ To serve Christ.
is none other thing, then to be leave that we be saved by him. For this faith
makes us acceptable before god, and irreprehensible and blameles before the
world, so that afterward we shall dilygently go about to perform that thing,
that becomes us to do, and ever remain and abide in yt fear and dread of god.
Of this worshipping speaks David in the person of Christ, saying: Psalm. 17
A people whom I have not known, shall serve me, as soon as they hear of me,
they shall obey me, But the straung children dissemble with me. Wherout yt
follows, that if I serve god in such wise, as is aforesaid, so am I become a
christen man. And here is to be noted, that this word, to serve, is ever to be
referred to faith, and the true worshippinge of god, as Moises says in Deuteronomy.
Thou shall fear god thy lord, Deuteronomy. 6.
and him only thou shall serve. It is needful yt I serve my neighbor with
worldly things, and also with spiritual, but I shall set no creature in the
steed of god, to put my hope and trust in them. How many of us is there (I
beseech the) that serves god on this wise? We boaste us of faith, but there is
so few of us that trust not in creatures, and specially in the same which
Christ here bri^geth in, that is, in wicked Mammon, Ma^mon has many servants
in so much that we run through fire and water to get it, ye to obtain it, we
put both bodi and life in ieoperdy. And whi do we thus? Forbicause infidelity
and blyndnes leads us, that we can not believe that Christ which through his
blood has gotten us everlasting riches, can and also will give us temporal and
worldly riches. But Paul judged right in saying: 1 Timothy 6
They that will be rich, fall into the temptacion and snare of the dyuell. For
I suppose that never creature deceived manne so much as this wicked Mammon For
where this Mammon is, there is great sorrow and care, to keep him, and also to
increace him. And hereof springs lady covetousness, Ephe. 5.
which S. Paul calls ydolatrye, which causes a man to hate Christ, and to
love this wicked Mammon. And suerly this ydoll will not suffer us to follow the
council of David, saying: If riches chance unto the, Psalm. 62
set not thy heart upon them. For it will take away thy heart from Christ, and
cause the to hang upon it. In temporal and worldly matters, seeing thou can
not serve two masters, and think thou to do it in spiritual things? Thou
shalt never bring yt to pass. If thou set thy heart upon Christ, and not
in the gatherynge of treasure, thou art a Christian manne. But if thou set
thy heart upon Mammon, thou art an infidele.

Ungodly carefulnes is forbidden
Secondarily, Christ forbids in this gospel the ungodly care and thought of
worldly things, and for the sustentation of our life, and allureth us unto
faith through two excellent examples. And this prohibitio^ follows the
sentence of serving of god and Mammon, very properlye. For a man might have
brought in, and said: If I shall not care to get riches, how shall I find my
wife and children? To the same doubt Christ answers: Be not you careful for
your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink: nor yet for your
body, what ye shall put on. As though he would say: Ye be careful,
Carefulnes is forbidden
as though he which has given you both body and life, is not able to give
you meat and clothing. Here is forbidden the carefulnes of temporal things, but
so, that gods commandment of labor, which was given to Adam in Paradise,
namely, Genesis 3. To labor is not forbidden.
In the sweat of thy face, thou shalt eat thy bread, is not taken away. I
must labor, and in any wise take heed, that I run not from one place to
an other, like the Anabaptists and Lybertines do, Anabaptists and Libertines
as though every man were bound to give me: This done, must I cast all my
carefulnes upon god, with such an hope and trust, yt god our faithful father,
shall not suffer me his child, here upon earth to suffer hunger. Hereunto are
to be referred two examples, one of the birds of the air, and the other of
the lilyes of the field. The fowls of the air (says he) does neither sow
nor reap, nor yet carry into the barnes, and yet your heavenly father feeds
them. Item: Considre the lilyes of the field, they labor not, neither
spinne. And yet for all that I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
roialtye, was not arrayed like unto one of these. Would God deny us, that
which he gives both unto the unreasonable fowls, and also unto lilyes, that
have no sensible life? Infidelity blyndeth us.
But we be of little faith, as Christ says here, and in frail and
transitory things so blinded and indurat, that neither entreaty, neither
threatnyng, neither promise, nor miracles, nor yet no teaching can move us. We
will not forsake the care of the bellye, which causes us against the doctrine
of Christ, to heap up riches here upon earth, and serve that ydoll our
bellye, whereby we forgette the true and right serving of God, and do
neither hope nor yet beeleue in God, but all our care is, to have our barnes
full. And here it appears to be true, that Christ spoke in an other place:
Mat. 5.
Where that thy treasure is, there is also thy heart. And like wise as he says
here: After all such things does the Hethen enquire. Do thou not hear,
that to have unfaithful carefulnes for temporal things, is a heithen work?
How can our covetous christian men be better painted in their own colors,
which at this time in a great number do reign?

Thirdely we have here an excellent promise full of consolation and comfort,
whereby the faithful may strengthen his faith and hope in god through Christ,
that he will never suffer his to be comfortles in this world. He says: Your
heavenly father knows that you have need of all these things. If our father
in heaven knows what thing we have need of, and is so merciful and full of
pitye, that he gives his children their daily bread, why do we vex our
selves, with so sorrowful care? Why be we so inwardly moved with sorrow and with
doubtfulnes? Let us seek the kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof,
and suerly he shall minister unto us those things that pertain to the
sustentacio^ of our life, Romans 5. Ioh. 14
or else he must be a liar, which in no wise can not be, that god which is the
truth, should lie. But here let us search out again what Christ means, when
he bids us, Seek first the kingedome of god. To seek the kingdom of god,
is no other thing, then to pray that he will bring us unto faith, and
through his holy ghost comfort and hold us in the same faith, unto our
end, as the Prophet David did, of whom we read in the 50. psalm. and in the
118. Which if we diligently do, our faith (for the which we pray) shall not
be allonly encresed and augmented, according to Christ's promise, Mat. 7.
saying: Ask, and you shall have. but also it shall happen, that likewise
temporal things being promised us, shall be given and ministered unto us. This
word, Ioh. 16
It shall be ministered unto you. declares our labor and provision to be
nothing, if god should not give the increase. Therefore let us well considre and
comprehend this promise in our heart, that we may learn, both in our spiritual
and worldly matters, to hope, trust, and put our confidence only in god through
Christ, that we may not through such ethnicall carefulnes for bodily things,
be separated from Christ, and the true serving of god. To whom with the son
and holy ghost, be al honor. Ame^

The gospel on the syxtenth sunday after trinitye sunday. Luce. 7.
ANd it fortuned after this, that he betwente into a city which is called
Naim, and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. When he came
nighe to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out,
which was the only son of his mother and she was a widow, and much people of
the city was with her. And when the lord saw her, he had compassion on
her, and said unto her: Weep not. And he came nighe, and touched the coffyn,
and they that bare him, stood still. And he said: Young man, I say unto the,
arise. And he that was dead, sat up, and began to speak. 4 Re. 17 4 Re. 4.
Accu 9. and 20. Ioh. 4. and. 6.
And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on them all and
they gave the glory unto god, saying: 4 Re. 17 4 Re. 4. Accu 9. and 20. Ioh. 4.
and. 6.
A great prophet is risen up among us, and god has visited his people.

THE EXPOSION.
Forasmuch as in this gospel we find what great benefit and charity was
showed unto this widow, therefore let us search out before al things with what
sorrow and misfortune she was oppressed with all. This well and diligently
considered and taken to heart, shall the better commend unto us, declare and set
forth this benefit done by Christ. First the euangelyst describes the state
of this woman, and says that she was a wydowe. A woman even of her nature, is
a weak vessel, as witnesses S. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.
If now that incommoditie also chance unto her, to leese her husband, than
vttterly she has no comfort in this world. Hereof it comes, that there is no
man welnigh, that more moves a good heart, and allureth him to pitye and
compassion, then the name of a wydowe and a fatherless child, yea god him
self, because that this kind of people live without comfort and consolation,
and utterly are despised of the world, helps them, and cares for them, ye
and with this example he co^me^deth them unto us, that we herein should follow
him. For it is written in the fifth book of Moises: Deu. 18.
The lord your god is god of al gods, and lord over all lords, a great,
mighty, and terrible god, which regards no parso^ and takes no gift. He does
right unto the fatherless and widow. He loves the stranger, and gives him
food and rayme^t Therefore love you also the strangers. etc. Two things are
here to be noted. The one is, That God will not forsake the widows and
fatherles children, but that he will keep and mercifully save them. Another is,
that we shall love and help poor miserable and forsaken people. To the first
the prophets and in espetiall Dauyd has much respect and regard, commending
and praisinge god to be the father of wydowes and of orphans, Psa. 67
saying: Oh sing unto god, sing praises unto his name, Magnify him that
rydeth above ye heavens, whose name is ye lord. Rejoice before him. He is a
father of ye fatherles, he is a defe^der of widows. Psalm. 9.
And in an other place he says: The lord is a defense for ye poor. Of the
last writes S. James, saying: Pure devotion and undefiled before God the
father is this, to visit the frendles and wydowes in their aduersitee, and to
keep him self unspotted of the world. Now forasmuch as this woman had lost
her husband and was become a wydowe, undoubtedly she was in a miserable state.

Nevertheless she had some comfort and solace left in her only son, in whom
was her delight. But he in like manner died also, so that now all her joy and
comfort in this world, was spent and gone. He that knows with what great
affections the mother loves and embraces her children after the death of the
father, may lightly perceive and understand, in what trouble and misery this
woman was in. But what should I make many words? undoubtedly I think there
could skant chance more trouble unto this woman, then to lose both her husband
and her child, and to be so utterly comfortles. Wherefore let a man first
consider her misery as it is written of the Evangelist.

Secondarily we see and perceive in this gospel the goodness and love of Christ,
with the which he pityeth this woman. And this is to be noted, that though the
love of Christ is highly commended and praised in all the histories of the
gospel, yet chifly we may perceive it here in this place more plainer and
excellent, for here was no faith that should express the sorrow of this woman,
and seek for grace. All that is done here of Christ, is done of mercy and love,
and of great pity and compassion of the heart, that was had toward this
woman. And it is here fulfilled that was spoken of Esaias, saying: Esa. 65
Before they cry unto me, I shall hear them. Seeing that all is done here of
mere grace, who would presumptuously glory in works, though he had wrought
never so much? And again. who would despair for sin, and would not rather
have him to Christ? This benefit done to this wydowe, is and may be to us a
lively doctrine, that we shall hope for all goodness of Christ, if that
ungracious infidelite did not hinder us, and lead us away from the confidence
in Christ. The holy scripture does teach and commends faith.
Such examples of the great love and charity of Christ, do lead and instruct
us to true faith, so that we may perceive that we be not only restored unto
health by grace, but also thereby are justified and saved. This faith requires
of us the whole scripture, with all thapostolical Epistles, But reason and
masters subtlety will not understand it, but thinks to obtain all things
through her works. And if the scripture sixehu^dreth times did witness, Romans 4
That he that works not, but believes in him that iustifyeth the wicked, that
his faith were reputed to righteousness, Yet our curiosite can a great deal
better do it and understand it. But let every man take heed, that he go the
right way, and err not. For the time is nere at hand, that we shall either for
true doctrine rejoice with God, or else for false doctrine be utterly confounded.
Surely this woman had neither faith before in Christ, nor yet had done any
work, where through she had deserved so great benefit, and yet great grace
was showed unto her. He that not being desired, nor yet entreated, does so
great benefit unto this woman, thynkest thou that he will not do the same to
those that pray to him for it? Briefly. At all times he is ready to help us
and to do us good, so that we can believe and doubt not. And for the most
party, then does he helps us, when we have most need of him, yea, when we
think that God himself, heaven and earth, and all is against us, and that we
be utterly forsaken, then (I say) does he begin to help. And the same thou
see to happen to this woman. For when her sorrow was greatest, then did he
help her. And that is the same that David says: When I call, Psalm. 4.
hear me, O God of my righteousness, and comfort me in my trouble.

Thyrdly, we see in this miracle the strength and virtue of Gods word, The
power and virtue of the word of God.
and what it works in us when we comprehend it by faith. For the Evangelist
after that he has showed and declared unto us, how Christ had pity on this
woman and comforted her, after he writes, how Christ through his word,
raised this child from death, and says: He came nigh and touched the coffyn,
and they that bare him stood still, and he said: Young man, I say unto thee,
arise. Here you hear, that Christ is Lord as well over the dead as over ye
quick, and what he speaks to this young man that is dead. But what happened?
The dead sat up and began to speak. Behold the great virtue of Christ's
word, that by the same the dead are raised to life. And whatsoever is done
here, after ye history to this young man, the same must be done daily,
spiritually in us. For who is without sin? And the reward of sin is death.
Therefore if we will be delivered from sin, and escape everlasting death,
Christ with his word must come and do it. For Christ says: He that keeps my
word, Ihon. 8.
shall not dye euerlastyngly. And his word must be comprehended and
understood by a true faith. For where the knowledge of this word lacks,
Ihon. 1.
there Christ which is the word, is not known. And again, where Christ is not
known, there cannot God be praised nor glorified with the words of this
people, saying: A great prophet is risen amongst us, and God has visited his
people. The knowledge of God bri^geth thankesgeuyng.
And contrary wise, where this word is comprehended and in heart conceived,
there is Christ known, and when he is known, then is God praised and
glorified, because that he has visited us, not in his wrath, but with his
infinite mercy, and has given us his only well-beloved son, so that through
his passion and death, he has redeemed us from sin, death, devil, and hell,
For the which great benefit we are bound to thank him euerlastyngly.

Finally, the benignitee of Christ allureth us unto faith and faith
acknowlegeth the power of Gods word, and this knowledge prayseth and glorifyeth
God euerlastyngly. To whom with the son and holy ghost be all honor and
praise. Amen.

The gospel on the.xvii. sunday after Trinitee sunday. Luc. 14.
ANd it chaunsed, that he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees, to
eat bread, on a Sabbath day, and they watched him. And behold, there was a
certain man before him, which had the dropsye. And Jesus answered and spoke
unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Mat. 12 Mar. 3. Luc. 6.
is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? And they held their peace. And he
took him and healed him, and let him go, and answered them, saying: Which of
you have an Ass or an ox fallen into a pyt, Exo. 23 Deu. 22 Mat. 12
and will not straight way pull him out on the Sabbath day? And they could not
answer him again to these things.

He put forth also a similitude to the gestes: when he marked how they preased
to the highest roumes, and said unto them, when thou art bydden of any man to a
weddyng, sit not down in the highest room, lest a more honorable man than
thou, be bydden of him, and he (that bad him and the) come and say to the: Give
this man room, and thou then begin with shame to take the lowest room. But
rather when thou art bydden, go and sytte in the lowest room, that when he
that bad the comes, he may say unto thee: Friend sytte up hyer. Pro. 25
Then shall thou have worship in the presence of them that sytte at meat with
thee. Mat. 23 Luc. 81
For who soever exalts himself, shall be brought low. And he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel Christ had to do and handles with two manner of persons.
First with the Pharisees, which waited him to find occasion to reprehende
him, and also with this man that had the dropsye. Let us therefore see first
how he handles him self toward these Phariseis, and how the Phariseis
handle themselfes toward Christ. The condition and nature of the Phariseis.
The Phariseis ever went about to blaspheme Christ's doing, according to their
nature and custom. As for his doctrine seemed unto them nothing at all, by
reason it was contrary to hypocrisy. Wherefore there was never nothing that
pleased them, whatsoever Christ taught. And though they saw never so much
his great miracles, which they could not deny, yet would they not give God
the glory, but said, that it was all done through Beelzebub, prince of the
devils. Much such blaspemye, deceit and envy, shall thou find in the
histories of the gospel. Mat. 12.
For even as the Pharisees persecuted Christ, Mat. 12
condemned his doctrine, and blasphemed his works and miracles, so Christ set
himself against them, and withstode them, as most great enemies to his holy
doctrine. If you look in the histories of the gospel, you shall find continual
war between Christ and the Phariseis. And it could be no other wise. For he
was the stombling stone, 1. Pe. 2. Luc. 2.
and a rock to be offended at, and a token which shall be spoken against of the
world. Wherefore it had not been well done, if he should have granted them any
thing pertainyng and touching the glory of his father. It was sufficient, that
he did declare with his deed his doctrine of christian patience, in those
things that pertayned to his person. Love is the master of al ye laws.
Wherefore Christ after his accustomed manner (though ye Phariseis never so much
waited him) healed this dropsy man upon the sabbath day, showing with the same
miracle, that as well Gods laws as man's laws, ought to serve and give place
unto charitee. And though the sabbot was commanded unto the Jews most
straightly to be kept, yet that commandment did not extend to the
hynderaunce of charity, whereof Christ in another place shows the reason why,
saying: The sabbot was made for man's sake, Mar. 2.
and not man for the sabbothes sake. 1. Ti. 1.
And S. Paul says: The chief sum of the commandment is love from a pure
heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned. Wherefore when I see my
neighbor in necessitee, I am bound to show him charitee and love, if it were
xx. times holy day, because love is the rule and maistres of all laws. Now
consider well with thy self, whether Christ did not right in healyng of this
manne that had the dropsye, how frowardly soever the Phariseis took it. If an
Ox or an ass had fallen into a hole on the sabbath day, thynkest thou that
they would have tarried till the sabbath day had been past? No surely. Why then
should not Christ show unto a man, that they showed unto a beast? Christian
liberty. To. 14.
And so let us likewise use the liberty yt we have in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Let us receive those that be weak, into the faith, and beware to trouble not
their conscience. And as for these obdurate and stubburne iustifiers of them
self, which have heard our doctrine of christian liberty, and yet dispiseth
it, against them let us use the same liberty. For whatsoever we do or leave
for their pleasure and weakness sake, it will healpe nothing at all, but
still they will obstinately remain in their blyndnes. For so are the Phariseis
against Christ, and Christ against the Phariseis, and yet is there so great
power and strength in the truth, yt the Phariseis are constrained to hold
their peace.

Secondarily, Christ gentely handled this sick man.
we see in this gospel how familiarly and gentely Christ handeleth this man
sick of the dropsy, he handeled and heals him, and lets him go. First he
was in hand with these Pharisees, who^ he would have gladly instructed, how
all laws in time of need are bound to give place unto love and charitee, but
they would neither hear, not yet receive his doctrine, their hearts were
stricken with so great blyndes. Yea, they would not only refuse to hear
Christ, but sought always and means to distroy him, which thing happened
chiefly upon the Sabbath day, Deu 18. Mar. 3.
when in the synagoge he made whole the man's hand that was dry and wythered.
Nevertheless Christ is friendly to this man that had the dropsy, he heals
him, and byddeth him go his ways. Howbeit, it is to be thought that this man
that had the dropsye had a good hope and trust in Christ, insomuch that he
followed Christ into the Phariseis house. And without doubt he had not been
healed, if he had not had such an hope in Christ. And as the blyndnes of
these Phariseis ought to abashe and fear us, because that they had eyes and
saw not, ears and heard not, an heart and believed not, so the goodness and
benignite of Christ, showed unto this man that had the dropsy, ought to move
us to lift up our hearts, and to put al our trust and confidence in Christ.
Therefore this miracle and such like, Romans 25
are written unto us, that therout we may learn, what manner a man Christ is,
and why the father has sent him into this world, and what from him is to be
hoped for of a christen man. He did good unto this man that had the dropsye,
because he hoped well in him. Wherefore then should he deny us any good thing,
if we believe in him? Is his hand shortened, Esai. 59
that it can not help? No truly.

His mercy endures for ever. The fault is in us, and not in his helpyng hand,
and that forbecause we will neither acknowledge our infirmite, nor yet believe.
But if we will acknowledge our imbecilite and weakness, specially in those
things that partayne to our soul, and ask grace of Christ in a true faith,
it is not possible, but it shall be granted us. Furthermore, it is requisite,
that we once obtaynyng this his grace and mercy, endeavor our selves to show
like love and charity to our neighbor, as Christ showed here unto this man
that had the dropsye.

Thirdely, The Pharisees still remaining in their blyndnes, and so that they
could neither through Christ's words, nor yet through his miracles be moved
to beeleue, Christ paid them home, and forasmuch as he perceived in them a
desirous appety of vain glory, and ever chosing themselves the uppermost
seats at feasts, and said: Christ reprehended ye ambitiousnes of ye pharisees
When thou art bid to dinner to a marriage, thou shall not set thy self in
the highgest place, lest peradventure one that is more honorable then thou, be
also bidden. And then he that bad both the and him, come and say unto the:
Give this man place. But when thou art called, set the down in the lowest
place, that he may say: Friend sit up higher. With these words Christ would
have corrected the ambition of the phariseis. For they sought the glory of this
world, and were in their hearts al given to pomp and pride, Mat. 23
As he says in an other place, That all the works they did, were done for the
intent, that they might be seen of men. Mat. 6.
And in the syxt chap. of Math. where Christ taught us truly to pray, to fast,
and give alms. There likewise he warned us to take heed of such phariseis,
and not to do good works in that intent, like as they did, and there he adds,
sayi^g: They have received their reward. He has teached us here mystically,
that if any man be called to the marriage of ye godly grace, he must not be
pufte up, nor yet think of him self more then becomes him, but rather he
ought to take heed, that he bears himself upright and be ever in fear, lest
he leese the goodness and gifts that he has received. For thus it stondeth in
the kingdom of Christ, that he that exalts him self, shall come low, and
he that meketh him self, shall he exalted. And in an other place. He that will
be greatest amongst you, Mar. 20
let him become your servant. The same thing aloweth Christ, Mat. 19
when he took a child and set him in the midst of his disciples, and said:
Except ye tourn and become as children, ye shall not enter into the kingedome
of god. Luc. 28.
Likewise, What happened unto the pharisey, in preferring himself before the
publican? Very this: The publican was justified, and the pharisey counted
unjust and not righteous. Therefore whosoever with this sinner choseth him the
lowest place, and knowledgeth his sin, and asks grace, Christ shall set him
in ye highest place, and give him everlasting life. Which god through Christ
our savior, grant to us all. Amen.

The gospel of the eightene sunday after trinity sunday, Math. 22.
But when the Pharisees had heard, that he had put the Saduces to silence,
they came together: and one of them which was a doctor of law, asked him a
question, temptinge him, and saying: Master, which is the greatest
commandment in the law? Jesus said unto him: Thou shalt Deuteronomy. 6.
love thy god with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind. This is the first and greatest commandment. And the second is like unto
it. Leui. 19 Romans 13 Galat. 5 Jacob. 2
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang
all the law and the prophets. While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus
asked them, saying: What thynk ye of Christ? Whose son is he? They say unto
him: the son of Dauyd. He said unto them Mat. 1^. Psa. 11
how then does David in spirit, call him lord, saying: The lord said unto
my lord, Mat. 1^ Psa. 11
sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. If Dauyd
then call him lord, how is he then his son? And no man was able to answer
him any thing, nether durst any man from that day forth ask him any mo
questions.

THE EXPOSITION.
FIrst, we have in this gospel of this day a question of the law, wherein is
to be considered, what they be that move this question and what their intent
was. The Phariseis were the chieffest, and counted the holiest amongst the
Jews people, which ever boasted of works, and disputed of the same. A
certain doctoure of the law, whom the pharisees had appointed, moved this
question here, because they feared, lest yt should chance unto them, as it did
unto the Saduces. Neither was it marvel, though those iustifiers of them
selves, reasoned of the greatest and chiefest commandment of the law, for
all their boasting was in works, all their labor and dylygence was to be
justified and blessed, and all through works. Which false opinion was so
growe^ and imprinted in their hearts, that the prophets, Christ, and also the
Apostelles endeavored them selves greatly, to reform it, but it was for the
most part all in vain. Wherefore the pharisees do here according to the
common saying, which also was used of Christ in an other place, saying: Mat. 12
Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. They understood the
virtue of faith, Wherefore they must needs fall into hypocrisy, which ever is
repugnant unto faith. And hereout it chanced that they so stiffly with stood
Christ, was the true doctoure of faith and truth. They reason with Christ,
but not of a good zeal, as we may lightly perceive in this gospel. The text
is thus. One of them a scribe, tempted him. etc. There is a difference when a
man of ignorance does question of a thing out of a good intent and for his
erudition, and when he goth about to tempte a man. For he that of a good zeal,
To te^pt.
asks any question, he does it to learn, because he is ignorant therein. And
he that tempts a man, he does it for that intent and purpose, to trippe him
in his saying. Wherefore in that the phariseis questioned not with Christ of no
good intent, Malice and wickedness of our nature.
but for to tempt him, we may learn therout the maliciousnes of our nature.
For that is so rooted and grafte in us, that by no means we can knowledge the
truth or believe Christ, except we be transformed into a new creature,
through the word and the holy ghost. John. 3.
For if we will not perpetually remain indurate and blind, we must be pulled
therfrom, and learned by the holy ghost.

Secondarily, considre now this question well, and also the answer of Christ.
And although those phariseis did not put forth this question of a good intent,
yet for all that the doctor of the law was not so styffe necked nor yet so
stubborn. Surely Christ's answer and solution did like him so well, in so
much that Christ himself said, that he was not far wide from the
kingedome of God, as sayncte Mark therein testifies. Mar. 12
The question was this. Master, which is the chiefest commandment in the
law? Whereunto Christ answered: Thou shalt love the lord thy god with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. And adds: This is the first
and greatest commandment. And the second is like unto it: Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments hang
all the law and the prophets. O what an excellent answer, if the Pharisees
could have understand it. For Christ reherseth not here only two
commandementes, but also teaches that in them hang the whole law and the
prophets. Which must be understand in this wise. The law (as witnesses S.
Paul) is spiritual. that is, Romans 7 The law is fulfilled with the spirit
the law cannot be fulfilled with outward works, but requires the affection
of the heart, The^ if the affection of the heart ought to be wholly directed to
the love of god, so that we should neither cleave to works, nor yet to any
creature, then must I needs have faith, This faith the holy ghost works
in me through the word. And when I have this true faith, then do I all
thing wyllyngelye that the law asks of me, and not constrained out of love,
and not for fear. Faith.
And I do not only that the first table of Moses requires of me, but also I
do that the second commands me. For I do believe and trust that the lord my
god is he that will save me through Christ, of his great mercy and grace,
without any deseruyng of my party. Furthermore, I love my neighbor as my
self, for I count his pouertye, tribulation and misery, to be mine, and all
that he suffers, as though I suffered my self. Hereout comes, that wha^ I
do what so ever is acceptable unto mi neighbor, and leave the thing that is
preiudyciall and hurtefull unto him, then the fulfillyng of the law is
adscribed unto love. And that may thou perceive and find in the epistle to
the Romans, where S. Paul writes, Romans 13
that he that loves his neighbor, has fulfilled the law. For thou shall
not be an aduouterer, thou shall not kill, thou shalt not steal, thou shall
bear no false witness, thou shalt not desire, and if there be any other
commandment, it is comprehended in this saying: Love thy neighbor as thy
self. And though the law both requires faith and love, yet still it
remains a word of wrath and anger, while she gives me not the spirit to
do that she commands. Thou will say unto me: Why then is the law given,
and what is her office? I answer with S. Paul: Romans 3.
By the law comes the knowledge of syn. etc. and for this purpose she
serves and is necessary. She brings me to the knowledge of imbecillitie
and weakness, perverse and froward nature, sins, which can through no
work be expelled and driven away, so than that I by that means am made the
apter and redyer, to hear and embrace ye doctrine of Christ of the divine grace
and goodness.

Thirdely, like as we have had in this gospel a question partaininge to the
law, so we have here now an other question partaininge to the gospel. After
that an answer was given unto the Pharisees according to their question, which
was the first and greatest commandment in the law, Christ asked them again
sayi^g: What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They answer: The son of
David. Then Christ said unto them: How then did David in spirit, Ps. ^09
call him lord, saying: The lord said unto my lord, Sit thou on my right
hand? etc. Here were ye pharisees taken at a baye, how crafty or subtyle so
ever they were. And while they were ignorant therein, knew not how Christ was
the son and the lord of David, they showed them self to have little
understanding in the mystery of the gospel. And although the Pharisees had no
understanding therein, yet al they that will be counted christen men, must both
know it, and believe it. For what other thing is the gospel, then a sweet and
comfortable preaching of Christ the son of David? that he for us became
man, and came into the world, to redeem and save us through his death and
passion? And ye he is called (as concerning ye flesh) the son of David, Whose
son Christ is
is for the great and excellent promise, that was made of Christ unto David.
So likewise we knowledgi^g him to be the lord of David, we confess him to be
very god and man, sent from the father into the world, that by him we should
be saved. This so excellent a mystery is hidden from the Pharisees, and all
that justify them selves, but unto us that know and worship the father in
Christ, and Christ in the father, it is plainly opened and well known. This
preaching of Christ that he is the son and lord of David, agrees well with
the question of the law. The law opens sin, but it forgiueth not sin, for
that high power is only given unto Christ our lord the son of David. Also the
law teaches, what we ought to do and forbere, but she gives not the spirit,
which can do that the law commands. Wherefore there belongs besides the
preaching of the law, which does humiliat us, the preaching of the son and
lord of David, that is the go^pell, which may pacifye our troubled consciences,
and may give us the holy ghost to teach us willyngly and for love to do that
thing that god requiret of us. Which knowledge god the father grant us, through
Christ our lord. Amen.

The ninetenth sunday after trinity sunday. Mat. 9.
HE entered also into a ship, and passed over and came into his own city. And
behold, Mat. 2. Luc. 5. b
they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying in a bed. And when Jesus
saw ye faith of the^, he said unto the sick of the palsy: Son, be of good
chere, thy sins be forgyuen the. And behold, certain of ye scribes said
within them selves: this man blasphameth. And when Jesus saw their thoughts,
he said: Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? Whether is easyer to say, Thy
sins be forgiven the, or to say, arise and walk? But that ye may know, yt the
son of man has power to forgive sins in earth. Then says he unto the sick
of the palsy: Actu. 3. and. 9. f Mar. 2. Luc. 5. c Ioh. 5. b
Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house. And he arose and departed to
his house. But the people that saw it, meruailed and gloryfied God, which had
given such power unto men.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel, is handled one of ye most principal articles of our faith, yt
is, remission of sins. Would god that we might learn and understand this
article. For it is a necessary thing for us to know, how our sins be forgiven
us. Sin, is a terrible word, bri^ging with him everlasting damnacio^, if we abide
and persevere therein. Furthermore, sin so highly displeases god, that he would
not be pleased with no other satisfaccio^, tha^ with the passion and death of his
only son Jesus Christ our lord. Moreover, there is scarce any other word yt
has more consolation and comfort in it, the^ remission of syns has, in
especial, if we know from whence it comes, and how we may apprehende it. The
which thing we may perceive in this gospel. They offered unto Christ a man
sick of the Palsy, that he should heal him. But what did Christ? He knew
full well, The disease of ye soul.
that the disease of the soul, was much more dangerous then the disease of
the body. And though he intended to heal and take away the bodily disease of
this man that had the palsy, yet he did and brought to pass first that which
was more needful and necessary, and afterward healed the body. And that is ye
cause why he is called a physicion in the gospel, because he does chiefly take
away the diseases of ye soul, as he says of him self: The whole need not the
Physicion, Mat. 9.
but they that are sick. Christ of his mere grace for gives sin.
Wherefore he said to the man that had the Palsy: My son, be of a good chere,
thy sins be forgeuen thee. Here thou hear the name of sin, and hear
also that joyful name of forgeuyng. And if diligently thou will considre who
it is that speaks these things, thou may lightly perceive and find what
he is, that will forgive us our sins, so that we knowledge and confess them
and desire grace, we may perceive I say, that it is Jesus Christ our Lord,
to whom is granted of God the father this power to forgive sin, as the
Angel witnesses, saying: Mat. 1.
He shall save his people from their sin. And as we necessarily may note and
mark here, that remission of sins, is and comes of mere grace, by Christ,
without any deseruyng of works, so likewise it is to be noted, how gentely
and mercyfully Christ here in this place does show him self. This man that
had the palsy, prays and desires only for his bodily health, and Christ
heals him both in body and soul, yea, and makes him the son and heir of
God, and says: Son be of a good chere. O unspeakable charitee, which can
not be expressed. O merciful and loving Lord, can there be showed greatter
grace to this man that had the Palsy? The sins are two manner of ways
forgiven. Esa. 34
But note how that his sins be forgeuen him double. First they be driven
from his heart, and grace powered in it, which alonely God does, as Esaias
witnesses saying: I am he, that takes away your si^nes, so that I will never
think upon them. Secondarily, forgeuenes of sins is only declared here,
which if it be comprehended with faith, it is not without effect, for it has
both a commandment of Christ, and also a promise. Wherout we may note, that
if we receive faith through hearing of the word of God, promisyng to us by
the minister forgeuenes of our sins, and do knowledge our offenses, surely
our sins be forgeuen us. For he in that office of preaching has the keys in
the name of the Church, as we find evidently in the xx. chapi. of Ihon: Iho.
20
Whose sin ye forgive etc. And in ye xvi. Mat. 16
chapter of Mathewe, Whatsoever ye lose upon earth etc. So that in any wise
we doubt not, but do comprehend the promise of Christ with faith.

Another man's faith.
Seco^darily, we see here what another ma^s faith prevails, and how greatly
it healpeth. Undoubtedly, it healpeth no more, then yt he in his prayer may
pray for me, that I my self may attain unto faith, whereby I may be saved.
Which if I do not obtain and get, another man's faith shall healpe me but a
little in my last end, in the point death. Therefore the gospel here says
plainly, That Christ saw the faith of them that brought this diseased man. For
surely those honest men had heard a good report of Christ, and paraduenture had
seen also, with what great benevolence and charitee Christ had healed those
that were diseased, having thereby great trust and confidence, that he likewise
would not forsake them. This their great faith and confidence is plainly
expressed in that, yt they were not only not ashamed to carry this sick man in
his bed, but also (as saint Mark testifies) insomuch as they could not come
nigh Christ for the multitude of people, Mar. 2.
they uncovered the rooffe of the house where he was, and when they had made a
hole, they let down the bed by cords, wherein the sick of the Palsy lay.
With this faith surely they moved Christ to restore this sick man unto health,
to receive him, and to make him the son of God. And surely it must needs be
that this man that had the palsy, did comprehend this article of remission of
sin, and that with faith, or else his sin had never been forgeuen him, as
witnesses scripture: Mat. 17
He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. He says not: If another
believes for thee etc. Therefore forasmuch as the prayer or intercession of
them that are alive, done and made for other in faith, is both a good work
and a charitable. Let us therefore follow the saying of saint James, warnyng us
thus: Pray one for another, Iaco. 5.
that you may be saved. For true and perfect faith breaks out, and is showed
through such good deeds of charity, if it comes to pass that saint Paul
says: Gala. 6
One bear another burden etc.

Thyrdly we see here, how yt the Scribes and Phariseis took Christ for a
blasphemer of God, and besides this, when Christ knew their thoughts, how he
answered them. For he could in no wise suffer this contumely and blasphemye.
But consider the Scribes, forasmuch as they had red in the Prophets, that God
alonely forgeueth sin, and thinkyng Christ to be but a simple man, they
thought that Christ with those words had highly dishonored and blasphemed God,
chale^gyng unto him the honor that belonged unto God. Wherewith they declare
and evidently show, that they knew not Christ, Iho. 18
nor also the father, which will be known in Christ. It is surely true and can
not be denied, that God only forgeueth sin. But here must be considered and
known, that Christ is very God, which also has power to remit sins. Mat. 28
And the same power gave he unto his church, that in his name remission of
sins should be annou^ced unto the end of the world. Wherefore Christ does
reprehend here the Scribes, forbecause they should comme to the true knowledge.
He judges their thoughts, which was above all man's understanding and
learning. And finally, with this great miracle he declares him self to have
power here upon earth to forgive sin, and says to him that had the Palsy:
Arise, take thy bed and go home. And he arose and went home. But the Scribes
and Phariseis remained still in their blyndnes, and would not know Christ's
high power.

Therefore it is mete unto us, that will be counted faithful men, to leave and
forsake these blind and leaders of the blind, and glorify God with the rest
of the people, which did give such power unto men. Amen.

The gospel on the.xx. sunday after Trinitee sunday. Math. 22.
THe Luc. 13.
kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that was a king, which made a marriage
for his son, and sent forth his servants, to call them that were bid to the
weddyng, and they would not come. Again he sent forth other servants,
saying: Tell them which are bidden: behold, I have prepared my dynner: mine
oxen and my fattlynges are killed, and al things are ready, come unto this
marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways: one to his
farmeplace, another to his marchaundise, and the remnant took his servants,
and entreated them shamefully and slew them. But when the king heard thereof,
he was wroth, and sent forth his men of war, and destroyed those murderers,
and brent up their city.

Then said he to his servants, the marriage in deed is prepared, but they
which were bydden, were not worthy. Go ye therefore out into the hye ways, and
as many as ye find, bid them to the marriage. And the servants went out into
the hye ways and gathered together all, as many as they could find, both good
and bad, and the weddyng was furnished with gestes. Then the king came in, to
se the gestes, and when he spyed a man, which had not on a Esai. 6.
weddyng garment, he said unto him: Friend, how came thou hither not having a
weddyng garment? And he was even speachelesse. Then said the king to the
ministers, take and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness
Mat. 13 and. 25.
there shall be weeping and gnashyng of teeth. For many are called, but few are
chosen.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis Gospel agrees almost with the symilitude which is written in the
fourtenth chapter of S. Luke, of the which we have a part spoken of on the
first sunday after Trinitye sunday, And as the grace of the gospel is there
likened unto a supper, so is it here likened unto a marriage, Howbeit, the union
and couplyng of Christ with the church, and in what wise he has taken her, and
married her unto him by faith, is here more plainly and more evidently set
forth and declared by this marriage, the^ there, through the parable of ye
souper. For it is true, that even as a souper here upon earth, is prepared and
ordained for mirth and ioyfulnes, so likewise there is perpetual peace and joy
in the kingdom of Christ. But in a marriage there is not only joy, but the
bridegroom and the bride ar made one flesh, Genesis 2.
as ye scripture testifies: For ye cause shall a man forsake father and mother,
and stycke to his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh. Ose. 2.
And even likewise as ye bride and the bridegroom ar one flesh, so shall we be
in Christ one body, so that we have a true faith. And as a man and his wife
have al their goods in common between them so have we likewise all that was
Christ's, so that we are not found unfaithful. To this pertains that S.
Paul writes to the Ephesians: Ephe. 5.
You men love your wives, as Christ loved ye congregation, and has given
himself for it to sanctify it, and cleanse it in the fountain of water, by ye
word, to make it unto him self a glorious congregation, having no spot nor
wrinkle nor any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame.

Secondarely, The outward word.
there is commended in this gospel the outward word. wherthrough we are called
and bidden to this marriage. For even as gorgeously as he prepared this marriage
with all things belonging thereunto, so diligently by his servants, he
sends and calls his gestes. First of al through the word of the gospel the
Jews were called unto this marriage, to whom also Christ was promised, as we
find in the eightene chap. of Deutronomy. Deuteronomy. 18
And were called also again the second time, and would not yet come. For they
were so combred with worldly things, that they cared not for the welthe of
their soul, and therefore were forsaken and condemned, in whose place the
poor Fentiles succeed. And that it is here spoken, that they gathered together
all that they found both good and euel, that is not spoken that we should think,
Mar. 23
that the ill men for their maliciousnes, shall receive a special reward in
heaven, Mat. 25
but that we must suffer to grow here upon earth the tares with the good wheat,
unto such time, that god by Christ shall divide the sheep from the kyddes, and
receive the sheep into his kingedome.

Thyrdely, in that the Jews did contempne and despise the word of god and
the gospel, and distroyed the ministers thereof, wherewith the king being
angry, sent forth his warriers, and destroyed those murderers, and set fire
upon their city. These words declares how hardly and without any mercy god
shall punish them both body and soul, The punishment of the Jews.
and al other worldly commodities, which despise and persecute his word. Were
not ye Jews punished with like ponishement? Hither may be referred that Christ
speaks in the tenth chapter of saint Mathewe: If no man will receive you,
Mat. 10
nor hear your preaching, depart out of that house or city, and shake the
dust of your fete. Truly I say unto you, it shall be easyer for the land of
Sodoma and Gomorra, in the day of judgment, then for that city.

Fourthly, we have in this parable, him which entered in without a weddyng
garment, who^ the king commanded to be bound and cast into utter darkness,
because he could not excuse him self. That, that is spoken here of the wedding
garment, is to be understand of those that iustifye them selfs. For those
though outwardly they appear to be good and holy, yet forbecause they be
hypocrites, The punisheme^t of hypocrites.
they shall not enter with Christ into the kingdom of heaven.

There is only but one work, where through we are justified and saved,
which is the merits of Christ. And whosoever receives this work with a
right and unfeigned faith, he wears that weddyng garment, and in that great
day shall he enter with Christ into his kingdom. Heb. 11.
But without this vesture of faith, it is impossible to please God.

But they therefore that have not this vesture (which, The weddyng garment.
though many be called, yet is there but a few that has it) they shall not
have part with Christ, but with Satan. Which I pray God save us from,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Gospel on the xxi. sunday after Trinitee sunday. Ihon. 4.
ANd there was a certain ruler, Mat. 8. Luce. 7.
whose son was sick at Capernaum. As soon as the same heard yt Jesus was
come out of Iewry into Galile, he went unto him, and besought him, that he
would come down and heal his son. For he was even at the point of death. Then
said Jesus unto him: Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe. The
ruler says unto him: Sir come down or ever that my son die. Jesus says unto
him: Go thy way, thy sonde lives. The man believed the word that Jesus had
spoken unto him, and he went his way. And as he was now going down, the
servants met him, and told him, saying: Thy son lives. Then inquired he
of them the hour, when he began to amend. And they said unto him: Yesterday
at the seventh hour, the fever left him. So the father knew, that it was the
same hour in yt which Jesus said unto him. Thy son lives, Act. 18.
And he beeleued, and al his household.

THE EXPOSITION.
FIrst, An example of unperfect faith.
in this gospel we have an exaumple of imperfect faith, which is a great
comfort for us, that are not as yet strong in the true faith, when we se this
ruler, having little faith and yet not rejected of Christ, but rebuked
familiarly, and afterward by the virtue of the word, made strong in the
faith. Whereout we learn how Christ suffers the weakness of our faith,
and that we shall not be rejected of him, so that we with like patience will
suffer his correction, where withal he rebukes our misbeliefe, as we se here
ye that this ruler did, and persevere ever in prayer with the Apostels, saying:
Luce. 15
Lord augment and increase our faith. And that this ruler had little and no
perfect faith, it is evident, in so much that he prays and desired Christ,
to go down with him to his house and heal his son. For a true faith and a
perfect, would have spoken like the euangelical Centurio^, saying: Mat. 8.
Lord, speak but a word, and my child shall be hole. Which Centurio believed,
that so great might and power was in gods word, that by the same, Christ
not being present, the child should have been healed. Wherefore he regards
and looks only to the word, for as much as he knows very well, that the
child should be made hole. In what manner of wise shall we now be made hole,
whether we be diseased in body or in soul, if we do not regard and have
respect to this word? David says: He has sent forth his word, Ps. 106.
and has healed them. But in these things is this ruler as yet ignorant and
also did not perceive that which Christ spoke: Ioh. 11.
He that believes in me, shall live, though he were dead already. Wherefore he
desyereth Christ once and again, that he would vouchsafe to come home into his
house. And as Christ does not reiecte this man, weak in the faith, being not
as yet perfect, so like wise we shall not despair, though we feel like
weakness in us, but suerly hope in Christ that is so merciful, and will bear
and suffer our weakness unto such time, that through his word and holy ghost we
shall be brought unto more perfection.

Faith must increase
Secondaryly, we see here how faith must ever augment and increase. No doubt
this ruler has faith, though it be not hole and perfect. He truesteth in
the goodness of Christ, and believes that he is ready to help every body, and
that he is a most gentle and a meek lord. Or else why should this ruler
hearing Christ's coming out of Jury into Galile, come unto Christ to ask
grace? It must needs be, that he here had a good hope in Christ, But in this
he failed, because he thought that Christ's person must needs have been there,
if his son should have been healed. For as yet he did not understand, what
power ye word of god had. Wherefore his faith must needs be increased and
augme^ted. For it is not sufficient, yt I believe only, that Christ will be my
merciful lord, and ready to help me, without I believe also that he can do it,
yea that he can do it only with a word, though he were not personalli present.
And further also I must believe, that in what so ever trouble I am in, my help
must come from god, though al things seemed to be against me. But this is a high
conninge which every body knows not. Yet did that good Abraham learn it, of
whom S. Paul says, that he believed upon hope, Romans 4
where nothing was to hope, that he should be a father of many people. This
knowledge, in so much that it was unknown unto this ruler, Christ instructed
him frienly, and with a soft and a gentle fashion, brings him unto the true
and perfect faith. And he does reprehe^d him, because he would not be content
with a word, but was one of those, 1. Cor. 1
that seeks signs and miracles as though he would say: For to seek signs and
miracles, and not to be content and trust to the word, is a token of
infidelity. Therefore take thou heed, Mat. 12
that thou apprehend the word, for there shall none other token be given to
this aduouterous generacio^, the^ ye toke^ of Jonas the prophet. Lo, after
this sort was this ruler rebuked. Thus wha^ he was yet lacking true faith, and
did not cease praying Christ, that he would vouchsafe to go with him before his
son dyed, Christ did not only speak in his ear, but also in his heart,
saying: Go thy ways, thy son is a live. But what does the Evangelist add
unto it? He believed those words etc. Here thou hear, that he that before
was imperfect and weak in faith, now has a steadfast faith and belief. By
whom? by Christ. which through his word and spirit, if we do increase in the
knowledge of god, daily does and will help us. Hither may be referred the
saying of Saint Paul in all his Episteles, where he prays and wysheth,
that the faithful might grow and increase in faith, and in the knowledge of
god.

How much we at heard in our prayer.
Thirdely, we see in this gospel, that we are not heard further, then in those
things that pertain to the health of our souls. For Christ although he was
desired of the ruler to go home with him, yet for all yt, he went not but denied
him the same, without doubt for that intent, that when he should perceive his son
to be made hole by the word, he should hereafter so much the more cleave to the
same word, and learn therwt to be content. And though Christ hears us no
further, then in those things that pertain to ye glory of god and our
salvation, yet nevertheless we ought still to be diligent in prayer without
ceassing for because that the holy spirit it self (although we know not how
and what to pray) makes intercession myghtely for us with unspeakable
syghynge. Romans 8.
Unto us therefore is made a promise that what so ever we desire in CHRIST'S
name, shall be given us. Wherefore if our prayer pertain to the salvation of
our soul, we are suer through promise, to obtain it, as Saint Paul says: 2
Cor. 1.
All the promises of god are yea in him, and are Amen in him, to the praise of
god by us. And if we desire any thing, that is both contrary to the glory
of god, and against our salvation, and if we be not heard, it is for our
wealth, and it is so meet that we be not heard. For it is better not to be
heard in our prayer and receive therewith salvation, then to obtain our petition
and own will, in things being to our damnacion. Of this mind was also S.
Augustine And this is the cause, that we are taught to pray in the lords
prayer: Fiat voluntas tua, Mat. 8.
Let thy will be fulfilled. Does not the lepre pray on this wise? Lord, and
thou will, thou may make me hole? He prays for health, but in such wise,
that the thing which he desyereth, be neither against God, nor the
salvation of his soul. And so likewise ought we to pray, that what so ever
we desyer, should be referred unto the will of God.

Fourthelye, we see in this gospel, Miracles are testimonials of the word
that signs and miracles are testimonials, wherewith was confirmed that the
word came from god, and to be his word. And also through miracles, men are
alured unto faith. But we do not speak here, of those signs and miracles,
which happen after a doctrine once taken, received and confyrmed but of those
miracles which approve every new doctrine to be of god. Exo. 17.
As we see in the second book of Moses, that the law was stablished by and
through many signs and miracles. And if a false prophet had come, and taught
contrary to that law, (as often times god suffers us to be tempted) and had
approved it with miracles, yet ought we to give no faith to such prophets.
Deu. 13. 2. Tes. 2.
As we see likewise in the gospel, which was preached by Christ in the
world, after the abrogacion of the law, and approved through so many
miracles, that no doctrine, (if it be contrary to that) ought to be
received, though the false prophets show never so great miracles. For in
the beginnynge by Christ, and after through the Apostels, has the gospel
been sufficiently approved, and he that now seeks any more signs or
miracles, let him hear this sentence: Mat. 12
This aduouterous generation seeks signs etc. Wherefore tokens and miracles
which were done in the beginning of the gospel by Christ, bare witness unto
the word, that it was of god, and was the truth. The word that Christ spoke
here to this Ruler, which was, Go thy ways, thy son lives. is approved by a
token, insomuch that the servants come and show the master, at what hour
the fever had left his son. And more over, through this miracle they were all
alured unto the faith, as the Evangelist declares it. Hither pertains, that
Christ spoke in the fourtenth chapter of S. John, Ioh. 14
saying: Believe me, that I am in the father, and the father in me. Or else
believe me, at the least for the works sake. Out of all these things, yt
appears, why in the beginning of the gospel, were done so diverse and many
miracles. God grant us the true knowledge of his holy word. Amen.

The gospel on the.xxii. sunday after trinity sunday. Math. 6.
THerefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain manne that was a
king, which would take accomptes of his servants. And when he had begone to
reckon, one was brought unto him, which ought him ten thousand talentes, but
for as much as he was not able to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold,
and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The
servant fell down, and besought him, saying: Sir, have patience with me, and
I will pay the all. Then had the Lord pitye on that servant, and loosed
him and forgave him, the debt.

So the same servant went out, and found one of his fellows which ought him
an hundredth pence, and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat,
saying: Pay that thouowest. And his fellow fell down, and besought him,
saying: Have patience with me, and I will pay the all. And he would not, but
went and cast him unto prison, till he should pay the det. So, when his fellows
saw what was done they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord,
all that had happened. Then his lord called him, and said unto him: O thou
ungracious servant, I forgave the all that debt, when thou desiredst me:
should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pitye
on the? And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the taylers, till he
should pay all that was due unto him. So Jacob. 2 Mat. 6. Mar. 12
likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts
forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe sum of this gospel is, We are bound to keep the commandments of god.
that by grace our sins are forgiven us, wherefore we likewise ar bound, to
forgive our neighbor their offenses done unto us. But forasmuch as it is
written here goodly in order, in what wise a man is justified, therefore
dilygently we shall entreat of every part thereof, as yt stondeth.

First, we hear in this parable, a certain part of the law. There is no man
under heaven, but is bound to observe the law, and yet nevertheless is a
transgressour thereof, Psa. 110
in especial if god would contend with us in judgment. For how should a man
here be justified through his works, yea though he had done outwardly all that
were commanded him? It must be fulfilled and done with all thy heart with all thy
soul, and with all thy might, according as god has commanded it. And
forasmuch as the saints and the elect of god, often times do stumble here and
offend, and have need to pray unto god, for to obtain forgiveness of their
sins at all hours, how shall an ypocrite then be justified before god,
through his works? For the prophet David did not pray without a cause, Ps.
142.
when he said: Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, For in thy
sight shall no man living be saved. And in an other place, Psalm. 31.
he says: Blessed are they, whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sins
ar covered. Blessed is that man, unto whom the lord imputes no sin, in
whose spirit there is no gyle. Wherefore we must needs say, that we all are this
kings detters. that is, we be al sinners. For else how can my sins be
forgiven me, without I felt them and knowledged them? If this physicion Christ,
shall be profitable unto me, so must I needs knowledge my deadly syckenes and
infirmity. And also, if I shall know my sin and debte, so must this king
bring forth his reckenyng book, which is the law, wherein my sins and
tra^sgressio^s be noted, to show me the same, to thentent that I may meke my
self, and ask mercy, where at the last I fall down prostrate before his
feet, and knowledge my self a very debtor.

Seco^darily, Through grace are our si^nes forgeuen us.
after that this servant was brought under sin, and had knowleged himself a
debtor, the parable shows in what wise he was released and discharged thereof,
which was through mercy and grace. For thus goes the text. Then had the Lord
pity on that servant, and discharged him, and forgave him the debt. This
servant promised to pay it all (as troubled consciences are wont to do) but
the king knew well that it was impossible for him to do. Wherefore he
discharged him, and forgave him of very pity and mercy, the debt freely. Out of
all this we must learn, from whence forgeuenes of sins comes. For
remission of sin stands not in works or in any deseruyng, but is granted
and given us freely by Christ, of mere grace and mercy. For why would this king
have had mercy of this servant and forgive him, if he had had wherewith to
pay? But truly, Forgeuenes of sins.
reason and the flesh understands not this, nor comprehends it, but goes
about to bring this thing better to pass through works. Surely there is
contencion and strife throughout all the world of this one article. The world
will not permit and suffer, that Christ is true herein and yet notwithstanding
reason shall here be confounded, and Christ shall be true, or else we certainly
shall be dampened euerlastyngly. For thou must needs be sure and certain, if
you will be saved, that thy sins be forgeuen thee. And thou can never be
sure of this article, if thou do lean and have confidence in works or
merits. Wherefore, if thou desire a peaceable conscience, thou must
comprehend the great grace and mercy of God in Christ, and that through
faith. And if thou do perceive this, thou have on thy side the holy Gospel,
that every where ascribes remission of sins unto the grace of God, and not
to thy works. Ihon. 1.
Did not saint Ihon Baptist declare evidently, that Christ was the Lamme of
God, that takes away the sins of the world? Now then, if Christ takes away
sin, through his own merits and deseruyng, how can our works do it then?
Further more thapostles teaches us so likewse iin ye Acts, Act. 4.
where they treat of this article, and say: There is no other name given to
me^ wherein we must be saved etc. And here on this parable we have, how the
king of great mercy and compassion forgave this debt.

Thirdly, this servant should have been myndful of the great benefit which
was showed upon him, and by right should have had patience with him that was in
his debte, forasmuch as faith, which comprehe^deth remission of sins in
Christ, is ever wont accustomably to come unto light and break forth through
charitee. But as an unthankful, and forgetful man of such great goodness
done unto him, he would have no patience with his companion which ought him an
hundredth pence. Does this man seem unto the a christian man, although his sin
before was dimitted him? No surely. For a christian man knows, that of mere
grace through Christ, his sins be forgeuen him: and knows also that in
like manner he should handle his neighbor. Therefore in that I apprehende
forgeuenes of sin by faith in Christ, and for Christ's sake serve and forgive
my neighbor, in so doing and co^tinuyng in the same I am a christian man,
Which if I do not, I am no christian man. Mat. 22
For the scripture witnesses that all the law and the Prophets hang and
consist in the love of God and my neighbor, as in two of the principal
commandments. Luc. 6.
Wherefore Christ in another place says: Forgive, and you shall be forgeuen.
Which thou may not understand, as though thou could deserve remission of
sins throug thy forgeuyng. The first part of this knowledge, is the preaching
of repentance, declaryng unto the, what thou ought to do with thy
neighbor, namely to forgive him. And the second part is a promise, that thy
sins shall be forgeuen the in Christ, by grace and mercy. And hereto pertayneth
our daily prayer, wherein we say: Remitte nobis debita nostra etc. Forgive us
our dettes, as we forgive our detters. Wherefore if thou have pleasure to do
good works, to testify by charity that thy faith is a right and a true faith
in Christ, serve thy neighbor, as God by his son has served the. For by
this shall every man know, that ye are the disciples of Christ, if you have
love one to another, as Christ says in the xiiii. chapter of Ihon. Iho. 14.


Fourthly, we see in ye fourth part of this parable how God shall punish
those that leave and depart from the faith, and forget the charitee and love,
The punishment of those that do fall from faith.
that they owe to their neighbor. For as soon as the king had heard how
extremely the servant, to whom he had forgeuen his debt, had handled his
companion, he was very wroth. Wherefore he called him before him, and
rigorously rebuked him, and delivered him to the iaylours until he paid all
that he ought. This word, Until, signfieth here, time without end. As though
the king would say. Of my great mercy and grace I forgave thee all thy
sins, that thou being myndefull of this great benefit, should have
likewise handled thy debtor. But forsomuche as thou art so unthankful, and
have utterly forgotten charitee, thou shall be dampened euerlastyngly. Out of
all these things consider, how every thing ought to be done in the kingdom
of Christ. First we ought to knowledge our self to be sinners, and that we
cannot be justified in the sight of God by works. And that is the first part
of this parable. Secondarily we must know, that our sins be forgeuen us of
grace through Christ, and that teaches the second part of this parable. And
thyrdly we are here taught, that when we have received remission of sin by
faith, it is needful that we by charitee testify to have this faith.
Fourthly, we be here taught, that if we do not these foresaid things, we
shall be dampened without mercy, and that is the last part of this parable.
Give thanks unto God.

The Gospel on the xxiii. sunday after Trinitee sunday. Mathewe. 22.
THen went the Phariseys, Mat. 12
and took counsel how they might tangle him in his words. And they sent out
unto him their disciples with Herodes servants, saying: Luc. 20.
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly,
neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the outward apparaunce
of men. Tell us therefore: How thynkest thou? Is it lawful that tribute be
given unto Caesar or not? But Jesus perceiuyng their wickedness, said: Why tempte
ye me ye hypocrites? Show me the tribute money. And they took him a penny. And
he said unto them: Whose is this image and superscripcion? They say unto him.
Cesars: Then said he unto the^: Ma. 17 To. 13.
Give therefore unto Caesar, the things that are Cesars: and unto God, those
things that are Gods.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have in this Gospel a very subtle and crafty invented question of the
Phariseys, wherewith they went about to take Christ in some tryp, in his words,
whereby they might have brought him in some slander. Which question diligently
considered, we shall find, that the children of this world in their kind, to
be no fools, but nevertheless, their wisdom, craft, and subtlety ever
being clothed and myxt with great maliciousnes and blyndnes.

Therefore first of all the Phariseys took counsayl, But at what thing?
Certainly of an evil matter. For when they could find no occasion nor means
whereby to hurt Christ, they took counsayl and with one consent did al agree and
determyne to take and trippe Christ craftily in his speaking. Whereout we may
consider the Phariseis to be of that sort, of whom the Prophet David had
before spoken, saying: Psalm. 2.
The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers are come together, against
the Lord and against his anointed. But whereof do they treat in their
counsel, and what do they conclude? They conclude to send their ministers
with thofficers of king Herod, to ask and demand of Christ, whether it were
mete to pay tribute to the Emperor, or not. For herein he was constrained
either to say yea, or nay. If he had said no, it was not lawful to pay tribute
unto the emperor, straight were the officers ready to accuse him before Herod
as a sedicious person. And if he had said and affirmed, that they should have
paid tribute, then should he have lost the favor of the people, because he
spoke against the liberty of the Jews, and so being out of favor and in great
displeasure, thought by that means he might be delivered into their hands.
This was a subtle, deceiptful, and deuilishe pollice. And without a christian
man had not the wisdom of Serpe^tes, The wisdom of the serpe^tes Mat. 10
which was commanded also to ye Apostles to have, who could withstand such
subtyl objections? Here out it comes, that which David the Prophet
complayneth of these wicked persons, Psalm. 20
saying: Lo, they have bent their bows, and made ready their arrows in the
quiver, yt they may privily shote at the^, which are true in heart. So likewise
do these Phariseys here, they go to counsel how they might take Jesus in his
sayings, and even the same that they concluded, they command their disciples,
instructyng the^ how and what they should say unto him, namely this: Master,
we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truly, and carest for
no man. For thou regardest not ye outward appearance of men etc. How goodly
are these wolves dressed with shepes garment? They call Christ a master, and al
for to constrain him with such flatteryng words to make answer unto them, yet
be not they of such disposicion to become his disciples, although there had
been taught never so much goodness unto the^. Furthermore they add that he is
true, and teaches the word of God truly. This is not evil spoken of Christ.
Iho. 14
For he teaches not only Gods word truly, but also he is the truth himself.
And this is required of al preachers, that they so endeavor them selfs, yt
these words may be truly spoken of the^. For it is our office to be true, and
to teach Gods word truly. Furthermore that they say: Thou carest for no man,
nor regardest ye outward appearance of men, partaineth unto us also. For the
truth is not to be hidden for no man's pleasure, but faithfully to be preached
and teached, yea although his distructio^ should follow and should be put to
death as S. Ihon Baptist was. And although Christ is excellently described unto
us by these words, yet they yt were sent did speak it, with a false fainyng
and dissemblyng heart. Wherout we may learn the disposicio^ of those
hypocrites, which persecute ye word of god. They omit ye head and the principal
of ye thing, and bring in unprofitable questions. They speak nothing with ye
heart, But whatsoever they speak, is for that purpose, that they may take and
tryp the innoce^tes and good men in their communicacion.

Secondarily, after that the Phariseys had put forth their subtle devised
question, and Christ knowing that they did it to tempt him, so he did answer
them, that it was not spoken in vain of the wise man, Pro. 21.
saying: There is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no counsel
against the Lord. Therefore he calls them hypocrites. And that they might well
understand, that he knew their malicious thoughts, he added: Why do ye tempte
me? Which words by right should have revoked the Phariseys and the ministers
from their maliciousnes and deceit, and caused them to have amended their
lives. But they were blind and remained still blind. Yet notwtsta^dyng, Christ
bad them to show him their tribute money, and said: Whose is this image and
superscripcion? They said unto him: The Emperors. Then said he unto them: Give
therefore unto the Emperor that, which is the Emperors, and give unto God
that which is Gods. As though he would say: Forasmuch as you are come
thereto, that for your sin you are brought under the yoke of the Emperor of
Rome, you must needs give, as unto your head and highest lord here upon earth
under God, that which belongs unto him. Here is to be noted, ye difference
that Christ makes between the kingdom of God and this world. For he does not
only approve and allow this high power and polliticke life, The ki^gdome of
Christ.
but also confermeth it. For the kingdom of God or of Christ, is spiritual,
which consists in the spirit, faith, and truth, wherefore it comes not
with outward doings, but it must be inwardly in us. Now because that it is a
spiritual kingdom, God requires and will be worshypped in spirit, Luc. 17
Ihon. 4
and in the truth, as Christ says in the fourth chapter of saint Ihon. The
true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and in truth. But to
worship God in spirit and truth, is, to love him with all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.
with all thy power, and to trust in him. For such faith and love, gives God
his honor, and keeps his commandments, as Christ says in an other place:
He that loves me, shall keep my word. Ioh. 14
Wherefore, when I put my whole trust in god the father, through Christ, and
love him above all creatures, then do I give god that pertains to god, and
pull from him none of his honor. And hereunto pertains the fruteful
admonicion of the prophet David, saying: Psalm. 28.
Adscribe unto the Lord O ye mighty, ascribe unto the Lord worship and
strength. And contrary wise, Cesars kingedo^
the kingdom of the Emperor is worldly, it is visible, in the which the
Emperor him self governs and bears rule mightily with his lords and
princes, as the scripture witnesses in an other place, saying: Luc. 22.
The Kings of the world have dominion over the people, and they that bear
rule over them, are called gracious lords. Nevertheless that kingdom is of
god, Romans 13
and stablished by gods ordinance, in such wise, that he that resists
this ordinance, resists god him self. Think thou, that princes and
great lords in the scripture, are called gods in vain and without a
cause? For if they be gods, Psa. 8^.
and are made by god partakers of his magnificence, then must they needs be
in gods steed, whose room they bear. Therefore, seeing they rule in gods
steed it is both meet and convenient, to give them that we are bound to
give them. But what are those things? S. Paul sets them furthe, and
says: Give unto every man his duty, To 13.
Tribute, to whom tribute belongs, Custom, to who^ custom is due, Fear, to
whom fear belongs, honor, to whom honor pertayneth. Here thou hear what
you art bound to give unto high powers. But paraduenture thou will say: Shall I
give obedience unto a tyrant and an ungracious prince or Lord? Yea truly, thou
art bound both to give and obey him. For what have thou to do with his tyranny?
If the magistrate does naught and contrary to equity, he has a judge, whom he
must answer in that appointed day.

Judgment is not here granted unto thee, except he constrayneth thee to do
any thing against God. Then thou may say with the Apostles: Act. 5.
We ought more to obey God, then men. But if he co^strayneth the do nothing
against God, then have thou here the sentence of Christ: Give to Caesar that
belongs unto him, and to God, that is Gods. Which answer is so good and
godly, that they that were sent of the, Phariseys meruailed at it. And for
because they could say nothing against it. They went their ways. God grant us
his grace.

The gospel on the.xxiiii. sunday after Trinitee sunday. Math. 9.
Whiles he thus spoke unto them Mat. 5. Luc. 8.
behold there came a certain ruler, and worshipped him, saying: My daughter
is even now disceased, but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.
And Jesus arose and followed him, and so did his disciples. Mar 5. Luc. 8. Leu^.
15
and behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood xii. years, came
behynd him, and touched the hemme of his vesture. For she said within her
self: If I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be safe. But Jesus
turned him about, and when he saw her, he said: Daughter be of good comfort,
thy faith has made the safe, and the woman was made whole, even that same time.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have two examples of faith in this Gospel. One in the Ruler that came to
Christ to get help for his daughter, which Ruler saint Mark calls Iayrus.
And another in the woman that was diseased with a bluddy flux, and healed by
Christ. In this woman was a perfect says, but the rulers faith as yet was
not perfect, but weak.

First, it was a point of faith in this ruler, because he believed that Christ
could raise his daughter to life, though she were dead: wherewith he confesses
Christ to be God, and a Lord over life and death. Then if Christ be a Lord
over death, he must needs be a Lord over sin (forasmuch as Adam through
his sin, brought death into the world) and such a Lord does of death and
of sin is he, that both death and sin by his death he has overcome,
abrogated and taken away. But how and to what purpose? That they should have
no power to co^dempne us that believe in Christ. For undoubtedly, we can not
live without sin, while we be in this mortal life, as it is written: Pro. 24
A just man falls vii. times in a day, and ryseth up again. But ye sin (so
that we believe) shall have no power over us, nor condemn us. Likewise, Romans 6.
although this natural death is not clean taken away, yet is it so
overthrown, that it is no more dampnable unto us, but is the beginning of the
true and principal life, Iho. 11
as Christ says: He that believes in me, shall not dye euerlastyngly. This must
we surely hold fast if we will be christian men, That is, we must believe,
that by the death and blood of Christ, we are delivered from sin, death,
devil and hell, so that we persevere in a true faith, we shall have everlasting
life through Christ. And this believes Iayrus partly. But in as much that he
believes not that Christ by the might and power of his word could make whole
his daughter, except he had been personally present, we must needs confess
that his faith was imperfect. But what shall we say of the faith of this woman?
She surely had so great confidence in Christ, that she concluded by her self,
that she should be whole, if she might touch only the hemme of his vesture.
Not that the vesture did make her whole, (for as S. Mark says, he felt great
virtue go from him, and speaks nothing of the vesture) but only the great
faith that she had in Christ. Wherefore Christ highly prayseth and commends ye
faith of this woman, saying: Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made
the safe. Lo, there thou have an example both of perfect and imperfect faith.

Secondarily, we see in this gospel how friendly and familiarly Christ
suffered the weakness and imbecilitie of this Ruler, and with the miracle done
unto the woman, augmentyng and bryngyng him to more parfect faith. For he
shows himself willing at ye desire of Iayrus, and follows him straight
ways home, declaryng with his deed that which he had taught before, saying:
Mat. 11
Come to me al ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you. But what
happened in the way? Behold, a woman that had been diseased xii. year with an
issue of bloudde, holdyng her peace, by faith gat and obtained health. She had
determined also by her self, that in holdyng her peace, and in silence, would
have gone home again. Mat. 5.
But as a city builded upon an high hill, can not be hyd, so likewise it was
neither mete nor yet convenient, that such great, high, and excellent faith,
should be hyd. And does not Christ say in the Gospel: Mat. 10
There is nothing hyd that shall not be openly showed, and nothing secret that
shall not be known? So likewise he will, that the faith of this woman should be
manifest and brought to light. And enquireth and says: Who has touched me?
The Apostles ignorant of this miracle, answered him and said: The people
thruste thee. But the woman feared and trembled, for she knew what was done in
her, came and fell down before him and told him the whole truth. Wherein
Christ commends her faith before all the people, not only that this should be
an example for the people to follow, but also to strength Iayrus faith, that he
should not doubt, but that such benignitee and mercy as was showed unto this
woman, should likewise be showed unto his daughter. Could Christ behave him
self more gentely, or be endued with greatter love, mekenes, pity and mercy?
He declares with the very deed, that he can help and succor us in all
trouble and necessitee, yea in the point of death, and is ready and willing
thereto. But we of our nature are so indurate, deaffe and blind, that we will
neither with wholesome doctrine and teaching, nor yet with miracle be moved unto
faith. Truly it is to be feared, lest we take and receive like end with the
styffe necked and blind Jews. For we can not excuse our selves, but the
same that was spoken unto the Jews, might likewise be spoken unto us, Ioh. 15.
where Christ said: If I my self had not come and spoken unto them, then
should they have had no sin. Is not Christ come through his gospel, and has
showed the same? Do we not hear his word daily? but when do we hear ye same
for any ame^dement of our life? I pray the take it once to heart, and remember
the goodness, frendlynes, and myldenes of Christ, how louyngly through his
word and miracles, he intyseth and allureth us unto faith. How familiarly he
takes and suffers our imbecilitee and weakness, and how fervently he
desires us to be just and blessed. Let these things so move us, that by the
meditacion hereof, we may not only increase in faith, but persevere in the same,
and thereby get everlasting salvation.

Thyrdly we see in this miracle, how the works of Christ are counted and
adjudged in the world for foolishenes, yea and are skorned and despised. For
Christ saying: The maid is not dead but sleapeth, what did they but laughed him
to skorne?

Do thou not think it a miserable thing, that the creature should scorn
his maker, creator of all things? That ungracious and blind flesh, stondeth
well in his own conceit, and thinkinge him self to have done a high feate,
when it does both scorn, deride, and blaspheme the doctrine, works, and
miracles of Christ, ye his heart in his body laughed at it. But what get they
thereby? Harken, The people is put forth, that they should not be present, at
the raising of this dead unto life. Lo, so it goes with them, that scorn and
despise the gospel of Christ, Romans 1.
that god gives them up unto shameful lusts, and blyndeth their foolish
hearts, so that they shall neither se nor understand the great misterye of the
death and resurrection of CHRIST, but shall be everlastingly dampened. Hereunto is
to be referred the saying of David the prophet, saying: Psalm. 1.
Blessed is the man, that goes not in the council of the ungodly, that
abides not in the way of sinners, and sets not in the seat of the
scornful. But delyteth in the law of the lord, and exercises himself in
his law, both day and night. Scorners calls David here all those, that
thinks all to be both foolyshnes and trifles, that god has spoken and done.
Scorners.
And he counts them blessed, that meddle not and have nothing to do with
such scorners. Out alas, how full is the world now a days of such
scorners? They be counted glorious and goodly fellows in this world which
scorn, despise, persecute and blaspheme the word of CHRIST. They be loved
and much made of, ye with goods and riches accumulated, so that they shall
lack nothing, neither cease to skorne Christ and his members. But good men
shall here think and have in remembrance, how this is not only chaunsed
unto them, but before time has such like blasphemye happened to our savior
Jesus Christ. For if they have called the good man of the house, Mat. 10
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his householde so? Besides
this, we have also a cause of great consolacion and comfort, insomuche as
our quarrel is just, godly, conformable, and consonant with Gods holy word.
For we can not glorifye God more highely, then to adscribe unto his only
begotten son, whom he has for great love and mercy that he bare us, sent
into the world to be crucified, to be our righteousness, holiness, and
redemption, so that we may remain and assuredly stand now in him as our
only salvation. For if we should adscribe unto our works, righteousness or
salvation, we could never be sure. Wherefore let all the word skorne,
blaspheme, and persecute this our doctrine. Hereof we are sure, that God,
Christ, the word of God and all the Angels in heaven, be all on our side.
From the beginning, the preaching of the gospel was foolishenes unto the
Gentyles, and occasion of falling unto the Jews, 1. Cor. 1
as saint Paul bears wytnes, and so shall remain unto the end.

God almighty so merciful, give us grace through the virtue of the holy ghost,
that we may daily more and more increase in wholesome doctrine, true faith, and
godly conversation, unto the end, that at the last through Christ we may obtain
and get everlasting salvation. Amen.

The sunday next before Aduent ye shall find in the fourth sunday in Lent, and
is written. John. 6.

Here ends the sermons upon the sondayes through the whole year.
JESUS.
Suffer the children and forbid them not to come unto me, for of such is the
kingdom of heaven. Math. 19. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are laden,
and I will ease you. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meke and
lowely in heart, and ye shall find rest in your souls. For my yocke is easy,
and my burden is light. Math. xi. Woodcut illustration of Christ welcoming the
little children to him (Matthew 19:14)

THE SECOND PART of this book contains the sermons upon the gospels, which
commonly are read on the feastiuall days, through the whole year.
The Gospel on saint Androwes day. Math. 4.
Woodcut illustration of St. Andrew the Apostle carrying an X-shaped saltire
cross. AS Jesus walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brethren: Simon,
which was called Peter, and Andrewe his brother, castyng a net into the sea
(for they were fishers) and he says unto them: follow me, and I will make you
(to become) Ier. 46 Eze. 46
fyshers of men. And they straight way left the nets, and followed him.

And when he was gone furthe from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the
son of Zebede, and Ihon his brother, in the ship with Zebede their father,
mendyng their nets, and he called them. And they immediately Luc. 5.
left the ship and their father, and followed him.

THE EXPOSITION.
ORDINATELY and very fruitful has saint Mathewe the Evangelist discribed,
how, and by whom it were mete and necessary that the kingdom of Christ were
ministered. For inasmuche as the same is brought to pass through the word of
God by ministers, therefore he declares first in what manner of wise Christ
began his preaching: and afterward, how unto the same gift of preachinge, he
called certain of his disciples, and says: From that time forth began
Jesus to preach, and say. etc. Here he names the man that first preached
the gospel, yea which by his word offered unto all men the grace of God unto
salvation, and names him Jesus, and that for the same intent and purpose, that
we might clearly perceive and understand by the name, what manner of preacher
he is. For he does not only preach and offer unto all men salvation freely
and willynglye, but also he will give it unto all those that hope and trust
in him, only by his propre merits and desert, without any respect of our
works, ye of mere grace and mercy, John. 1.
according to the saying of Saint John, which says: The law is given by
Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ. The sum of the preaching of
Christ.
Now peradventure thou will demand of me, what the preachinge of Christ was,
and the some thereof. In short words he spoke as follows: Amend your
selves, for the kinkedome of heaven is at hand. To amend our selves, to walk
in a new life, and to forsake our old vicious living, requires the
preaching of ye law of penance. And forasmuch as the preaching of ye gospel of
the grace of god, brings little utility or profit to man, except he first
be brought to the knowledge of his offenses and sins, Romans 3.
and have a contryte heart, therefore it is very requisite and necessary, that
the law, whereby we be brought to the same knowledge, be ever first preached
and taught: The ki^gdome of heaven.
Which done, the other follows: namelye this: The kyngedome of heaven is at
hand. The kyngedome of heaven in this place, is taken for the godly grace of
the gospel, As though Christ would say: If I may this only thing obtayn of you,
that your sins may earnestly displease you, and ask for grace with all your
whole heart, it shall be brought to pass, that grace shall not be denied you.
For now truly, that acceptable time and days of salvation be at hand, in the
which remission of sins is not only offered unto you, but through my merits
and of mere grace, shall be forgeuen you. At the lest be warned of this, that you
may know this time of visitacon, and that you do not despise my word. Here
thou have out of the gospel of saint Matthew, the true preacher of grace, and
the whole sum of his preaching, with the which Christ will have his
kingdom begone and ministered. But will he alone be occupied and charged with
the administracion of the same? No truly. For as before this time he has had
ministers and servants, so likewise he will have them now. Ministers of ye
word of God
The Prophets, and in especial saint Ihon Baptyst, were needful and very
necessary, to prepare the way to this preaching of grace. And so likewise as
in his time, and also after his departing, he would have such healpers (such
I say) as saint Paul names them, 1. Ti. 5.
which faithfully and earnestly should teach the word of God, and do that
lay in them, to hold it in estimacion and his dignitee. But where shall he
pick out those, or get such? Shall he get them in the high schole at
Athenes? or out of the noumbre of the doctoures in Egypt? Or else shall they
be found at Jerusalem, where so great a company of honest Scribes and
Phariseis are found? No verily: He will pick and chose them out of the nombre
of laboryng men. Why, and wherefore will he do so? Therefore, forbecause his
doctrine was so vile counted, and had of so little estimacion before the world,
which doctrine whersoeuer it is brought to light, for the most part there
follows persecucion and mortal hatred. In somuche that saint Paul names
the same word, The word of the Cross. Also note and mark, even as the
word is despised and abiected before the world, so shall likewise his
ministers be. Ioh. 13.
For the servant is not greater then his master. 1. Cor. 1
And saint Paul says: There is not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many of high degree called, but that folishe is before the
world, has God chosen, yt he might confound the wise.

But how did Christ use this calling? Jesus walked (says the Evangelist) by
the sea of Galile, he saw Simon Peter, and Adrewe his brother castyng a net
into the sea, and said unto them: Follow me. The same sone after does he to
James and John, Two manner of calling.
which also were fyshers. Where is to be noted, that there is two manner of
calling. The one is discribed in the first book of Moses where it is written,
that in the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat thy bread. Which partayneth
unto all men. And the other is, when any man is called of God, or by some other
lawefull means to be a King, a prince, a ruler of the common wealth, or
chosen to be a preacher of gods word. And this pertayneth not unto all men,
but to a certain. In the first calling were the Apostels, wherein doubtless as
good and virtuous men, they would have remained and abiden, in case they had not
been called to none other. After whose insample are we bound to abide in our
calling. And if it fortune any man to be called to any office or dignity
concerning the commonwealth, he shall not only take it upon him willingly, but
also he is bound to beware, that he behave himself therein righteously, and
justly. 1 Cor. 4.
And if any man seem meet to teach the congregation of Christ, let him follow
the counsel of good men, and be instructed with the warnyng, 1 Cor. 4
that (as S. Paul says) he be found faitstfull therein. And where there is
no calling, there let every man abide in the first calling. And no man
takes the honor unto him self, Hebre. 5
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Secondaryly, The office of ye Apostles
after that Christ had segregated and called to him these four Apostels from
their first calling, he declared what he would do with them, and says:
I will make you fyshers of men. Fysshinge in this place is as much to say,
Fyshing
as preachinge the word of god or the gospel.

As we have also in the xiii. chapter of Mathewe, Mat. 13
Where he lykeneth the kingedome of heaven to a net, cast into the sea,
wherewith are taken all manner of fysshes. For as a net is cast into the sea
for none other intent or purpose, then there to catch fish, so is it convenient
and meet that they which by lawful calling come to the office of preaching,
often declare the word of god, and that for none other intent, then to allure
and bring men thereby in the true faith of Christ, to the laud and praise of
god, and for the salvation of their sowles. As we read of Christ our lord,
how he glorified by good right, because he sought only the glory of his
father. John. 8. Luc. 19.
And in an other place, he says: The son of man came to seek and to
save that which was lost. And when Christ spoke these words of fysshynge,
Iere. 16
he had a respect unto the prophecye of Ieremye, when he said: Behold, I
will send out many fisshers to take them. Out of all these sayings a man
may lightely gather, what Christ desiered of the Apostels, and what they were
bound to do, which was nothing else, but to preach and teach, and not to
devour and slaye. For CHRIST neuerment, that to fisshe, was as much to say,
as to kill and slaye, or to oppress any manne by violence, but contrary
wise, to handle the word of God with all faithfulness and gentleness, as we
have in the last chapter of Saint Mark: Go your ways (says Christ) into
all the world and preach the Gospel to all creatures. And Saint Paul when
he describes and informs a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3.
he requires not of him, that he should be expert how to handle a weapon,
but that he should be apt and meet to preach and teach. 1 Cor. 4.
For in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, he declares what a preacher
is, and also sets forth his office, saying:

Let every man this wise esteem us, even for the ministers of Christ, and
stewardes of the secrets of God. Now is there no more required of the
Steward, then that he be found faithful etc.

The saying of the Prophet Esaias agrees well with this sentence, saying: Esai.
^4.
Cry as loud as thou can, and leave not of. Lift up thy voice like a
Trompette, and show my people their offenses. Lift up thy voice and be not
afraid. We must needs confess that all this is spoken of the office of
preaching and teaching. What need we many words? The office of a preacher is
to teach, to rebuke, to comfort, to exhort, and to be found faithful in
his office. Therefore, he that will be taken for a true preacher, shall not
come to that madness, for to draw again saint Peter's swoorde, which was
ones put into the sheath. But all his authoritee and office stands in this,
that he is bound to remain with saint Ihon Baptyst, the voice of a crier,
Mat. 26 Esai 40
or else he does usurp another office, and should rather be named a sedicious
manqueller, then a preacher of the word of God.

Thyrdly this Gospel declares unto us the obedience and simplicitee of the
Apostles, The obedience of the Apostles.
which were called of Christ to preach. For as soon as they heard this voice
of Christ: Come and follow me. straight ways they did give them selves over
into the will of God, were obedient, not disputed whether it were lawefull and
meet to forsakee father and mother, wife and children, to follow a man of so
little reputacion before the world, as was Christ, but did even as we read in
another place of Abraham, when he was commanded to go out of his country into
a land that God should show him, he disputed not whether he should goo, or
whether he might not serve God as well in his fathers house, as in a strange
country, but most symply obeyed the word of God. So likewise were these
Apostles found obedient. The power of ye word of God.
Wherefore that mighty word of God and the gospel is highly to be magnified
and extolled, which does not only penetrate the ears, but stryketh and
touches the heart, Or else truly flesh and blood had as well remained
disobedient in the Apostles as in ye Phariseis. For they, though Christ never
so often repeted and cried unto them: Amend your self, the kingdom of heaven
is at hand. yet would they neither hear him nor follow him. But where Christ
cries as well in the heart as in the ear, there without any busynes,
willyngly, men both hears him and follows him. But when he cries only but
in the ear, then remain we as blind and as hard hearted, as that blind
Pharao did. Nevertheless it is all our fault that we do not hear and follow
Christ. Furthermore, we shall with all diligence seek Christ and be fervent
in hearing of the Gospel, forasmuch as he says: Luc. ^.
Who so has ears to hear, let him hear. And though the Apostles are bound
to give thanks unto God, and knowledge that it all came of him, in that they
were so obedient and followed Christ, yet is this written for an example for
us, so that I know not how to give greatter honor and worship to the
saints, The worshipping of saints.
then when through their ensample I am induced to follow Christ.

And here is to be noted, that there is two manner of following of Christ. The
one is bodily wise, The folowi^g of Christ is two manner of wise. i^
and the other spiritually. Of the bodily following of Christ speaks this
present Gospel, and does not pertayne unto all men, but unto those only
that be commanded, as the Apostles were, and also Abraham. Or when through the
will of God, the Tyrants of this world shall take thee from thy wife and
children by violence, and put the to execucion for the Gospel sake, And so
there is Christ to be followed, not only spiritually, but also bodily. For of
that it is written: Mat. 10
Whosoever denies me before men, him will I also deny before my father which
is in heaven. How to follow Christ both spiritually and bodily.
The other following of Christ is spiritual, and partayneth unto all christian
men. For as long as I determyne with my self to forsake all things that I
have in the world wyllyngly, whenever it shall please God so to ordain it,
yea and at all times am ready to dye for the truth sake, so long I follow
Christ. And so may this spiritual following of Christ stand, and be
acceptable before God, without the bodily following, as chaunseth often times.
But the bodily following without the spiritual ought not to be. For such
things ought in such a chance both to be joined together. Will thou know
now, in what wise thou shall behave and instruct thy self herein? Harken to.
If God ordain it so, that thou must forsake all thing, and for the truth sake
suffer all aduersitee, put away and expel from thee all fear, and be of
good comfort, and follow Christ faithfully, not considering neither wife nor
children, Mat. 5.
for great shall be thy reward in heaven. And although God does not visit the
with such affliccion and tribulacion, nevertheless it is mete and convenient
that thy heart and mind be setteled, and utterly persuaded at all times to be
ready to follow Christ. But in the mean time, thou shalt not temerously and
without great causes forsake neither wife nor children, nor no other thing that
God has sent thee and endued with all. For in that to be willing to suffer all
trouble, persecucion and poverty, when it shall please God to send it thee, is
called the true obaiyng and following of Christ. To whom with the father and
holy ghost be all honor. Amen.

The Gospel on saint Thomas day. Ihon. 20.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. Thomas. But Ioh. 11.
Thomas one of the xii. (which is called Didymus) was not with them, when Jesus
came. The other disciples therefore said unto him: We have seen the Lord. But
he said unto the^: Except I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put
my finger into the prynt of the nails, and thurst my hand into his side, I
will not believe. And after eight days again his disciples were within, and
Thomas with them. Then came Jesus when the doors were shut, and stood in the
mids, and said: Peace be unto you.

After that said he to Thomas: Bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, and
reach hither thy hand, and thurst it into my side, and be not faythles, but
beleuyng. Thomas answered and said unto him: My Lord, and my God. Jesus said
unto him: Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have believed: Blessed are
they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

THE EXPOSITION.
An ensample of incredulite.
First we have in this Gospel an ensample of incredulite in saint Thomas, and
so gross, that worthily any man might wonder at it, in especial in such an
Apostle which had heard so often times of Christ, how that he should be put
to death, and rise again the third day. except that the imbecilitee and
weakness of our nature and flesh were not sufficiently known unto us, yea
except that our detestable incredulite that is grafte in us, were not better
known unto us, then is needful here to recite with many words. And wherein I
beseech you may we wretches glorifye in, when such notable incredulite can be
found in such an Apostle? But for no other intent or purpose is this laid
before us, then only that we thereby may learn to know the weakness and
maliciousnes of our flesh. For as long as this blyndnes and maliciousnes of
our flesh is not helped and redressed through Christ and his spirit, so long
shall that faith which Christ requires of us with so many words be no
greater in us, then it was here in S. Thomas. Many there be which suppose that
faith is so common a thing, that it is in every man's freewylle to believe who
will, that Christ dyed and rose again the third day. Which if it were so in
deed, what needed Christ to say these words: Suppose you that the son of
man, Luc. 28.
when he comes, shall find faith upon earth? Moreover, what was the cause
that the Apostels in the time of the resurrection of Christ, were so rude and
ignorant, in the matter of faith and iustificacion? Nor it is not to be
thought, that such thing happened only unto S. Thomas, and not to the rest
of the Apostests, except that we will say, that all such tokens and acts
which we find in the story of the resurrection of Christ (first done through
angels, and then by Christ himself, whereby the Apostels in this article were
confirmed) were vanities and lies. I may suffer every man to say herein his
pleasure. Yet do I thus think, and can approve yt by many testimonies of
scripture, that no mortal man, how well learned or wise so ever he be, how good
or sharp witted so ever he be, can learn or be instructed in the faith of
Christ, The holy ghost works faith in us. Esai. 54
except the singular grace of the holy ghost draw him and instruct him
therein. The prophet says: They shall be all taught of god, Then if I can
instruct and teach my self in those things, that concern our faith, what
need has god to teach me? Upon this reason S. John the euangelyst, says: He
came into his own, John. 1.
and his own received him not. If faith be such a light and an easy thing to
come by, what was the cause that the Jews were so ignorant in the coming of
their Messiah, which were taught and brought up in the law? Or for what cause
does the light shine in darkness, and the darkness can not comprehend it?
Wherefore it is meet that we learn hereout, that it is not in every man's
power to have faith, but that it is a gift and a work of God only, as we
find in this place of saint Thomas, that in no manner of wise he would believe,
except he saw with his eyes, and felt with his fyngers.

Secondarily, we find in this ensample how patiently, and gently Christ
suffers such imbecilitee and weakness in his servants. Yea, he turns
such meekness into a strong faith. For as we read in the history of the
resurrection, how he first did appear unto the women and the Apostles, so he
does seem here likewise in this place unto the unfaithful Thomas, because he
should not still persevere in incredulitee, but should become faithful. He came
the eight day after his resurrection unto the disciples, and besides that he
saluted them with his peace, he showed unto Thomas his hands and his feet,
saying: Bring thy finger hither, and see my hands, and reche hither thy hand
and thrust it into my side, and be not faythlesse, but beleuyng. Is not this a
high and an excellent patience and gentylnes, in such wise to suffer the
weakness of his elect? And I beseech you, how could be done unto Thomas a
greatter pleasure? For except he had seen and felt, he would not have believed.
And yet was Christ so good and so full of pity, that Thomas had all his will
and mind. For besides that he rebuked him with most gentle and sweet words,
he suffered him to put his finger in his side. O good Lord, what great
affection and love thynkest thou does he bear to his elect servants? Does
not this place approve and confirm the same saying, that he used while he was
yet in this mortal life, saying: Mat. 11
Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you? Note also
here, how Christ thoroughly learneth and instructs Thomas, both with words
and tokens. The words wherewith he is taught, drives away and expels his
incredulite, which words are so laid against him, that thereby thou may
perceive no greatter sin to be upon earth, then is incredulitee. Whereout,
Incredulite is a great sin.
as out of a fountain and spring, flows all other sins. For he says: Be
not faythlesse, but believe. As though he would say: If thou fall from the
faith, thou art utterly undone. But if thou be faithful and beleuest, and
hereafter do not doubt of the merits of my resurrection, then trust surely,
that this incredulitee shall not in any wise hinder or hurt thee, but shall so
and in such manner of wise be forgeuen thee, that hereafter I will never
remember it more. For I require nothing else for this great benefit, which I
have purchased for the whole world, through my bitter passion, then only a
faithful heart, which shall not put his confidence in no creature, whether
it be in heaven or in earth, except only in my merits and deseruyng.
Behold, how with these words, thapostle is reduced and brought to true
faith. And likewise as he is strengthened and comforted with words, so also is
he helped with signs and tokens, Signs confirms faith.
which for the most part is showed to confirm our faith. And yet it is done
after a most simple manner, by reason he may ye easyer be brought to a true
faith and believe. Who would not put and set his trust in such a merciful and
a gentle Lord? Who would set his hope in any other except him only?

Thirdly, this Gospel prayseth and commends tranquilitee, Peace of conscience.
quietness and peace of conscience, and shows likewise how that Christ has
communicated the same to the Apostles. And of this peace Christ speaks before
his passion, Iho. 14
saying: Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world
gives, give I unto you etc. With the which words Christ makes a difference
between a civil and a christian faith. The peace of the wolrde lies in civil
and corporal things, whereunto if riches and goods chance plenteously, it
makes men very negligent and careless, incase it be not provided and
prevented through the word of God. But a christian peace consists in
spiritual things which makes a man hardy and strong in persecution and
temptacion, and such a one, as when extreme necessitee and the honor of God
does so require, they shall not only not fear ye devil with the world and all
their adherentes, but also shall despise them and set nothing by them, Act. 5.
as we see the Apostles did after that the holy ghost was confirmed in them.
Such a faith does Christ work in his servants, and is apprehended of them
only, that with a true faith knowledge and embrace Jesus Christ their lord.
And this peace I have, so long as I believe in Christ. And now if I do not
believe, it is not possible that I can have any peace in my conscience toward
God for my sins sake, which always accuses me in my conscience, nor will
not suffer me to come nor attain to this spiritual peace.

Fourthly, The confession of Thomas.
we find here an excellent confession in Thomas, in which he knowlegeth
Christ to be his God and his Lord. And this confession is so needful and
necessary, without the which no man can have the true righteousness that
prevails before God, nor enter into the kingdom of heaven. But note also,
how before that Christ had showed his hands and his feet unto Thomas, he
could not have this confession. Hands and fete what it is in scripture.
Hands and feet in scripture betokens often times works and conversation.
Therefore when Christ shows us his hands and feet, that is, When he has
brought us to that point, throught his spirit and word, that we acknowledge
his merits, passion, death, and finally all his works, only to be the cause
of our righteousness and salvation, then may we say with the Apostle: My Lord,
my God and put all our trust in him, according to the saying of David: Ps. 54.
Set your trust in the Lord, and he shall care for you. When Christ does not
in such wise show us his hands and fete, so is it for us impossible to make
any such confession. For saint Paul says not without a cause to the
Corinthians, saying: 1. Co. 12
No man can say that JESUS is the Lord, then through the holy ghost. Wherefore
it is Christ that must bring us to this confession. Further note, that Thomas
being enflamed with the holy ghost, calls Christ his god. This and such like
sentences, by the which it is proved that Christ is the true and natural God,
ought diligently to be noted, and surely laid up in our minds, and
especially now in this last and perilous time. Wherefore it is very necessary,
when such errors and abuses crepe in (which God forbid) that we be well
instructed with this confession of Thomas, lest we be utterly drawn from the
true faith of Christ. With this confession of Thomas, saint Ihon in his
canonical Epistle agrees very aptely, 1. Iho. 5
where he calls Christ very God and everlasting light, which is freely
confessed Christ to be the true God. He that will (these admonicions
notwithstanding) be deceived, on his peril be it. For we truly (through ye
help of God) will stand, live and dye in this article, in such hope and
trust, that the almighty God of his great mercy and goodness, will maintayn us
here euerlastyngly, through his only son our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Gospel on saint Stephin his day the Martyr. Math. 23.
Woodcut illustration of St. Stephen 's martyrdom; the apostle is being stoned
to death as he prays. Wherefore behold Mat. 10 Luc. 11. Ioh. 16 Act. 6. and. 7.
I send unto you prophets and wise men, ^ Scribes, and some of them ye shall
kill and crucify: and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagoges, and
perse cure them from city to city: that upon you may come all the righteous
blood which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Genesis
3.
Abel, unto the blood of Zacharye the son o^ Barachias, 2. Pa. 24
whom ye flewe between the temple and the altar. Verily I say unto you: all
these things shall come upon this generation.

Luc. 13.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that kyilest the prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee, how often would 4. Es. ^
I have gathered thy children together, even as the Hen gathers her
chickyns under her wings, and ye would not? Behold Psalm. 9.
your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you: ye shall not see me
hencefurth, till that ye say Ps. 118 Luc. 9.
Blessed is he, that comes in the name of the Lord.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel Christ handeleth the Jews somewhat roughly, like as one that
almost had made an end of his course and runnyng, and nere to his death, ready
to be offered up: Yea, he reproves them in such wise of their blyndnes,
maliciousnes and their indurate heart, and that with so great vehemence and so
ernestly, that he could not hardlyer assault them. And that their ingratitude
should be the better known unto them and be brought to light, he recites unto
them the great benefits that God from the beginning of the world had visited
them with all, yea, and that which was yet coming before that their great
cicie of Jerusalem should be destroyed: And said how he sent them Prophets,
Wysemen and Scribes, and ever had sought all means and occasions to bring them
through their preaching to salvation, yet al would not help. Prophets.
He calls Prophets those which through the inspiracion of the holy ghost,
and by the commandment of God prophecy and teach the people the will of
God: And which have been taught of no man, except of God only, as Moses was.
Wise men.
And he calls wise men those, that have learned and heard all their wisdom
of other good men, and are ready to utter it again to all men, as was Aaron in
the old Testament, and saint Stephin in the new Testament. Scrybes Scribes
he calls those, which not only through preaching the word of God, but
also through their diligent labor in writing, teach other men, and
profits them highely, as were many after the Apostles time, and likewise in
our time there be many that have done much good in the church of Christ, and
daily yet does. Of the which in another place Christ says: Mat. 13
Every Scribe taught unto the kingdom of heaven, is like an householder, which
brings forth of his treasure things new and old, Out of which words
lightly may be gathered, the great benefits that God had showed upon the
Jews. And how (I pray you) can be so wise or well learned that can comprehend
with words all the benefits that god had showed unto the Jews, from that time
that he had brought them out of Egypt, and delivered them from bondage? A great
benefit to have the word of God
And yet amongst all other, this was the greatest and highest benefit that he
had given them his word, without doubt a most precious and excellent gift.
Which gift was so great, Romans 4
that as saint Paul says, they far excelled us Heathen people, forasmuch
as God had committed his word unto them. And the prophet David boasts,
Psalm. 16
that god had done no such thing to all nations, like as he had done unto
the Jews. But they showed them selves again so unthankful, that it
constrained god to take away that same word from them, as we see in the
eight chapter of the prophet Amos, saying: Behold the time comes, says
the lord god, Amos. 8
that I shall send an hunger into the earth, not the hunger of bread,
neither the thruste of water, but an hunger to hear the word of the lord.
And the truth of such a prophecy does god sometime fulfill, as in few years
after it did chance, when the Jews were brought into Assiria. etc.

And yet nevertheless yt is to be thought a great grace and benefit, that
they were not depryued of the word of god. For they had Moses, Aaron, and so
many prophets besides, as Saint John baptiste, Christ himself and the
Apostels, that Christ might well rehearse unto them: I send unto you
Prophets, wise men, and scribes. etc.

Secondarilye, he reproves them of their crueltye, which they used against
the Prophets and other that were sent unto them, receiuinge them with no
reverence, but most abhominably did handle them. And where they had been
woorthye of great rewards, they contrary wise, killed them. The ingratitude
of ye Jews.
Some of them (says he) shall you kill and crucifye, and some of them shall you
scourg in your sinagoges, and persecute them from city to city. etc. This
was a great blyndenes that the Jews slew all the Prophets, and would not
suffer none to live that spoke against their false worshippyng of God, which
they contrary to the word of God, had inverted of their own brains. And in
this blyndnes and maliciousnes they abode and remained still in Christ's time,
and long after, and would in no wise suffer any thing that should learn them
to amend their blyndnes. But so it is wont to go with them that will not
harken unto the word of God, but abuse the same. Wherefore worthily happens
unto them the saying of Esaias: Esai. 6.
Blind the heart of this people etc. Surely they can not blame Christ, seeing
that the way of truth was so diligently taught unto them, before his coming.
First through the Prophets other ministers of his word, and in his time by
Christ himself, and after Christ's ascencion, by the Apostles and other mo, so
that they can lay no blame to no man, nor can in no wise excuse them selves.
Did not Christ give them sufficient warnyng in this present Gospel, where he
says: Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that slayest the Prophets and stonest them
that are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as the Hen gathers her chickyns under her wings, and ye would not?
etc. He that had leisure or time to declare the worthiness of this similitude,
and in what wise the Hen is affeccioned toward her chickyns, and in what wise
she retayneth them, and gets them their food, and with what desire and
feruentnesse she fights for their safegarde, and in how many things she
dissembleth and suffers them patiently: finally, in what wise she keeps and
defends them under her wings, which all aptely may be apropriated unto
Christ, which for our sakes did and suffered so many things, without doubt
yt should be evident unto all men, ye the Jews them selves were the very
cause and occasion of their blindness and damnacion, As the prophet Oseas
witnesses, saying: Ose. 13.
O Israel, thy iniquity has destroyed the: But in me only is thy healpe. To
whom of the prophets have they obeyed? Or which of them have they not
persecuted? What trouble and busynes suffered Moses among them? Yea how
shamefully they behaved them selves against Christ, and how did they handle
him? Which of the Apostels were ever safe and suer amongst them? Did they not
stone to death that blessed Saint Steven the holy martyr of god? Out of their
dooinges it is manifest, The nature of ye flesh.
that there was nothing more pleasaunter to the Jews, than to stone,
crucifye, to obtruncat, scourg, and persecute with most grievous ponishments,
the blessed saints of Christ. But to hear the holy word of god, to knowledge
that most joyful time of their Messiah, there were very few of them so to do.
Yea and though we were ignorant with how great crueltye they entreated all
those that were sent to them from god, yet might a man sufficiently learn it
in the only story of Steven, which is written in ye seventh chapter of the
acts of the Apostles. Act. 7.


Thirdely, Of the punisheme^t of ye souls of ye Jews.
Christ declares the ponishement that should happen unto the Jews for their
ingratitude which should not only be a corporal ponishment, but also a
spiritual ponishmente. First shall come upon them all the righteous blood
that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abell, unto the
blood of Zacharye the son of Barachias, 2 Pa. 24
whom they slew between the temple and the altar. O what an horrible and a
grievous punishment should this be? For god will no more suffer unpunished this
effusion of blood, then he will suffer unpunished the effusion of the Precious
blood of his only son, as the scripture witnesses, saying: Zach. 2
He that touches you, shall touch the apple of his own eye. And again in an
other place: Verily I say unto you, Mat. 25
whatsoever you do to one of the least that believe in me, that same do you to
me O you tyrants why does not these sayings touch you and move you? Why does
not the great ponishment of the soul withdrawn you from your great
curelnes, that you might be afraid to commit any more such unworthy acts
against the words of god? Do you not hear that the blood of those, which
you do kill for the word of god, shall not allonly come upon you, but also all
the blood that has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous
Abell unto this day? Ye will not beeleue these things, but daily go about
to mayntaine your wanto^ and abominable mind But since it is so, that you
will do none other, take your pleasure. For we truly shall abide patiently
(by the grace of God) that time, in the which we shall resist you, and all
the adversaries of the word of god openly, with great trust and constancye.
For doubt you not but that day of vengeance shall come. Sapient. 5.

Besides this, you shall be punished with corporal ponishment for your
ingratitude and unthankfulness, For thus says the lord: Behold your habitacion
shall be left unto you desolate. And in an other place, he says: Mat 24
There shall not be left one stone upon an other. These be those things
that Christ gave the Jews warnyng of, which should happen upon them, and
partly he told it by similitudes, and partlye without any similitude. But
what prevailed it to them? Did they either repent them or amend them? No
snerly. And Christ also after his ascension left them his blessed apostels,
giving them fourtye years space to repent them, and yet all would not help,
nor cause them to forsake their mischeuous incredulity and pertinacy, but as
S. Paul says: Romans 2.
They heaped them self a treasure of wrath, against the day of wrath. etc.
Wherefore it is come to pass, that the judgment of god, his wrath and
indignacion is come upon them, which is euidente to the whole world. And they
which before time would not hear Christ and his Apostels, in the name of god,
afterward were constrained to hear the Romans in the dyuels name. I pray
god the father, The ingratitud and unthankfulness of the^ that have the word of
god.
that we be not ones constrained to learn, what a thing it is, so manyfestly
to despise, forbid and drive away by forse gods word, and in no wise to
give place to the truth.

The word of god shines so clear amongst us, ye yt ca^ not be denied, but be
confessed to be the very true word. And on the other side, our ingratitude and
maliciousnes is so great, that it is not unknown. Wherefore I think that such
punishment as pleases God shall follow, yet I know not what God purposes to
do, but I know what I am bound to fear, and to be afraid of. Nevertheless,
let us ask for grace, and he of his goodness shall turn his wrath from us.
Amen.

The Gospel on saint Ihon his day the and Apostle Evangelist. Ihon. 21.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. John the Evangelist, holding a chalice
with snake. JESUS said unto Peter: Follow me. Peter turned him about and saw
the disciple John. 13 19. and 20.
whom Jesus loved, following (which also leaned on his breast at supper and
said: Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?) When Peter therefore saw him, he
says to Jesus: Lord, what shall he here do? Jesus says unto him: If I will
have him to tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Then went
this saying abroad among the brethren, that ye disciple should not dye. yet
Jesus said not to him, he shall not dye, but if I will that he tarry till I
come, what is that to thee? The same disciple is he, which testified of these
things, and wrote these things. And we know that his testimony true.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN the last chapter of the Gospel of saint Ihon, Christ demau^deth three
times of Peter if that he loved him At the which demand Peter answered three
times, and said that he loved him. And because that Peter should not lack an
occasion to declare his love, and to prove it in deed, Christ goes to and
declares unto him wherewith he might gratify and serve him, namely, if he
loved him, he should feade his sheep. To feade is to teach. Psalm. 22.
To feade is as much to say as to teach and preach. And so takes it David,
when he says: The Lord is my shepeherd, I can want nothing. He feadeth me in
a grene pasture, and ledeth me to a fresh water. He calls the sheep, Sheep.
Iho. 10
his elect christians, as he says in the.x. chapter of Ihon: My sheep
hears my voice. And in the Gospel of Matthew Christ says: Mat. 10
Behold I send you as sheep in the mids of Wolfes. As though Christ would
say unto Peter: My Peter, I have bought my sheep, that is my christians,
dearly, with an inestimable price, wherefore I would not see any of them neither
neglected nor yet lost. Therefore if you love me, as thou have spoken, thou
shall understand, that there can be nothing more acceptable unto me, then that
my sheep have good feadyng: That is, that they be diligently taught and
instructed in the word of God. How Peter should follow Christ
And if thou will know who^ thou should follow in this office of preaching,
harken to this saying: Follow me. For thou know and have seen in what wise I
have behaved my self herein etc.

Now that in this place Peter is commanded to follow Christ, I think that
the same commandment and precept partayneth not only unto Peter but
generally unto all christian men. For since we be named christians, and take
our name of Christ, who^ should we follow but Christ? who says here: Follow
me? But there has been in the world, and is yet unto this hour, diverse and
sundry ways prescribed us to follow, For this follows S. Francys, the other S.
Benedict, the third S. Dominick, the fowerth follows S. Bruno, as a most suer
rule of his living. And as touching this thing, there has been amongst
christen men, so variable and sundry opinions and ways to follow, that who so
ever will note the^ well, it can not be, but he must needs be sore grieved in his
heart at them, in so much that they be all fained and made repugnaunt to the
manifest word of Christ. For who of ye fathers can be found, yt dare avow and
say of the^ selves: He that follows me in my rule, walks not in darkness.
Though in need yt is not euel if we follow our fathers, In what wise we should
to low the Fathers 1 Cor. 4
but it is needful the^ yt we do it in such form as S. Paul describes it
sayi^g: Be ye my folowers (where he does add) as I follow Christ. Wherefore yt is
needful, yt this commandment of Christ should move and stere us, and not to
think that it was given only to Peter, but also unto al christen me^, nameli
unto those, that glorify themselves of Christ, therefore should they likewise
follow hi^, of who^ they bear ye name. For it is Christ only yt dare auowe and
sai: John. 8
He yt follows me, walks not in darkness. Seco^darily, forasmuch as we have
heard and learned, yt there is no suerer thing in this life, the^ to follow
Christ, therefore it is necessary, that we learn how and in what manner of wise
it is needful yt we follow him. that is, yt every man must follow Christ in his
calli^g. For this present gospel teaches us that in Peter, yt when he heard
Christ say: Follow me. he turned him self about, and saw the disciple whom
Christ loved, and said unto Jesus: Lord, but what shall he do? Peter had a
commandment of Christ to follow him, and that in his calling, which was
before declared unto him, Every manne follow Christ in his calling.
namely in feadyng Christ his sheep. And forbecause he had so sone forgotte it,
lookyng to another, he is here reproved of Christ with these words: what is
that to the? And again he hears, Follow thou me. But this was not only done
for Peter, but for us also, that we should not charge our selves with other
cares and busynes, but with good aduisement and counsel being diligent in our
own busynesses, should endeavor our self to do faithfully and with a christian
mind that thing, whereunto we are called. For truly, if every man in his
degree would diligently endeavor them selfs, to do yt thing whereunto they are
ordained and called of God, and not to set so little by it as they do, without
doubt, or should find him self so charged, that he should sone forget to
remember what other men had to do. And take an example: The office of prechi^g
If I am called to the office of preaching, to be a minister of the word of
God, so is it very necessary, that I do the same with all diligence, in
preaching, readyng, rebukyng comfortyng, and prouidyng for the poor etc.
Furthermore it is necessary, that I behave my self in all things
appertainyng to that office, that men may perceive, that I seek none other
thing, but the honor of God, and vtilitee of the congregation.

Then if I will diligently and studiously fulfill this office as here is a
commandment given to Peter, and as saint Paul in his Epistles gloryeth that
he has done, 2. Co. 12
doubtless I shall have so much to do in mine own office, that I shall not
need to meddle with other men's offices and duties, nor take them upon me, but
ever be studious with all my strength to do according to mine own calling. In
like manner, Magistrare.
if I were chosen to the office of the magistrate, and had received of god the
power of the sweard, to defend the good and virtuous, and to punish the evil
and transgressors, and in that office did aply my self with all diligence to
do, as it becomes me before god to do in that office, surely I should not
have leisure in mine office, to behold what other men do, but it should be
necessary for me with diligence to endeavor my self to be found faithful in
mine own calling. The like manner it is in the office of a good and dylygente
father of the household or mother of an household, servant or handemayde,
that every one do well remember their own duetye, and faithfullye serve and
do in their vocation, never taking one the others office upon him, seeing
that it is an unjust and a sinful thing to see the matter come to this
point, that the servant should take upon him the masters part, or the
master the servants. And therefore Saint Paul says: 1 Cor. 7
Let every manne continue in that same calling that he is called unto.

And here note, that we speak of that vocation that God calls us unto.
Neither are the feigned religious men of our time to be heard, if at this
text they seek a defense for their error, and say: Thou are called unto a
Monastical life, therefore needs must thou continue in the Monestarye, and
live a religious life.

And the cause why they are not to be heard, is this. God called them not to
that living, but men: that is, they were brought unto it by the tradycion of
dyuels.

Thirdely, The authority of the Apostels.
in this gospel is commended and highly praised the auctoritee and office of
the Apostels, especially against those that say: If man's doctrine is not to
be received, no more is the Apostels doctrine, for they were men also. But
who ever taught the, or of whom ever haste thou heard that it is not couenient
to hear those men, that teach the truth and word of god? In this point it is
necessary that men understand well. For when we say that the doctrines and
tradicions of men are nothing worth in the mattiers of iustificacion and faith,
we speak nothing of the word of god which is preached by men, but such
doctrine as men have ymagined against the word of god. And suerly if our
adversaries would in this matter show and behave them selves as the Apostles
did, we would right gladly receive them, nothing considering that they are
but me^. And if ye will know what the Apostels did, harken what is written in
this gospel of John the Evangelist, for we will not now speak of the other
Apostels. For John says in this place: This is that same disciple yt bears
witness of these things, and has written these things. etc. Hear ye not now
whereof John glorifieth? Of the truth doubtless and that he wrote no lie. Now
seeing he has written the truth, why should I not believe him? Truly I can not
denay, but I ought to receive a prophet in the name of a prophet. and on the
other part, I am bound to forsake him that comes not in the name of a
prophet, that is, he that speaks not the word of god and the truth.
Wherefore if we will that men shall receive and hear us, go to then, let us
speak and preach the truth of the word of god, and bring not dross for
silver, Esai. 1.
but set it forth puerly, and lead not ye people into a confidence of their
own works, but bring them unto Christ. Let us follow the Apostles in the
office of preachinge, especially S. John in this gospel, which justly may
glory, that he preached ye treuth, and so shall ye people on the other part
remember their duty toward us again. For we know that this sentence of
Christ was spoken for that same cause, Luc. 10.
where he says: Whosoever hears you, hears me. And who so despises you,
dispiseth me.

The gospel upon the Innocents day. Math. 2.
Behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in sleep to Joseph in Egypt, saying:
Arise and take the child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel.
Exo. 4.
For they are dead which sought the chyldes life. And he arose, and took
the child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. But when he
heard, that Archelaus did reign in Iewry, in the room of his father Herod,
he was afraid to go thy there. Notwithstanding, after he was warned of God in
sleep, he turned aside into the parties of Galile, and went and dwelt in a
city which is called Nazareth, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
by the Prophets: Iud, 13.
He shall be called a Nazarite.

THE EXPOSITION.
THis gospel dear christians, is replenished and full of many godly doctrines
and helthsom lessons. Therefore we ought to wyshe and desire with hearty
prayer, that God of his great mercy would vouchesafe to lighten our minds,
that we may receive, gather, and print in our hearts such things, as in it
are profitable and necessary for our instruction.

And first the Evangelist describes in this place how Mary, Joseph and the
child fled into Egypt: Christ flees into Egypt.
Which doubtless was a great sorrow to Mary and Joseph: yea such a cross, as
day and night turmented them. Think you this did not right sore vex them,
seeing that they had heard before that this child should, as a most mighty
king, reign in the house of Jacob eternally, and now they are constrained to
flee with him into Egypt, and (as banished persons) there to live in all
miserye? But in this God would declare, that the kingdom of his beloved son
is not of this world, and that he must enter into his glory and kingdom
through many persecutions, and much trouble. Yea, John 18 Luc. 22.
furthermore it declares that all such as depend upon him, and repose their
whole hope in him, shall have none other fortune in this world, then Christ
him self had. And here note the profound judgments of God. Christ being the
beloved son of the father, with Iosephe and his loving mother Mary, must
needs flee and give place to Herod, a most wretched caytife and cruel tyrant:
Where as yet God might (yea with one word of his mouth) have destroyed him,
and punished him according to his demerites. Why was this done? Doubtless,
forasmuch as Christ was given into this world to dye for us, and to suffer al
manner of evils, it was necessary that some proof of it should be now showed in
his childhod. Osee. 11
And furthermore, it was necessary to fulfill the prophecy of Oseas saiynge.
Out of Egypt I have called my son. And also Herod himself (as yet) had not
fulfilled the measure of his fury, And needs must he daily more and more heap
the wrath and indignacion of God upon him self. For wretchedly he lived all
his life, therefore he wretchedly dyed. He cruelly executed the tyraunts part,
wherefore he had the reward of a tyrant. And such is the fortune of
Christians, that their enemies do live a most pleasant life and are exalted
as high as the Cedre trees of ye high mountains of Lybane, Psalm. 36
but the Christians ar oppressed and trodden under foot, as you see here, yt it
chanced, to Christ himself, to Mary his blessed mother, and to Joseph.

God is careful for his.
Secondarily, in this Gospel is declared, how like a father, and how
mercyfully, God takes upon him the cure and charge to provide for his beloved
son Christ, and his parents. And first, lest they might fall into the hands
of that most cruel tyrant, he commanded them to flee into Egypt, and to
tarry there unto ye death of Herod. And this does he by a noble messanger.
that is to say, an angel. Besides this, where as Jesus parents were poor
folks and had small comfort, either of kinnesmen, or of their neighbors,
yet god so looks unto them, that the wise men came from the East
countreies, bringinge them gifts, wherewith they might sustain both
themselves, and the babe, until the tyrannous crueltye of Herod were ceased,
and at an end.

Now, although god laid a very heavy cross upon Marye, Joseph, and the
babe Jesus, yet withdrewe he not from them his fatherly mind, but cherisshed
them with such goodness and mercy, that although they were in tribulacion,
yet they perished not, but were fortunately delivered, even as god has
promised unto all christians, that suffer tribulacion for his word.

And although god for a time withdraw his healpe, and appears that in very
deed he has forsaken us, yet at the last we shall euidentlye prove and
plainly see, that in very deed no man can be more studiouslye careful for
us, than the Lord our God. In the mean time let us only study to do
after the Prophet David's council, to abide pacientelye the lord, Psalm. 26
to do his pleasure manfullye, that our hearts may be comforted, and by
hope lyfted up unto him, so that patiently we abide what aduersytye so ever
chance unto us. This (I say) if we do, it is impossible that we should be
forsaken and left without comfort. And though men would not comfort us, yet
needs must it come to pass that God by his holy Angels shall comfort us, as
here you have a noble example in Iosephe, Mary and the child Jesus, which
although for a time they gave place to Herod, yet after Herodes death, they
were again called out of Egypt by the Angel.

Thyrdly the Evangelist describes the cruelty and tyranny of Herod. For
after that he had given commandment unto the Wysemen, that they should go and
diligently search for the child, and when they had found him to bring word
to him, that he also might come and worship him, and do him reverence, he now
seeing that he was mocked of the Wysemen, was excedyng wroth, and sent and slew
all the children that were in Bethleem two years old or under, according to the
time that he had serched forth of the Wysemen. What is this? Is this to worship
him? This is to worship with tyrants
yea doubtless, thus appears hypocrisy and tyranny. For as touching such men,
when they speak fairest, then get they sonest and farthest of from them. For
surely their mouths are full of bitterness and desceite, and under their tongues
are pain and sorrow, Psalm. 9.
as says the Prophet David. A man needs not to seek far for an example.
Did not Ioab master of the army under David deal so with Abner bearyng to
him a friendly countenance? 3. Re. 9
Or when did Saul keep faithful promise with David, although often times he
swear depely unto him? Even so did wicked Herod here with the Wysemen. For
first before them he pretended himself to be a simple person, and a man with
out guyle or fraud, promisyng that he would honor and reverence that new
borne child: even as in our time some evil persons seem to do, which can
fashion them selves to every man's company, and with fair and sweet words
wype simple men's mouths so smoothly, that any man would think their minds
and words were all one, till at the last, the poor and simple do prove by
experience that they dissemble with them, and intended nothing less the^ the
godly words that they spoke. But let us speak of Herod, which before these
wise men promises that he entendeth to be virtuous and to worship this
Christ, that should come in to ye world, But fulfilleth he this promise? Yea god
wot: His prayer was so strong, that no mother in Bethlehem nor in all the
coasts, might keep her children a live. For as many as were two year and
under, were slain. Oh excellent prayer. Are there not think ye in our time yt
would worship Christ in like manner, if they might thereto be suffered and have
occasion? Suerly it were ill done, to surmise any such thing of our hypocrites
sith they do daily hear so many sermons. Yet I fear me, if it should come to
that point, that they would destroy and root us out whom the world counts
heretics (for flesh is flesh and so continues) that many would be ready to
do such gods service (as Christ calls it in S. Iohnes gospel) yea and
right gladly proffer their service to do it. And this I know that we (with the
grace of god) shall be ready not only to suffer all adversity for the gospels
sake, but also to dye for it, be Herod and all his ungodly members never so mad
with it.

Fourthelye, the Evangelist in this place recyteth the saying of Jeremy the
Prophet which so many years before prophesied that miserable murderyng of the
infantes, Iere. 13
which were slain under that cruel tyrant Herod, and also the great
lamentacion and weaping of those mothers for their childrent. And in this place
first is declared and praised the truth of all the prophecies, The truth of
prophecies.
that those things which they before spoke of, must needs be accomplished
and fulfilled, even as Christ said: Heaven and earth shall pass, but my word
shall not pass. Furthermore here is an example to all ministers of the word,
Ma. 24
that with all diligencie they consider it and endeavor them selves, All
preachers should confirm their sayings with scripture
that whatsoever they teach, preach, or otherwise do in their office, that
they do it upon a good foundation of the holy scriptures, so that they may ever
be ready to answer to those, as are not sufficiently instructed in their
doctrine or works, or that understand not their preaching. For even Christ him
self in likewise approved his doctrine out of the old testament and the
Prophets, and that in many places. And did not the Apostles in like manner?
How excellent an artificer does Paul show himself in recityng the textes
of the old Testament? For whatsoever it be that is builded upon that sure
foundation of the holy scripture, be it doctrine, or work begone or finished,
it stands sure and steadfast. Contrary, whatsoever is not builded upon that
foundation, there is no remedy, it must needs fall. God through Christ give us
the knowledge of of his holy word. Amen.

The gospel on the conversion of S. Paul the Apostels day. Mat. 19.
Woodcut illustration depicting St. Paul the Apostle leaning on a sword. THen
answered Peter, and said unto him. Behold Mat. 4 Mar. 10 Luc. 18.
we have forsaken all, and followed the, what shall we have therefore? Jesus
said unto them: Verily I say unto you: that when the son of man shall sytte
in the seat of his majesty, ye that have followed me, in the regeneracio^ Luc.
22.
shall sit upon twelve seats, and judge the twelve trybes of Israel Deuteronomy. 33
And every one that forsakes house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, Ioh. 13.
shall receive an hundredth fold, and shall inheryte everlasting life.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN the gospel of S. Mathewe is made mention of a certain ruler, which did
ask Christ what he should do, that he might inherit and have everlasting life.
Unto whom Christ answered saying: If thou wylt enter into life, keep the
commandments. And forbicause he did ask like a iustifier that would be
iustifed by his own works without faith, therefore he receaueth such an
answer as concerning works. This ioyly fellow by and by boasts and rufleth
out (as the fashion of iustifiers always is for to do) and proudely answered
of his works which he had done, and says: All these have I kept from my youth
up, What lack I yet? Iustifiers are boasters of their works.
What shall we say or think of this vain and proud confidence? Peradventure
he should not have had answered much amysse, if the law had not been spiritual
(as saint Paul says) and had not required the affection of the heart and the
inward man, and not only the outward appearance of works, works.
wherein this iustifier was deceived. Now for-because that he should learn to
know his imperfection and hypocrisy, Christ says unto him: One thing ye want.
If thou will be perfect, go thy way and sell that you have, and give it unto the
poor. Here was suddenly a wyndow opened into his heart, so that he might have
seen, upon what a feeble and weak foundation and imperfect faith he stood. But
what does he? He goes not about to do yt, Riches are a let unto life
everlasting.
which Christ commanded him, but left him, and goes his ways. Wherout it
comes well to pass which Christ says: O how hardly shall they that put
their confidence in riches, come into ye kingdom of god? It is easier (says
he) for Camel to go through the eye of a nedle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of heaven etc. Which things when S. Peter had heard that it
was no small thing to leave all and follow Christ, and that he had already done
it voluntarily and not compelled thereunto, he does ask Christ, what shall
become of him and the other Apostles. It cannot be denied but that S. Peter with
his brother Andrew, freely and voluntarily did leave and forsook al (although it
was but little) and followed Christ. And surely, if Peter had been so rich as
ever was Cresus, yet when he had heard Christ speak in his heart this saying,
Follow me. A carnal affection was in Peter
he would have left al and followed him. Nevertheless it was a carnal affection
in him, taking thought for his reward, before he had done his diligence, or
before he had brought his work to an end. And as touchi^g this matter, it
seems that Peter was like unto those workmen, which when they were agreed for
their wages, went into ye vyneyard, but yet requires a greater reward, then
they that came about ye ix. and xi. hour. For when did Abraham (I pray you)
require any such thing when he was commanded of God to forsake his fathers
house and follow the Lord into a strange land? Therefore Peter is set forth in
this place as an example of man's infirmitee which notwithstanding, Peter s
faith of Christ.
Christ (according to his gentle and fatherly affection) does gladly bear and
take in good part, eue^ as it often times chau^sed in ye Apostles, who^ Christ
with such lenity and myldnes of mind did so long bear withal, until at his
time he did bring the^ unto perfection. Yea if that good and most bountiful
Christ should reject and cast away all them which were weak in ye faith, what
should become of us I beseech you? There is not one of us which would not
gladly take a reward, though he had not deserved the same by any manner of
service. Besides that, all we with good will would reign with Christ, though
we have neueer suffered any thing with him or for him. But look not, that that
shall so come to pass, but thus it shall be, He that suffers with me, shall
also reign with me.

Seco^darily, though it be mete and convenient, yt we do our duty and service
unto God of very love of the heart, without any respect of reward (for the
reward shall follow of his own accord) yet notwithstanding Christ shows unto
Peter and to the other Apostles, how he will entreat them, and what they shall
at length receive of him. And this his promise he also confirms with an oath,
saying: Verily I say unto you, that when the son of man shall sit in the seat
of his Majesty, ye which have followed me in the new birth, shall sit also
upon the twelve seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

Hear how large a promise is made in this place unto the Apostles. For he
will not only confer this benefit unto them, (although a greater can not
be desired) that by him they shall be made good and righteous, The reward of
the Apostles.
and (if they persevere unto the end in a true faith) partakers also of
everlasting life, by his only grace and mercy: but also he will make them
judges, that in the new birth, when we shall be received into everlasting
health, they shall sit nere unto Christ. Of the which judgment saint Paul
also speaks: 1. Cor. 6
Do ye not know (says he) that we shall judge Angels. Albeit we must not
refer this judgment to the last judgment only, but it must also be
understood of the last judgment of the spirit among christians in this
life. For as soon as by the word we receive the holy ghost, and and are made
the sons of God through faith, the^ is this gift given us also, that by the
word we may judge al things, even as saint Paul witnesses in another
place. The spiiritual man judges all things, 1. Cor. 2
and he is judged of no man. And Christ also: Now is come the judgment of
this world, and the prince of this world shall be thrust out. Are not the
things, which are promised unto the Apostles in this place, great and
excellent? And it is to be understand that to leave all things, and to follow
Christ, must be done at the first. For although the Apostles had left all
things and followed Christ when he spoke these words, yet was faith at that
time imperfect in them. Moreover the holy ghost was not yet confirmed in them,
as it came to pass afterward upon the day of Pentecost. Yea, even Christ
himself affirms, that they left all things imperfectly, and followed him,
when he says that he sent forth his disciples without staff and scrippe, and
yet they lacked nothing. And in another place. The children of the spouse fast
not, whiles the spouse is with them. The Apostles in very deed followed Christ,
He that believes is constant in time of persecucion.
and were sent forth to preach in Jury. But where was persecution? yea, rather
where was faith, which could have borne such persecucion if it had happened?
Wherefore it is to be understand, that the Apostles left all things, and
followed Christ perfectly then, and not before, when upon ye dai of Pentecost,
they did with constant mind confess Christ before the Scribes and Phariseis,
and all the people. Moreover, when they preached not only in Iurye, but in all
the world unto the people with such sedulitee, diligence and constancy, that
at last they were also compelled to dye for preaching of the Gospel. The
conversion of saint Paul.
And truly as concerning this matter of following Christ, saint Paul, whose
feast we celebrate this day, is not to be counted the least.

For after that he was converted of God (as we read in the nynth chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles) and of a Wolf was made a sheep, he preached his
Lord Christ with such zeal and earnest affection of mind, that even at this
day his voice is heard of this matter, and that not in one place only, but
throughout all the whole world. The almighty God grant that we may receive
his doctrine and direct our life according to the same.

Thyrdly, forasmuch as Christ has promised unto his Apostles, judgment over
the xii. tribes of Israel, because that in his name they left all things, and
followed him: Now he proceeds to declare further, what he will give to all
those that for his names sake shall lose any thing, Reward comes of it self
and says. Every one that forsakes house, or brethren or systers, or father
or mother, or wife or children, or lands for my names sake, shall receive an
hundredth fold, and the inheritance of everlasting life. If any man will
refer the former promise only to the Apostles, let him know, that this
promise is spoken so plainly to all christians generally, that it must needs
remain a general truth. Only let us mark this well, how it must be
understand, to leave all things, and to follow Christ. For to do this truly and
unfeignedly, doubtless is required a true faith. yea, if I have a true faith,
which is dead unto all creatures, and lives unto Christ alone and unto
righteousness, then have I left all things in my heart, To leave and forsake all.
although by the good will of God I may christianly and godly use and enjoy my
goods so long as I live: yet nevertheless I am always ready, if need be, to
leave al things and willyngly to follow Christ, yea eue^ unto death, having
this hope and assured trust, yt it pleases God that it be so, and that he
requires ye same of me. Besides that, I am certain, yt God will use me with
such liberalite, yt I shall receive an hundredth fold for ye things yt I have
forsaken in this world. Finally, I know this also, yt in that other life, I
shall receive everlasting life. For Christ, which is ye truth it self, in no
wise does lie, but without dout does perform this promise with me. But in
this place it shall be expedient that we do rightly understand, what it is to
receive an hundredth fold. The error of the Anabaptists
For the Anabaptists go about hereof to prove a corporal kingedome of
Christ, and a suer and quiet life, which the christians must inioye a
thousand years after the resurrection of the dead, all the wicked and ungodly
being destroyed. And of this error they make this the chief ground, because
it is added in S. Luke, and also in S. Mark: In this life. John. 6 John. 8
But I pray you, how do these agree together, that where Christ in an other
place did refuse to be chosen a king amongst the Jews, after a corporal
and worldly manner, and said unto Pilate: My kingdom is not of this world?
now as one forgetful of his former sentence, is of a contrary mind, and is
come to administre a corporal kingdom in this world, and to give unto his
christians earthly pleasures, the pride and power of this world? No, To
receive an hundredth fold.
not so. But to receive an hundredth fold in this world is nothing else, than
to have a mercy, quiet and suer conscience, which esteems more his
redemtion, justice and everlasting health, which he has gotten by Christ
only, then all the riches of this world, be they never so glorious and
delectable to the ungodly. And in very deed, such a good thing is a quiet
conscience, through the benefit of Christ. And this so great a good thing,
will Christ give in this life unto all them, which with a true faith faith do
hang upon him, or leave any thing for his sake. And in the country
everlasting to come he will give that felicity of life which ever shall
endure. To the which, the almighty god preserve and keep us all, through his
well-beloved son Jesus Christ our lord. Amen.

The gospel on the purificacion of the Virgin Maryes day. Luc. 2.
Woodcut illustration of the Virgin Mary holding the infant Jesus. ANd when the
time of their purificacion Leui. 12
after the law of Moses was come, they 1 Reg. 2
brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, as it is written in the
law of ye Lord: Exo. 23. and. 22. Number. 8.
Every manne child that first opens the matrix, shall be called holy to
the Lord, and to offer (as it is said in the law of the Lord) a pair of turtle
doves or two young pigeons. And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose
name was Simeon, and the same man was just and godly, and looked for the
consolac^on of Israel and the holy ghost was in him. And an answer had he
received of the holy ghost, that he should not see death, except he first saw
the Lords Christ. And he came by inspiration into the Temple.

And when the father and mother brought in the child Jesus, to do for him
after the custom of the Leu. 12.
law, then took he him up in his arms, and said: Lord, now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, according to thy promise. For mine eyes have
seen thy salvation, which thou haste prepared before the face of al people.
Esa. 49 Act. 17.
A light to lyghten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

THE EXPOSITION.
THe gospel this day red (deareli beloved) describes first the purificacion
of Mary, and the offering up of the child Jesus into the temple. And doubtless,
there was a meruelouse great meekenes and lowlynes in the blessed vigin Mary,
and also in the child Jesus, to submit themselves so lowly and so diligently to
fulfill that law, which they were nothing at al bound unto. I pray you, who
can say, they were bound unto the law? Let us first speak of Mary. The law of
purificacio^ contains this in sum: Leu. 12.
That when a woman has borne a man child, she must remain forty days in the
blood of her purifiyng: and if she bare a woman child, fourscore days. But this
law could by no means include Mary, forasmuch as she was vyrgin before the
birth and in the birth of her child, The perpetual virginiti of Mari
and perpetually for ever continues virgin. Neither ought she to be accounted
among those women, who^ that law speaks of, which have conceived and borne by
the seed of man. Neither says the scripture: Examples of love and meekenes in
Mary and in Christ.
A certain woman. but a virgin should bear Christ. Yet that notwithstanding, in
this matter she gladly does as other women, yea and that with the pure love of
ye heart, wherein she would serve and teach other. And in this she instructs
us, that we should many times do by brotherly love, some things that we are
not bound to do. But what shall we say of the child Jesus? Was not he
above the law, and lord of the whole law? yet for all that he is offered up
in the temple as another child should be, with the accustomable sacrifice, by
the law required at such purifiynges, and that for this cause, that in the
oblacion of this child it might be signified, that our first natiuitee is so
vnpure, so full of malice and so fylthy, Romans 8.
as nothing is fylthyer. And in like manner by this purifciacion it is
signified, yt by this child as by the first borne among many brethren, al men
must needs be purifyed. Furthermore, Christ also submits himself under the
law, not that it was necessary for him so to do, as concerning his own
person, but that he would satisfy the law for us, and so abrogate it, The law
is abrogate by Christ.
that in the matter, concerning iustificacio^, it should have nothing to do,
even as Christ has brought it to pass. For does not saint Paul say: Romans 6.
You are not under the law, but under grace? This now is very comfortable to
us. For the law commanded many things, which we were unable to fulfill,
Acts xv. yet nevertheless it was necessary, and that under pain of eternal
damnacion, that we should fulfill the law, and satisfy it. Wherefore without
doubt, we all must needs have dispayred, if Christ had not come and fulfilled
it, and abrogate it, and by his grace and merits only obtained for us
remission of sins, righteousness, and eternal he^lth. And here note, that the
law in ^he matter of iustificacion is abrogate, as we have before monished.
But in as much as partayneth unto the obedience of faith, so much it becomes
us to fulfill and do, as christians and the children of God.

Secondarilye, for as much as Simeon should bear witness of this child and of
his doctrine that should follow, to the intent, that his testimony might take (as
it is worthy) more weight and estimacion, therefore is he so well described of
the Evangelist by his virtue and godliness. For thus says the evangelist. And
this man was righteous and godly. Simeon
But no man can be righteous and godli, without the holy ghost, and faith. For
why, faith only makes virtuous and righteous, as the scripture witnesses.
Furthermore, he that believes, fears god, Fear.
not with servile or bond fear, but with a childly fear, or such a fear, as
becomes a son to bear unto his father. If the^ it be true that the evangelist
writes of Simeo^ (as without doubt it is) needs must it follow that Symeon had a
faithful and godly heart. But such a faith, whereunto did she pretend, or
wherein did she put her trust and confidence? To works of the law? Nay. But
he looked for the consolacion of Israel, as the evangelist says. What is
this that I do hear? Is this babe the only comfort of Israel? Suerly and
without dout he is even so. The fathefull are every where few in number.
How many think you were there among so many thousands of men in Israel and
Judah, that knew this? I warant ye a small number, if ye take away from them,
Mary, Joseph, Anna the prophetisse, and this Simeon. What a wonderful thing is
this. Yea there is no such marvel as this, that among so holy a people and
enryched with so many prerogatives from god him self, ar found so small a
number, that acknowledged this time of grace and salvation. Only this old man
Simeon, and Anna the prophetisse, took heed unto ye prophecy of Christ, and
marked this time of grace: certainly believing that it should be so in deed,
that he should not taste of death, but that he should first behold the Christ
of the lord. And what followed? For as much as his faith and hope was certain
and right, therefore he received an oracle or answer of the holy ghost, that he
should not se death, before he had seen the lords Christ. Oh in what joy was
this good father then? And on the other side, how grievous was the abidyng so
long time unto him, till he might see that day and attain to that joy.
Notwithstanding at the last it came, and he obtained his herty desire. For
when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom
of the law, this Simeon came also into the temple not of his own head, but by
the mocion of the holy ghost. And the^ received the babe into his arms and
confessed him to be his lord and savior, and wished unto him all things
fortunate and prosperous, as in this place in goodly order and frutefully the
Euangelyst describes it.

The joy of Simeon.
Thirdelye here note, in how great myrthe, in what great joy, this old man
triumphed as it were when the eyes of his heart were opened to know his
Messiah. Now (said he) O lord, thou let thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy promise. Oh, how noble a thing is a heart that believes
well? For, I pray you, what thing cares Simeon for now? when he knows his
king and fauiour? Doutles nothing now can make him pensive or sorrowful.
Neither cares he much, whether he live or dye. As though he should say: Oh
lord God, I have with great and fervent desire longed to see thy son, the
savior of the world, and now by thy goodness and mercy I have that I ever
desired. And therefore, now I feale my felfe in so great joy, that it is all
one to me whether I live or dye. Phi. 1.
Now if I must live longer, I know that my savior, yea the savior of all the
whole world is come, and therefore there is nothing can make me sorrowful. But
if I must dye, then am I sure that death is to me auantage. Yea verily (oh
Lord) I heartely desire to be dissolved and be with thee. For I am sure, that
neither sin nor death, nor devil nor hell can hurt me, for as much as I have
seen thy son my lord, and I have known him as my Messiah and savior.
Behold how after this manner Symeon makes his song, and declares what faith
he has in this child. And what does he more? Suffices it that he only
believes, Christ is savior before all people
and that this joy tickleth his heart only? Nay not so. But he would make
this joy known unto all men, and he says, That God has prepared this
savior, before the face of all people. Whereunto? A light to lighten among the
Heathen, and the glory of thy people of Israel. Surely that is it that I would
so gladly have hard spoken of. And I beseech you what thing might we poor
heathen require more? We were bond unto this time in darkness and great
incredulite, utterly ignorant what we should do to attain everlasting
salvation. But God has set forth this light, and now has he ended this
miserye. Who has done this? This child, of whom Symeon speaks such
excellent things. And by what thing has he brought this to pass? By his
helthsom doctrine and gospel. For as he only is the glory of his people, when
they acknowledge him by faith, so also is he a light unto us, when he would
that his most holy word should come unto us. For then in deed began it to be
fulfilled, that the prophet long before saw in spirit, and said: The people
that dwelt in darkness saw a great light etc. Wherefore (dearly beloved) let us
with hearty affection endeavor our selves, that in as much as we are made the
children of god, by the word of god, that we acknowledge the same with Simeon,
and be thankful. And never admit to seek remission of sins, justice and
eternal health at any other, then this child, whom Simeon acknowledges and
names the savior of the whole world. Who with the father and the holy
ghost preserve and keep us all Amen.

The gospel on saint Mathias the apostels day. Math. 11.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. Matthias leaning on a spear. AT that
time, Jesus answered and said: I thank the, O father, lord of heaven and
earth, because thou haste hid those things from the wife and prudent, and have
showed them unto babes, verily father eue^ so was it thy good pleasure. Mat. 12
Luc. 10. Ioh. 3.
Al things are given over unto me of my father. Ioh. 7 8. b 10. b
And no man knows the son, but the father: neither knows any man the
father, save the son, and he to whom so ever the son will open him.

Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will case you. Eccle. 6
Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and
ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy, 1. Ioh. 5
and my burden is light.

THE EXPOSITION.
TO the right understanding of this present Gospel, Two natures in Christ.
it is necessary that we consider well, two natures in Christ. And verily if
these two natures be well and christianly considered, it shall open and make
plain many places of the godly scriptures, which at the first sight might seem
to be contrary, so that in very deed there shall appear in them no
repugnauncye at all. As for an example: I and my father are one. And again in
another place: My father is greater then I. Now if you refer this sentence
unto Christ's divine nature, and the other unto his human nature, I pray you,
shall not these sayings well agree? And in like manner must thou needs do in
this gospel. For that he gives thanks to his father, it belongs to his
manhod: and that he says, All things are given me of my father. it must be
referred unto his godhead. But wherefore gives Christ thanks unto his father?
Forsooth because the word which is contemned of Corazin, and Bethsaida, is hyd
from the wise and prudent, and is reveled or opened unto young children. Wise
and prudent men.
In this place he calls them wise and prudet, that trust to their ownes
wisdom, and by their own wits and understandings, will search out all
things. Of whom also the prophet says: Woe to you that are wise in your own
eyes, Esai. 5.
and prudent in your own conceits. Such wisdom and such prudence (that
is) such as will not be subdued and submit it self captive under the word of
God, and to the folishe preaching of the cross, shall never be able to
perceive any thing at all of the matter of his iustificacion, nor in any thing
that appertains to the glory of God. And why? God can by no means, nor will
suffer such pride, as commonly comes of carnal wisdom, as it is written:
God resists the proud, 1. Pe. 5.
and gives grace unto the lowly. Furthermore we see that such as are
carnally wise and ciuily prudent men, very seldom they come unto the
knowledge of God. But who then are they that are admitted unto the knowledge of
God, and unto faith? Forsothe little children.

And in this place Christ calls them children, Children or babes
that despair of them selves of all their carnal wisdom and prudence, that
only considers and depely fyxeth in their heart, those things which Christ
taught, preached and wrought. Knowing also that in matter appertainyng unto the
honor of God, to righteousness and our salvation, or our own carnal wit, is
of no waytte nor value, but only the word of God. Wysme^
And knowing also that no man can kmowe or apprehende that justice without the
reuelacion of God. And now, unto the first no^bre that is of carnal wise men
and prudent, pertayne the hye priests, Phariseys, and Scribes, and all
iusticiaries, that from the beginning of the world unto this day, defend and
maintain justice of works, contrary and against the justice of faith. And of
such at this time in so open light of the Gospel there are innumerable. On the
other part, that is to say, among them that be little children, Children
are to be nombred the Apostles, and all that believe, which esteem the
Euangelye as a most precious and holy relic, and in nothing are against it,
but with all gentilnes and lowly mind do receive it. Therefore if thou wylt
come with these children unto the knowledge of the gospel and eternal felicitee
(well) be not wise and prudent in thine own conceit, but meake thy self in
thine heart. for the word continues hyd unto carnal wisdom. Wherefore also
saint Paul calls it a misterye or a preuie secret that all men
understand not, nor perceive. We speak (says he) the wisdom of God in a
mystery.

Secondarily, Christ is very God.
when Christ as very manne had ascribed the reuelacion of his Euangelie or
gospel unto his father, he would now also show himself to be very God, equal
with the father: and he says, All things are given unto me of my father. And,
No man knows the son but the father, neither knows any man the father but
the son, and he to whom the son will open him. Of these words it is
evident, that Christ is not only very man, but also very God. For seeing yt in
this place he shows that the knowledge of his heavenly father is in his power
to give it unto whom he will, which thing in another place he ascribes unto
his father only: needs must it follow, Christ is equal with the father.
that as concerning ye divine nature, he is equal with his father. And if he
be equal with his father, it follows of necessitee, that he is very God. Now
if he be very God, why should I not believe in him? why should I refuse to put in
him all my whole hope, trust and co^solacion? especially seeing that he is so
minded toward me and all men that believe in him, that both he will, and also is
hable to help us. And that he will gladly succor us, it appears in this,
that for our sakes he gives thanks unto his heavenly father, as one that has
great pleasure in our salvation and health. Besides that, he is able to help
us, for all things are given unto him of his father. And to this partaineth
it, Ioh. 14
that he said unto Philip. Have I been so long time with you, and thou have not
known me? Philip, he that sees me, sees also my father: Again, Believe me
that I am in the father, and the father is in me. Hear you not in this
sentence, that Christ is equal with the father, and therefore needs must he be
God? It will be very profitable to collect and gather such sentences
together, and to have them in our minds. For how hardes thing is it to the
flesh, to believe that a man so despised and crucify^^, should be the son of
God, yea God himself: And that he has (by the effusion of his precious blood)
washed away the sins of all men, and obtained for them eternal life. So
strongly, and with such force is satan wont to fight against this article.
For he knows certainly that if he may win us from this Christ, it is
impossible but he shall take us for his pray. For think you, that it was for
naught ye Christ said: Mat. 9.
He is blessed that shall not be offended against me? Surely he saw before,
that his poor and co^temptible person should make many afraid to come to his
doctrine. Therefore he wills that we look unto his word, and considre it
prude^tly, and not only say: Jesus son of David have mercy upon us. But also
say with Thomas, Mar. 10 Ioh. 20.
My Lord and my God.

Thyrdly Christ allureth and calls us unto him self with a very sweet and
fatherly promise, and says: Come unto me all you that labor and are laden,
and I will refreshe, comfort, and ease you. Christ allureth us unto himself
with a merciful promise
I pray you, who now will be slow, and not rather with all that he can, make
have unto so gentle a savior Christ? And diligently note, who they be that
Christ calls here unto himself. They are such as labor, and are laden in
their conscience. And who be those? Those doubtless that feel their sins and
knowledge them, and for them be fearful and tremblyng, without comfort, and
of a contrite heart. For to such consciences there is no work, no holy deed,
no wisdom, that can succor them, but Christ only by his death and
passion, and by that precious effusion of his blood. Many one there are, that
in such trouble of conscience, and in the great conflictes and anguishe of ye
same, seek remedies, by certain prescribed holiness and works. But these
profit no more then did that woman, which was sick of ye issue of blood xii.
year, which had suffered many things of many Physicions, and spent al her
goods, and was never the better, Mar. 5.
neither had any succor. For ye more they study with their works (those I
say, which are done without true faith) to pacifye the conscience, the more
they do hurt it. Wherefore, thus must we seek for remedy. When by the
preaching of Moses we be brought into the knowledge of our sin, Romans 3.
and we feel our selves right soore oppressed with the burden of sin, then
let us seek for him, which by his death and passion has obtained for us
remission of all our sins. But if Satan will here draw the back, and (as
he is full of malice and craft) so put it into thy mind that thou shall think
Christ such a one, The comfort of conscience must be sought at Christ
as can in no wise abide sinners: then know thou that thou look unto this
promise, that Christ has made to thee in this Gospel, when he says: Come
unto me al ye that labor and are laden, and I, even I, shall refreshe you:
Which else no work, nor saint, can do. Why I beseech you, be you afraid?
when I am gentle and lowely in heart, and such a one, as it should be full
sore against my will that any sinner should depart fro me without comfort.
Behold thus Christ allureth and calls us unto himself, and sets forth to
us a promise, that he will refreshe and comfort such as are laden and
oppressed with sin. Yea, and further when we be comforted, he will lay a
yoke upon us, but no such as they felt before. But Christ's yoke is easy, and
his burden light. The doctrine of Christ, because of the cross, which it
ever brings with it, is a great yoke and heavy burden to the flesh. But
when the spirit comes, it is made easy and light, were it before neuere so
heavy, as saint Ihon says: His precepts are not heavy. 2. Ioh. 5
That almighty lord give us grace that we never suffer our selves to be
withdrawn from that yoke. Amen.

The gospel on the annunciation of the blessed Vyrgyne Mary. Luc. 1.
Woodcut illustration of the Annunciation, with Mary sitting to the left of the
angel, with the Holy Ghost (represented as a dove)and a lily between them. ANd
in the syxte month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of
Galile, named Nazareth, to a virgyne spoused to a man, whose name was Joseph,
of the house of Dauyd, and the virgins name was Marye. And the Angel went in
unto her, and said: Hayle full of grace, the lord is with the: blessed art
thou among women.

When she saw him, she was abashed at his saying, and cast in her mind, what
manner of salutacion that should be. And the angel said unto her: Fear not
Marye, for thou haste found grace with God. Behold, Esai. 6.
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and Mat. 2 Luc. 2.
shalt call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the son
of the highest. And the lord God shall give unto him the seat of his father
Dauyd, and he Esa. 9
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and Dan 7 Mich. 4
of his kingedome there shall be none end.

Then said Mary unto the angel: How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
And the angel answered and said unto her: The holy ghost shall come upon the,
and the power of the highest shall ouershadowe the. Therefore also that holy
thing which shall be borne, shall be called the son of god. And behold, thy
cosyn Elyza beth she has also conceived a son in her age, and this is her
syxt month, which was called barren, for Zach, 8. Mat. 19 Mar. 10 Luc. 18.
with god shall nothing be impossible. And Mary said: Behold the hand maid of
the Lord, be it unto me, according to thy word.

THE EXPOSITION.
Here in the Gospel of this day, is described the Annu^ciatio^ of the
natyuyty of our lord Jesus Christ, which was before promised unto ye holy
fathers, and that there so long and so desirously waited for. And the
euangelyst Luke with very great diligence marvelous plainly describes that
glad tidinges. For he right diligently discusseth all the circumstances of it,
and in as goodly order as may be recyted them.

First he shows the time, The time.
that is, the syxte, month, after yt Elizabeth wife to Zachary the priest, had
conceived John the baptist. And then furthermore, Gabiel,
he names also the angel, by that name that was known and excellent in
the scriptures: as in Daniell the 8. and 9. chapter: And this angel also was
before sent unto Zachary. Thirdely, he shows who sent that angel, Who sent
him
that is god, which long before had ordained Marye unto this glory that she
should be the mother unto his son. Fourthelye also you se, whether and to whom
the Angel was sent: that is, into a town of Galile, named Nazareth, The
city The husband. The virgyne.
unto a virgin despoused unto a man called Joseph, of the house of David.
And the virgins name was Mary. Now if a man will declare these circumstances,
and according to their dignity discuss them, it can not be opened what
dignity and ornament these shall add unto the annuncion.

And now considre after what manner this annunciation came to pass, and how
we should understand it. The angel comes unto Mary, and very gentely saluteth
her, as a virgin replenished with grace, with whom the Lord is: and which
should in time coming, be blessed above al women, because of those excellent
gifts, which god would give unto her. And in as much as she was abashed or
troubled, because of his words, therefore the Angel continues his words,
and says: Mary, be not afraid, doubtless thou have found grace with God.
Behold thou shall conceive in thy womb and bear a son, and shall call his
name Jesus. Here it is necessary that we consider well two things. First,
that Mary found so great grace with God. Two things noted.
For that which is found, surely it is found without any merits of any
works that went before, and so it comes unlooked for. To confirm grace is
not to merit or deserve.
Then if Mary found such grace before God, I beseech you where are they, that
say she deserved it? And thereupon do make an Idol of her, setting it above
God. I can well bear, and truly so is it worthy, that Mary be praised, and
exalted as a goodly virgyn, and full of grace before God, yea, and also to be
set forth unto all christians, as a lively ensample of faith. yet (that
notwithstanding) suffer her to continue a creature that attained unto that
dignitee, by grace without merits, and that never desired to be extolled above
her son, as ye may well perceive by her own words, where she says in the
gospel: Whatsoever my son shall say unto you, that do. John. 2
Does not this most blessed virgyn Mary in this place send men from her
self unto Christ, and unto his word? Surely we confess, that Mary obtained
of God greatter favor or grace, then all other women, in that she was full of
the holy ghost, and the Lord was with her. But now it follows not of this,
that I should make an Idol of her, that we should esteem her to be our life,
swetenes, and al our hope, as does that ca^ticle Salve regina, but rather it
were more right, to speak these things of Christ, which says. I, I, I am
the way, the truth and life. The other thing, that we here think worthy to be
noted is this. We must diligently way, what the Angel said unto Mari. Behold
(said he) thou shall conceive in thy womb and bear a son. For these words
pertayne unto the humanitee of Christ, which in our time is impugned, without
shame, The anabaptists error.
of the Anabaptists. For they confess, that he received of Mary in her womb,
figure, form and nutrimentes. But this they believe not, that he took any thing
of flesh and blood of Mary. But this text teaches plainly that doubtless
Christ first was conceived of the holy ghost, and then by the operacion of the
same holy ghost, he received (as every other child does) form, figure, and
nourishementes, flesh and blood of his mother the virgyn Mary, and so was
borne of her as the article of our faith declares. And we by the assistance
of Gods grace shall ever continue in this faith and confess it, and never
depart from it, though the Anabaptists wax never so wodde, and babble never so
much vain words in waste.

Secondarily, in this Gospel is excelle^tly described the kingdom of Christ.
The kingedome of Christ.
For the Angel says: And the Lord God shall give unto him the seat of David
his father, and he shall reign over ye house of Jacob eternally: and there
shall be no end of his kingdom. In these words Christ is called the son of
David, and I think because he was so long before promised to David, and that
he took flesh and blood of Mary, David's seat.
which was of the seade of David. And this seat or majesty of David, which
should be given unto him, is no corporal seat, but a spiritual seat. For if
it were a corporal seat, it could not endure for ever, but it must needs have
an end.

And therefore the Angel added: And his kingdom shall have none end. Such a
kingdom of Christ is also excellently described by the Prophet Esaie in the
ix. chapter, where among other things he says thus: Esai. 9.
His imperie shall be dilated or multiplied, and peace shall be without end upon
the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, that he may confirm and strengthen
it, in justice and judgment, from thencefurth and for evermore. Mark, that
such a peace shall be in the kingdom of Christ, which shall not endure for a
time, but for evermore. And how could this peace be referred unto David, which
neither had this peace, nor yet could give it unto other? Furthermore, in this
kingdom justice shall be made strong in judgment. Judgment.
Now, how shall this be? Where as is no knowledge of sins, there can not
follow the justice of faith. Therefore that I may come unto the knowledge of
sin, and after that, by faith attayn unto ye righteousness of faith, Christ
first causes me, so to be throwe^ down at the preaching of repentance, that
I shall feale my self worthy for my sins to have hell and eternal
dampnacion. But then through the preaching of free remission of sins for
Christ's sake, I shall be again comforted, and raised up, so that in time
coming I shall fear nothing for my sins, but I shall stand steadfast in
faith, and wait for eternal health. After this manner is justice stablished by
judgment in the kingdom of Christ. Upon this again it follows, that this
seat of David, which here is promised unto Christ, is nothing else but a
spiritual kingdom of Christ, which is governed and ruled by ye scripture of
the Eua^gely, or gospel. Neither can it stand in any manner other thing, then
in spirit and truth. For it can not be a corporal kingdom. For why, these
things that we have now spoken of, and the corporal kingdom that David
sometime governed, differ as far as heaven and yerth. And to speak
briefly, Christ him self in the gospel of Luke concludes this, saying: The
kingdom of God is within you. Luc. 17


Thyrdly, we have here a noble ensample of true faith in Mary. For although at
the first she was abashed at the Angels word, and afterward also wondered
right sore, Examples of faith in Mari
how she should be the mother of the Lord, seeing that she knew no man: Yet
now when she hears, that the holy ghost should work all this in her, she
gladly commits her self unto the will of God, with great mekenes and
lowlynes, and believes the Angel which God had sent unto her. Wherefore also
Elizabeth highly praised this faith, Luc. 1.
saying: Blessed art thou which have believed, for those things shall be
accomplished in thee, which were told thee from the Lord. Nature of faith
For this is the true nature of faith, which appears here in Mary, to
beleueue the word, to lean unto the word, and to cleave unto the word, yea
though that thing which the word speaks of, can in no wise be comprehended
by man's reason. For why should it be called faith, but that it believes things
invisible and not apparent, yea, and inco^prehe^sible to man? Thus did Abraham,
when contrary unto hope, he believed i^to hope. For as S. Paul says: He was not
weak in faith, neither considered his own body, dead in manner, (for he was
now almost an hundredth year old) nor the baraine womb of Sarah. He staggered
not through unbelief at the promise of god, but he was strong in faith, and
gave to god the honor, full certefyed, that whatsoever god promised, he was
able to perform it. Inlike manner must we do. Whenever god speaks any
thing which I can not obtain nor perceive by my reason or wisdom, it
becomes me not to dispute, by what means it may come to pass, but thus
must I say: Behold, I am ready the lords bond servant, and gladly do I
meekely submit my self captive unto thy word, althouge I perceive it not,
nor can not comprehend it. Thus did Mary, when the angel had said: The holy
ghost shall come over the, and the power of the most highest, shall
ouershadowe the. etc. Marye said: Behold the Lords hand maiden, be it done
to me, according to thy word. Now if ye will do unto Marye such service
as shall please her, beeleue the promise of god as she believed it. Fear god,
as Mary feared god, live as she lived, and thou shall possess eternal life
as Marye does. As Christ promised: Who so ever does ye will of my father that
is in heaven, he is my brother, sister and mother. God grant us all that we
may do well. Amen.

THE PASSION OF OUR Lord Jesus Christ, parted into six Sermons.
The first sermon Mat. 26.
Mar. 14 Luce. 22
Woodcut illustration of the Crucifixion. WHen ye eue^ was come he sat down
with the twelve. And as they did eat he said: Verily I say unto you, that
Ioh. 13.
one of you shall betraye me. And they were exceedinge sorrowful, and began
every one of them to say unto him: Lord, is it I? He answered, and said: He
that dippeth his hand with me in the dishe, the same shall betray me. Psalm. 61
The son of man truly goes as it is written of him: but woe unto that man by
whom the son of man shall be betrayed. It had been good for that man, if he
had not been borne. Then Judas which betrayed him, answered, and said:
Master, is it I? He said unto him: Thou haste said. When they were caryng,
Jesus took break, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to
his disciples. and said: 1 Cor. 9. Luce. 22 Mar: 18.
Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and thanked, and gave it
them, saying: Drink ye all of this, for this is my blood (which is of the new
testament) that is shed for many for the remission of sins. But I say unto
you: I will not drink hensforth of this fruit of the vinetree, until that
day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kyngedome. Mat. 14
And when they had said grace, they went out unto mount Oliver.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have (dee^ly beloved) not with out cause recited unto you out of ye gospel
of Math. the text of ye Lords supper, and that we purpose at this time to treat
upon unto your loving charity. For so it see we think it profitable to council
and help the weak, which about this time ar wont for the more part of a
custom to come unto the communion of the lords supper and participat of it.
and therefore they shall love and more gladlye desire some brief instruction
in this matter.

The beginning of this gospel declares with how great humanity and
gentleness Christ provoked Judas unto repentance, adding also unto yt, Christ's
patience calleeth Judas to repentance.
that except he did repent, that da^nacion in soul and body was prophesied to
chance unto him. But who told Christ that Judas should betray him, and deliver
him into the hands of the Jews? Surely no man. But he being very god, that
searches the hertes and raines of al men, knew it, neither needs he any man
to show him such things. Now that his clemency, goodness, and long suffering
in all things might appear, therefore he handles him that should betray him,
with such mercy and friendly or familiare dealing, and calls him unto penance
after that fashion that he vtereth him not by name, but only with his word
touches his conscience. Called not he him sufficiently unto repentance, when
he said unto him: Woo to that manne, by whom the son of man is betrayed?
It had been better for that man that he had never been borne? Doubtless, whom so
great mercy of Christ (as in this place is showed unto the traitor, and also
offered unto him) provoke not unto repentance and faith: surely I say that
man must needs have an indurate and blinded heart, as had Judas. For Christ
could handle him no better, nor with more mercyful kyndnes. Romans 2.
This great patience of god and Christ, considered S. Paul, saying: Dyspisest
you the riches of his goodness, patience and long sufferyng? Know thou not,
that the loving kyndnes of God leads the to repentance? Of this now it
follows that not Christ, but we our selves are ye cause of our own
destruction, Osee. 13
as the prophet Oseas witnesses, saying: O Israel, thy distruccion comes of
thy self. But Christ offers unto us, grace, and his spirit, yea and that
very liberally in many places of ye gospel Therefore, whosoever now will not do
penance, that man must needs fall into like danger with the Jews, which would
not know ye time of their visitacion. Judas heard what he ought to have done,
and what doubtless should follow upon that his betraiyng, and what reward he
might surely trust unto, except he forsook that evil and mischeuous enterprise,
yt he had taken in hand. But did he repent? or did this any thing move him?
Nay forsooth. But as the serpent stops his ears, that he hear not the
voice of ye enchanter: Judas an ensample to ye impenitent.
even so Judas stops his ears, and shut out al ye admonicions of Christ.
Wherefore it came to pass, yt by his own sin, he is dampened perpetually. And
also, he is set forth as a synguler ensample to all that are impenite^t. But ye
God of mercy, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, vouchesafe of his great and
tender mercyful goodness, to keep and preserve us al from such impenitent
hearts and desperate minds.

Secondarily, after that Christ with such friendly words (although in vain)
had called Judas to repentance, and with his well-beloved Apostles had eaten that
Easter lamb, he ordained and instituted the remembrance and commemoracion of
our redemption which here in this place of the new testament is as well
expressed and declared by figures and figurative speeches, as it was in the
old testament. For as the pure Paschal lamb without spotte, The paschal la^be
signified Christ. The effusion of the lambs blood, signified the effusion of
Christ's blood. And the salvation of the children of Israel from temporal death
by the Lambs blood, signified our salvation from eternal death by Christ's
blood. And as almighty God passing through Egypt, killed all the Egiptians
heirs in every house, and left not one alive, and nevertheless he passed by
the children of Isreal's houses, where he saw the Lambs blood upon the doors,
and hurted none of them, but saved them al by the means of the Lambs blood:
so likewise at the last judgment of the whole world, none shall be passed
over and saved, but that shall be found marked with the blood of that most
pure and immaculate lamb Jesus Christ.

And for as much as the sheddyng of that lambs blood was a token and figure of
the sheddyng of Christ's blood then to come, The lords supper.
and forasmuch also as all the sacraments and figures of the old testament,
ceased and had an end in Christ: lest by our great unkindness we should
peradventure be forgetful of ye great benefit of Christ, therefore at his last
supper (when he took his leave of his Apostles to depart out of the world) he
did make a new will and testament, wherein he bequeathed unto us clean
remission of all our sins, and the everlasting inheritance of heaven. And
the same he confirmed the next day with his own blood and death.

And lest we should forget the same, he ordained not a yearly memory (as the
Paschal Lamb was eaten but ones every year) out a daily remembrance he
ordained thereof in bread and wine sanctified and dedicated to that purpose,
Mat. 26
saying: This is my body: This cup is my blood, which is shed for the
remission of sins. Do this in the remembrance of me. Admonishyng us by these
words, spoken at the making of his last will and testament, and at his
departing out of the world (because they should be the better remembered) that
whenever we do eat the bread in his holy supper, and drink of that cup,
we should remember how much Christ has done for us, and how he dyed for
our sakes. Therefore, says saint Paul: 1 Cor. 11
As often as you shall eat of this bread, and drink the cup, you shall show
forth the Lords death until he come.

And forasmuch as this holy bread broken, and the wine divided, do represent
unto us the death of Christ now passed, as the killyng of the Paschal Lamb
did represent the same yet to come: therefore our savior Christ used the same
manner of speech of the bread and wine, as God before used of the Paschal lamb.

For as in the old testament God said: Exo. 12.
This is the Lords Passeby, or Passover, even so says Christ in ye new
testament, This is my body: Ma. 26
This is my blood. But in the old mystery and sacrament, the Lamb was not the
Lords very Passover or passing by, but it was a figure which represented his
passing by. So likewise in the new testament, the bread and wine be not
Christ's very body and blood, but they be figures, which by Christ's
institucion be unto the godly receivers thereof, sacraments, tokens,
significacions, and represe^tacions of his very flesh and blood instructyng
their faith, that as the bread and wine feed them corporally, and continue
this temporal life: so the very flesh and blood of Christ feeds them
spiritually, and gives them everlasting life. For unto the faithful Christ is
at his own holy table present, with his mighty spirit and grace, and is of
them more fruitfully received, than if corporally they should receive him
bodily present. And therefore they that shall worthily come to this Gods board,
must after due trial of themselves, consider first, who ordained this table,
also what meat and drink they shall have that come thereto, and how they
ought to behave them selves thereat. He that prepared the table is Christ
himself. The meat and drink wherewith he feeds them that come thereto as
they ought do, is his own very flesh and blood.

They that come thereto, must occupye their minds in considering how his
body was broken for them, and his blood shed for their redemption, and so
ought they to approach to this heavenly table with all humblenes of heart, and
godlynes of mind, as to the table wherein Christ himself is given. And they
that come otherwise to this holy table, they come unworthily, and do not eat
and drink Christ's flesh and blood, but eat and drink their own damnacion:
because they do not duly consider Christ's very flesh and blood, which be
offered there spiritually to be eaten and dronken, but dispisyng Christ's most
holy supper, do come thereto as it were to other meats and drynkes, without
regard of the Lords body, which is the spiritual meat of that table.

Therefore, let a man (as saint Paul says) examine himself, and so eat of
the bread and drink of the cup, for he that eats and drynketh unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnacion, not desernyng the Lords body.

Evil persons do not ea^e the body of Christ
Thyrdly, we can not deny, but that both the good and bad do eat and drink the
sacramental bread and wine, but besides the sacraments the good eats
everlasting life, the evil and wicked members of the devil everlasting death.
For they do not eat and drink the body and blud of Christ, but (as saint
Paul says) they are gyltie of the body and blood of the Lord, and eat and
drink their own damnacion.

Fourthly, it is necessary that we know, whereunto this sacrament profits,
and what vtilitee comes to us by it, and what is the power of it. And this
can no man learn better any where, then of the very words, wherewith this
sacrament was instituted, which say: This is my body, given for you, unto the
remission of sins. Christ ordained this sacrament of his body and blood in
bread and wine, to preach unto us, that as our bodies be fed, norished and
preserved with meat and drink, so are our hungry souls fed, norished and
preserved by ye body and blood of Christ. This same spiritual eating and
drinkyng of the said body and blood of Christ, is not received in the mouth,
and digested in the stomach, but it is received with a pure heart and a
sincere faith, beleuyng that Christ gave his body to death and shed his blood
upon the cross for us, and that he does so join and incorporate himself to
us, that he is our head, and we his members, having him dwelling in us, and
we in him. What thing can be more comfortable to us, than to eat this meat
and drink this drink? For he says himself: John. 6
He that eats me, shall live by me. Wherefore in this sacrament, received with
a true faith, we are assured that our sins be forgeuen, which thing when we
feel in our heates, at the receiuyng of ye Lords supper, what thing can be
more joyful, more pleasant or more comfortable unto us? Remission of sins
is ye highest treasure that can be in the world.
Who is it that would not apply his whole study, cast in his mind day and
night, yea and go though it were never so long a journey, so yt he might
attain this treasure? Suppose you there be any riches in this world like
unto this? Nay verily. Why so? For the goods of this world, be they never so
excellent, never so precious and great in value, never so pleasant and
beautiful, yet they ebb and flow, they fall as leaves, and they pass away,
although in this life only they comfort man much, yea, and rather vex and
trouble him: But this treasure of forgeuenes of sins, when by faith it is
obtained, found, and set hand upon, it brings with it no incertaine,
deceiuable nor transitory life, but a continual, everlasting, and perpetual
life, and also it causes peace and joy in the holy ghost, which shall last
for ever. Wherefore yt is very necessary, that we with all diligence and
studiouse mind, search for this treasure. There are some that are so minded that
they think that when they have the word, it is not very necessary nor makes
no great matter whether they come unto the sacrament or no, and yt it is in
their liberty whether they will take part of the lords table or no. All men ar
bound to receive the Sacrament.
But I deny that liberty, and lai, yt al me^ are so sore bound to remember this
benefit received of God through Christ, as ye apostels were, and often to
reuolue it in heart and to give thanks for it. For though I neither can, nor
will bynd me^ unto a certain prescript, or peculier time to receive this
sacrament, yet it is necessary, that we consider the commandment of
Christ, and that oftentimes we accomplish and in deed fulfill it.
Furthermore, it is a truth and can not be denied, but that by the word,
there is offered unto us the remission of sins. And in the same word is this
sacrament commanded and comprehended, so that the one can not be in onye wise
divided from the other.

Fiftely, considre now, who these be that use this sacrament accordyngly: The
use of the lords supper.
Douteles that are such as believe. There is a promise in the lords supper, that
Christ would give his own body unto death for us, and that he would shed his
blud, to wash away our sins. And in this promise there is no douting. But
what profits this promise unto me, except I receive and take hold upon it by
faith? But yet if I will be partaker of these things, it is necessary that I
come in faith. For every promise of God is received by faith. So likewise
teaches the sentences in ye gospel of John: Ioh. 6.
He that eats this bread shall live eternally. Item, The bread which I will
give, it is my flesh for the life of the world. Item, He that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, continues in me, and I in him etc. Al these sentences
ar spoken of faith. Now who so comes unto the communion of the lords supper
not having this faith, then not only he eats it not unto his health and
eternal life, but much rather he takes part of this sacrament unto eternal
co^demnacio^, as S. Paul in the epistle to the Cor. sufficiently shows and
teaches. 1 Co. 11.
Therefore if thou feel thy sins and know them, and would right gladly
be delivered from them, and desire to grow, increase and wax strong in
faith, well, make have and come to this supper. For in it thou shall find, not
only forgiveness of sins, and that by ye word, but also thou shall feed thy
soul with ye body and blud of Jesus Christ, a great co^forting to thy faith.

Furthermore, this sacrament should move and stir us to friendship, to live
quietly in peace, unity and concord, and to put away all hatred, variance and
discord. and to testify a brotherly and unfeigned love between us. For when we
be made al partakers of this one table what ought we to think, but that we be
al me^bres of one spiritual body? that we be joined together in one Christ, as
a great number of grains of corn be joined together in one lofe.

Wherefore they that can not be persuaded to be good to their christian
brethren (for whom Christ suffered death) when in this sacrament they be put
in remembrance, that the son of god bestowed his life for his enemies. We
see daily that eating and drinking together, makes friends, and continues
friendship: Much more then ought the table of Christ to move us so to do,
whereby we confess us to be all members of one body, and acknowledge Christ to
be given us of God his father. To whom with the son and holy ghost, be all
honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The gospel on the second sermon upon the passion of our lord. John. 18.
WHen Jesus had spoken these words, Mat. 19 Mar 14 Luce. 22
he went forth with his disciples, over the brook Cedron, where was a garden,
into which he entered, and his disciples. Judas also which betrayed him, knew
the place, for Jesus often times resorted thither with his disciples. Judas then
after he had received a bond of men, and ministers of the high priests and
pharisees, came thither with lanternes, and fire brandes, and weapons. And
Jesus knowing all things that should come on him, went forth, and said unto
them: Whom seek ye? They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus says unto
them: I am he. Judas also which betrayed him, stood with them: As sone then as
he had said unto them, I am he. they went backward and fell to the ground.
Then asked he them again: Whom seek ye? They said: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
answered: I have told you, that I am he. If ye seek me therefore, let these go
their way, that the sayings might be fulfilled which he spoke: Ioh. 17
Of them which thou gave me, have I not lost one.

Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the high priests
servant, and cut of his right ear. The servants name was Maichus. Therefore
says Jesus unto Peter: Mat. 2^ Gene. 9
put up thy sword into the sheath: Shall I not drink of the cup which my
father has given me?

THE EXPOSITION.
Forasmuch (dearly beloved) as we have undertake, to declare unto you, and
to set out the dear death and most bitter passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: I
have thought it convenient, and need also requires the same, that we should
first show briefly, what is the use of the same passion, and what vtilitee and
fruit may come by it unto us.

For there is no greatter folly, nor more worthy laughter, than to make only
such preachynges, as should move men's minds to fret at the Jews, because
they did such an horrible crime against Christ and by such words take an
occasion to curse and rebuke the traitor Judas, and to condemn him. For
surely here are to be considered, things far greatter and higher then
those. And what things are they that we ought here to consider? First we
ought to ponder, what were the principal causes of that so great passion,
which the most innocent la^be of God suffered. For if this be depely wayed and
considered in the heart, it shall work as much in our hearts, as does the
preaching of the law, whose office is commonly to set before our eyes the
huge greatness of our sins, to fear us and to drive us unto despair. But
now, who were they that were the cause of that so paynful death and passion
unto Christ: The cause of the does of Christ Esai. 53
and that committed that horrible crime to sley the son of God? No man can
show this more truly nor better, then the prophet, which says: Because of
the transgression of my people I have slain him. Keep this sentence diligently
in thy mind. And if thou wylt so do, thou shall have as great cause to fret
at thy self, as ever thou could find to be displeased with the Jews, and
that wretched poor fellow Judas. And if yt the Lord our God gave his dearly
beloved son unto this passion, for the tra^sgression and sins of his
people, surely we also do put to our workyng and helpyng hands unto this
passion, and ar also as well as other, authors of his death. Have not we sinned
also with other? Or are we except out of this sentence? Al men have sinned, and
are destitute of the glory of God. Romans 3
Doubtless no man can here excuse himself, neither is any man free from sin,
so yt he may lay al ye blame upon the Jews, for Christ's death. 1 Iho. 2
For as S. Iho^ says: He is ye propiciacion and obtayner of grace for our
sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of all the world.

Therefore, when thou hear that this innocent Christ was bound, scourged,
spyt upon, and skorned, and besides that, beaten upon the face, crouned with
thorn, and crucified, thou should then call to mind and remember, Our sins
crucified Christ.
that thou thy self have done this, and that thy sins were the most just
cause and very occasion of all these things. Neither must thou remember
things lightly, but so meditate them in thy mind, that thou may know thy
self, a most grievous sinner, and confess thy self such a one, as by thy
sins provoked so great wrath and indignacion of God. Nor think not that thy
sins were light for ye which it was necessary yt the son of God should come
down from heaven, and suffer the most vyllayn death of the cross. Consider
also in thy mind, that this passion, What profit we have by the death and
passion of Christ
and shedyng of that precious blud, was done for thy wealth and profit, yt thy
sins and all thy tra^sgressions should by effusion of this blud be washed
away, and so thou delivered from al thy sins, might be made the son and
heir of God. Now if you by faith take hold upon this, and with all the whole
faith of thy heart, trustest wholly upon it, it shall make the fre from al
sins, reco^cile the unto ye heavenly father, and bring perpetual joy, and
eternal felicity unto the. Even as S. Paul says: Christ, Rom 5.
when we were yet weak, according unto the time, died for ye ungodly. And
scarce will any man dye for ye righteous. Yet peradventure, some man dare dye
for a good man. But in this has God set out his love toward us, that when we
were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Much more now yt we be justified in his
blood, we shall be saved from the wrath by him etc. After this manner the wounds
of Christ, may be unto the a preaching of the law, when thou call to mind,
that he suffered them for thy sins. And again, when thou reme^brest and
beleuest, that all this was done for thy wealth, then receyuest thou that glad
tidings, which preaches unto the, that thou shall not perish, but art
delivered from all thy sins, and shall live with Christ eternally.

Is not this a wondrous great profit, that thou have by the passion of
Christ? where are, I pray you now, Note this ye sectaries that sell your
merits to other.
those iusticiaries, which ascribe their salvation not unto the passion and
death of our Lord Jesus Christ, but unto ye merits of their own works?
Surely, they err exceadyng sore, that so believe. For doubtless our own
works were never able to perform so great a thing, but Christ, Christ I say,
Christ only is he, that by his death and passion, and by the effusion of his
precious bloudde, gives freely, and makes us to possess eternal health. For
he is made unto us wisdom from God, 1. Cor. 1
and righteousness, and sanctificacion, and redemption.

Secondarily, we hear now of the Evangelist Ihon, that when Christ had
ended, that his last supper, and had finished that excellent sermon made then
unto his disciples, he went forth with his disciples over ye broke called
Cedro^, into a certain garden, to pray. Prayer requires a secret place. 1.
Ti. 2.
Some men will say, what means this, that Christ taryeth not within the
house? Should prayer be bound unto certain prescrybed places? Nay truly. For
saint Paul wylleth, that in every place we hold up our hands unto God. Yet
that notwithstanding, such is the nature of fervent and earnest prayer, that
it may be far better and deuoutlyer done, Mat. 6
in some secret place, or (as Christ says) in thy chamber, then in such
places, where is great resort of people, Ma. 14
as we also see in the gospel of Mathewe, how Jesus went alone into the
mountain to pray. But then specially is it agreeable, that he yt prays be
alone, and far from other, when his necessitee and panges of his mind are
great, that he may so much the more freely shed forth his whole heart, before
the Lord his God, and in his lap lay forth all his aduersitee, whatsoever
it be. And now, what think you moved Christ to depart aside into the garden
to pray? Necessitee compels men to pray.
Surely that exceadyng great anguishe of his heart. For now he knew yt the
time was come of his passion, which he so sore feared, that he said: My soul
is sorrowful unto the death. And again: O my father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me. You hear in this place how great fear, how great
anguishe, how great tribulacion and pensiuenes was in the flesh of Christ. And
doubtless the same fear invaded him, when he ha^gyng upon the cross, cried
out with the saying of the Psalmist:

Oh God, Oh my God, why have thou forsaken me? Psa. 21.
But now ponder what Christ does in such necessitee, and from whence he
asks comfort and help. Christ asks at his heavenly father.
Doubtless he has no manner of help, comfort, or hope, but in his heavenly
father, at whose hand also he looks for all co^solacion: seeing yt it was
impossible for any creature to help in such necessitee and trouble.

And although he must needs drink of the cup of his passion, yet was he
comforted and strengthened by his heavenly father, which sent an Angel from
heaven to comfort him, Luc. 22.
which altogether was done for us. For this infirmitee of Christ that we here
see, was made our strength. For surely we could never have been able to
overcome any temptacio^, but only by Christ. Whenever therefore in our
necessitee, we ask any thing of our heavenly father for Christ's sake, we
shall doubtless for Christ, obtain help, comfort, and all our hearts desire,
and be assured of most sure consolacion.

Thirdely, when Christ had ended his prayer, Judas came with the servants
of the Bishops and Phariseis, to betraye his Master and Lord, to deliver
him into the hands of the Bishops and Priests. Is not this an horrible thing
to speak, especially that an Apostle betrayed Christ? Before he had preached
the gospel, before he had done miracles, yea and so behaved him self, that
he seemed nothing unlike the other Apostles. Besides this, it was not long
before, that he sat at one table with Christ and his Apostles, and was
partener of his Supper, and had heard, with how great patience and
meekemes, (although in close words) the lord had called him unto repentance.
Yet notwithstanding, he was so sore indurate and blinded, that for a little
vile money he sells his Lord, There is no trust in man.
and betrayeth him unto the Jews. Who can now have any trust in manne,
seeing this traitor dare be so bold, (as one that has none evil in his
mind, or thinks no harm) to kiss Christ? Who also shall boast himself of
the gift that God has given him, before he come unto a blessed and christian
end? Doutles it was not said for naught: Mat 24
He that perseuereth unto the end, shall be saved. There are many that have a
good beginning, when they first begin to believe, as we have experience of
such in our times. For there have been some, which in the beginning when the
gospel began to florysh, were so fervent and exceeding herty, that in manner
they did durst out all together with fervent love, and seemed as they would at
ones devour the whole gospel. But a very small number is there of them that
have continued the same hartye good mind, unto a good, fortunable and perfect
end. Wherefore this is ever true, that our savior Christ says: Mat. 1^
The last shall be first, and the first last. What needs mo words? When such
men ones fall from the gospel, they run into such envy and hatred against
it, that without doubt they would do as Judas here does to his lord and
master, if god wo^d permit unto them, occasion to do it. How often (I pray
you) complains S. Paul of such false brethren? Note this O chris^ian reader
and do it.
Therefore all christian men have a great cause, without ceassyng to offer
prayers unto god by Christ, that not only he would bring us unto the true and
right faith, but also that of his great mercy and unspeakable goodness, he
voutchsafe to conserve us in the same, unto the end.

Fourthely, we see in this place, Christ wyllinglye gave him unto the cross.
how willyngly Christ gave himself unto the cross, for so says the text.
Then Jesus knowinge all things, that should come unto him, he went to meet
them, and said: Whom seek ye? They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. And
Jesus said unto them: I am he. Is it not fulfilled in this place that the
prophet said: Esa. 53.
He shall be led as a sheep unto the slaughter, and as a lamb before the
sherer, so shall he hold his peace, and he shall not open his mouth? And also
the saying of the Apostle. Phil 2.
He was made obedient to the father unto the death, even unto the death of ye
cross. Christ is our gift and our ensample.
Now though we look upon Christ but even as upon a gift given unto us,
surely it shall not a little stablishe and strengthen our faith, that he would
so gladly offer himself unto the death for our profit and for our redemption.
But if we consider Christ given unto us, as an example, we must remember, 1
Pet. 2.
what S. Pet. writes in his epistle: Christ suffered for us, leui^g us an
example, yt we should follow his foot steps, For so shall we take the cross, as
willi^gly upon us, if need require it, as we se that he suffered death upon the
cross. And I pray you, why should we not here willyngly offer our selves,
seeing that we have so mighty and merciful a lord, that will be present and
assist us in all our tribulacio^s? And that he is able, we may perceive it in
that he threw down all the Jews unto the earth, by the power of his word.
That he is merciful he shows in this, that in the myddest of his adversity,
he casts not of the care for his disciples, but is so careful for the^ that
in their behalf he said unto his adversaries ye most gredely sought to drink
his blood: If that ye seek me, let these go, so that the word might be
fulfilled, Ioh. 17
which he had said. Of those whom thou gave me, I have not lost one.

Fiftelye, when Peter had cut of the ear of Malchus the bishops servant,
Christ commanded Peter to put up his swearde. Wherein doubteles he taught us,
that his kingedome which only is administered by the word, and stands in
spirit and faith, this kingdom I say, may be defended with no power of the
flesh, but is only to be conserved and defended of god. God defends ye gospel
And seeing there is no doubt, but god will defend his own kingdom, I pray you,
why fear we so much ye enemies of ye gospel? Why do we not rather in this
behalf, suffer god to provide for these things? Why say we not with saint
Paul: Romans 8.
If God be with us, who may be against us? Surely it cannot be denied, but
their power is great, that bear evil will, and would the Gospel were utterly
destroyed. But what is all their power, if it be conferred unto the power of
god? At the least, let us study this. Let us by all means haste unto this,
that we may stand strongly by the word, and suffer not our selves to be
separate from it, and suffer not our selves to be separated from it, and
doubtless God himself shall find a way, how to conserve it, and to defend
it against all his adversaries. For it is not in vain that the prophet says:
Esa. 55.
My word shall not return to me void, but it shall do all my will, and it
shall prospere in those things, whereunto I have sent it. Then if the word
must needs fulfill the thing it is sent unto, I pray you, who can resist it? Is
it possible think you, that a creature should compel his creator? I think
nay. And I believe, that God is able without any pain, to fulfill his counsel
and will, although the enemies of the gospel would burst for sorrow. It is
then convenient, that the ministers of the gospel, by no means fight with the
temporal sword, but only with the sword of the word, which S. Paul
calls, the word of God. Ephe. 6
But he that is not so content, but affirms, that his quarrel must be
defended with fystes and blows, violence and power, doubtless it shall chance
to him as Christ says here: Every man that stryketh with the sword, shall
perish upon the sword.

The third sermon upon the passion of our Lord. John. 28.
THen the company and the Capitain, and ministers of the Jews took Jesus, and
bound him, and led him away to Anna first, for he was father in law unto
Cayphas, which was the high priest that same year. Cayphas was he, which
gave council to the Jews Ioh. 17.
that it was expedient, that one man should dye for the people.

Mar. 20 Mar. 14 Luce. 22
And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did an other disciple: that disciple was
known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high
priest But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other disciple
(which was known unto the high priest) and spoke to the damsel that kept
the door, and brought in Peter. The^ said the damsel that kept the door, unto
Peter: Art not thou one of this man's disciples? He said: I am not. The
servants and the ministers stood there, which had made a fire of coals, for
it was cold, and they warmed them selves.

Peter also stood among them, and warmed him. Mar. 14 Luce. 21
The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine. Jesus
answered him: I spoke openly in the world, I ever taught in the synnagog and in
the Temple, whither all the Jews resort, and in secret have I said nothing,
why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them.
Behold, they can tell what I said. When he had thus spoken, one of the
mynisters which stood by, smote Jesus on the face, saying: Answerest thou the
high priest so? Actu. 23.
Jesus answered him: If I have evil spoken, bear witness of evil: But if I
have well spoken, why smytest thou me? And Annas sent him bound to Cayphas the
high priest. Simon Peter stood and warmed him self. The^ said they unto him:
Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said: I am not. One
of the servants of the high priests (his cosyn whose ear Peter smote of)
said unto him: Did not I se the in the garden with him? Ioh. 13.
Peter therefore denied again, and immediately the cock crewe.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this part of the gospel we may consider, whyther Jesus was carried after
that Judas had betrayed him, namely unto the houses, first of Annas and then
unto Cayphas. For Annas was Cayphas father in law. What do I hear? The
hipocrisye of the Iewishe bishops
Thinks any man that this is credyble, yt these men so virtuous, holy, and
well learned, would covet to destroy a prophet of so great fame, a man of such
innocent living, yea one in whose mouth was found no guile, and would they
(think you) lay assaults to destroy him? I pray you, how agree these two
to gether, that they be both so virtuous fathers, and such bloudthursty
butchers? Surely these two things agree not very well, yet here we see they
agree in one. And though the Prophet David often accuses them, as men most
greadye to suppe innocent blood, yet perchance they can cloak this their
malicious mind, and so hyde it, and excuse it, that they will, men should
report them, as though they did all this of an exceadyng great zeal, to
defend the law of Moses, and the tradicions of the fathers, like as it is
commonly practiced, that their can be imagined none so great or heinous a
crime against ye truth, but hypocrisy can before the world paint it out with
fair colors, Nothing so evil but hipocrisy can make it holy.
yea and set it furthe with a glorious shine of godlynes. Well, let hypocrisye
use her colors as long as she lust, and deceive men as much as she can. For
surely when ye truth comes, and the light of the Gospel does shine abroad,
doubtless then it shall evidently appear, what lay hid in such men's
hearts, and whereof that their zeal came, that is, of mere envy and stubburne
hatred, where with they are so set on fire, and do fret against the truth, that
they can by no means abide it.

For why? the truth so rebukes and reprehendeth that outward shine of
righteous works and all their holiness, and it shows, that although
outwardely they be honest and virtuous, yet in heart they are detestable
wretches, and bloudthursty dogs, unto whom also God shall say at the last
day: Depart from me you workers of iniquitee, Mat. 7
I know you not. But this they can suffer in no wise, and it is a double edged
sword in their hearts, when so ever they are compelled to hear these things
spoken. Now forasmuch as Christ had told them their faults many times, and
evermore rebuked sharply their hypocrisy, they now therefore swarm together
and gather their counsels, and for money do hyer the traitor to betray him,
Psalm. 2.
and deliver him into their hands. Yet do they not this to conserve and
defend their law, Money makes Judas betray ye truth to this day
but this they do to oppress ye truth, wherewith Christ had sore troubled them,
and would in no wise suffer their hypocrisye to be esteemed as righteousness.
This I say is ye only cause, why they would so gladly rid Christ out of the
way. I pray you who will now wonder that in our days our religious fathers,
surely induced by this example, rage with such cruelty against the word of
God and his gospel? I assure you, they are not so unwise, but rightwell they
can considre, what is expedient for them to do in this behalf, and therefore
they often assemble and co^sulte among themselfes. For why, they see, if the
gospel may goo forth and prospere, that this outward and carnal gods service
that they have, this outward show of holiness that they crake upon, will in
short time be very little set by. And if these things ones be had in no
reputacion, then doubtless that holy god of theirs (the belly) shall be jack
out of office, and no more worshipped. And then men shall sing to him an Anthem
nothing pleasant, that is to say, Ps. 127
Labores manuum tuarum manducabis, Thou shall eat the labors of thine own
hands. I pray you who will not with this be disquieted, and disco^tent in his
mind? Who of them will not take counsel to rydde this doctrine out of the way?
Therefore in this place note diligently who they are that take Christ, bind
him, skourge him, and give commandment to crucify him, and you shall evidently
perceive, what lies hyd under the hypocrisye of all men.

Secondarily it is not lightly to be passed over, Christ knowledgeth and
defends his doctrine
but diligently to be noted, that Christ, when he was examined before ye bishop
as concerning his doctrine, he appealed unto the hearers of his sermons, and
defended boldly and consta^tly the same his doctrine, as true doctrine. And so
was it very necessary, that Christ should do. For God not only requires, that
we should continually apply his doctrine, by teaching, hearing and learning it:
but also that we should freely confess it, and defend it, whenever we should
be examined of it. For Christendom stands not, as somesay, in believe well
and hold thy tongue, but believe and confess, as the Prophet says: Ps. 115.
I believed and therefore I spoke. But thou wylt say: I am no enemy of the
word, and as much as in me is, I can well suffer the gospel to be preached, if
at the least it should not break peace and concord among the people. What is
this? Sekest thou peace in this world, and would thou have constant
friendship with it? Doubtless it were a fair thing, if it might be possible to
bring it to pass. And also I think there can no man be found, but he rather
would have glad and merry days, then tribulacion and persecucions. Mat. 10
But would he so that said: I am not come to send peace upon earth, but a
sword? I suppose his mind is not so. He that will have the gospel must have
the cross also with ye gospel
For if thou wylt have peace with this world, then needs must thou lack the
word, and all the good things that in it are offered and given to thee. But
if you wylt have the word, needs must thou also have the cross, which ye
word brings with it, and thou must willyngly take it and persevere in the
same unto the end of thy life. Yea though one cross would follow upon
another, and lie most heavily upon thy neck. even as the prophet David also
says: Ps. 118.
And I spoke of thy testimonies in the presence of Kings, and I was not
ashamed. Patience and boldness.
And note that unto the sufferance of ye cross, we need much patience: and
unto the defense of the word we must have a mouth, that can speak with out
fear. Mat. 5.
For although Christ had taught that if a man were stryken upon the right
cheake, he should turn the other also, yet will he not now approve this
strype given him, by silence and holdyng his peace, but he said: If I have
spoken evil, bring witness of that evil. But if I said well, why do thou
stryke me? Christ took this strype patiently, as the scripture says: When he
was raised upon, he did not give evil words again. When he was evil
entreated, he did not thret them. Yet could not he approve that their iniust
delyng, as a thing well done. And even so it is expedient for every christian
manne to do, that is, he ought doubtless freely to confess the truth before
the world and all men, as did the Prophets, saint Ihon Baptist, Christ
himself and the Apostles, and as all the elect since the beginning of the
world have done. And if he therefore be skorned, beaten, persecuted, and
condemned of men, he ought after the ensample of Christ, with quiet and
pacient mind, to take upon him, and suffer such iniurye and persecucion. Yet
not withstandyng, he ought not to approve nor praise their quarrel that so do,
nor yet suffer, that by his silence such tyranny be approved or lauded, but
with free and vnfearful open mouth, let him show that this their unjust
dealyng is evil and unrighteous, as in ded it is nothing else but unrighteous
and wicked. Tit. 1.
And therefore also is it that S. Paul requires in a bishop, that he be
mighty and able to exhort with true doctrine, and to convince the againsayers.

Thyrdly, we have now the fall of saint Peter, The presumpcion and rashness
of flesh
whom we ought diligently to consider and mark. For we not only behold in
him, how foolish, rash and unwise the presumption of man is, but also we
learn in him, that when a man has by frailtye fallen, he should not by and
by despair, but much rather look unto the goodness and clemencye of
Christ, by the which Peter was again received, and obtained remission of all
his sins. Doubteles, it was a great presumption that he promised to go with
Christ, even unto the very death, and by this presumtion fell he into so great
sin. For how should flesh wish for death, seeing that very nature has so
disposed the flesh, that she rather desires a quiet and pleasant living? For
even he that is endued with the holy ghost, has much a do to take heed, least
in death he be overcome or despair: much less may we think, that of our own
strength we may be able to stand against it. Wherefore we ought to be very
circumspecte and ware, that we presume not, but that we stand in fear evermore.
yet for all that, contynually beseching god the father, that he will voutchsafe
for his son Christ's sake, to comfort us with his holy spirit, that we be
overcome in no temptacion, but that evermore we may perceive and feel his
help, strength and consolacion. For certainly this is truth that the prophet
says: The lord is my helper, Ps. 117.
I will not fear what man can do to me. The cleme^cy of Christ toward
sinners.
And though it chance sometime while we live here, that we fall, yet let not
our heart give over, nor we may not despair, but by and by arise again, and
also call again for the grace and mercy of god. For surely Christ has even
now the same mind, Anabaptists error.
that he had then, when he received Peter again into his favor. The
Anabaptystes of this our time, deny that those may return again to grace,
which ones knew the truth and afterward again fell into sin: and as much as
in them is, poor Peter and we all should perish and be perpetually
condemned. But set their folishe bablyng light, for they be vain, and vain
they continue. But rather consider thou how Peter fell, and was again
received into grace, and so shalt thou get profit by considering it. In
what place Peter fell.
And note diligently in what place Peter fell and committed that great sin,
namely, he fell in the Bishops palace. And of this place may thou learn,
how great ieopardy it is to preachers of the word of God, often to use the
courts of great men of the world: and especially for these consideracions.
First, Ieopardyes of ye courts of great men.
it is an honesty for a man (as courtyers repute it) often to haunt voluptuous
pleasures, with a certain pride and dignity to excel other, which things in
deed as such tempatacions, may easily move and break a right godly man.
Then furthermore, Satan him self also is very ready, and our flesh is
exceadyng weak, so that without doubt here needs great carefulnes and
studious head to be taken. But what shall the preacher of Gods truth do here?
Forsooth thus. He may not have to great love unto the courtly dainty fare, nor
to much acquaint himself with those which in the court do seek none other
thing but voluptuous pleasures, honor, port, and in such things have their
heaven, but he ought diligently to remember his office, and give all his care
and study, well to rule with the sword of God, and continually to whet that
upon them. Doubtless the manner of courtiers is such, that for a time you
shall be well-beloved and accepted, and thou shall have given the sweet words
enough, especially if thou seldom talk of the truth and can well lift a great
chalice, and be a fair Masser: But if thou wylt play ye true preacher, and
tell every man his vice and sin (as in deed it shall be thy duty) surely
thou shalt sone perceive, whether moo Iosephes and Danyels dwell in the court,
or else Herodes and Aman. And to say the truth, Herod could very well abide
Ihon Baptist, Ihon Baptyst paid for his favor in Herodes court. Mar. 6 Mat. 11
and gladly heard he him. But when Ihon rebuked him for the adultry, by and by
all his favor was lost, and Ihon was feign to pay no less then his head for
ye great favor he had in the court. Finally, In kings and princes courts,
thou shalt find very few Daniels, but as Christ said, such as are clothed
in fine soft sylkes, so that thou shall have great need, to be very ware and
wise, if thou will dwell and be conversant among courtiers.

The fourth sermon on the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ihon. xviii.
THen led they Jesus from Cayphas into the hall of judgment. It was in the
morning, and they them selves went not into the judgment hall, lest they
should be defiled, but that they might eat the passover. Pylate then went out
unto them, and said: what accusacio^s bring you against this man? They
answered and said unto him: If he were not an evil doer, we would not have
delivered him unto thee. Then said Pylate unto them, take ye him, and judge him
after your own law. The Jews therefore said unto him: it is not lawful for us
to put any manne to death. That the words of Jesus might be fulfilled Ma. 20
which he spoke, signifiyng what death he should dye.

Ma. 26
Then Pylate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him: Art thou the king of the Jews? Mar. 15 Luc. 23.
Jesus answered: Say thou that of thy self, or has any other told it thee
of me? Pylate answered: Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and hye priests have
delivered the unto me. What have thou done? Jesus answered: My kingdom is not
of this world, if my kingdom were of this world, then would my ministers
surely fight, that I should not be delivered to ye Jews, but now is my
kingdom not from hence. Pylate therefore said unto him: Art thou a king the^?
Jesus answered: Thou say that I am a king. Ihon. 6
For this cause was I borne, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth. And all that are of ye truth hear my
voice. Pilate said unto him: What thing is truth? And when he had said this, he
went out again unto the Jews, and says unto them: Ma. 27 Mar. 15 Luc. 23.
I find in him no cause at all. Ye have a custom, that I should deliver you
one lose at Easter. will ye that I lose unto you the king of the Jews? Then
cried they all again, saying: Act. 3.
Not him, but Barrabas. The Same Barrabas was a murderer

THE EXPOSITION.
AS before the Evangelist has plainly described the hypocrisy of the Bishops
and Phariseis, in that they (as men zealous for the law) took Christ and bound
him, and carried him to and fro, from post to pyller, now hither, now thither,
even so now in this part of the gospel, is set out the hypocrisy of all the
people: so that it is true that the prophet Oseas says: that as the people is,
Ose. 4.
such are ye priests. For in yt they led unto their law hall, Christ that
innocent lamb of God, and there to deliver him to the slaughter, they have no
conscience nor grudge at this: but rather they are persuaded, that they do God
high service. The hipocrisye of the people.
Furthermore they think them selves sufficiently cleansed and pure, if they
take heed to this only, that they go not into the law hall.

What is this, Mat. 23
but to strain out a gnat, and swalow or devour a Camel: to make clean the
outward part of the cup and platter, but to leave it within full of rauin
and intemperancye? To this also pertains it yt they say unto Pylate: It is
not leful for us to sley any man. I beseech ye, durst not they murder a man,
yt in their hearts had adjudged Christ to death? You see now in this, what is
the nature of Hypocrisy. Hypocrisy.
Truly this, with outward works to bear a beutyful show, willing outwardly
to be reputed good and honest, rather then to be so in deed: contemnyng all
other, dispisyng and condemnyng them, in comparison to them selves. And
especially hypocrisy is ragyng wod, and in a fury against such as condemn
her outward works and reiecte her as an enemy unto righteousness that is of
faith.

Now then begins she to be horn wodde and can not contain her wrath, but
rather would (if she had power so to do) murder all men, and commit them to
tormentors to be hewn in pieces, then she would suffer one jot of her
outward holiness and honestye to be defaced. Ioh. 16
And of this comes it, that Christ said himself: that when such should
murder christians, they should think that they did high service to God.
Wherefore, whosoever will be a true christian, he must needs leave all hypocrisy,
and only study how to abtain the rightousnes of faith. For faith gladly is
occupied in inward and spiritual things and forces not greatly for outward
things.

Furthermore, it more gladly suffers patiently all damage and iniurye, then
to do any to other. But how do the Jews here? Forsooth they will not enter into
the Consistorye, but this they would, A pure heart makes a pure and good
work: an defiled heart makes an uncle ^n and evil work.
ye and that with all their hearts, that Christ were murdered, and hanged
upon the cross. Neither is there any that one whit is moved with mercy or
pitye toward Christ, but they al at ones with a loud voice cry: Crucify him,
Crucify him. They all are vnpure in heart, therefore must it needs be vnpure
all that ever they do. Wherefore is it right yt the Jews receive such reward.
Contrarily, for as much as al christians ar pure in heart, al things also that
they do, are pure and clean. And doubtless this benefit obtain we by ye faith,
which is in Christ Jesus our lord.

Secondarily, The ki^gdome of Christ.
we have in this talkyng of Pylat with Christ a notable sentence, and worthy
to be kept in memory, of the kingdom of Christ, what form it must have in
this world, and what state it shall have in the world to come. For Pylat
scornfully aposeth Christ in this manner: Art thou that king of the Jews?
Even as scornefullye he asked him: What is truth? And now to this question
Christ gives a noble answer, not for Pilates sake, which in deed not so
much as desired to be partener of this kingedome, but for our sake, that we
might know how to prepare our selves well to this kyngedome, and ryghtlye to
think, and teach of it. For suerly every man can not judge rightlye of this
kingdom, for as much as in it all things are done contrary to our judgment.
The ki^gdome of Christ is hyd under the cross.
And I pray you, how should we have any belief, or certain knowledge of this
kingdom, except God would give us his spirit? For doubteles this kyngedome is
hid with a cross in this world, and lyethe secret under it. And the lord
of this kingdom was as a malefactor between two murderers nailed to ye cross.
I assure you Pilate him self believed not, that Christ had any kingdom,
although he heard that laid to Christ's charge. Nor the Jews them selves
believed it, that he had a kingdom, although in very deed, at a certain time
they would violently have taken him, and have made him their king, as S. John
writes in his gospel, Ioh. 6.
saying: But Jesus when he knew yt they would come and by strength take him,
and make him king, he fled again into the mountain him self alone. etc.

Note what is the kingdom of God.
Wherefore, it is very convenient for a christian man, diligently to considre
and note what is here said, that he may perceive and understand it. My kingdom
(says Christ) is not of this world. If it be not of this world, what kingdom
is it the^, and in what things consists it? To. 14.
Blessed S. Paul shall answer this. The ki^gdom of god (says he) is not meat
and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in the holy ghost. Suerly he that
with these things serves god is accepted unto god, and aloweable before men.
Thou hear in this place, that the kingdom of Christ is nothing else, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy ghost. But from whence comes this
righteousness? Romans 3.
Of faith, as the scripture says: To him that believes, his faith is imputed
for ryghteousnes. But now whereof comes faith? Of the word. (as S. Paul
says) Faith comes of hearing, Romans 10
and hearing, by the word of god. Furthermore, where the word is, there is
also faith: and where faith is, there is ryhhteousnes, and where ryghteousnes
is, there is peace in conscience, and where peace in consciences is, there is
spiritual joy. Wherefore, where righteousness, peace and joy is, there is also
the kingdom of God, as the Apostle says, and we also have alleged it before.
Of this now it follows, yt the kingdom of Christ stands not in outward
things, in outward power and administracion of cyuil things, nor in any
pomp or any proud port, but in the word of God, in spirit and faith, like
as Christ said in another place: Luc. 17.
The kingdom of God is wtin you. Yet notwithsta^di^g, it is so covered with ye
cross, that it can be seen or known of no man, but of him, to whom it is
given of God to se it.

Thyrdly, The blindness of Judges that order matters for friendship or favor.
here is set forth the example of a wicked Judge in Pylate. For he, although he
well considered ye innocence of Christ, and was well ascertained that he had
not deserved ye death, as he himself also confessed: yet for the friendship and
favor of the Jews only, he delivered Jesus to ye ministers to be scourged, to
be crouned with thorns, to be spyt upon and stryken. Besides all this (was it
not a great blyndnes) he was scourged and most vyllainously entreated.
Furthermore, he brought him forth and said: Behold, I bring him forth to you,
yt you may know that I have found in him no cause worthy death. If you find no
cause in him worthy of death, I pray the Pylate, why dyddest you deliver him to
the Jews to be scourged, and suffer ye soldiers and servants to use so
great tyranny and evil against him? Or wherefore say thou afterward: Take
him you, and crucify him according to your law, as for me I find no cause in
him? Is this ye offce of a Judge to deliver an innocent co^uict by no witness,
into ye hands of his enemies? Even thus surely it comes to pass, when men
will be Judges and retain the favor of men, as it chaunsed here unto
Pylate. But what says God in this matter? Forsooth thus: In way of judgment
be not thou an acceptor of persons. Deu. 1.
that is: In judgment thou shall do to a stranger and unknown, as to thy
friend and acquayntaunce. Deal with the poor as with the rich. And briefly,
be to one man, as to another, so that no man may have just occasion to
complain either of violence, tyranny, affection or favor, parcialitee or
injustice. But this does not Pylate here regard, but lest he should lose
Cesars favor, he willyngly does that thing for ye Jews pleasure, that he was
very well ascertayned to be unjust and untrue. For why, with his own mouth he
pronounces, that he found no cause in Christ worthy death, and yet presumes
he to do this horrible fact to condemn Christ, and to adiudge him to
death. Now let us not think, but that even in our time like iniquitee
may be found, Pylate sometime iudgethe in our times.
yea daily like ensamples are done before our eyes, if men will at the least
open their eyes and look upon them. For where Christ our Lord is, and
reigns by his word, spirit and Gospel, there must it needs be also,
that the poor Christians suffer all tyranny of the enemies of the Gospel, yea
though their behauour be such, that they offend and hurt no man. Furthermore
it is impossible, but such as be adversaries of the truth, shall together
conspire against it, yea though they before were most utter enemies, as in this
place we se Pylate and Herod do. Even so in our time, we see them that before
were mortal enemies, and at dissencion with in them selves, now they become hye
lovers and friends, and agree in one to persecute the gospel, and to murder
innocents. But be thou of a good comfort, thou I say, that have received the
truth and love it. We have this Christ, which rose from death ye third day,
and overcame all his enemies and adversaries, and furthermore has received al
power in heaven and earth. This Christ, if we continue steadfast in faith unto
the end, will take our part, stand on our side and save us, so that we shall
never be separate from him.

Fourthly, The truth is euerie-s sted out of countenance.
Pylate again skornfully asks Christ saying: What is truth? taking occasion
to ask that question, because he heard Christ say: I came into ye world for
this intent, that I might bear witness unto the truth. And as in this place
we learn, that ye truth and gospel shall ever by this world be mocked, despised
and iested out of countenance, and that man's reason, nor any wit of man can by
it self take or apprehe^d it, so also must we know what Christ in this place
calls the truth. Truth.
Neither may we take this diffinicion of the truth out of our own brain, but
of the gospel of S. Ihon, where Christ himself teaches and defines it: Thy
sermon or word O father (says he) is ye truth. But what sermon is it, or what
manner word is it? Truly none other sermon or word, but the same word of
his heavenly father, that is to say, ye most holy gospel. For this is such a
word, and of so great power, that it is able to comfort the bruised and
fearful consciences, and gives the holy ghost, which leads us from all
hipocrisy, which most of al things is enemy unto the truth. And of this word
also, speaks the apostle Paul, saying: Romans 1.
The gospel is the power of god, unto health or salvation, to every manne that
believes. It was necessary for Christ to bear witness to those things, as he
says unto Pilate, that is, he must needs in his preachinge set forth this
truth, which truth is none other, but the word of god and the gospel, whereby
is set forth unto all men, the good will of god, toward all those that
receive and profess his gospel: But now if I will know this truth, and by
the knowledge of it, attain unto eternal health, I may not go about it
scornefully as Pylate does in this place, But I must do as the Tessalonians
did in the acts of the apostels. Act. 17.
Those that received the word were very studious, and daily searched the
scriptures, whether it were so as the Apostels preached. For if I do so,
without doubt the understanding and sense of the scripture, shall not be denayed
me, but abundantly given unto me, Psa. 18.
as the scripture testifies: The witness of the lord is faithful, giving
wisdom unto babes. And to this pertains it, that Christ says in John.
Search the scripture, for they bear witness of me.

The fowerth sermon on the passion. Ioh. 19.
THen Pylate took Jesus therefore and scourged him. Ma. 27 Mar. 15
And the soldiers wound a croune of thorns, and put on his head. And they
did on him a purple garmente, and came unto him, and said: Hayl king of the
Jews: and they smote him on the face. Pylate went forth again, and said unto
them: Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know, that I find nofaute
in him.

Then came Jesus forth, wearinge a croune of thorn, and a robe of purple. And
he says unto them: Behold the man. Mat 27 Mar. 15 Luc. 23.


When the high Priests therefore and ministers saw him, they cried, saying:
Crucifye him, Crucifye him. Pilate says unto them: Take ye him, and crucifi
him, for I find no cause in him The Jews answered him: We have Deu. 24
a law, and by our law he ought to dye, because Ioh. 5.
be made himself the son of god. When Pylate heard that saying, he was the
more afraid, and went again into the judgment hall, and says unto Jesus:
Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him none answer. Then said Pylate unto him:
Speak thou not unto me? Know thou not that I have power to crucifye the,
and have power to lose the? Jesus answered. Thou could have no power at all
against me, Sap. 6.
except it were given the from above. Therefore he that delivered me unto
the, has the more sin. Ioh. 3. ^^o. 13.
And from thence forth, sought Pylate means to lose him, but the Jews cried,
saying: If thou let him go, thou art not Cesares friend. For Ma. 17 Mar. 15
Luc. 23. Actu. 17.
whosoever makes him self a king, is against Caesar.

When Pylate heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down to
give sentence, in a place that is called the Pauemente, but in the Hebrew tongue
Gabbatha. It was the preparyng day of the easter, about the syxte hour. And he
says unto the Jews: Behold your king. They cried: Away with him, away with
him, crucify him. Pylate says unto them: Shall I crucify your king? The
high priests answered: We have no king but Caesar. Mat 17 Mar. 15 Luc. 23.
Heb. 13.
Then delivered he him unto them, to be crucified.

And they took Jesus, and led him away. And he bare his cross, Mat 17
Mar. 15 Luc. 23. Heb. 13.
and went forth into a place, which is called the place of dead men's
sculles, but in Hebrew, Golgatha, where they crucified him, and two other with
him, one on either side, And Jesus in the myddest. Ma. 17 Mar. 15 Luc. 23
Pylat wrote a title and put it on the cross. The writing was: Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews. This title red many of the Jews, for ye place where
Jesus was crucified was nighe to the city. And it was written in Hebrew,
Greek and Latin. Then said the high priests of the Jews to Pylate: Write
not king of the Jews, but that he said: I am king of the Jews. Pylate
answered: What I have written, that have I written.

Then the sowldiers, Ma, 17 Mar. 15
when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to
every sowdier a part, and also his coat. The coat was without seame, wrought
upon throughout. They said therefore among themselves: Let us not divide it, but
cast lottes for it, who shall have it. That ye scripture might be fulfilled,
saying: Psa. 22.
They parted my raiment among them, and for my coat did they cast lottes. And
the soldiers did such things in deed.

There stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister, Mary
the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen. When Jesus therefore saw his mother,
and the disciple standing Ioh. 13.
who^ he loved, he says unto his mother: Woman, behold thy son. Then said
he to the disciple: Behold thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took
her for his own.

After these things, Jesus knowing that all things were now performed, that
Psa. 6 9
the scripture might be fulfilled, he says: I thyrst. So there stood a vessel
by, full of vinegar. Mat 27 Mar. 15
Therefore they filled a Sponge with vyneger, wound it about with Isope, and put
it to his mouth. As Soon as Jesus then received of the vinegar, he said: Iho. 17
It is finished, and bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this place again we see both the hypocrisy of Pylate, and also the malice
of the Jews. For I pray you, what more grievous thing could they do to Jesus,
then to scourge him with whyppes, and croune him with thorns, because he named
him self king of the Jews? Well, it was well done. For doubtless such
hypocrysy Hypocrisy.
and blyndnes must needs be both wonderful, and horrible. Pylate himself
confessed that he found no cause worthy death in him: and that not ones, but
twyse or thryse. The Jews also before this time, had seen his miracles, had
heard his preaching, and esteemed him as an excellent Prophet That
notwithstanding, here they gather together and one counsels with another,
yea, and one gives earnest healpe to another, that at the last they may
murder Christ. Pylate byddeth the Jews take and crucify him. And the Jews
affirm that he must needs suffer. Yet to have some cloak to cover with
their envy and malice, wherein they were altogether fyered against Christ,
they alleadg the cause, Because (say they) he has made him self the son
of god. What is this, but outwardely to pretend an honest cloak, and inwardely
and in the heart, to be excedyng thyrstye of innocent blood? Such men David
calls bludy men.
But mark whereunto Pilate is come with his blindenes. Because Christ
answers not Pylate after his mind and fantasy, he contemns Christ and
presumes thus to boast and say: Know not thou, that I have power to
crucify the, and I have power to acquit the? This proud brag could not
Christ abide, and therefore he answered him thus: Thou cowldest have no power
against me, except it were given the from above. A comfortable sentence
This sentence if it be well considered and looked upon, and deeply graven in ye
heart, is a very comfortable sentence, especially to those that have received
the gospel, and for the gospels sake, daily look for blows.

For whose quarrel is this? The gospel is Gods quarrel
Gods quarrel or ours? If it be gods quarrel, tell me I pray you, is
not he able to defend it? Yes truly he is able enough. For he has
mightily showed him self able in Pharao, in all Egipte, in Herod, and all
tyrauntes, when they did the uttermost of their tyranny. But is he also ready
to defend this quarrel? Yea doubteles. Genesis 12
For thus he says to Abraham I will bliss those that bliss the, and I will
curse those that curse the. Suerly he that promised this to Abraham, will not
forsake us at our necessity, if so be that we suffer for his names sake, yea,
all our adversaries can not so much as hurt our little finger, except it be the
will of God which is in heaven, as Christ in this place answered Pylate.
Therefore if at any time thou by the good will of God fall into temptacion,
know thou, that God is faithful, which will not suffer the to be tempted, 1.
Co. 10
more then yt can bear, but he will with the temptacion a profit.

Note this well Our sins daily croune Christ with thorns
And diligently note this, firyng it depely in thy memory, that our sins
scourged Christ, and set ye croune of thorn upon his head: neither was this
only ones done, but yet it is daily done by us when we will be called
christians, and yet we do no this will, of who^ we bear that most holy and
glorious name.

Seco^darily note, that ye Jews will have Caesar for their Lord, An horrible
thing to refuse Christ.
but they will not acknowledge Christ to be their king. For they cry: away with
him, away with him. Now is not this most ingratitude before God, yt when he
has sent to them his only begotten son, a savior, who^ they so many years
had looked and trusted for, now with such cruelty to cast him from them? They
might doubtless have received Christ, and been delivered from sin, death,
devil and hell, but they will rather refuse Christ, and serve a foreign lord,
and perish both body and soul. And for this purpose, they more wylli^gly
desired to let go a notable murderer Barraba^, and to pardon him, because of
their feastful days custom, then Christ. To this pertains also yt they said
to Pylate. Write not king of the Jews, but that he said, I am king of the
Jews. What is this but to refuse Christ, and to cast him from them? But what
is wont to follow such contempt? Truly this. Note what follows contempt of ye
word of God. Mat. 8. Romans 11
That the children of the kingdom be thrown out, and the poor Gentyles be
received into their place, as S. Paul also says. By their fall, health
chaunsed unto the Ge^tyles, that he might provoke them to be zealous after them.
For if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the minishyng of them
the riches of the heathen, how much more should it be so, if they all
believed? yet it is done for them that shall be received, that their nombre may
be fulfilled. For in the Acts of the Apostles saint Paul says, that the
Gospel and word of God, must first be preached unto the Jews: Act. 13
but because they thurst it from them, and judged them selves unworthy eternal
life, we must turn unto the heathen. And this punishment is a plage of the
soul. And this blyndnes have the Jews dearly bought, because they persecuted
with such hatred, and such stubburnes their Messiah and king promised unto
them, and so mocked and skorned him, and nailed him unto a cross. Besides
this, they escaped not also corporal punishment. Corporal punishment
For they lost their bodies, honors, all their goods, wife and children, and
were banished from their own country, insomuch that unto this day, there
lives no people under the Sun more wretched, forsaken and despised, and that
for this cause (as I have said) that they would not receive this Christ, for
their king. What think you shall chaunse unto us, if we now in our time,
having the word of God so rychely among us, we read and hear it daily, and
yet so yrke and be werye of it, that neither would we hear it or read it?

Surely we be like the Gergesines. For as they desired Christ to depart unto
some other country out of their coasts, so we had much rather that Christ
should depart into some other strange country, then we would for his words
sake, lose any of our gaynes, honor or riches. Surely God will punish such
unthankfulness in us, except we be turned and do penance, and other wise
dispose our selves toward the word of God. For even so says saint Paul to
the Romans: If God spared not the natural branches, take heed, lest it
come to pass, that he spare not thee.

Thyrdly, considre here and reuolue in mind with what wrath, wodnes and
furour, the Jews drew Christ out of the city, and hanged him upon the cross
and that not at adventure, but of set purpose, between two thieves and
murderers, as the worste and one that had most grievously offended in like
crime with them. When thou co^siderest thy self, and reuoluest this in thy
mind, know thou, that thou must not so much consider the malice of the
Jews, as thine own most grievous sins. God is extreme enemy to sin
And this lesson must you learn in this most despised and villaynous death,
that God is an extreme enemy unto sin. For is he not most highly displeased
with it, and is an utter enemy unto it, when he would receive none other
satisfaction for it, but the death of his only begotten son? Though nothing
else were, yet verily this should overthrow our consciences, that we might
learn to know our sins and viciate nature, and to seek with hearty
intercession, yea with tears, the clemency and mercy of Christ. Our sins
crucified Christ.
For certainly those do far sorer torment Christ, that will be called
christians, and yet consider not why Christ would dye for their sins, then
did the blind Jews that crucified him. For if the Jews had known him (says
S. Paul) they would in no wise have crucified the Lord of glory. 1. Cor. 2
But when do we acknowledge our sins? When do we apprehend ye merit of
Christ by faith? Where is our thankefulnes for those so many and so great
unspeakable benefytes? Yea, we dare pluck this Christ's glory fro^m him,
which he has so dearly bought that it can not be expressed, and we seek new
ways, which we also prescribe unto righteousness and eternal health,
Iusticiaries.
as al iusticiariers do, which are persuaded in conscience, that they may by
their own righteousness and virtues, worthily deserve no less then heaven it
self, and eternal salvation. But certify, if we by our own works, and our
own powers might obtayn health and eternal life, then it must needs follow,
that Christ suffered such vexacion and grievous pains, yea and offered
himself unto so horrible a death and passion, but vainly for his pleasure and
phantasy, even as S. Paul says: If rightwisenes came by ye law, Gala. 2.
then is Christ dead in vain. Wherefore, if thou wylt be thankeful unto Christ
for his passion and death, consider it well, and knowledge yt thy sins have
given him those wounds in his body, and that for them he suffered that most
painful passion. Then pray unto him, that it will please him to give thee ye
merit of his passion unto thy profit. For if you do this with true faith, then
will he forgive the thy sins, and wash away all thine iniquities, in his
own blood. Of this there is no doubt, for he him self says in ye gospel of
saint Ihon: Ihon. 3
As Moses exalted the serpent in wilderness, so must the son of man be
exalted, that every man that believes in him shall not perish, but shall have
life eternal. And this is confirmed by all places throughout all the scripture,
that spoke of the passion of Christ, as is this sentence of S. Paul to the
Rommaynes: Romans 4
Christ dyed for our sins, and has risen again for our iustificacion. And
without doubt, Note well this sentence.
whosoever suffers this article of the death and passion of Christ, and of
his blessed blood sheding to be taken from him, needs must that man at the
hour of death (when his conscience shall have that great conflict with sin)
despair, yea though he had in one heap gathered together the merits of all
saints that ever were since the beginning of ye world. For in this matter
that pertayneth to remission of sin, iustificacion, and eternal health, it is
not required to work, The Euagelist allege ye scripture
but to believe. Observe also and note diligently, that the Evangelists
describyng the passion of Christ, how the Jews entreated him, they many times
have respect unto the scripture, which showed before ye self same things, the
which scripture they also alege, as in this place, where they show how he was
crucified between ii. thieves: Also howee the soldiers cast lotte for his
garments etc. Neither do they this for any other purpose, but to admonish us
to direct our eyes unto the scriptures, and ever more in matter appertainyng
unto salvation, to waygh them, and direct our judgment, according to the same.

Fourthly, Christ hangyng upon the cross, does excedyngly set forth that his
most hearty love toward us, in this, Christ is careful for his elect
that he commends his most derely beloved mother to the Apostle Ihon, and
again Iho^ unto his mother, that he might be to her as a defender and
comfortable patron, in that her extreme necessite and trouble. For as he now
is careful for his mother and provides for her, even so is he careful and
provides for all that love his name, receive his gospel, and through faith
repose it in their hearts, and so furthermore show it forth of their hearts,
doing the works of it through love. And that we might ascertainly challenge to
our selves such clemency and goodness in Christ, therefore he says in another
place: Who is my mother, Luc. 8.
or who are my brethren? Truly, whosoever does the will of my father that is
in heaven, he is my brother and sister, and mother. Christ's mother.
By these words thou may well perceive that Christ will take thee for his
brother, sister, yea, and for his mother also, and will even so acknowledge thee,
if thou believe in him, and not only will he defend and surely keep thee in
this life, but also he will conserve the into eternal life. Only let this be
thy hearty study to do the will of his father that is in heaven. But what
calls he the will of his father? This is the will of him that has sent me,
Ihon. 6
even the fathers, that every man that sees the son and believes in him,
should have life eternal, and I will again raise him in the last day. In this
place he plainly and evidently says, We must be armed with the scripture
against temptacion.
that he that believes in him, does the will of his father. And truly, it is
very necessary for us, earnestly to considre those examples, that shows what
mind Christ bears unto us. For the time will come, yea, it is all ready at
hand, that these places of scripture shall do us excedyng much good, and
singularly comfort us in all our necessitee and troubles. But if persecucion
find me here unarmed, sure it is, that I shall not continue constant, but
suddenly forgette God, and seek help and comfort at creatures. And what shall
then chance to me? Truly this, that for mine vntha^kefulnes, God will forsake
me, and because I am not armed with his word, therefore will he withdraw his
hand from me, and forsake me, so that I shall fall into destruction, and for ever
perish, both in body and soul.

Fyftly, we see that Christ when he now knew that al things were finished,
and he had tasted the vyneger, and had said: It is ended. He bowed his head and
gave up the spirit, That he cried: I thrust, and by and by vyneger is given him
to drink, Psa. 69
it was done for this cause, that we should believe (seeing that all things done
in this passion agree so well with the scriture) that this man without doubt, is
the same Christ, whom the holy fathers have so long time before waited for.
And that before he dyed, he cried: It is ended. This is so excellent a word
and so precious, All our salvation in Christ only.
that not only it is be graue^ in our hearts by faith, but also be in all
places written, even with letters of gold before our eyes. Will you know why?
Harken. We were by nature the children of wrath and condempnacion, so burdened
in sin and unfaithfulness, that we should perpetually have perished, if we
had not been succored and helped. Therefore only this Jesus Christ our Lord
assisted us with his help and comfort. And because before the heavenly father,
we could find no favor or grace, without oblation and sacrifice, therefore
Christ offered him self upon the cross for us, and reconciled his father with
his own blud, and obtained of him for us, favor and forgiveness, righteousness,
and eternal life. Heb. 11.
as the epistle to the Hebrews, says: With one offering, has he made perfect
for ever, those that are sanctified. I beseech you, what could we more desire,
or what greater benefits may be done unto us? Sin is conquered, death is
conquered, the devil and hell are conquered, so that we may now freely sai: 1
Co. 15.
Death is swalowed into victory. Death where is thy sting? Hell where is thy
victory? But thanks to god, that has given us the victory, by our lord Jesus
Christ. Christ's glory must be given him only
This now is our dueti, that we remember to give to Christ only this his glory
and honor, and to knowledge him for our high Bishop, which offered him self for
us, and so by his passion and death, finished and brought to perfect end, all
our salvation. For if we now give to him this his honor as our duty is, and
steadfastly believe that all this that was done, was done altogether for us and
for our salvation, douteles we shall so have it, that this his merit shall not
be taken as vain or frustrate, but of most greatest strength and efficacy for
us. On the other party, if we will not give unto him this his glory, but rather
will ascribe to our own deserving, merits and works, that thing, which cost
him that so great and inestimable price, that is, the effusion and sheding of
his most precious and holy blood, then truly we make our selves unworthy to
have this passion and inerite of Christ, given unto us: neither are we like
(except we repent) to have any other favor at Christ's judgment, then the
Jews that crucified him. The which thing, the almighty god keep far from
us, for his great mercy and goodness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The syxte sermon on the Passion Ioh. xix.
THe Jews therefore because it was the preparyng day of the Sabbath, that the
bodies should not remain on the cross on the Sabbath day (for the Sabbath
day was an high day) besought Pylate that their legs might ve broken, and
that they might be taken down. Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs
of the first, and of the other which was crucyfyed with him. But when they
came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs,
but one of the sowldiers with a spear, thruste him into the side, and forth
with came therout blood and water.

And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true. And he knows that
he says true. that ye might believe also.

For these things were done, that the scripture might be fulfilled. Exodus 12
Ye shall not break one bone of him. And again another scripture says: Zac. 12
They shall look on him whom they pearsed.

Mat. 26 Mar. 15 Luce. 23
After this, Joseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly
for fear of the Jews) besought Pylat, that he might take down the body of
Jesus. And Pylate gave him license. He came therefore and took the body of
Jesus, and there came also Nicodemus, (which at the beginning came to Jesus by
night) and brought of Myrre and Aloes myngeled together, about an hundredth
pound wayght. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it with linen
clothes with the odoures, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. And in the
place where he was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new
sepulcher, wherein was never manne laid. There laid they Jesus therefore,
because of the preparyng of the Sabbath of the Jews, for the sepulcher was nigh
at hand.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have treated dearly beloved, in these former sermons, very plainly upon
the prisonment or bindyg, scourgyng, spittyng upon, derision or scornyng, and
lastly the very death of our Lord Jesus Christ, and according to these
articles we have diligently put in your memory, that ye very chief and
principal cause why Christ should suffer this, was our sins. Furthermore we
have declared unto you what vtilitee and profit comes by this passion unto
those that by faith apprehend it, acknowledgyng their sins, and being for the
same confounded, for fear in their consciences, that is to say, they obtain
forgeuens of sins, according as blessed S. Peter testifyeth saying: 1. Pet. 3
Christ ones suffered for our sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, and
to bring us to God he was mortified in the flesh, but quickened in the
spitite. And now follows what was done after his death, before he was buried.
The Evangelist writes thus. Then ye Jews because it was the preparyng day,
besought Pylate, that the legs of those that were crucified might be broken,
and that they might be taken down, and Pylate agreed to their peticion, and
permitted it. But was it so done in deed? They broke ye thieves legged, but not
Christ's. And this was done, that the scripture should be fulfilled (as ye
Evangelist allegeth) which says: You shall not break a bone of him. And
again an other scripture said: Zac. 12 The aduersaris ca^ do no more then is
permitted the^. Psa. 21.
They shall see him, whom they have pearsed. But what lessons have we in this
History? First we must here mark and learn, that the adversaries of Christ,
could proceed no further in their malice and furor against him, the^ was
permited them of God. And although Christ before was come into that angwyshe
and necessitye, that he cried: My god, My god, wherefore have thou forsaken me?
yet even then the heavenly father took the care and custodi of him, so that
nothing might chance unto him, but yt which before was comprehended in the
scriptures, and testified of him. And as in this place he took the care for
his son, and so defended him, that his bones were not broken, even so will he
mercifully conserve and keep all that believe, that receive the word of his son
Jesus Christ, and continue in it unto the end, so that nothing may be able to
chance unto them, but only that, which is the good will of god, as we have an
example in David, David.
whom god suffered for a time to be persecuted, yea and banished of Saul: yet
at the last he made him king, and brought him to honor. Also take insample of
Job, Job.
in whom god appointed Satan, both the time, and measure, how far he should
tempt gods servant. Truth it is, the world may take away our lives, if god
will so permit them but the eternal life, which only is obtained by Christ,
that can no man take from us.

We also learn in this place of this history, that seeing the words spoken of
the paschall lamb in the second book of Moses, ar here by the evangelist
applied and referred unto Christ. In this (I say) we learn, Christ is the
true paschall lamb.
that Christ is therefore the true paschal lamb, signified by that lamb in
the old testament and now offered upon the cross for our sins, by cause all
that believe in him shall not perish, nor be ashamed, but shall have life
everlasting. Doubtless this knew S. John, when he said: Ioh. 1.
Behold the lamb of god, which takes away the sins of the world. And
Paul also, called Christ the paschall lamb, saying after this manner: 1
Cor. 5.
Our Paschall Christ, is offered up for us. Therefore let us keep our feast,
not in old leven, nor in leven of malice and wickedness, but in unleavened
bread, that is pureness and truth. True holiness of ye heart.
Now to cleave to this true paschal lamb (whose bones according to the
scripture were not broken) and by faith to be planted in him, brings a far
other holiness then any the Jews had, which sought it in extreme outward
things, that is, it brings holiness of the heart, which consysteth in
spirit, faith and truth.

Secondarily, the Evangelist says: that one of the soldiers opened with a
spear Christ's side, and by and by, there ran forth blood and water. And
furthermore, though he says, he himself saw it, yet brings he again the
scripture, that there might be a more sure testimony out of the prophet
Zacharye, Zach. 12 Apoc. 1.
which says: They shall see into whom they thrust their spear. Now is this a
sure testimony full of comfort, especially unto us, and takes away al doubts
from our hearts, as if infidelity should think. Christ is not our redemer, he
is not very god. etc. These blasphemers (I say) are put away, for why, we see
that all thing that is done here in the passion of Christ is consonant and
agreeable with the scripture. And what signifies it, ye there stremeth out
blood and water, The blood of Christ signifies the remission of sins.
from the side of Christ? By ye blud Christ would show unto us, that remission
and forgiveness of sins, should evermore continue in his Church, as without doubt
it was obtained through ye same his most precious blud. But for who^ was it
obtained? Suerly for those, that come to it by knowledgi^g of their sins, and
by faith. But to the unbeliever this most precious treasure may not be
propounded, nor the thing that is holy, Mat. 7
may not be cast before him, but only must it be communicate to those, that
despair of their own works and strengthes, and that knowledge, that they need
the help and comfort of Christ.

We believe rem ssion of sins.
Therefore also we confess in our Creed, that there is forgiveness of sins, which
we must needs believe. Now if we obtain remission of sins by ye sheding of the
blud of Christ, as the blud flowing from his side testifyeth, where is then the
bragging of our works? where ar our merits? They are shut out and excluded by
the death and passion of Christ, Note how works are concluded
not that good works ought not to be done, but yt they may not be joined with
justification, which only comes by faith. We must in this behalf give
Christ his own honor wholly and perfectly, and apprehend his merit by faith,
and so shall it come to pass, that neither sin, nor death, nor dyuel nor hell
shall hurt the. And those good works ye faith does, as in deed it ought to do
good works, take them as fruits of faith, whereby the faith and sure trust of
our hearts toward god is declared.

In like manner, the water The water.
that flowed from Christ's side declares, that Christ after his resurreccion,
would send his holy spirit, and that water of life, where with it is nedeful
that the hearts of all the elect be purifyed. And of this water did all the
Prophets prophecye, especially Esaias, when he said: Esa 44
I will power water upon the thyrsty, and streams upon the dry ground. I will
power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessyng upon thy branch, and they
shall spryng, burgenyng among the herbs, as the salowes that grew by the side
of the river. According to this, Christ also cries in the gospel of S. Ihon:
Who so thursteth, let him come to me and drink: Ioh. 7.
He that believes on me, as ye scripture says, stremes of water of life shall
flow out from his belly. And the Evangelist himself expounds this, showing
yt it is meant of the holy ghost, for he says: This spoke Jesus of ye spirit
which those yt believe in him, should receive. Christ loves us.
He then that has by theffusion of his most precious blood, obtained for us
remission of all our sins, and delivered us from eternal death, and
reconciled us into the favor of god his father, and that without any of our
merits or deseruinges, and also has promised to se^d his holy ghost, which
may leede our hearts into the knowledge and faith of God, think you he does
not very heartely love us, and would our welfare? Now seeing yt he thus
heartely wylleth our welfare, why should we not believe in him? why should we
not acknowledge this so great love? Yet are there me^ found (the more pity it
is) that ascribe more to their own merits, then to Christ, and therefore they
cannot be tha^keful, who^ doubtless at that day, Christ shall therefore punish,
according to their own deservings.

Thirdly, we have here described, who they were that buried Christ, and with
what reverence his dead body was brought unto the earth. Some man perchance
would marvel, that Joseph and Nicodemus now dare ask of Pylate the dead
body of Jesus, which yet when Jesus lived, they durst not come at him, The
death of Christ beginning to conquer
scant by night. But now the fruits and vtility of Christ's passion, somewhat
opens it self, she winge what should ensue the passion and death of Christ,
when a little and a little, it comech to men's knowledge, both what manner a man
Christ is, and also how innocently and undeservedly he was persecuted by the
Jews, and condemned unto the cross. And these two doubtless came after the
true knowledge of god and his son Jesus Christ, which now so manifestly do
this humanity unto Christ, contemned and crucified, having no respect that
he was so hated of the Jews.

For that they here do, it comes of an imperfecte faith, for they were yet far
from the perfection that Paul speaks of, Romans 1
saying: I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, for it is the power of god
unto salvation, to every man that believes. But that they exhibited to Christ
such reverence and honor, that they take him down from the cross, and
enbalmed him with Myrre and Aloe, and with such spice they wind up his body,
and lay it gloriously in the sepulture, it is an humane and gentle affection,
done according to the custom of the Jews.

The estimation of the world of Christ's death and sepulcher. Deu. 21
And here note, how the death and sepulture of Christ is esteemed before the
world, both his death and burial are ignominious and shameful. For it is
written in the law: He is accursed that ha^geth upon a tree: Besides this, the
blind Jews had none other opinion of Christ, neither by his life nor in his
death, as it is evident unto this day.

But before God, this death and buryall is honest and precious, as also it is
esteemed among all that believe, which know assuredly, that by that despised
death, the beleuers are delivered from sin, death, devil and hell. Does not S.
Paul say often time: 1. Cor. 2
I have known no man but Christ, and even the same that was crucified? And
this is an undoubted truth, Note this earnestly gentle reader.
take away this contemptible death and buryal of Christ, and you shall
perceive, that all men must be compelled to despair and to fall into the
danger of the devil. On the other part, set before your eyes the passion,
death and buryal of Christ, apprehendyng them by true faith, as most precious
jewels and divine treasures, done for thee, and thou shall find thy conscience
able to resyst against all the assaults of Satan, and also of sin. And as
Joseph and Nycodemus, by faith showed this humanitee unto Christ, so endeavor
thy self by faith, that unto sin thou may be dead and buried with Christ,
Romans 6.
and after again rise through faith with him. For surely this pleases Christ,
and is necessary, and very profitable unto thy salvation.

Fourthly, we see how contemtuously Pylate delyuereth Christ to be buried,
forsyng not for him, nothing regardyng that he should rise again the third
day. The sentence of Infidels
In this mind are all the enemies of the gospel and truth of God. When they
have slain ye ministers of the word, then they think all thing very well and
safe, and all whyst, as they would have it. Exo. 1.2.3.
Even so did Pharao, with intolerable burdens oppress the children of
Israel, thynkyng by that means to stop the ordinance of God, that the
Israelites should not so much grow and increase: but the more they were
oppressed, so much more they grew and multiplied, and at the last by his
own crueltee, he was his own destruction.

Even so chaunsed it to Pylate and the Jews, which think all sure, now yt
they have slain Christ, whose preaching so much moves the people: But yet
even then, brust forth that fire, whereof Christ said: Luc. 12.
I am come to send fire into the earth. This fire was kyndled and brent, when
after the resurrection and ascencion of Christ, he sent his Apostles into all
the whole world, and commanded them to preach penance in his name, and
remission of sins to all creatures. Money makes men say Christ is not risen.
And though the Jews gave ye soldiers money, to say that Christ was not risen
again, but his disciples had taken him away out of the grave, yet that
notwithstanding, Christ rose again, and appeared unto his Apostles, declaryng
by many miracles, that he had verily risen, and that unto him, as unto the king
and most highest Lord, was delivered al power in heaven and in earth. Neither
Herod, Pylate and all the Jews could then let this, Christ will be king,
and the devil swear nay.
nor yet afterward were the Romayne Emperors able to que^che it, no nor at
this perylous time can the enemies of ye truth prevail, but Christ will
continue eternal Lord and king, yea maugre their berdes, that go about to
suppress the truth. They think that if they may murder the chief authors
and capitaynes, and make away with them, then shall their power and
magnificence floryshe and have no hynderance nor hurt. Luc. 1.
But Christ that exalts the lowly, and throws down the mighty from their
seat, knows when and how to overthrow those Nembrothes and their
ymaginacions, that will they nyll they, they shall be feign to hear the truth.
And even in our time, god has so set forth the strength of his power, that by
his grace, we have the sincere truth and pure gospel, spite of all the ungodly
adversaries, though they would burst for pain. I beseech God grant, that we
may acknowledge the same his truth, and apprehend and take hold upon the same,
and unto the end cleave fast unto this contempned Christ crucified, so that
after this life, we may come unto his glory and eternal life, by the merytes of
the same our only savior, mediator and advocate, Jesus Christ, to who^ with the
father and the holy ghost, be al honor, laud and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The gospel on Easter Monday. Luc. xxiiii.
ANd behold, two of them went that same day to a town called Emaus, which was
from Jerusalem about three score forlonges, and they talked together of all
these things yt had happened. And it chaunsed the while they communed together
and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. But their eyes
were holden that they should not know him. And he said unto them: What manner
of communicacions are those that ye have one to another, as ye walk and are
sad? And the one of them (whose name was Cleophas) answered and said to him:
Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem and have not known the things which
have chaunsed there in these days? He said unto them: What things. And they
said unto him: Of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet, mighty in deed and
word before God, and all the people: and how the hye priests and our rulers
delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. But we
trusted that it had been he, which should have redeemed Israel. And as touching
all these things, to day is even the third day, that this were done. Luc. 24
Ioh. 20.
Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished which came carely
unto the sepulcher and found not his body, and came saying, that they had seen
a vision of Angels, which said that he was alive. And certain of them which
were with us, went to the sepulcher, and found it even as the women had said,
but him they saw not.

And he said unto them: O fools and slow of heart to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken. Esai. 53 Mat 25
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
And he began at Moses, and all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them all
scriptures which were writ^en of him, and they drew nigh unto the roune,
which they went unto. And he made as thought he would have gone further. And
they Genesis 19 Luc. 14
constrained him, saying: Abide with us, for it draws toward night, and the
day is far passed. And he went in to tarry with them.

Ma. 15
And it came to pass, as he far at meat with them he took bread, and
blyssed it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they
knew him: and he vanished out of their sight. And they said between
theimselues: Did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by
the way, and opened to us the scriptures? And they arose in the same hour, and
returned again to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them
that werwith them, saying: The Lord is risen in deed, and has appeared to
Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew
him in breakyng of bread.

THE EXPOSITION.
First of all dearly beloved, let us consider the vnbeleiefe and infirmitee of
these two disciples, that went from Jerusalem to Emaus. For as it chaunsed to
these, even so chaunsed it to diverse other, as we may read in this history of
ye resurrection of Christ. Neither was it possible, that this article of
Christ's resurrection should be perceived or believed, without great difficultee:
yea, and that they might apprehend it, Christ serves our infirmitee.
Christ was in a manner compelled to serve them in words, deeds, miracles and
the angels. Furthermore in showing his wounds, and yet for all this very
hardely could they be persuaded in this article of ye resurrection. So perverse
is the flesh, and so full of evil, if it be not by the spirit of God illuminate
and brought to the knowledge of God. Notwithstanding there remained yet in these
two, certain small sparks of love toward Christ, so that they must needs
talk of Christ, and the one open his grief unto the other. And when they thus
do, Christ gladly comes unto them, and as a stranger iournyeth with them,
saluteth them, and asks the cause of their comunicacion and reasonyng, and
why they were so sorrowful. Wherein we have a lesson, that Christ has a
meruaylous delight in devout, godly and christian communyng or talkyng,
Christian talking. Mat. 18
ye be his own doctrine he allows it and shows it (saying whersoeuer it,
are come together in my name, there will I be the third) thus calling us from
vain and filthy uncomely words and talkyng. It is to be wyshed, that this
lesson were diligently inculcate in men's memory. For truly men are to
nothing so much enclyned, as unto evil talkyng, detraction and filthye
communicacion: so that a man may find more honesty and nurture in the
talkyng of ye heathen and unchristened, then among those that bost them selves
of Christ's name, nothing co^sideryng nor regardyng, Mat. 12
that of every idle word we must give account in the day of judgment: Ephe.
4
nor yet ponderyng, that S. Paul so earnestly forbad christians, that in any
wise no fylthy word should be herd out of their mouth. Wherefore, if thou will
have Christ present at thy communication and talkyng, do as these two disciples
did. Talk of those things that pertayne to the honor of God, and thine own
salvation. Let thy will and study be ever in the law of God, and so shall
Christ not be far from thee. But if in thy talkyng thou forget God, then
look not for God, but for the devil to be present with thee.

Secondarily, we have here also what Christ did when he was come into the
company of these two disciples. And first he makes himself so, as though he
knew nothing, nor had heard what was done in Jerusalem in those days. And
this does he to draw forth their incredulitee, and to rebuke them for it,
and to have occasion to instruct them, as he did after ward. And they by and
by plainly declared their minds, so talkyng of Christ, that a man may easily
perceive, that as concerning him, his word and promises, though they had not
utterly, yet for the most part, they were fallen into despair. Besides this,
though they acknowleged him to be a Prophet, mighty in words and deeds
before God, yet now they thought their hope frustrate, Christ will not cast us
away for our imperfectness. Romans 7
that he should redeem Israel. But what does Christ? Christ our Lord
knows very well and perfectly what is our infirmitee and incredulitee,
neither is he ignorant that no good thing is in our flesh. Wherefore, although
we be imperfect in faith, yet will not he cast us away, but rebuke and
teach us, as he does here the disciples, teaching us by his own ensample, to
do likewise. And first he corrects us, and says: O fools and hard
hearted, to believe in all things that ye Prophets have spoken. Must not
Christ suffer these things, and so enter into his glory? It is neither
unright nor cruelty, that he here calls his disciples foles, which yet he
forbad Matthew.v. Mat. 5.
For that he here does, he does it of a godly zeal and fatherly love, and so
also may any manne do likewise, especially when their heart nor mind be none
otherwise affecte, then was Christ toward his disciples.

Then began he at Moses and all the prophets, and interpreted to them in
all their writings, such places as were written of him. It is not comely to
rebuke only, and not to comfort again. Furthermore he that shall rebuke
another man, ought not only to recite to his rebuke, what he had done
unrightfully, but he must also show what he has done honestly, virtuously,
and also profitably: Eue^ so does Christ here. First he rebukes their
incredulitee or unfaithfulness. Then forasmuch as faith comes of hearing of
the word, he proves and allows their saying out of the divine scriptures,
that Christ must suffer. And walkyng with them he earnestly continues his
sermon with such majesty and power, that ye disciples after were compelled to
knowledge it and say: Did not our heart burn in us, when he talked with us in
the way, and opened to us the scriptures? O blessed is that man, who^ Christ
thus draws by his word, and which is by Christ's spirit instruct into the
true knowledge of God.

Thyrdly, the Evangelist describes after what manner Christ openly showed
himself to these his disciples, and opened their eyes, saying: And they
drewenye unto the town whether they went, and he made as though he would go
further. And they compelled him and said: Tarry with us, for it draws toward
night, and the day it far passed. And he tarried with them. And it came to pass
when he sat at the table with them, he took bread, gave thanks, brake it, and
gave it them. Then were their eyes opened, and they knew him. And he vanished
out of their sight.

They knew that it was Christ's accustomed manner, to break the bread, and
especially to give thanks. Yet should they not have known him by these
signs, if he had not opened their eyes, which in deed was done, when
Christ gave thanks and brake the bread.

Here must we first learn, We must be thankful to God. 1 Cor. 4
to give thanks ever to god, for all his benefits given to us, both corporal
and spiritual. For I pray you, what haste thou, but thou receyuedst it of
god? Now if god has given it to the, of mere grace, without any merit of
thine, I beseech the, why will thou not ever give him thanks for it? Verily
Saynct Paul (in the first epistle to Timothe in the fourth chap. where he
teaches of the liberty of meats and drinks) wills that christians should
receive all things with thanks gyuynge. 1 Timothy 4
and even so exhorts he us to do in the epistle to the Thessalonians.
Secondly also note, 1 Tes. 5 Christ opens the eyes
that Christ opened his disciples eyes, and brouhht them into the knoweledge
of himself. For even as these disciples could not come to such knowledge of
them selves, till their eyes were opened, no more can we believe as we ought
to believe, tell Christ lyghten our eyes, and bring us unto the true faith,
by his word, and holy spirit.

Fourthly, this gospel shows, Faith must be openly confessed.
that when through Christ's word and spirit our eyes ar opened to know God,
then that our faith shall not be vain in us, and yt we keep not this joy, only
to our selves, but yt we shall co^municat it unto many, and freely confess our
joy, even as S. Paul says: Romans 10
With the heart we believe unto righteousness and with the mouth we confess
the same believe unto health. And David says: I believed, and therefore I spoke.
Psa. 115
The preaching of the passion, and resurrection of Christ, is no such
treasure, that when a man has found it, he should hyde it, and keep it secret
from other, let no man think so, but it would be distributed and imparted
to many other, Mat. 10
like as Christ said: That I have spoken to you in your ear secretly, declare
it openly, even in the houses top. And so does the disciples here. For
as soon as they had seen and known Christ, they by and by arise and returned
unto Jerusalem, where they found the xi. gatheeed, and these that were with
them, to whom they declared what was done in the way, and how they knew the
Lord by breakyng the bread. And so ought every christian man to do, when he
knows Christ, and by his word and spirit is come unto the faith, he should
give all men part of that treasure, and to endeavor himself, that all men may
come to that knowledge and righteousness of faith, that is in Jesus Christ our
Lord, To whom with the father and the holy ghost be all honor and glory for
ever and ever. Amen.

The gospel on Easter Tuesday. Luke.24.
AS they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in Ioh. 20
the mids of them, and says unto them: Peace be unto you (it is I, fear
not.) But they were abashed and afraid, and supposed that they had seen a
spirit. And he said unto them: Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise
in your hearts? Behold my hands and my fete, that it is even I my self,
Handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have.
And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. And while
they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them: Ioh. 21.
Have ye here any meat? And they offered him a piece of a broyled fyshe, and
of an honey comb. And he took it and did eat before them.

And he said unto them: Mat. 16
These are the words I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all
must needs be fulfilled, which were written of me, in the law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. Actu. 17
Then opened he their wits, that they might understand the scriptures, and
said unto them: Thus is it written, and thus it behooved Christ to suffer, and
to rise again from death the third day, and that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name among all nations.

THE EXPOSITION.
Our savior Christ, to the intent that this article of his resurrection, might
be perfectly inculcate and beaten into the hertes of his disciples, shows
himself openly unto them. And this manifestacion and appearinge was not done
as the other were before, only to twain or three disciples, but it was showed
before them all, Thomas excepted, which at this time was absent, and it was
done immediatelye as they were come from Emaus, declaring what they had seen,
to the other Apostels, which answered them saying, that Christ is risen in
deed, and has appeared to Symo^. And as they were thus talking, Jesus himself
(as this gospel witnesses) stood amongst them, and said: Peace be with you.
Three things did Christ at this apearinge.

First he gave and offered unto them, Peace of God,
as unto his intierly beloved disciples, his divine peace, and not a corporal,
or wordely peace, for he said before. Ioh. 15.
The world shall hate you, but this was a peace of conscience, which the
holy scripture calls commonly, the peace of god. As when saint Paul
wished this peace to the Philippians, Phil. 4
he uses these words: The peace of god, which exceeds all understanding,
might keep your hearts and minds, in Christ Jesus. Such a peace is it,
that Christ calls his peace, as a peace that the world can not give, Ioh.
14
when he said: I leave you peace, my peace I give to you. Hear you not now
that Christ makes a very plain distinction or difference from the worldly
peace, calling this peace his, his I say, his peace. For doubtelesse, this
peace can not stand, where as faith is not. Romans 5.
For as Saint Paul teaches, this peace springs and flows out of faith.
And therefore if we will attain unto this peace, we must with great and
contynuall diligence apply the word, preach, teach, hear and receive it.
For of the word comes faith, by faith we being justified, we are at
peace with God. Romans v.

Furthermore, this peace is never to any other, the^ to christians, which have
apprehended the gospel by faith, and have by the same conceived a consydence
and suer hope, that in time coming, no sin can accuse or condemn them.
The world doubteles is very ignoraunte of this peace.

For the world knows none other peace, but that which lives in ydelnes,
and brings the vain voluptuous plasures and joys of this life, neither has
it any persecution or tribulation intermedled with it, Peace of conscience
sto^deth sure against all persecutions. Ioh. 16.
as this peace which we call the peace of god has, But yet is this peace of
god a peace that stands sure, and indeed the true peace, yea though all the
world be enemy unto it, Like as Christ testifies, saying: Ye shall have
persecutions in the world, but in me you shall have peace.

Secondarilye, Christ confirms faith in the Apostels, when here he shows
them his hands and feet, and also eats with them as any other man did.
Surely, Incredulitye is an horrible thing.
incredulity must needs be an horrible thing, saying that Christ takes
such great pains to deliver the Apostels from it. A little before they
confessed that Christ had truly rysed, and appeared unto Simon: they had
heard also that he had talked with the two dysciples in Emans, and gyuynge
thanks he had broken the bread unto them, yet this notwithstanding, when
he came unto them, salutynge them so peaceablye, yet they were astonished,
doubting whether they might think it Christ, or a ghost, such as men say
walke^^ after men be dead. But what did Christ to this? Casts he them
of, Christ bears our infirmitye.
because of this their infirmytie? Nay truly. But becomes a seruante unto
them, serving them both with words and deeds, yea and also with his
holy ghost, to bring them unto faith and save them. For it is evident by the
gospel of S. John, that even then, he gave to them his holy ghost, whom also
after in the Witsonday he stablished in them. Now how indurate and blinded, yea
obsessed with all the feendes of hell are those hearts, that will not believe
this, our so friendly, gentle and merciful lord god? What greater thing, or
what more could he do for his disciples? First he rebukes their incredulity
with words, saying: Why are ye troubled, and wherefore do cogitacions ascend
into your hearts? But for as much as they yet believed not, he showed to them
his hands and feet, saying: I am even he. Touch me on every part, and
look upon me, for spirits have not flesh and bone as you see me have. They
yet not beeleuynge and wonderynge for joy, he asks them, saying: Have ye
any thing to eat? And he did eat before them part of a fyshe, and an
honye comb, that at the last they might by this see, he was no dead
ghost, nor spirit, but he had truly risen from the death. Surely this it
is, to bear the weakness of them that be weak. The goodness of Christ
Now that man whom this so great goodness of Christ moves not to faith,
wheresoever it be preached, doubteles there is nothing that ever shall move
him.

Christ teaches the scripture.
Thyrdely, Christ teaches his disciples out of the holy scriptures, saying:
These are the words that I have spoken unto you, when I was yet with you, that
all things must needs be fulfilled, that are written in the law of Moses,
in the prophets and Psalms of me. Furthermore he opened their mind, that
they should understand the scriptures. etc. O how gloriouslye goes this
preaching of Christ forth? Christ instructs these plain men and
unlearned with the holy scripture, taken out of the law, the prophets and the
psalms. But as the epistle to the Hebrews, says: Heb. 4.
Preachinge is but vain, if it be not adjoined to faith. therefore Christ
also opens the eyes and understanding of their mind, so that not only they
may hear his word, but also they may understand it. Oh good preacher: O
gentle lord Christ, that thus faithfully teaches his disciple, and brings
them to the knowledge of his truth, The most best and greatest lord, our god,
grant us this grace, The outward prechi^g and the hollye ghost must be
together Apoc. 3.
that the same manner may be among us in the offire of preching. that is, that
we may with much severity and great diligence, inculcate thy word, and that
Christ may also as dililigentely, teach the same word inwardely by his holy
spirit. For suerly it is he that has the key of David, wherewith he shuts,
and no man opens he opens, and no man shuts. And verelye all preaching
is vain, except Christ do inwardly teach by his holy spirit. Nowithstanding I
would no man should esteem as a light thing, the dignity of the vocal word,
or the word pronounced and spoken, taking occasion of these my words so to
do: for this is mine opinion, that both the word and spirit of god, must
be joined together. And who shall dare tontemne the word that Christ here
ordayneth and commands, and also commits the same to his beeloued
Apostels? For thus he says furthormore: Thus it is written, and thus must
Christ suffer, and rise again from the dead the third day, and to preach in
his name, penance and forgiveness of sins, among al nations. etc. In the
gospel of saint Ihon, this commandment and office of preaching is more
evidently described. For in the same place the Evangelist says thus.

Iho. 20
And Jesus said to them: As my father has sent me, even so I send you likewise,
and after that he brethed upon them, saying: Receive ye ye holy ghost. Whose
sins soever ye shall forgive, they are forgeuen, and whosesoeuer sins ye
shall retain, they are retained. The administracion of the word of God
Of these words it is evident that, Christ committed to them ye office or
administracion to teach his word over all the universal world. Now if we
adioyne this place of S. Ihon with these words of Christ recyted in this
gospel, every man of understanding may easily perceive, how this forgeuyng of
sins is done, The law.
That is thus. First must penance be preached, that is, men must be brought by
the knowledge of the law of God, to confess, hate and abhor their sin.
True penance.
For this is it, that the divine scriptures call doing of penance, as we may
see in the Prophet Esaie. Esa. 55
Let ye ungodly (says he) forsake his evil way, and the vnrightwise man his
ymaginacions, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him: Return I say to our God, for he is very ready to forgive. And saint
Paul also, Ephe 4
describes it saying: He that did steal, let him steal no more etc. Now
after that men are brought unto the knowledge of their sins, and also to hate
them, then must be preached unto them and set before their eyes, the merytes of
Jesus Christ.

For to preach remission of sins in his name, The gospel.
is to ascribe the remission of sins unto his passion, death and merits. And
when this is apprehended and believed, there is forgeuenes of sins, not by
him, or for his sake that preaches and declares this, but by him and his
merytes, that has given that commandment and commission to preach remyssion
of sins in his name. To whom be honor and praise, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel on saint Marks day the Evangelist, you shall find after
Alhallowen day.

The gospel on Philyp and Jacob the Apostles day. Ihon. 14.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. Philip with an open book and halberd.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. James (the Greater) dressed as a
medieval pilgrim with cape, broad-brimmed hat adorned with cockle shell, scrip
and walking stick. ANd he said unto his dyscyples: Let not your heart be
troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my fathers house are many
mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for
you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
even unto my self, that Iho. 12 and 17.
where I am, there may ye be also. And whether I go ye know, and the way ye
know.

Thomas says unto him: Lord we know not whether thou go. And how is it
possible for us, to know the way? Jesus says unto him: Ihon. 1 6.8. and.11.
I am the way and the truth, and the life. No man comes unto the father, but
by me. If ye had known me ye had known my father also. And now ye know him,
and have seen him.

Phylyp says unto him: Lord, show us the father, and it suffiseth us: Jesus
says unto him: Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known
me? Phylyp, he that has seen me, has seen the father. And how say thou
then: show us the father? Beleuest thou not that Iho. 10.
I am in ye father, and the father in me? The words that I speak unto you, I
speak not of my self, but the father that dwells in me is he that does the
works.

Believe me that I am in the father, and Iho. 16.
the father in me. Or it is believe me for the works sake.

Verily verily I say unto you: he that believes on me, the works that I do,
the same shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I
go to my father: Ma. 17 and 21. Mar. 11 Luc. 9. Iho. 15 and.16. Iaco. 1. 1.
Iho. 3 and.5
And whatsouer ye ask in my name that will I do, that the father may be
glorified by the son, if ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

THE EXPOSITION.
Christ armeth his disciples against ye slander of the cross.
OUr Lord Jesus Christ in that most excellent sermon made unto his disciples
at his last supper among all other his most godly exhortacions, this he
principally endeavored himself unto, to conserve his disciples from the
slander of the cross, and to prepare and comfort them against ye adversaries
of it, that were coming. For he knew right well the imbecilitee and weakness,
not only of his disciples, but also of all men, in whom his holy ghost and
spirit is not yet confirmed. And now the time was present at hand, when Christ
by his death should glorify the father, and return into his glory. Now
forasmuch as the Apostles so sore abhorred the cross, and rather would that
Christ should after the manner of Kings and princes of this world, begin
his kingdom in Iewry, wherein they might as great Lords and Dukes, rule with
him, therefore Christ would lead them away from such imaginacions and
thoughts, unto the meditacion of eternal glory, whereunto there is no
entrance, but by the cross. Act. 14.
And thus he says: Let not your heart be troubled, nor be abashed, needs must
I suffer, and the scripture must needs be fulfilled, which testifyeth of my
death and passion, that by it, I shall deliver all men from eternal death. I
pray you then, why should your hearts be troubled? You believe in God, well,
believe also in me. for though it shall so come to pass that I shall be betrayed
to the Jews, I shall suffer, be crucified and dye, yea and furthermore, it shall
be nedeful that my divine nature, my strength and power, be for a time hyd
secret under the cross, yet nevertheless, I am in deed God, of on and the
sam substance with the father, wherefore let never such perturbacion in any
wise be heard of among you: for why, my cross shall not come, but to the
great advantage and welfare, both of you, and also of all the world. For
doubtless this is a truth, Many ma^sions in the fathers kingdom.
that in my fathers house there are many mansions, where into he will receive his
servants, keep them, and also be glorified in them. Furthermore, both you
and all the lecte, are already predestinate unto those mansions, yt is, unto
eternal life. Notwithsta^di^g, as yet those mansio^s are not perfect nor
prepared as they must be. But if you will know how they must be prepared
and made ready. Mark my saying. It is necessary, that by my passion and my
death, I should first abolishe and take away the kingdom of death and sin.
Then, that I should go unto my father, and receive that my kingdom, which
shall continue for ever, even for this cause, that I may ye more better
govern, maintain and defend in that my kingdom, all that are my disciples.

Neither think you that I shall take this kingdom to mine own commodite only,
for truly I will return unto you by my word and holy spirit, and I will take
you unto my self, that where I am, you also may be. Ma. 10
I will not leave you Orphalynges, I love you more dearlyer, then to leave you
among so many Wolfes, persecutyng you for my word sake: only be you of a
good comfort, and be nothing afraid. Neither let this my passion yt shall
chance, seem so great a marvel unto you. Yea, if ye will be my disciples,
know you assuredly, that you must abide like chance and fortune with me, as I
abide. Now what needs many words. To go to the father to receive ye kingdom.
You have already heard whether I must go, that is, unto my father, to receive
there my kingdom. You also know the way unto my father, so that in this matter
there needs not many words. Behold, after this manner Christ comfort his
Apostles, against ye slander of the cross that should come, and stablysheth
them, tellyng that his death and passion should be the perfect preparyng of
those dwelling places, wherinto they should be received, yea, and also that all
their salvation ought to be fyxed in the same his most blessed death and
passion.

Weakness and ignorance of man.
Secondarily, here are set out two examples, that is, of the ignorance and
weakness of the Apostles. For when Christ had said: Whether I go you know,
and you know the way, Saint Thomas by and by said: Lord, we know not
whether thou go, and how may we know the way? But if one of these must
be a liar, truly Thomas shall be the liar, and not Christ. For had they not
heard Christ often times say: Mat 20
The son of man shall be betrayed to the princes of the priests and Scribes,
and they shall co^dempne him to death, and deliver him to the Heathen to be
scorned, scourged and crucified, and the third day he shall rise again?
Furthermore, were they utterly ignorant of these things and without knowledge
when they said: Lord, Ihon. 6
unto who^ shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life, and we do believe
and we have known, that thou art the same Christ, the son of the living God?
Doubtless we find here in them a faith, but yet it has this imperfectness,
that this faith as yet was not confirmed by the holy ghost, nor yet tried by
any persecucion. Even so does Philip also, when Christ said: If you knew me,
doubtless you should know my father also etc. Philip said: Lord, show us the
father, and it suffiseth to us. What means this? Would Philyp also then see
the father with his corporal eyes, or would he none otherwise hold himself
contented? Suffiseth it not that Christ had said before unto him: If you had
known me, surely you should have know my father also? Verily in this matter
appertainyng to the knowledge of God, al men have one affection, neither can
they do any other wise.

Verily we are blind in this cause touching God We are blind in ma^ters of
faith Ioh. 3.
and his honor, except we be lightened by ye holy ghost, and comforted in faith,
and approved by the cross. For that which is borne of the flesh, it is
flesh, and it has annexed and knyt to it self, incredulitee and ignorance,
as examples through the scripture do evidently prove, and as in this gospel
also we may see it plainly set forth in thse Apostles.

Thyrdly, we shall now come to the answer given unto the Apostle saint
Thomas: which also we will wey and diligently consider, for in it is
propounded unto us, ye excedyng great goodness and mercy of Christ. For though
as yet they were rude and ignorant in the matter of faith, yet Christ forsook
them not, but in this his godly and most excellent answer, so entreats them,
that it may very well be perceived that he desired nothing so much as to
procure their health, and to bring them unto the knowledge of faith. Now what
answer gave he to them? Christ is the way.
I am ye way, the truth and the life. O worthy and excellent sentence, worthy
to be written eue^ with golden letters, in the hearts of all men. But it is to
be lamented that it has so long time lain despised and neglected, and that so
few have in hearts apprehended and understand it. Men's ways
I pray you, how many ways before times has their been, whereby we have
interprysed to obtain eternal life? Surely, I think in numerable. For look
how many heads, so many ways were invented of our own brains to come unto
justice and eternal life. But these ways in deed if they were conferred and
judged by the word of God, were nothing else but wrong paths and false ways
out of the true way, which led us not unto eternal life, but to perpetual
condempnacion of death, not unto heaven, but unto hell in deed.

And these are the ways that the Wise man spoke of, saying: Pro. 12.
The way of a fool is straight in his own eyes. But what says Christ to
this? Forsooth he says, that he only is the way, as he is in very deed and
without doubt. For by him we have remission of sins, righteousness and eternal
health, and a free entrance in unto the father. Neither is any man admytted
unto the fathers presence by any other mediator or mean, but by this Christ
only. And he that will not believe this, let him know it assuredly, that he
shall never comme unto the father, neither be partaker of eternal life. Life.
And I beseech you, how shall he comme unto the father, that seeks other means
to comme to him, then by Christ? Besides that, he rather gives credence unto
false liyng, then to the truth, even that truth whereof Christ here
testifyeth of, affirmyng him self to be the truth. For I pray you, Treuth.
what are all men, all men's doctrynes, all the studyes and counsels of
men, if they be conferred to Christ and his words? Truly all liars, and
mere lies are all those things that are spoken without the word of God, as
the scripture testifyeth. psa. 115.
Psalm Cxv. Every manne is a liar. But of the word of God the scripture
says: Thy word is truth.

Now if the word of God only be truth, Ioh 17. psa. 118.
then it necessarily must follow, that whatsoever men have invented without
the word of God, it is lies and mere deceyuable iuglyng. How can it be but
truth, seeing ye to those that believe in it, Romans 1.
it is the power of God unto salvation and eternal health?

For to believe ye word of God, is even the same as to believe Christ. For Christ
is the same word, and the word was made flesh. Ihon. 1.
And to believe Christ, is so excellent and noble a thing, that it takes away
sins and eternal death, and for them gives righteousness and eternal life.
And thus it abides true that Christ said in this place: I am the way, the
truth and the life.

Fourthly, consider also what Christe-sayd unto Philip, neither would Christ
refuse him because of his imbecilitee or weakness, but rather instructs him
thus: Philip, he that sees me, sees my father. Philip would see ye father,
Christ is very God.
but Christ would grave it, not only in Philippes heart, but also in all other
his disciples hearts, that he is one thing and substance with the father, one
God equal with the father in majesty and glory, of a like strength and
wisdom with him. This only except, that Christ for our infirmitees sakes,
to redeem us was made man, and therefore, as much as pertayneth to that, he is
made less then ye father, as it is written in the viii. Psalm: Psalm. 8.
Thou have made him a little less, under the dignitee of angels etc. Philip
(says Christ) he that sees me, sees my father. And furthermore I dwell in
the father, and the father in me. Behold how earnestly Christ recyteth and
bet eth into his disciples his divine nature and essence with the father, and
also requires, that they should no less believe on him: Verily (says he) all that I do or speak, I do it not or speak it of my self, but the father yt
dwells in me, he does those works. Therefore for the works sake, at the
lest believe me, that I am in the father, and the father is in me. Furthermore,
Christ highly prayseth this faith, as he most earnestly requires it, and
says. Verily, I say unto you: He that believes in me, the works that I do,
he also shall do them, and greatter things then these shall he do. He shall do
greatter things then these, especially seeing that Christ goes to the father
to receive his kingdom, and to send the holy ghost. Faith askyng in the name
of Christ obtayneth all things
I beseech you now, who date be so impudent a beast, or so styffe necked,
that he shall dare any thing at all derogate or minishe ye dignitee of faith,
seeing that to the beleuer there are made such excellent promises? Yea and
furthermore here is made a comfortable and excellent promise unto faith, that
is to say, that whatsoever she will ask in the name of Christ, shall be given
her. Wherefore shall it be given? Doubtless yt the father may be glorified through
the son. And to speak briefly. We must thus believe of Christ, yt he is of
the same essence, of the same power and wisdom with the father, so that he
that believes not in Christ, that man I say, shall never come at the father, nor
at his knowledge. For Christ is the way, the truth and the life. And also noman
comes to ye father, but by Christ, as our savior Jesus Christ has
testified in many places of his gospel. Wherefore that we may come to the
knowledge of ye father, dearly beloved of the Lord, let us diligently apply our
selves to hear the word of God, whereby the true knowledge of Christ is given
unto us. Who known and apprehended by faith, we may be made parteners and
obtain eternal life. Amen.

The gospel on the Ascencion of our Lord Jesus Christ day. Mark. 16.
Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they fat at meat, and cast in their
teth their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them
which had seen that he was risen again from the dead. And he said unto them:
Mat. 28
Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to all creatures, he that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved. But he that believes not, shall be
dampened.

And those tokens shall follow them that believe: Actu. 4.11.20.
In my name they shall cast out devils, they Act. 2 and 19.
shall speak with new tongues, they shall Luc. 10 and 18.
drive away serpents. And if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them. They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover.

So then, when the Lord had spoken unto them Lu. 24 Actu. 1.
he was received into heaven, and is on the right hand of God. And they went
forth, and preached every where: the Lord workyng with them Heb. 2
and confirmyng the word with miracles following.

THE EXPOSITION.
Seeing that al things in the divine scriptures ought well to be considered and
wayed, this may not be ouerpassed, but must diligently be noted and considered,
that the Evangelist S. Mark in this place, where he descrybeth the asce^cion
of our Lord Jesus Christ (wherein also like at in his passion and resurrection
consysteth our whole iustificacion) makes mention of that sin, for the which
our Lord Jesus Christ so often before he ascended into heaven, rebuked his
disciples, namely of their incredulitee and unbelief. Surely it must needs be,
that this is an heavy and great sin, yea, it is to be esteemed and thought a
very spryng, well and fountayn of all mischief, seeing that our savior
Christ, even now, when he would depart and go to his heavenly father,
rebukes it so earnestly in his Apostles. For thus says the Evangelist: At the
last as the eleven sat at the table, he showed himself unto them, and rebuked
their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had
seen him risen. Here you hear what sin this was, namely Incredulitee. And I
pray you, Unbelief is ye spryng of all sin
who is so shameless to deny that unbelief is the fountayn of all evil,
especially if he compare faith whereof scripture speaks, with her effects,
with incredulitee and her fruits? For so comparyng them, it shall be an easy
thing to perceive, how good and what a great thing faith is, and how excedyng
an evil unbelief is. The scripture every where testifies this of faith, and
doubtless such is the nature of it that it utterly dispayreth of all the works
that man other does or can do, nor puts no trust or confidence in none of
them, but alonely seeks at Christ, that righteousness that is of value before
God, of mere grace and mercy, without any merytes or deservings of works.
And this faith is of such power, that when it is true and right, it obtayneth
also by Christ remission of sins, righteousness and eternal health, yea, of
the children of the devil, it makes the sons and heirs of God, as S. Paul
writes in the Epistle to the Romans, saying: Romans 8.
Surely, whosoever are led by the spirit of God, these are the children of
God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye
have received the spirit of adopcion, by who^ we cry, abba father. The Same
spirit testifyeth together with our spirit, that we are the sons of God. If
we be children, then are we heirs also. Namely heirs of God, and annexed
heirs of Christ etc.

And doubtless thus it is with true faith. Contrary, unbelief has his peculyar
nature, and such is his condition, that it determyneth his own righteousness
and eternal life, to come of his own works, and not of the merit of
Christ, which can not be but to the great injury of the passion of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whose merit only the heavenly father is pacifyed.
Incredulite always robs Christ of his honor. 1. Iho. 3
And what greater contumely and blasphemy may be done unto our Lord Christ,
then to dispoyle him of his honor, and to ascribe unto our works that thing,
which justly ought to be attributed only unto his merit and grace? For does
not the scripture say: He is the obtainyng of grace or propiciacion for our
sins? Again in ye first Epistle to the Corinthians: Christ is made unto us
(says saint Paul) wisdom from God and righteousness, and sanctifiyng, and
redempcio^. Those then that again say the merytes of Christ, and with words
cry out against it, and as much as in them lies, go about to suppress it,
they do with all their study seek righteousness and eternal health by ye merits
of their own works. And those without dout are false christians, eue^ the same ye
Christ speaks on in Mat. that they should come under his name and sai: Mat 24
Lo heree is Christ. etc. And thus shall it chance to the^, that they shall
never have the righteousness eternal health, and inheritance of the sons of
god, but a vain praise and a deceyuable glory, that only shall they obtain.
And why? For in all their works they sought nothing else, then the phariseis
did, whom Christ blames in the gospel of Matthew, and says, Mat. 6.
that they did their works for this intent, that they might be glorified of
men. And S. Paul says: To. 10.
They being ignoraunte of the righteousness that is allowed and given of god,
and seekinge to set up a righteousness of their own, they were not subject
to the righteousness of god. To this pertains also the promise of the holy
ghost, where Christ says: Ioh. 16
When the holy ghost shall come, he shall rebuke the world of sin, because they
believed not in me. etc. In this place we hear again, that unbelief is so
great a sin, that needs must the holy ghost be given from heaven, to rebuke
men of their unbelief. Who can now think it meruail, though Christ often
times so sore blamed and rebuked unbelief in his disciples, and again in so
highlye praised and avaunced faith? It is therefore dearlye beloved our part,
studiously to avoid unbelief, and by all means to embrace the true faith of
Christ that by it we may be justified before god, and have eternal life.

Secondarily, The word. Baptism.
in this gospel is committed unto the apostels, the office to preach the
word of god, and according to the same word, the administration of Baptism.
And suerly this commandment of Christ highly sets out, praises and
extolleth the vocation of the Apostels and also the ministers of the word,
which every christian man ought diligently to consider, and pythely to root it
in his heart. For where men are assured, that the Apostels and ministers of the
word come not forth uncommanded, nor do not headilye of their own autoritye
usurp this office of teaching, bu are sent to preach and baptize from the
Lord our God, there without doubt the office of preaching and administration
of the sacraments shall be esteemed accordinglye in high honor and dignity.
Therefore, doubteles it is very necessary for every christian diligently to
observe, mark and learn this gospel, as wherein we are taught, that high
honor ought to be given to the administracion of the word and sacraments, as
to things that Christ himself the only begotten son of god, so earnestly
commanded to his beloved Apostles, and also adourned these things with his
own word. But let us now hear what words Christ spoke to his disciples.
Go (said he) into the whole world, and preach the gospel to every creature.
Who so believes and is baptized, shall be saved: but who so believes not, shall be
damned. In this text there are two things especially commanded the Apostles,
that is, to teach the gospel, and to baptize. As it is also more evidently and
plainly declared by the evangelist Math. where Christ says thus to his
apostels: Mat, 20
Go ye your way therefore, and teach all nations, and baptize them in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of holy Ghost. And teach them to keep
all things, whatsoever I have commanded you. In these words again we
perceive, that these two things are commanded chiefly to the Apostles, that
is, to teach and to baptize. Now it is nedeful that we with all diligence
mark this commandment, as a thing yt Christ so studiously and earnestly, yea
as evidently as was possible, expresses and beats it into his disciples
memory, and that for none other cause, but to declare that he specially takes
cure and regards the administracion of his holy word and the sacraments:
and to admonish us, yt we also bear and attribute unto these his ordinances
their right honor, and give unto them their due glory. But among al men the
ministers of this word ought well to consider and take dilligent head unto this
commandment of Christ For seeing that ye office to teach, is the ordinance
and commandment of the most best and most mighty god, therefore ye ministers
part is, in this office and commandment of God so to behave him self, and to
order all his doctrine and life after such manner, yt by his grauitee and
diligence, and blameless and irreprehensible living the word of ye gospel may
be set forward and magnified, as saint Paul also says: 1. Co. 3.
This is required of stewardes of the mysteries of God, yt they be found
faithful. And on ye other part, ye hearer considering yt this ministry is
instituted of God, he ought not only to hear and receive and word with al
humilitee and reverence, but also well to esteem and honorably to entertayn the
minister for his names sake that instituted the administracion, lest it chance
unto us, as it did to ye Jews, to who^ Christ said: I do glorify my father,
and you do dishonor me. And saint Paul says: Those that rule well and
faithfully with the word, they are worthy double honor. And the same
testimonies also gives he to the Galathians, that they received him as an
angel of god, yea and if it had been possible, they would have dug out
their eyes to have given to him. To baptize is a work of god.
And in like manner ought yt ministry of baptism to be esteemed as a precious
and godly gift, for why, we se here it is not the inuencion or imagynacion of
man, but it is the instytution and commandment of the lord god himself.

Furthermore this is well to be noted, that the mystery of the word and
baptism, ought to be communicate unto all men. And I pray you, who may here
with good conscience exclude the infantes, Baptism is permitted unto infants.
who^ Christ excluded not? We must preach to al men, al men must be baptized,
neither ought the infantes by any means to be restrained from baptism. For
although as yet they are not apt to hear the outward word, yet is god able
to teach them inwardly by his spyrite, till they may grow and ware able to
hear and receive the vocal and externe outward word, preached to them.

The office of ye word.
Thyrdely, when Christ has committed to his apostels and preachers the
ministry of the word, he also shows what manner of word it is yt they must
preach and teach to the people, that is, yt most comfortable tidi^gs of holy
gospel. Go forth (says he) preach the gospel to al creatures. Gospel.
But what is ye gospel. It is a glad tidi^gs, wherein is offered and given to
us, for Christ's merits, without any deserving upon our behalf, but of mere
grace, remission of sins, righteousness, and eternal life.

And this preaching must he that is come to the knowledge of his sins, by the
preaching of the law, receive with faith, nether may he doubt of this promise if
it shall do him any profit. In like manner says S. Paul: The gospel is the
power of God unto salvation, to every man yt believes it. Here you hear that ye
gospel is ye power of God, not wtstanding it must be received by faith. In the
word is the power of God, of this you may not doubt but believe, if any faith
be in thine heart. Christ's promise shall here in no wise deceive us, if our
faith be perfect, like as Christ also here requires faith, saying: The word
of God must be preched
Whosoever believes and is baptized, shall be saved: But he that believes not, shall be
condemned. We must here note two things. First, that Christ gave
commandment to his Apostles to preach only his word and gospel. Where this
is well considered and pondered in the mind, there shortly vanishes away and
are abolished tradicions, dreams, and doctrynes of men. I pray you, how
agrees this, that in the causes pertainyng to our iustificacion, any other
doctrine should be admitted, but the only word of God? In ceremo^ies and
excercises because of youth, there might be observed tradicions and
co^stitucions of men, but in this matter of iustifycacion, the word of God
only is to be admitted. The second note is, The sacraments have their power
of ye word.
that Christ joins together the ministerye of the word, and baptism. For
this will he teach in it, that baptism and the sacraments have their power
of the word, and can by no means be disseuered from the word. For as
concerning baptism, what authoritee could it have, if ye word were not joined
with it? Doubtless the water should be nothing, but still remain water. But
join the word to it, and consider well the commandment annexed to it, then
shall not the water be simple water, but as S. Paul calls it, it is a
washyng of regentracion and of new birth, and renewyng of the holy ghost. And
therefore is it that Christ says in this gospel: Who so believes and is
baptized, he shall be saved.

Signs and miracles do confirm ye word.
Fourthly, Christ shows here what tokens shall follow upon them that believe. In
my name (says Christ) they shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new
tongues, take away serpents etc. As he would say: My word is before the world
a despised word, neither have you which must preach it, as yet obtained any
authoritee before men, so that they may receive your preaching and doctrine
without miracles and signs, wherefore this will I do: I will give you power to
drive out devils, to speak with new tongues, to heal the sick etc. And
whosoever (that after your word and doctrine shall be by those tokens and signs
confyrmed) will believe you and be baptized, certainly he shall obtain
remission of sins, and life eternal. But whosoever believes not, all excuses set
a part, shall be damned. Upon this it necessarily follows, that miracles and
signs were excedyng necessary at ye first beginning to preach the gospel. For
if any authoritee and power should be given to this dottryne, it was necessary
to establishe it and confirm it, with so excellent and noble miracles, like as
the law also was before confyrmed by signs and miracles. Notwithstanding
those signs whereby the law was confirmed, were far more horrible then were
the signs in the beginning of the Gospel. For the signs that were wrought in
the beginning of the gospel, were very pleasant, if you compare them to those
signs that were showed in the beginning of the law. And the preaching of the
gospel also is far more gladder tidings and more comfortable to the heart,
then is Moses with all his precepts and laws. Now in our time to require like
miracles and signs, it is vnsittyng, unreasonable and unlawful. But if we
will so do, Christ answers and says: Mat. 8.
This aduouterous generation seeks a sign, and other shall not be given to
it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas etc. For we have the gospel of Christ
confirmed with miracles and signs of the Apostles, and that sufficiently
established, surely he that will not believe it, can with no miracles nor signs
be brought unto the faith.

Fyftly, The ascencion of Christ
we have in this gospel an article of our faith of the ascencion of Christ
into heaven, with ye approve and confirmacion of the same. For thus says the
text: And the Lord after that he had spoken unto them, he was taken up into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God etc. Hitherto Christ had preached
and taught after that he was crucified and risen again the third day from the
dead, and truly after his resurrection he had much a do with the incredulitee
of his Apostles, to whom also at the last he showed what he would them to do.

And after he had all this done, Mar 16
he ascended into heaven, and sytteth on the right hand of God, that is, he
takes to himself a new kingdom, that he perpetually with his father being
Lord on heaven and earth, may and shall reign in equal power with God his
father, What it is to sit on the right hand of God.
for to conserve, govern, maintayn and defend, all that are his, from all
evils. For this to do, is to sit on the right hand of God. Furthermore, lest
his assencion into heaven should be without an evident vtilitee and profit, he
would send from heaven his holy ghost, which might confirm his in the faith,
make them strong in all their troubles and persecucions, and defend and
comfort them against their threttes that hated the word, even as the Prophet
did testifi, Ps. 67.
saying: He ascended into the highth, and has led captiuitee, capteiue and
has given gifts to men. Oh dear brethren is not this a mighty Lord, that
has conquered and delivered us from the captiuitee of Satan, and has given
freely to us his word and spirit, and lastly by this means has made us the
sons of God?

Surely, he that will not believe and put his confidence in this god and such a
Lord, doubtless his vnbelif shall turn and bring him unto perpetual
dampnacion and loss both of body and soul. The which God vouchesafe to
turn from us for his great infinite grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The gospel on the Monday after Witsondaye. Ioh. 3.
FOr God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Luce. 19
For God sent not his son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. He that believes on him, is not condemned.
But he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in
the name of the only begotten son of god. And this is the co^demnacio^ John. 1
and. 12.
the light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then light,
because their deeds were euel. For Ephesians. 5
every one that evil does, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
least his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the
light, that his deeds may be known, how they are wrought in God.

After these things, came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Iewrye, and
there he tarried with them, Ioh. 4. Mat. 3. Mar. 1. Luc. 3. Mar. 4
and baptized. And John also baptized in Enno^ besyds Salim, because there was
much water there, and they came, and were baptized.

For Ihon was not yet put in prison.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this gospel CHRIST sets out highly, The love of God toward us
that exceeding love and charity of our heavenly father, that he ever has
borne unto man k^nde. And this love does Christ so highly extol and magnifye,
that he affirms that love to have been the chief principal and only cause
wherefore he would give his only begotten son into this world. Let us
therefore with most herty attentio^ consider this praise wherewith Christ
sets out the love of his heavenly father. For in it we shall plainly
perceive, what moved god to redeem us, and by whom he would work our
redemtion. And what moved the heavenly father to do this? Did men obtain it
with their good works? Or deserved they it by their honest conversation? Truly
if that time that Christ came into to the world, he would have judged men
according to their merits and works, it was to be feared, least as it
happein the time of Noe, he should have drowned all the world with water, for
doubteles, at that time there were not very many good in all the world. For even
the Jews which received the law and prophets, and therefore ought to have been
more holier and better then the other nations, these (I say) were (a few
except) more wretched and abominable then any other. Then needs must there be
a far other cause of our redemtio^, Out of love and grace ar we saved
then the merits of man. What is it then? Christ answers: God so loved the
world. Do not you hear now, that our redemtion depends and consists upon
mere love, grace, compassion and mercy? And this love ought well to stir us
up and to bring us to faith. For if we well consider and weye this love in our
hearts, it will sufficiently teach us, how high, ye unspeakable it is. For
suerly we had deserved by unbelief and our sins perpetual damnacio^, and god
might most rightfully have shed upon us his terrible wrath, furor, and
indignacion, and have condemnd us unto perpetual da^nacion. but what did he? So
mighty now was not his wrath, but his love, that not only he saved us from
destruction, but also made us free and safe from sin, death, dyuel and hell.
But how did he this, or by what mean or mediator? Would he do this by his
angels, or by any other mediator or mean? Nay verily: But to do this, he sent
and gave freely his only begotten son. Here again that excedyng love is
glorified, which was the cause ye god would redeem us. For truly all that ever
god gives, that gives he of grace, no merits going before. With this agrees
the saying of S, Paul: If when we were enemies we were reconciled to god by ye
death of his son much more now that we be reconcyled, we shall be saved by his
life. Here also in this saying the apostell confesses that god received us of
grace, ye when we were yet his enemies. Finally, God has delivered us from our
sins and from hell, and has given to us eternal life by free grace and love,
and that has he done by his beloved and only begotten son Jesus Christ.

Secondarily, although our salvation be gotten and made perfect by Christ only,
yet this must we learn to know, how men may obtain it. And this also does
Christ manifestly show in this gospel: That every man (says he) ye believes
in him should not perish, but should have life eaternall. You hear in these
words, whether salvation gotten by Christ, may be received by works, or
apprehended by faith. Without doubt, our works do nothing in this matter.
But here must needs be a true faith, and an assured confidence and belief in
god. But when is that belief and faith true? Faith.
When we despair of all our works, merits and virtues, and esteem them as
things that can not help us, and therefore the Prophet Esai says: Esai. 63
that all our justice or righteousness are as a defiled clothe.

And thus dispairyng of our selves to seek our righteousness in the merytes,
passion and death of our Lord Jesus Christ only, of whom Ihon the Baptist gave
this true testimonye, that he is the Lamb of God, Ihon. 1.
that takes away the sins of the world.

This faith I say, does apprehende by Christ remission of sins, justice and
eternal life. Neither may we in this matter admyt any work of man, except we
would pluck away, steal and take from Christ his glory, Esai. 42
which he will not give to any other, and so stealyng Christ's honor, burden
our souls unto the perpetual death and damnacion of our selves.

Surely it is an undoubted truth, that a christian man must do good works,
and have an honest conversation, and with good works confyrme and allow his
faith. For who would deny this? But to set a faith and confidence in those
works, and to admit our merytes in ye cause of our iustifycacion, is in no
wise to be permytted. For by that means, grace were no grace, and that which
before was atributed by very right unto the only love of God, that should we
then ascrybe unto our works and merits. Therefore Christ says in this
gospel: He that believes in the son of man, shall not be judged. But he that
believes not, is already judged, because he believes not in the name of the
only begotten son of God. Faith only abides in battle of conscience.
See ye that in the conflicte and battle of the conscience, faith stands
sure, and is not condemned nor judged? Contrarily, that unbelief is already
condemned, and the sentence of eternal damnacion is pronounced against it? For
Christ will in this gospel (as he does in many other places of the scripture)
ascribe quietness of conscience and salvation unto faith, and the disquietnes
of conscience and perpetual damnacion to unbelief.

Thirdely, Condemnacion.
because Christ spoke of judgment and condemnacio^, he now proceeds and
declares what is condemnacio^, and says. And this is ye condemnacion, that
the light is come into the world, and men have loved rather darkness then
light. And why? For because their works were evil. Christ him self with his
doctrine and gospel is this light, The light. Ioh. 8.
as in another place he calls himself, saying: I am the light of the world,
Whosoever follows me he walks not in darkness. The darkness, Darkness.
is our flesh, nature, man's reason, and unbelief, yea all the wisdom and
prudencie of man, which does not spring out of faith, but spring from our
reason without faith. And now I beseech you to mark with me well, at what
point our reason, our wisdom and prudence is wont to stumble at, if it follow
not the very word of god as his captain and leader? Surely when Christ came
into this world, he was more redyer to save and help, then to condemn,
nowithstanding that the father had given into his hand all iudgmente. And
truly the Jews had well eschaped this judgment or eternal damnacion, and had
by faith obtained health and salvation, if they would have received Christ which
is the light of the world, and believed his word. But what do they? They set
more by darkness then by light. John. 1.
And as John says in the first chap. of his gospel: The light shined in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. There was no fault in the light,
but a great defaulte in the darkness that received it not. But what follows
now out of this darkness? Forsooth this. Those that neither knowledge nor learn
their darkness, nor will not give Christ his due honor, they judge and
condemn themselves, even as Christ says: Whosoever believes not, he is already
condemned.

And truly it chau^seth so by most rihgteous judgment to him that is
unfaithful. Incredulitee is judged by his own self that is, through unbelief
For inasmuche as he does evil, and yet can not abide the light or to be
reprehended, it is right that his own unbelief should judge or condemn him.
But so is it not with the faithful man, for he can abide that his works that are
done in the truth, should come to the light and be tried and wayed by the word
of God, and judged by the rule and squire of the word of God. For how should
he fear the light, seeing that all his works are done in God? Consider it
well: For thus in every place of the scripture, life is ascribed unto faith,
and judgment and condempnacion to incredulitee and unbelief. God give us
grace to receive and retain with us his light, to the comfort of our souls.
Amen.

The gospel on the tewysday in the Whytson weke. Ihon. 10.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that enters not in by the door into the
sheep fold, but clymeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a
murderer. But he that enters in by the door, is yt shepeherde of the sheep:
to him the porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and Pro. 10.
he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out. And when he has
sent forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for
they know his voice. A stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him,
for they know not the voice of strangers.

This proverb spoke Jesus unto them, but they understood not what things they
were, which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again: Verily
verily, I say unto you: Iho. 14
I am the door of the sheep. All (even as many as came before me) are thieves
and murderers, but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door, by me if any
man enter in, he shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A
thief comes not but for to steal, kill and destroy. I am come that they
might have life, and that they might have it more aboundantlye.

THE EXPOSITION.
Forasmuch as Christ our Lord shows in this gospel or similitude by
conferryng them together, both what the evil shepeherd and teacher is, also
how he may be known: and on the other part, what the good shepeherde and
teacher is, and by what signs also men may know him, I think it mete first
to treat of the good shepeherde, especial for this cause, that it is a thing
very profitable and necessary, and also a matter of great weight and
importance. For Christ describes here the good shepherd so, A preachers
calling and doctrine shall be upright and law full.
that he must needs enter in at ye door into the shepefold. that is, it is
necessary yt the preacher be called by some lawefull and godly means. it is
necessary also, that his doctrine be true and godly. And how can they teach
the truth, that are not called unto that office by god, or by some godly
means? Surely in this matter it is not convenient for every man that will, to
run, but it is necessary, that me^ enter by the door into the shepfold. And if
thou will know who is the door, then mark well Christ's words, which thus
expounds him self, Christ is the door.
saying: I am the door of the sheep, by me who so enters, he shall be saved,
and he shall enter in and go forth, and he shall find pasture. Mark here that
not only the preacher must be admitted to this office by Christ and a
christian mean, but that the hearer also by like manner ought to be called
to this sheepefolde of the elect of God. And this only stands in the power
of CHRIST, in his word and his gospel. Actu. 9.
Saynct Paul was called from heaven of Christ, unto this office to teach
the gospel without any other mean, so that he might enter at the true
door into the sheepefolde. But God permytted the Apostell S. Mathye to be
called unto the office to teach the word of god, Actu. 1.
by certain other means, so that he also should enter by the true door. And
are not al men called unto the fold of Christ by ye word of Christ, as often as
this or other like gospel is preached? Whosoever thirsts, John. 7
let him come to me and drink? Therefore, before all things this is
necessary, that we enter in at the door into the sheepfolde, that is to say,
by Christ. For if this entrance be true and by faithful means done, doubtless
it shall come to pass as Christ here says: Whosoever enters in by me, he shall
be saved. Hear ye not now, that our salvation stands only in the power of
Christ? And in like manner said he unto his Apostles, when they asked him the
way to ye father: I am (said he) the way, the truth, and the life. Furthermore
he that thus enters by Christ, he must needs by faith obtain and possess al
those goods and heavenly treasures, that the heavenly father has given unto us
in his son, and so confess it and with his mouth declare it unto other in all
places, the which thing Christ showed under these words, coming in, and going
forth. Moreover, They shall ever find pasture. These pastures Pasturs
signify the word of god, ye Christ should largly give unto his disciples. And
whersoeuer this Word be, there can not men co^dingly praise so great a benefit
of god. But where it is not, there chances it according to the saying of the
prophet Joel: Why does the cattle morn? Why do the droues of beasts cry and
rore? Because that they have no pasture. yea even the whole flocks of sheep
have perished. Out of all this it follows, that the good shepeherd that came
in by Christ, must needs teach the word of Christ, and the righteousness of
faith by Christ. And suerly by this token and sign a good shepeheard may well
be known.

A descripcion of a false teacher or preacher.
Secondarily, Christ in this gospel describes the evil shepeherd, whom he so
paynteth in his own colors, that we may well know him if we will open our
eyes to see him. For thus says Christ: He that enters not in at the door
into the shepefolde, but clymeth up another way, he is a thief and a
murderer. We heard a little before, that Christ himself is the door, and also
the keeper of the door. And surely where this Christ is unknown, let no man
think to have any enteraunce given him into this shepefold, let no man promise
himself their salvation. Briefly, there is no enteraunce in, nor going out,
nor findyng of pasture, much less shall we have there good shepeherdes or
preachers of the word. For how shall that man teach Christen men, which
himself was never made a Christian? Or how should he in preaching co^tynually
declare unto the people the justice of faith, that as yet never, not so much
as ones, tasted it?

Evil persons defraude, steal and tobbe Christ's honor.
Surely where such are, there can be found nothing but stealyng and
murtheryng. For they steal from Christ his own due honor, in that they
ascrybe to the merytes of works, righteousness, where as it only comes by
the merytes of Jesus Christ. And upon this theft comes that horrible murder,
that is, by their false and wicked doctrine they lead from Christ so great a
nombre of souls, rauishyng them violently into condempnacion, and castyng them
into Satan's mouth to devour them. Oh alack, what an exceadyng nombre of
souls has been by this doctrine deceived both before the incarnacion of
Christ, and also since, and so cast headlong into condempnacion? Among the
Jews, this did the Bishops, Priests, Scribes and Phariseys, which would
utterly oppress the righteousness of faith, and in the place of it set up the
righteousness of works. Yea, they so sore prevailed in this doctrine, that all
the Prophets had enough to do to dispute and resyst their doctrine, in somuche
that many times the Prophets suffered no little persecucion for resystyng it,
like as Christ himself in the gospel of saint Matthew reproves them for it,
saying: Mat. 2^
Behold I send unto you prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and some of
them shall ye murder and crucifye etc. But among christen men the same part
was played by the religious fathers, that boosted them self to be the children
of the Romish bishop. For which of them all (if you except very few) can be
found that preached the righteousness of faith so diligently and earnestly, as
it became him? Doubtless they all had an eye unto their father the Bishop of
Rome, and neither by teaching nor preaching sought they any other pasture, or
showed any other to their sheep then that which the Prophet Hieremye speaks
of, saying: Woo to the shepeherdes of Israel, Iere. 23
that feade them selves etc. Now if thou will know these thieves and
murderers, mark their doctryn. For whosoever they be that set up
rihgteousnes by the merytes and deservings of works, and contrary to
Christ's merytes earnestly preach the same, those are they that Christ
descrybeth in this place, and whom also he commands us to beware of Matthew.
7.

Thyrdly, because Christ has now described the good shepeherdes and the evil,
he now shows how christen men must behave themself toward them both,
that is, They must hear the voice and doctrine of this good shepeherde, to
whom the keaper of the door has opened the door, and they must know his
voice and follow him, Faithful men do know the good preacher
if he go before etc. But how shall this come to pass, that the sheep shall
so readyly know the voice of the good shepeherde?

They are accustomed to the good and healthsome pastures, that is, they have
ones learned out of the holy gospels, that in terrors of conscience and
knowledge of sins, there is none other consolacion, but in the only merytes
of Christ. And that those only be partakers of it, that take hold of it by
faith, and so turn it unto their own profit. And forasmuch as when the good
shepeherde comes, he leads them no way, but unto Christ. They know also
that they are bound to receive him as a minister of the word, as Christ
testifyeth in another place, saying: Mat. 10
He that receives you, receives me. And in another place, when the thief and
murderer comes with his false doctrine, preaching another strange doctrine
that flows not out of the faith of Christ, then can they by the word of God
know, judge, and reprove that doctrine, and will in no wise receive nor admit
nor hear that false prophet in the stead of a true Prophet of God. For they
know perfectly that Christ says, that he that hears and keeps the word
of God (I say the word of God) he shall be saved. Luc. 11.
And what needs many words? Does not the scriptures every where admonish us
to beware of such thieves and murderers? Beware (says Christ) of false
prophets, that comme to you in shepes clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolfes. And saint Paul forbyddeth the Galathians, that they admit none other
gospel then that they heard of him, insomuch that if an Angel should come down
from heaven and preach another gospel they ought not to receive him. The sheep
of Christ know all this, wherefore they will hear none other but their own
highest bishop and shepeherd Christ, which here says: I am come that they
may have life, yea and have it more abundantly. Furthermore, they hear all
ye ministers of Christ, that come in his name and bring his word. The other
worke-doctors they do forsake, co^sideryng they are thieves and murderers, and
such as treat the word of God both falsely and ungodly. Wherefore Christ
says: They shall not follow ye forreyner or strange shepeherd, but they will
flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers. Which God grant
that we may also acknowledge Christ our sheherde and follow his word. Amen.

The sermon on saint Barnabas the Apostles day, is the same that is red on
Simon and Iudes day.

The gospel on saint John the Baptystes day. Luc. 1.
Woodcut illustration of St. John the Baptist with a cross (held like a
military standard) and lamb. ELyzabeths time came that she should be delivered,
and she brought forth a son. And her neighbors and her cosyns heard how
the lord had showed great mercy upon her, and they reioysed with her. Ge.
17. and. 21. Leui. 12


And it fortuned that in the eight day they came to circumcise the child: and
called his name Zacharias, after the name of his father. And his mother
answered and said: Not so, but he shall be called John. And they said unto her:

There is none in thy kyndred, that is named with this name. And they made
signs to his father,, how he would have him called. And he asked for writing
tables, and wrote, saying: His name is John. And they meruayled all. And his
mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue also, and he spoke and praised
God. And fear came on al them ye dwelt nigh unto them. And all these sayings
were noysed abroad through out all the hill country of Iurye: and all they
that heard them, laid them up in their hearts, saying: What manner of child
shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him.

And his father zacharias was filled with the holy ghost, and prophesied,
saying:

Praised be the lord god of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people.

THE EXPOSITION.
Seeing (dear christians) that the Euangeliste S. Luke has done such
diligence in describing the natiuiti of John the Baptist as it is plainly
manifest in the gospel that this day is recyted, it shall be necessary that
we diligently consider and well look upon the person of John. For surely this
child (in whose birth those so great and glorious tokens chaunsed) has some
syngular grace and gift above other children. The nativity of saint Ihon.
Is not this a new and a syngular great thing, that he is borne of pare^tes
very old, yea in manner at the pyttes brynke with age, and is sanctified in his
mothers womb, and ordained to be the foreleaper, that is, a gentleman vssher
unto our Lord God Jesus Christ? He shall be (said the Angel, when he declared his
birth unto Zacharye his father, what time he did his priestly office before God)
great before the Lord. Wine and strong drink shall he not drink, and even
from his mothers womb shall he be filled with the holy ghost, and many of ye
children of Israel shall he turn again wholly unto the Lord their God etc. By
these words you hear, that great excellent and wonderful things shall be
brought to pass and accomplyshed by this child. Furthermore, Zacharye thus
reioyseth in his canticle, saying: And thou O babe shall be called a prophet of
the most highest, For thou shall go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his
ways etc. What think you was this holy child afterward? Ihon is ane usa^ple
of a good precher.
He was made a true, godly and excellent preacher, which besides that most
holy life that he altogether spent in godly and honest conversation, he so
administered and fulfilled his office, that he may well be set forth to all
preachers and ministers of Gods word, as a worthy ensample and president,
contynually to be present and set before them. For he not only preached
penance, and by preaching the law prepared a way unto Christ, but also he
showed unto the people Christ, which is most truly that Lamb of God, that
takes away the sins of the whole world. As also the holy ghost says
again by Zacharye: To give knowledge unto his people. But what knowledge?
Knowledge of salvation or health. For thereto serves the preaching of John,
which first through the law fears the consciences, and afterward
comfort them and rayseth them up by preaching unto them the lamb of god.
Wherein then rests this knowledge? In the forgeuenes of sins. How then
obtain we that remission of sins? By the bowels of mercy of our Lord god,
wherein the day star (Christ) has visited us from heaven. And to who^ has
he appeared by that so great mercy? To those that sytte in darkness and in the
shadow of death, as well the Jews as Gentyles. Ihon 10
For Christ would as our archcbishop and true shepeherd make one flock and one
shepefold of the Jews and Heathen, that the fear of al men (if at the least
they would receive the day star or day spryng of the gospel and belief in
Christ) that their feet (I say) might be set straight into the way of peace,
which proceeds of true faith. Behold, all these things appertain to the
office of Ihon, which was not only a preacher and a prophet, but also he was
more then a prophet. Ihon is more the^ a Prophet
For he preached not only Christ to come, as other prophets did, but also he
showed Christ present. And forasmuch as Ihon should thus show Christ, which
by his preaching, passion, death and resurrection should take away all our
sorrows and sickenesses, it was needful that great joy should happen in his
natiuite. For and by as soon as this child was borne, al ye neighbors and
kynsfolke did rejoice with the parents of ye child: and upon the eight day
they circumcised the child, and at the fathers commandment and writing, they
gave him a name of grace and mercy, and this fame is spredde abroad among all
them that dwelt in the Mountains of Iewrye, and all that did hear it, laid
it in their hearts, co^fessyng that the hand of the Lord, that is, The hand
of the Lord.
the power and help of God was with him. Lo, thus must men consider Ihon, to
know how highly he is to be esteemed.

Secondarily, in this gospel faith makes Zachary to speak, which a little
before, through his incredulitee was domme. And like as in this we see how
great a sin unbelief is, even so on the other part we perceive, how
precious and godly a treasure faith is. The Angel of God said unto zacharye:
Thy wife Elizabeth shall bear unto thee a son. To these words ought
zacharias to have given credit. But what does he? Because he was aged and his
wife well gone in age also, therefore he will or he give credit, know how
these things shall be fulfilled, therefore he is compelled to silence, till those
things were fulfilled that were promised unto him by the Angel. And in like
manner, unto this day are all they stryken dumme, Dumnes in this our time
that will not believe the Apostles of God, his word and the Gospel. For where
as it were their duetye to advance the glory of God and the merit of Christ,
and to set forth the same, there they extol the righteousness of their own
works, as that Pharisei did. Luc. 17 God (said he) I thank the: For I am not as
the residue of men, extorcioners, unrighteous, aduouterers, nor yet as this
Publycane. Call ye this to laud and glorify the grace of god, and merit of
Christ? Nay truly. Thus to boast, is worse then to be dumme. For though in
this prayer are heard many words, yet is there not one heard, that seteth up or
magnifieth the grace of god or merit of Christ. Now though I can speak and
utter many words, yet as long as unbelief (that takes away the glory of
god) reigns in my heart, I remain dombe before god: as the scripture says:
Wisdom has opened the mouth of the dombe. that is to say: The knowledge of
god makes men eloquent, that they know how to give god his honor in Christ,
to praise and glorify him, and finally to confess his word. Such an
eloquent Orator was Paul made when he compared his own justice that he had in
the lord unto mire and dong, that by it he might suffer no damage in that
righteousness which Christ has brought and gives to the beleuers. And such
an eloque^t preacher was Zacharias, after that the time appointed by the angel,
was fulfilled. For by and by after the circumcision of his son John, he was
filled with the holy ghost, and prophesied, praisyng god, that had given that
great grace unto him. Therefore I say, where faith and the holy ghost are not,
there must we needs be dum spiritually, yea though we speak many vain and
void words.

Thirdely, the Evangelist here describes word for word, what Zacharias said
when he was filled with the holy ghost, and why he so earnestly praised and
glorified the Lord his God. For thus he said:

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel. To bless To bless
in this place is as much as to laud. For now in as much as zacharias had
received ye child promised to him, and also he knew in spirit what Christ
should do, whose way this child should make ready, he praises God for that so
great and excellent a benefyte: Geuyng us an ensample, that we evermore should
thank and praise God for those his benefits given to us, both corporal and
also spiritual. Now if ye be desirous to hear the cause of this praisyng God
of zachary himself. For he (says he) has visited and wrought the redemption
of his people.

This word Visit, God does visit us ii. manner of ways
is in the scriptures taken two manner of ways. For sometime God visits us in
his wrath and furor, as when he punishes our sins as it chaunsed Pharao in
the red sea, and ye Jews in the time of Tytus and Vespasian the Emperor. Many
times he visits us in mercy and grace, as it happened to the Jews when they
were brought out of Egypt, also when Christ was sent and given, of the which
visitacion Christ himself speaks and complayneth, Mat. 20
because they knew not the time of their visitacion. And of this merciful
visitacion does zacharias speak in this place, saying that God has visited
and wrought the redemption of his people. He knowlegeth also and estemeth this
redemption so certain and sure, that he proclaymeth and laudeth it as done
already where in deed it was as then yet to be done in time coming. And to this
apertayneth ye follows in this ca^ticle. And he has set up unto us an horn
of health, in ye house of David his servant. An horn in scripture An horn in
scripture.
is taken for the power and dominion. As zacharias would say: The corporal
kingdom now has his end now appointed, and the septer is taken from ye
tribe of Judah, But be of good comfort, we shall now be better then ever we
were. For why, we shall have a new king, which in deed was promised us long
agoo, which shall set up a kingdom, not corporal, wherein he may reign with
outward power, but a kingdom of health and eternal life, according to the
promise so many thousand years promised to the Patriarchs and unto David. For
doubtless, whosoever shall believe in this king, and keep his word, he shall
assuredly obtain this health. Now who could doubt in this? Did not God in times
past speak these words by ye mouth of the Prophets? Disse^cio^ betwyxt
Christ and ye world.
Did not he promise the same by the Patriarchs? Notwithstanding there shall
rise debate and discencion between this king and the world. For surely he will
give sentence, that all such things as the world estemeth right and good, be
unrighteous, and by his word he will cast away all their holiness, wisdom and
virtues, and co^dempne them. And here out shall begin this strife with
contynuance, but yet so, that at ye conclusion the victory shall be Christ's,
not alonly for his own commoditee or profit, but much rather for all those
that believe in him. If thou desyrest to know what he shall do: He shall deliver
us from our enemies, and from the hands of all them that hated us. Furthermore
he will show us the way, which when we enter into we shall not despair of
mercy for our sins: for he will remember that faithful oath, that he swear
to Abraham our father. Briefly by his own merits of mere grace without
deserving of our works, he will make us righteous, godly and blessed: so that
we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, may serve him all the days
of our life: not in outward ceremonies and services, as in times past, but in
holiness and righteousness that is accepted before him. He requires the heart,
he asks faith, he will be worshipped in spirit and truth and will not be
filled with outward works that lack faith, as men have done in times past.
Thus you see that Zacharias by the holy ghost acknowledges the grace of the
gospel that should come, therefore he praises and glorifieth god, as one
ascertayned, that by this grace we al shall be saved. The lord our god give us
grace, both that we may know it, and also that for it we may give thanks to
god our father, and glorify him for ever. Amen.

The gospel on saint Peter and Paul's day. Math. 16.
Woodcut illustration of St. Peter the Apostle holding a book and the keys of
the kingdom of heaven. When Jesus came into the coasts of the city which is
called Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying: Mar. 8. Luc. 9.
Who do men say that I the son of man am? They say: Some say, thou art John
Baptist: some Helias: some Hieremias, or one of the number of the prophets. He
says unto them: But whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter answered and said:
Luce. 9. John. 6
Thou art Christ the son of the living god. And Jesus answered and said
unto him: Happy art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
opened that unto the, John. 6
but my father which is in heaven. And I say also unto the, that thou art
Peter, and upon this rock, 1 Co. 10. Esa. 28.
I will buyld my congregation. And the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. And will give unto the, the keys of the kyngedome of heaven, and mat. 18
what so ever thou byndest in earth, shall be bound in heaven: and what so
ever thou losest in earth, shall be loed in heaven.

THE EXPOSITION.
The confession of the Apostles.
WE have first set forth in this gospel, that excellent confession of S. Peter
and the other Apostels, wherein they confess that he is Christ the son of
the living god. This confession is so excellent and noble, yea and so
christian, that we dare boldlye say, that where this confession is not,
doubteles there is no salvation at all, as the Apostell Saint Paul
witnesses, Romans
saying: The heart believes unto righteousness, and the mouth confesses unto
salvation.

First CHRIST asks what opinyon the people had of him, and whom they said
he was. The Apostels answered him: Some say, thou art John the Baptist: some
say, Helias: some Hieremias, or one of the prophets. Christ was not
ignoraunte what was spoken of him, and also he knew it better then the
apostels could tell him, that where the gospel is preached, there must needs
arise many lies, which are imagined not only against the truth, but also
against them ye preach the truth, whereout it chances often times that the
world rages and waxes wood with them.

Therefore needs must it be, that Christ aposing his disciples, sought some
other thing at his apostels, that is to sai, their confession of faith as ye
shall hear. For thus he says: But whom say you that I am? The^ answered Petre
in the name of them al: The faith of the Apostels.
Thou art the same Christ the son of the living god. Considre inwardly this
confession, and thou shall see that the faith of all the Apostels was a true and
a right faith, except that as yet it was not confirmed with the cross, and
that yet the holy ghost was not come upon them. First of all they confess that
he is the same Christ, that is to say, the same anointed and captain, whom
god had long before promised, Esai. 55
to their fathers, and whom they had so long time looked for, that doubtless
he should come and fulfill all such things as the holy scriptures had
prophesied of. Furthermore also they confess, that he is Christ son of the
living god, sent into this world, that by his merit, passion and death, all
men might be made good, righteous, and blessed. And thus (as it is in dead
conueniente to do) they confess the same one Christ to be both god and man.
For as concerning his humane nature, he is the son of Dauyd, anointed of
the father king and Priest, and that after the order of Melchisedech: and God
has given unto him the seat of David, that is, the spiritual kyngedome,
which is admynistred by the spyryte, that he may sytte upon it eternallye.
But as concerning his godheade, he is the son of the living god, one in
substance, essence or being and majesty with the father, so yt neither may the
father be separate from the son, nor the son from the father, as saint
Paul says: Collo. 2
In Christ dwells all fullness of the godhead corporally. Now whosoever with
such faith, and after this manner as the Apostles here did, confesses Christ,
without doubt he shall also with the Apostles be made partaker of eternal
salvation, as Christ here says unto Peter, like as to al his disciples:
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona etc.

Secondarily we see in this gospel that this confession comes not of our
strengthes, but by the reuelacion of God. For as soon as Peter had in the name
of them all declared what opinion they had of him, Flesh and blood in scripture
by and by Christ said: Flesh and blood has not opened it to thee, but my
father which is heaven. Shall then our flesh, that is, reason, wit, prudence,
freewyll and the strengthes of man be of no value in matter of our
iustificacion and confessyng of God? Surely nothing. For without doubt here
nothing is of value, but mere grace and mercy. Now if it be grace, than I
believe, that I may do good works, that I can confess Christ as the Apostles
do in this place, needs must I let flesh continue as flesh, and blood as
blood, so ye inasmuche as partayneth unto our salvation, ye flesh not only can
do nothing, but also it can do nothing but sin, as S. Ihon ye Evangelist
says: Ihon. 1
As many as receive him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God, to
those yt believe in his name which are not borne of bloudes nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but they are borne of God. Does not the
Evangelist here clean refuse and reject in matter of iustificacio^ al together
that is borne of bloudes, or of ye will of flesh or of the will of man? Even
so it is necessary that we consider here in this place the confession of Peter
and the other Apostles, that it came not of their reason, wisdom or frewyll.
For surely Christ would in this word drive back, make blunt and overthrow our
presumpcion, and meke that pride that is borne in us, that we should learn to
distrust of our selves and our own strengthes, and to seek righteousness and
health otherwhere, then at our selves or in our own works. But where should it
be sought? Forsooth at him that opened unto the Apostles that excellent
confession of Christ, that is to say, at the heavenly father, of whom Christ
also says in another place: Noman knows the father, but only the son: and
noman knows the son, but the father only, and he to whom the father will
open him.

Thyrdly, A promise given unto the church.
we have in this Gospel a promise of Christ given to the church, that is
this: That the gates of hell, that is, Satan and all power and wisdom of the
world, shall not prevail against it.

Now note upon what foundation this church must be builded, to whom this
excellent promise pertayneth. Christ says: Thou art Peter, that is stonye,
that is, you stand steadfast in thy confession as does the stony rock. For
thou co^fessest and beleuest, that I am Christ and the son of the living God,
that is, thou beleuest that I am the savior and redemer of the whole world.
Wherefore now, such faith shall be in my church, that has respect to me and my
word and only depends upon me and stand sure and firm in the same
confession as thou have done now. And upon such a faith as only puts
confidence upon my word, I will buyld my church so strongly, that not the gates
of hell, that is, what so ever be against me, other in hell or in earth, shall
prevail against it. Doubtless persecution shall arise, and Satan him self
shall not cease by thousand means to tempte, The gates of hell.
if it may any way be possible to take away the word from my church. But he
shall not obtain his purpose but spend his labor in vain. And why? For I my
self will be protector and defender of it. A like saying has Christ in Mat.
Whosoever hears of me these words and does them, Mat. 7
I will liken him to a wise man that has buylt his house upon a rocky stone,
and the rain came down, and the fluddes arose, and the winds blew, and they
fell with violence upon that house, and it was not overthrown, for it was
builded upon a stony rock. Now seeing that Christ has with this his so rich and
excellent a promise provided for his church, With out the trwe church is no
salvation Ephe. 5
I pray you, who will be so mad to separate him self from christ's church? I
say again, from Christ's church, for the which as S. Paul says he has given
him self to death, to sanctify it, and cleanse it in the fountain of water by
the word, to make it unto him self a glorious congregation, having no spot nor
wrinkell, nor any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame.

Fourthly, we se to whom Christ has committed the power of ye keys, and how
far ye same power extends it self. It was said before, that Peter answered in
the name of all the Apostels, and that Christ's words were to Peter and to al ye
other Apostels. Seeing it is so, needs must we confess, that power and autorite
to lose and bind, was not given to Peter alone, but generally to all the
Apostels. Now if any will be contencious and hold opinion that the power was
given to Peter only, yet is his mouth stopped with these places of Math. and
John, where Christ said to his Apostles: Mat, 18 Ioh. 20
Whose sins so ever ye forgive, they be forgiven, and whose sins so ever ye
retain, they are retained. Although it be without question, that those yt
dispute and strive by the swords (as they say) for the power of Peter, they
take upon them those disputacions, not for Peter's sake, but o^li to flatter
therewith their Roman Antichrist. But truth it is, yt the gates of hell have so
sore prevailed against him, that every child may perceive easily, yt this
promise ought not to be wrested and falsely applied to the Roman seat. Besides
yt, what with his false doctrine and his diuelishe pride he has so sore
overthrown him self, that his estimacion has but small place in the hertes of
those that believe. But now, what is the power of the keys? Truly nothing else
but ye administracion of ye word and sacraments. For Christ has given this his
word and sacraments unto his church. And the church commits the same power
unto ye ministers of the word, which execute this office in ye name of ye whole
church. Therefore whersoeuer the word is preched, received and believed, there
also without doubt is remission of sins, and that is it that here is
understand by losyng. To lose and bind.
And whersoeuer the word of god is preached and men believe it not, surely there
remains perpetual co^demnacio^, and there is no remission of sins, and that
same is here understand by binding. For doutles the promise stands here
steadfastly and assuredly, yt what so ever ye ministers of ye word lose upon
earth in the name of the whole congregation, the same is losed also in earth:
And what so ever they bind upon earth, the same is bound also in heaven. And
doubteles this power is not to be contemned, for that the minister or priest
does in this matter, he doothe it not of himself, but god himself doothe
it, which for the same intent, has given unto us his word and
Sacraments. To whom with the son and the holy ghost be all honor and
praise, world without end. Amen.

The gospel on saint Mary Magdalenes day. Luc. 7.
Woodcut illustration of St. Mary Magdalen with long loose hair, helmet and a
jar of oil. ANd one of the Phariseis desired him that he would eat with him.
And he went into the Phariseis house, and sat down to meat Mat. 26 Mar 14
John. 11
And behold, a woman in that City (which was a sinner) as soon as she
knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Phariseis house, she brought and
alablaster box of oyntement and stood at his feet behynd him weeping, and
began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hears of her
head, and kyssed his feet, and anointed them with the oyntement.

When the Pharesey which had bydden him saw, he spoke within him self,
saying: If this man were a prophet, he would suerly know, who, and what manner
of woman this is that touches him, for she is a sinner. And Jesus answered,
and said unto him: Simon, I have somewhat to say unto the. And he said:
Master say on. There was a certain lender which had two detters: the one
ought five hundredth pence, and the other fyfty. When they had nothing to
pay, he forgave them both Tell me therefore which of them will love him most?
Simon answered and said: I suppose that he to whom he forgave most. And he
said unto him: Thou have truly judged.

And he turned to the woman and said unto Symo^: See thou this woman? I
entered into thy house, thou gave me no water for my feet: but she has
washed my feet with tears, and wyped them with the heeres of her head. Thou
gave me no kiss, but she, sense the time I came in, has not ceased to
kiss my feet. Mine head with oil thou dyddest not annoint, but she has
anointed my feet with ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, many sins are
forgeuen her, for she loved much. To whom less is forgeuen, the same does
less love. And he said unto her, thy sins are forgeuen thee. And they that
satte at meat with him began to say within the^ selves: who is this which
forgeueh sins also? And he said to the woman: Mat. 5.
Thy faith has saved thee. Go in peace.

THE EXPOSITION.
IN this Gospel dear Christians is first descrybed a poor sinner, which not
only was come to the knowledge of her sins, but also by faith obtained
remission of the^. Wherefore it is a very necessary thing, that this word, A
sinful woman, A sinner
be well considered and wayed in our hearts, that by it we may put a true
difference between an indurate and blind sinner as was ye Pharisey, and a
sinner that acknowlegeth his myserye and sins. For there are sinners which
are doubtless blinded and delivered into a reprouable sense, as was Pharao, of
whom ye scripture says, that his heart was hardened. Exo. 14
There are also some that are sinners only before God and not before the world,
as the hypocrites, of who^ the scrip says says: Luc. 16.
You are those that iustifye your selves before men. Notwithstanding God knows
your hearts. Also there are sinners both before God and the world. And
forasmuch as their sins displease them, and they acknowledge their sins,
therefore especially is the gospel occupied about these before any other. And
such a sinner also was this woman that is spoken of in this gospel. For she
felt her sins, and acknowleged that she had broken the law, and further that
she had need of help and counsel. And therefore makes she so great have and
deferreth it not, when she had heard that Jesus was in ye Phariseys house,
sekyng grace of him that had power and authoritee to remyt sin. Furthermore
with weapyng tears, annoyntyng, washyng and wypyng his feet, she testifyeth
what strong faith and love she bare unto Christ. Faith is an excellent thing
And now ponder it well, how excellent a thing faith is, that first
acknowlegeth her sins, and after that flees unto Christ. This woman being a
public open sinner, knew right well that she should have but a syngle welcome
into the Phariseys house, neither should she escape the rebukes and tauntes of
them, yet so great is her love and faith toward Christ, that neglectyng and
contemnynge al their rebukes, checkes and other contumelyes, without fear she
hastes unto Christ, of whom she might obtain remission of her sins.
Wherefore, now note diligently and consider the process and also the success
of this woman, for doubtless she shall teach both the and me, how they must be
disposed that will obtain remission of their syns of god the father through
Christ. Thus says the Evangelist: She began to weete his feet with tears.
Tears are a most certain sign of a penitent mind, that the sins
displease from the heart. But what were such repentance without faith? But
this woman has faith also. Repentance and ^ayth must be joined together
Truly it is a great token of faith in this woman, that setting light the
threttes and checkes of the Phariseys, she hastes unto Christ, and that
Christ him self testified, saying: Thy faith has made the safe. Now
doubtless this faith was not idle in this woman, but is shed forth it self
through love. Are not these manifest signs of love, that according to the
custom of the region, she enbalmeth Christ's head with most precious
ointment, weeteth his feet with tears, kysseth them and wypeth them with the
hears of her head? Even so it is expedient that we be like this woman, if
at the least we will obtain eternal health. True penance.
Needs must we have a perpetual penance, that is to say, the knowledge of
sin, the forsakyng of sin, and the hatyng of sin. Furthermore we must
have faith, whereby we may take hold upon the promise of the Gospel: Last of
all, it is necessary that we declare our faith with works of love, even as
we here se ensample set surth in this woman.

Secondarily, in this Gospel is Christ descrybed as a good, gentle and
merciful Lord. The goodness of Christ
For he receives this woman with so great humanitee and gentleness, nothing
considering the murmuryng of the Phariseys, so that this receyuyng should well
move and stir up all sinners to true faith. Let us mark all things
orderly as they stand, and we shall find Christ in all things merciful, gentle
and full of compassion, like as he is set forth unto us in the scriptures.

First Christ suffers the sinful woman to annoint him, he suffers her to
wash his feet and to wype them, he suffers her to kiss him, which no
Pharisey would have suffered to be done, especially of such a woman.
Furthermore, when the Pharisey murmured that he received so great a sinner,
Christ defe^deth this his fact by a similitude of a creditor that had two
debtors, the one ought five hundredth pence, and the other fyfty. Now seeing
neither of both were able to pay, he forgave them both. And then he asked Symo^:
Tell me, whether of these twain shall love him most? Wherefore Christ came in to
the world.
Surely with this similitude Christ shows wherefore he came into this world,
namely for sinners. For without doubt we all are his debtors. And who is it
that is not a debtor, or that will deny this debte? If we will say (says
saint Ihon) that we have not sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us. Romans 3.
And S. Paul says: All have sinned, and want the glory of God. What shall I
say of the similitude which is written in the gospel of saint Luke? To make
short, we all are debtors of this Lord which way soever we turn our selves.
Luc. 12.
And would to God he would give us this grace to knowledge our debt, and to
believe in Christ which for gives it, and also furthermore yt we might find
grace as this woman did. Doubtless she knowleged her sins, sought grace, and
found it. And inasmuche as five hundred pence were forgiven her, all her
iniquite remitted and pardoned, therefore also she showed her self thankful
and heartely loved him of who^ she was thus received into grace. Love followed
faith.
Wherefore if thou also will have remission of thy sins, set thy self among
these debtors that owe five hundred pence, know thy self to be the greatest
sinner living upon the earth, say with ye Publicane: I am not worthy to look
up into the heaven, and then ask grace at Christ, believe the words of his
Gospel. If thou thus do, doubtless thou shall obtain thy request.

For that sweet word spoken unto the woman, pertayneth also as well unto yt as
unto her. The word is this: Thy sins are forgeuen thee. And this word ought
ever to sound in a christians ear, as often as our sins oppress us, and we
would gladly be delivered from them, as we say in the confession of our faith:
I believe that in this life there is perpetually forgeuenes of sins. The
Church has ever sinners, as the scripture testifyeth: The righteous falls
vii. times in the day and ryseth again. Therefore seeing that we are so weak
that we sin continually, therefore is it nedeful that we may have contynually
remission of sins in the Church of Christ, and the christian ought to know
that these words: Thy sins are forgeuen thee, are words for all times that
never shall be disanulled but continue for ever.

Thyrdly, Hypocrites always murmur against God.
this gospel contains the grudgynges of the Phariseys against Christ, which
rise upon this occasion, that Christ received the synful woman and forgave her
all her sins. The chief of them was Simon, which said wtin himself: If he
were a Prophet, surely he should know, who and what woman it is that touches
him, for she is a sinner. Of these cogitacions a man may perceive, what is the
nature of hypocrisy. Now this is the nature of hypocrisy. Now this is ye
nature of hypocrites to esteem them selves highly, to boast and crake their
own merytes, to set up their own righteousness, and to contempne all other as
we may see in many examples of the holy gospel. And doubtless this hypocrisy is
a thing borne within all men, yea so soore rooted, that it can not be
plucked out, till the holy ghost come, and new create that old Adam, making
him a new creature, ^. 9.
as Esaias says: For all they are wicked and hypocrites, and all their mouths
have spoken folly. But Christ in this place could not ouerpasse it, but he
tells Simon his hypocrisye. Thou (says he) gave me not water for my
feet, (as the custom is of this country:) when I came into thy house, thou
gave me no kiss, thou enbalmedst not my head with oil. But this sinner has
done all this, yea and that with such diligence, that I can not cast her from
me, for it is done of faith and love. Thou lothest her as a sinner, but I for
the faythes sake that she has in me, do receive her as a daughter and
inheritour of God. And though before times her sins were great, Faith makes
us children of God.
yet now is the love greater yt she has to me. By like manner Christ stopped
ye mouths of the other Phariseys that sat at meat with him, so that they said
within them selfs: What, is this he that also forgeueth sins? For Christ by
and by adds to this: Thy faith has made the safe, go thy way in peace. As
who says: You wonder and are offended, that I am not offended toward this
poor woman, but know you, yt I not only will receive her, but also will make
her more righteous then you are. For why, she believes in me and sets her
whole faith upon me. Therefore will I forgive her all her sins, and obtain
her peace in conscience before God, yt she shall no more be accused for her
sins. How think you sounded these words in the Jews ears? Yet were they
made never the better by these words. They were hypocrites, and hypocrytes
they continued: even as we all should do if the holy spirit of God bring us not
from our hypocrisy unto his truth. God through Christ grant that we may
attain unto it. Amen.

The gospel on saint James day the Apostle. Matthew. 20.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. James dressed as a medieval pilgrim
with cape, broad-brimmed hat adorned with cockle shell, scrip and walking
stick. THen came to him the mother of zebedes children, with her sons, Mar. 10
worshippyng him, and desiryng a certain thing of him. And he says unto her:
What wylt thou? She said unto him: Grant, that these my two sons may sytte,
the one on thy right hand, and the other on the left, in thy kyndome.

But Jesus answered and said: Ye wot not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink
of the cup that I shall drink of: and to be baptized with the baptism that I
am baptized with? They say unto him, we are. He said unto them: Ye shall drink
in deed of my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with.
But to sit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give: But it shall
chance unto them, that it is Mat. 25
prepared for of my father.

THE EXPOSITION.
First we see here in this gospel the ignorance of the Apostles James and Ihon,
which had often heard of Christ, although they did not receive it, nor printed
it in their memory, that Christ's kingdom should be a spiritual kingdom, and
even within them. Yea they were yet so ignorant, that they thought they should
without any cross at all been wholly promoted and made great Lords, and so
reign with Christ, according to the pomp and glory of this world. But these
so fond imaginacions dare they them selves not utter unto Christ, although
they set not a little by these, but moved their mother to go to Christ, to prove
whether she might obtayn yt they desired. But what was their request? Forsooth
that in the kingdom of Christ, which they thought a worldely kingdom, one
might have his seat upon the right hand, another upon the left hand, and so
to enjoy the honor of this world. Here it had been the mothers duetye, to
bring her sons from this purpose and mind, and to have enstructed them much
better. But in these matters that appertain to the kyndome of Christ, the
mother is as blind and ignorant as her sons. She would gladly have had her
sons promoted and made great men, even as customably many mothers boast ye
pomp and riches with their children. But the kingdom of Christ is not so
ordered, to have in it much po^pe and boasting, but as it is a spiritual
kingdom, even so it has only a spiritual scepter, namely the word and the
holy gospel. And now this word is such a word that it brings with it not
a pleasant life, but contradiction and persecucion, 1. Cor. 1
insomuche that S. Paul calls it the word of the cross, saying: The word
of the cross is to them that perish, folly, but to us that obtain health, it
is the power of God. If then it be the word of the cross, how can we have in
the kingdom of Christ, other pleasure, pomp or honors of this world? It is
not to be looked for, but needs must we here suffer, and by many tribulacions
we must enter into the kingdom of God, as saint Luke testifyeth of Christ
also, Luc. 24 Esa. 53.
that he must needs suffer and rise again from the dead, and so to enter into
his glory. But as yet James and Ihon understood not this, therefore they
judged it should be in the kingdom of Christ, as it was in other ciuyl
kingdoms. And surely as these Apostles were then ignorant of the kingdom of
Christ, so doubtless are we, except we be lightened by the holy ghost.

Secondarily, The presu^pcion of man.
we have here also an example of the presumpcion of man. For besides their
peticion which was against God, they dare also say, that they were able to
drink the cup which the Lord should drink, and to be baptized with the
baptism, which the Lord should be baptized in.

What judge you of this presumpcion? Even so said Peter to Christ, that he
would go with him into death, but the end showed that it was but the purpose
of a man. The cup and baptism of Christ, in this place are taken for his
passion and persecucion that he suffered, as it is also in the Prophet: Psalm.
I will take to me (says he) the cup of salvation, and I will call upon the
name of the Lord. Of this baptism Christ himself says: I must be baptized
with a baptism, and what pangues suffer I till it be fulfilled? To drink this
cup and to be baptized with this baptism is not in every man's power, but
there longs to it an especial connyng. But what is that? Forsooth the same
coming that is wrought in us only by the holy ghost.

For where soever he comes, there must it needs be wrought that in
tribulacio^ they shall have paciens But on the other part where the holy ghost
is not, there are men none otherwise minded than Peter was, when he did strike
of the Bishops servants ear. And truly these disciples which at this time
were thus presumptuous, knew but little what the cross and baptism meant. But
did god therefore cast the^ of? No forsooth. But he bears their weakness and
suffers it very gentelye. And also promyseth thme that they shall drink his
cup and suffer with him many tribulacions, and so by many tribulacions at the
last enter into the kingdom of heaven, and perpetually raygne with him.
Therefore if Christ cast not of his disciples, The weak ar to be boren with all.
because of their weakness, but bears with them with all humanity and
gentleness, till they might come to the true understanding, doubtless no more
becomes it us to condemn those yt are weak, but much rather it is our deuty
to instruct and teach them, and to bring them unto better knowledge.

Thirdly, for as much as these disciples required to sit in Christ's kingdom
(that they esteemed to be a temporal raygne) one on the right hand, and an
other upon the left, Christ denayeth not his heavenly kingdom to them, only
showing to them of whose hand they shall receive it: To sit at my right hand
(says he) or at my left hand, it pertains not to me to give, Christ
speaks some times as a man, and sometime as God.
but unto them for whom it is prepared of my father. Here note diligently,
that Christ speaks sometimes as a man, and sometime as god. For this is very
necessary to be observed and noted if we will at the least understand ye
scriptures. In the gospel of saint Ihon Christ says: As the father rayseth up
the dead and gives life, even so the son gives life to who^ he will. Here
Christ makes himself in all things equal with ye father. Therefore needs must
this place be understand of ye godly nature of Christ. In this present gospel
Christ says, that only the father and not he gives to sit on the right hand
or on the left. Except this be understand of Christ's humayne nature, I pray
you, how shall these two so contrary sentences else agree? Wherefore it is very
necessary to note diligently (as we before admonished) when Christ speaks as
man and when he speaks as God. And also furthermore note this, that unto the
kingdom of Christ and unto that joy that is everlasting none can bring us, but
God only, which prepared it for us from the beginning of the world. This is
altogether in his power to give it unto whom he will. Now if this power be
all in him, where are then our works? where is our virtue, righteousness or
holiness?

Doubtless we are bound to do good works, ye and to be virtuous, righteous and
holy, for Christ's will is that our light should shine before men to the
glory of our heavenly father. This is very truth, and who can deny it? But here
must we diligently take heed, that unto our iustificacion no man's work or
merit be joined with all, for that comes only of faith, wherein also the
grace, goodness and mercy of God works altogether, which only is apprehended
by faith. And where as this faith is, there is also forgeuenes of sins,
righteousness and eternal salvation is. Then follow good works, as ye fruits,
tokens and arguments of true faith. But this have we sufficiently treated upon
before. Only the Lord God give us grace to perceive it and retain it in our
hearts. Amen.

The gospel on saint Bartholomewes day the Apostle. Luc. 22.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. Bartholomew holding a flaying knife.
ANd there was a strife among the^ which of them should seem to be the
greatest. And he said unto the^: The kings of nations reign over them, and
they that have authoritee upon them, are called gracious Lords, but ye shall
not be so. Mat. 20
But he that is greatest among you, shall be as the younger, And he that is
chief, shall be as he that does minister: For whether is greatter he that
sytteth at meat, or he that serves? Is not he that sytteth at meat? But I am
among you, as he that ministers. Ye are they, which have bydden with me in my
temptacions. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has appointed to
me, that ye may eat and drink at my table im my kingdom, and Mat. 19
syttee on seats, iudgyng the xii. tribes of Israel.

THE EXPOSITION.
The ignorance of the Apostles.
THis Gospel again sets out to us an ensample of the ignorance and
infirmity that was in the Apostles. And surely a man might well marvel, that
the Apostles which had heard Christ so long, yet had obtained no more
understanding of ye spiritual kingdom of Christ, and of spiritual things.
Yea, and if we consider at what time this strife and contencion was, surely the
infirmitee of ye Apostles shall appear far more and greater, then if it had
chanced at some other time. When then chanced this contention? By and by
after that last supper wherein Christ had said, that his Traitors hand was
with him at his table, and that the son of man should pass as it was written of
him. The which words suerly should rather have stricken the Apostels into
fear and made them heavy and pensive, seeing that Christ showed them with these
words so openly yt he should suffer, yet begin they to strive, which of them
should be highest in reputacion. Iho. 13
Did not Christ a little before tell them, that a servant is not greater
then his lord? Now where did Christ their lord ever desire great dominions of
this world or the great pompes of it? Did not he fly, John. 6
when the Jews would have taken him and made him king? Did not he before
show them, Mat. 10
that he would send them as sheep among wolves? When was it ever seen that
sheep bare rule as Emperoures among wolves? But truth it is, although this
be preached, till men leesse their voice for wearines, yet is flesh flesh
still, and so continneth except the spyrite of God come to yt and lighten it.
John. 2 1. Co. 15
So that well said S. Paul: The first man of earth is earthly. For what
speak we, what understand we, what do we (without the spirit of god) but
earthely things? Some attribute much to our reason, our wits, our free
will, but if we will confer and examine al our strengthes according to the
scripture, lo S. Paul stands forth, and says: Romans 8.
The wisdom of the flesh, is enmitye to god, for it is not subject to the
law of god, nor in very deed it can not be. You hear now in this place,
that it is not in our power to obey to the law of god. Why then defend we so
earnestly and so highly commend the strengthes of man and free will? I beseech
the knowledge it, even in the example of the Apostles, what and how great the
infirmity and powers of man is, the^ without doubt shall thou the better
understand, what thou must look for of Christ. For truly thou shalt never
have the knoweledge of Christ, except thou first know thy self.

Christ does bear our weakness and instructed us.
Secondarily, we se here with how great pacyence Christ bears this infirmity
of the Apostels, and many times familiarly talks with them and teaches them.
The kings (says Christ) of the heythen, bear rule over them, and those
that use power over them, are called gracious lords. In which words Christ
confirms the ciuyl empiers and dominions of this world, but he approves it
not in the Apostles. For other men are called unto those degrees and offices.
Who ar they? Kings of the Heithen, princes and other great men. For douteles
unto them is the sweard given and committed, (as Paul says) to punish the
euel, Romans 13
and defend the good and virtuous. And forasmuch as they have this sweard
committed to them of god, and not of them selves, therefore we the residue of
the people must obey and be subject to this ordinance of god, for conscience
sake. Pet. 2.
And S. Peter says: Be subject unto every humane ordinance for the lords
sake. And when the soldiers came to S. John and asked him, Luce. 3.
saying: What shall we do to be saved? He commanded not them to lay away their
sweardes, but that they should oppress no man, nor do no man wrong. And even so
Christ in this place acknowledges, ye kings and princes and other
magistrates must have the dominion, and that their dominions and regimentes are
gods own ordinance, notwithstanding he will by no means admit his apostels
and ministers of his word unto such cyuyle impery. As for you (says Christ)
you shall not be so. How then? He that is the greater among you, shall be as the
youngest: and the chiefest shall be as a servant. You se here how goodly Christ
turns all otherwise. The disciples would be rulers, and Christ deposes them
from al cyuile goueruenaile. The disciples would be lords, and Christ makes
the^ servants. Does he this (think ye) lawfully, and did he him self abstain
from such imperye and power? Yea doubteles. Phil. 2.
For thus writes S. Paul: Let the same mind be among you, that was in Christ
Jesus, which when he was in form of god, he thought it not robbery to be equal
with god, but he humbles him self, taking the form of a servant, made in the
similitude of men, and in habit found as man, he meketh himself and was made
obedient unto the death, yea the death of the cross. And even so Christ in
this gospel allegeth his own example, saying: Who is greater, he that sits,
or he that serves? Is not he that sits? And I am among you, as he that
serves. Christ becomet out servant.
Hear you not how Christ, although he was lord, yet he meketh him self and
is made a servant to us? Even so must the apostels and all minysters of the
word do.

They may bear rule, but yet so as CHRIST bare rule in this world, and as S.
Paul said: 1 Co. 7.
Let men so esteem us, as the ministers of Christ, and dispensers of the
mysteries of God. Surely this gospel is a fearful gospel to our Bishops and
priests. For it is to be feared, except they use them selves otherwise in
expoundyng the word of God then they have done before time, this gospel will
eternally condemn them.

Thyrdly, there is in this gospel a notable and excellent promise, that Christ
will ordain and appoint to his Apostles and all his electes a kingdom, even as
his heavenly father has appointed him, yt they may eat and drink upon his
table in that kingdom, and furthermore sit upon seats iudgyng the xii. tribes
of Israel. Who would not now gladly and with all his heart lay himself under
this cross, to suffer with Christ in this world, seeing that by his passion we
shall enter into that great glory? Doubtless they are fools and without wit,
that more set by and esteem this temporal and small joy and voluptuous
pleasures of this world, then that glorious kingdom that Christ will give to
his after this life. Truth it is, ye Apostles fell in this thing and desired
this temporal glory. But what do ye think by this, did not they after that
their had received the holy ghost, contemn and set not a straw by this
worldely glory? I long (said Paul) to be dissolved, Phi. 1.
and to be with Christ. Item Christ is life to me, and death is advantage. He
said not, that he desired to be a Lord and bear rule, or to desire the worldly
glory, or that the glory of the world should be to him advantage, but this
wishes he with most hearty desire, to be with Christ in his kingdom.
Christ's kingdom is spiritual.
And here note, ye Christ's kingdom is spiritual, and though it stands in
this world and is begone by the word and spirit, yet shall it not be made
perfect and end in this world, but in the world to come. Now as this
kingdom is spiritual, To eat and drink in the kingdom of Christ.
so to eat and drink in it, is also spiritual. And this is the meaning of
Christ: In this world truly you shall have small joy, for you are not of this
world, therefore the world shall persecute and shall hate you, but be of a
good comfort, for this persecucion shall ones have an end. I will then receive
you into my kingdom, In the which kingdom ye shall enjoy perpetual peace,
joy and abundance of all spiritual riches. And God shall wype al tears from
your eyes, and death shall be no more, nor lamentacion, nor criyng, nor sorrow
shall be any more, for they are gone before. If ye have sowed in tears, ye shall
reap in gladness. And in like manner must we speak of the thrones and
judgment. For all these things are spiritual. Those that believe may judge all
things by the word, and they can be judged of no man. Furthermore at that
day they shall be witnesses to those that believed their words, that they may
be saved, and against those yt believed not their words to convince them,
that they may be cast away and dampened for ever. In sum, Christ promises
his Apostles, those that have followed him, despisyng ye poverty of the world
and the contempt and hatered of the Phariseys, and do obey him, that they shall
have his kingdom, perpetual salvation, and everlasting joy, which promise is
not to ye Apostles only, but to all that believe in him, and continue unto the
end in his faith. Which God grant us through his only son our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

The gospel on saint Mathewes day the Apostle and Evangelists day. Math. 9.
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. Matthew the Evangelist holding a
scroll. ANd as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man (named Mathewe)
sittyng at the receyte of custom, and he says unto him, follow me. And he
rose, and followed him. And it came to pass, as Jesus satte at meat in his
house: behold, many Publicanes also and sinners that came, sat down with
Jesus and his disciples.

And when the Phariseys saw it, they said unto his disciples: Why eats your
master with Publicans and sinners? But when Jesus heart that, he said unto
them: They that be strong, need not the Physician, but they that are sick: Go
ye rather and learn what that means: Osee. 6. Mat. 11
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have here first in this Gospel the calling of the holy Apostle S. Mathewe
unto his office to preach the Gospel. And it is very necessary to consider
and look well upon this and such like callynges. For we see how great evil
they are authors of, and what great hurt they do, that forsake wife and
children and uncalled take upon them the office of preaching. The calling is
tow manner o^ ways. Exo 3.
Verily the lawful calling is wrought of God, either immediately or mediatly.
By God immediately were called in the old testament Moses and the prophets,
and in the new testament S. Paul. And these certainly approved their vocacion
with good doctrine and miracles, that it was of God. Act. 9.
And mediatly from God were called the other Apostles, which also after the
resurrection of Christ chose certain other and ordained and appointed them to
be preachers. Now this mean and organe is Christ, which chose in the name of
his father certain disciples, and appointed them to preach the gospel. Of
this vocacion which is by certain means, S. Paul speaks manyfestly: For
this cause I left yt in Candy (or Creta) to amend such things as want, and to
set in every town bishops etc. But now some man will say: How shall I
know whether this vocacio^ done by means between God and us, be true and
godly, seeing that ye Papists and Anabaptists call and appoint such as be of
their sects to preaching? I answer. This may be known by ye doctrine of him
that is called. For if it be agreale to the word of God, then is that vacacio^
true and lawful: And such a preacher is to be heard, received, and had in good
honor and estimacio^. That he ought to be heard, Christ says: Who that
hears you, hears me. Who casts forth you, he casts forth me. That he
ought to be had in good estimacion, S. Paul says: Priests that govern well,
are worthy double honor, especially such as labor in the word and
doctrine. But if he boast his sendyng, ministry and calling never so much,
and yet his doctrine be against the word of God, take it for an vnfallyble
truth, he is sent of Satan. And such in very deed are the Papists and
Annabaptystes, whose doctrine almost in every article is plain contrary
against the word of God. Now in this vocacion of Mathewe note these 11.
things. First that Christ called a simple and unlearned plain man to ye office
of preaching. This shows plainly that God choseth those things yt are
folishe before the world, to shame those that the world has in high
estimacion. Another to note is, that he called unto ye office of Apostleship a
sinner and a Publican. And by this he shows, that he is not a respector of
personages, and also that he came into the world to save sinners.

The obedience of Mathewe.
Secondarily, this Gospel prayseth and sets forth the obedience of Mathewe.
For by and by as he had heard the voice and commandment of Christ, he obayed
and followed him. Yea he followed Christ both spiritually and also corporally.
The word that Christ said to him, Follow me, not only sounded in the ears of
his body, but it also entered into his very heart, and made him prompt and glad
to forsake all things, and to follow Christ. For if the spirit of God had not
made that word lively and able to work in his heart, he had not (doubtless) so
sone forsaken his office and riches. For surely we know right well the nature
of richemen, The nature of richmen Mat 19
even by ye words that Christ himself spoke, saying: It is easyer for a Camel
to go through the eye of a nedle, then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And here note the power of the word when it is spoken, for
it is not so light a thing or of so little price as some ungodly esteem it. And
Christ says also in another place of the same word. You are not those that
speak, but the spirit of your father that speaks within you. You hear that
Christ will not separate his spirit and his word. So we see in this
gospel, that this word of Christ, Follow me. did illuminat with the holy spirit
the heart of Matthew, and wrought in him so great faith, desire and love toward
Christ, that by and by, nothing considering his acompt, which yet he had not
mad to the magistrates, he forsook al together and followed Christ. As S. Paul
says: All that is written, is written for our learning, therefore ought we to
set before our eyes this obedience of Matthew, and learn by it to obei in all
things that god commands and requires of us. As for example. If thou be
called unto matrimony, and have not the gift of continency, follow god, which
says of this thing: Genesis 2.
Therefore shall man forsake father and mother, and keep himself unto his wife,
and they shall be two in one flesh. If thou be called to any office in the commonwealth and ciuyle adminystracion, be ready, faithful and obedient. For this
vocacion that is done by the superior Magistrates, is (as S Peter says) of god
himself. 2. Pet. 5
If thou be called to the office of preaching, and art apt to that office, be
obediente, do thy calling. For in this case Christ says: Follow me.

Thirdely, we se in this gospel, Christ came for sinners.
that Christ eats and drinks with publicans and sinners, so that in this
deed he shows and testifies, that he came into this world for sinners. Note
that I say, for siners. For though all the world has ever been full of mischief
and gylty of sin, neither is no man in it, but needs the merits of Christ,
yet do not all men understand this nor acknowledge this. And especyallye the
indurate and hard hearted Pharaos, Pharao
and after them the hipocrites acknoweledge it not.

For ye indurate sinners lead forth their lives even like beasts, not greatly
forsyng whether there be any other life after this or no, or whether there be
any Christ to bring them to that life or no.

But the hypocrites Hypocrittes
that lean to their own righteousness, in deed they can talk of ye wrath to
come, yet notwithstanding they leave Christ and take thus much upon them
selves, that they trust in their own good works to obtain that life and
salvation. I pray you, what good can Christ do to such? Yea what should he do
with such? This first sort of people are stubburne necked and hard hearted,
and thinks they have no need of Christ. The other sort of iusticiaryers,
forsakes the merit of Christ, True sinners
like as they would deserve heaven by their own works. Christ seeing and
considering this, leaves these two sorts, and joins himself to such as
acknowledge them selves sinners, and desire and seek for tomforte and help. And
they also with all their heart, with true love and gladness receive him and
believe his preaching, Mich 7
they doubt not his promise, but they say with the Prophet Mycheas: He shall be
turned, and he will have mercy upon us, and he will cast all our sins into
the deapth of the seas. Even so must we do. Let us adioyne our selves to Christ
as sinners, show to him our sins, and with tears require his mercy. If we
do this with a faithful heart, surely in this gospel he has declared in deed,
yt he is ready to help such sinners. And furthermore with this his deed
agrees also his words that here he speaks unto the Phariseys, saying: The
whole needs not the Physician but the sick. Again: I am not comme to call
the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Fourthly, the Evangelist discrybeth how the Phariseys murmured against
Christ, wherein they open and show plainly that notable pride of their
hearts. But wherefore murmr they? Because Christ eats and drynketh with
sinners. O great holiness of these Phariseys. Tell me I pray ye O holy
hypocrites, where is it written, that such as knowledge themselves sinners and
do repent it, ought to be fled, and their company to be eschewed? Is not
this think you a good and virtuous deed, to seek out again the lost and stray
sheep, and to bring him again into the right way? But I see you do the clean
contrary, for ye judge it both wicked and ungodly. Surely Christ said well of
you in ye gospel of Matthew: Blind guydes, coulyng out the gnat, and swolowe the
Camel. Ma. 27
Ye observe men's tradicions, and would men should esteem you virtuous and
godly, yet can ye very well away with it, that your neighbor should continue
in sin and be condemned. Now if ye were virtuous in deed, ye would surely
never do so. For true righteousness, because it comes of faith, and therefore
also loves his neighbor with all the heart, it wishes yt all men might be
virtuous, righteous and blessed. Wherefore will ye know what ye want? Ye have no
faith, and therefore can ye not love your neighbor, for in very deed that is
the fruit of faith. Now because ye lack faith and love, ye have not only no
compassion upon them that be laden with sin and would with all their hearts
be delivered from their sins, but also (even as the nature of hypocrites and
iusticiariers is) ye despise them and cast them from you. But this your
dispising can do you no good in this behalf. Ye must neds take an other trade
of living, if ye will be taken for righteous. Will ye know how so? Learn what
this means that the prophet Oseas said: Osee. 6.
I will mercy and not sacrifice. For all these outewarde works, all these
outewarde sacrifices, profit nothing at all, except there be present in
the heart a true faith in God, and true love to your neighbor. Behold thus
have we here painted unto us the arrogance and pride of hypocrisy, and
furthermore how Christ stops up the Phariseys mouths, and confuteth
them by the holy scriptures. God grant that the adversaries of the truth
in this our present time, may acknowledge his holy word, and beecome with
the chylderen of god, partakers of his heavenly kingdom, through CHRIST our
Lord. Amen.

The gospel upon S. Mychael the Archangell day. Math. 18.
Woodcut illustration of the Archangel Michael fighting a dragon (Satan). AT
the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying: Mar 9. Luc. 9.
Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a child to him,
and set him in the midst of them, and said: Verily I say unto you: Mar. 10
Except ye turn, and become as Luc. 18. Actu. 2.
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever therefore
humbles himself as this child, the same is the greatest in the ki^gdome of
heaven. And who so receaueth such a child in my name, receives me. But who so
does offend one of these lytleones, Actu. 9 Luc. 17
which believe in me, it were better for him, that a mylstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were doruned in the depth of the sea. Woe unto ye world
because of offenses. 1. Co. 11
Necessary it is that offenses come: But woe unto the man by whom the offense
comes.

Wherefore Mat. 5
if thy hand or thy foot hinder the, cut him of and cast it from thee. It is
better for thee to enter into life halte or maimed, rather then thou should
(having two hands or two feet) be cast into everlasting fire. And it thine
eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee. It is better for thee
to enter into life with one eye, rather then (having two eyes) to be cast in to
hell fire. Take heed, that ye despise not one of these lytleones. For I say unto
you, that in heaven their Angels do always be hold the face of my father,
which is in heaven.

THE EXPOSITION. of this present gospel.
WE have again here in this gospel an example of ye Apostles infirmitee and
ignorance, wherein we see how pacie^tly Christ bears their infirmitee. And as
ye goodness of Christ appears in this Gospel, even so the affection of the
Apostles shows it self to be exceadyng gross and rude, and full of
ignorance.

For consider what they do. They came to Christ and said: Who is greattest in
the kingdom of heaven? What mean they by these words? Think they that
Christ should have a corporal knogdome in this world, and promote his
disciples unto great lordships, as it is done in worldly princes courts.
Heard they ever Christ so teachi^g? Did not he show them before: Mat. 5.
Ye ar blessed when men shall rail upon you, and persecute you for my names
sake? Now how agree these two, to be persecuted, and to bear temporal dominion
and power? Truth it is, that the Apostels should reign with Christ. But where?
In this world? Nay verily. The ki^gdome of Christ is spiritual.
For the kingdom of Christ is a far other thing the^ a temporal worldly
kingdom, as ye apostles well proved and learned after yt they had receued ye
holy ghost. But here as yet they understand not this, and therefore they desire
to know who is greatest in the kingdom of heaven. But what does or says
Christ? Suerly as he is wont to do and say. For as he often bare their
infirmity, and cast them not of for their rude and gosse affections, even so
does he now at this time. He takes a child, and sets him in the midst of
them, and says: Except ye be turned and become as children, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of heaven. Here in this place Christ teaches his
disciple both by word and example. For he sets a child in the midst of
them, and by and by shows a cause why he so does, that is, yt it was
necessary for them to become as children. How then do children? They live as
nature teaches the^, with out any craft or malice, they know no pomp, no pride
or any other vices of the world, only fly they to the milk that they suck
out of their mothers breasts. Even so must a christian man be minded. After
what manner we should become children
For it is necessary that he be whole dead as concerning to the pomp, malice,
guyle, pride both spiritual and carnal, and that he only depend upon Christ
and his word, and neither attempt nor presume none other thing, then the word
and commandment of Christ prescrybeth to him. For whersoeuer they do thus,
there is no pride, no confidence in merytes of works, no guyle, no malice, but
mere poverty of spirit and innocence. Now where as is poverty of spirit and
innocence, there is fulfilled ye saying of Christ: Whosoever meaketh himself as
this child, he is the greatest in the kingdom of heavens. And of this
chyldehod speaks S. Paul, seiyng: 1 Co. 14
Brethren be not children in wits, but in malice be children. 1 Pe. 2.
And S. Peter says: Desire you yt reasonable milk without guyle, as children
new borne, that in it ye may grow up, for you have tasted how sweet ye Lord
is.

Secondarily, Christ shows with what severity and constancy he will defend
such as come to this pouertee of spirit, yt is, he will take the cure of them
whatsoever chance to them, be it good or evil. If any good thing be done to
them, he will accept it as done to himself, as he witnesses saying: Mat. 25
Whatsoever you did to one of these lytleones yt believes in me, you did it to
me. Zacha. 2
And in ye Prophet Zachary is written: Whosoever touches you, touches the ball of
mine eye. Also if any evil be done to them, he will account it as done to
himself. For he says thus: He that receives such a child in my name, he
receives me. And he that offe^deth one of these lytleones that believe in me,
it were expedient for him, that an ass mylle stone were hanged at his neck,
and he drouned in the depth of the sea. Does not God now defend the beleuers,
and is not he careful for that little and despised flock that cleaves unto
Christ? I pray you, who shall co^tempne ye doctrine of such a Lord, yt thus
cares and defe^deth his servants? Who^ would not this so great care move to
believe in Christ? And to us yt are already received unto faith, what can be
more comfort, or what can we more desire? Now look how comfortable this text
is to the beleuers, when Christ says: He yt receives you, receiuech me? Even
so fearful and terrible is it to those that vex and persecute this poor and
despised people of Christ, which does believe in the word. And forasmuch as
Christ shall impute ye pesecucion as done to himself, without doubt it shall come
to pass, when ye time appointed of God is fulfilled, that Christ will bridle ye
furor and voluptuous mind of the ungodly. But yet notwtsta^dyng the ungodly
will not now believe this, till (as the common proverb says) they have both
their hands full, and the sentence of perpetual dampnacion be declared against
them, even as you perceive it chaunsed unto Pharao.

Thyrdly, Christ shows his disciples before, that there should come sla^der
which should continue unto ye end of ye world: and also instructs them how
to behave themselves among such slanders. Woe to the world (says he) for
slanders. Needs must slanders come, but yet woe to that man by who^ slanders
come. Christ shows plainly yt slanders should continue in ye world unto ye end
of this world, even as Paul says: There must be sects among you. 1. Co. 11
Why so Paul? That they which are perfect among you, might be known. But
whereof shall this offense or slander arise, or wherein consists it? Two manner
of slander.
First it shall come of false doctrine which did arise by and by after the
resurrection of Christ, while the Apostels were yet alive, and was by
conterfaict apostels and false brethren taught unto the people, yea and that
diligently. To omyt the other, did it not eue^ so chance to S. Paul, amongst
and with ye Galathia^s? He had preached the gospel of Christ to them, and had
fully and sufficiently instructed them in the matters of faith, yea and they
had received him with such hearty love and so fervent a desire and with such
reverence, Gal. 1.
that he confesses that they would have plucked out their eyes and given them
to him, if it had been possible. Yet for all this, after his departure there
came false brethren, which set forth and taught to the Galathia^s other manner
of doctrine the^ Paul had taught them. What slanders think ye arose of this?
Even in like manner chanced it in our days. God has given to us very
plenteously and richely his word and gospel, yt suerly we ought with whole
hearts to thank him and laud him for that so great and noble a treasure. But
what chanced now? When the word now did florishe, and through the wonderful
goodness and gracious favor of god, it brought forth right bewtiful fruits
among many one, even did there burst forth with their slanders, the Bishop of
Rome with all his Papisticall rablement of Monks and Friars, which with the
residue of their sects and doctors, did with all their power invade and resist
(so much as lay in them) the plain and true word of god, to the great
hinderance of the gospel. By and by upon this followed that pestiferous sect and
doctrine of ye Anabaptists, which made me^ excedi^g wood for a time, which also
has don no little hurt to the furtheraunce of Christ's holy word.

What slanders think ye have come by these and many mo sects? Furthermore
this slander is against love, as when I will not obey the Magistrate, I will
not do and pay, as other men do and pay, neither bear the common charges as
other bear, but I will be clean without law, and have a singular prerogative
before al other. Of this slander Christ him self says to Peter: Mat. ^7
Least we should be a slander unto them, go to the sea, and cast thy hook,
and that fyshe which first comes, take him up, open his mouth, and thou
shalt find a grote, take it out, and give it them for the and me. Now
without doubt these slanders shall continue in the world unto the end. And
especial the slaunderers of doctrine shall be both grievous and vehemente. But
what remedy against this slander? Spiritually are the hands and feet cut
of.
I must cut of that which would offend me, be it either foot, hand or
eyes: that is, I must continue in the word, nothing consyderyng what shall
chance, even though father or mother, brother or sister, wife or children,
kin or affinytye, monye or riches would pluck me from it, yet must I
set more by the word, then by all these. For better yt is that I forsake
all things, be they never so dear and precious in this world, and to be
saved before god, then to have all men my friends and be separated from god.
And seeing that god will so extremelye punyshe them that raise such
slanders, what think ye shall come to such as for those slanders leave and
forsake the truth? Doubtless he shall punish them both alyke.

Fourthly, here is a general admonicion unto al men, that they dispyse none of
these lytleones that are dead to the world and poor in spirit, and knyt
together one in Christ. Yea, there is also assygned a cause why they should
beware of hurtyng them. The little ones, wherefore they are not to be offended
Psalm. 19
For their Angels (says Christ) in heaven always see the face of my father
which is in heaven. Surely without doubt if God be so mercyful to his
servants, that he has appointed Angels unto this ministry to keep and
defend them, doubtless then this will please him but a little, if they be
despised, persecuted, troubled and trodden under foot. For surely the Lord is
as careful for them, as if these things were done unto himself. And
furthermore, he must needs be disco^tented to se them evil entreated, for whose
sake he came into this world and shed his precious blood. I pray you who can
think otherwise in this behalf? Shall it not provoke his anger, that we
dispyse those who^ he has redeemed with his death and precious blood shed? For if
that lost sheep be so dear to him, and he so entyrely loved it, that he left
nyntye and nine in the wyldernes, and ceased not seeking till he had found
it, why should we then either persecute or trouble that sheep? Surely he may
suffer it, but without doubt he will not leave it unpunished. Furthermore he
says: It is not his fathers will that one of these lytleones should peryshe.
Are not these strong reasons that might well refrain us from persecutyng of
our christian brethren? Their angels (says Christ) which must serve them,
ever see the face of my father. Truth it is that I will be their savior, and
my fathers will is yt they should not perish. Now if these words will not
move us, surely I know not what should move us to learn to love christian
men, and not to despise them. But commonly it so chaunseth, that these poor
little ones of Christ have evermore persecucion then favor in this world.
Wherefore I beseech God grant us grace to persevere in his faith and patiently
for his names sake to suffer persecucion unto the end, through Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The gospel on saint Lukes day the Evangelist, ye shall find after Alhalowen
day.

The gospel on saint Simon and Iudes day. Ihon. 15.
Iho. 13. 1. Iho. 3
Woodcut illustration of the apostle St. Jude holding a club. Woodcut
illustration of the apostle St. Simon carrying a bucksaw. THis is my commaun,
deme^t: that ye love together, as I have loved you.

Greater love has no man, then this: that a man bestow his life for his
friends. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Hencefurth
call I you not servants, for the servant knows not what his lord does.
But you have I called friends: For all things that I have heard of my father
have I opened to you.

Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, to go and
bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain, that whatsoever ye
ask of ye father in my name, he may give it you.

THE EXPOSITION.
CHrist gave his disciples this commandment of brotherly love, after that
last supper when he now knew the time of his passion at hand, and that
immediately he should be taken away from them. Surely this is an undoubted truth,
that there is besides faith no work in the world, nor none can be, that
shall be acceptable unto God, save only charitee and love of my neighbor, of
the which Christ speaks in this Gospel. Or else why should Christ with so
great seueritee and earnest admonicion in that his last sermon that ever he
made, Christ's commandment of charitee.
have given and inculcate this precepte of charitee? And here note two things.
First that Christ gave this precept and not Moses. For if it were Moses
precept, it should be a precept as the other precepts were in the law, which
in deed taught and commanded what should be done, and what should be left
undone, but they gave not ye spirit, whereby it might be done with free heart
and courage. But Christ does not here so, but as he shows what is necessary
to be done, even so he also gives the spirit, that we may be able to do those
things that he has commanded. And this is the only cause, why he him self
says of his precepts: My yoke is sweet, and my burden light. And saint Ihon
in his Epistle Canonical says: His commandments are not heavy.

Wherefore these works of love are not hypocrites works, like as the works
of the law were, which ye Jews did without spirit, but whatsoever a
Christian does in this behalf, he does it with an whole heart, 1 Co. 14
even as saint Paul says: Charitee seeks not the thing that is her own.
For why. A christian knows, that Christ requires not only true faith, that
worshippeth the father in spirit and truth, but also he requires an unfeigned
love.

Further note, that this love spryngeth not of her self, but it spryngeth
forth of faith, so that whersoeuer there is no faith, there can never be any
true love. Faith. Love.
Faith hears the word of God, and takes hold upon those things, that the
same word promyseth in the merytes of Christ, and so obtayneth without any
merits of works, only of mere grace and mercy, remission of sins,
righteousness and eternal life. Now if any man will in this cause of
iustifycacion, admyxt ye mire of his own works, he goth clean out of the
way, and shoteth beside the mark brustyng his head against this stony rock of
saint Paul's words, Romans 11 Gala. 3.
where he says: If then righteousness be of the works of the law, Christ is
dead in vain. Of this faith I say spryngeth love, Love.
which in this gospel Christ so earnestly commands unto us. 1. Co. 13
But what does this love? She forbeareth long, she is gentle, she enuyeth not,
she is not froward, she is not proud, she is not ambicious, she seeks not
her own, she is not angry, she imagyneth not evil, she reioyseth not upon
iniquitee, and she ioyeth wholly in the truth etc. 1 Timothy 1
Therefore says saint Paul in an other place also: The end and sum of the
commandment is love, that comes of a pure heart and a good conscience, and
an unfeigned faith. Further, forasmuch as Christ knows, that there consists
a great wayghty matter in true love, that spryngeth of faith, therefore in this
his last sermon, he taught not many precepts of good works, but only
commands this, that they should love one another. As he would say: If ye
have faith and love, ye shall also right easily perform all other things, what
soever I have commanded you to do.

Secondarily, The cross from whence it comes.
forasmuch as Christ had before showed his disciples, that the cross should
come upon them, and had before told them, that they should suffer much
aduersitee in this world, now here Christ repeteth the same, and also shows
the cause wherefore: If the world (said he) hate you, know you that it hated
me first. The world.
Christ here calls all them the world, that have not received his word,
have not obayed the gospel, nor known the father in him, nor him in ye father:
And breifely, whosoever they be that want faith, and acknowledge not the
righteousness of faith, seem they never so virtuous, righteous, holy and wise in
their own eyes, Christ calls them all by this one name The world, and
declares them to be his enemies. After this sort does saint Ihon use this
word, saying: John. 1
He was in the world and the world is made by him, and the world knew him
not. Then when Christ says: If the world hate you, know you that it first
hated me.

Wherewith he seems to say: Wondre not, if ye wise and righteous in the worlds
estimacion, and also the mighty men in this world do resyst you, and
persecute you, for suerly there is no little cause, why they so will do. The
world holds and defends with to the and nail, the righteousness of works,
but your doctrine shall be clean repugnant and contrary, for if ye will purely
and sincerely preach my word, ye shall maintain and defend the righteousness
of faith. And if ye will do so earnestly as it shall be your duty, needs must
ye cast of all that is in the world, that is, all carnal wisdom, virtue,
righteousness, strength, freewill. as ye know that I have done. How shall ye
in so doing be at unity with them? Ioh. 12.
Now is the judgment of this world. And furthermore, the holy ghost shall be
sent for the same purpose, to rebuke the world as I have done. Now if for
this gentle rebukinge the world shall hate you, and take all things to the
worste, and imagyne all manner of myschiefe against you, know you that even so
did the world by me. If I had approved and allowed their works, as I did
reprove and disalow them, I had had the high Priests mine especial good
friends, with the Phariseis and all the Jews: but when I would needs do mine
office truly, and fully accomplish my duty, needs must I lose all their
frendeshippes, and also for that cause suffer so many of their false
accusacyons, checkes and rebukes. Now, would you speed better than I? There
is also and other cause why the world can not love you: For you are not of
this world. If you were of this world, the world would love that which is
his own, but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of
the world, therefore the world hates you. You hear in this place, that if
the world hate you, it is an evident argument, that you are not of the world.
And even so says S Paul: Gala. 1.
If I should please men I should not be Christ's servant. And a like testimony
does Christ give his apostels, that they are not of this world. Why so? For they
shall rebuke the world reprove and damn the carnal justice of the world, and
earnestly affirm and preach the righteousness of faith, for they are not of this
world. that is, they seek not a carnal justice as the world does, their
confidence is not in their good works as ye worlds is, but they earnestly
preach ye merits of Christ, as ye only cause of our righteousness and salvation.
Now because the world can not bear this, there is mortal war and contynuall
hatred between them and the world, even as Christ says here again in this
gospel: But all these things shall they do to you, for my names sake,
because they know not him that has sent me. Fynallye. Because the world
knows not the father, therefore knows it not the son. And because it knows
not the son, neither knows it them whom the son has sent. Wherefore, seeing
yt the world neither knows the father, nor the son, nor yet the apostels whom
the son has sent, needs must it then persecute, hate and condemn, both the
truth and also those that preach it.

Thirdly, Christ in this persecution, Our comfort in adversity is in ye word
of God.
which surely is ever annexed to the gospel in this world, commands us to
take sure hold of his word, as that only comfort, whereby Christians in all
tribulacions solace them selves. Remember (says he) my word, which I have
said unto you.

This text teaches us (as it seems) that there shall be no another comfort upon
earth, especially in persecucions, except only that word, and doubtless it
is even so in deed. For what consolacion may be in that man's heart, which
has refused and put from his sight the word of God? Co^trarily what I pray
you shall hinder or hurt him, that takes hold upon the word, and by faith
printeth it in his heart? For he doubtless knows very well, that he must needs
suffer pesecutions and tribulacions, that is a very true tale: but yet he
knows also this, that persecucion shall shortly have an end, and at the
time ordained of God, it shall be changed into perpetual joy, Romans 8.
as saint Paul says: Surely I think, that ye passions of this time, are not
worthy to be judged equal to the glory that shall be reveled among us.

Iho. 16
And of this speaks Christ, saying: A woman when she trauaileth, has sorrow,
for her hour is come.

But when she has brought furthe her manchylde, she now remembers not the
pangues, for joy that a man is borne into the world. And even so you now have
sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart shall joy, and no man shall
take away your joy from you. These and such like words does the christian
man set hand upon in persecucion. so that he may stand steadfast in them, and
sing with the Prophet: Ps. 129.
My soul stays her in his word, my soul has trusted in the Lord. And
therefore says Christ here to his disciples: Mat. 10
Remember my word, that I have spoken to you, But what word is it? The
servant is not greater then his Lord. Now if they have persecuted the Lord
in this world, let the servant hold him contented, though all things
proceed not according to his purpose, and though some time he speade as his
master speade before him: For doubtless it can be none other wise. If they
(says Christ) have persecuted me, they shall also persecute you. If they have
kept my word, they will also keep yours. In these words Christ shows very
plainly, that there should be perpetual dissencion between his disciples and
the world, for his disciples will cleave to his word, the which in deed
the world can not abide. And therefore Christ gives his disciples this
counsel, that they shall look to the word, and steadfastly stand in that,
yea though the world never so madly and furiously rage and rave against it.
Which God grant that all we may apprehende and persyst in it, to his honor
and our souls health, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Gospel on all Saints day. Math. 5.
Woodcut illustration depicting the feast of All Saints with the blessed in
heaven, above the damned in hell. WHen he saw the people, he went up into a
mountayn, and when he was set, his disciples came to him: and after that he
had opened his mouth, he taught them, saying: Luc. 6
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Esa. 66
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall receive comfort. Blessed are the
meek: for they shall receive the inheritance of the earth. Blessed are they
which Iere. 31
hunger and thyrst after righteousness: for they shall be satisfied. Blessed are
the mercyful: for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall se God. Blessed are the peace
makers, for they shall be called the children of god.

Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theyrs is
the kingdom of heaven. 1 Pet. 2.3. c 4. c
Blessed are ye when men revile you and persecute you, and shall falsely say all
manner of euel sayings against you for my sake. Actu. 5.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE must very diligently (dear christians) observe and note in this gospel,
The office of Christ is to teach and to save.
that when Christ saw the people and his disciples were come up to him, he
makes unto them a godly and, fruteful sermon, which comprehends in a manner
all things that are necessary for a christian man to do spiritually before
god. For by this sermon we may see how diligent Christ was in administrynge his
office, and feeding his sheep. Furthermore we must needs confess, that as all that Christ taught and preached, was both good and helthsome, so no sermon
that ever he made, is more diligenlye and perfectlye written, then this in the
mount, and that which he made after his last supper. Surely by this his
example Christ would not only teach the ministers of his word with all
diligence faithful to attend their office, but also that all that they
teach, they should teach it faithfullye and drive it into ye peoples ears, as
we se that Christ did here in this gospel. Let us then see what was the
beginning of Christ's doctrine, in this his most excellent and noble sermon.

First, Ghostly pouerte.
Christ promises the kingdom of heaven and salvation to the poor in spirit.
But what signifies it to be poor in spirit? The poor in spirit are those,
that cleave to no transitory thing of this world, that set their confidence in
no creature, that are dead unto the world, and leave and whollye put their
faith in Christ and his word. Upon such poor shall the spirit of the lord
rest, as the prophet Esaias says. These poor receive the gospel, Esa. 66
Mat. 11
as our Savior said to the disciples of John. And furthermore such pore men
are so dearly beloved of god, that he promises peculier gifts and synguler
graces to such as do them any benefit, as ye may read in the 40 Psalm. And
such pore are not proud in the ymaginacio^ of their own hearts. They contemn
no man, they despise no man, but are lowly and meek, even from the heart.
Wherefore they shall have as Christ promises here, the kingdom of heaven, where
as all hypocrites that swell by their outward righteousness, and for the same
prefer them selves before al other, shall have perpetual fire and everlasting
damnacion.

Secondly, Christ promises to those that morn, comfort, here by the
spirit, and in the world to come eternal life and the kingdom of heaven. But
what signifies here this word. To mourn? Doubtless the same, yt Christ speaks
on in another place, Ioh. 16
saying: You shall morn and weep, but the world shall be glad. Now is this
as clear as mydde day, neither can any manne denaye yt, that such as
confess Christ and believe his word, The cross and persecution.
the cross hangs ever upon them, and they are diverse and many ways
tempted, sometime on the one side, sometime on the other, that ever they find
Christ's word true, Ioh. 16
which said: Ye shall have tribulacion in the world. Wherefore, except in
these so great troubles and vexacions as christian man had some comfort and
these great and excellent promises, how could he abide all these things? How
could he contynew steadfast? For suerlye the cross is not so sweet and
pleasant to the flesh, that it will freerely and with a glad mind come
under it and suffer it. The holy ghost. Ioh. 4.
Needs must the spirit come, which therefore is called of Christ, the
Comforter, because that in tribulacion he comfort the sorrowful. And also
though we have the spirit, yet must the word be applied and diligently put in
our minds, least we wax slothful sluggardes, and livers in a careless
securitee. And to this purpose serves this sentence of Christ, which
promises eternal consolacion to those that mourn. Here in this life they
shall be comforted by his word, and in the world to come, by his bless and
eternal life. Now this promise, so full of comfort makes a man glad minded,
so that he is more ready to suffer and abide, eue^ with a glad heart, the
cross that god shall please to lay upon him.

Meekenes.
Thirdly, Christ promises to those that are meke the possession of the land,
and blessedness. Now to be meke is not only when a man is not angrye, but also
when he can repress and refrain his wrath, had he never so just a cause
to be discontented and angrye. Of such anger the prophet David says: Psalm.
4
Be ye angrye, but sin not. For to be never angry at all, it is impossible
for such as live here in this body. For why? wrath is even borne in us, as
are also all other vices: so that we can not utterly lay it from us. Ephe. ^
Suerlye it were our duty and very right, that we should continue ever in
meekenes and gentleness, and never be angrye. (I speak of such anger, as has
adjoined envy with it) But I pray you, where are they that so can moderate
themselves? Ephe, 4
Therefore S. Paul says: Let not the son go down upon your wrath. A father
is angry with his son, but yet commonly the fatherly love continues in his
heart. A master is angrye with his servant and scholar, but it comes of a
good affection. Even so may one christian man be angry with an other, and
rebuke, correct, and show him his fault, but with this anger must charity be
admyxed. Bryefely, CHRIST requires this meekenes of his disciples, saying:
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowely in heart. Mat. 11
And here he promyseth to the meek, salvation and possession of the land. Who
will not now with all dilygence labor for faith, whereoute springs this
virtue? The possession of the land what it is.
Many interpret spirituallye the possession of the land, as when the
Prophet Dauyd says: I beeleue to see the Lord, in the land of the living.
Other understand it corporallye, sygnyfiynge that the gentle and meek men
keeps better his goods and possessiones, then he that will law for every
trifle, and will not loose so much as the paring of his nail.

Truth it is that Moses being a most lowelye and gentle person, Nu. 22.
accomplished excellent affairs, yea though he were the meekest man that
dwells upon earth. And also either of these understandings is good and
profitable.

Spiritual hunger and thirst.
Fourthly, Christ pronounces them blessed that hungre and thirste for
righteousness, addyng this promise: That they shall be satisfied. Now stands
this hungre and thyrst in this point, that I dyspayre of my self and all my
strengthes, shall knoweledge my corrupt nature, mine inabilitee, syckenes,
sin and infirmity, and allonly desire that righteousness that is of valewe
before god.

Surely this acknowledgyng of our selves, does highly please god, yea and for
to bring us unto this knowledge has he given the law, and wills that the
preaching of penance should proceed and go before the preaching of forgiveness of
sins, as it is plain in the gospel of S. Luc. that we might so much the sooner
attain unto this hunger and thirste of righteousness. Luc. 24
And doubtless needs must we be thus hungry and thyrsty for righteousness, or
else we shall ever want it, that is, we shall never be made righteousness. But to
be brief. When through preachinge of penance we are utterly overthrown, so
that al together we dyspayre of our selves, and begin to seek our
righteousness in CHRIST, this promise stands steadfast, that we shall be
satysfyed. Contraryly if we have not this hungre, thyrst, knowledge and desire,
behold the vyrgin Mary says thus: He has sent away the rich emptye.

To be merciful
Fiftely, Christ also in the gospel pronounces that the merciful men are
blessed. To be merciful, is as much, as to be ready to forgive and remit, as
often as our neighbor does us iniurye or angreth us, or provoke us unto
displeasure. And this mercifulnes is so necessary for a christen man, that he
ca^ not obtain forgiveness of his sins, except he also first forgive his
neighbor such trespasses as he has committed against him: yet not by this
mercy and merit of the same do we obtain, get or deserve forgiveness of of our
sins, for yt have we by only faith, but God would, that I should by this
forgiveness testify my faith. Now when I declare my faith by so forgiui^g my
neighbor, what will Christ do toward me? I shall also have mercy as Christ
says in this gospel. And as he says in another place: Luc. 5.
Forgive and it shall be forgiven you. But now when I will not for give, no more
shall I obtain mercy, and therefore utterly fall out of all the favor of god the
father.

Sixthly, the clean and pure in heart are blessed. Cleannes and pure of heart.
Psalm. 13 Mar. 10
But who is clean in heart, seeing that the scripture says: There is none that
does good, no there is none at al? Also none is good (that is) clean, but alone
god Doutles it is truth, that by nature we are sinners, neither can we do any
thing that is good, ye and also after yt we have received ye holy ghost, yet
remained in us concupiscens or unlawful lust, Romans 7
with who^ we must ever wrestle and fight against it. Yet this comfort have
we when we ones come to the knowledge of Christ, and have by faith set hand
upon his promise, by partakinge with him we be very christians, and also pure
in heart. Actu. 15
For as Saint Peter says: By faith are purified our hearts. Furthermore,
although the heart by faith be purified, yet there remains in us the remnant
of sin and concupiscens, which daily sore trouble us, but for faith, they
are not imputed unto us. As S. Paul testifies, Romans 8.
saying: Then now there is no condemnacion to such as are in Christ Jesus.
Therefore we are fully assured, if we have faith, that we shall se god in this
world by faith in his word, and in the world to come face unto face.

Seventhly, Christ calls those blessed, that are the makers of peace. Romans 5.
Those are makers of peace, that ever counsayl peace, that reconcyle men that
be fallen out, and set them again at one, and studiouslye take heed to keep
and conserve peace.

Such are called peacemakers. And such men do especially please god, chiefly
because this virtue comes of faith, and has his root and springinge out of
faith, and therefore because that in this thing they follow the example of his
beloved son our lord Jesus Christ. What did he? When we were yet enemies
(says S. Paul) he reconcyled us unto his father, opened to us the heavens, and
by the effusion of his blood, of mere and free grace, he washed away all our
sins, that we apprehending this by faith, might obtain righteousness, and so
ever more follow the same example in our deeds. Now when do we this? When
with all hearty study we endeavor our selves to conserve peace, and that among
all men brotherly love may be continued. But what shall be the reward of this
virtue? what gift shall be given for it? We shall be called the sons of
god, and we shall possess eternal life.

Eighthly, Christ also calls those blessed that suffer persecution, and are
despised for his sake, which in deed ought to give great comfort to
christian men put under the cross and tribulation. Through much trouble we
enter into the ki^gdom of God.
Why are we so vexed and full of sorrow in temporal afflyctions, seeing that
Christ will by them bring us into heaven, where we shall perpetually reign
with him? Truly this temporal cross can in no means be compared unto the
everlasting joy. Mark well that he says: For my names sake. Also When men
speak all evil against you, belyinge you. For he that is an evil dooer, and
according to his deseruyng suffers for it, although he look to this promise,
it shall little profit him. Thou must needs suffer in a good quarrel, that
thou may be sure, that all that shall chance to thee, happens for the
truths sake. Even as Saint Peter also says: Let none of you suffer as a
murderer or a thief, or as an evil dooer, or as a busye body in other men's
matters. Wherefore if thy cause be good, thou may assuredly have this hope,
that this trouble and sufferynge shall be rewarded and recompensed with
everlasting joy. Which almighty God grant us through Jesus Christ. AMEN.

The gospel upon S. Marks day. John. 15.
I Am Eccl. 24
the true vine, and my father is the husband man. Every branche that bears
not fruit in me, he will take away And every branch that bears fruit, will
he pourg, that it may bring forth more fruit. Act. 15.
Now are ye clean through the words which I have spoken unto you. Bide in me,
and I in you. As the branch can not bear fruit of it self, except it bide in
the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. For without me ye can do nothing: if a man bide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branche and is wythered: and men gather them, and cast them into
the fire, and they burn. Mat. 21 John. 3
If ye bide in me, and my words abide in you, ask what ye will, and it shall
be done for you.

THE EXPOSITION.
WE have in this gospel a very comfortable lesson for all them that are true and
faithful christen people, wherein Christ exhorted al his universal church to
remain in him comparing him self unto a vine tree, and his lovers unto branches.
Which similitude has bin used in ye old testament also, where god called the
house of Israel, that is the church of god a vineyard, Psa. Esa. Ier. Mat. 20
and. 21.
as evidently may be seen in ye prophets. And as Christ in the gospel of Mat.
does declare a vineyard to be his church, so in this place he called it a
vineyard also, and god ye father, an husbandma^, and him self he called ye
vinetre, his Apostels and every membre of his church, branches. Let us therefore
apply and compare one with the other, and se how they do agree. For as the
vineyard is not ordained for to bear thorns and thystels, but that the vine
trees should be planted in it for to bear fruits, so the church is ordained,
not to florishe with ye riches of this world (which verily are thorns) but
for to plant Christ in it. For as the husband man does make clean the ground
of the vyneyard, and does plant in it vine trees, and does hedge it round
about, makes a press, and buyldeth a tower in it, purges and makes clean
the branches, that they may bring forth fruit plentifullye, so likewise God
the father has chosen to him self from among men a church, in the which he
has planted Christ his son, which garden he also has strengthened with an
invincible stone, namely Christ, against which stone or tower eue^ the gates
of hell can not prevail. For eue^ as when the godly be regenerate in Christ,
so he does purge and make clean their hearts that they may bring forth
fruit. In this vine tree there be ii. kinds of branches or sorts of men,
for some have a shape of godliness and seem to believe in Christ, and to be
special in Christ's church, hearing sermons, receiuyng the sacraments, and do
many good works, and yet they do not truly believe in Christ, nor yet their
works do not proceed out of a true faith. These be hypocritical and
unfruitful branches, which shall at ye length be cast into everlasting fire.
There be some also without repentance, which bear the name of christian men,
and yet do most abound and are endued with most horrible and shameful crimes.
Some there be that are godly, and even as they verily believe in Christ, so
verily they work by faith, and bring furthe fruit, that always does remain.
And this difference ought chiefly to be marked. The ungodly and wicked speaks
most pestiferously of Christ's church, for because yt they se in it many
impure and wicked men, for whose sakes they think that the church of Christ
is not ye true church, nor that it has not the true Gospel. But they that so
do condemn the true church, forbecause it is admixed with evil persons, are
here again condemned with this sermon of Christ.

For truly Christ speaking of the branches, does not speak of those, that
with their open profession be separated and divided from the church, as the
Jews and Turks, but of those which be or seem to be in the vine tree, Christ.
And of these he makes two sorts, Two kind of branches
some of them be barraine, and some fruitful. By the which he teaches very
plainly, that the church here upon earth has co^mixed with her many evil
persons, which although they seem to be the very members of Christ, yet they
be but branches to be cut away, and to be cast into the fire. He says,
that the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sows good seed in
his field. But whylest the man was a sleep his enemy came, and did sow cockle
among the wheat. And again, the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a little
net that is cast into the sea, which did pull up all kind of fyshes. And in
another place. A certain man went into the marriage, which had not his marriage
garment. And saint Iho^ said. They went out from us, but they were not of us.
But I pray you what becomes of these branches that brings forth fruit? He
says: He purges it and makes it clean, to bring forth fruit more
plenteously. Good branches
Branches which be fruitful and profitable in the church, be all those that
truly believe in Christ, and of a true faith does obey unto the true calling
of God. This branch is not cast away, is not taken away, as the first was,
but is cut with a hoke, and is made clean.

Seco^darily, Now are ye clean (says Christ) because of the word that I
have spoken unto you. I beseech the, what means these words? Be the Apostles
pure and clean branches, when as yet they were sinners, and ready immediately
to leave their master Christ, and to deny him? I say ye are clean, not
forbecause of your own flesh, which is yet sinful, nor for the purity and
cleanesse of your righteousness, which is myngled with much impuritne and
uncleanness, but for the word which I have spoken unto you (says Christ,) That
is, for my gospel, which I have showed unto you, that is to say, that I am the
very true Messiah, and satisfaction for sin, which with my death has kept
you from death, which has taken upon me the horriblenes of hell, that I might
deliver you from hell, yea, and I have purchased for you of God my father, that
he shall take you for his children, sons and heirs of the heavenly kingdom.
And this is the word, by the which man is verily purifyed and made clean, if
it be received by faith. First who soever does receive this word of the
Gospel by faith, he is accounted before God for very just, pure, and holy, and
that not for the works of righteousness which we do, but only for Jesus
Christ the son of God, received by faith. S. Paul says, they be made
righteous, freely by his grace, by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus,
which God has put as atonement maker by f^yth, his blood being a mean.
Therefore, whosoever does believe ye word of the gospel of Christ, although that
sin does still remain in his flesh, yet sin is not imputed unto him, so
that he now may be just before God, not with his own righteousness, but with
an others righteousness, that is, the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which is
given unto him by faith. For blessed is that man, to whom God does not impute
sin. Furthermore, whosoever receives the word of the Gospel by faith
(which is given by ye holy ghost) which shall mortify the remna^tes of the
flesh, The houke is the holy ghost.
and shall so rule sin, yt it shall not reign in our mortal bodies. Therefore
the holy ghost is ye very true houke, with the which the branches be purged,
and that by the words of the Gospel. First that by faith we may be
accounted before God, just for Christ's sake: Secondly, yt the deeds of the
flesh may be mortified, and the lusts of sin be quenched. And although it
can not be done in this life, that sin wholly might be pulled up out of the
flesh, yet it may be done through the holy ghost, that sin shall be paired
away, and the fruit of it destroyed, so that we shall not walk after the
flesh, but after the spirit. In conclusion, whosoever does receive the word
of the gospel by faith, he shall be troubled with many afflictions and
persecusions in this world. Christ says: If they have persecuted me, they
shall persecute you. And in an other place: We must by many tribulacions (says
he) enter into the kingdom of God. Tribulacio^ and trouble is the houke also.
Wherefore, afflictions are to be accounted among those houkes with the which
the heavenly father does purge his branches. The keeper of the vyneyard
cutteth away the branches with an houke, not for to hurt them and so to
perish, but that they might bring plenteously forth fruit. Tribulacion is
sent, and wherefore?
So God the father sends to the godly the cross and afflictions, not that
they should perish, but that they should be preseuerued. To this man is sent a
cross, that he should be admonished of the sin yet remainyng in his flesh:
to that man, because he should walk in his vocacion, least sin should reign
in his flesh: to another, that he should be an example for the amendment of
other men, and so to other for other causes, not for this cause, that they
should utterly perish, but that they should be delivered from perishyng, and
to attain eternal health.

When we be punished with the cross and misery, we must go to the vyneyarde,
we must call to remembrance the cuttyng knyfe or houke of the keeper of the
vineyarde, and we must know, to what end they cut in the vyneyarde, and
that end is the end of affliction, which is accustomed to chance to the godly,
that is to say, that they should not be cast into the fire, and so to peryshe
in the flame, but that they should be purged, and that as well they might
bring furthe more plentyfully fruit, as to bring forth and increase. And that
it is even so, that they which remain in the true vynetree, which is
Christ, might be purged or made clean, and bring forth much fruit, Christ
adds unto it and says: Tarrye in me, and I in you: As the branch can not
bear fruit of him self, except he tarry in the vynetree. etc.

This is as it were an handsonme conclusion of the first exhortacion. I have
said that I am the very true vine tree. I have said, that the branch that
taryeth in me shall bring forth fruit plentifully, Therefore I beseech you, that
you would tarry in me, forasmuch as I do tarry in you, and ye shall bring forth
much fruit. But tell me, how shall we tarry in Christ? Do we tarry in him,
when we do tarry in tradicions and commandments of men? No truly. Christ
says: They worship me in vain with the commandments of men. But we tarry
in Christ, when we tarry in the word of Christ by faith. Whosoever believes
in me (says he) keeps my word, and my father shall love him, and we shall
come unto him, and make our dwelling place with him. What benefit does
chance to him that taryeth in Christ? First Christ taryeth in him, for he
says: Tarry in me, and I in you. What thing better or more greatter do thou
seek? Whosoever has Christ, has all the treasure of heavenly goodness.
Saint Paul says: Jesus Christ is made unto us from God, wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, and redemption. Therefore whosoever has Christ, is made
before God, just, holy and righteous, and is delivered from all trouble.

Thyrdly, let us consider what fruit the Apostles brought, which tarried in
Christ. Although the Apostles a little while after did forsake Christ, by fliyng
away from him, and deniyng of him, yet for all that by and by they did repent,
and they were so joins in couple with Christ, that they did always continue in
him. Wherefore they brought forth at the first beginning much fruit, by
preaching of the gospel of Christ. After that they had received the gifts of
the holy ghost on Whytsonday, they did sprede abroad the Gospel throughout all
the world, and gathered together the church of Christ, not only of the
Jews, but also of the Gentiles.

Saint Paul says, that the gospel was preached among all creatures, which
were under heaven. And again: The gospel has increased even through the whole
world. Furthermore, besides many other godliness and good works, they brough
forth plentyful fruit, in doing of great miracles, which they did in the name
of Christ, whereby Christ did florishe, and the authoritee and truth of Gods
word was highly commended. They showed themselves toward the Magistrates, as
they ought to do. They loved their neighbors according to the order of
charitee. They gave not them selves to gluttony and riotous bankettynges, or to
uncleanness and wantonness. Finally, they did as well privately as openly lead a
godly life, and suffers very much trouble and persecucion for the word of
God. They were tried by many mockes and stripes. They were cast into prisons and
chains. They suffered much hunger and penury, at the last, they suffered all
kind of persecution and death, and yet they forsook not their vocation, but the
more they were persecuted, the more stronger did they confess Christ. Wherefore
they did the rather obtain with Christ his heavenly kingdom. And this is the
fruits which the Apostles brought forth, when they did tarry in Christ. Every
man has his own fruits tariyng in Christ. For he that tarryeth in Christ, he
even at the first beginning brings forth fruit by the calling and confessyng
the name of Christ, both by his honest behavior and with all kinds of godlynes
and virtue, by obedience, chastitee, temperance, sobriety, by true biyng and
sellyng, and by other such kinds of virtues. And these be ye miracles which
be now required of the godly. And undoubtedly whosoever does follow these
virtues in this world, brings forth great miracles. There is so great a
multitude of unshamefast men, of gluttons and deceyuers in this corruptible
world, that it is no less a miracle to live among them, justly, chastely,
shamefastly, and soberly, then it was in times past to make a blind man to see,
or else to raise up a dead man. To conclude, whosoever remains in Christ
brings forth fruit, by sufferaunce and patience in the cross, in aduersitee
and afflictions. Let him not forsake his vocacion, although he be persecuted,
but let him rather be encouraged by affliction to maintain his vocacion, that
he may openly declare that he knows Jesus Christ to be his righteousness and
health. What should be the let, but he that remains in Christ, shall bring
forth much fruit? He that does not tarrye in Christ, does not bring forth
fruit.

Fourthly, let us well understand that he says: Without me ye can do nothing,
that is, ye can not bring forth any profitable or healthful fruit, nor ye can
do no good work that is acceptable to God, except ye believe in me, and tarry by
faith in me. What is it to be and to tarrye in Christ? Surely it is to believe
Jesus Christ to be borne of ye virgin Mary, to be very Christ, and this Christ
to be the only propiciatorye and sacrifice for our sins, which has made
reconciliacion for thee to the father, and for whose sake thou art made his son
by adoption, and heir of the heavenly and celestial kingedome. By this faith
thou art accepted for Christ's sake of god: by this faith thou art accounted
before god as just: by this faith, what works so ever they be that thou do,
whether they be of public or private vocations (here we do not speak of
sin, which can not be done by faith) they be accepted of god, not as the
honest doings of Ethnikes, but as the true godly works unto everlasting life.
And here we must not think that god does give eternal life to the godly
for their merytes sakes, but that the godly takes the right of etrrnall life
by faith, for Christ's sake. Therefore those works that be done by this faith,
be called the fruits of eternal life, partly, because they be done to
declare our thankfulness, for that yt we have received the right of the kingdom
of heaven and eternal life, and partly that they be rewarded with rewards in
the life everlasting. Who so ever shall bide in Christ that is. shall believe
that he is accepted of God, and to be his son adoptiue for CHRIST'S sake,
he what so ever he does, although it seem never so excellent and pleasant,
pure and holy, it profits nothing before god.

To be short, they that do not remain in Christ are those, which know the
name of Christ, leads a wicked life, walks after the flesh, and obeys to
sin. If Christ does not tarry in him, how shall he tarry in Christ? S. John
says: He that says I know him, and does not keep his commandments, is
a liar, and there is no truth in him. And again: Whosoever shall say: I love
god, and shall hate his brother, is a liar. And S. Paul says: If there be any
man that shall not provide for his, and especial for his household, he is
worse then an Infidele. It is very plain, that those which lead a wicked
life, although they boaste themselves of the name of a christian, yet for all
that they tarry not in Christ. What shall be come of those that remain not in
Christ? Even verily that thing, that belongs to the unfruitful branches,
which are in the vine tree. Ezec. 16
These being cut away from the vine tree, are profitable to no buyldinge as
other wood and tymbre is, but being cast out a doors, they wyther, and the^
be gathered together, and cast into the fire, and there be burned. And they are
profitable for nothing else, but for to feed the fire. The self same thing is
to be said of those, which do not tarry in Christ. These serve for none other
purpose, but even for to be meat not for temporal fire that consumes the
branches, Mar. 9. 1. Tes. ^. Esa 66
but they shall be punished with perpetual and inextinquible fire. and as Esaias
says, where their worm does not dye and the fire goes never out. etc.
Therefore good christian people let us tarry in Christ, and let his word
abide in us, acknowledging him our only satisfier for our sins, savior,
and the pacifier of gods wrath.

Fifthly, let us consider and learn out of this gospel, that if this his word
does tarrye in us, if we have a sure and a strong faith unto it, declaringe
our self thankful toward so worthy a benefactor with our obedience to keep
his commandments thus (I say) if we tarry in him and his word tarry in us,
then this promise, Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.
shall be performed unto us Here is nothing excepted, either corporal,
spiritual, or heavenly goods. What can a christen man lack, having this
firm and sure promise? for he says: What so ever ye shall ask. Is there any
kind of people upon earth, that has so rich and so excellent a promise, as a
true christian has? No trewly. But let us not swerve, the words of Christ
are dligently to be considered, and rightly to be understand. Christ does not
simpely say: What so ever ye will ask, it shall be done unto you. But this
saying has he put before these words: If ye abide in me, and my words
abide in you. with the which words is to be understand, that then shall
be unto us, what so ever we will and shall ask. Therefore, he that will and
ask those things which be contrary unto Christ's words, and the which be
prohybited by the words of the Lord, he tarieth not in Christ, nor the words
of Christ abide not in him, wherefore this promise pertains not to him. John
in an other place says This is the trust, the which we have in him, that if
we ask any thing after his will, he hears us. God has made manifest his
will by his promises and Gospel. Therefore those that shall call upon God,
and shall ask annye benefytes of him either corporal or spiritual, we ought
to look into his gospel and promises, that we may know of them, what things
he wylleth us to will and to ask. Of corporal things Christ says: Your
heavenly father knows, what need ye have of all those things. Seek therefore
first the kingdom of god, and his righteousness, and al these things shall be
cast unto you. Of spiritual things and heavenly goodness the gospel of Christ is
full of them. As for this thing came Christ, specially, that al which believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Therefore thou have here put
unto thee, the treasure of al good things, which thou do not will only and
ask, but also thou may claim, if thou do tarry in Christ; and his words
tarry in the. In conclusion. Let us pray unto the heavenly father for his
grace, that he will grant us through his holy spirit, that we may acknowledge
Christ our savior and abide in him. Amen

The gospel on S. Lukes day. Luce. 10
Woodcut illustration of St. Luke the Evangelist with a book and an ox. AFter
these things the lord appointed other seventy and two also, and sent them two
and two before him into every city and place whether he him self would come.
Therefore said he unto them: Mat. 9.
the harvest is great, stut the laborers ar few. Pray ye therefore the lord
of the harvest, to send forth laborers into his harvest, Go your ways:
Behold, I send you forth as sheep among wolves. Bear no wallet, neither
scrippe, nor shoes, and Mat. 10
salute no man by the way. 4 Re. 4 Mat. 20 Luc. 9.
Into what house so ever ye enter, first say: Peace be to this house. And if
the son of peace be there your peace shall rest upon him, if not, it shall
turn to you again. And in the same house tarry still, eating and drynkyng
such as they give. For the labourer is worthy his reward.

THE EXPOSITION.
HEre in this Gospel is first to be noted the earnest and diligent favor of
Christ toward ma^kynd. That where as he had sent into Galilee (as it
appears in the chapter which goth before this) twelve ambassadors or
messingers, whom he did call Apostles, to preach the kingdom of God, and to
confirm the same preaching with miracles, so when he perceived the great desire
of the people to hear this his Gospel of the kingdom of God, and was going
from Galile unto Jury, he did chose out of his disciples other.lxxii. to go
before him and preach, two and two together. Now therefore let us hear with
what commandment and prerogatives they were sent to preach. The occasion why
he sent the^, he showed saying: The harvest is great, but the laborers are
few. Here are few words, but weighty things are to be noted in them.
First, that those which desire to hear the gospel of Christ, are likened unto
the harvest. For in husbandry every thing has his time and grothe, until the
seeds are ripe and ready to be reaped. First the ground is plowed, then sown,
after the seeds spryng up into grass, and grows up unto stalks, at length
ye seeds increase and are reaped and carried into the barnes. The husbandry of
Christ's ^elde.
In like manner does it chance with the husbandry in Gods field. First Moses
with his law did till the ground, afterward the Prophets did sow in the
time of John the baptist, the airs did apeare: last of al, when Christ was
come and had sent forth his Apostels, came the harvest, and the corn was
carried into Gods barn. Now for as much as the time of preachinge of the
gospel of Christ is the harvest time, let us see what the corn is that is
carried into this barn. What ye corn is which is broghte together into the
barn of god.
The corn is partly the people which thoroughe the preachinge of the gospel
are gathered into the barn of Christ's church, and partly also those good
things, which men do gather out of the gospel through faith. But what be
those? is it not such wheat and barley as the belly is fed with all? No suerly,
but the thing which the faithful do gather in the haurest of the gospel,
are spiritual: namelye, righteousness before god and men, whereof the first is
by faith through Christ (for the just lyutth by his own faith) the second
through obediens and the fruits of faith, and last of all, the life
everlasting and heavenly joy. This is that corn which is gathered in the
harvest of the gospel.

Great pain must be taken in husbandrye
Secondarilye it is to be noted, that as in this temporal harvest nothing is
gathered into the barnes without great sweat and labor, for there must be
diligent watch both day and night, and the heat of the day must be
tolerated and borne, and the hands must be hardened, so likewise, when ye
shall gather the spiritual corn, much adversity is to be suffered. For the
more you do labor and suffer, the more corn ye shall gather into your
barnes. Wherefore, seeing that now is the time of our harvest, let us not be
idle and slothful, but cherefullye let us take in hand the pains of the
harvest, for he that does gather in the heruest, (says Solomon) is a wise
child, but he that is slothful in the summer, is a child of confusion. And, O
thou sluggard go to the Emmet, considre her ways, and learn to be wise. She
has no guide, nor ouerseer nor ruler: yet in the summer she provides her
meat, and gathers her fode together in the harvest.

Thirdely, Christ says: True preachers are optained of god.
Pray the lord of the harvest, to send forth laborers into his harvest. Where
with is undoubtedly signified, that the true preachers are not shaken (as the
proverb is) from the trees, but that it is needful for us to get them from
heaven with our prayers. You will say peradventure: Shall not we then study, and
cause our children to be taught in holy scripture? shall we only make a common
prayer, and have a preacher sudde^ly sent down from heaven? Verily Christ
would have us to be diligent in the educatio^ of our youth and in the study of
his holy scripture. For it is the duty both of the Magistrates, and also of
the parents, to help and prouid that youth, yea that all men (if it be
possible) be brought up in the study of gods holy scripture, that every
one may be ready to the ministration of the gospel. But in so dooynge, we
must remember, that it is not our industrye, labor and study, that
prouydeth the true preacher of the Gospel, but it is our heavenly fathers
gift, from whom comes every good and perfete gift. And therefore we
must add unto our dylygent labor, prayers, that god will vouchesafe to give
the increase, and that he will illuminate those that we have brought up in
learning and now have called to the ministry of the church, with his holy
ghost, that they may sincerely preach the word, and faithfully minister in
the Church of God. I (says saint Paul) have planted, Apollo has watered,
but God has given the increase. So than, another is he that planteth any thing,
another he that waters, but God, which gives the increase. Therefore shall
not we plant, nor water? Let us not think so, for it follows: Every one shall
receive his reward, according to his labor. For we are Gods laborers, ye are
Gods husbandrye, ye are Gods buildyng. Wherefore, in calling and receiuyng of
ministers of the church we ought so to pray, that we do not neglect our duty
in the mean while, and so we ought to do our duties, that we forgette not to
pray also, that God will give the increase, and his benediction unto our work.

Fourthly, we learn here the great danger and persecucion that Christ has
called and seth his preachers in. For he says: Go your way, behold, I send you
forth as Lambs among the Wolves. It is not unknown how fearce, cruel, and
rauenyng a beast a Wolf is of nature against the unarmed Lambs. This saying
of Christ what is it else, but as he would say: I send you wholly without weapon
among extreme and cruel enemies? What peace, tra^quilitee, or comfort shall a
man look for among such enemies? The prophecies of Messiah are not to be
understand corrally.
Surely this saying was necessary to be spoken to the Apostles and disciples of
Christ For when they should be sent of Christ to preach, that the kingdom of
Messiah was nere at hand and already come, they were put in remembrance of
persecutions and afflictions that should happen unto them, because they should
not imagyne and dream of a corporal kingdom of Messiah: and that they should
perceive also, that when ye Prophets setting forth the peaceable, joyful and
happy kingdom of Messiah, they did not speak of the outward peace and
tranquilitee of this world, but of the spiritual majesty and perpetual
felicitee, then preached by the Gospel, and afterward to be manyfested unto
the whole world. For if the kingdom of Christ were of this world, Christ
should not have sent his Apostles as sheep among Wolves, but rather he would
have brought it to pass, that they should have been had in great reputacion,
and should have been honorably entreated and received, as it had become such
a great kings Ambassadors. But now he sets them forth into many dangers,
saying: They shall deliver you up (says he) to ye counsails, Mat. 10
and shall scourge you in their synagoges. Mar. 13
And ye shall be brought to the head rulers and kings for my sake. And in
another place he says: Ma. 14
They shall put you to trouble and shall kill you, and ye shall be hated of all
people for my names sake.

The Same that Christ preaches here to his Apostles, partaineth to all other
private persons, beleuyng the words of the Apostles. For every manne in his
own vocacion is sent like a Lamb among Wolves. And necessarily we must enter
through many afflictions into the kingdom of God. For we must be ever on the
sufferyng side. The Lamb hurts not, he spoyleth not, nor deuoureth. But he
is hurt, spoiled and devoured. So likewise the small and weak flock of Christ
is of other injured, spoiled, and troubled. We must (I say) by many
tribulacions enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Also we are here commanded not to be careful, but every man in following his
vocacion must be diligent to execute the same, trusting and believing that god
so will provide and care for us, that we shall lack nothing. as it apeareth in
his apostels and disciples whom he sent forth without any wallet, scrip or
shoes, yet they did lack nothing, for when he did ask the^ whether they had
lacked any thing or no, they answered: No. Therefore let us (as Christ
commands us) seek first the kingdom of god, and the righteousness thereof, and
all these things shall be ministered unto us.

Filftey, here is to be noted, that we must earnestly and diligently do that
which we are bidden to do, and not to be withdrawn from it by no manner of
ways, another under pretense of love and friendeshippe, or visityng our
friends, and saluting them, but (as the disciples were commanded) to go
forwards and not to be stayed or returned by any such meetings and communings
by the way, so neglecting our office. After this manner did Eliza the Prophet
say unto his servant: If ye mete any man, salute him not: and if any salute
the, answer him not again. Wherewith commanding him, that he diligently and
spedely should do and perform his masters business and commandment. Wherefore
let every man so apply and take heed in his vocation that god thereby may be
glorified and praised To whom with the son and holy, ghost be all honor,
world without end. Amen.

Certain fautes which at the first sight might stay the reader, are these: The
first number, signifies the lease of the queyre: the second number, the side.
b. 1. the second side, for mothes, read mouths. b. 2. facie. 1. what shall
signs, what signs shall. b. 3. fac. 1. does look his master, look for his
master. c. 2 fac, 2. then so, then to. c. 5 fa. 1. folish folishnes, folio
eodem, mystery, ministry. d. 2. 1. a mes, arms. d 3. 1 he aith, he says. e.
1. did long, did not long. e. 8. 1. inogh, enough. f. 3. 2 our neceues, our
necessaries. f. 4. 1. this is place, this place it is. f. 5. 1. and wag
battle, and wage battle. eodem, shall say, shall hear. f. 6. 2. satisfaction,
sanctificacion. g. 1. 2. so much, add, so much to who^ it pleases him. g. 4.
1. faith by hearing, faith comes by heryng. h. 5. 1. laiyng, saying. h. 5. 2.
would world, k. 4. 1. does he give, does he not give. Where the gospel on
Easter day is appointed Matthew. 28. take for it Marc. 16. for the exposition
is applied to the same. o. 2. 1. which go, which would go, p. 2. 1. deseching,
besechinge. s: 5. 2. mihtely, mightily. v. 2. 2 Christ was, Christ which was.
v. 8. 1, Fentils Gentyls. x. 5. 1. hereinand, herein, and. y 4. 2. word,
world.

IMPRINTED at London in Poules churcheyarde, at the sign of the Brazen
serpent, by Reynold Wolf.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO DOMINI. M.D.L.


