SALOMONS PEST-HOVSE, OR TOVVRE-ROYALL.

NEWLY RE-EDIFIED and prepared to preserve Londoners with their Families, and
others, from the doubted Deluge of the Plague.

Item, A laudable exercise for those that are departed, or shall depart out of
the City into the Country, to spend their time till they return.

A handful of Holy Meditations useful and requisite for Gods people, men and
women, of all Estates and degrees, in these doubtful days, whether troubled
in body or mind, and whether Gods visitation of the Plague increase or
decrease.

By the reverend, learned, and godly Divine I. D. Preacher of Gods word.

Whereunto is added Mr Hollands Admonition, and Mr Phaers Prescription for
bodily Physics.

Also, London Looke-backe: A description or representation of the great and
memorable Mortality An. 1625. in Heroicke matchless lines,

By A. H. of Tr. College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, and are to be sold in Green Harbor, by
MICHAEL SPARK, at the sign of the Bible. 1630.

TO ALL YOU, The Israel of God, that be at London, Cambridge, or elsewhere,
beloved of God, called to be Saints: Grace be with you and Peace, from God our
Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, (Romans 1.7.) with all that call on the name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in every place, both their Lord and ours, (1 Cor.
1.2.)

This comfortable Treatise is commended. ()

To the judicious Christian READER.
Beloved: The wisest Preacher (of a mortal man, and of immortal memory,)
that ever was or shall be, inspired with the spirit of God; says, There is a
time to weep as well as to laugh, a time to mourn as well as to dance: And
certes, seeing every man and woman under their own Vines and Fig Trees have a
long time satiated themselves with laughing and dancing, or making merry with
their friends; doubtless now is the time that God calls for weeping and
mourning at the least: For, has he not shot diverse of his Arrows? and have
not some Bullets fallen from his warning Pieces? which Arrows and Bullets,
both poisoned with the Pestilence, have hit and slain some people not only in
and about this populous City, but elsewhere in the spacious Country also: And
who perceives not that the destroying Angel has unsheathed his sword and
brandished it over us of this City, us of this whole Land? Yea, the black
Horse of the Pestilence with pale Death on his back, has been and is,
est-soones, prauncing and trampling in the streets of our City at midnight:
And the Angel having wings has flowne also into the Country, and there done
as before: Now, though the sinful sons and daughters of men lie,
nevertheless, still sleeping in their sensualites, yet the vigilant Watchmen
of our English Israel have discovered both the one and the other: That is, the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel observing this Gods begun judgment and
further threat'ned punishment of the Pestilence; they, I say, have not spared
both in City and Country, publicly, and privately, with feruencie to pray for
us, for the preventing and diuerting of Gods further furious Hand upon us, and
in their preachings with their silver Trumpets to lift up their voices to sound
aloud; and cry down the high-crying sins of this City, of this Land: Yea,
diverse of these worthy Ministers have been and are so zealous in praying and
preaching for Repentance and Perseverance, that their throats are grown
hoarse, their bodies weak, and their healths impaired: In so much that vulgar
Profanists and Carnallists of the time (like as Festus once said of Paul) are
ready to say, much zeal has made them mad: But howeuer, for this their
assiduitie and indefatigable labor of love their reward is with the Lord; and
though the zeal of Gods House do eat them up; yet they shall once shine as
Stars in the Firmament of Heaven.

Among those reverend Divines, one has compiled this comfortable Treatise, or
to use its proper Title-phrase, has reedified and prepared this Pesthouse, or
Tower-Royall, first built by King Solomon so many hundred years agone, and
before he turned from a Prince to a Preacher.

If any list to be curiously, inquisitiue and ask, who or what is the Author,
this I.D? or to question his attributes of reverend, learned, godly, Give me
the publisher his friend leave to answer; First, that happ'ly his humility is
such and for some reasons in his Christian wisdom he desires not to have the
Phylacterie of his Name expressed: and it being so, he is not the first of Gods
people that has desired his name to be obscured in a comfortable and useful
work: Secondly, for his attributes, let me also answer; for the first, they
that know him, do know him so to be; for the two latter, let his labor it
self answer and witness for him.

To conclude; Whosoever the Author is or whatsoever I the publisher am, Know
this, courteous Reader, that it was written and is published for mine own and
thy Christian solace and comfort, now in a requisite time of a begun Sickness
and Mortality: the meditation whereof in our best healths; will do us,
doubtless, no hurt: And who knows? Yes, the Lord knows whether it may be
his Swan-like Song, this writing mine. For who can number unto himself any
more days or houers? Lord teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my
heart to wisdom; in laboring to make my peace with God. And for my pains in
publishing hereof, let me crave your Prayers. And so I betake you to God and
the good Word of his Grace, which is able (in sickness and in health; in life
and in death, in City or Country,) to build you up further, and to give you
an Inheritance (in Salomons strong Towre-Royall) among them that are sanctified.

Farewell in Christ. H. D.

A Postscript to the Reader
SInce God began this year, his Visitation, and to shake his Rod of the
Pestilence over us, I have observed an error among the sons of men, viz.
They have been and are very diligent in enquiring after the weekly Bills of
mortality, and they that could first obtain the Bill from their Parish Clarks,
have acknowledged to be most beholden unto them: and I will not simply condemn
this their diligence: But come we to enquire what use they have made of this
their double diligence and prime-intelligence: If they have found an increase
of the number, have they humbled themselves in Prayer, endeavoring to depart
from their sins, and to travail to this Towre-Royall, in the sequel, for
safety? Surely no, few or none have so done: the increase happ'ly has
dejected them, made them murmr, and project to flee to their Country-houses
here or there, and peradventure to send beforehand their Wives, Children, and
Household Stuff: yea, very careful they have been, and are for this their
bodily safeguard. Again, on the other side, if they have seen by the Bill a
decrease in the number; how many, nay how few have returned to God by the way
of thankfulness for such his great mercy and forbearance? I fear, and it
appears, that rather they have been thereby encouraged to go on in security,
if not in sensuality. I may say therefore with the Author and Founder of our
Towre-Royall. This is (also) an evil under the Sun, committed by the sons of
men; Of whom I my self being one, and ingenuously confessing. I cannot free my
self from being tainted with the Infection of this evil, will say no more:
but do humbly implore for my self, and all the Israel of God, more wise,
humble, concrite and thankful hearts, in observing his works: Open thou my
lips, Psalm. 51.15. Psalm. 119.18.
O Lord, that my mouth may show forth thy praise. And open mine eyes that I may
see the wonders of thy works. Iterum in Christo vale.

I. D.

SALOMONS PEST-HOVSE OR TOWRE-ROYALL, Collected out of the 18. Chapter of the
Proverbs, verse 10.
The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs unto it, and is
preserved.

Confirmed by the practice of King David, 1. Chron. Chap. 21. ver. 17. and 26.
And he called upon the Lord, and be answered him by fire from heaven.


THe whole College of the bodily Physicians, and the Prince of them, that wise
and learned Galen, prescibe for the time of Plague, that of all remedies, to
prevent the contagion, the best is, to fly and shun the infected and corrupted
air, and to depart unto a wholesome and purer air: and that with these three
rules, Cito, long, tarde. Depart speedily, far off, and return slowly. As
this is Physically prescribed, so it is diligently practiced, as daily
experience teaches, of all sorts of men, yea of the Physicians themselves; I
will not contradict the prescriptio^ of the Physician, nor disprooue the
diligence of the sons of men, if they use departure lawfully, therein not
sinning, Contra Patriam charitatem, vocationem,) against their Country, their
calling, and Christian charity. But because by the corruption of our nature
(which is more than the corruption of the air) we suffer our selves as with
maine sail to be carried away from the Creator to the creatures; fixing all
our senses more upon the aerial corruption, than upon the inward cause of the
contagion, the rottenness of our bones, which we carry within our selves, and
are more careful to depart into the Country than unto the Lord; as if by the
swiftness of our feet we could out-runne Him who rides upon the wings of the
Cherubims, Psalm. 10.4.
which causes that the Lord has a Pursiuant, which he sends to arrest some
in the pure air, (namely the Plague it self) which has arrested some in the
Country as well as the City, Anno. 1603. and 1625.
as the experience of the two last Visitations verified and this present year
have shown unto us all, verifing the threatening of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 28.22. This
is the reason why the whole College of the spiritual Physicians of our souls
have prescribed for the time of Plague, a better flight and departure, than
that which is prescribed by Galen and therest; namely (to the name of Jehovah)
by the feet of Prayer, mentioned and storied by that wise Solomon in the words
prefixed. And as it is prescribed, so it has been practiced of the Saints of
God: among the rest, of King David in the time of Plague, as the second place
adjoining unto the first does witness. Of this place then, which is the right
A^ke, and the little Zoar, whereunto our first care ought to be in the time of
plague to depart, and which is also the trusty friend and servant to aid the
sick, and the Exercise for them that are departed, to spend the time till they
return, give me leave Christian Readers to discourse out of the harmony of
these two places here prefixed.

To pray well, says Chrysostom, is an excellent art, which does adorn a
Christian, but it is not sufficient to know that we must pray, but also in what
manner: and therefore that we might the better be instructed in the going to
this place, and become skillful in this art, I will branch the description of
this place in these three several parts, which will store us with a cluster of
singular Meditations.

The first is, the name of the place, it is (the name of the Lord.) The second
is, the quality, condition property; and the safenesse of it, expressed in
two things; First, because it is (a strong tower) secondly, by the success of
those that run unto it (and is exalted) or delivered: which is the thing which
they receive that run to it.

The third thing is, what manner of persons they must be (the righteous runs
unto it.) As for the place, let me observe four things. For as in the time of
Plague, for our departure, first it is necessary, that we know the name of the
place whereunto we go: secondly, that we have feet to bear and carry us
thither: thirdly, that we have a direction that we might not err: fourthly,
that we have some right and interest there, or some acquaintance, that we may
be received. So likewise these four things are necessary to be known of us,
in our spiritual departure.

Touching the name of the place whereunto David fled in the time of plague, as
it has diverse names, 1 The name of the place.
so in this place it is called the name of Jehovah. Here I pretermit the five
several significations of the name of the Lord used in the book of God, taking
it in this place, first for the Lord himself: secondly, for his attributes by
which he does manifest himself. Of which Moses, Number. 14. brings in a perfect
catalogue, and the Lord has delivered this his name by proclamation, Exo.
34.5.6. The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, etc. God then the almighty, eternal,
immortal, invisible Lord, the judge of the world, Psalm. 94.2. God, merciful
and gracious, the supreme Physician of our souls, who heals all our
iniquities, Psalm. 103. God to whom power belongs, and whose is salvation
alone, Psalm. 62. is the place it self whereunto David, and we ought to fly
from the contagion. The name of a place if it be known, famous and renowned,
has often much force to persuade us rather to go unto such a place, than unto
such or such: surely there was never name of place more worthy to go unto,
then the name of Jehovah O ye righteous souls that thirst or may thirst by
reason of the heat of the plague upon your beds, fly unto this place, to the
waters of comfort: here are wels enough to be drawn at: this is the name which
God has proclaimed to the world, and whereby he would be known to men, that
if ever they come to him, they may speak their minds in the confidence and
trust of this amiable name. Esteem it not strange, beloved, that the name of a
place is attributed to the Lord: for that he is a place of refuge, three
(running) here used by king Solomon. As for the Lord he does attribute unto
himself this name by the pen of the holy Ghost, calling himself a secret
place, Psalm. 91.1. a throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16 a refuge, Psalm. 9 9 a
fortress, Psalm. 18 2. a strong tower, and David the father in diverse places,
Psalm. 18 2. The Lord is my fortress and my refuge: and in the 32.7. Thou art
my secret place, and compassest me about with joyful deliverance: and so Psalm.
94 22. This is also the confession of the son in this place: and of all the
Saints of God, unto whose confessions I refer you, as they are set down by
the holy Ghost (runs) implies as much, which gives me entrance to the
second point, opening unto us the feet which we need, to go unto this place,
the which if ye are desirous to know, The feet to carry us thither.
they are two in number (Faith and Prayer). Faith the first, for if by faith we
stand, 2 Cor. 1 24. by faith we may also go to the Lord who is faithful. Now
how could we go unto him by the feet of prayer, if we did not believe in
him? Romans 10.14. The second, is prayer, a spiritual leg to bear us thither,
noted by Solomon, making mention of running: by Jonah, speaking of coming.
Chap. 2, ver. 7. And my prayer came unto thee, in thine holy temple? By the
Apostle, when he speaks of going, let us therefore go unto the throne of
grace, Heb. 4.16. Lastly, by the holy Ghost, using this word Climbing. Apoc.
8.4. Both the name of the place which is appointed for us to go unto, and the
spiritual legs which the Lord has given us to carry us thither, do preach
unto the sons of men the admirable goodness and mercy of the Lord toward them.
In this world we are as pilgrims, Psalm. 119. having here no continuing City,
Heb. 13.14. and while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord.
2. Cor. 5.6. In which pilgrimage, Many are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm.
34. O the great goodness of the Lord then, that he has given us feet to come
unto him, and made himsefe a place of refuge for us in all our troubles! which
goodness is comfortable unto the faithful: for as it is a comfort unto the
pilgrim, shepherd, or soldier, to have in the heat of the day a place of
refuge to refresh their wearied members: So likewise what a comfort is it for
you O afflicted souls in the heat of your afflictions, to have the name of
Jehovah for a sacred Sanctuary! the Lord is not like unto the Princes of the
earth, who desire not to be molested with the requests of their distressed
subjects. It is a joy to the wearied student, that he may sometime come home to
his fathers house and recreate himself: Into this world the Lord has sent us
as in an University, which although it is far off from our fathers house,
yet the Lord has given us spiritual feet, by which in a moment we can ascend
unto our fathers house, and recreate there our wearied spirits. This world is a
waste desert, if we need any thing, here are the legs by which speedily we
may run to this place, and provide our selves. If the Lord has cast us down
upon our beds, and that we cannot use the feet of our bodies, behold, he has
given us other feet, to use in stead of these. King Ezekiah visited with the
plague, could not use the feet of the flesh, but with the feet of the spirit,
went unto this place, known unto him by the name of Jehovah. Jonah is locked up
in a prison in the belly of the Whale, (the Lords prison) and cannot stir
himself, and yet by the virtue of these feet, out of the depth he ascends to
the holy temple of Jehovah.

The hose to put on.
Now that these feet may be able to bear us thither, and that they may not
fail us in our voyage, they must put on the hose of faith: and as the Apostle
speaks, our feet must be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.
And as the feet to that Image of Daniel were part of iron, Ephesians 6.15.
part of clay, which the Prophet expounds partly strong, partly weak or
broken: Dan 2 42.
So the feet of our prayers are, according to the hosen wherewith they are
covered; if they put on fear and distrustfulnesse, they will be shiuering and
sinking downward, of clay, weak, and impotent; if they put on faith and
confidence in the mercies of God, they will be feet of iron, strong, stable and
firm, keeping us upright, and will carry us to the very throne of grace. A
dirction to know the way.


Further, as they that depart into the Country, if they know not the way to
the place whereunto they go, must have a guide, or a direction, because they
should not err; So in the going to this place, because there are so many false
guides and directions, the Lord himself has given us a Card of direction to
lead us thereunto, the witness of his holy word, written and sealed, that can
never deceive us. As the fiery pillar in the desert, showed the way unto the
Israelites: So this word of the Lord is a fiery pillar unto us in the dark
desert of this world, to show us the way to that heavenly Canaan; it is the
lantern unto our feet, and a light to our paths, Luke 12.35.
Psalm. 105. and therefore, according to the direction of our Savior, Let our
ioynes be girded, and let us bear in our

The right or interest which the faithful have to this place.
Fourthly, to go to this place, it is necessary to know what right or interest
we have in it. In the places whereunto men betake their selves in the time of
plague, either they have some right or interest there, because they are their
own, or because they have some friends or acquaintance there that will receive
them; or lastly, because they have either hired or purchased a house. So
likewise unto the name of Jehovah, the place where we ought to go in the time
of plague, as also at all other times, we have a special right and interest.
First, acquaintance and our best friends; God our father, Christ our brother,
the holy Ghost our comforter. Thirdly, because David, 1. Chro. 21.17. in his
prayer, shows upon what right and encouragement in the time of plague he went
to this place, (O Lord my God I beseech thee, etc.) it was then, because the
Lord was his God; he had a particular feeling of the love of God toward him,
and knew him to be his God for he had had some experience of deliverance. The
reason why we must have this right, is because being infected with the plague
of sin, we should not be received. In the Country, they will not receive
those that are infected with the plague: Neither can they also, in whose souls
the plague of sin does reign, be admitted to this place, and therefore the
Lord has given us Christ the righteous, to cover our unrighteousness, that
thus as pure and clean we might come unto him. I know by mine experience, that
in the Country heretofore, they would not admit some that came from the City,
unless they had put on new apparel. To come unto that heavenly Jerusalem by
the feet of prayer, we cannot be admitted, Ephe. 4.24.
except we put off the old man, and put on the new man which is created in
righteousness, and therefore, that we should not be hindered to go thither, He
has put on us, the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.14. that being adorned with his
righteousness and holiness, as Jacob was with the garment of his brother
Esau, We might with confidence approach to the throne of grace, Heb. 4. It is
only then in the name of Christ that we must go to the name of Jehovah, Ioh.
14.14. Ioh. 57. Mat. 21.22. Ioh. 16.14. 1. Tim. 2.5. 1 Ioh. 2.1. In his name,
the poor Lazarus has as much right to go unto it, as king Solomon: the
infected as the sound: the learned as the unlearned: for Christ prays for
them all: and as Augustine speaks. Christ prays with us all as our brother;
he prays in us all as our head, he is prayed unto by us all, as our Lord, but
he prays for us all, as our high Priest. Let then the Romanists in the time
of plague, run unto the name of Jehovah, in the name of Saint Sebastian. Alas
they shall not be admitted: for Christ alone, as Ambrose speaks, is the eye
wherewith we see the father, the hand to offer up our prayers, and the mouth
to speak unto him. But as for us, with David let us go unto him by force of
this right, saying with him, O Lord our God, we beseech thee, etc.

The practice of King David.
Having understood the name of the place, with other circumstances, let us now
examine the practice of King David; unto this place, with these feet, by the
same right, following the true direction, he runned in the time of the plague
with his family, the Elders of Israel. For he fled not to his Castle, neither
departed he cut of Iewrie, nor transported his family into another place, but
as it is storied, 1. Chron. 21.26. (He called upon the Lord.) Here is a
foundation whereupon some prodigal of their lives, uncharitable to others,
proud in their conceits, build the unlawfulness of departing out of the
contagi^us places in the time of plague, condemning it by the example of King
David in general, Theodorus Beza, written touching this matter, wherein he
learnedly, soundly and religiously refuteth their gross opinion; only let me
destroy their building which they erect upon the example of King David. Dan to
Beershebah, which left him no place free to go unto: for whither should he
fly, seeing that the pestilence Sam. 24. Thirdly, his own guiltiness, that
plague being caused by his sin, the numbering of the people, which caused such
a sorrow in David, that he was ready by his own death to redeem the public
calamity, praying unto the Lord, 1. Chro. 21.17. O Lord my God I beseech thee,
let thine hand be on me, and on my fathers Fourthly, the soundness of
Jerusalem, the place where he was, the Angel having not yet, or very sparingly
touched the head City, 1. Chron. 21.15. the Lord repenting of the evil, when
the Angel came to Jerusalem: these four particulars are able to cast down
their building, and to disprooue their consequence: David fled not, Ergo, it is
unlawful for any man to depart: the true consequence, if we would argue out of
this place, might be this: David and the Elders departed not: Ergo, let not
Magistrate forsake his City, nor the Minister his flock. Having plucked out
the weeds and the thistles, let us as the good husbandman sow the good seed.
As this then proves not the unlawfulness of departure; so on the other side,
it does commend unto us king David's praying, The true use of the example
and his spiritual departure, teaching us that in the time of plague, our
first and principal care ought to be, as well before our departure, as in our
departure if we are so minded, (for I urge no necessity of it) to fly and
run by the feet of faith and prayer to the name of the Lord, which being
forgotten, omitted, or negligently practiced, makes our departure unlawful.
Imitate the King then, O ye righteous souls, in this threatened tempest of the
plague, let your souls take (the wings of a Dove) the motion and agility of
the spirit of God, and let them fly by the strength of their prayers to the
bosom of Gods mercies where they shall be at rest, David in this his going to
the name of the Lord, has showen and manifested four things: His Conscience,
Humility, Memory, Wisdom. His Conscience, that it was good: his Humility,
great: his Memory, holy: his Wisdom, right.

Touching the first, the spirit of prayer is a sign of a good Tertullian
speaks, Lib. de cast. Oration de conscientia procedit si conscientia
erubescat, erubescet oration. Prayer does proceed from the Conscience: if the
Conscience blush, prayer will also be ashamed. O it is an excellent thing that
we can give our selves to this holy exercise: let one have riches, honor,
pleasures, let him be adored as a little god, if he have not the spirit of
prayer to push him forward with David, in the midst of his felicity, he is
most miserable.

Secondly, his misery and humility, for a King is become a beggar, and at the
gate of the King of heaven he uses speeches of submission. (I beseech thee O
Lord) Lo here O proud son of Adam, of thy self thou have nothing, but like a
poor suppliant beggar thou art constrained to go before the gate of that
right God, as well the king that sits upon his throne, Lazarus that sits
before the door of the rich man. Thirdly his memory, the subject whereof was
the Lord, O holy remembrance! Although he had as it were forgotten him by his
sin in his prosperity, yet he remembers him by his prayer in his
affliction: O the excellency of prayer, it is a remembering of our best friend,
whose remembrance is comfortable to our distressed souls. The subject of our
memoris, have been along time commodities, pleasures, riches, honor, triumphs
and therefore, o England, behold another subject to exercise the art of thy
memory: If then we have forgotten him by our fervent prayer in our sin, let us
now remember him by our seruent prayer in our affliction. Many have practiced
the art of memory, according to the memoratiue Art, and precepts of memory,
which appoint places, and their furniture, for the help of such as are
unexperienced; but let us practice the art of this holy memory, let God be
Psalm. 50. Secondly the name of him, whom we call upon, that it is Jehovah,
Lord, our God, a God not in show, but in substance and performance: a strong
God, a tower of defense, Psalm. 9.10. Thirdly, what he is by nature, how sweet
and amiable, how rich in Ephesians. 2. Fourthly, what he is by promise, how faithful
Tim. 1.3 Lastly, what he is by covenant, made unto Abraham's seed, not in the
blood of bulls, but in the blood of the seed of Abraham: Further David has
shown his wisdom, and that in the choice of the place, taking his mark
aright, and directing his petition to the true and proper periode. Imitate the
wisdom of king David in his choice, he that goes to a place, runs aright
and wisely, if he be wise, and not by crooked and erroneous ways: David
shows us the right way, for to what place should we go but to this, when our
sorrows are multiplied? shall we follow the ways of the wicked, and say with
them, Malac. 3. It is in vain, that I have served him, and what profit is it,
that I have kept his Commandments? Or shall we run upon the way of
impatience, adding grief to grief, living the life of Caine, or dying the
death of Judas, drowning our souls in a gulf of desperation Shall we spend
the time in bannings, execrations, cursing the day and night, the earth that
bears us, the air that inspireth us? Not so, O Christian souls, call upon
the name of the Lord with David, there was never name so worthy to be called
upon, in heaven or earth, so mighty for deliverance, so sure for protection,
so gainefull for success, so compendious to cut off unnecessary labors as
the name of Jehovah:

Having understood the Conscience, Humility, Memory, 6. The causes to move
us to go to this place.
and Wisdom of David; let me open to you the reasons to move and persuade us
to go to this place. Five things move the sons of men in the time of plague to
depart from contagious places, unto a purer air. First, the counsel of the
Physicians, Secondly, the practice of others. Thirdly, the danger or peril
which they are like to fall in. Fourthly, desire of health and life. Fifthly,
the experience of success. Let the same be motives unto us in this infection,
to persuade us to run speedily unto this Arc of Noah. First, it is prescribed
by Psalm. 50.15. King David's Physician; by God the son, who prescribing the
remedies which men ought to use in the last days, in which the Trinity of
punishments. Famine, Luke 21.36, Watch and pray continually; by Prophets,
Apostles, and wise men, Iam. 5.13. Eccle. 38.9. and 17.23. Secondly, the
practice of the spiritual Physicians, as they have prescribed it, so they have
also practiced it, and have fled unto this place; to this Sanctuary went the
renowned Patriarchs, the godly Princes, the holy Prophets, the blessed
Apostles, the Prince of glory, the son of the immortal God, the constant
Martyrs: whose examples ye shall find in the storehouse of the Scriptures. The
example of the bodily Physicians, of which some depart in the time of plague,
has much force to make us hasten our departure; how much more ought the
practice of the spiritual Physicians spur us forward upon our spiritual (In
nobis, circa nos, contra nos) In us, round about us, against us. In us the
plague of sin: round about us, the fire of the present plague: against us,
Satan who seeks to make us curse the Lord, and the fire of Gods wrath and
anger: To avoid this threefold go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may
receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. Why went
that woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve years unto Christ,
Matthew. 9.20.
but that she might receive her health: verse. 12. The sickness of the plague
is an issue of blood, which being once opened, will ever run, and keep a
course if it be not stanched by the power and mercy of God: which mercy is
only obtained, by going unto his sacred name: to obtain this double health,
David went unto this place, 1. Chron. 2 1. that the plague of his soul might
be healed, and the bodily plague be removed. If we are as it were dead for
sorrow, prayer will revive us, for it is, Vita animae, the life of the soul:
and as Chrysostom. terms it, Est anima ipsius animae, It is the soul of the
soul. If we go into the Country which cannot save us; how much more ought we
to fly to this name, which has the power to do it: this his power, being
accompanied with mercy and kindness, for thou O Lord, art good and gracious,
Psalm. 8 6 Fifthly, experience of good success, is the last motive, they which
have fled to this place, have not been stopped by the way, but have had good
speed. Go unto King Hezekiah, Job, David, and the rest, and they will preach
unto you by experience, the experience

His power, I have heard it that power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11. There
was never affliction or sore so great, but the hand of that Physician has
been able to matter it, the least finger of his right hand being of more
puissance, then the whole arm of flesh.

His will and promise, Psalm. 91.1. Joel. 2.32. Iam 5.15. Eccle. Matthew. 7.7.
Ioh. 14.13. The King of heaven is not like unto the Princes of the earth, or
unto that Philip of Macedon, who answered unto the widow coming in his Court
to him, to be heard, I am not at leisure, (unto which also she answered
justly, then be not a King any longer) for seeing that he has promised it, he
is also willing, his promise being signed with the finger of the holy Ghost,
and sealed with the blood of his beloved and anointed. Neither is he like unto
him, Matthew. 7. who answered, trouble me not, my doors are shut; the gate of
heaven is always open for us. God reuoketh not his promise as King Solomon. 1.
Reg. 2.20.21.23. Ask my mother, for I will not say thee nay; and yet behold
how this time is changed, Adoniah has spoken this word against his own life;
of the Lords promise we need not doubt, but with David boldly we may speak,
Psalm. 86.7. In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will hear
me.

Thirdly, His goodness, mercy, and liberality, which is so 147.9. Doubt not
then, but that he will hear the supplications of men, whom he has made a
little lower then the Angels, to crown them with glory above other creatures,
Psalm. 8.56. Let therefore, says Augustine, thy prayer ascend, and Gods mercy
will descend, shall we distrust his goodness, who is rich to all that call
upon him? Romans 10.12. Or shall we suspect his bountifulness, which powers out
plentifully his blessings upon all flesh? Romans 8.32. And although we have
offended him, yet our offenses will not stop his mercies. Men, when they have
done any good turn to any, if they be never so little offended, they cast men
in the teeth with the benefits they have done them, and vpbraid them with the
good turns they have showed; wherefore men are loath to make request to such
for any thing: If we go unto the Lord, we shall not meet with one that is of
such a disposition and nature: Iam. 1.5.
he, as the Apostle speaks, reproacheth no man; nor keeps his anger for
ever, Psalm. 103.9. The willingness, mercy, and goodness of the Prince to
have us, makes us also willing to go to him; who more willing, then he that
is our Father, our Savior, then he that has suffered for us, scoffings,
spittings, bands, stripes, and death it self? Never lap of the mother has
been so open to her babes, as the bowels of Gods compassions are open to the
righteous. Harken to this, ye faint spirits, be strengthened ye weak hands
and feeble knees, receive this comfort, that he has delivered, he does
deliver, he yet will and can deliver. I end this point with the 13.14. and
15. verses of the 10. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans: wherein behold a
singular and compendious gradation. As they that would come to King Solomon
sitting upon his throne, were feign to run up six stairs (for his throne,
was mounted unto by six stairs) so the perfection and consummation of man
going to the throne of the true Solomon Jesus Christ, ascends and arises by
six degrees: the highest and the happiest stairs being, inuocating and
saving, prayer and deliverance. These are then the five reasons, by which wise
Christians ought to be guided. I imitate King David, only resorting to the
wings of the Lords favor. And herein we should be wise, if we leuel our hearts
and affections at the very right center and mark of prayer (which is the name
of Jehovah alone) and the period or scope in whom our requests must end.

Five sorts of men erring in the going to this place.
But alas, there are five sorts of men, which make choice of other places,
rejecting the wisdom of David, the counsel of the spiritual Physicians, and
the practice to the Saints of God, going a crooked, a circular, and endless
way, not toward the mark, nor with a right foot as the Apostle Gal. 2. The
first kind, fly first to the help of mortal man, and with Asa make speed to
the bodily Physician, to the confections of Art, or to the purer air, not
once mindful of this place; but when all helps fail them, and that the Lord
sends his Sergiant and heavenly Pursiphant to arrest them, then they return
to run to this place. What name shall we give you (O ye of little faith) but
the name of weak Christians? Put not your trust in the son of man, for there
is no help in him, Psalm 146. There is a second Jehovah, yea denying that there
ever has been, or is yet at this present, such a place to be found, wh^eunto
the righteous is preserved, such as David describes in the 10. Psalm, 3.4.
Which seek not God, but contemn him, and think they shall never be moved. O
ye mere Atheists, what name deserve you, but that name which the Lord
himself gives you, Psalm. 14.1. the name of fools? If Cain has been ^ct^d,
because he offered an unworthy sacrifice, what deserve they that offer none
at all? The third sort run to a place, Saul, as Nero, as Julian: Return,
return, O ye wretched and bewitched sons of men, with the name of deuillish
idolaters. The Bernard writes on the 91. Psalm, are ill lodged and have a
poor Tabernacle, the devil has soon blown that away. The last sort, are
the superstitious Papists, who in the time of Sebastian for as every sickness
and disease has his Apothecarie and Physician among them: So the plague has
Saint Sebastian, unto whom with their families they run to be preserved.
That execrable Psalter of the Virgin Marie, compiled by them, makes her to be
this secret place whereunto we ought to run: the prayer of David which he
made being visited with the plague, Psalm 38. is blasphemously abused in this
manner, O Lady rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath:
The 91. Psalm is in the like manner abused, Who so dwells in the secret of
the blessed Virgin, etc. But O ye blind seducers of soul, it may be first a
challenge unto you all, that neither David, Job or Ezechiah visited with the
plague went to Cherub or Seraphin, Gabriel or Raphael, Abraham or Moses: whom
have I in heaven but thee? says David: he says not, that he had a Moses or a
Samuel: have all these erred? Even so will we with them. Secondly, ye go to
them that cannot help you, let them arise, if they can help you in the time
of your misery, Iere. 2. In the famine of Samaria, 2. Reg. 6. a woman crying
to the King, help me, O King, he answered, seeing the Lord does not succor
thee, how should I help thee? Concluding secondly, Sebastian, help and laid
us Saint Sebastian. If it lies not in the power of mortal men that are living
with us to help, how much less can they that are dead? And far less, one
that perhaps David, Psalm. 115. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, etc. they that
refused a far smaller offer upon the earth, Apoc. 22.9.
the only bowing of the knee unto them (See thou do it not) will be much
more discontented, to see the knees of the heart to stoup to them for the
ceasing of the plague: for although an Angel smote seventy thousand in the
time of David, yet he was but the instrument, God only the agent, and
therefore he only to be prayed unto. If the Papists reply that they entreat
only Saint Sebastian Sebastian, nor any Saint so ever, to be his Master of
Request: this is a service not unmeet for the governors of the earth? the Lord
is not like unto earthly Princes, unto the which may be said, that which Iethro
said, Exodus 18. to Moses, the thing is too heavy for thee, thou art not able
to do it thy self alone: for the Almighty is able to do it alone, neither
is there any defect in his hearing, whose ears are open to the prayers of the
poor. Let us therefore hold Christ Jesus alone for the Master of Requests; it
is he only that can present our requests which we make unto the Lord for the
ceasing of the plague: let others run where they will, to sticks and stones
from the name of the Lord: I do you no injury to impute this to you, for as
Hilarie writes upon the first Psalm, It is as great an offense to make a new,
as to deny the true God. The Lord annoint your eyes with his eye-salue, that
ye may return to fly to the name of Jehovah. As for us, we will follow the
holy Canon and leave the broad way, whose end is destruction, saying with
David, Psalm. 11.1. In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then to my soul,
fly to your mountain as a bird. Matthew. 7.
I end the first branch of this discourse with that holy Epiphoneme of King
David, Psalm. 146.5. Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help,
whose hope is in the Lord his God.

After the name of the place, and other circumstances, The second part, the
properties of the place.
there follows in the two places, the condition, properties, quality and
safenesse of the place whereunto we must run in the time of the plague. The
sons of men in the time of infection, before their departure, have a special
regard of the place where they will go, of the situation, nature, and such
like, and being led by the prescription of the Physician: Secondly, by their
own mind, they make choice commonly of a place in which they perceive these
seven properties following: and although Solomon here makes mention but of
one, namly of a safe place, yet give me leave to discourse of the rest.

First, they go where there is a good, wholesome and pure air, 1 A pure place.
not subject to stinking euaporations, and it is the prescriptio^ of the
Physicians, that we should go unto places where the air is not corrupted, far
from the infection. David fled to such a place, for such is the name of
Jehovah, a pure place, far from the corruptions of this world, for he is a
pure, and incorruptible God, in whom there is no infectio^ of sin: the Lord,
holy, holy, holy, not admitting those in whose mortal bodies the plague of sin
does reign: to pray then and to repent, is to return and go to a wholesome
light. Eccle. 17.24. The places whereunto the sons of men fly, although they
are for a time corrupted, yet they are not warra^ted still so to remain, diverse
alteratio^s by sundry means may befall, as by the resort of persons infected,
and such like: but the name of Jehovah, this place of refuge, shall never be
altered, for he is the immutable and unchangeable God, and the gates of that
City no unclean person shall enter, Apoc, 22.14 15.

Secondly, men make choice of a pleasant and delectable place, 2 A pleasant
place.
both for their bodies and souls, where there is good company to recreate
themselves in their sorrow and exile, food and necessaries for their bodies,
further by the river side, or where there is good water: lastly, where they may
also have food for their souls, the word of God Preached. This place of
refuge, the name of Jehovah, is a pleasant and delectable place, where can
thou better recreate thy self, then by thy Father and brother Jesus Christ in
this thy exile and misery? Comfortable is the bosom of the mother to the young
infant, but more comfortable is the name of the Lord to the righteous which are
called little babes by the Apostle. Paul makes mention in his voyage toward
Rome, of a certain place which was called (The fair havens) Act. 27. this
place of refuge better deserved this name, let us go thither, for it is a
harbor and rode for those which are tossed in the sea and deluge of the
Pestilence: happy is the soul that landeth at these havens. If we desire
water, there is the fountain of life: Iere. 2. the water of grace, Psalm. 51.
If we desire the word; there is the word it self, Jesus Christ, Ioh. 1 the
truth Ioh: 14. There is the best, the first, the ancientest Preacher, God
himself that preached in Paradise.

Thirdly, in our choice we seek out a safe place, whither we may go without
danger, 3 A safe place.
and where we may abide safe, and dwell without danger. The name of Jehovah is
a safe harbor, the secret place and shadow of the most high, Psalm. 91.1. under
whose wings we shall abide safe and harmless. Three things prove the
safenesse of this place: First, the A strong tower, Prou. 18.10. A secret
place, Psalm. 32.7. A rock and fortress, Psalm. 18. which is invincible. Such
are not the fortresses of mortal men, which they are constrained to render up,
being driven thereunto either by famine, or force, as Seba in the time of David
hereof is a witness. Secondly, the Lord of the soil, which inhabiteth that
place, his name is Jehovah: the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. the strong and
invincible God, who will and is able to preserve us. Thirdly, it is proved by
the success of those who run to it, and by that which they receive, they are
exalted, preserved or delivered (says Solomon) which David acknowledges,
Psalm. 32.7. and is confirmed by the success of David's prayer, 2. Sam. 24.25.
and the plague ceased from Israel. Comfortable is the saying of David; Psalm.
91.3.15.16. in which, six things prove the happy success of the righteous
that runs unto it. First, Gods ready answer: Secondly, his presence:
Thirdly, his deliverance: Fourthly, his advancement to honor: Fifthly, length
of days: Sixthly, fruition of salvation: O the excellent riches, pleasures, and
joys which the righteous there shall enjoy. As Lot there fled unto little Zoar
to be preserved from the fire of Sodom. Genesis 1^.
So let us fly to the name of Jehovah, to be safe from the fire of the plague.
The earthly places whereunto men run, do want this property: they are not
warranted to be safe there, either from danger or from the plague, and the
experience of this year does declare it unto us all. Some have returned and
some have died there, but as for the name of Jehovah, thy soul is certain to
be preserved, if thither she takes her recourse; and as they only escaped
the flood, that entered into the Arc of Noah: So likewise, they that enter into
this incorruptible and immortal Arc, shall only be safegarded from the deluge
of afflictions. The Dove of Noah at her first flight from the Arc, although
she mounted aloft, and fetched many retires, yet she could find no resting,
until she returned again to the Arc: So the poor soul may fly where she
will, but yet she shall not have any sure footing to rest, except she return
to the heavenly Arc: let us therefore be wise as Serpents, and simple as
Doves, for as they being persecuted, fly unto the rocks; so let us in our
calamities take our recourse to the rock of David, Psalm. 18.2. never have
there bin holes in the rocks so open for the dove, as the name of Jehovah for
the righteous souls. There are two renowned places mentioned by Pliny,
Locris, and Crotone, where the plague was never, as he writes lib. 1. cap. 96.
and without doubt many resorted thither: but although we should fly at this
day to Locris and Crotone, if we carry within us the plague of sin, the
inward cause of the bodily contagion, we have no warrant to be safegarded. But
me thinks I hear a controversy: thou ask the earth, says Augustine, and
the Lord gives thee heaven: temporal life, and he gives thee the eternal.
The Surgion that saweth off the arm or leg of the Patient, who cries for
impatience and apprehension; he areth him, Non secundu^ voluntatem, sed
sanitate^, not according to his will but according to his health: and so the
Lord deals with his Patients.

4. A place where they have friends.
Fourthly, to proceed, men make choice of places where they have their friends:
the children resort to their parents, the parents to their children, brethren
to their brethren, and one friend to another. The name of the Lord is a place
of refuge where we have our bestfriends, there we have our Father, our eldest
brother Christ Jesus, the holy Ghost our comforter: and therefore David in the
time of Plague went to this comfortable place. Experience hereof Anno 1625.
In earthly places unto which the sons of men resort, either we have no
friends, or they are far off, and therefore we seek other: or sometimes
although we have friends, yet they will not receive us for fear of infection:
but in this holy temple, and upon this holy mountain, we are sure to find at
all times the aforesaid friends.

5. A place accessible for all men.
Fifthly, we have regard to choose a place which is lawful for all men to come
unto, which is not prohibited or forbidden by the Lord of the soil and
Magistrate of the place, and where we know we shall be received. This place of
refuge is such, accessible for all men, for whosoever shall call on the name of
the Lord, shall be saved, Joel. 2.32. Never a city of refuge so free for all
manner of transgressions: hither may come the King and the subject, the rich
and the poor, the learned and the unlearned, the merchant and the tradesman:
the sound and the sick, yea the infected with the plague. In the time of
infection, it is not lawful for them that dwell where the contagion reigns,
to com unto the Princes Court, they are forbidden by Proclamation to resort
thither. But the court of heaven is open for all men, yea the for infected, for
they cannot infect the Court of heaven: The King of heaven his proclamation.
the King of heaven has made a Proclamation in the 50. Psalm. that we should
resort thither, and the Prince of glory Jesus Christ who keeps his residence
there, will not keep us back. If the Prince had made a Proclamation that the
infected should resort to his court to be healed, who would not hasten
thither? It was not lawful for all men to come to the inner Court of King
Ahassuerus; Esth. 4.
none might approach but they to whom he held out his golden Scepter, except
he would die the death that was appointed for such as durst come near: no such
kind of punishment is appointed for those that go unto the Court of the King
of heaven, we may approach boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4.16.
the scepter of our King (I mean not that iron scepter of his justice,) but
the golden of his mercy, is ever held forth to man, woman, children, bond or
free, stranger or Citizen, infected or not infected, whether they be called, or
not called: and they all may safely approach: I name not neither inward or
outward court, but even to the throne of grace, where the King himself
sits: and if there we crave of him, I say not to the half of his Kingdom
(as Ahassuerus spoke unto Ester) but to the whole, it shall not be denied us.
Fear of punishment keeps us from the Princes court. Let not fear keep us
from the court of heaven. Nehem 2^
Nehemiah although he held the cup to the King, yet how fearful he was to
make a request unto him: But as for you O ye righteous souls, fear ye not, O
you little flock, for it is your fathers pleasrue to give you a Kingdom. Luke
12. Further in time of contagion, not only the court but also the other cities,
towns and villages, will not often lodge them that come from contagious
places, either the Lord of the soil, or the magistrate of those places
forbidding it; but as for that heavenly Jerusalem, and the Lord of the living,
thereunto every one may resort, the Lord and magistrate of heaven does not
interdict it. David cried unto the Lord, and said, thou art my portion in the
land of the living. Psalm. 142.5. At Rome the housen of the Aediles, were
always open for all men, that they might resort thither, to have their causes
heard: and so is the house of the Lord for the afflicted souls. In some places
there are appointed (as I my self have seen) watchmen with halbards, to ask
the passengers from whence they come, and sometimes to keep out those that
come from infected places, but in our going to this place, we need not to have
such fear, for as Chrysostom says, Hic non est miles assistens qui expellat,
here there is no Sergiant or Soldier to keep thee out. If the cities of the
earth shut their gates before thee, thou can not enter. As for that heavenly
Jerusalem, it is not locked, and although it were, prayer, as Augustine
speaks, is a key to open heaven, and to bring thee to the presence of God.
Sermon. 226. detemp. the Town and Villages in times of infection although they
receive some, yet they will not harbor many: and often there is no place for
multitudes: but so is it not with the name of Jehovah, with this strong tower,
it is not like unto the bulwarks of mortal men, into the which if too many
enter, they will hinder one another, this fortress can receive millions and
millions without any impediment. Further the temple is also interdicted to the
infected, for they are commanded by the magistrate to keep their housen for a
time, or if they come, they are entreated to sit a side: but the Lords holy
temple above in heaven, is not forbidden unto the infected, nor to any man: it
is lawful for them to go thither and pray, and that with the success of
David, Psalm. 18. In my trouble I did call upon the Lord and cried unto my God,
and he heard my voice out of his Temple.

6. A place near unto the City
Sixthly, some make a choice in the plague time, of a place which is near,
whereunto they may easily go without any great trouble or cost: the name of
the Lord is such a place, compendious to cut off unnecessary labors, ye need
not to run far, the Lord is near, as the Prophet speaks, to all them
that call upon him: neither will it cost us any thing, money or merits,
intercession of friends or gifts: Poor men, ye that want friends or money,
and therefore cannot provide your selves a place, be not dismaide, behold, here
is a place which will cost you nothing. It is a place whereunto we may go at
all times, at dinner time, and at supper, as Chrysostom speaks, in the day
time, and at midnight, in thy health, and in thy sickness: the sick man may
ly down upon his bed and go unto it, and when with King Ezekiah he cannot use
the feet of the flesh, yet may he use the feet of the spirit. In a moment we
can fly thither, for as soon as we have finished our prayer, we are already
come to this place, and to the Lord of this soil, our prayer and God meeting
one another in heaven, as Jesus Christ and the woman at the Well, Ioh. 4. As
for earthly places whereunto men resort, either they are far off, uneasy to
go unto, and that with trouble and cost, or expenses, sometimes we are
stopped, we must have Warrants and Certificates of the Parish and
Churchwardens, that our house is not infected, before we can be admitted: all
this trouble we need not in the time of plague in our going to the name of the
Lord: nothing will stop us, the bodily plague shall be no impediment, for we
have a warrant that we may pass, the King of heaven his warrant in the 50.
Psalm, Call upon me, etc. The warrant of the infected.
and therefore this place is better then the earthly, where the fearful
sons of men dwell which fear the apparel, household stuff, yea and thy
letters: I know nothing then to stop our passage, but the plague of the soul,
as the Lord of this soil tells us in the, 2. Cor. 6.17. Touch none unclean
thing, and I will receive you. Solomon speaks: but alas, I am unrighteous,
and how can I therefore go unto this strong tower? The answer is, Solomon
speaks not of them that are righteous by their own righteousness, but by
the righteousness of Christ Jesus: such are all the faithful in whose mortal
bodies the plague of sin does not remain, their infirmities being healed by
David's Physician, Psalm 103. If ye desire a certificate thereof, you have the
Gospel, subscribed and sealed by God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. If ye desire a witness, ye have a threefold witness, The spirit, the
water and the blood, 1. Ioh. 5.8.

7. A place where we may have a Physician.
Lastly, we make choice of such places, where if need be, we may have good
Physicians, for we esteem it a great misery, to be destitute of a good
Physician, and of means to help us in our need. The place of refuge
whereunto David fled, and we also ought to fly, following his direction, has
the best Physician which is both in heaven or earth, God the Father, King
David's Physician, who has both health and sickness, life and death in his
power to dispose of them for our good and salvation: knock therefore boldly
with the hand of prayer and repentance at the gate of his mercy, and thrust in
his hands, both thy life and health. And thus much for the qualities and
properties of the place.

To pray for others is also requisite.
Further, we have to observe that David went not to this place of refuge alone,
but with his whole family, for he prayed with the Elders of the people, for the
people, and for the deliverance of his whole kingdom. Herein imitate King
David, remember in thy prayer thy whole family, and the state of the whole
kingdom, the Tribe of Judah, and the Tribe of Leui. There are four sorts for
which we must pray: Supra nos, above us: Secondly Sub nobis, under us:
Fourthly, for those which are Contra against us. In the going to the name of
the Lord, we must not imitate the negligence of many, who depart into the
Country, and care only for themselves; as for their families, or at least
their servants, they are not once mindful of them: but we must as well carry
with us in our prayers, the servants which are under us, as she that lies in
our bosom: And the Olive plants which are round about our tables, Psalm. 108.3.
The Athenians would offer sacrifice, but only for their own City, and their
neighbors of Chios: but we Christians must pray, not only for the mother
City, but for all the daughters: Christ teaches us to say, Our father, etc.
as if we all came from one womb. It is a principle both of nature and
policy, Vis vnita fortior, Strength united, receives more strength. It
holds likewise in Divinity. If the prayer of one righteous person avails
much, the prayer of many righteous shall avail more. If the Syrophenician
obtained for her daughter the sure she made, much more the whole Church of
England shall obtain for all her daughters: Where two or three be gathered
together in his name, he is in the midst of them: Much rather in the midst of a
people, in the midst of thousands, in whom there is Anima vna, cor vnum: One
soul, one heart, one tongue, as if they were all but one man. Lord, heal the
sores of our land, for behold, both the mother and the daughters, the head and
the members do prostrate our selves before his Majesty. Ye of the sect of
Rome, divide not at this time of the plague in your prayers, the soul, the
voice and language of the Country into two places. Eliah and his company,
praying in one place and with one style: O Lord God of Abraham, and ye in
another: O Baal heal us: Some praying for the life of David, and some for the
life of Iabin. As for us, we will pray for the Lords anointed our Sovereign,
that God may hide Him under the shadow of his wings from the noisome
pestilence, knowing that this is one of the parts of our obedience toward him,
that we (as Constantine the great taught his soldiers to show their allegiance
in nothing more then this) should pray for him, yea, for his royal Consort, his
hopeful posterity and their Families. I end this point with the saying of an
ancient Father: That there is no better Guard, or Halbards to safeguard a
Prince, than the prayers of the Righteous.

Before I come to the third branch of this discourse, Three rules to be
observed in out going to this place.
give leave Christian Readers to the spiritual Physicians, to lay down three
rules, which are to be observed in this our spiritual departure to the name of
the Lord. The bodily Physicians touching departure prescribe (as is before
said) three rules. Long, cito, tarde: Go far off, depart speedily, return
slowly. The same rules are to be observed by the righteous: First, we must fly
far, 1. Long.
not with the prodigal and forlorn son in a far Country, far from the fear
of God and thought of death, or with Jonah from the presence of the Lord, who
rides on the Cherubins and can overtake us: for whither shall I go, Psalm.
839.9.
says David, from thy spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? But
far from this world and the earth unto the holy temple and mountain, unto
heaven which is high above the earth, as David speaks, Psalm. 103.11. unto
that place which is called the land of the living. Secondly, fly far from
the plague of sin, and the infected air of this world, and being come unto
that far Country, the Lord of the soil will receive you. 2. Cito.
The second rule is, fly speedily, and defer not your departure: which rule
is not in any manner to be omitted, it is the counsel of the wise man Jesus
Syrach, Eccle. 38.9. My son fail not in thy sickness but pray unto the
Lord, and he will make thee whole. It Is the commandment of the Lord to call
upon him in the time of need, Psalm. 50. Which must be performed with speed,
according to the example of David, Psalm. 119. I will run the way of thy
Commandments. If we make have to fly into the Country, and forget to go
speedily unto this Sanctuary, it is as Augustine speaks of another matter,
Cursus celerrimus praeter viam: A swift race besides the way. Have in this
matter is praise worthy, and a man can never run too fast that runs to this
place. The delay that Elizeus made, let me go kiss my Father, and those shifts
in the Gospel: Let me first go bury my mother, or take leave of my friends,
are not admitted in this business: commune not therefore with flesh and blood.
If in the time of plague, we make such haste to depart, before we have ordained
our business aright, or bad our friends farwell: How much more ought we to
hasten our spiritual voyage? While the fal-bridge is let down, let us make
speed to enter. Many, because they went not far, nor made speed to depart, have
endangered their b^dies, but many more, because they fled not from the
contagion of sin with speed, have endangered their souls: and therefore as the
Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 9. of another matter, so I may say of this going: So
run that ye may obtain.

3. Tarde.
The third rule is, Return slowly: that is, continue where thou art: a
necessary rule to be observed in the going to the name of the Lord. It is the
rule of the spiritual Physicians, Ephesians. 6.18 Romans 12. 1. These. 5. Pray
continually, etc. As it is prescribed, so it has been practiced: Luke 21.36.
the woman of Canaan continued in her prayer, and returned not in have. They
which are in the Country, although there be many things which might move
them to return, yet for the safety of their bodies, they continue till the
plague be ceased: So continue in thy prayer by the Lord, and be not weary of
well doing. Although three things might have moved the Syrophenician to
return, the silence of Christ, her back friends, and the odious names given
unto her, yet these discouragements her poor soul digested, obtaining both a
cure for her daughters infirmity, and a commendation for her faith. O woman
thou have wrought a miracle by the preseuerance of thy prayer, and have given
to thy Savior occasion to do a memorable act, convenient to his nature,
glorious to his holy name. Let us at this time follow her perseverance, and
although the Lord should seem to be silent for a time, yet let us not draw
back, that we may receive a cure both for our souls and bodies, and deserve a
commendation both by God and other nations, and thereby give occasion unto the
Lord to show his omnipotent power in the ceasing of the plague: and to do an
act in England convenient to his nature, and glorious to his holy name. And as
Jacob wrestled with the Angel and would not let him go until he had received
the blessing: So let us as it were strive with the Lord by our prayers, and let
him not go until he have heard us, in that which we ask of him in this
afflicted time. Let our prayers be now as the showers of the rain, if the
first shower fails of watering the earth sufficiently: the second, the third
or the fourth, will fulfill the thirst thereof. Let us be like unto the widow,
Luke 18 and our importunity will draw him unto audience: but yet let us hold a
better opinion of the Judge of the world then of a common vulgar friend, It
delighted his ears to hear our redoubled obsecrations, and he suspendeth our
desires in expectation, that we should be importunate to crave. The bodily
Physician cannot away with the importunate patient: but God, Habak. 2.3
King David's Physician, loves the importunate prayer, and more acceptable is
to him the end of our prayer then the beginning. I would the children of light
were as wise in their generation, as the wodden Priests, 1. Reg. 18. who cried
long to Baal: yea cut themselves with knives that they might be heard: and what
ought not we then do to obtain our suite? Let nothing then move us to
return: but as the King of the Philistines, 1. Sam. 6. though they had Calves
at home, yet they kept the straight way to Bethshemesh, and held one path:
turning neither to the right, nor to the left hand; neither ever stood still,
till they came into the field of Iosuah. So in our going to the name of
Jehovah, the affection of our souls bearing the Arc and coffer of our suite,
though it has worldly allurements to draw it back, as the Kine had Calves:
yet let it in the way to the house of God, as they to Bethshemesh, hold one
path of perseverance, turning neither to the right or left hand with wandering
cogitations, till it comes into the field and garden of God, and there let it
remain. Many heretofore having not continued in the Country, in their hasty
returning have fallen sick, and died: So many having not continued in this
strong bulwark, have endangered both body and soul. And thus much hitherto of
the second part.

The third part containing the household stuff which we must carry unto that
place.
There follows now the third and the last, which opens unto us the
household stuff which we must carry with us thither noted in the word
(Righteous.) As they which go in the country in the time of plague carry with
them their household stuff, their furniture, and those things which are
necessary for their bodies, and as Noah entering the Arc, carried with him
necessaries; so likewise in our going to this place, we must carry with us
those things which are necessary for our souls, that we may be received by
the Lord of that soil, and without which we cannot go thither. There are five
pieces of spiritual household stuff which are necessary for us, noted in the
word Righteous.

1. Repentance.
The first is Repentance and holiness of life, for he that is righteous gives
himself to righteousness: And this furniture carried with him David, 2. Sam.
24.11. As they which go in the country have their reasons why they carry with
them such and such necessaries: So give me leave in the opening of this
furniture, to show you also the reasons which must move us to carry them with
us. As for this first, the first reason 2. Tim. 2.19.
it is the Apostles precept: Let every one that calls on the name of Christ
depart from iniquity. The second is, that we may be received, Psalm. 11 7. His
eyes are upon the righteous, and his ears open to their cry, but his face is
against them that do evil, Psalm. 66.18.
to cut off their remembrance from the earth, Psalm. 34.15.16. If I regard
wickedness in my heart says David, the Lord will not hear me. For as Solomon
testifies, the Lord is far off from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of
the righteous. Prou. 15.29. Draw therefore near to God, and he will draw near
to you: cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purge your hearts ye wavering
minded. Prou. 28.9.
Iam. 4.8.9. The third is, that the bodily plague may cease, for how maxim
here prevail, remove the cause, that the effect may cease. Let us not as the
sons of Jacob, bring into the presence of our father, Psalm. 59.
the garment of Joseph which we our selves have be blooded. As Aaron could not
come before the Lord before he was washed, so let us not go unto him before we
have cleansed ourselves from infection of the soul. And as Jacob Genesis 42.
exhorted his sons, when they were going to Joseph, carry with you the best
fruits of the land and give them him: so let us in our going to the true
Joseph, Jesus Christ, carry with us the best fruits of our hearts to offer up
the sacrifice of our prayers, leaving our corrupt affections, as Abraham left
behind him at the foot of the hill his asses. I conclude this first point with
the saying of Chrysostom, as in a garland, it is not enough that the flowers
be pure and clean, but the hand also which handles them: so it is not
sufficient that the words of our prayers be holy, but the heart also which
conceiueth them.

2. Faith.
The second piece of household stuff (Faith) for the righteous is also he that
believes in Christ, and is righteous through the righteousness of Christ the
righteous. 1. Sam. 24.
This furniture carried David with him, for as he had a desire of health and
remission of his sin, so he had also a steadfast faith and confidence that it
should be forgiven him. This persuasion of deliverance, and hope of obtaining,
we must Iam. 1.6. Let him ask in faith and waver not. And in the fourth to the
Heb. 16. that we should go boldly to the throne of grace: drawing near unto
him with a true heart in assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. casting not away that
confidence which has recompense of reward, Verse. 35. it is the counsel of Mar.
11.24. Secondly, carry it with thee, that thou may receive that, for which
thou go unto him faithfully. Psalm. 145.18. And whatsoever ye shall ask in
prayer, if ye believe ye shall receive it. Math. 21.22. Without this, there
is no going thither. Romans 10.14. But as righteousness and truth kiss each
other, so must prayer and faith, which is the ground of prayer: first believe,
and then speak, this was the order of David, Psalm. 116. this faith will make
us acceptable to the Lord of that soil, and make us find favor at his hands:
Faith is a beautiful queen, as highly favored of the King of Kings, as ever
Esther was of King Ahassuerus: she shall not be stayed without at the gate, but
with an humble presumption, may approach into the inner court, and shall
receive her request: for if we shall receive a kingdom, Luke 12. how much more
that which is less, being asked by faith? come not then without this advocate.
Cyprian, in his treatise de Id^l. vanit. says, (speaking how he and his
brethren did much good in the visitation of the sick) prout fides patientis
adiuuat, aut gratia curantis aspirat, that he prospered according as they and
the patient had faith to speak unto God: the greatest enemy to the efficacy
of our prayer is distrustfulnes. And therefore God forbid says Augustine that
what we desire God to do for us with our mouths, we should deny him to be
able to do in our hearts. A heathen man Seneca could say, in Hippolito.
he that as keth fearfully and doubtful, teaches him to deny of whom he
asks: and men doubting they shall not obtain, make God unwilling to hear
them. As unbelief did shut the door unto the Jews that some of them enter
not into Canaan, a tipe of heavenly Jerusalem; so distrustfulnes is able to
shut our prayer out of that heavenly Canaan. And therefore as Jacob going to
his father Isaac, to receive the blessing, put on the garment of his eldest
brother, so let us going to our heavenly father to obtain our request, be
clothed with faith through the righteousness of our eldest brother Jesus
Christ. Further, this confidence gives us entry into that place. Open the
gates, says the prophet, Es. 26.2. that the righteous Nation which keeps
faith, may enter in. Faith is a key that opens unto us the gates of the
city. Thirdly, this furniture is necessary Cor. 1. It is the root that
bears us, the legs and supporters, and the strong men that hold us up that
we fall not. As the Doves nest is in the clefts of rocks that cannot be
assaulted, so faith rests it self in the wounds of Christ, it casts an
anchor in knowledge of the true God, and stands as firm, as mount Sion that
cannot be removed. Fourthly, we must carry it Jehovah for remission of sin
and spiritual life, and for the remoouing of the effect of sin, the bodily
contagion, we are desirous of it, we must not forget this furniture, for by
Faith we live, Abac. 2. It is the life of the soul, and the soul and spirit
of the new man. We may have a name that we live, but indeed we are dead to
Godward, if we believe not: doubting then neither of might, mercy, or of his
promise, because they are passed by covenant, oath, before immovable
witnesses, the best in heaven, and the best in earth, and because they are
signed with the finger of the holy Ghost, and sealed with the blood of his
anointed and beloved, let us with a holy confidence run to this place in
this afflicted time of the contagion, that we may receive mercy.

2 Humility.
The third piece necessary for our voyage, is (Humility) which excludes all
opinion of our own worthiness and righteousness. 2. Sam. 24.
David carried his furniture with him, yea this royal ornament: as appears
out of two things. First, out of the term and phrase of observation (I
beseech you) a proper term of submission, and the poor suitors phrase.
Secondly, out of his bodily prostrating of himself in sacke-cloath with the
Elders of Israel. 1. Chro. 21. Herein let us in this time of plague imitate
King David in our going to the name of the Lord, carrying with us this
ornament, this submission and lowlynesse: let us use the poor suitors phrase
and not pride of speech: saying, we are worthy O Lord: let us not go thither
to brag, as many run into Country to the dominiere; but let us pray that
the Lord will give us with us this submission, that we may bow not only the
knees of our bodies, but of our hearts: yea, that we may even bow the very
phrase of our words with David, that we may utter them as if the smallest
Grasshopper of the earth were to speak with fear and reverence before that
dreadful Majesty.

Three things Jehovah. It was the counsel that Aesope gave to Solon, enquiring
what speech he should use before Craesus: either very little, or very sweet,
said he. If when we go to the Princes of the earth, who are but smoke and
vanity, we speak with humility, much more does the presence of the most
high God require Abraham speaking to the Lord, Genesis 18.
confess that we are but dust and ashes. Let us as Lazarus with all our ulcers
(which are many in the time of plague) and withal our sores detected and laid
open: lie before the gates of him who is rich in mercy, lamenting, craving, and
beseeching to be refreshed. Christians, learn of Christ to pray, who although
there was no unworthiness in him, yet he kneeled, fell upon the ground, the
footstool of his own Majesty, and lay upon his face, which never Angel
beheld without reverence. The To him looks the Lord, that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, Esa. 66.2. which he will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. for he is
near unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save such as be
afflicted in spirit, Psalm. 34.18. The prayer of him that humbles himself,
Eccle. 35.17.
goes through the clouds: the Lords mercy can only give us the twofold health
which we sue for at this time: now this mercy to whom does he give it, but to
the humble? 1 Pet. 5. Humility is both grace it self, and a vessel to
comprehend other graces: and she emptying herself by a modest estimation of
her own gifts, is filled again by the Lord. Let us now beloved as it were
strive by humility with the Lord, according to the policy of Jacob: Let us
win by yielding, and the lower we stoop toward the ground, the more
advantage we shall get to obtain. The Lord to whom we go, if this humility be
in us, will both dwell with us and in us. O Lord, says Austine, how high art
thou, and yet the humble of heart, are thine houses to dwell in: The proud
Pharisie, Luke 18. went unto the Lord without his furniture, praying with pride
and with a scornful demonstration, and therefore returned not justified as
the Publican. O that we had not for the most part of us all such Pharisaicall
eye brows, whether we talk with God or man, that we might hear that
comfortable voice which was spoken unto Daniel, Fear not, Cap. 10.12,
for from the first day that thou did humble thy self before thy God, thy
words were heard. Let us therefore use to conclude this point: this humble
style of David, it has been the style of a King: and although it seems in
glorious, yet it has been the style of the glorious Saints of God: it will
give us the honor of Saints, and raise us from the dust, set us upon the
thrones, and if it please the Lord to take us away by the plague, it will place
us with Angels: let us not then brethren forget it, that the anger of the Lord
may cease, and that with joy hereafter we may sing with Marie in her Canticle,
Luke 2. He has regarded the lowliness of his handmaide.

The Reverence, devotion, Feruencie and zeal.
zeal and feruencie. For the noise of our lips, if it be as the ringing of
Basins, a vocal modulation, without cordial meditation, it cannot procure us
audience, for it is as the offering of the halt and the lame, a body without a
soul: it is the counsel of the wise man, Eccle. 5.1. Be not rash with thy
mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a thing before God. Our prayers
must not be a formal service only, but the sighs of our souls must be
sent with an earnest message to the cares of God: they must not be perfunctorie
and cold, rather of custom then of devotion: for a prayer from fained lips,
will return empty into the bosom that sent it up. When we go to this place,
let us not go, as if our souls and tongues were strangers, the one not
knowing what the other does: our lips babbling without, and our heart not
pricked with any inward compunction, for else it is as the altar without fire:
a perfunctorie prayer, is as the prayer of the Parret. Johannes Fridericus the
Prince of Saxonia had a Parret who could rehearse the Latin Pater noster.
Cardinal Ascanius had another, who rehearsed the Creed, representing perhaps
the faith and praying of his Master. What are the careless devotions of those,
who leave their spirits as it were in a slumber while they are a praying, but
like unto those two Parrets babbling; as they must be deuote, so must they be
fervent, kindled by a burning zeal, inflamed with fervent love: and as the
Hearts bray after the water brooks, so must our souls after the living God:
Psalm. 42.
For the prayer of a righteous man avails much, etc. if it be fervent, Iam
5.16. If we are desirous to know the necessity of this zeal and feruencie,
receive these up prayers with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5. he that was
the mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah has roared in his supplications.
Secondly, the spirit of God bids us go he makes requests in our names
with groans not to be expressed, Romans 8. Thirdly, the Majesty of

The fifth and last piece of household stuff, 5 Patience.
is Christian patience, a submission unto his holy will and pleasure, a virtue
proper unto the righteous. David carried it with him thither, and we must not
leave it behind us, following the streams of our foolish appetites: 2 Samuel 24.
we must limit our prayer in God and his holy will, asking absolutely his
glory, and our salvation: but remitting the means unto his wisdom and
pleasure. The fountain of our heart must not power forth sweet and sour
together, praying, but with impatience: let us set him no time as the Disciples
did about the kingdom of Israel, but let us come to the resolution of David, 2 Samuel 15. Behold, here am I, let him do to me as it seems good in his eyes.
Iudi 8.
Worthy is the Oration of Judith which she made to her people of Bethulia, who
would deliver up the City into the hands of the enemy, unless within few
days the Lord should help them: Who are you that have tempted the Lord, and
set your selves in the place of God? Let us wait for salvation from him, and
call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice if it please him: thus
should we exhort our selves in our prayers, when impatience does besiege our
hearts. It is safe for us to cast the ankers of all our purposes, and to stay
our wills upon his will. The reasons to Luke 21. and in the prayer which he has
taught us: of David, Psalm. 37.7. Nero, that they may do all things, and that
no body may control them. No, no, beloved, his will is always holy, always
just and equitable, although it seems unto thee unjust. Father, not my will,
but thine be fulfilled. This is then the spiritual furniture which we must
carry with us, if we will go to the name of Jehovah. Prayer with these
companions will return laden with the sheaues of comfort and bliss from the
plentifullest fields. And by these it is manifested, that the righteous only
go to this place: the name of Jehovah is not like unto the earthly places,
unto which in the time of infection resort both good and bad. The ungodly may
make a show to go into it, but yet they connot come thither, for there is the
spirit of prayer, Zach. 12. which is given only to them that bring with them
this spiritual furniture. As for weapons to safeguard our selves, we need
none, for this household stuff are spiritual weapons, Ephesians. 6. This shall
suffice for the Arc of Noah.

A trusty friend and servant appointed by the Magistrate of heaven, to aid the
sick in the time of Plague.
Now because the Civil Magistrate appoints in every Parish trusty men to
aid the infected, and to provide them with necessaries: Give me also leave to
show unto you, beloved, a trusty friend and servant to aid the sick,
appointed by the Magistrate of heaven. If ye are desirous to know who it is,
Prayer is his name, Psalm. 50 Call upon me etc. David has used this faithful
friend in the time of the plague, he has sent it as an Ambassador into the
Court of heaven to sue for peace: he sent not merits, distrustfulnesse,
impatience, or blasphemies: but prayer, the surest and effectuallest
Ambassador, happy for success. We are all desirous, if the Lord visit us
with the rod of David, to have some trusty and faithful friend or servant to
keep and aid us, to dispatch our business, to send here and there, and to
provide us with necessaries: and we make much of such that will assist us in
such a fearful sickness. The qualities of this friend.
We can have no better servant then King David's friend, who has many good
qualities: we desire in the time of plague a servant or friend, 1 Faithful.
in whom we find these good qualities: First, Faithfulness, for many have
been robbed by their keepers, as experience teaches. Prayer is a messenger of
especial trust, it will travail with us by day: awake with us by night: it
will not forsake us by land, by water, in weal, in woe, living or dying, it is
our last friend and indissolublest companion. Secondly, 2 Quick.
we desire one quick of speed: Prayer is able in a minute to mount above the
Eagles of the sky, into the heaven of heavens, and is a chariot of fire
bearing us aloft into the presence of God to seek his assistance; he knows
to address himself in ways unknown in the stillest silence of the night,
till he come to the secrets and chamber of the Lord, King David's Physician.
Thirdly, we seek one who is willing, and is not afraid, 3 Willing.
(for they are scarce to be found) prayer is such a friend, he is not afraid to
be with thee: neither the tediousness of the way, or difficulty of the
passage can hinder him from his purpose.

Fourthly, 4 Learned.
we are desirous to have one that can speak language which the Physician can
understand, if need were to send him thither, and who can provide us of
necessaries, such one is prayer: for what language soever it speaks, the
Physician of heaven can understand it.

Fifthly, one that is able to comfort us in our distress, 5 A comforter.
such a comforter is prayer, it is the life of the soul: if thou art perplexed
with such grief of heart, as neither wine (according to the advice of Solomon)
nor strong drink can bring ease unto thy spirit melting like wax, finding no
comfort at all either in light or darkness, pleasures or riches, kinsfolks
or friends, wishing with Job 4. O that thou would hide me in the grave, and
keep me secret until thy wrath is past: yet then this friend is our comfort,
he will speak for us unto the Lord, King David's Physician, by this we may
fly into the bosom of Gods mercies. If any then be afflicted amongst you, let
him pray, Iam. 5. The reason why we desire a friend with all these qualities,
is that he might both aid, and provide us with all necessaries: prayer is a
friend who is able to dispatch David's Physician comforter of the sick, the
holy Ghost, it is his name; John 14. he will not fear to come to thee, as
often the merits and send them up, 1 Bad servants. Merits. Ephesians. 6 4.
the stars in heaven would disdain it, that we which dwell at the
footstool of God dare to presume so far, when the purest creatures in heaven
are impure in his sight. 2 Fear.
Secondly, if we send up fear and distrustfulnesse, the length of the way will
tire them out, they are as heavy and lumpish as gaddes of iron, they will sink
to the ground, before they come half way to the throne of salvation. Thirdly,
if we send up blasphemies and curses, 3 Blasphemies.
all the creatures betwixt heaven and earth will band themselves against us.
The Sun and Moon will rain down blood, the fire, hot burning coals, and
the air thunderbolts upon our heads. And therefore let us not use the aid of
these three bad servants. As prayer is a servant to aid the sick, so it is a
trusty friend or servant to keep your housen, and families. (O ye Londoners
that are departed) in the City ye use the aid and trust of others, but they
are not the best, for they are mortal and corruptible: exhort them therefore to
use this friend toward the Lord, both for you and for themselves: for except
the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the Lord
keep the city, the keeper waits in vain, says David. Thus I have shown
you that be at London, beloved of God, called to be Saints, Salomons Pesthouse,
Psalm 127.1.
to enter in your families.

I come now to you beloved that have left your mother City for a time, which
hope to return: An exercise for the Londoners that are in the Country.
your departure I will not disprooue, nor wiser then I, if ye have used it
lawfully, remembering in your exile the affliction of Joseph. And spending the
time in those things which make for the peace of your City. To refresh your
minds, and spend your time there because the works of your vocation you cannot
exercise: diverse other exercises I know are used, perhaps not so well as ye
might: all of them I do not condemn: but it is to be feared, that the
exercises of some have been and are frivolous, and gamesome quarrellers, and
that carding, dicing, and that Cup challenging Profession, by which many
drinking to health, drink thems^lues out of health, have been to others as
usual pastimes, as the fields to walk in. Give me leave beloved to show you a
better Exercise, and another pastime, the pastime of King David, a royal
exercise, which he used in the time of plague, his prayer and invocation with
the elders of Israel: spend herein your time beloved till ye return: when your
Mother mourns, will you sport? when the head smarteth, shall the members be
senseless? pray with the Prophet for the peace of your Jerusalem. It is the
Apostles precept, to pray continually, which if it ever was time to practice,
it is at this present. The praise of Prayer.
Suffer me to enter into the praise of this exercise, diverse things do add
commendation to it, which ought to persuade you to the use thereof. 1 It is
Divine.
The first argument of praise may be taken from the author thereof Not Moses or
Samuel, Prophet or Apostle, Patriarch or Martyr, but God the father, God the
son, God the holy Ghost, the blessed Trinity have been the authors, which
make it a divine and heavenly exercise. 2 Honorable:
The second argument from the persons which have used it, we delight in
Exercises which are accounted honorable, and which men of credit and good
account do commonly use; this Exercise is honorable, yea royal: not base and
contemptible only have spent their time with it, but Kings and Princes, King
David, Manasses, Ezechiah, and the rest. The blessed Prophets, Patriarks, yea
the Prince of glory, the son of the immortal God Christ Jesus: It is so
heavenly and honorable, that by prayer we do approach near unto God, and do
as it were conioyne our selves with him: while we are in the body, we are
absent from home: but by prayer we do ascend into heaven, prayer being as it
were the band of our internal conjunction with God. Further, it is honorable,
not only in regard of the persons which have used it, but also, to God and
Psalm. 50. acknowledging that all might, glory, felicity, health and salvation
belongs to him, and that from him alone we must receive it.

To spirit of prayer. If we desire the valor of Knighthood, by prayer we may
stand in place where Gods hand has made a breach, and do as much as all the
chariots and horsemen in a kingdom. If you esteem it an honor to be in the
service of the Prince, give your self to prayer, it is one of the chiefest
parts of Gods service. Yea it is so excellent, that the sacrifice of prayer is
offered alone to him, Christian.
whom Solomon calls excellent and glorious. It is an honor to be a christian,
let us therefore use the christian exercise: two things do admonish us, our
name, and the example of Christ. Christians

The pleasure of it, 3 Delectable.
may be the third argument of commendation: this exercise is pleasant and
delectable. To spend the time in the Country, diverse use pleasant and
delectable Exercises: this is both acceptable to God, and pleasant to man: to
God, for the sweet odours of our prayers ascend into heaven, Apoc. 8. 1 To God:
And as the sent of incense and Odoriferous things is pleasant to the nostrils
of mortal man: So the prayer of the righteous, says Chrysostom, is pleasant
to the immortal God. It is not then, the lamentation of men, eiulation of
women and children, mingling heaven and earth together with a confusion of
outcries, that is acceptable to God, and which can enforce him to give us
audience; but it is humble prayer, the voice of repentance: which as Jesus
Syrach speaks, Eccl. 35.16. shall be accepted with favor, 2 To man.
and reach unto the clouds. Secondly, to us, all that our heart desires is in
this Exercise. Some being in the Country, spend their time in discourses,
prayer is a discourse with our beloved. If it was a pleasure to Jacob to speak
unto Rachel, and to Jonathan with David: O what a recreation is it for our
souls that they may familiarly speak with him, whose love unto us is better
then gold or pearl. If we delight to speak languages, by prayer we may
speak the excellentest language which has ever been, the language of Canaan:
let us not fear to discourse with the Lord by our prayers, for he is not like
unto the spruce and finicall sons of men: fear not, says Chrysostom, he
seeks not at thy hands painted eloquence, an angelical tongue, filed
phrases: but beholds only the beauty of thy soul. Others take their pleasure
while they are in the Country, to ride up and down in their Coaches and
Chariots, being carried therein betwixt heaven and earth. Let prayer be your
Coach beloved: it is as one says, as a Chariot of fire, bearing us aloft in
the presence of God, able to mount us above the Eagles of the sky to seek the
Lords assistance. In the time of plague, there was heretofore appointed a
Wagon or Coach to carry the sick to the Pesthouse, and there to be healed:
there is no better Chariot to carry our souls unto the house of heaven to be
healed by that heavenly Physician, then humble prayer. Some delight to go up
and down and see their friends; our best friends at this time, and at altimes
who can do us the most good: are God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost:
let us visit them therefore continually by our prayers. Others in writing
letters, what is prayer else but as it were a letter sent to God in which we
declare our need: and as a letter is an amiable discourse and conference of
one friend with another, as if they were both present: So is our prayer, as a
friendly letter or discourse of us which are absent from home: with our best
friend the Lord, as if we were present with him in heaven. Send this letter,
and letter upon letter: ye that are now exiled, show unto the Lord your need:
pray unto him that he will bring you home again, and remove that in his
mercy which keeps you back. Lastly, some in running of Races, or in Hunting:
but ye beloved in this afflicted time, run the way of Gods Commandments: as
David, Psalm. 119. run to the name of Jehovah with the righteous, Prou. 18.
run the race which is set before you, and that with patience, looking unto
Christ Jesus, Hebr. 12.1. and so run that ye may obtain that which you sue
for. Hunt not after the pleasures of this life, but after the living God: and
as the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so let your souls pant after the
living God, Psalm. 42.1. That the Lords Hunter, Psalm. 91. hunt us not, but that
the Lord may deliver us from the snare of the Hunter, and from the noisome
pestilence, Psalm 91.3. Use therefore this comfortable Exercise: the child is
never better but when it is in his fathers and mothers lap: So shall you never
be better, but when by prayer you creep as it were in your heavenly Fathers
bosom: it will kindle your love toward him, as the love of lovers is kindled,
the more they come together: and if ye remain there the next ensuing Winter,
fervent prayer will be in stead of fire, to kindle in your hearts the love of
God.

Fourthly, the profit of this Exercise commends it much; 4 Profitable.
it is not only delectable, but also profitable. Some which are in the
Country at this time spend their time I do confess profitably, 1 To us.
riding up and down to buy commodities against the future: but prayer is a
far profitabler Exercise for this time, for it is not only profitable to our
selves, but also unto others: yea, to the whole Realm. And as the Apostle
speaks of Godliness, that it is profitable for all things; so I may say of
prayer, that it can obtain any thing: profitable for us in two respects:
First, to obtain that we have not: Secondly, to keep that we have obtained
First, if thou lackest prayer is the means to obtain it, James 1. If thy
understanding be dark, pray with David, Psalm. 119. Open mine eyes O Lord,
that I may see the mysteries of thy Law. If thou lackest zeal, pray with
David, Psalm. 119. Lord incline my heart unto thy law, etc. And because this
world is a desert where we may easily err, pray with David, Psalm. 50. Lead me
in thy paths, etc. If our souls be infected with the plague of vanity and
covetousness, the means to remove it, is prayer, Psalm. 119. O Lord remove
far from me vanity, and incline not my heart to covetousness. The means to
obtain a contented mind, is also prayer, Prou. 30. Poverty nor riches give
me not, etc. If thou desire to think upon thy mortality, by the subject
which now is presented to thee, pray with David. Psa. 90. Teach us O Lord, to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom. If ye desire to
return, it is not your sports and delights, but your prayers that must bring
you back. 2 Samuel 24.
If ye desire the ceasing of the begun plague, it is your prayer that must
remove the cause, that the Adam: for by them you often loose that which you
had purchased ryotously (which Alexander blamed in his friends) wasting and
consuming your whole ability. 2 The others;
There is another thing which ought to persuade you to this Exercise: which is,
that it is profitable to others prayer does more good then Alms: for by our
Alms we can help but a few; but by our prayers we can help thousands and
thousands: yea those which are far off. Prayers, are the alms of the rich as
well as of the poor: for Pharaoh did as well beg for prayers, as poor
Lazarus for crummes. Ye rich men that are in the Country, bestow these alms
upon the poor, as well as the alms of your purses: and in this afflicted
time, seek more to profit the whole Realm by your prayers, then by your
commodities. I end this point with the saying of Augustine: Plus profeci orando
qua^ legendo, 5 To strengthen us.
I have more profited by praying, than by reading.

Fifthly, this Exercise is commendable, because it is able to strengthen us Some
in the Country do spend their time in Exercises, by which they may maintain
their health, and strengthen their bodies, that they may be able to do any
thing: the Exercise of prayer is good to make us recover the health of our
souls, which was waxen weak: as this present begun plague, and your present
exile both do witness. Yea, it is able to make us do admirable things. Was
it ever heard that mighty Potentates, as there have been many: Alexander the
great, Julius Caesar and the rest, could make the Sun or the Moon to stand
still in the firmament? And yet this has done the prayer of Iosuah. Have there
ever been any armies so great and mighty, which could make the Earth to
tremble under their feet? No beloved: the mighty army of Xerxes could not do
it, and yet this has done the prayer of the Apostles, Act. 4. Who has ever
heard that it has been possible to mortal man, to raise the dead and to give
life to the deceased? The Physicians do acknowledge their impotencie, and yet
this has done the prayer of Elizeus. Heb. ^
As the Apostle then in the commendation of faith, rehearses the wonders which
they have wrought by faith: So it may be said of prayer which is done in
faith: by prayer Moses divided the red rea: by prayer Joshua beat down the walls
of Jericho: by prayer Sidrach and Abednago quenched the fire: Daniel stopped
the Lions greedy and devouring throats: the Apostles opened the prisons and
brake their bands. And I will yet add one thing, by prayer, brethren, you
shall be able to overcome him, who is invincible. The Lord has besieged and
beguirt your City by his destroying Angel, the only means to resist him,
and to make him retire, are your humble prayers: O the admirable force of
prayer, which overcomes him who overcomes al things! I may compare the
prayers of the righteous to the hairs of Sampson: as long as his head was
adorned and covered with them, he was in a manner invincible, he brake the
cords and roapes wherewith he was bound: his strength lying in his hair; but
being shaven, his strength went from him, he waxed weak and like other men.
All your strength beloved lies in your prayer, as long as you exercise your
selves therein, you shall be able to resist, I say not the tyrants and the
devil, but the Lords Angel himself. You have another enemy, the which to
resist, it is necessary that you learn to handle the sword of prayer, this
enemy is cruel, malicious, mighty, subtle and industrious, his name
bewrays his nature; Satan by name, who is not only in the City, but
follows you in the country (for as a devouring Lion he compasses the earth)
and there he seeks to make you forget the Lord, and the affliction of Joseph:
to stick to the creature, and forget the Creator; to withstand this Enemy and
his fiery darts, let this be your continual Exercise: Imitate the industrious
wrestlers, who to eass down another, first fall down themselves: so to
overthrow this enemy who seeks in the Country to overthrow you; cast down
your selves by humble prayer and fasting, that in that place you may triumph
over him who thought to triumph over you. To end beloved, to you all I speak
together, you that are in the City, enter this Tower: you that are cast down
upon your beds, use the aid of this friend: you that are departed, let this
be your pastime, that we altogether may be preserved from the deluge, and the
waters may decrease more and more, till they be dried up, that being decreased
we may offer the sacrifice of thanksgiving, as Noah offered unto the Lord
after the flood. But let us not be like unto the seasicke, who only are weak,
lament and cry as long as they are in the tempest, and when they begin to smell
the air, and are gone out of the ship, they forget both their sickness and
their deliverance. Genesis 28.
But rather as Jacob (ye that are departed) flying to heaven, the remembrance
of his country being sweet, made an excellent vow and prayer, that if he came
again to his fathers house in safety, the Lord should be his God, and that he
would give unto the Lord the tenth of all he had: so likewise ye that are
departed, or to depart from your Mother City, as Jacob from his fathers house,
the remembrance thereof being sweet to you, as I know it is, make the vow and
prayer of Jacob, that when the Lord bring you home again in safety, that he
shall be your God, and that ye will serve him with more zeal and feruencie
then ye have done before: further, that ye will (if not the tenth) yet some
part of your goods, bestow upon the Lord, in his poor members. Let the
Apostles words be the conclusion, 2 Pet. 3.17.18.
Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware left ye be
also lead away with the error of the wicked, but grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to him be glory both now and
for evermore, Amen.

A zealous Prayer in time of the Plague to be used by all Londoners that are
fled from the City, and all others that are sensible of the Cities Calamity,
wheresoever.
O LORD GOD, our only helper and Defender, who amongst all other Evils, have
promised to deliver thy People from the noisome Pestilence; We beseech thee,
take this thy heavy Plague away from us; and especially withhold thy hand from
off the City of LONDON, the Metropolis of this Kingdom, where thy Name is
daily called upon. And let our humble Supplications (which at this time, upon
our knees we make unto thee in the name of CHRIST JESUS,) procure our happy
Release, and appease thy Wrath, which we have justly procured against us
through sin. Lord, we being heartily sorry for our sins, (fully purposing
by the assistance of thy holy Spirit to amend our lives) do humbly entreat
thee to have mercy upon us, to take away this plague from us, and not to suffer
us to perish after so miserable a sort. We thank thee, O Lord, that thou have
not left us altogether comfortless, nor cast us off without hope, but have
somewhat withdrawn thy heavy hand, and spared many of us; we pray thee to
continue thy favor daily more and more toward us; to deal with us in Mercy,
not in Justice; to bless us and all those that depend on us; To set thy saving
Mark upon our houses, as thou did for the Israelites in Egypt; To give
order to the Destroyer, that he hurt us not, to put thy strength to our
Medicines; to let thy good blessing make the preservatives of Physicians
effectual; and to make our shifting places, for more security, profitable
unto us. Give us grace, O Lord, not to trust too much on outward means, but
only on thy Mercy. Protect us always in all our ways; have pity upon our
distressed Brethren and Sisters, whether in London or else where, Comfort the
desolate Widow; provide for all Orphans and Fatherless Children; gather us
together again, that by these means are dispersed: Send us Health, Peace with
men upon Earth, and peace of Conscience toward thee, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

In the Visitation, Anno 1603. Mr. Henry Holland, (of pious memory) published
a book entitled Spiritual Preservatives against the Pestilence: Whereunto
was annexed An Admonition concerning the use of Physic, and all natural
helps, which the Lord may bless for our good, as in other maladies, so in the
Pestilence.
Which book being worn out of Print, the Admontion is here added, for the use
and benefit of us now living.
SAint James adds that after the former spiritual comforts the Elders of his
time, did anoint the sick with oil of the name of the Lord, even as our
Savior had before appointed, and his Disciples practiced in their miraculous
cures. Mark. 6.


The gift of healing the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 12.30. Showing it to be a
peculiar gift: are all doers of miracles? have all the gifts of healing? And it
ceased in the Church, when the Gospel was sufficiently confirmed with
miracles, even anon after the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists had finished
and ended their work, and when their time was expired.

Now then the gift ceassing: it is madness to retain still the time which
went with the gift, that is, this anointing or aneiling and more madness to
make a Sacrament of it, as Antichrist has done, and most extreme madness to
give it unto them only which are a dying, which was wont to be given to such as
did recover health again. Wherefore as the holy Visitors did then first use
their spiritual exercise, which is left for us to practice, and next this
extraordinary gift and means of healing: so let us carefully and wisely here
call for, in the second place, the learned Physician, the comfortable and
ordinary means which God has left unto us in nature as long as the World
endures: This order that holy Writer, Ecclus 38.9.10 11.12.
the Godly Preacher commends unto us in these words; My son, fail not in
thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord and he will make thee whole: leave off
from sin, and order thine hands aright, etc. and cleanse thine heart from all
wickedness, etc. Then give place to the Physician, for the Lord has created
him, let him not go from thee, for thou have need of him: the hour may come
that their enterprises may have good success, for he also shall pray unto the
Lord, that he would prosper that which is given for the prolonging of life.
Whereas some object, that in the Pestilence natural remedies of Physic cannot
benefit us, because the causes here cannot be seen or found in nature: I
answer with M.B. If there come into the Pestilence no natural causes, then
these whom the Plague has infected, cannot doubtless so much be eased, much
less be healed, by natural remedies. But this second to be very false
experience and common sense do daily tell us. Wherefore I affirm that natural
remedies must not be neglected.

Again, whereas others do object, that Physic here often is seen to have
but small good success: I answer, that we must not say of natural
Preservatives, that because they do not benefit one, or two, or three:
therefore they cannot help any at all. It is a bad conclusion: for, consider
that God does govern natural causes and their effects as it pleases him, and
blesses them to whom he will, where, and when he will. And hence it comes,
that the infection touches not every one that is in danger of it, neither is
it deadly to every one that is infected.

Others yet more fondly dispute against natural remedies in this sickness:
and they say that God has here a more special providence, and he will smite
whom he will to death, and therefore all remedies are to small purpose. These
men again want judgment.

I answer, that the Lord no doubt when he sent a Famine into Egypt, and the
Regions thereabout, he determined who should die in that Scarcity: yet for all
this, cease not Joseph with most wise counsel to provide for the Egyptians,
and Jacob for his family. The like did Paul in the Sea with the Mariners, when
he had received an answer, he should come to Rome safely.

And Christ knew his time, and yet he went aside often from his enemies hand
till his hour came, using the ordinary means for his preservation.

And that no man may stand stiffly in his own rash judgment. Quid Temeritate
fortius? (says Tully) What so foole-hardie, or so violent, as rash and hasty
spirits? 1. De natura deorum.


Hear what that learned Father, (of ever blessed memory) Master Luther says
of this matter in his De Peste in Witteberga. Ann 1527.
Treatise translated out of Dutch into Latin, and in English thus much;

God has created Physic, and given us a mind and reason, that every man
should have a care of his own body for health and life: whosoever will not use
these, when as without the hurt of his neighbor he may, the same man
betrayeth his own life, and there lacks little, but that before God he is
made a murderer: for by the same reason he may despise meat and drink,
raiment and housing, and trusting too much unto his faith say, if God will, he
can preserve me without all these things: than the which folly, this is yet
greater, that he which after this sort, casts off the care of his body, he
may hurt and infect others also, and so through his negligence, he may purchase
the blame of a murderer.

Some men indeed do as foolish men do in a common firing, which will not come
and help the City, but let the fire alone, that the whole City might be
burned: namely upon this trust, doubtless, if God will, he can without water
quench the fire.

But, friend, thou ought in no wise so to deal: Nay, it is unlawful and
shameful which thou perswadest thy self: but rather use remedies and Medicines,
and do whatsoever any way may help: perfume thine house, orchard or street:
fly the infected places, and so behave thy self as one willing to quench, not
to maintain this open fire.

Again it follows in the same Treatise.

If Satan by the will of God, either by himself or his Ministers, has
wrought us this deadly Infection: I on the other side before all things will
pray unto God, that of his mercy he will take away the same from us: then I
will put to my simple helping hand, both by perfuming and cleansing of the
air, by using of medicines, and also in shunning the infection, where my
presence is not necessary. Lest I might seem my self to have neglected some
thing, or to be cause of death unto others, who through my negligence may take
harm. But if God nevertheless will have me visited with this sickness or
call me out of this world unto his Kingdom, yet I have not done but that which
was my duty, neither have I offended in any thing, either against my self or
my neighbor, but where my service is needful, there I will let pass nothing
of all things which either can or ought to be done of me. Behold this is that
Godly faith indeed which does nothing rashly, neither tempts God in any
thing.

Thus then I conclude, when thou shall have wisely considered and discerned the
causes of the Pestilence: then turn to God (as the Prophet bids) with all
thine heart, Joel. 2.12.
with fasting, with weeping, and with mourning, and flee a loft by faith into
the secret place, almighty shadow, and blessed protection of the Lord, and
there rest patiently as under his holy wings, ever praying for the increase of
faith and patience, that thou may quietly wait and depend upon God and for a
good Conscience, that so thou may avoid false, foolish, and wicked fears,
and cheerfully stand in thy place: and carefully call for the Protection of
the mighty, blessed and holy Angels, and for the communion and presence of
Jesus Christ: so shall thou chase far away the wicked and unclean Spirits,
which are sent of God to poysen and destroy men with the Pestilence.

And Lastly, when thou have used all the means before showed for thy
spiritual comfort and help, thou must neglect no ordinance nor help of God
in nature, both for thy cure and preservation: The wicked, indeed, inuert and
pervert this order, as did Asa, and therefore no meruell if they receive often
a curse instead of a blessing; for if Physic give them health of body, their
souls notwithstanding are never cured or made any better by their
chasticements: but they daily gather more strength to commit sin with
boldness.

LEt the Rich seek for the godly, wise and learned Physician, and take heed
of wicked ignorant bold Empyricks, which kill many men, and yet fear nothing,
because they be not called to their accounts, according to good Laws for this
cause provided.

And let the poorer sort with good advise and counsel (if they can have any)
use Master Phaers medicines, in his short, but learned Treatise of the
Pestilence, which he wrote of purpose for the benefit and comfort of the Poor.

I have added a few medicines of Master Phaers, which may serve at a need, and
by Gods grace do some good, when better counsel is wanting.

A most precious Electuary against the Pestilence for the Rich.
TAke Cynamome elect, one ounce, Terra sigillata, 6. drams, fine Mirre 3.
drams, Unicorns horn, one dram, the seed and rind of Citron, roots of Dyptany,
Burnet, Tormentille, Zedoary, red Coral, ana: drams two, yellow Saunders, 4.
scruples, red Saunders 2. scruples, White been, and red Flowers of Marygolds,
ana, one dram, Iuory raced, Scabious, Betonice, Offininis tunicae appellatae,
seed of Basile, the bone of a Stags Heart, Saffron, ana, two scruples, make a
fine powder, and ad unto it of Bole Armoniake Preparate two ounces, White
sugar, three pound, and with a Syrup of Acetociate Citri, make a goodly
Electuary, and keep it in a Glass.

Or this form with less cost and quantity.
Take of the roots of Dictamu, tormentil, bole armonick, Prepared, (that is,
washed with water of Sabious) Terra figillata, ana, 6. drams of the root of
Gentian, and of the root of butterburre, of Betonie, called in the shops
Betonice tunica. Ana, 2. scruples, red Sanders one scruple, Iuerie raced, the
bark of Citron, of red Coral, of the bone of a Stags heart, of tho root of
Zedoary, ana, half a dram of most pure Pearls, of both kinds of been, ana, 2.
scruples, Fragmentorum quinque lapidum pretiosorum, ana, one scruple, Amber,
good Unicorns horn, ana, half a scruple, of Gold, and Silver leaves three of
each; mingle all these and make a fine powder.

If the Pestilence come with great excess of heat, take one dram and drink it
up in Rose water and Vinegar; but if you feel it cold, take it in a draught of
White Wine and cover you with clothes, so that you may sweat as long as is
possible, for without doubt it is a present remedy, as I my self have
oftentimes proved.

For the Poor the best I find is this.
TAke the root called Petasites in Latin, in English Butter-burre, growing by
the waterside, dry it and make fine powder of it, and give it the sick.

If the Pestilence comes with heat, take 3. drams of it in Rose Water and
Vinegar: but if it come with a cold, give it in a draught of Wine, and cause
the party to sweat as long as he or she can well endure it.

If a Botch appear, to ripen it.
TAke Mallows, and the roots of Holyhoke, and Onions, as much as shall
suffice, wash them and sees them in water, and afterward bray them in a Mortar
with powder of Linseed, Fenugreke, and a good quantity of Swines grease fresh,
laying on the plaster every day once.

To break the Botch.
SOme lay on it a Plaster made of Figs (which was King Hezekiahs plaster,
and therefore not to be despised) add sour leaven, and Raisins without
Kernels, brayed and incorporate altogether in oil of Camomill,

To mundifie the Botch.
AFterward, mundifie thesore with a salve made of yelkes of Eggs, fine Barley
flower, and a little Honey or oil of Roses.

For incarnation of the place.
LAst of all for the perfect incarnation, Take the juice of Daises, and with a
little wax make a soft ointment and use it, or you may lay thereto an other
salve incarnatiue, as ye are wont to do in other clean sores.

LONDON, LOOK-BACKE. The Description of the late great, memorable and
prodigious Plague. 1625.
GOod God! what poison lurkd in that first fruict
Whose surfeit left us wretches prostitute
To such a world of sorrow? Not confined
Only to tear and cruciate the mind
With sad remembrance of the bliss, wherein
We might have lived, but see the cruel Sin
Spares not our souls weak houses, both does spread
From viler parts unto the nobler head
A thousand Maladies, which now alas
Through each small Inlet of the Body, pass
Remorslesse Enemies, and batter down,
The clayie bulwarks of our Mud-wall'd town.
Our throat is like that vast breach, which does bring
In like the Trojan Horse dire surfeiting;
When in the Stomach like the Marketplace
The foes let loose dare spread themselves, and trace
Through all the City, some are ready first
To break the Sluices, which do raging burst
And drown low buildings, some with flaming brands
Fire holy Temples, some with Swords in hands
Sharpe-pointed-Iauelins, Malls, and poisonous darts
Make Massacres through all the trembling parts
Of the distressed Fabric; no control
Can barre'em but they will assault the Soul
It self almost, while each small-breathing Pore
Betrays unto the foe a Posterne Door
To enter in at, every crawling vein
Affords him harbor, and does Entertain
The bloody Enemy, each Muscle, Nerve,
And Filme makes him a Fortress to preserve
His longer Durance, till the guest at last
With ruin pays his Host for all that is past.
How many such foes, think you? secret lie
When hundreds of them ambush in one Eye?
Which is the Lantern, and the Watch, and Light
Keeps Centurie for all the Bodies Night.
As soon may I exactly number all
The fainting leaves that in an Autumn fall,
The Creatures of the Summer, or the Store
Of wilder insects, which old Nilus shore
Each year produces, as with Judgment show
How many fierce and bold diseases flow
Upon this wretched Carcass; when each year
New troops of raging Fevers domineere
That know no name, Each boy can nigh express
Diseases now to Pose Hippocrates.
Happy that age of gold, not only cause
It had no vice, and so no need of Laws,
When Nature was their Solon, and the want
Of Knowledge to do ill, did make them Ignorant
Of the Redress, not blessed alone in this,
Although the air and earth increased their bliss,
But that an able Body was combined
In a sweet friendship with a harmless mind,
They knew no Physic (though their drugs did grow
Then in full virtue, able to bestow
Health on this age) because they Knew not how
To get those Sicknesses, which men Know now.
The Ague with a hundred names; the Aches
More than the Joints; the Palsy that attaches
The limbs with Dissolution; the wild
And Bedlem Frenzy, the Vertigo styled,
Because it whirles the giddie brains about:
The sweving Megrim; and the racking Gout:
The cruel Stone; the torturing Collicke fierce
And wringing winds, which through the lims disperse
Their ayrie torments; lingering dispense
Of pale Consumptions, which besot the sense:
The Deluge of a Dropsy. When shall I
Run through'em all? the sleepie Lethargy;
Quick-murdering Apoplexy which does Kill
E're it makes Sick: the piteous Falling-Ill:
The Elephant-skin'd Leprosy: Iaundies stain:
Ambush'd Impostumes which surprise the brain:
With hart-assaulting Pleurisies: the tough
And cluttered Phlegm: and Rheum that breeds the Cough,
Strappado, Cramps; the sodaine-pricking Stitch,
The Nightmare: which the people think a Witch,
The All conquering Pox, to which compared the rest
Are Lady Sick-fits: this is that foreign guest
The Diuell-instructed Indies to us sold
To recompense the filching of their Gold.
All these and more innumerable powers
Lay siege unto this weake-wall'd Fort of ours
And often surprise an Out-work, yea sometime
In desperate malice ready are to clime
The walls themselves: till that the heart, much like
A strong Defendant, makes good the Dike
And giues'em a repulse: yet often, alas,
This noble Champion stains the conquered Mass
With dying blood: For Sickness is a Fight,
The victory doubtful, Chances infinite.
But has that power who is all Mercy, still
More, and more cruel Punishments to Kill
Minute-liu'd man? yea, though you add to these
Pale meager Famine, Murders of the Seas,
And Wars vast Slaughters; you shall find one more
That may affright the rest we named before
The PLAGVE, whose very naming seems t'affright
My trembling Quill, as it does have to write,
Lest as it raging flies about the land
This Instant it might seize upon my hand:
The Plague a dreary Punishment, Heavens curse,
The fatal Engine of Destruction, worse
Than we can well imagine, which does bring
Terror on mortals, Death on every thing,
And Desolation unto Cities: O
What ere thou art, dire Ill, whether thou do flow
From powerful Influence of the Stars, or ^at^er
Do thy vast malice and contagion gather
From poisonous Southern winds, which have prevailed
Upon the sickly air, or Steames Exhaled
From The Earths enuenom'd womb: or whether't be
Our Bodies Constitutions, which agree
With the malicious air and so contract
The quick Infection: whether't be the Pact
Of Fate, and will of Heaven which does stand,
Or Gods immediate angry moved hand,
As it is; O pull it in, thou Gracious Power,
And let not this blind Enemy devour
The Grace of England. CHARLES implores, we
With him in zealous Orisons agree:
Hear him for us, and us for him; and stay
Thy dreadful vengeance, which does now display
Horror through all thy People, and begins
To show the ugly portraict of our sins,
Which have pulled down thy wrath. O let suffice
That world of blood in foreine Air that lies,
Of noble English souls, whose carcasses
The brutish Shores, wild Fields and greedy Seas
Expose to Dogs, to ravenous Fowls, and Fishes;
Ah, little answering to the tender wishes
Of their poor mothers, who at home the while
Gape at their childrens Honors, and beguile
Their early fears with too late hopes: alas
They little think, that now the soyled Grass
Usurps their dear embraces, and grim Fate
Sits pale upon those Beauties, which of late
They made their Ages comforts, who now shall
Ah! be bound to them for a Burial.
O call to mind this Fatal Year, wherein
Equally and justly sent.
Thy Justice has been equal to our Sin;
Both great: O let thy blessed Goodness still,
As it is wont to do, surpass our Ill.
Those men whom we did love, whom we did trust
Should be our Shields, are turned to Shades, to Dust:
Let the in-throned Soul of JAMES implore,
That after Him, thou punish His no more.
Let the great Spirit of OXFORD, which has past
The Sentence of thy Anger, be the last
Thou plaguest us withal; and let us know,
That still thou pittiest us, poor men, below.
But never let this Land endure again
That woeful solitude, which once did reign
In our fair Cities; which, neglected left,
In a deplored ruin, showed the theft
Of angry Fate: when scarce a tenant Mouse
Was left, in many a fair unpeopled house;
But the sad Owls and Night Ravens aloof,
Did keep their Revels on the silent roof:
When at high Noone one passing by, should meet
A Midnight Dark, and silence in the street;
When in the ways well-pau'd and worn before
By frequent steps of men, there now grew store
Of uncouth Grass; and Haruests now apace
Grew where they once were sold, in the Marketplace:
When as no Merryments, no Sports, no Plays
Were known at all, and yet all Holy Days,
No Papers then over the doors were set,
With, Chambers ready furnished to be let;
But a sad, Lord have mercy upon us, and
A bloody Cross, as fatal Marks did stand,
Able to fright one from the Prayer. The time
Then held it an inexpiable Crime,
To visit a sick friend: Strange Stoure, wherein
Love was a fault, and Charity a sin;
When Bad did fear infection from the Good,
And men did hate their cruel Neighborhood.
'Twas a deplored time, wherein the Skies
Themselves did labor, and let fall their eyes;
When one might see the Sun, with sallow hair
And languishing complexion, dull the air:
Looking eeu'n so, as when at Chryses Plaint,
He went like Night, the Grecian troops to taint
With sad Infection; when his dire shafts cast,
Killed more than Hector in the nine years past.
The Heavens were clothed with bleak mists, and the air,
With the thick Dampe, was struck into despair
Of future clearenesse, or serener day,
But that the Clouds for fear ran often away.
The Night, whose dewie shade had wont to tame
The soultry relics of the Midday flame,
Distilled no Crystal Pearls upon the ground;
But wrapped in vaporous smoke, and clothed around
With poisonous Exhalations, did affright
The trembling Moon; whose dim and paler light
Looked with that countenance, as if again.
Her silver horns should never escape the Wane,
So to renew her Circuit. The dull Quire
Of sickly Stars showed now no smiling fire,
But shone like vn-snuff'd Tapers: as if Fate
Did give them leave now to prognosticate
Their own estate, not others; and apply
Themselves at last to sad Astrology.
The poison clutter'd Springs, with Plague infused,
Ran not with Crystal torrents, as they used;
But in dull streams, as them dire influence fills,
With fainting pace, scarce reached unto their rills:
And languid Rivers, which before did pass
The Crystal with their clearenesse; now, alas,
Look muddie, without stirring: and their streams,
That wont to be all spangled with the beams
Of the blithe Sun; now, in a weltring flood,
Ran not with water, but prodigious blood.
Those Trees whereof the Ancients used to raise
Their Funeral Piles, might in these fatal days
Burn at their own Death's, which in sad despair
Spread not their leauie beauties through the air,
But suffered Autumn in the Spring: forlorn
And ferall Cypress now had cause to mourn,
Poppeyes themselves this time in death did sleep,
And the Myrrhe-tree had reason here to weep
A funeral Perfume: those gaudie flowers
Which wont to make Ghirlonds for Paramours,
Mourned in their drouping bravery, and spread
The ground at their own deaths, as for the dead.
The Corn grew not, as if it meant t'undoo
Men not with Plague alone, but Famine too.
Herbs, Physics Sovereigns, here infected die,
And for themselves could find no remedy.
The brute Beasts now, which Nature to bestow
The Excellence on Man, did make with low
Downe-looking Postures, first did feel the rage
Of th'Earth-borne Plague, and died before their age.
The long-liu'd Heart this time to die began,
Before it reached unto the age of Man.
The faithful Spaniell, by his death, did try
The mischief of his well-nos'd Faculty,
And ranging with quick Sent, did soonest prove
The Infectious Malice of the Dog above.
The lusty Steed, scouring in's Game apace,
Lights on Deaths Gole, in middle of his Race:
The nimble Foul as the air it flies around,
Flags his sick wings, and sinkes unto the ground,
Not long before to the remorselesse Sky
In silly Notes have sung his Elegy.
The lucklesse Night-Rauens, which used to groan
The death of others, now might Dirge their own:
The Snow-plum'd Swan, as it did gently ride
Upon the silver Stream, sung forth, and di'de.
Anon the Damp dares break into the Walls,
Making a way by thousand Funerals:
Who can express th'astonishment and fear,
Which does at entrance of a Plague appear?
Even so the fleeced Heard does tremble, when
An Aburne Lion, hungry from his Den,
Breaks in among 'em: then you may behold
The pale-look'd Shepherd gaze upon his Fold
With helpelesse pity, the poor Lam-kins creep
Under their Dams; the silly trembling Sheep
Stand full of cold amazement at the sight,
Small hope for mercy, and less hope in flight,
Expecting only which of all shall escape.
The ready horror of the Lions rape.
Other Diseases warning give before,
That we may reckon, and acquit the Score
Of our sins Prodigality: in this,
We scarce can be resolved whether it is
Sickness, or Death it self; so quick it tries
The strength of Nature, so soon poor Man dies:
That many to repose in the Evening lying,
Have made their sleep true kin to Death, by dying
Before the Morn. Ah! who would then defer
A preparation for this Messenger
Of blessed or cursed Eternity? What man
Would still presume to sin, that knows the span
Of short uncertain Life? Ye gracious Powers,
That measure out the minutes and the hours
Of this our wandering Pilgrimage, restrain
These sudden slaughter-men; or, good God waine
Us from our sins, that we may neither fear
The rape of Death, nor covet to be here:
O curb this raging Sickness, which with sense
Bereaues us of the means of Penitence.
When a dire Frenzy seizes on the Brain,
Full of resistlesse flame, and full of pain;
That Madness, which no cure can well appease,
Is but a Symptom, unto this Disease.
Our blood all fire, as if it did portend
We were not here to stay, but soon ascend;
When streams of sulphur through our veins do glide,
And scarce the sense of sorrow does abide.
This time how miserable, may we guess,
Where want of sense, is chiefest happiness:
When the distracted Soul can scarce devise
How to supply the weakest Faculties
Of the disturbed Body; but presents
Unto the Eye strange objects, strange portents,
And antique shadows: when the feuerish rage
Sets us on Iourneyes often, and Pilgrimage,
And entertaines our wild and wandering sight
With monstrous Land-schips, able to affright
A man in's wits: when the deceived Ears
Do apprehend what ere the Fancy fears;
The groans of Ghosts, and whispering of Sprites,
The silken tread of Faeries in the Nights,
The language of an ayrie Picture, howles
Of funeral Dogs, and warnings of sad Owls.
The Taste distasteth all things, and the same
Is sweet, and bitter, when the inward flame
Furs the swollen tongue; and the quick Feeling marred,
Knows no difference between soft and hard:
Such a confused Error does distract
The laboring senses, so is the Fancy rackt
By the dire sickness; when from place to place
The Body rolleth, and would feign embrace
Some Icie cooler: but alas, the heat
Asswaging, there ensues a Marble sweat
'Twixt Death and Nature, wrestling: then appear
Those deadly Characters, which th'Ensigne bear
Before approaching Fate; which notice give,
None spotless die, how ever they did live.
A sickness comfortless; when we do fear
To see those friends whom we do love most dear.
The Ministers Devotion here does stick,
By leaving Visitation of the sick,
Making the Service Book imperfect: when
We see a crossed Door, as 'twere a Den
Of Serpents, or a Prodigy, we shun
The poor distressed Habitation.
The Death as comfortless; where not appears
One friend, to shed some tender funeral tears:
Black Night's the only Mourner. No sad Verse,
Nor solemn flowers do deck the drearie Hearse:
Some few old folk perhaps, for many a year
Who have forgot to weep, attend the Beer;
Such, whose dry age has made most fit to keep
The Infected without fear, but not to weep;
Whose kin to death, made them not fear to die,
Whose deafness made them then fit company
Unto the sick, when they were speechless grown:
A miserable Consolation.
But had you looked about, you might have seen
Death in each corner, and the secret teene
Of angry Destiny: No sport dispels
The mists of sorrow; a sad silence dwells
In all the streets, and a pale terror seizes
Upon their faces, who had no Diseases.
So usual 'twas, before the morn to dye,
That when at Night two friends left company,
They would not say, Good Night; but thus alone,
God send's a joyful Resurrection.
If two or three days interposed between,
One friend by chance another friend had seen,
It was as strange, and joyful, as to some,
When a dear friend does from the Indies come.
Through the naked town, of death there was such plenty,
One Bell at once was feign to ring for twenty.
No Clocks were heard to strike upon their Bells,
Cause nothing rung but death-lamenting Knels.
Strange, that the Hours should fail to tell the Day,
When time to thousands ran so fast away.
Time was confused, and kept at such a plight,
The Day to thousands now was made a Night.
Hundreds that never saw before, but di'de,
At one same time, in one same Grave abide;
That our weak Fancies, if we did not hold
It Profanation, here to be too bold,
Might wonder what, being strangers, they would say
To one another at the Judgment Day.
Some, by their fear to go to Church debarred,
Anon are carried dead unto the Yard.
The Churchyards gron'd, with too much death oppressed,
And the Earth rests not, 'cause so many rest.
And Churches now with too much burial fed,
Feared they should have no meeting but of Dead:
Death fell on death, and men began to fear
That men would want to carry forth the Beer.
The Bearers, Keepers, Sextons that remain
Surpass in number all the town again.
Friends here killed friends, womb-fellowes kill their Brothers
Fathers their Sons, and Daughters kill their Mothers:
By one another (strange!) so many di'de
And yet no murder here, no Homicide.
A Mother great with Child by the Plagues might
Infects to death her child not borne to light.
So killing that which yet never lived; the womb
Of th'aliue Mother, to th'dead Child was tomb,
Where in the fleshy grave the still Babe lying,
Does kill his mother by his own first dying.
Her travail here on Earth she could not tend
But finishes in heaven her Iournies end.
To others, frolic set unto their meals,
Secure of Death, sly Death upon them steals,
And strikes among 'em, so that thence in speed
With heavy Cheer they are borne the worms to feed.
To some at work, to others at their play,
To thousands death makes a long Holy Day.
Death all conditions equally inuades,
Nor riches, power, nor beauty here persuades,
Old dye with young, with women men, the rage
Of the dire Plague spares neither sex nor age.
Most powerful Influence of ruling Stars
Which with blind darts kill more than bloody Wars,
Resistlesse Famine, greedy time, or when
The threatfull hand of tyrants strikes men
Into pale terror, more than all diseases,
Ah, happy he who heaven least displeases.
FINIS.

