FOUR SERMONS: Viz. 1. The blessedness of Peacemakers. Preached before the
KING. 2. The advancement of Gods Children. Preached before the KING. 3. The
Sin against the holy GHOST. Preached at Paul's Cross. 4. The Christian
PETITIONER. Preached at Oxford on the Act Sunday.


By JOHN DENISON Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplaynes.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

Beati Pacifici. THE BLESSEDNESS of Peacemakers: And the ADVANCEMENT of Gods
Children. JN Two Sermons preached before the King, by JOHN DENISON Doctor of
Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chapleynes.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, THOMAS Earl of Kelly, Viscount Fenton, One of the
GENTLEMEN of his Majesty's Royal Bedchamber, Knight of the most noble order
of the GARTER, and of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
Right Honorable:
THE publishing of these Sermons has, by some who are judicious, been thought
necessary for the present times: They may happily stir men up to a serious
consideration, and correspondent thankfulness for these blessed days of
Peace and Grace which we enjoy, under the government of the most Wise,
Learned, and Religious King, that ever this Nation had.

And peradventure, the view of this excellent Ornament, Peace.
may move some, who are now contentious, to become studious, according to the
Apostles precept, 1 These. 4.11.
of Peace and Quietness.

Being resolved for the publishing of them, I wanted no motives for dedication.
As my self have duly observed, and others ingeniously acknowledged your
Lordship, in your general carriage, Doctor Hall.
A worthy pattern of all true honor: So have I much rejoiced to observe your
Lordships religious disposition (the life and luster of true Nobleness) and
your constant sanctifying of the Sabbath, both at the prayers of the Church,
and preaching of the word, without neglect or divorce of those sacred
ordinances.

And who does not honor you as a worthy instrument of our happiness, in the
happy rescue of the dear life of our gracious Soueraign? For had the bloody
designs of the insolent Gowries taken effect, the light of our Israel had
been put out; 2. Sam. 21.17.
and we (for ought that any mortal eye can see) left altogether hopeless of
those great blessings we now enjoy. But in more particular, the respect your
honor has had to my Ministry, ever since I was known unto you, and your
gracing of me both in Court and Country, do worthily challenge some
testification of thankfulness, without which I might justly incur Claudius
Caesar's censure upon ingratitude. Ingratos reuocauit in seruitutem. Sueton,
And as your Lordships favors have been public, so the Philosopher has
taught me not to tender my thanks in angulo, and ad aurem. Seneca de Benefic.
lib. 1. c. 23.


Therefore (insteade of better means) these two Sermons, like the widows two
Mites, do humbly present themselves to your Lordships hands, craving your
acceptance, and the continuance of your favor to him, who heartily prays for
your prosperous estate, and has unfeignedly devoted himself

Your Honors in all humble observance, IO. DENISON.

To the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
I Am occasioned, in saluting thee, to Apologize for my self. I have been
taxed, by some, for too much tartness in these Sermons, against those who
dissent from our Church in her Ceremonies and government, and for ranking them
with Peace-breakers. But hear my just defense: I profess freely, if a man be
of an humble spirit, peaceable behavior, and, as his Majesty writes, Learned
and Grave, Preface to his (...)
though he do not altogether like the Ceremonies of our Church, he is not the
man whom either my tongue or pen shall strike.

And be he Minister or private Christian, by how much the more strict and
careful any one is in the ways of God (so it be in sincerity, without
contention and ostentation) the more I do esteem him worthy of respect.

But when I observe some others, either by their Books, Sermons or
Conferences, to be proud, factious, and contentious; blame me not for taxing
them as enemies to our Peace; or if thou do, I little regard it. Pride,
Faction, and contention, I could never like in any. Saint Austin says in the
like case: Est ergo ecclesiae quod ferat foris g^ma^in^us. Inimicos tamen
deputat suos foris and intus: foris facilius euitabiles, intus difficilius
tolerabiles. Aug. praef ad Psalm. 142.
The Church has that she may suffer without, and sigh for within, yet she
accounts as enemies both those that are without, and those that are within;
those that are without are more easily avoided, those that are within are more
hardly endured.

Judge. 6.24. New transl. margent.
Gideons Altar and Ensigns did carry this Motto, Jehovah shalom; The Lord send
Peace: And our Sovereigns diction is, Blessed are the Peacemakers
Beati Pacifici, which consorting with his gracious actions, should call us
all, like good Soldiers, to the standard of Peace. Those two famous Cities of
Greece which often iarred one with another, Thebes and Athens.
when they were assalted by the common enemy, united their forces for the
common defense: Would to God the children of light would learn to be as wise
as the children of this world in their generation. Luke 16.8.


His Majesty has gone before us in his excellent encounters: Were it not
fitter to follow him against the common enemies in a just and weighty quarrel,
then by taking up the pen, to disturb the peace of the Church, about matter of
Ceremonies? Let me entreat those who are contentious, as they tender the peace
of their Souls, to ponder diligently the Apostles precept to the Colossians:
Colos. 3.15.
Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which you are called in one
body. And to consider seriously his prayer for the Thessalonians, 2. These. 3.16.
uttered with much vehemence, and diverse weighty and moving circumstances. Now
the Lord of peace himself give you peace always by all means. And I heartily
wish, that his precept may so prevail with them, and his prayer for them, Pax
transitoriae est quoddam vestigium pacis aeternae. Greg: Pastor. Par. 3. admon.
that they may become the Sons of Peace; and that this Peace temporal, may
be to them a pledge, and step to Peace eternal.

MAT. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers.


WE read in the tenth of Luke, Luke 10.5.
that when our SAVIOVR sent forth his Disciples to any house, he enjoined
them, thus to salute it: Peace be to this house.

That salutation, blessed be God, has prospered well in the hands of his
servants, and, Ioh. 12.3.
like Mary's precious ointment, has filled this house with a sweet perfume of
Peace. In regard whereof, instead of the Disciples salutation, I have taken our
Saviors benediction, (for my purpose was, that my first Oblation in this house
should be a Peace Offering.) Beati Pacifici: Blessed are the Peacemakers, for
they shall be called the children of God.

Which words contain 2. especial points, 1. A benediction, Blessed are the
Peacemakers. 2. A reason or manifestation of the benediction: For they shall
be called the children of God.


The Benediction, which at this time shall be the bounds of my speech, yields
two words, and the same two parts: Beati and Pacifici.


For in them I observe, A Person, and his condition.


The person a Peacemaker, his condition, He is blessed.

And indeed these are inseparable companions, Peacemakers and Blessedness:
They go hand in hand, and are like Hippocrates twins, which lived and died
together. There was never any blessed (had he opportunity) but he was a
Peacemaker. Never was there Peacemaker, but he was blessed. Here Beati is
first in place, but Pacifici is first in order: For a man must be Pacificus,
before he can be Beatus; he must be a Peacemaker, that he may be Blessed,
and therefore we will begin with him first.

Now this word Pacificus is a compound, and involues two words, Substantiae
sunt receptacula accidentium: Accidentiae sunt ornamenta substantiarum.
a subject and an adiunct, a man and his ornament, Peace, and a maker of Peace.
I call Peace an ornament according to the phrase in Schools, and fitly in my
conceit, for without it a man is but a Skeleton, or like the brazen Serpent
when it was without virtue, Nehushton, a piece of brass: 2. King. 18.4^
We will first consider the ornament that makes the man, Peace; and then the
man who is graced with this ornament, the maker of Peace.

Saint Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5. exhorts thus concerning the ministers of Christ: Have
them in singular reverence for their works sake. He that regards that
exhortation, will look into the work, and when he finds that they are
conversant about the most noble subject, Medici animarum. Chrysostom.
as being the Physicians, and watchmen for the Souls of men: It will cause
him to subscribe to the Apostles encomium, Heb 13.17.
who calls that office, (...), A worthy work, and consequently to yield to
his exhortation, 1. Tim. 3.
Have them in singular reverence. So he that considers this excellent work and
ornament Peace, will take notice of the worth of the Peacemaker, and
consequently pronounce him blessed. Thus the total of this our present
discourse, yields us these particulars. First a work, which is Pax, Peace:
Secondly, the workmen, Pacifici, the Peacemakers; and that will bring in the
third, which is a reward, Beati, Blessed. And of these points in order.

The first part: Of PEACE.
SPeciosum nomen pacis est, says Hilary: The name of Peace is specious, yea it
is precious. For God, the fountain of all goodness, is in sundry places of
Scripture styled. Romans 15.33. 1. Cor. 14.33. and passim.
The God of Peace. Christ, the author of our hopes and happiness, in the ninth
of Isaiah, Isaiah 9.6.
is called the Prince of Peace. The Gospel, which is the glad-tidings of good
things, Romans 10.15. Romans 1.16.
and the power of God to salvation, in the sixth to the Ephesians, is entitled,
Ephesians. 6.15.
The Gospel of Peace. Peace, it makes the sweetest Hymn that the Angels could
sing at our Saviors birth, Gloria in altissimis, Luke 1.14.
Glory be to God in the highest heavens, Peace upon earth. The richest legacy
our Savior could bequeath to his Church, at the time of his death, Ioh. 14.27.
Pacem relinquo vobis, My peace I leave with you, my peace I give you. Yea so
ample and excellent is this ornament, that the Hebrews under the name of
Peace, do comprehend all prosperity and felicity whatsoever; and not unfitly,
if we consider it in the several branches.

Some divide it into two parts, some into three.
I will not stand to show how some dicotomise* some tricotomise this Peace. I
like the distinction of a fourfold Peace, because by it I shall the better
unfold this ornament. And that is, Pax superna, interna, externa, aeterna: The
Peace of Reconciliation, of Consolation, of Association, of eternal Salvation,
and these four are like four links of a Chain, all inseperably knit together.

The Peace of Reconciliation, is the Peace between God and man. This is the
foundation of all true comforts, and the head of the fountain, whence all the
other kinds of Peace do spring. When Adam did eat the forbidden fruit he
lost his favor and Peace with God, Et Deum and pacem perdidit. August.
and his flying from the face of God was an evident argument of the breach of
that Peace.

This was a miserable condition; for better it were to be at varience with all
the world, then to be at odds with God. Horrendum est: Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing, says the Apostle, to fall into the hands of the
living God. And no marvel, Deuteronomy. 4.24.
for he is a consuming fire; yea, he is able to cast both soul and body into
hell for ever. Mat. 10.28.


By how much therefore this war and varience is woeful, by so much more is
the reconciliation comfortable. Therefore the Lord does not only ingeminate
the joy of this news, Esaias. 40.1. saying, Comfort you, comfort you my people.
But bids his servants bring forth this Cordial, Ver. 2.
and speak to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
ended. As it was joyful news to Pharaohs butler, Genesis 40.13.
that the King his masters favor should be recovered, and himself restored to
his office: So must it needs be a singular comfort to all the children of God,
that he is reconciled to them, and they restored to that happy estate which
they lost in Adam: So that I may say of this kind of Peace; Speciosum nomen
Pacis est. The name of Peace is specious, it is precious.

Now this Peace of reconciliation, brings in the next link, the peace of
Conscience, which I call the peace of Consolation: For when this happy news is
brought home to the heart, that Gods justice is satisfied, and his wrath
pacifyed; then have we Peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.


There is no misery comparable to the sting of Conscience; A wounded spirit who
can bear? 1. Pro. 18.14.
When one shall be restless, like the raging Sea, tossed with the billows of
despair, as Esau speaks of an unreconciled sinner: Esa. 57.20.
When he shall have the Furies with their whippes and torches vexing him, as
Suetonius writes of Nero: Sueton. in vit. Nero cap, 34.
when he shall feel a burden upon his Soul even heavier then Aetna, as the
holy Historian speaks of Cayne: Genesis 4.13.
If then Christ Jesus shall bring this distressed soul into his wine-celler of
comfort, and spread over it the banner of his compassion, as it is Cant. 2.4.
Then, as the babe sprang in the womb of Elizabeth at the salutation of the
blessed Virgin: Luke 1.41.
So shall the humbled heart, upon the apprehension of this comfort, even leap
for joy. Yea, so comfortable is this peace of Conscience, Aug. de Genes. ad
Lit. 2.8.
that Saint Austin calls it the souls Paradise: And Solomon, speaking of it,
says, Pro. 15.15.
A good Conscience is a continual feast. So that I may likewise conclude
concerning it, Speciosum nomen Pacis est. The name of this Peace is specious
and precious.

The third kind of Peace, which I call the peace of Association, is that
civil peace which is between man and man. And this also is a consequent of
the former. 1. Ioh. 4.20.
For as Saint John says, he that loves God, will also love his brother; So he
that is at Peace with God, and with his own Soul, will surely be at Peace
with men. This Peace is excellent; and therefore almighty God, when he will
give a great testimony of his loving favor to David, 1. Chro. 22.9.
tells him that his son shall be a man of Peace. And when he will manifest
his respect to the melting heart of Josiah, 2. Reg. 22.20.
he promises him that he shall go to his grave in Peace.

The passages of Scripture urging this, are abundant and vehement. As that in
the twelfth to the Romans. Romans 12.18.
If it be possible, and as much as in you is, have Peace with all men. If it
seem (...), impossible, in regard of others, yet (...), do you your best
endeavor to have Peace. And what a vehement adiuration is that in the second
to the Philippians? Phil. 2.1.
If there be any consolation in Christ, any comfort in Charity, any fellowship
of the spirit, any compassion and mercy, embrace Peace and unity.

But as we have done in the former, so let us see the beauty of this blessing
by her contraries, Wars and Contention. For, Nazianz. de Pace.
Quantum sit pacis bonum ex ipsa seditione conspicitur. What is war and
contention, but a devouring fire, which consumes the house of Millo, Shechem,
Judge. 9.15.
and the Cedars of Libanus? For by it, Nation is destroyed of Nation, and City
of City, 2. Chro. 15.6.
as one house is set on fire by another: Therefore albeit Solomon says;
Eccles. 3 8.
There is a time for war, and a time for Peace, yet are wars to be shunned
as the bane of this blessing. As nature has provided no euacuation of blood
but in case of extremity, so wars are not to be taken in hand but in case of
necessity, August. Epist. 205. Peace should be voluntary, War necessary.
according to that of Saint Austin, Pacem habere debet voluntas, bellum
necessitas. Those therefore that will attempt needelesse wars, let them
prosper like Ahab at Ramoth Gilead, 1. Reg 22.34. 2. Reg. 19.35.
and Rabshekah against Jerusalem. Let it be unto them as it was to those Roman
hot-spurs Flaminius, Plutarchus.
Minutius, and Varro; who smarted for their temerity in this case. Those that
come in hostile manner, with their knives engraven, As it was at the intended
invasion* 1588
To cut the throats of the English Heretics, let them see a coin stamped (as a
memorial of their disastrous enterprise) with the form of a Navy, and that
inscription, Venit, iuit, fuit: It came, it went away, it came to just nothing.
Surely no man knows thoroughly the benefit of Peace, but he that has seen the
doleful face of war. He that had heard the clattering of Armor, the rattling
of Trumpets, the thundering of Canons, the cries of the wounded, the groans of
the dying, and seen the fyring of Temples, the deflowring of Virgins, the
rapes of Matrons, the murdering of infants, the vastation of fields, and
spoiling of houses, could not but say with sorrow, En quo discordia ciues
perduxit miseros! Virgil, Eclog. 1.
Behold the doleful issue of our discord; and acknowledge, that the name of
Peace is precious. He that has read that lamentable Epistle of the ancient
Britains, inscribed, Apud Gildam. page 14.
Aegitio ter consult gemitus Britanorum; to Aegitius thrice Consul, the sighs
of the Britains. He that could behold how many noble families, how many
famous cities, how many glorious Monarchies have been brought to their periods
by wars, by contention; would confess ingenuously, that Peace is a great
blessing. Horace.
O fortunati minium bona si sua norint-Angli. But alas, we sit under our
vines, The holy Historian speaks of this as of a great blessing 1. Reg. 4.25.
and under our fig trees, yea, we enjoy abundant blessings in Peace, yet are we
not so happy as to see our happiness; yea we are grown, through our plenty of
Peace, to dis-esteeme it, as the Indians do their fragrant woods in fires, who
by much use are weary of them, and as the Israelites did Manna, who by reason
of their plenty did loath it.

Well, let contentious spirits be transported as they will; the sons of
Peace, shall say with the Psalmist, Ecce quam bonum and quam iucundum, Psalm.
133.1.
Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, brethren to dwell together at
unity. See, it is both bonum, and iucundum, Horace. A man the th mark most
plainly hits, that to his profit pleasure fits. Psalm. 34.14.
it is good and pleasant: Et omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci. Would
a man see good days? He must lay the foundation thereof in Peace. Peace, it is
the mother of plenty and prosperity, according to that in the 147, Psalm; He
sets Peace within thy borders, and satisfies thee with the flower of
wheat: And that in the 122. Psalm. 122.7.
Let Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces. Where Peace
is planted in the borders, there is the flower of wheat, and when it is
entertained within the walls, prosperity takes up her habitation within the
Palaces. Health is not more beneficial to the natural body, then Peace to the
politic. Plutarch said well, Plutarch. Reipub. gerenda praecept.
Those Hiues are in best case where the Bees make most noise, but those
commonwealths are in best state, where least noise and tumult is. Peace, it is
the nurse of Piety; by it religion thriues, and the Church flourishes; As we
read in the ninth of the Acts: Act. 9.31.
Then had the Churches rest, and multiplied. Yea it is not only the mother of
prosperity, and nurse of Piety, but even the glory and crown of Christianity;
Ephesians 43.
when the unity of spirit is so kept in the bonds of Peace, that Christians are
(like those happy conuerts in the primitive Church) (...), Acts. 4.32.
as it were one Soul in so many bodies. Illic mandauit Deus benedictionem.
There the Lord promised his blessing, Psalm. 133.3.
and life for evermore. Non in commotione Dominus: God was neither in the
blustering winds, the boystrous earthquake, nor the furious fire; 1. Reg.
19.11.12.
But when the still and soft voice comes, there the Lord is, according to that
of the Apostle, Brethren live in Peace, and the God of Peace shall be with you.
2. Cor. 13. 2. Cor. 13.11.
Therefore I may also say of this kind of Peace, Speciosum nomen Pacis est.
The name of this Peace is precious.

The fourth and last kind of Peace, is Peace eternal, which also follows
the other; For he that has not Peace on earth, shall neither have peace nor
place in Heaven. As the first was Pax regis, so this is Pax regni; As that was
Pax gratiae, so this is Pax gloriae, that was peace with Heaven, this peace in
Heaven: That was peace of grace, this is peace of glory.

Cassiodorus in Psalm. 36.
This Cassiodore describes negatiuely, Vbi nihil aduersum nihil contrarium,
which admits no adversity, no cross or calamity; for the servants of God have
all tears wiped from their eyes. Revel. 7.17.
There is a marvelous difference betwixt our present and future condition. We
are here like seafaring men, incountred with many contrary winds; Never did
any sail so prosperously in the Ocean of this present world, but sometimes he
has met with the storms of discontent: But there is sinus maris, and sinus
matris; the port and haven of constant happiness. The excellency of this
peace, the Scriptures set not forth positiuely, but in Alegoryes, and no
marvel: For neither eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.9.
nor ear has heard, nor can it enter into the hearts of men, what the Saints
and servants of God shall enjoy in heaven. Saint Austin knows not whether he
should call it, August de Ciuit. Dei. 19. 11.
Pax in aeterna vita, or aeterna vita in Pace: peace in eternal life, or
eternal life in peace. And no marvel, for if he had been furnished with the
tongues of men and Angels, he could never have expressed the excellency of it:
Tam spe^iosum nomen pacis est; the name of this Peace is so specious, so
precious.

The second part: Of the Peacemaker.
I Might further observe the excellency of Peace and Unity, as being founded in
the blessed Trinity, three persons and one God. But I come to speak of the
Peacemaker, whose honor it is, that Peace is the work of the blessed Trinity.

2. Cor. 5.19.
First, the Apostle says, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to
himself. Psalm. 85.8.
He speaks peace to the souls of his servants, Psalm. 46.10.
causes wars to cease, and planteth peace in their borders. Leuit. 26.6
Therefore is he called the God of Peace; yea the name of his house is Peace,
for his dwelling is at Salem, that is, peace, Psalm. 76.2.

Romans 5.1.
Christ Jesus also is a blessed Peacemaker. For we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.14.
Yea he is called our peace it self, because peace is Praecipuum opus
vnigeniti, Chrysostom*
the especial work of the Son of God. (...). Col. 1.20.


He set at peace, by the blood of his cross, all things in earth and heaven.
In which words we have both the price and bounds of this peace; the price, it
was per sanguinem crucis, it cost him his dearest heart blood, and for the
bounds, they are of a large extent, he reconciled all things in heaven and
earth: He brake down a double partition wall, and reconciled man unto man, and
both unto God; and therefore is he styled the prince of Peace.

The Holy Ghost is a blessed Peacemaker: for Peace is one of those excellent
fruits of the Spirit mentioned Gal 5.22. He calmes a threefold war in the
souls of men, that is, of the perturbations against reason, the flesh against
the spirit, and the terror of Conscience wrestling with the wrath of God. And
therefore is he called effectiue, Augustine.
the Comforter. Now as the blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
are Peacemakers, so are all the children of God, but diversely.

Some employ themselves in making peace between God and man. So did Moses
stand in the gappe, and by his humble supplications, stayed the Cannons of Gods
wrathful indignation from playing upon the Israelites: Psalm. 106.23,
So Noah by his sacrifice procured a covenant of Peace, at the hands of the
Lord, and stopped the fountains of the deep, Genesis 8.21.
and the floodgates of heaven, that the earth should no more be made a
fish-poole by the inundation of waters.

Some are for the peace of Conscience, who having a tongue of the learned, Esa.
50.4.
do minister a word to him that is weary. These come like Noah's Dove with the
Oliue-branch, Genes. 8.11.
like the pitiful Samaritan, with the oil of gladness, Luke 10, 34.
and the balmes of mercy. Quam speciosi! Oh how beautiful are the feet of
them that bring glad tidings of Peace? Romans 10.15.


Some are employed in out-ward and civil peace. So was Moses when he
indeauoured to take up the quarrel between the two Hebrews. Exodus 2.13.
So was Abraham when he prevented the strife between himself and Lot, Genesis
13.8.
and stayed it between their servants. And so are those worthy Monarchs, who
establish peace in their own territories, and compound controversies between
neighbour-Nations. Thus as there are diverse kinds of Peace, so are there of
Peacemakers, and I may say of them all in our Saviors words, Blessed are the
Peacemakers. And so I come to the third part, which is the uniting of
Peacemaking and Blessedness together.

The third part.
HEre I might first say the Peacemakers are blessed, Quoniam filij deo
vocabuntur, because they shall be called the children of God; but that were to
gleane before the harvest.

I may derive an argument from the excellency of Peace. If peace be such a
gracious ornament, such a singular blessing, I may well conclude thereupon,
that the Peacemaker is blessed. For in this the Axiom holds, Aristot. 1.
poster. cap. 2.
Propter quod vnum quodque tale, illud magis tale est: The temple being an
excellent work, Psalm. 74.5.
they were renowned that builded it: So Peace being a singular blessing, they
must needs be thrice blessed that make it. As God is glorified in the
excellent frame and structure of the heavens, Psalm. 19.1.
because his wisdom, power and goodness shine therein most resplendently: So is
the Peacemaker much honored in this excellent work of Peace, because such
goodness and blessedness are knit to the same inseparably.

The peacemaker is blessed in the very act of peace; as he is esteemed a
blessed man, that quenches some violent fire: 1. Sam. 25.32.
And therefore David blessed Abigail for staying his hand from the stroke of
violence upon churlish Nabal, saying; Blessed be thou, who have kept me this
day from shedding of blood.

The peacemakers are blessed in their fame, Eccles. 7.1.
which is like a precious ointment: Plutar. in Alcibiad.
Erat in ore Graecis (says Plutarch) it came into a proverb for the honor of
Nicias, that Pericles kindled the wars, but Nicias quenched them. How did the
Poets sing of the Spiders making their webs in harness in the days of Numa
Pompilius? And how do stories ring of the shutting up of Ianus Temple door,
and keeping war under lock and key, in the days of Augustus Caesar? And the
holy Historian, which sets forth Solomon famous for his wealth, 2 Chro. 9.27.
who made Silver as plentiful as stones in the street, and for his wisdom,
in that he had a heart like the sands of the sea shore; 1 Reg. 4.26.
yet makes him in nothing more glorious then this, that he was a King of peace,
and so a lively type of Christ the Prince of peace. As Tully said of Caesar,
Plutarch, de vtilet. cap. ab host.
that in erecting Pompeyes statue, he had set up his own: so he that has
been the instrument of peace to others, procures peace to his own soul. I
may say with the Psalmist, mark the end of this man, for it is peace, yea, it
is peace that shall never end.

Thus have I hitherto showed that the Peacemakers are blessed. But the life of
all that, depends principally upon Application.

Application.
But me thinks I see Iehu marching furiously, and saying, What have thou to
do with Peace? For as David says, Psalm. 120.7.
there are some who are enemies to Peace, and for such here is a corrasiue.
First, we see what we may conclude of Peace-breakers; for in this also the
Axiom is good, contrariorum contraria est ratio: if the Peacemaker be blessed,
the Peace-breaker must needs be cursed; if the one be filius Dei, the other
must needs be filius Diaboli, as Gregory concludes against him. Gregory.


There are some, who like Salamanders, live in the fire of contention; that,
are never quiet within themselves, but when they are at variance with others.
Some there are that are still sowing the seeds, and blowing up the coals of
contention. What are these, but the devils bellows, and his seedes-men? And
therefore may S. Paul very fitly call them (...), adsurd men. 2 These 3.2.
And he has just cause to challenge the factious Corinthians to be carnal, 1
Cor. 3.3.
because of their contentions: For as the beasts that were savage in the field,
were quiet in the Arc: So would these men, were they come sincerely into the
Arc of the Church; lay by the humor of contention, and (as the Apostle
exhorts) study to be quiet. 1 These. 4.11. Bern. in Cant. ser. 29.
Ve homini (says Saint Bernard) per quem vniculum pacis turbatur. Woe be to
the man by whom the bond of peace is violated.

Romans 16.17.
Saint Paul in the sixteenth to the Romans, speaking of these Cankers and
Catterpillers, exhorts us to mark those that make contentions, and avoid them.
Mark them as you would the Basiliske, avoid them as you would a Pesthouse,
where Lord have mercy upon us is written upon the door. I will briefly do
the one, let us all diligently endeavor the other.

The first and greatest Peace-breaker in the world is Satan, a name expressing
his nature; for he is an adversary to Peace. August. de temp. sermon. 169.
Deus plantat, inimicus euellit; where God plants peace, the Devil pluckes it
up by the root; and like that wicked seedes-man, sowes the tares of contention.

He first dissolved the happy peace between heaven and earth, between God and
man.

Secondly, he made a breach between man and man, so that when there were
scarce three men in the world, he stirred up one of them to murder another.

Thirdly, between man and the creatures: For whereas Adam, in his state of
obedience, was Lord over all the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the
heaven: In his case of rebellion, which was by Satan's instigation, all the
creatures became rebellious unto him.

Fourthly, he brake the peace between the creatures themselves: For they which
were like the strings of a well tuned instrument, yielding an excellent
harmony; were brought into such a discord, as will never be reformed while the
world stands.

Fifthly, in a word, he made man at war within himself, whilst the unruly
passions and perturbations do contend in his corrupted soul, like the
opposite elements in the confused Chaos. This is a cruel peace-breaker, avoid
him.

Next to the Devil the prince of darkness, I may fitly rank the Bishops of
Rome, who challenges a great sovereignty in the suburbs of hell; Purgatory.
and concerning the kingdoms of the earth, take up that claim in the fourth
of Luke, (doubtless as the Devils deputies; Luke 4.6.
) All these kingdoms are mine, and to whomsoever I will I give them. They have
changed Peter's keys, Mat. 16.19.
which Christ gave him to use, into Peter's sword, which Christ bad him put up
with a subpaena of perishing by the sword, Mat. 26.52.
if he took it. I have wondered at that Romish ceremony; ^^c* Cerem San.
Roma. Eccles. lib. 1. sec. 7.
that The Pope on Christmas day at night, sends a hallowed sword to some great
Prince, whom he in special manner favors. How unfit a present is a sword from
a Churchman? surely a Bible had been much better beseeming his function. And
how unfit a time is Christmas, a festiuity celebrated in remembrance of Christ's
incarnation, the Prince of Peace?

They shall have the honor next to the Devil, of being the greatest
Peace-breakers in the Christian world. For some of them forth of their
intolerable pride, to raise their thrones on high, Who raised such broiles,
both at home and abroad, vt tota fere Italia tumultuaretur. Platina.
as Boniface the 8. Some forth of their insatiable covetousness, to advance
their kinsfolks, as Innocent the 8. Some forth of their implacable malice, and
desire of revenge, as Julius the second, (who was laborum patientissimus
iniuriarum impatiens) have stirred up the storms of many bloody wars amongst
Christians. Plat in Iul. etc. Vide Gui story more large.
How unfit for a Bishop is that Elogie of Julius the second. Moritur bellica
gloria clarus, he died a brave Soldier. And diverse others I might mention,
Spiritus mires magis q^ religiosos g^ Ioh. 11. (...)
of whom their own Historians do write, that they lived rather like Soldiers
and swash-bucklers, then Pastors and peacemakers. Greg Epi. I^ Indict.
They did not greatly regard that speech of Gregory the great, Nos pastores
facti sumus, non percussores: We should be feeders, not fighters. Vide
Platinam in vit. Sergij tertij.
You shall hardly find such furious immanity amongst the Barbarians, as you
shall read done by these holy Fathers one upon another, both living and dead.
No Church in Christendom can vye Schisms, Vide Genebra. Chro. and Onuphr.
for violence and durance, with the Church of Rome. Insomuch that she has
been sometimes like Cerberous with his three heads, and each of them ready to
devour another. What broiles and combustions have they raised betwixt
Monarchs and their Subjects, by sending forth their thunderbolts of
Excommunication, absoluing them from their due alleagiance, and dissoluing the
strongest bonds of grace and nature? These great Peace-breakers have been well
marked by diverse, avoid them.

Next to the Popes, we will place the Popes Ianisaries, the Jesuits. Men sent
forth to cast about the wildefire of broils in Kingdoms and Commonwealths;
of whom I may say, Lactan. Instit. 6. 5.
as Lactantius speaks of the Philosophers, Nomen sibi solum retinuerunt. For
how unlike are they to him, That is, Jesus.
whose name they do most impudently and injuriously usurp? He went about
doing good; they, Acts 10.38. The Devil. Job 1.7.
like the great peripateticke in the first of Job, go about doing mischief:
His words and deeds were always attended with compassion and mercy; theirs,
as men of their own unction confess, Quodlibet p. 84.
are cruelty and tyranny. None more meek and humble then he; none more proud
and lofty then they. Indeed they resemble their Father and founder Ignatius
Loyola, who had auspirated his new found devotion in blood, had not his Mule
(like Balaams Ass) been wiser then the Master, or rather the provident hand
of God stopped his intended design. He being offended with a Moore (with whom he
travailed on the way) for speaking against the Virgin Mary; after the Moore was
departed from him, disputed with himself whether he might lawfully kill him. At
last, coming to a place that parted into two ways, he laid the rains on his
Mules neck, resolving, that if she went the same way the Moore went, he would
go after and kill him; but it pleased God that the Mule went another way.
Ribadmeira. in vita Ignat. Louila. lib. 1. cap. 3. Bern. in Psalm. 91. ser. 6.


As in ancient time you had no play without a Devil in it; so in these latter
days, you have scarce a treason, but a Jesuit is an actor in it. The times
have been, that other Friars and Monks have had their shares in treacherous
conspiracies, but now the Jesuits have in a manner engrossed those things into
their own hands. These are Machiauelian Peace-breakers, avoid them.

But what, are our Church and Commonwealth without Peace-breakers? Would to
God they were. I may say with Saint Bernard, Pax a paganis, pax ab hereticis,
etc. Neither Pagans nor Heretics (blessed be God) do much molest us: But we
are encumbered with certain contentious brethren, who strive as earnestly about
matter of ceremony and circumstance, Jude Epi. verse. 3.
as Saint Jude exhorts us to do for the faith which was once delivered to
the Saints: and fear more to put a Surplesse on their backs, then to derive
that dreadful woe upon their souls; Woe be to me, 1 Cor. 9.16.
if I preach not the Gospel. It will be objected, that what they do is for
religion and zeal to Gods glory. But alas cannot zeal and religion stand in a
Church professing and advancing the Gospel without strife and contention? I
doubt not but I may say of some of them; They have the zeal of God, though not
according to knowledge. Oh how happy were it, if they would let judgment be
their guide, and not suffer themselves to be ouer-ruled by preiudicate opinion.

But may not I say also with Saint Austin concerning some others, Aug. in Psalm.
38.
There is vox pietatis, which is, excusatio iniquitatis? There is nothing more
ordinary then specious pretenses. The Turks say it is for Mahomet that they
make war upon Christians, and the Pope pleades it is in ordine ad Deum, that
he disturbs Commonwealths. But what tell you me of Jacobs voice, when I see
Esaus hands; these men may be pacidi, sure they are not pacifici.

What? is it the Church government they would have altered from Episcopal to
Presbyteriall? If that were granted, what the issue thereof would be, let
Amsterdam admonish us, where the Brownists See the profane schism of the
Brownists. cap. 10. page 58.
do so ordinarily and violently toss their censures and Excommunications one
against another; Johnson and Ainsworth, the Pastor, and Doctor. And their
Disciples into Anabaptisme, etc.
subdiuide themselves into diverse Schisms, and Sects, and carry themselves so
imperiously Franc. Johnson their Pastor and Patriarch, suffered his aged
father, (who went to Amsterdam to make peace betvveen his sons) to stand two
hours on his feet before him, whilst himself sat all the time. And sent him
home, yea to his grave, with the sentence of Excommunication upon him. See the
profane schism of the Bro. p. 65.
in their Consistories, that if any Bishop amongst us (whom they challenge for
Lord-lings) carry himself more Lordly and loftily then those men do,
deponatur. But these are brethren, and I heartily wish therefore, that by some
good means they were reformed; if not, it is the Apostles precept that they be
avoided.

Neither is the Commonwealth without Peace-breakers. You have certain
Leguleians, some Lawyers I say (for the judicious and conscionable Lawyer I
honor as a worthy man and member in the Commonwealth) who either through
ignorance, or of a worse mind, are the causes of many suites and
controversies. Those who Nero-like set all on fire that they may warm
themselves by the heat thereof: Those who do study vt fraudem fariant legi;
Gratian.
find tricks to pervert and cosen the Law. Those who are like unconscionable
Surgeons, that keep sores from healing to continue their gain; those are
the boutefeus, whom I observe to be great Peace-breakers.

The many suites depending in every Court argue our much want of peace. And
albeit I may say with comfort, that I never yet had any suite against any man,
nor any against me in any Court in this Kingdom: yet when along the shore, I
see with Themistocles the ribs and rackes of Gallyes tossed in these surges,
I condole their condition. But peradventure it will be objected, it is the
Clyents fault, whose contentious disposition cannot endure to be without
suites. If so, I wish him the benefit in the Emblem; Let him lurk close under
these bushes, till he be thoroughly fleeced. Were I before them who possess the
honorable seats of Justice, I would exhort and beseech them to discard
needelesse suites, and to dispatch the needful.

Now besides these, there is a generation of bloody Esaues, who profess
themselves enemies to Peace; those who are but a word and a stabbe; or, which
is worse, settle upon the dregs of their malice, till they obtain
opportunity of revenge. Amongst such, a small quarrel yeeldes a challenge, and
brings them into the field, As Aristippus answered one that objected fear to
him in danger by sea. Tu quidem non magnopere sollicitus es pro anima
nebulonis; ego pro Aristippi anima. Aul. Gel. Noct. At. 19.1.
where the prodigality of their lives show that they are little worth. To give
one of them the fool were piaculare; yet do they not stick to demonstrate in
act, what they detest in conceit; for what greater folly then to become a slave
to unruly passion? and to hazard both soul and body upon a needless point,
yea upon so needless points as they commonly do? His Majesty, forth of his
Princely care and deep judgment, has well observed the misery and madness
belonging to these Duels: those that are wise will avoid them.

But here I will pause; for if I should descend from general faculties to
personal faults, my speech would run in infinitum.

It has fared with me in this my last discourse, as with a Trauailer, who upon
the hearing of hue and cry, leaves the road to pursue Malefactors; For these
Peace-breakers have drawn me a great deal out of the way, wherein I was
walking. But I will return into the Kings highway, the way of Peace, which is
the road to heaven.

The time does admonish me to draw to an end; yet I am loath my Sun should
set in a cloud, my calm should end in a storm, and my song of Peace and
unity in a discord.

As before I exhorted you in Saint Paul's words to mark the Peace-breakers, and
to avoid them: So must I now say with the same Apostle, Rome 14.19.
Let us follow those things that concern Peace. If we will walk in the way of
Peace, then shall we do well, like good soldiers, to follow Christ Jesus our
captain, and like good subjects, him our Prince of Peace. And him we have both
lucem and ducem, our light and our guide; for he came into the world, Luke 1.79.
to give light to them that sit in darkness, and to guide our feet into the
way of Peace. We will therefore mark some of his precepts, and observe some of
his paths, that we may walk in them.

Greg. Epist. lib. 11. Indict. 6. Epist. 45.
The first path to Peace is Humility, which Gregory calls radicem pacis, the
root of Peace. Learn of me (says Christ) that I am lowly and meek of heart,
Mat. 21.30.
and you shall find rest to your souls. He came like rain into a fleece of
Wool, Psalm. 72.6.
or (as it is in the Hebrew) into the mowne grass, which falls softly and makes
no noise; Nullum strepitum facit. Lact. lib. 4. ca. 16. Mat. 12.19.
as Lactantius expounds the place; yea, he did not strive, neither was his
voice heard in the streets. Saint Chrysostom says truly, Chrysostom. in Romans
hom. 27.
Nihil adeo corpus ecclesiae scindit atque superbia: Nothing rends the body of
the Church so much as pride does; which accords with that of Solomon; Pro.
13.10.
Only by pride do men make contention. And what I pray you has caused the
present quarrels in our Church, but this? For when men cannot ariue at
greatness by a direct course, they seek it by a compass of their own
devising; if they cannot have it by worth, they will seek it by singularity:
But whosoever will be the son of Peace, must follow Christ Jesus our Prince
of Peace in his paths and precepts of Humility.

Again, Justice and equity are great Peacemakers: For Mercy and Truth meet
together, Psalm. 85.10.
Righteousness and Peace kiss each other. Wrongs and injuries kindle the fire
of contention, Justice and equity quench it. Those that are employed either in
matters of arbitrament or judgment, must be like the Center in the midst of
the Circumference, which is as near to one part of heaven as another. As when
our Savior saluted his Disciples with a Pax vobis, Peace be unto you, John
20.19.
stetit in medio, he stood in the midst of them: and it is his main precept,
Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, Mat. 7.12.
do you the same to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. Thus Justice
and equity are the special paths wherein every son of Peace must follow our
Prince of Peace Christ Jesus.

Another especial path of Peace is Patience, which will teach a man not to
offer, 1 Cor. 6.7. They must be patient that will be Peacemakers. Pro. 19.11.
but rather to suffer wrong; for they must be patientes that will be pacifici,
as Tertullian says. They must account it their honor to pass by a
transgression, and hold it pious wisdom to buy their peace, though it be with
some wrong, some damage: Genesis 13.9.
As Abraham offered to Lot the choice of the right hand or the left, which was
his own in equity; and as our Savior paid tribute, when he might have pleaded
immunity. And here again we have Vtrumque es mihi domine Jesus and speculum
patiendi and praemium patientis. Bern super Cant. ser. 48.
Christ a pattern without a parallel; Gessit mira, periulit durae, nec tantum
dura sed and indigna Bern. de di^ig^^do Deo.
never was there any, who endured the like injuries and indignities, especially
if you consider the persons, agent, and patient, scoffs, railings, slanders,
blasphemies, bonds, buffets, whippes, nippings, thorns, nails, spear, yea
whatsoever hell, or the malice of miscreants could devise against him: Yet all
this he endured with admirable patience; yea in all this he was tanquam ouis,
as a sheep before the sheerer, Non solum coram tondente sed coram occidente
obmutuit. Bern.
he was dumb; yea as a sheep not only before the shearer, but even before
the slaughterer he opened not his mouth.

And in this path of Patience, must every son of Peace follow Christ Jesus
our Prince of Peace.

The last path of Peace that I will observe, is Christian wisdom and
discretion: For as Peace is the tranquillity of order (according to Saint
Austins description: Pax est tranquillit as ordinis. Aug. de ciui. dei. 19.13.
) so Wisdom and discretion must marshall order, as the Schooleman observes.
Aquinas.
And therefore he says truly, that although Peace and Charity have great
affinity, yet in this they differ, That Charity has Peace, Charitas pacem
habet, sapientia facit.
Wisdom makes Peace. And this made Gregory tell Bishop Serenus, who being
transported with rash zeal had scandalized diverse, Indict. 4. Epi. 9.
Zelum discretione condisses, you should have seasoned your zeal with
discretion; yea, it is the precept of our blessed Savior, Col. 2.3.
in whom all the treasures of wisdom are hid: Mark. 9.30.
Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another, showing that the
brine of discretion must be the means to season and conserve the blessing of
Peace.

Lo these are the paths of Peace, wherein the sons of Peace must follow
their Prince of Peace Christ Jesus. And (that I may use the Apostles words,
Gal. 6. Gal. 6.16.
As many as walk after these rules, Peace shall be upon them, and upon the
Israel of God.

Yet one friend of Peace more I may not altogether forget, and that is Prayer.
This Chrysostom calls propugnaculum pacis, the fortress of Peace. It is the
rule of the kingly Prophet, and therefore the rather to be regarded: Psalm.
122.6.
O pray for the peace of Jerusalem. As Romans 12.18. Colos. 3.15. Phil. 2 1. 2
These 3.16. and passim.
It is the frequent Prayer and precept of the profound Apostle. Therefore (to
conclude) I will accordingly turn my speech from man to God, and say; Blessed
be God, who has planted peace in our borders: Blessed be Jesus Christ, who
has given us peace with God, with men, with our own souls. Lord let this
excellent work of Peace prosper still in the hands of our King of Peace; and
establish his throne in Peace, to him and his posterity, whilst the Sun and
Moon shall endure; and that through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior,
to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, might, majesty,
and dominion now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
THE SECOND Sermon. Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the
children of God.
SAint Chrysostom in his fifth Homily upon Genesis says, it fares with him in
handling that Scripture, Qui in aurifodinis laborant, etc.
as it does with them who labor in mines of Gold. For they having found some
rich vein of Ore, hardly cease from digging. And so fares it with me, who,
having in the golden mine of these Beatitudes light upon a a rich vein, I
mean this beatitude, which in the judgment of Saint Austin (the most
judicious of the ancient fathers) is the most excellent of seven, August.
Sermon. Dom. in mon. lib. 1.
I am loath to cease from prosecuting what I have begun.

I have heretofore observed, that these words contain a Benediction, Blessed
are the Peacemakers, and a reason or manifestation of the benediction: For
they shall be called the children of God. The benediction I have handled, and
the reason now remains to be considered. We read in the first of Samuel and
the seventeenth, 1. Sam. 17.25.
that David having heard somewhat ingenerall, concerning the reward of him that
should encounter and conquer Goliath; For his better encouragement in that
combat, enquires in more particular, Ver. 26.
What shall be done to the man that kills this Philistim? So, me thinks,
those who have heard in general that the Peacemaker is blessed being the sons
of peace, should for their further comfort and encouragement, in the practice
of this excellent duty, enquire more particularly wherein this blessedness
does consist. And that is the thing which I now intend to show, in these words,
For they shall be called the children of God; wherein I note these four
particulars.

First, a word of Connection, which knits the benediction and reason together
(...), For.

Secondly the exaltation or advancement of the Peacemakers, For they are
(...), the children of God.

Thirdly the appropriation of this advancement, (...), They, not only, cum
alijs, but prae alijs, Before others.
are the children of God.

Fourthly the promulgation or publication of this advancement, (...), They
shall be called so, they shall be called the children of God.

And of these points in order.

The first part: The word of connection (...), For.
ONe would have thought, it had been enough to hear from the mouth of our
blessed Savior positiuely, Blessed are the Peacemakers. For if Pythagoras his
ipse dixit, was such a stickler amongst his scholars, how much more should our
Saviors be amongst his followers? 1. Ioh. 5.6.
If we receive the testimony of men (says Saint John) the testimony of God is
greater. Lo, here is the testimony of him who is both God and man, and
therefore the greatest that may be, and consequently to be carefully regarded.
It is lawful to lay the opinions and positions of men in the balance of
examination, Ratio cum ratione.
that Reason may be poysed and pondered with Reason, as Saint Austin says. But
this honor should be ever given to the word of Christ, that we should say with
the Centurion, Mar. 8.3.
Speak the word only. And when Christ has spoken the word, we should rest in
it, and wait upon it. Yet has it pleased our blessed Savior, for our further
instruction and comfort, to add to his comfortable assertion a pithy reason.

Every one has his (...), either sound or seeming reason for his actions and
opinions, Etiam si cum ratio; ne insaniat, he will rather show himself
senseless, then seem unreasonable. Thus he that cast his money into the Sea,
did it, because they were malae cupiditates; of whom one said well, Ego dubito,
Lactan. lib. 3. ca. 13.
vtrumne sanus an demens fuerit, I doubt whether the man were mad or in his
right wits, for the evil was not in the money, but the mind of the possessor.
The Epicure has his (...), of voluptuousness, 1. Cor. 15.32.
Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye; whereas his inference
should have been that of Esaiah to Hezekiah, Esa. 38.7.
Set thine house in an order, for thou must dye. Adam after his fall, had his
(...) of hypocrisy, Genesis 3.10.
I heard thy voice in the Garden (says he) therefore I was afraid. He might
as well have complained of the light, because he had sore eyes; for the fear
that shaked Adam like a fever, was from within him, namely his sinful
condition.

The libertine has his (...) of security; Romans 6.15.
We may sin, because we are not under the Law, but under Grace. But Saint
Paul has taught us a better consequent in the second to Titus. Tit. 2.11.
The grace of God, which brings salvation unto all men, teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to have our conversation soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world. Our disputer too, has his
presumptuous (...), Disput. page 7. Lactan. lib. 2. cap. 12.
We may not kneel when we receive the Sacrament, for that gesture would argue
an inferiority on our parts to Christ. May not I say of him in Lactantius
words, Hic profecte rationem non asserit, sed euertit: This man is no
supporter, but a supplanter of reason. For surely his reason is nearer to
blasphemy against Christ, then we are in equality to Christ. Thus humane
reasons are, many times, like the Commets, not fixed in any orb of truth; and
like pictures, which a far off seem very fair, but at hand are very course.
But our Saviors reasons are like himself, sound, divine, heavenly.

The second part: The advancement of the Peacemakers.
AND such is the weighty reason here used, The Peacemakers are blessed, for
they are the children of God, And this indeed is a great advancement. Stromat.
lib. 2.
For as Clemens Alexandrinus, concurring with Plato, says, It is vera
beatitudo, true blessedness to be like God, which is the case of all Gods
children, who have that image restamped upon them, which was defaced in Adam.

When Esau found that his brother had prevented him, and got the blessing from
him, he wept hitterly, and said, Genesis 27.38.
Have thou but one blessing? Bless me, even me also my father: but the aged
and indulgent father, who would gladly have heaped innumerable blessings upon
his best affected son, had already conferred upon Jacob the spiritual
blessing not to be revoked. And therefore albeit he had a temporal blessing
for him, The fatness of the Earth, Ver. 39,
and the dew of Heaven: yet the same, being no way comparable to the
spiritual, he will not vouchsafe it the name of a blessing. But behold, we
have here, not the blessing of Esau, but of Jacob; not a temporal and earthly,
but a spiritual and heavenly, yea, that which as far exceedes all earthly
blessings, as the heavens are above the earth. And this only the God of heaven
dispenses.

Dan. 2.48.
Nebuchadnezzar may make Daniel a great man, give him many and great gifts, and
make him governor over the whole province of Babel; Genesis 41.42.43
Daniel the second. Pharaoh may set Joseph over all the land of Egypt, put his
ring upon his hand, array him in garments of fine linen, put a golden chain
about his neck, set him upon his second Chariot, and cause the people to bow
unto him, Gen 41. Ahashuerosh may cloth Mordecai in royal apparel, Hest. 6.8.
set the crown royal upon his head, and cause him to ride on his own horse
through the streets of the City, Hester 6: Hest. 6.11.
Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the kings of the earth will honor. But
to make us the children of God, to give us heaven for our inheritance, to
advance us to the Throne with Christ, and to inuest us with the crown of
glory, it is only in his power who is the King of Kings: and this indeed is
the transcendent advancement. If it was esteemed a great favor, that Christ
called his disciples friends: Ioh. 15.15.
how great is this honor, that God vouchsafes to call us his sons, his
children?

God has diverse sons, he has a son aeterna generatione, By eternal
generation.
his only begotten Son Christ Jesus, John 1. He has sons potenti
creatione, By creation.
for so the Angels are called Job. 1. Dignitatis participatione, By partaking
his dignity.
for so kings are styled Psalm. 82. Publica professione, By public profession.
For so the sons of Sheth are entitled, Genesis 6. Gratiosa adoptione, By
adoption.
For so all the faithful are called in sundry places of Scripture. It is true
(as Saint Austin says) Nemo in filijs Dei similis filio Dei: Aug. in Psalm. 88
Amongst all the sons of God, Heb. 1.3.
none is like the only begotten Son, who is the brightness of the glory,
and the engraven form of his person; Yet is this our sonneship by adoption,
exceeding admirable and comfortable.

It is admirable in diverse respects, First it is not forth of any desert, which
amongst men is the ordinary ground of Adoption, as Saint Austin says, Aug. in
Ioh. tract. 2.
Homines voluntate faciunt quod natura non potuerunt. Men's wills supply where
nature fayles; for having no children of their own, they adopt some others;
Quoniam sinistra fortuna mihi filios eripuit. Sueton.
So did Augustus Caesar Tiberius, Pharaohs daughter Moses, Mordecai Hester; and
many others, whom divine and humane stories do mention. But there was no such
necessary ground of our adoption. For albeit we wanted a Father, yet God
wanted no sons, no children. He had the elect Angels upon whom he might have
conferred his favors; he had his only begotten son, Colos. 1.13.
the son of his love, concerning whom he has more then once proclaimed from
heaven, Mat. 3.17. Mat. 17.5.
This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. So that I may say in
Saint Bernards words, Profecto haec est indulgentia non indigentia: Surely this
proceeded forth of Gods indulgence, not indigence; It was not any defect in
God, that caused him to adopt us his children.

Secondly our adoption is yet more admirable, in that it is founded in Christ.
For we were predestined to the adoption of children by Christ Jesus. Ephesians.
1.5.
And albeit the heavenly inheritance did anciently belong to us, as being
prepared for us from the foundation of the world; Mat. 25.34.
Yet, as Esau sold his birthright, which the law of nature had cast upon him,
so we in Adams atayndor, did forfeit our inheritance, which God had prepared
for us: But when the fullness of time came, God sent his Son that he might
redeem us, and we might receive the adoption of sons. Gal. 4.5.

In such a case as this, men cannot brook riualitie, or copartnership, no more
then the world can endure two Suns: Yet Christ Jesus, who was the only Son
of God, Qui vnicus natus est vnus manner noluit. Aug. in Ioh. trac. 2.
would not remain so; here was mira dignatio, a wonderful favor. Yea, he
that was the Son of God, became the son of man, Aug. in Psalm. 53
that we the sons of men, might become the sons of God; here was mira
mutatio, a wonderful change. Yea, that which was yet more strange, Aug. de
verb. Dom. Sermon. 27.
Emit sibi fratres sanguine suo, as the same father says; It pleased him to
purchase brethren, and that at no less a price then his precious blood. So,
that which might in all likelihood have been a powerful bar, became an
effectual bond of our adoption.

Thirdly, this our adoption was yet more admirable, in respect of our
vncapablenesse of this favor, this honor. For although adoption be gratiosa
admissio ad participandam haereditatem, even a free and gracious admittance to
the participation of an inheritance, as the Schole-man says: Yet commonly,
Aquinas. 3 ae. q. 23.
men in this act have an eye to some worth in the person whom they adopt. But
as David said to Saul, 1. Sam. 18.18.
Who am I, and what is my fathers house, that I should be son in law to the
King? So may I say, who were we, and what were our merits, that God should
vouchsafe to take us for his children? We might confess ingenuously with the
prodigal child, Luke 15.19.
We are not worthy to be called thy sons; and supplycate humbly with him,
make us as one of thy hired servants, vouchsafe us even the least measure of
thy favor, and it is more then we can expect, then we can deserve, To see
this honor done by some great Monarch to a poor beggar, must needs be
wonderful in the eyes of the beholders; yet that comes exceedingly too short
in proportion and comparison of our adoption by almighty God. For what
proportion, what comparison between heaven and earth, God and man? Yea, if our
condition had been base and ignoble only, and not sinful also, it had been
less strange: But we, being by birth and conception wretched sinners, Psalm.
51.5. Romans 5.10.
enemies to God, and by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
to make us the children of God, is an unspeakable favor, and deserves that
(...) in the fifth to the Romans, Romans 5.8.
God sets forth his love. Sarah spoke eagerly and angerly concerning Ishmael,
Genesis 21.10.
This son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with my son. And might not
God have said as roundly and resolutely concerning us, These bondslaues of
sin and Satan shall not be heirs with my Son? But such is the goodness of
our gracious God, that he deals with us like the father of the Prodigal
child, of whom Saint Ambrose Ambros. in Luke 15.
says, Filius timet conuitium, pater adornat conuiuium. The son fears a
sharp check, but the father prouides a dainty feast. For he, not only
pardons our indignities, Psalm. 103.3.4.
but crowns us with mercy and loving kindness.

Fourthly, this our adoption is admirable in the latitude of advancement; as
Saint Paul presses it most soundly and sweetly in the eight to the Romans;
Romans 8.17.
If we be children, we are also heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Jesus Christ. Chrysostom. in Romans Hom. 14.
Here Chrysostom observes three notable passages of honor, every one arising
by degrees above another. For first, where as one may be a child and yet not
be an heir, we are not only children but heirs also. Secondly, we are not
heirs to any mortal man, though never so potent, but heirs to the immortal
and omnipotent God. Thirdly, we are not basely associated in this our
inheritance, we are co-heyres annexed to Jesus Christ, then which there can be
no greater honor. For when our Savior will propose the greatest advancement
that may be, to them who have done worthily in the spiritual warfare, Revel.
3.21.
it is this, To him that overcomes will I give to sit with me on my Throne,
as I have overcome and sit with my father on his Throne.

In regard therefore of the advancement which attends our adoption, Psalm. 1.12.
well might Saint John say, Dedit eis potestatem, as the vulgar latin has it,
To them he gave power to be made the sons of God: Greg. super Ezech. hom. 6.
and Gregory thereupon, Quid hac potestate altius? Quid hac altitudine
sublimus? Well might he call it (...), a prerogative or dignity, Iansen Conc.
Cap. 1.
as Iansenus well interprets the word: For it is the greatest prerogative that
heaven and earth do yield. If it were the highest ambition of that great
conqueror to be esteemed Iouis filius, Alexander, the son of Jupiter.
what an honor is it to be called the children of Jehovah, the great God of
heaven and earth? Well might that Apostle say, 1. Ioh. 3.1.
Behold what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the sons of God. Surely this great advancement deserves an Ecce to
usher it for demonstration, Behold; and a Qualem charitatem to follow it for
admiration, What manner of love the father has bestowed upon us. Ioh. 3.16.
For here is that Sic Deus dilexit mundum: So God loved the world; and this Sic
is like that Sicut in the Lamentations of Jeremy, Lamen. 1.12.
it cannot be paralleld. Psalm. 8.4.
What is man, O Lord, that thou art so mindful of him? What are the sons of
men that thou should so visit them, so honor them.

Now as this advancement is very admirable, so is it very comfortable: yea,
here is a confluence of all comforts belonging to it. It were a tedious, nay,
an impossible task to recount them all; I will mention a few, yet so, that by
a cluster or two of Grapes, Numb. 13.24.
you may judge of the riches of Canaan. Hence it is, that the children of God
are freed from the spirit of bondage, Romans 8.15.
and receive the spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba father; Mat. 7.
they have both access and audience before the throne of grace. Hence it is
that they enjoy the especial providence of almighty God; Mat. 6.
for their heavenly father cares for them. Fathers lay up for their children,
2 Cor. 12.14.
says Paul, and how marvelous (says David) is the goodness which the Lord
has laid up for his children, Psalm. 31.19.
even before the sons of men? And no marvel, Romans 8.32.
for he that spared not his own son, but gave him for us all to death, how
should he not with him give us all things that are good? Are the children of
God in want? the Lord is ready to relieve them; rather then they shall lack,
the stony rock shall yield them water, Number. 19.11.
the heavens shall reign down Quails and Manna in abundance. Exodus 16.13.
The poor Widow shall relieve Elias, 1 Reg. cap. 17. and 19.
the Angel from heaven shall furnish him, and the ravenous Ravens shall feed
him: Thus all the creatures shall be serviceable to the children of God, and
the earth, the air, the heavens shall be storehouses for them. Are they in
danger or distress? Psalm. 34.7.
the Angels become their guard, and do pitch their tents about them. Are they
not all ministering spirits to the children of God, Heb. 1.14.
that are heirs of salvation? Are they sick? The Lord will make their bed in
their sickness. Psalm. 41.3.
Are they alone? the father will come and dwell with them. John 14.23.
Are they in sorrow and heaviness? behold, their heavenly Father is the father
of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3.
and the God of all consolation. Have they a journey, a progress to undertake?
the Lord will be their fidus Achates, as he was to Jacob in his journey to
Mesopotamia, Genesis 28.15.
he will be with them whither soever they go. But why go I about to number
those comforts that are numberless? Or why do I confine my speech to the
things of this life? Neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter
into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepared for his children in
the life to come. There is that kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28.
(...). Mat. 25.34. Heb. 11.10.
which is the ancient inheritance. There is that City whose builder and founder
is God, that glorious City which the Angel measured with a golden reed, Revel.
21.15.
into which they are infranchised. There is that blessed society, innumerable
Angels, Heb. 12.22.
the spirits of just and holy men, and Jesus Christ the mediator of the new
covenant, to whom they are joined.

There are those (...), 1 Pet. 5.4.
those thrones and crowns of glory, that shall never fade. Yea, there the
sons of God shall shine like the Sun in the kingdom of their father. In a
word, Mat. 13.43.
from this Adoption it is, that the children of God have an interest in all the
comforts, and all the creatures that heaven and earth do yield; according to
Saint Paul's epiphoneme, whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephus, or the
world, or life, or death, 1 Cor. 3.23.
or things present or things to come, they are all yours, because you are
Christ's and Christ is Gods.

Behold here the admirable and comfortable advancement of Gods children: And
therein behold the blessed condition of the Peacemaker; who is so estranged
from the world; that he does not in some degree desire advancement? and who is
so void of judgment, that he does not prefer this honor before the
greatest advancement in the world? Aug. in Psa. 84.
Habetis patrem, habetis patriam, habetis patrimonium, says Saint Austin. If
you be the sons of peace, you are the children of God, you have a loving
father, a rich inheritance, a goodly patrimony.

When the Apostle Peter speaks of this, he breaks forth into this vehement
acclamation, Blessed be God, 1 Pet. 1.3.
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us again, to an
inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, but is reserved
for us in the heavens.

Give me leave now to make some Application of what I have delivered, and so I
will finish this maine point. And first, I hope that this discourse has not
been heard of you without comfort. We hold it a great cause of joy to be the
children of Nobles, and to be admitted into the favor of Princes, and surely
they are great temporal blessings, that men may lawfully rejoice in. But let
me say unto you in our Saviors words, Rejoice not in this, Luke 10.20.
but rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven: let it be your
joy that you are the children of God, and in favor with the King of Kings, as
the Apostle says, Rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 4.4.
and again I say rejoice.

Again, are we the children of God? far be it from us to undervalue the
glorious inheritance of the Saints of God in life. Far be it from us to
dis-esteeme it, like that carnal Cardinal, Cardinal of Bourbon.
who said he would not give his part in Paris for his part in Paradise. Let us
not be like profane Esau, who for the satisfying of his appetite lost his
birthright. Heb. 12.16.
But rather let us say resolutely, with Naboth, 1 Reg. 21.3.
God forbid that I should make away the inheritance of my fathers. So, God
forbid, that for all the vain and transitory profits and pleasures upon earth,
we should deprive our selves of those rivers of pleasures, which the Saints of
God do enjoy in heaven. Bernard says truly of the best things of this
present life, possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant. The
possession of them burdens us, the love of them defiles us, and the loss of
them vexes us: And the time will come, when either the day of death, or the day
of judgment shall swallow them all up, as the Ocean does the rivers. For the
glory of this world passes away like a shadow. 1 Cor. 7.31.


Again, are we the children of God? then let us endeavor that our carriage
and comportment may answer this dignity. It becomes not the children of Nobles
to be conversant in base actions. And how unfit is it for the children of God
to become like the Indian drudges? to be taken up with the corruptions of this
evil world, and to have their affections in caeno, when they should be in
caelo? Our Savior has taught us better in the fifth of Matthew, Let your light
so shine before men, Mat. 5.16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven.

To conclude, Let us, as the Apostle Peter exhorts, 2 Peter 1.10. Romans 8.16.
study to make our election sure by good works; Let us get the evidence of our
adoption sealed up to our souls and consciences by the spirit of God. Then let
the earth totter, and her pillars tremble under her; let the sea roar even to
astonishment; let the heavens burn to dissolution, and the elements with
vehement heat be consumed, this our adoption shall be our comfort on earth,
and our crown in heaven for ever more.

The third part: The appropriation of this advancement.
But what, is this Adoption tied only to the ornament of Peace? Surely no: Gal
3.26.
For Saint Paul says, You are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.
And Saint Austin in largeth the means, Per gratia^, per fidem, per
sacramentum, per sanguinem Christi. De verb. Dom. ser. 63.
saying, We are the sons of God by grace, by faith, by the Sacrament, by the
blood of Christ. Every faithful Christian is made one with Christ, whereby he
becomes the child of God; He has the image of God stamped upon him. And as
our natural birth makes us the children of our earthly parents: so our
supernatural and new birth makes us the children of our heavenly father.

May not I then say of the Peacemaker, as Saint Paul of the Jews? What is
then the preferment of the Jew? So, Romans 3.1.
what is the advantage and advancement of the Peacemaker? Yes, and answer with
him in the same place: much every way. Though Iesse had eight sons, yet was
David only the Lords darling: Though Christ had twelve Disciples, yet was John
the Disciple whom Jesus loved: Though all Jacobs children were dear unto him,
yet was Bemamin the son of his right hand: So may I say, that howsoever all the
faithful are the children of God, and consequently blessed, yet the
Peacemakers have that honor in a more especial kind, because they do in a
more lively manner resemble almighty God, in that which is most excellent. For
as amongst the divine attributes, some of them are quoad nos, more excellent
then others, as namely those of mercy and peace, which are the sanctuary to a
distressed sinner; so all those, who do in a more especial manner come
nearest to God in the same, are (...) by a kind of eminency called the
children of God: For as Bernard says, Deus, Deus pacis, Bern.
ergo pacifici filij Dei iure optimo vocantur. God is the God of peace, and
therefore those who are Peacemakers, are the children of God by especial
right. Though the body of man consist of diverse humors, yet the denomination
of the constitution is from that which is most predominate: So, though the
children of God be endued with many virtues, yet are they denominated from that
which is most excellent, and that is Peace. For there is an emphasis in the
word (...), they. 2 Samuel 23.
They are like David's worthies amongst his soldiers, who excelled them in
prowes; 1 Samuel 10.23.
and like Saul amongst the Israelites, higher then the rest by the head. Though
all Judea be the Lords, yet the Lord loves the gates of Sion more then all the
dwellings of Jacob. Psalm. 87.2:
So, albeit he has many children, yet his sons of Peace are dearest to him.
And as Jacob bequeathing to every of his sons a blessing, yet bestowed one
portion upon Joseph above his brethren: Genesis 48.22.
Even so the God of Jacob, though he have blessings for all his children, yet
those that are Peacemakers are blessed above others. As one Star excels
another in glory, so do the sons of Peace exceed all that shine in the
firmament of the Chuch: And hereafter when others shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament, they shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.

Again, to this question: Is our Adoption tied only to this ornament of
Peace? I may answer further. Albeit it is not only tied to that, yet is it so
tied to that, that wheresoever the one is wanting, the other cannot be enjoyed.
A man cannot be the child of God, quantum vis polleat virtutibus, Gregor.
pastor. part. 3. admon. 23.
though he were qualified with many other virtues, except he be of a peaceable
disposition: he that is not filius pacis, the son of peace, Non per venitur
ad vocabulum beati, nisi per nomen pacifici. Aug. de temp. 169.
must needs be filius mortis, filius maledictionis, the son of death and
malediction. Where there is an emptiness of peace, there is a barrenness of
grace, and the virtues, how specious soever they be, are but commets: But
wheresoever peace is, there are the children of God, yea they shall be called
the children of God: And so I come to the fourth and last point of this
Advancement, the promulgation or publication of it.

The fourth part: The promulgation of this advancement.
ANd here a doubt meets us, which may seem to eclipse all the former
comforts. For as one says, multa videntur and non sunt* so, multa vocantur and
non sunt: As many things seem which are not, so many are called that are not,
as Ireneus said to Marcus the Gnosticke, Iren. li. 1. ca. 10.
Vocem solum habes, virtutem vero ipsius ignoras: Thou have the name, but thou
know not the virtue of it. Thus the Church of Sardis, in the third of the
Revelation, Revel 3.1^
had a name that she lived, when she was dead. And the Church of Laodicea, in
the same Chapter, Verse. 17.
said she was rich and wanted nothing, whereas she was poor, and miserable,
and naked. And did not the Jews ordinary ostentatio^ carry these titles before
it, The seed of Abraham, the Temple of the Lord? yes, and that without any
just cause, God knows: For they had degenerated from Abraham, and polluted the
Temple. Thus the Romanists at this day, do ingrosse to themselves the names of
Catholics, and wheresoever they meet with the name of the Church, they are
ready, Aelian. var. hist.
like frantic Thrasyllus, to arrest it for their own.

But, qui vocantur and non sunt, Aug. in 1. Epi. Ioh. tract. 4.
quid illis prodest nomen, vbires non est, says Saint Austin? What good shall
the name do them, when that which the name imports, is wanting to them? surely
none at all. What benefit was it to the impure Nouations, that forth of their
swelling pride, they took to themselves the name of Puritans, as Eusebius
writes? Eusebius. hist. eccle. lib. 6. cap. 42.
And what avails it some to arrogate to themselves the names of brethren, the
people of God, and the like, except we might see them humble, and the children
of peace? Antiochus who breathed out nothing but tyranny and cruelty against
the Church of God, was honored with that title Epiphanes, The illustrious.
whereas he better deserved, and so was called by some, Antiochus Epinianes,
rathet Antiochus the furious then the famous: so was Absolon called his Fathers
peace; whereas he was indeed his Fathers grief and disgrace. And does not the
Bishop of Rome style himself servus seruorum Dei, whilst he endeauours to be
Dominus dominantium? Surely that humble title, and his unlimited power agree as
ill together, Plutar. in vita Demost.
as Demosthenes short breath and long periods. The changing of their names at
their entering into the Popedom, Vt si homo ante malefacius fuerit, Bonifacius
appelletur, si rusticus Vrbanus, si improbus Innocentius, etc. Pol. Virgil. de
invent. lib. 4. ca. 10
intended by them for ornament, is justly censured as ridiculous, by Polidore
Virgil. For if there be mutatio nominis, non hominis, a change of the name, but
not of the man (only there is a Wolf cased in a Lambs skin) nothing can be
more idle or ridiculous. Glorious titles without ground are mere vanities;
like the Apothecaries gallypots, quorum tituli remedia habent pyxides venenum,
Lactant.
which having without the name of some excellent preservative, within are
either empty, or hold some deadly aconite.

If Nomen be not rei notamen (as Saint Austin deriues the word; Aug. de Genesis ad
liter cap. 6.
) If we be called the children of God, and be not so, what have we gained
thereby? surely we do only embrace a shadow.

All this is true, and yet behold here is not the least glimpse or spark of
comfort taken from the Peacemakers. For this phrase, they shall be called,
notes here, not a mere and bare denomination, but a demonstration of a true
denomination; the words import more then simply to be: they import thus much,
that is, the Peacemakers shall not only be the children of God, to their
exceeding comfort: but they shall also be published so to be, to their endless
honor.

Now for the manifestation hereof, I will parallel these words with other
passages of Scripture where the same Phrase is thus used. And I will only
pitch upon one chapter, that is, the first of Luke. In the 76. verse it is said
of John Baptist, that he should be called the Prophet of the most high. And was
he not so? Yes even by the attestation of our Savior Christ he was a Prophet,
Mat. 11.9.
and more then a Prophet. Again the Virgin Mary in the 48. verse says, From
henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. And that this is not a bare
title conferred upon her, the woman's acclamation can witness in the eleauenth
of Luke: Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the Pappes which thou have sucked. Yea
she shall be honored as the most blessed amongst women to the end of the
world. Again in the 35. verse the Angel Gabriel says, that Christ shall be
called the Son of God. And that Christ was so, Mat. 16.16.
Peter confessed worthily in the time of his life; the Centurion witnessed
notably at the time of his death: Mat. 26.54.
And Saint Paul says, Romans 1.4.
that by his resurrection he was mightily declared to be the Son of God. Thus
as John Baptist was called a Prophet, the Virgin Mary was called blessed, and
Christ was called the Son of God, that is, they not only were so, but were
acknowledged and published so to be: So shall the Peacemakers be called the
children of God. For he that will not suffer a hair to fall from the head of
his servants without his divine providence, will not suffer their graces and
endowments to vanish and perish in silence. Albeit they may be compassed about
for a time with the clouds of obscurity, yet shall their worth break forth
like the light, Psalm. 37.6.
and be published to the world with a cloud of witnesses. Heb. 12.1.
Thus did the divine providence dispose most fitly of our Sauiors passion; both
for the Time, Place, and manner of his Death. For the Time and Place, The
Passover.
It was at the great festiuitie held at Jerusalem, which yielded a confluence
of many nations to that City, which was then the only Metropolis of Religion
through the world: And for the manner of it likewise: For he was lifted up, Ioh.
3.14.
like the brazen Serpent, upon a high cross upon a conspicuous Mountain, In
Praefatione ad librum de septem verbis.
and that with all his parts stretched out severally, as Bellarmine has lately
and largely showed. The inscription also was in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
that by the Cross, the Time, the Place, the Nations and Languages, the happy
news of our redemption, by the death and passion of Jesus Christ, might be
dispearsed, as it were by many rivers, throughout the world. Our Saviors
malicious adversaries sought to prevent his resurrection; Mat. 27.63.66.
by rolling a stone to the mouth of the Sepulcher, by setting a watch over the
stone, and a seal over the watch; And when they found their endeavors therein
to be frustrate, they sought by suborning and hiring the soldiers, to
suppress the notice thereof. But their subordinat free concealment, became an
especial means of publication of his glorious triumph over death. Mat. 28.15.


Jobs admirable patience, in his vnparelled afflictions, could not be confined
to his house, though he was left alone and desolate, but shall be published to
all posterities; and the fame thereof shall out-last the vast Pyramides of
Egypt: the names of their builders are long since buried in oblivion (a just
guerdon for such a work of vanity) but there shall always be some, Plin. lib.
26
that shall to his honor, remember the patience of Job. Iam. 5.11.
Moses might entreat the Lord secretly, in that passionate and compassionate
speech, aut dimitte hanc noxam, Exodus 32.32.
Lord either pardon this sin, or else blot me out of the book that thou
have written. But his zeal to Gods glory, and love to his people shall be
preached on the house top, and be carried upon the wings of fame from one
generation to another. As our Savior said of the woman that poured the costly
ointment upon his head. Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole
world, Mat. 26.13.
this also which she has done, shall be spoken of, for a memorial of her. As
the odor of the ointment filled the house; Ioh. 12.3. Eccles. 7.3.
so shall the odor of her fame, like a good ointment, fill the house of the
world, even till the worlds end.

Psalm. 112.6.
Lo thus, in memoria aeterna erit iustus, the Peacemakers shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, and be called the children of God. Neither shall they
need to be the Trumpetors of their own merits and actions, it shall be done
abundantly by others.

The Sons of Peace shall call them so, Mat. 11.19.
For Wisdom shall be justified of her children. Yea, which is strange, not
only the Sons of Peace, but even the Sons of perdition shall call them so.
Dearly beloved (says Saint John) Now are we the Sons of God, 1 Ioh. 3.1.2
though the world know us not: Intimating, that there will be a time, when this
faex mundi, the wicked of the world shall be forced to acknowledge the blessed
condition of Gods children. When they shall take up that doleful complaint:
This is the man whom we sometimes had in derision; Sap 5.4.
and accounted his life madness, and his death without honor: but now is he
numbered amongst the children of God, and his Lot amongst the Saints. And thus
we see in the history of the Evangelists, that our Saviors innocence, piety,
charity was acknowledged and published by Heaven and Earth, God and Men,
Strangers and Acquaintance, Friends and Foes, Angels and Devils, and if they
should have held their peace, the stones in the street would have proclaimed
it. Lastly, Luke 19.40.
Christ Jesus the Prince of Peace shall call them so. When he conuersed with
men in the days of his infirmity, he was not ashamed to call them brethren:
Nor yet in his glorified estate, Heb. 2.11.
after his resurrection; when he sent that comfortable message by the devout
woman to his Disciples. Ioh. 20.17.
Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father and your Father,
to my God and your God; Words as full of comfort, as the Ocean of waters. My
brethren, a loving appellation; my Father and your Father, a blessed union in a
happy correlation; I ascend, and to what end, Ioh. 14.2.
but to prepare them Mansions in the heavenly habitation? But behold, the
consummation of all consolation shall be at the end of the world, when the
Son of God, embracing the sons of Peace in the arms of his mercy, shall say
in the presence and audience of men and Angels, Come ye blessed of my father,
Mat. 25.34.
possess the inheritance of the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations
of the world.

By this time, I hope you see that the Peacemakers are blessed; For all these
streams of comfort, that I have discovered, do fall into the Ocean of this
blessedness, and this blessedness is the crown of the Peacemaker. I will
contract all my building into a little model, and so conclude. The
Peacemakers (you see) are blessed, and they are blessed in this great
advancement, They are the children of God; adopted, not forth of any defect,
but forth of his bounty and mercy they are adopted by Jesus Christ, they are
adopted from a base and wretched condition, they are adopted to a glorious
inheritance in heaven. These sons of Peace are singled out in a most
especial manner. They are like the Sun in the firmament the eye in the Head,
and the heart in the Body, the noblest and worthiest of all the children of
God, And this their worth shall be published to the world. It shall be
published by the sons of Peace, by the sons of perdition, by the Son of God
himself. Thus, as the Laurel was to the Roman Emperors both Munimentum and
Ornamentum, a Defense against danger, and an Ornament of honor: So shall this
Oliua Pacis be to the children of God. Quanta est huius pacis retributio (says
S. Austin, August. de ^emp Ser. 169.
) haereditatem possidere cum Christo, substantiam patris habere cum filio,
caelesti regno participare cum Domino. And what can your hearts desire more
then this? To be the children of God, and the best affected of his children,
heirs of Grace and Glory, co-heyres annexed with Jesus Christ, partakers of
that unspeakable happiness which shall be honorably published on earth, and
enjoyed eternally in the heavens? Therefore to conclude, let me say to you
with Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Psalm. 34.
Quaerite Pacem, vt inueniatis premiu^, Seek Peace and follow after it, that
you may have the reward of Peacemakers; Psalm. 34. Chrysostom. ibid.
Pulsate ianuam Pacis, knock at the gate of Peace, till it be opened to you. So
shall the same be to you a door and passage into Heaven; which mercy the God
of Peace and Mercy grant us, for his Son our Savior Christ's sake, to whom
with the Holy Ghost, three persons and one immortal God, be ascribed all
Honor, and Glory, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for ever more Amen.

FINIS.
THE SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST PLAINLY described, By The Authority of
Scriptures. The Testimony of Fathers. The consent of Schoolmen.
In a Sermon Preached at PAVLS Cross, by JOHN DENISON Doctor of Divinity, and
one of his Majesty's Chapleynes.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN KING, Lord Bishop of LONDON.
Right Reverend and Honorable:
THESE two Sermons being thought a second time worthy of the Press, I make
bold to present to your Lordship. They were both Preached in your charges; the
one in that eminent place where your Lordship has Episcopal jurisdiction; At
Paul's cross
the other in that famous University, At Oxford.
where then you were a worthy Governor. The one has passed hitherto under
your patronage; and the other, being an Orphan, desires it. It obtained good
acceptance with that Noble Lord, The Lord Elsmere, Lord Chancellor of England.
who loved your Lordship dearly, and to whom my self was exceedingly bound.
In regard whereof, I hope it shall find the more favorable entertainment at
your Lordships hands. The God of heaven, who has honored you with many
gracious endowments, and made you an excellent ornament of our Church, continue
his favors, and enlarge his blessings to you, for the Churches good, and your
own eternal comfort.

Your Lordships humbly devoted, JOHN DENISON.

To the Reader.
IT fares with me (Christian Reader) as with those Physicians, who having
employed their study for the health of their Patients, do afterward divulge
their experiments for the good of others. For having, at the request of
certain friends prepared these ingrediences, and found them comfortable to
their tender souls, I have been moved to publish the same, both for the
further comfort of them, and benefit of others. And the rather have I been
hereunto induced, (...). Hippoc Aphor.
because (to use the Physicians words) here is a dangerous experiment, and
difficult judgment, the disease being the most dangerous and deadly of all
diseases incident to any mortal creature, and the physic for cure,
description, or prevention very rare to be had in our vulgar tongue; None to my
knowledge having of purpose handled it, though I have known some distressed
souls, have greatly needed it, and many very Christianly affected have much
desired it. And so commending these my Meditations to thy courteous acceptance,
and my self to thy Christian prayers, I commend thee to the grace of God in
Christ Jesus.

Thine in the Lord, I. D.

A SERMON: Wherein the Sin against the Holy Ghost is plainly described.
HEB. 10.26.27. For if we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge
of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful
looking for of judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the adversaries.


IT is the part of every Christian at his entrance into the profession of
Christianity, (Right Honorable, right Worshipful, and well-beloved in Christ
Jesus) to consider our Saviors Caveat to the Disciples, He that indureth to
the end shall be Mat. 10.22.
saved. To what purpose is it that the Seafaring man sails prosperously,
ariues safely, and obtaines a rich prize, if he sink or suffer shipwreck in
his return? This life is a seafaring life; to what purpose is it that a
Christian be farely embarked for heaven, if afterward he suffer shipwreck of
his holy Faith? What avails it the Warrior to march hotly with Iehu, fight
manfully with Jonathan, if he turn his back with Ephraim before the end of
the battle? This life is a warfare, what can it avail us to encounter
Satan, if we suffer him to foil and conquer us? For he only that fights the
good fight, finisheth his course, and keeps the faith, can expect the crown
of 2 Timothy 4.7.
righteousness.

This is the thing whereof Saint Paul does in this place admonish the Hebrews,
namely, that they forsake not the fellowship they have among Verse 25.
themselves. Wherein, that he may the better prevail, he infers these words
of my Text as a pithy reason, and powerful ingredience, to make the medicine
of his admonition to work the more effectually. If the Soldier shall fly
forth of the field, revolt from his Captain, forsake his colors, run from
his company, and turn to the enemy, he disgraceth his military profession,
disableth himself for the trophies of honor, and meriteth condign
punishment. Behold, we are the Lords Soldiers, the Church is our field, Christ
Jesus our Captain, the word and Sacraments our colors, the communion of
Saints our company; he that shall fly forth of this field, revolt from this
Captain, forsake these colors, run from this company, and be found fighting
under Satan's conduct, dishonors his Christian profession, depriueth
himself of the crown of glory, and incurreth the danger of Gods heavy
judgment. For if we sin willingly, after we have received the knowledge of
the truth. That is, if we have given our names to Christ, served in his camp,
taken pay in his wars, and yet play the carnal Apostataes with 2 Timothy 4 9.
Demas, the heretical with 2 Timothy 2.17.
Hymeneus and Philetus, the scornful with Socrat. and Theodoret.
Julian the Emperor, the spightfull with 2 Timothy 4.14.
Alexander the Copper-smith, there remains small hope of receiving comfort by
Christ's eternal sacrifice, but rather extreme terror in the expectation of
his dreadful sentence; small probability of being cleansed in his precious
blood, but rather a sore possibility of being devoured by a violent fire:
Peccata sunt animae vulnera, sins are the souls wounds, according to the
sacred Scriptures, and the ancient Fathers phrase of speech. And as the wounds
of the body do differ, some being dangerous, some more mortal, some
altogether incurable; so fares it with the wounds of the soul, some are cured
more easily, as the Maid was raised from death by Christ, Mark. 9. Some with
less facility, like the Widows Son, Luke 7. Some yet with greater
difficulty, like Lazarus, John 11. The cure will cost many a groan, and many
a sigh: some are altogether incurable, the sin cleaving to the sinner, like
the Leprosy of Gehazi for 2 Kin. 5.27.
ever. Lo such a wound and such a sin we have in hand at this present, even
the sin against the holy Ghost. For the subject of this Scripture is a deadly
wound, even a wound, and death; a wound going before, and death following after
it.

The wound is expressed in these words, For if we sin willingly, after we
have received the knowledge of the truth.

The death and danger in these words, There remains no more sacrifice for
sin, but a fearful looking for of judgment, and a violent fire which shall
devour the adversaries.

Behold, here is the most heinous sin of all sins, and the most grievous
judgment of all judgments, here is a fearful transgression, and a doleful
affliction, in the one behold the tower of Babel, in the other the valley of
Benhinnom, in the one the extremest degree of iniquity, in the other the
uttermost measure of misery; in the one a sinners execrable condition in this
life, in the other his lamentable confusion in the life to come. But now I
purpose God willing only to speak of the wound; In the handling whereof, I
intend to take these courses.

1. I will open it. 2. I will search it. 3. I will bind it up again by
Application.
In the opening of the wound, I find it in the general to be an Apostasy
from the Gospel. For it is a forsaking the communion we have among our selves.
So says the Apostle, ver. 25. And in the particular view thereof, I note four
bad humors which feed it; for mali humores sunt praui mores, as Bernard Bern.
super Cant. ser. 36.
says.

Verse. 26
The first is an advised sinfulness, After we have received the knowledge of
the truth. The second, a resolute wilfulness, If we sin willingly.
Verse. 29
The third is obstinate malice, For here is an adversary that despights the
spirit of grace. The fourth is a general corruption of Religion, For it is a
treading underfoot the Son of God, and counting the blood of the Testament
as an unholy thing: and both these points are expressed in the 29. Verse.


So that in a word I find, and consequently do define this sin to be A
Witting Willing Malicious Total
Apostasy.

First, for the matter of this sin.

It is an Apostasy, either from the public profession, or private
acknowledgement of the Gospel.

For the manner of it.

It must be witting, and not of ignorance.

It must be willing, and not of co-action.

It must be malicious, and not of infirmity.

It will be total, and not some particular impiety.

In the handling of which points, let me say to you in Chris. var. loc. in
Mat. hom. 9.
Chrysostomes words, Excutite pigritiam, non est res leuis quam audituri estis,
rouse up your spirits and raise up your attention, the matter you are to hear
is of no small moment.

The first part: The opening of the WOVND.
The first bad Humor.
When almighty God had laid the foundation of the world, his first work was
fiat lux, let there be light, and this light being dispersed and confused, he
afterward placed in the Globe of the Sun, which he made vehiculum lucis: So
in the creation of man, (...).
a model of that greater world, he placed the light of understanding in the
firmament of his Soul, to guide him in the way of holiness, and to bring him
to the place of eternal happiness. But Satan, whose kingdom is the kingdom
of darkness, in envy toward man, and malice to God, obscured that light
with the clouds of error, that so he might lead wretched sinners blinde-fold
to hell, like the Syrians into the midst of 2. Reg. 6.20.
Samaria. Yet God in mercy, beholding this misery into which man was cast,
gathering together (as it were) the scattered beams of knowledge, does by the
spirit of illumination unite them in the Globe of the understanding, and where
he affords this favor, the abuse thereof is very dangerous. This is that
knowledge of the truth, which is here spoken of, for it is cognitio accepta,
non acquisita, knowledge received from the illuminating spirit of God, not
acquired or obtained by the light or industry of nature. They who offend in
this kind, must be such as Saint Paul speaks of, you were once darkness, but
now you are light in the l Lord. So that Turks and infidels, who never yet
received the knowledge of the truth, cannot commit this sin. Neither is this
to be taken for some superficial conceit, swimming in the brain only; but
such a knowledge, as taking some place in the heart, has affected the same
with a certain comfort and delight therein, and brings with it a glimpse of
that glory, which is revealed in that truth, and shall be received in the
kingdom of heaven. And therefore the Apostle attributes to those who commit
this sin, not only that they be lightened, but that they have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and been made pertakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and the powers of the world to Heb. 6.4.
come. Now when a man shall find the taste of Gods word sweeter then the
honey, and the Psalm. 19.10.
honie-combe, as it was to David, and shall afterward distaste and happily
detest it, as the Israelites did Numb. 11.6.
Manna: When he shall rejoice in the meditation of eternal life, and yet
reject the consolation thereof, like the young man, who ran to our blessed
Savior, kneeled to him, and cried out, good master, what shall I do that I
may possess eternal life? yet went away like a Mark. 10.17.
flincher: When he shall have relished, and even been ravished with the
comfortable taste of the powers of the world to come, like Balaam, who
passionately wished, O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my latter
end be like Number. 23.10.
his. Yet shall, like a graceless man abandon the means, and banish the care
and cogitation thereof, what probability, nay what possibility is there that
he should be renewed by repentance? Albeit affected ignorance is very liable
to the curse of God, according to our Saviors words, Woe be to thee Corazin,
woe be to thee Mat. 11.21.
Bethsaida: yet inflicted ignorance obtaines his conniuence, as it is Act. 17.
Acts 17.30.
The time of this ignorance God regarded not. This circumstance does much
extenuate a sin, when a man may say for himself, as the Lord said of
Nineveh, there are six score thousand persons that cannot discern betwixt
their right hand and Ion. 4.11.
their left. And when a man can plead for himself with Abimelech, Lord will thou slay even the righteous Genesis 20.4.
Nation? as if he should say, had we known her to be his wife, we would
never have offered violence to him, nor villainy to her. And contrarily, it
does much aggrauate the sin, when one can admire, acknowledge and commend the
graces of God in others, yet be graceless himself. When he is like the
Athenians, who knew what was good but would not do Athenienses scire quae,
etc. Tul. de senect.
it, and like the Scribes and Pharisees who had the key of heaven, yet would
not enter therein. For as Saint James says Iam. 4.17.
, to him that knows to do well, and does it not, to him it is sin, that
is, sin with a witness, it is a sin (...) in a more eminent and
extraordinary manner then others. As Bernard says, Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 36.
Ac si diceret sumenti cibum at non digerenti perniciosum est. As meat that is
eaten and not digested, so is knowledge received and not practiced; as the one
breeds diseases in the body, so the other brings destruction to the soul.

It was Adams great perfection that made his ruin so lamentable; and the
transcendent excellency of the Angels, which made their sin so damnable, and
their fall so unrecoverable. And no marvel, for it is absolute Justice, Luke
12.47.
that the servant which knows his Masters will and does it not, should be
beaten with many stripes. Saint Paul Romans 9. and 10
speaks of the errors of the Jews his Countrymen with great compassion,
because they had the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. But our
Savior checks the wilful blindness of the Pharisees, with as great
indignation, telling them that if they were blind they should have no Ioh.
9.39.41.
sin (meaning not so heinous sin) but because they said they did see,
therefore their sin remained, that is, it stuck close by them. So that, as
Saloman says, Eccles. 1.18.
He that increases knowledge increases sorrow. So may I say, he that
increases knowledge, and does not use it, increases danger. Men had need to
consider what end they propound to their knowledge. Some says Bernard get
knowledge, Bern. sup. Cant. Ser. 36. Et turpis quaestus est.
vt vendant, that they may make merchandise of it; and that is filthy gain.
Some, vt aedificent, that they may edify others, and that is charity; Et
charitas est.
Some, vt aedificentur, that themselves may be builded up in grace, Et
prudentia est.
and that is wisdom. And indeed it is great wisdom for a man to reap to
himself the fruit of his own knowledge; and as great folly when he can teach
another and not teach himself. Romans 2.21. Therefore Salomons counsel is good
in this case, Pro. 5.15.
Drink thy water of thy Cisterne. Have thou a fountain of knowledge to
refresh others with the streams thereof, yet thy self have a thirsty soul,
and a barren life? What an absurdity is this before men, and danger in the
sight of God? O water, and refresh thine own soul, make use of the knowledge
of the truth, which thou have received, least after many gracious showers of
instruction, thy soul remaining bad and barren, thou be exposed to the curse
of God Heb. 6.8.
: It had been better for some, not to have known the way of righteousness
(as Saint Peter says) then, 2 Pet. 2.21.
after they had known it, to turn from the holy Commandments given unto
them. Had they not known, then had their Audit been more easy. For behold,
where the Lord delivers forth large talents of knowledge, there he expects
great reckonings of obedience to be brought in, not looking for the like at
their hands, toward whom he has not been such a bountiful Creditour. This
caused Peter when he taxed the people in the Temple, for betraying and denying
Christ in the presence of Pilate Acts 3.17.
, not to leave them comfortless in so heinous a crime, but to give them hope
that they should obtain remission, and have their sins put away at the time
of the refreshing, because they did it through ignorance. This also was a
staff of comfort to Saint Paul, whose cruelty toward the Saints and servants
of God was most extreme. For he was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an
oppressor, yea those outrages were prosecuted with violent fury and madness,
as himself ingenuously confesses Act 26.10.11.
. Yet these his merciless persecuting sins found mercy at Gods hands, upon
his serious repentance, as he comfortably witnesses 1. Tim. 1.13.
. In a word, this was the ground of our Saviors prayer at the time of his
passion: Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. As though he should
say: If they knew indeed that I am the Son of God, and would offer me this
indignity; the Messiah and Savior of the world, and yet would show me this
cruelty; the Lord of glory, and yet would crucify me, I would never
vouchsafe to open my mouth for them: but now, O Father, for as much as these
things have not been revealed to the eye of their understanding, nor made
evident to the view of their conscience, vouchsafe them pardon, and lay not
this sin to their charge.

The second bad Humor.
THE second bad Humor that feeds this mortal wound, is willingness; If we
sin willingly. If the Pilote be not skillful or careful, those that go by
Sea must needs sail dangerously; but if they also carry full sail in the
midst of a tempest, they cannot choose but be ouerset. Even so it fares with
us, while we flote in the sea of this present world; If our understanding
which is our Pilote, do fail us, after we have received the knowledge of the
truth, our case is dangerous: but if withal we give our wills full sail,
every blast of Satan's temptations will be ready to sink us, and this is the
Apostles word here in this place. If we sin willingly, which word implies
somewhat more then a simple and single will, and imports rather a resolute
wilfulness. So that this is not a mixed action, wherein the sinner is partly
willing, partly unwilling, but an absolute resigning of that faculty for the
performance of wicked designs. As when a man will run on desperately, and
sin even because he will sin, small or no occasion moving him thereunto:
For the less the occasion and temptation is, the greater is the transgression.
This was a further circumstance which made Adams sin so Genesis 3.2.
heinous, that having free access to all the other trees in Paradise; he must
needs taste of the forbidden fruit. As it was vile in 1 King. 21.4.
Ahab, that having many goodly possessions of his own, he must needs be
sick for Naboths vineyard; and it does much aggrauate the offense, when a
rich man shall deal deceitefully in word, in weight and measure. Thus when a
man is rather transported by his own rebellious will, then enforced by any
urgent necessity, is rather carried forward by a prompt and peremptory
inclination, then by any violent and coactiue temptation, this is to sin
willingly. When Satan no sooner tempts, but the sinner as readily yeeldes, as
the etymon of the word imports, (...) of (...) Indulgeo. When it is not by
constraint, but of a ready mind, as Saint Peter's opposition 1 Pet. 5.2.
does manifest, (...). So is the Apostles speech of sinning willingly here to
be understood. Do what we can, whilst we carry about this mass of
corruption, sin will have her residence in us, but Saint Paul warnes, that we
suffer it not to reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the
lusts Romans 6.12.
thereof. If it violently overrule us, we must not willingly let it rule over
us: If it compel like a tyrant, we must not let it command as a King. We
must sigh under the bondage, and groan under the burden of it, like the
Israelites under Exodus 2.23.
Pharaoh. We must not say as those people professed to Ios. 1.16.
Iosuah, All that thou command us we will do, and whether thou sendest us
we will go: for if we do, it will command that which is dangerous and
damnable, and will send us to hell for our hyre. The wages of sin is Romans
6.23.
death: we must all acknowledge with Saint John, 1. Epist. 1. 1. John 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin we deceive our selves; yet we must take
heed, we be not such as he speaks of in his third Chapter, (...), 1. John
3.4.
which settle and sell themselves to work wickedness: For if such a one
cannot be renewed by repentance, Non est excusatio infirmitatis, sed culpa
Anselm in Heb. 6.
voluntatis; he can plead no excuse of infirmity, but must needs lay all the
blame upon the wills iniquity. There are some (as Solomon notes) Prou. 2.14. sic
Tremel.
Which do even rejoice in doing evil, and delight in perverse courses. Yea,
they cannot sleep, except they have done Prou. 4.16.
evil, but this rejoicing is odious, and this delight exceeding dangerous.
Lord, how opposite are these men in their affections to our Savior Christ?
John 4.34.
It was his meat and drink to do the will of God; but it is their meat and
drink, yea it lulls them a sleep, to do the works of the devil. What a
malepert speech is that of Saul's Courtiers, Psalm. 12.4.
Our tongues are our own and we will talk? they will because they will, Stat
pro ratione voluntas. Yea they are ready to say with Apud Sueton, Julius Caesar.
Caesar, iacta est alea, fall back fall edge they are resolved to persist in
their sins. What a desperate resolution is that of wilful wretches in the
sixth of Iere. 6.16.
Jeremy? Who being thus lovingly exhorted and graciously promised, Walk in
the good way, and you shall find rest to your souls, do answer as wickedly
as peremptorily, we will not walk therein. Well may it be said of these men,
that they sin willingly, which so rashly forsake the way of salvation, and so
readily step into the path of condemnation. Such resolute sinners were the
Jews, whose stony hearts and flinty souls, neither Christ's tears could Luke
19.40.
mollify, nor his threatenings terrify, therefore is their habitation become
desolate for ever. Such resolute and dissolute sinners were the Sodomites, who
could not be restrained by Lots submisse Genesis 19.7.8.11.
petition, his more then lawful motion, nor the Lords extraordinary
affliction; but still persisted obstinately, till even extreme weariness
enforced them to leave their wickedness. And what then could they else expect,
but that fire and brimstone from heaven should be their portions. Hoc Deum
maxim irritat, This says Chrysostom. in Psalm. 108.
Chrysostom, dorh mightily provoke God, when men do sin with such a
pre-meditation and settled resolution. So says David in the eighteenth Psalm.
Psalm. 18.26.
With the pure thou will show thy self pure, but with the froward thou will
wrestle; for so the Hebrew word (...) is well translated by Tremelius. Thus God
will wrestle with the wicked, not in mercy, as he did with Jacob Genesis 32.
, when he supported him, but in judgment, as Jacob did with Esau when he
supplanted him. If the sinner will be wilful, God will be as wilful, if
froward God will be as froward. If he will wrestle with God in disobedience,
God will trip up his heels in vengeance, and cast him down with the
rebellious spirits into the lowest hell. As in the time of the Law there was no
Sanctuary for wilful murderers: So was there never any Sanctuary of mercy
for wilful sinners. If a subject shall be carried violently in a rebellion,
much compassion is to be showed, but he that runs voluntarily with the
disloyal, deserves to be severely punished: so when a poor sinner can say
with the Apostle, I Romans 7.23.
would not willingly do that evil I do; It is the law of my members, that
rebels against the law of my mind, and leads me captive to the law of sin,
he may look with comfort toward the mercy seat. For Hieron in Mat. 16.
peccata non nocent si non placent, sin shall not hurt us, if it do
displease us. But when it may be said to him, as it is in the fiftieth Psalm,
Simulac vides furem: As soon as thou see a thief thou runnest with him:
Yea, when he shall commit all uncleanness with greediness Ephesians. 4.14.
, (...), even couetously; when his heart shall be as eagerly set upon his
wickedness, as the covetous man's on his wealth, what can he hope for, but that
the gate of mercy should be shut against him? Therefore is the Lord so resolute
Deuteronomy. 22.19.
, that if a man will go confidently and wilfully on in his sins, blessing
himself, and promising peace to his soul, he will not be merciful to him.
Yea he has ratified it with an asseueration, Isa. 22.19.
Surely the iniquity of such a sinner shall never be pardoned or purged. Yea
if a bare speech or asseueration will not serve, when Elies sons will
wilfully persist in their sins, and will not be reclaimed, either for their
own credit, their fathers comfort, or the Lords glory; he takes his oath, 1 Samuel 3.14.
that the wickedness of Elies house shall not be purged with sacrifice or
offering for ever.

The third bad humor.
THE third bad humor which feeds this Apostasy, is bitter and violent,
namely Malice, a consequent of the former. For when men do once grow wilful,
they easily become malicious, and wax even rebelliously bent against the
truth. So as was Julian the Emperor, whom Hierome Hier. Catalog. script.
Eccles.
therefore most justly styles for his malice, Canem rabidum, even a mad
Dog. So as were the Jews, whom our Savior taxing for this sin, Mat. 12.37.
calls, a brood of Vipers: because they were full of venim and malice. Such a
sinner the Apostle does here call an adversary, as being one that directly
opposes himself against the rules of piety, and afterward in more fearful
words he brandeth him thus, which does despite the spirit of grace. And in the
sixth to the Hebrews, Heb. 6.6.
he calls him a crucifier of Christ, and a mocker of him. When a man shall
become a professed adversary to him who is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell Mat. 10.28.
: when he shall despite the spirit of grace, which is the spirit of comfort,
helps our infirmities, and makes request for us with groans and sighs
which cannot be Romans 8 26.
expressed. When he shall make but a mock of Christ, to whom the blessed
Angels do homage Heb. 1.6.
, oh how lamentable is the estate of such a one? When the patient loathes his
food, quarrels with his Physician, is angry with his friends, chafes with
himself, you will say he is in ill case; and such is the condition of a
froward and malicious sinner: When the vis irascibilis. Which should be as a
Dog at the door of the soul, to keep away the Thief, shall wax mad,
and bite the Master or his friends, even snarle at God, at his servants, and
his sacred truth, what safety or comfort can that soul have? When Christians
which should be as Lambs, and new borne-Babes, in receiving 1. Pet. 2.1.2.
Iam. 1.12.
with meekness the sincere milk of the word, and the comfortable food of the
blessed Sacrament, shall turn dogs and swine, tread underfoot those
precious pearls, and be ready even to rent their Mat. 7.6.
Pastors, they must needs kindle Gods wrath, and accelerate his judgments.
This was the sin of Alexander the Copper-smith, of whom Saint Paul 2 Timothy
4.15.
says, (...), he vehemently withstood our Preaching. He says not (...) but
(...), not us but our words, our preaching; for that had not been so heinous:
the one is but a personal persecution, and so had been a sin against
charity; the other a doctrinall, and consequently was a direct offense against
piety. And surely, it is a fearful thing when a man sets himself against
heaven. 1 Samuel 2.25.
If one man sin against another (says Elie) the Judge shall judge it, but if
a man sin against the Lord, who will plead for him? It goes hard with a
malefactor, when no man will, can, or dare be his advocate: but it is Gods just
judgment upon a malicious sinner: and therefore it was his ordinance, Number.
15.30.
that he which sinned presumptuously (even erecting with an high hand the
flagge of defiance against God, as the metaphor imports) and blasphemed the
Lord, the same person should be cut off from among his people: that the same
cutting off, might be a praeludium to his fearful and final separation from
the society of the blessed Angels, the spirits of just and holy men, and from
Jesus Christ the mediator of the new Heb. 12.22.
Testament. How fearful was the obstinacy of Stephens enemies, who being not
able to resist the spirit by which he spoke, charged him with blasphemy Act.
6.10.11.
? And albeit the Lord did grace his innocent conscience with an Angelical
countenance; yet they so persisted in their malice, that they gave him just
cause to tax them thus, You stiff-necked and of uncircumcised hearts and
ears, you have always resisted the holy Ghost. Such obstinate sins must
needs be punished, when as others committed of frailty may easily be
pardoned. Should I not spare Nineueh, says the Lord Ion. 4.11.
(which does trespass of infirmity.) But how should I spare Judah which does
transgress Ier. 5.7.
rebelliously. Here God has something to say for Nineueh, but rebellious Judah
stands arraigned of high treason, and God having nothing to say for her, nor
she for her self, why the sentence of death should not pass against her, must
needs be condemned, except Gods justice shall be violated, which must
inuiolably be maintained, though all the rebellious Men and Angels in the world
be damned. It is dangerous to walk in the counsel of the ungodly, dreadful
to stand in the way of sinners, but (...). Psalm. 1.1.
happy and thrice happy is he that does not sit in the seat of the scornful.
Who would think that any could be so forsaken of God, and bereft of grace,
that he should malice and scorn the eternal Majesty? yet experience has
found out such vile wretches. For such a one was that blasphemous Pope Julius,
who being forbidden by his Physician to eat Porke, because of his gout, said
in a great chafe ( horresco referens, I tremble to utter his words.) Les vies
de Papes de Rome. Iules. 3.
Give me my Porkes flesh, al dispetto di Dio, even in despite of God.

What horrible blasphemies did that execrable Emperor Julian the Apostata, as
also his lewd companion Libanius the Sophister belch forth against Christ? who
at their going forth to the Persian war, asked in Histor. Trip. lib. 6. cap.
43.
scoffing manner, What the Carpenters Son (meaning Christ) was doing? To whom
it was well answered by a good Christian, Theodoret. hist. l. 3 c* 18.
Loculum fabricatur, he is making a coffin for Julian; which prophetical
speech was verified by the event, for indeed Julian was strangely wounded and
slain in that war. Now when a man is grown to this height of impiety, that
he dares thus with a high hand sin against the Almighty, the Lord stops the
suites of those who would pray for him, not admitting any petition to be put up
in the Court of mercy: according to those words of Saint John, There is a sin
unto death, I say not thou should pray for 1 Ioh. 5.16.
it. And how often does the Lord albeit he be the father of mercies, and the God
of all consolation 2 Cor. 1.3.
, how often I say does he send forth his express prohibition to Jeremy, Ier. 7.
and 11. and 15. chap.
Thou shall not pray for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayers for
them? Yea he is wont in such cases, to stir up the spirits of his servants to
pray against such notorious sinners: and to power forth dreadful execrations
upon them. And to that end has he armed the Church with that fearful censure
Anathemamaran-atha, If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed
till the coming of 1 Cor. 16.12.
Christ.

Thus does David Psalm. 59.5.
desire the Lord not to be merciful to them that transgress maliciously. Yea
how often does he pursue the enemies of God, most passionate and bitter
imprecations? Thus did Peter against Simon Magus, as histories report: Theodor.
hist. l. 3. ca. 9. 17. 19.
Thus did the primitive Church pray against Julian the Apostata, and never left
assaulting him with her weapons (which are prayers and tears) till he had
received his final and fearful stroke of destruction; and then she sang
Hallelujaes for his Hieron. super Habac. l. 2.
overthrow. Gods dearest children may commit very heinous sins, yet they do
it of infirmity, and not maliciously. The sin of Peter was very fearful,
yea could any almost be more heinous? when as he a chief Apostle, at the word
of a silly Maid, against his constant protestation, three several times
within the space of a few hours, did not only deny, and forsake, but even
forswear his Master and Savior: yea and that with dreadful Mat. 26.74. (...).
execrations upon himself, If he knew the man? But alas, all this proceeded
from infirmity; the present danger and fear of death extorted those oaths;
and drew those execrations from him. And therefore, when he went forth and wept
bitterly, diluit culpam lachrymis, when he wept, he wipte away his heinous
sins with bitter tears, and the Lords compassions failed him not.

The fourth bad humor.
Revel. 8.11.
SAint John in the eight Chapter of the Revelation speaks of a great Star,
called Wormwood, which falling into the waters and fountains made them bitter,
so that many died thereof. Behold, such is the humor of malice; For whereas
other sins do but muddie the streams, this impoisons the very fountain of
our holy profession, and brings immortal death without remedy. And this is the
fourth degree of this dreadful Apostasy, which for the better handling, I
call a particular humor, when it is indeed like the corruptions of all the
humors in the body. For it is not a (...), but rather a (...), not some smaller
distemper, but a general evil disposition and habit of Religion, not a
binding of Sampsons hands, but a shauing of his locks; not like the setting of
the Sun in a cloud, but a total Eclipse, yea such a going down as never
admits any rising again. For it is a total and final Apostasy which does
usually accompany the malicious resisting of the known truth. And therefore
Athanasius Athanas. ad Serapion.
ioynes that malice and Apostasy together in the definition of this blasphemy
against the holy Ghost, calling it a malicious denying of the faith which a man
has professed, as Sueton. Iul. Caes. cap. 1.
Sylla said in Suetonius: Vno Caesari multos Marios in esse, there were many
Marijes in one Caesar: So I may say there are many iniquities in this one
sin: which indeed becomes a congeries of all abominations. For the curse of
God seazeth upon such a malicious sinner as has been mentioned, to an utter
privation of grace, like David's heavy imprecation upon mount Gilboe 2 Samuel
1.21.
You mountains of Gilboe upon you be neither dew nor rain for ever. And like
our Saviors curse upon the fig tree, never man eat fruit of thee while the
world stands. Again, Satan casts his violent and inuenomed temptations,
which the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. calls fiery darts; and those where they strike
they stick fah, and work upon the Soul, like the arrows on Jobs body, Job
6.4.
The venom whereof dried up his spirits. And then as in the general deluge,
when the waters increased to a certain height, all flesh Genesis 7.21.
perished; so in this great ouerflowing of sin, all sparks of grace are
utterly extinguished.

This is employed here when the Apostle speaks of an opposition against the
causes of our salvation, namely, The Son of God, the blood of the Testament,
and the spirit of grace. And this elsewhere 1 Timothy 1.19.
he calls A shipwreck of faith, and an Apostasy from the faith, (...), 1 Timothy 4.1.2.
1 Timothy 4. And adds the reason, Having their consciences burnt with an hot
Iron. For when the conscience is cauterized, there follows an utter benumming
of the sanctified faculties, so that there is left no spiritual sense of
grace. As we say of griefs, so it is in sins, Curae leaves loquuntur,
ingentes stupent, the smaller sins at first are irksome, and terrify, but
being grown many and great, they stupifie. So that he which was wont to cry
out with Saint Paul, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of death, Romans 7. can make a covenant with death the grave and hell, Esaias
28. He who was pressed down with the ponderous weight of his sins, which
were as a heavy burden too heavy for him to bear, Psalm. 38. can at last go
as roundly away with them as ever Sampson went with the Gates of Azzah. The
conscience at first will diligently observe and censure the sinner, but the
same being neglected, he becomes (...), Even condemned of Tit. 3.11.
himself, and yet continues in sin with great security. If a wounded man
have but one Surgeon, and one salve to cure him, and yet he alas, would slay
that Surgeon, and cast away that salve, what hope can there be of his recovery?
And such is the condition of a desperate sinner, Christ Jesus is the Surgeon,
and his precious blood the blessed balm to cure our wounded souls. If a man
shall then offer violence to his person, Crucifying again to himself the
son of Heb. 6.6.
God: And contempt to this plaster, In treading underfoot the blood of the
Heb. 10.29.
Testament; Is there any means left in heaven or earth to cure him? Surely no,
but that must needs follow which our Savior Christ threatened to the Jews,
John 8.24.
You shall dye in your sins. Saint 1. Tim. 4.1.
Paul prophesies of some that in the latter times shall depart from the faith,
and Saint Peter says 2. Pet. 2.1. verse 20.
, there shall be some that will deny the Lord that bought them: And this
afterward he calls an intangling, meaning so, that one cannot be loosed; and an
ouercomming, so that he cannot be delivered; the issue of which estate he
expresses, saying, They bring upon themselves swift damnation. And truly when
Satan prevails so far, that he vanquisheth them with his suggestions, and
fettereth them in the chains of sin, striking his temptations like the nail
of Iael into the temples of their Judge 4.21.
heads, so that they lie groueling like Sisera in his Tents, being made even
his bondslaues and vassalles; there is little hope that ever they shall
recover. For it is impossible, that they which have been so qualified with the
grace of Gods spirit, if they fall away, should be renewed by Heb. 6.6.
repentance. The children of God (...), they do fall, but (...) as here it is,
Prolapsi Ansel. in Heb. 6. Id est totalit. Lapsi. Aquin.
id est, prorsus lapsi, as Anselm interprets, that is, utterly fall away they
cannot, for the Lord stays them up with his hand, Psalm. 37.24. As when Peter
through the terrors of the waves was ready to sink, Christ took him by the
hand and saved him: So when we are oppressed with the waves of temptations, and
are ready to sink in the Gulf of despair, the Lord reaches forth the hand
of compassion and preserves us, (...), in many things we stumble all, as Saint
James Iam 3.2.
says, Yea the just man falls seven times (that is, very often) as Solomon
Prou. 24.16.
witnesses. But here is the comfort that he rises again, though his foot
slip through his frailty, or he be cast down through the stumbling blocks of
temptations, yet he finds the center of Gods mercy to rest upon, and takes
new footing by unfeigned repentance. Non sic impij, non sic, as for the ungodly
it is neither so nor so with them, for their fall is total, it is final.
David fell dangerously in the matter of Vriah, 2 Samuel 11. but Saul fell away
fearfully, when he consulted with a Witch, 1 Samuel 28. Aaron fell grievously,
when he suffered the Israelites to make earings and dance about the Calfe,
Exodus 32. But Balaam fell away wilfully, when he taught Balaac to entrap the
children of Israel, Numb. 31. Peter fell dangerously when he denied Christ
Jesus, Mat. 26. But Judas fell away desperately when he hanged himself, Mat.
27. Thus the godly, although they fall into gross sins, yet do not utterly
fall away. According to that in the first of John and the third, Whosoever is
borne of God sins not, that is, he sins not totally and finally. Christ's
speech to Peter, Luke 22. was very comfortable, Luke 22.32.
I have prayed for thee (...), (...).
that thy faith fail not, that it be not wholly Eclipsed. And that intercession
of Christ is effectual for all Gods children, who, albeit they may sometimes
labor in obscurity, like the Sun, yet can they never be wholly Eclipsed
like the Moon. Though diverse bones be broken or out of joint, yet the skillful
Surgeon will set them together again; but if all be asunder, how can they be
united? Though the body be subject to a mighty confusion of bad humors, and
distemper of blood, yet if the vital spirits be not consumed, nor the vigor
of nature utterly exhausted, the skillful Physician has hope to recover his
patient. But if the spirits be spent, and there be no force of nature to assist
the medicine, but rather to resist the same, there is no way but one; for what
can be expected but death? And so is it in the sickness of the soul, it may
be recovered upon many particular diseases of sin, but if it once be subject
to a total Apostasy, it can never be cured, there is no way but death with
such a sick sinner: and therefore Saint John 1 John 5.16.
does very fitly call it a sin unto death. If the soul of man be left like
the tree that Nebuchadnezzar saw in a Dan. 4.26.
dream (the stumpe and roots whereof was left in the earth) though many
branches of grace be lopped off by Satan, yet behold it may flourish again;
but if it be like the tree that Saint Jude Jude ver. 12.
speaks of, Without fruit, twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, then the
axe of Gods judgments lies near to it. Luke 14.34.35
If the salt have utterly lost his savor, it is good for nothing, but to be
cast out; so if a Christian have lost all the sap and savor of grace, and
become utterly without relish in the practice and profession of godliness, he
is good for nothing, but must look to be cast forth into utter darkness, and
into that violent fire that shall devour the aduersasarie.

Behold now (beloved) you see what is the sin against the holy Ghost, even a
witting, a willing, a malicious, a total Apostasy. And this monstrous sin
is like the mighty winds which beating on the four corners of the house
wherein Jobs children were, did cast it on their heads Job. 1.19.
: for when sin once breathes, and blows from these four Climates, it draws
down the judgments of God upon the sinners heads, to their everlasting ruin.
Leuit. 11.20.
And as the Fowls that went on all four, being unclean, were abomination to
men: so he that goes groueling on these four feet of Apostasy, is
abominable in the sight of God, and shall be subject to the filthy dungeon
with the unclean spirits. But to the end that the nature and danger of this
sin may the better appear, let us consider why it is called the sin
against the holy Ghost. Where first we must observe, that it is so called, not,
because it is committed against the person, but against the attributes, and
especial operation of the holy Ghost. The old and vulgar distinction of the
Schoolmen does illustrate this very well. The Father is called Power, against
him therefore men are said to sin in weakness, and infirmity. The Son is
called Wisdom, against him they offend of ignorance and simplicity. The holy
Ghost is called Grace, against him therefore they sin who transgress
wilfully and maliciously; It being then the proper and especial work of the
holy Spirit to inlighten the understanding, to mollify the heart by
repentance, and to sanctify it by grace; he that shall thus oppose himself
against the work of the same spirit, must needs become graceless and
impenitent, that blessed and gracious spirit being taken away. For as the iron
which was made soft by being in the fire, when it is taken forth becomes
harder then ever it was. So the heart of man, which with the fire of Gods
spirit, was in some sort mollified and made to melt, when the same spirit is
utterly withdrawn, becomes extremely obdurate and incorrigible. Dan. 9.9.
To thee (O Lord God) belongs mercy and forgiveness, says Daniel. True it
is, but when a man has made himself incapable of mercy, the cogitation
thereof is rather a corrosiue then any comfort at all. Are not those who charge
Christ with an unclean spirit, worthy to be possessed with the spirit of slumber?
If they despite the spirit of grace, do they not deserve to be deprived of
the spirit of grace? If they tread underfoot of a base estimation the Son
of God, and the blood of the Testament, is it not a just recompense, that
Satan should trample them under his feet in the place of torments? If the
Lord give over men to a Reprobate sense, for abusing only the mere gifts of
Romans 1.28.
nature, how much more may they expect to have their eyes blinded and their
hearts Ioh. 12.40.
hardened, who maliciously resist the works of grace? Chrysostom op. imperf. in Mat.
Hom. 37.
And then as the tacklings being taken from the ship, and the same left to the
mercy of the Seas, is cast upon rocks, dashed in pieces, or drowned in the
sands; so, the soul of man being stripped of the tacklings of grace, must
needs suffer shipwreck, and perish in the gulf of eternal perdition. This
misery is by no means to be avoided; for as Chrysostom says, Cum a Deo
deserimur Diabolo tradimur. Chrysostom. in Ioh. Hom. 67.
when men are forsaken of God, they are delivered to the Devil: not for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord,
as the Corinthian 1. Cor. 5.5.
was. But to be vexed in soul here, and to be tormented in soul and body
hereafter as Saul 1. Sam. 16.
was. And then what follows our Savior shows in the persons of the
blasphemous Pharisees Luke 11.25.
: When the unclean spirit having been cast out returns, he brings with him
seven spirits worse then himself, which do enter and dwell there and taking
up their habitation, do shut fast the door of the heart, so that, albeit the
spirit of God do knock again and again Revel. 3.20.
, yet can it find no entrance, and that causes such a lamentable effect. The
latter end of that man is worse then the beginning. Thus the heart being
hardened becomes impenitent, and so the impenitent sinner becomes unpardonable:
for where there is no grace for Repentance, there is no place for pardon:
According to the Apostles words, Romans 2. Romans 2.5.
Thou after thy hardness, and heart that cannot repent, treasurest up unto thy
self wrath against the day of wrath. The stinging of an Aspe is incurable, and
such is this wound, and sting of Satan, for it grows cankerous, (...), like
the sin of Hymeneus and 2 Timothy 2.17.
Philetus. Yea it becomes that which the Surgeons call (...), even such an
eating vlcerous sore as does totally mortify the part affected, so that all
the plasters that art or nature can devise, will not help it. This, says
Hierome, is that kind of leprosy which cannot be cured. And so much for the
opening of the wound.

The second part: The searching of the WOVND.
HEre now (beloved) I could be contented to take my station, and to stay my
hand from searching this wound any further: But because there is some
controversy concerning the same amongst the spiritual Physicians, to whom the
cure or care thereof does belong, I hold it expedient, either in reconciling,
or confuting the differences of opinions, to relieve those who may be subject
to doubting, and to satisfy if it be possible, even those which are possessed
with the spirit of contradiction: by manifesting, that as I have laid the
foundation of my positive doctrine, upon the immovable rock of the holy
Scriptures, so I have the consent of the learned of all sorts, who do build
with me upon the same foundation; so that only singularity shall have
occasion to dissent.

There are about this matter but two points controuerted, the one is touching
the description, the other the remission of this sin. Concerning the first,
some make final impenitency to be the sin against the holy Ghost; but those
that so do, are confuted by themselves; for they hold the sin against the
holy Ghost to be pardonable, so that consequently, if final impenitency be the
sin against the holy Ghost, final impenitency should be pardonable: which
absurdity every sensible man must needs be ashamed of.

But Bellarmine himself Bellam. de poenitent. lib. 2. cap. 16.
has diverse arguments for the confutation of this error, which I will
briefly repeat.

1. The sin against the holy Ghost is properly blasphemy, but final
impenitency is not blasphemy; therefore final impenitency is not the sin
against the holy Ghost.

2. Final impenitency is not committed till death, but the sin against the
holy Ghost is committed before death: therefore final impenitency is not the
sin against the holy Ghost; The minor proposition is evident, for our Savior
charged the Pharisees with this sin, who were then living, and for any thing
we know, lived long after.

Further, Paul speaking of this sin in the sixth to the Hebrews, says, it is
impossible that they which have committed the same should be renewed by
repentance. In which words the Apostle speaks of those that are alive, else
should he affirm that the dead cannot be renewed by repentance, which speech
were idle and much unbeseeming so great an Apostle. Again, whereas Saint John
says, there is a sin unto death, I say not that thou should pray for it; 1
Ioh. 5.16.
he speaks of living men. And whereas some think he speaks of the dead, the
Text is directly against them. For he says, he that knows his brother to
sin a sin not unto death, etc. in which words he admits that a man may
see and know when the sin is committed, and therefore he speaks not of
final impenitencie, which cannot be known till after a man's death, and hardly
then also. Moreover if he spoke of the sins of those that are dead, he
should not say, He that knows his brother to sin; but he that knows his
brother to have sinned.

Thus Bellarmine having confuted that opinion concerning final impenitency,
and affirmed truly, Circumstantia quaedam, quae in omni peccato reperiri
potest.
that the same is but circumstantia quaedam, a certain circumstance, which may
be found in every particular sin: he defines the sin against the holy
Ghost in the same manner as I have handled it, calling it a malicious
opposition against the manifest and known truth; Athanasius. Chrysostom.
Basil. Hilarie. Ambrose. Hierome. Anselme. Richardus de S. Vict. Theophylact.
Beda. Pacianus.
which definition he confirms by the common consent of ancient writers
Communi consensu veterum. Bellarm, ibid.
, to whose reasons and authorities were they not very pithy and pregnant, I
might annexe sundry Ludolphus de vita Christi. par. 1. cap. 73. P. Lumb. lib.
2. Did. 43. D. Dionys. Carthus. in Mat. 12. Titleman in Mat. 12. Gagnaus.
Catharinus and Alphons. Salmeron super Heb. 6.
others. But that which he alleges may very well satisfy any reasonable man.

Now for the other point, namely that this sin is irremissible, I will by
Gods grace prove it directly by the Scriptures. And because the same is a
circumstance somewhat more subject to controversy, I will annexe the
testimonies and reasons of diverse Papists both ancient and modern. Yea I trust
I shall make it evident, that, touching this point, there is indeed no such
difference, but that which may be reconciled by a distinction allowed on all
parts, if men will lay by the humors of contradiction and contention.

First, the three Evangelists which mention this sin, do absolutely deny
remission to him that commits it. Saint Luke says plainly, Luke 12.10.
It shall not be forgiven him. Saint Mark more expressly, Mark. 3.29.
He shall never have forgiveness, but shall be guilty of eternal damnation.
Yea the vulgar Latin has it, of an everlasting sin. Aeterni delicti.
Saint Matthew yet more vehemently, Mat. 12.32.
it shall not be forgiven him, either in this world, or in the world to come.
May I not here use Saint Augustines words in another case, Aug. Epi. 59.
Quid hoc euidentius, quid apertius, quid expressius? What speeches could be
uttered more evident, more apparent, more vehement, then these? I cannot but
wonder, that any man should shut his eyes against the clear light of such an
evident truth, or open his mouth to contradict it. Yea, that any should dare to
assay the breaking of such a threefold cord, as when the holy Ghost says, It
shall not be forgiven, to affirm, yes it shall be forgiven. When he says, it
shall never have forgiveness, to auough yes it shall have forgiveness, though
hardly: And when he says, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, to
say presumptuously, yes, either in this world or in the world to come. If this
be tolerable, what truth is there so certain or sacred, but it shall be
subject to contradiction? Let us compare this place with another, though much
inferior in the vehemency of negation. It is said in the ninth of Mark, that
Mark. 9.44.
the fire of hell never goes out; and why may not one by the like exposition
say, yes, it will go out, but yet hardly, which were happy news for Dives,
and other damned spirits; And a good supporting of Origens old error, who
held, that hell should be destroyed, and all the damned after a certain number
of years be saved. But indeed such licentious expositions are utterly
unlawful, and do parallel Satan's denial of the Lords words, in the second
and third of Genesis, Genesis 2.17. Genesis 3.4.
you shall surely die, you shall not die at all.

But Bellarmine De Poenitent. lib. 2. c. 16.
would expound the speeches of the Evangelists by certain places in Matthew and
Jeremy. In the nineteenth of Matthew Mat. 19.24.26.
our Savior says, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. In which
words says he, our Savior seems plainly to exclude rich men from salvation,
yet he adds, that which is impossible to men, is possible to God. Ier. 13.32.
And in the thirteenth of Jeremy, he says, that the Jews can no more be
changed, then the blacke-Moore can change his skin, or the Leopard his spots,
and yet does he in many places after that, exhort and call them to repentance.

To these place I answer, first in general, that they are not like; for
though in similitudes and comparisons, extensiue speeches are sometimes used,
to note a difficulty by an impossibility As Mat. 24.35. compared with Luke
16.17.
, yet in a simple negation it is not so. And further to the places in
particular. First, those words in the nineteenth of Matthew may be taken for a
direct and simple negative, being truly expounded? for our Savior in the
tenth of Saint Mark Mark. 10.24.
, does thus qualify the rigor of them: It is hard for them that trust in
riches, to enter into heaven. So that a man may truly say, it is impossible
for a man so besotted with his riches and devoted to his wealth, that he makes
it the especial object of his love, the center of his hope, the fort of his
confidence, to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Secondly, I deny not, but,
as it is possible, respecting the absolute omnipotency of Almighty God, to save
such a rich man; so is there no defect in God, for saving of him that sins
against the Holy Ghost: but the impossibility arises from the sinner himself.
For so some take the word. (...), some, (...).
Let the bunch on the Camels back be taken away, and he may go into the gate
at Jerusalem, called the needles eye: let the gable rope be untwisted, and you
may put it through the eye of a needle: So let the rich man like Zacheus give
some part of his goods to the poor, and make restitution where he has
wronged, and he may come to heaven: And let him that has blasphemed repent and
believe, and he shall surely be saved.

Concerning the words in Jeremy, we must observe a rule of Scripture, which
Saint Aug. collat. cum Donat. c. 20.
Augustine and Bellarmine himself observes: Bellarm. de Eccle. militante.
lib. 3. cap. 16.
Namely, that sometimes those things are spoken indefinitely of all, which
properly and directly do belong to a part Compare Ezeck. 3.7. with 9.4. Gal.
3.1. with. 6.1.
only. It is written in the twelfth of John, Ioh. 12.39.
Though he had done many miracles there, yet they believed not in him. Here a
man would think, that none of the Jews believed in Christ; yet verse 42. It
is said that many of the rulers believed in him. When our Savior at his
passion prays thus, Father forgive them for they know not what they do. This
could not be spoken of every individual man, which had a hand in his
execution, but only of some; for it is evident, that diverse of them most
desperately, even against their conscience did oppose themselves against
Christ: and so might the Lord speak indefinitely of the Jews, that they were
like the black-More even altogether incorrigible, when as some of them,
notwithstanding were capable of Repentance and Pardon. Again, if it were
granted, that the Lord counted all the Jews unrecoverable, must it needs be
that his sending to persuade them to repentance, does therefore cross his
censure? Who knows not that it is usual with God, to send his Prophets and
Preachers, to call them to repentance, of whom he has said expressly before,
that they will not Iere. 7.27. Ezekiel. 2.4.5.
repent, and yet he sent to them that so they might be without excuse?

Secondly, as the Evangelists do plainly teach the impossibility of pardon
for this sin: So does Saint Paul in this Epistle use many and weighty
Arguments to confirm the same, which I will briefly contract into one.

He that cannot possibly be renewed by Repentance. Heb. 6.4.6.
He that falls quite away. Heb. 10.26.29.
He that cannot have any benefit by Christ's sacrifice. He that dies without
mercy. He that must certainly look for a fearful judgment.
Cannot be pardoned and saved.

But he that sins against the holy Ghost, cannot be renewed by Repentance,
He falls quite away, he cannot have any benefit by Christ's sacrifice, he dies
without mercy, he must certainly look for a fearful judgment, and violent
fire: therefore he that sins against the holy Ghost, cannot be pardoned and
saved.

To these places Bellarmine and the Rhemists do answer, that whereas the
Apostle says, he cannot be renewed by Repentance, and there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, he is thus to be understood, he cannot have the benefit
of a second Baptism. To whom I answer: First, Bellarmine and the Rhemists do
without all warrant or reason confound Baptism and Repentance, and the
sacrifice of Christ; And, if Baptism and Repentance be confounded, why should
not also the other doctrines mentioned with the same? So that Repentance.
Faith, Baptism, the resurrection, and the last judgment shall be all one. But
let these men who are so violent without any arguments, and so confident upon
only the bare words of two or three of the Fathers expounding this place, let
them consider what others of the ancient Fathers have written, and what even
these have affirmed concerning this sin in other places. The ingenuitie of
Arias Montanus Arius Monta. in Heb. 6.
a learned Papist is much to be commended, who says most truly, that it is an
extreme racking of the word Repentance, when it is here without cause
transferred to another sense. Again, if it were granted that the Apostle in
the sixth to the Hebrews, denies a second Baptism when he speaks of
Repentance, because they are mentioned together in the same place, and have
some affinity and correspondence: yet how does it follow that in this Chapter
he should have relation to Baptism? When as the same is neither directly
mentioned, nor by any necessary consequent implied or intimated? Lastly,
suppose the Apostles words were so to be taken, as that he should therein deny
second Baptism to the sinner, does not the same imply a denial of pardon? For
why should he deny them a second Baptism, but to teach them, that the means
and isntrumental causes of Repentance and reconciliation being denied, the
effect cannot be granted? But the truth is, as every single eye may perceive,
that the Apostle has in those places utterly excluded those that sin against
the holy Ghost, both from the means, and fruit of repentance.

Thirdly, Saint John 1 John. 5.16.
speaking of this sin; calls it a sin unto death, meaning such a sin as
yields death without remedy or recovery, as the phrase being an Hebraisme does
necessarily import, and Chrysostom does truly expound Chrysostom. in psalm. 49 Vt
in lege quaedam fuere immedicabilia, etc.
it. Yea Alphonsus Salmeron Alph. Salmer. in 1. Ep. Ioh. dispu. 32.
, one of the Fathers and founders of the Jesuits, calls it a sin to death,
quia suapte natura, tendit ad mortem animae: because it does naturally tend to
the death of the soul. Again, the Apostle forbids us to pray for such a
sinner. Now if prayer, which should be the means to work Repentance in men,
and to procure remission for them at the hands of God, may not be afforded
them, is there any hope that such should be pardoned? To this Bellarmine
answers, that the Apostle does not directly forbid us to pray for such, but
only does not encourage or persuade us, because the suite is very hard to be
obtained. And to him I reply, that first the desperateness of the disease
being to death, may imply a reason of denying the medicine of prayer to obtain
life. 1 John 5.
Secondly, the coherence of the words, with the words precedent, do euict them
to be a direct prohibition. For whereas before he had taught, Verse. 14.
that if we ask any thing according to Gods will, we shall be heard, he
presently adds these words, as a Caveat, that we pray not for him that
sins unto death, because that such a prayer is not according to Gods will.
Thirdly, if Saint John had noted only a difficulty, not an impossibility of
obtaining our desires, should he not have persuaded us to be the more earnest
and importunate in prayer, rather then to have discouraged us? When our Savior
says Mat. 7.14.
that the way is narrow, and the gate is strait that leads unto life, would
you not make him absurd in saying, I say not that you shall enter that way: or
indiscreet in discouraging men, by denying them hope of entrance? Does he not
better in persuading us, strive therefore earnestly to enter into that straight
Luke 13.24. (...).
gate: and so, if the matter had been subject to difficulty, and not to
impossibility, doubtless Saint John would have exhorted us, even to strive
mightily (...). Romans 15.20.
by prayers to God for the remission of that sin, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans
15.30. Lastly, that it is a direct prohibition, diverse both ancient Fathers,
and Papists also do directly avouch. As Tertul de pudic. cap. 19.
Tertullian Aug. ser. Domini in Monte. lib 1.
Augustine, Hier. cited by P. Lumberd.
Hierome, Sixtus Quintus orat. habit. in consistor. de morte. Henr 3
Sixtus Quintus, F^rus. in 1. Ioh. 5.
Ferus, Didac. de la vega. in Psalm. 6. poenitent Con. 5. and diverse others.
Didacus de la Vega, and diverse others. Yea, Catharinus Catharin in 1. Epist.
Ioh. cap. 5.
, in my judgment, has written very iudiciously concerning both this place and
the point in hand. Some (says he) have made this place obscure, supposing that
to be absurd which indeed has no absurdity in it (meaning that prayer should
be denied to some kind of sinners.) But this comes to pass by reason of a
certain old and vulgar opinion, namely, that no such outrageous, or diuilish
sin could be found, which of it self was inexpiable.

Thus having proved by the authority of sacred Scriptures that this sin is
irremissible, and answered such objections as have bin made against my proof,
I might also confirm the same by many testimonies of the ancient Tertul de
pudicitia. cap. 2. Cyprian. lib. 3. Justin ad Quirin. cap. 28. Chry. in psa.
49. Hieron. Ep. 22. ad Marcel. Aug. expos. Epist. ad Romans inchoat. Origin, etc.
Fathers, besides those which have already been produced, but I haste to that
point which I have ever affected, and in the beginning promised and propounded,
namely, the reconciling of diversity in opinion.

It is a distinction of the Gerson. pars 2. compend. Theo. log. de septem.
vitijs capital. Negative. Privative. Contrary.
Schoolmen, a sin may be called irremissible, three manner of ways,
negatiuely, priuatiuely, contrarily. Negatiuely, which can no way be pardoned,
as the sins of the reprobate Angels. Priuatiuely, when the sin by
congruence of merit deserves to be punished, though by congruity of Gods mercy
it may be pardoned, of which nature is every ordinary mortal sin.
Contrarily, when the sin has a disposition contrary to pardon and remission,
and such is the sin against the holy Ghost: For it does directly resist and
reject the grace of God, as Bellarmine confesses Direct resistet and repudiet
gratiam Dei. Bell. de poenit. lib 2. cap. 17.
. It hardneth the heart, so that those which commit this sin, are usually
given over to a reprobate sense, and forsaken of God, as Judas was, so that
they cannot repent, as Anselme Ita quod non possint poenitere. Anselm. in Mat.
12.
affirms. Yea it hardneth a man's heart like a stone, so that he cannot be
helped by the prayers of the Church, as P. Lumbord P. Lumb. lib. 2. did. 43. b.
reports. Bonauenture Bonauent. in 2* sent. did. 43. quaest. 1. Potestatem
and dispositionem poenitentiae private. Ibid. quaest. 2
calls it a sin to death, because it takes away the disposition of receiving
life, which consists in the embracing of repentance. Yea, if it be strictly
taken and considered (says he) it depriueth men both of the power and
disposition of repentance, so that there is left neither inclination nor
ability to repent. And therefore as Catharinus Cathar. in Heb. 6. and ^.
Epist Ioh.
does acknowledge this sin to be unpardonable, so does Sixtus Quintus Sixth.
Quint. vbi supra.
, and yeeldes the same reason that others do, saying, By reason of men's
impenitency, this sin becomes absolutely and simply unpardonable. And Gerson
Vbi supra.
says, that in this respect it can by no means be remitted: Yea, that final
impenitency does certainly cleave to this blasphemous Apostasy, Dionysius
plainly affirms Dionys. and Hug. Card. in Mat. 12.
, and yields two reasons for it. Yea Hugo Cardinalis gives eight reasons of
this impossibility of pardon. Stella Nunquam de facto remittitur, quanquam
possit remitti. Stella. in Luke 12.
and Iansenius Non negat remissionis possibilitatem sed euentum. Iansen.
Concord. Cap. 49.
indeed, being willing to say as much as they can for the power and
possibility of pardon for this sin, are constrained to confess, that
actually, and indeed, it is never remitted, although there be some
possibility, that it may be remitted. Alas that is a poor possibility that is
never reduced into act. Such possibilities are but idle Chimeraes, even
ridiculous conceits. There is a similitude used by diverse, yea by some who
seem to contradict the vnpardonablenesse of this sin, which similitude does
indeed express it, with the reason and manner of it, and it is this.

As the man which is sick, Ludolph de vita Christi. par. 1. cap. 73. Bonauent.
in 2. sent. distin 43. quaest. 2. Gerson vbi supr. Greg. de Valent. disp. lib.
1. qu. 4. punct. 3. Bellarm. de poen. lib. 2. cap. 17.
if he be in that case that he can neither take food nor Physic, may rightly
be said to be incurable; so he that is infected with the sickness of this
sin, being through his impenitencie incapable of Gods mercy, and Christ's
merits, may truly be said to be unpardonable. The medicine and means of
recovery is neither weak nor wanting to him that has grace to apply it; but
he that wants this grace is wanting to himself. God does not work always to
the uttermost extent of his mighty power, Phil. 3.21.
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, but distributeth, or
denies to every man so as seems best to his divine wisdom; and works (as it
is in the Philosophical Axiom) according to the capacity of the patient,
making men desirous of salvation where he does grant it, and capable of grace
where he does impart it. In which sense it is said, our Savior could not do
many works amongst his Countrymen, because of their unbelief. Mark 6.5.

It Is true, as Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 19.
there is no sin so great, that it can overcome Gods mercy, if we repent and
ask pardon in due time; but if a man have no power to repent, then God has no
will to pardon. The Lords hand is not shortened, that he cannot help, but man's
heart is hardened that he cannot repent, and this makes the sin unpardonable;
so that the question is not of Gods power and man's will, but of man's power and
Gods will.

There is no man that has more iudiciously decided this controversy then Beda
in Mar. 3
Beda and Ludolph. de vita Christi. par. 1. cap. 73.
Ludolphus, with whose words, being consonant to the truth, and concluding what
I have at large delivered, I will conclude: The spirit of blasphemy shall not
be forgiven a man, Sicut nunquam ad remissionem ita nunquam ad poenitentiam
peruenturus est.
not because remission is denied him if he repent, but because that such a
blasphemer, through his just desert, as he can never obtain remission, so can
he never come to repentance. And so much for the searching of the wound.

The third part: The binding up the WOVND.
IT remains now in the third and last place, that I bind up the wound, with
Application, not with hope to cure it; which if I should promise, I might be
like those Lawyers, who for their fees do undertake men's causes though they
know them to be unconscionable, and those Physicians and Surgeons, who take in
hand the cure of those patients, whose sores and sickness they know be
incurable. I may say of this sin as Jeremy says of Babylon. Ier. 51.9.
We would have cured Babylon, but she could not be cured: forsake her, and let
us go every one into his own Country. This sin cannot possibly be cured,
therefore let every one in the fear of God have care that he may avoid it.

The Apostle speaking of this sin to the Hebrews, says, Heb. 6.9.
Confidemus de vobis meliora delectissimi; and so do I say to you, beloved, I
hope better things of you all, and such as belong to salvation. For were your
hearts possessed with this sin, you could have small delight in this sacred
assembly, and holy exercise. Now although there be no place of application for
cure, yet is there for matter of confutation, of admonition, and of
consolation. Of confutation against error, of admonition against security, of
co^solatio^ against despair.

For first, those merciless men the Nouatians So called of Nouatus their
ringleader. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 42. Ambros. de poenit lib. 1. cap.
9. Hieron. ad Marcel. de blasph. in 55.
are hereby confuted, who held every gross sin committed by a Christian to
be the sin against the holy Ghost: and therefore, how seriously penitent
soever any one was after such a sin (though of infirmity) yet they accounted
his repentance to be fruitless, and incapable of the mercy of God. Socrates.
lib. 1. cap. 7.
So that whereas diverse in the primitive Church fell into Idolatry through
fear of most horrible tortures prepared for Christians; Albeit they did
afterward exceedingly bewail their miserable condition, yet would they not
yield them the privileges of the Church, nor join with them in the
participation of the blessed Sacraments.

(...). Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 42. Epiphan. Tom^^haeres. 59.
These were the men which through swelling pride did take to themselves the name
of Puritanes* But the very matter of their doctrine (as Epiphaneus truly
says) does prove them to be impure.

Against these men as diverse of the ancient Fathers have written very
substantially: So even the torrent of the sacred 1 Ioh. 7.8. Iam. 3.2. Ezekiel.
18.22. Mat. 11.28.
Scriptures (which convince all men of sin, and offer pardon to every true
penitent) does utterly condemn them. Amongst other things, that just and
ingenious reproof of that renowned Emperor Constantine to Acesius a Nouatian
Bishop is worthy of remembrance. When the good Emperor did ask this proud
Bishop, why he did separate himself from the Communion of the faithful, his
answer being, because they had fallen in the persecution of Decius,
Constantine replied, Socrat. l. 1. c. 7.
Erige tibi scalam Acesi, and ad coelum solus ascend. Set thee up a Ladder O
Acesius, whereby thou may clime to heaven alone. Justly taxing thereby his
pride, and truly showing, that if his opinion were true, no man could come to
heaven, because no man is free from sin. Saint Augustine says, Aug. Hom. 27.
some objected against him, That he opened a gappe to sin, when he offered a
heaven of safety to every repentant sinner, but most injuriously; For if
almighty God be so gracious, that to a man unfeignedly forsaking his sins, and
serving God with an upright heart, Non solum veniam promittit sed coronam,
graunts not only the remission of sin, but the reward of a Crown, as
Cypryan Cyprian de laps. Sermon. 5.
speaks: Why should men be so austere and strict, as to shut up the bowels of
compassion to the serious penitent?

And here by the way (beloved) let me give you a caveat. Forasmuch as this
sin does depend upon such difficult circumstances, the extraordinary gift of
discerning the spirits being 1 Cor. 12.10.
abolished, it is very hard without some rare Sine rarissimis inspirationibus.
Bez. de pass. dom. Hom. 28.
inspiration, to discern this sin in others, and very dangerous to charge
any with the same. Therefore, although you see some sin very desperately, yet
take heed, you step not hastily into Gods throne, but rather erect a tribunal
in your own hearts, and judge your selves, as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Cor.
11.31.
do not unadvisedly shoot forth the darts of your censures against others,
nor uncharitably deny them the comfort of your prayers. Caietans charitable
speech does much affect Caietan. in Epist. 1 John.
me. Whereas Saint John says, If thou see thy brother sin a sin to
death, I say not that thou should pray for him: Memini Bernardum, etc. I
remember says he, that Bernard adds, and si non ores, gemas tamen, even when
thou may not pray for him, yet may thou sigh for him. Fortassis gemitus
tuus penetret, quo oration non praesumit tendere. Happily thy sighs may have
access, where thou dare not send thy prayers. As for the Nouatians, only
the mistaking of diverse places of Scripture misled them, which being freed from
their erroneous exposition, do nothing serve for the supporting of their
merciless heresy.

Secondly, here is matter of admonition. For, seeing this sin is so
dreadful, we should be very careful and fearful, lest we fall into the
same. Though it were a wound like Alexanders, of which the historian says,
curatio vulneris grauior ipso vulnere? The curing of the wound was more
grievous, then the wound it self: yet if there were any hope of cure, it were
somewhat tolerable, but when all the balm in Gilead cannot cure it, it is most
lamentable. It is a point of wisdom to prevent corporal diseases that are
mortal, and it is much more necessary to prevent the spiritual. And as for
the better prevention of sickness, and preservation of health, diverse hurtful
meats are to be shunned, and certain wholesome means to be used: so for the
preventing of this mortal disease, and preserving the soul in spiritual
health, diverse evil courses are to be carefully avoided, and diverse Christian
duties to be diligently practiced.

When you are tempted by Satan or his instruments, consent not, if he thrust
any evil temptations into your heads by conceit, as he did into the head of
Christ Jesus: Mat. 4.
let him never put it into your hearts by consent, Ioh. 13.2. Chrysostom. in Mat.
hom. 67.
as he did into the heart of Judas. What madness is it (says Chrysostom) to
entertain the temptations of the Devil who seeks to torment thee, rather
then the motions of Christ's spirit, who desires to save thee? To receive a
sword at the hands of a Thief to kill thee, and to refuse a Diadem at the
hands of a King to crown thee? Remember that comfortable precept and promise,
Resist the Devil, Iam. 4.7.
and he will fly from thee.

Take heed of the degrees of sin, for they are dangerous; One sin draws
on another, as one wave drives forward another; and as great waters arise of
small heads, which do break down banks, and carry them away; such are the
inundations of sin, (...). Inundauerunt. Sept. and vulgar. Hos. 4.2.
when they break out, and blood touches blood. It behooves every Christian
therefore to take heed of the beginning of sin, and to stop the course and
current of the same, lest that it becoming violent, cast down the banks of
Gods threatenings, and carry him headlong to the sin of all sins. Men do
not fall into deadly diseases but by degrees; neither do they slip into this
deadly sin, but by diverse degrees do fall into it, as Theodoret does
manifest in Julian the Emperor, Theodoret. hist. lib. 3. cap. 3.
who first banished the fear of God, and at last, Pietate omnino spoliebatur,
was utterly bereft of Piety.

When a sinner gives way to his own corruptions and Satan's temptations, he
becomes like the Image in Daniel Dan. 2.45.
, whose head was gold, his breast of silver, his belly of brass, his legs of
iron, his feet of clay; thus does he wax worse and worse, till at last as a
stone cut out of a mountain without hands smote the image and brake it in
pieces: So the judgments of God, not created in the beginning by the hand of
God, but cut out of the mountain of man's transgressions, does beat him in
pieces like a potters vessel. For if our sins do increase, and come one in
the neck of another, like the messengers of Job, our punishments must needs
follow like the plagues of Egypt. Therefore Woe be to them (says the Prophet)
that Esa. 5.18.
draw iniquity in the cords of vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes. Cords are
twisted of many small threads which severally have very small force, but united
are very strong: and so it comes to pass, that the threads of smaller sins
being twisted by often committing, and drawn out by long continuance, do at
last make this great gable of the sin against the Holy Ghost, wherewith the
sinners hands and feet being bound, He is cast into utter darkness, where is
nothing Mat. 22.13.
but wayling and weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Be careful to avoid the least sin, lest the same be an introduction to
greater. For as the Philistims came upon Sampson and overcame him, by diverse
insinuations; first bound his hands, then platted his hair, and at last shaued
off his locks: So do sin and Satan wind themselves in by diverse inferior
temptations, still proceeding and augmenting the same till the locks of grace
be quite shaued off. As it is said of Ninus Victores, Justin. 1. lib. 1
Quaeque sequentis victoriae causa fuit, every victory was the means of another
conquest: So every smaller suggestion of Satan becomes an instrument of a
greater temptation. Had king David at the first been persuaded to murder Vriah
he would have said, what murder Vriah, my loyal subject, my faithful
servant? God forbid, not for the one half of my kingdom. Yet after that he
had sinned with Bathsheba, adultry made way to cruelty. Sins are like the
sores of the body, which at first are but vicious humors, then tumors, after
that impostumate, and at last become incurable. So the sores of sin wax
greater and greater, Mortem parit immortalem. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 6. Bern. de
aduent. Ser. 6. Et in Cant. Sermon. 15.
till they breed and bring eternal death. And therefore Bernard does very
fitly call sin morbum animae, and mortem animae, The souls sickness, and
the souls death. Thus as robbers put some little villain into the house which
sets open the doors to all the thieves: And as warriors by a smaller breach do
get into the besieged City, and then do rob, and kill, and burn, and utterly
spoil it; So does the devil get entrance and advantage of men by some smaller
sin, and prevails more and more till he has battered the foundation of
their faith, dispoyled them of the rich ornaments of grace, and become even
Lord of the Soul.

If at any time you be cast down by the temptations of the devil (as alas who
can always stand) let him not keep you down. That is good counsel of our
Savior, Reu. 2.4.
Remember whence thou art fallen, repent and amend. The prodigal child is set
forth a pattern to this purpose, who Luke 15: Ver. 18.21.
said (and did what he said) that he would rise and go to his father,
confess his sins and crave pardon for the same. Redeat homo per quotidiana
lamenta, vnde corruit per vana delectamenta Aug. de temp. Ser. 182.
, says Saint Austin. Let a man return by daily lamentations, to that from
whence he is fallen by vain delectations. Repentance is the only stay that
holds us from falling into hell. Repent therefore and proportion your
Repentance according to your sins, like Manasses, who having caused the
streets of Jerusalem to flow with blood, made the prison in Babylon to run
with tears. Cyprian de Laps. Ser. 5.
Alto vulnere diligens medicina non desit (says Cyprian,) a deep wound must
have a diligent cure. Thus let every sinner raise up himself by true and
unfeigned Repentance, lest his slippes of infirmity become the fall of Apostasy.

Take heed of backsliding, reciduation in sin is no less dangerous then a
relapse in sickness. The bone often broken will hardly be set; The tree that's
often transplanted will scarcely prosper. Has Christ washed Revel. 1.6.
thee in his blood? Cured thee with his stripes, Esa. 53.5.
and healed thee with his wounds? has he paid thy debts, cancelled the bond
upon the cross, and set thee up being a Col. 2.13.
bankrupt in grace? Return not with the swine to wallow in thy filthy sins,
let not the devil wound thee again by fresh bleeding iniquities, run not
into debt hy new transgressions, Yea sin no more lest a worse thing happen
Ioh. 5.14.
to thee.

Thus all sins are carefully to be avoided, yet some are more especially to
be shunned as having a spice of this dangerous disease, the sin against the
holy Ghost, and some duties likewise are more especially to be practiced as
means and mithridates against that woeful evil. Amongst many I will observe
some in both kinds.

It is dangerous to sin against knowledge, and more dangerous yet to sin
against the checks of conscience, but most dangerous to sin against the
motions of Gods blessed spirit. It is dangerous madness for the pilot to shut
his eyes against the stars that should guide him. And such is the case of all
those, who wilfully put out the light of knowledge, and regard not the checks
of conscience. The Lord tells Israel in the second of Hosea, I will stop thy way
with thorns, and so does he set the stings of conscience to stay the sinner,
if it be possible, from his wicked courses, and fearful is the neglect
thereof. For he that regards not the cry of his sins to his conscience, shall
surely have them crying to heaven against him for vengeance.

Take heed of scorning or vilifying the blessed word of God, especially the
Gospel of Peace. When men shall be angry with the word, 1 Reg. 22.8.
as Ahab was with Michaiah, because it reproues their corruptions, it is with
them as our Savior says, Ioh. 3.19.20.
They hate the light because their works are evil: and it argues their
deformities, that they cannot abide to look into the glass Iam. 1.23.
which discouers them. When men do thus disesteeme and shun the Gospel of
Christ, it is a shrewd sign that the same is no pardon of theirs, but rather
their indictment. There are some who have scarce three sentences of Scripture,
yet of those they have no further use, but to apply them profanely in the
midst of their vain exercises. Let such take heed: We say it is not safe to
make sport with edge tools; but I am sure it is dangerous to jest with Gods
sacred ordinances.

Oppose not your selves against any work of grace, that is eminent in any of
Gods servants, or made evident to your Consciences by the word or works of
God. This was the fearful sin of many of the Jews, who though they beheld
the divine power shining in the words and works of Christ; yet did they oppose
themselves against him, charging him in a blasphemous manner, to cast out
Devils by the help of Beelzebub the prince of Devils. And such were those whom
the blessed and mild Martyr Saint Stephen takes up so roundly, calling them
stiff necked, of uncircumcised hearts.

Take heed of inconstancy and wavering in your holy profession, as some do
Heb. 10.39.
which withdraw themselves to perdition. The Apostle here warnes us that we
cast not away our confidence; and reason, for by it Ephesians 6.16.
we quench the fiery darts of the Devil. We should not be like Demosthenes,
who in the midst of the battle cast away his buckler inscribed with golden
letters Plutar. in vita Demost.
(...), that is, good fortune: But rather imitate that worthy Thebane
Epaminondas, who being ready to expire in his tent, enquired whether the enemy
had got his target which fell from him in receiving of a deadly wound: But it
being preserved and presented to him, Justin. lib. 7.
Veluti laborum suorum gloriaeque socium osculatus est: He kissed it as the
associate in his labors, and the companion of his honors. Some send away
Religion for a time, thinking to take it up again at their pleasure, but such
often times prove like Noah's Raven, they houer and flutter up and down, but
hardly return into the Arc of the Church. There have been diverse
malcontents amongst us, who have had their excursions, and revolted to popery,
but let those who are wandering return with speed to the bosom of their
mother, Non perdit visc^ra via matter Eclesia. August. Hom. 27.
Who has not lost the bowels of compassion, except they have lost all sense of
grace. Let those that are returned be seriously humbled for this their revolt,
as for a fearful sin, and bless God for their conversion, as for a great
mercy. And let every one take heed of inconstancy in his holy profession, lest
he become like Ecebolius, Socrates lib. 3. cap. 11.
who as Socrates says changed with every Emperor, like the weather cock with
every wind; and as he began so he lived and died an unconstant man. If
therefore your cogitations be never so little declining, stop the course of
them whilst you have means to recover your selves, and make such a league with
Religion as Elizeus made with Elias; As the Lord lives, and as thy Soul
lives I will not leave thee.

Take heed of presumptuous sins; For who would adventure to take deadly
poison, though he had the best mithridate in the world? (...). Gal. 6.1.
If a Christian shall be suddenly surprised by Satan, before he can bethink
himself of the nature or danger of the sin, Sam. 11.2.
as David was, when he was ensnared with the beauty of Bathsheba, he is to be
pitied: But when a man shall immediately upon the temptation run to the
mercy of God Romans 2.4.
, abuse his patience, and say presumptuously within himself, like him in the
Psalm Psalm. 10. Ver. 6. Ver. 12.

Tush, I shall never be cast down. Tush, God has forgotten, he hides away
his face and will never see it, his case is very dangerous. Therefore did the
Prophet David pray so earnestly Psalm. 19.13.
, Lord keep thy servant from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me, so shall I be innocent from the great offense. Surely beloved, he that
auoydeth sins of presumption shall never fall into this heinous sin of
Apostasy.

Especially take heed of Malice and hatred. Malice against men is dangerous,
but if it bend it self against the God of heaven, his servants, or his sacred
truth, it is damnable and odious, for it is peccatum Diabolicum, the Devils
proper and especial sin. Augustine.
I cannot better compare a man in this case, then to mount Aetna, which has
the fire boiling and burning within it, and breaks forth sometimes suddenly
into furious flames: For so when the fire of this malice shall boil and burn
in the heart of a man, it will quickly break forth into the flames of
blasphemy, as it appears in the practice of the malicious Jews.

Honor the word of God, especially the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 2.16.
as the word of life, Romans 1.16.
as the power of God to salvation. Esteem it and rejoice in it, as the wise
men did in the star which led them to Christ, Mat. 2.10.
When they saw the star they rejoiced with an exceeding great joy. When you
hear or read it, do it with all reverence, and receive it as 1 These. 2.13.
the word of God, which works in them that believe, and being grafted in you
Iam. 1.21.
is able to save your Souls. Whatsoever you learn forth of the word, if it be
a known truth, do not wilfully reject it, but willingly embrace it, though it
cross your profits or your pleasures never so much. If we be weak yet in no
case let us be wilful.

What good lessons soever you learn, be careful to put them in practice; God
looks that every talent should be employed to his glory. Therefore let not
your knowledge swim idly in your brains, like the heavens in their bare
reuolutions, much less in their malevolent conjunctions, but see that it be
fruitful in your lives, like the heavens in their sweet influences. I have
read of a Pyrat who taking a vessel that was for Dover, and falling to rifle
her, happened upon a Bible, which when he opened to see what book it was, he
light suddenly upon that precept, Thou shall not steal, whereupon his heart
was stricken with remorse: But one of his company taking notice of the accident,
said in a desperate manner, Wherefore came we to sea then? and so cast the
Bible over the board. This was a fearful putting out the light of knowledge,
and neglect of an extraordinary admonition, which the offender did exceedingly
bewail at his death.

Look to the sincerity of your hearts; for the heart is the fountain, and
therefore it is necessary that it be kept pure and uncorrupted. Sickness
seazeth easily and dangerously upon corrupt bodies, but those which by
sobriety and temperance are kept sound, cannot be so quickly infected. Cum
viritim Athenienses aegroturent. Aeli: va. Histo. lib. 17
As Aelian writes of Socrates, who retained his health when the Athenians were
every man sick. So hypocrisy lets in this sin readily, but sincerity
keeps it out as carefully. The Apostle therefore admonishes fitly in the
third to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.13.
Take heed that there be not in you an evil and unfaithful heart to depart
from the living God. And in the twelfth to the Hebrews Heb. 3.12.
he exhorts; Make straight steps to your feet, least that which is halting be
turned out of the way: showing that a false heart void of sincerity draws
away from God, and halting hypocrisy leads us out of the way of life.
Therefore whatsoever we profess, let it be in sincerity; for commonly where
religion begins in hypocrisy, it ends in apostasy.

Cherish the fear of God: An awful and humble spirit is a singular blessing.
Saint Cyprian says well, Timor innocentiae custos, Cyprian. Epist. 2.
Fear is a good keeper of innocence. And Solomon says, Prou. 14.27.
The fear of the Lord is a wellspring of life to avoid the snares of death.
This deadly sin cannot have access to that heart, where the fear of God
resideth. For as the veins that have narrow passages, do hardly receive
poison: So where the passages of your souls are straightned with a reverend
awe of the majesty of God, you can never be infected with the poison of this
blasphemy, which is ever accompanied with haughty pride. Therefore I may say
with Solomon, Prou. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears always, but he that hardens his heart shall
fall into evil.

Be careful to entertain the motions of Gods blessed spirit: For how can you
with hope and comfort knock at the door of mercy, if you will not hear the
spirit of God knocking at the door of your hearts? What true joy can your
hearts have, when you grieve the spirit of God by sending him away? and what
know you, if you send him away, whether he will ever return to you again?

When you have entertained the good motions of Gods spirit, be careful to
cherish them. Behold how our Savior rowseth up the Church of Sardis in the
third of the Revelation: Revel. 3.2.
Be awake and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to dye. The
Lord cannot abide any loss in these rich Jewels: And therefore Saint Paul
exhorts, 1 These 5.19.
quench not the spirit; as the holy fire which came from heaven was carefully
preserved in the Temple: So must you see that in your souls, the temples of
the holy Ghost, his heavenly graces be carefully cherished. Yea the Lord looks
for an improuement of his graces, according to the Apostles exhortation; Grow
in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Lastly, Ephesians. 6.
get the spirit of prayer and supplication, which is the special part of the
Apostles complete armor. Magnum oration propugnaculum. Chrysostom. Idem de orando
Deum. lib. 2.
This is a mighty fortress against the assaults of Satan; yea it is (says
Chrysostom) the life and sinews of our souls. Prayer is an especial means
to inlighten the understanding with knowledge, and to water the heart with
grace. Eusebius Eusebius. hist. Eccles. 5.5.
shows that the Christians by Prayer obtained fulmen aduersus hostis, imbrem
ad refocillandum exercitum: lightning against the enemy, and rain to refresh
the army. So be careful daily and duly to power forth your prayers to God,
and you shall be fortified against this and other sins; you shall be
furnished with grace and established with the Lords free spirit for ever.

3. Here is matter of consolation for every penitent heart; because Repentance
is a most certain supersedeas, and evidence of freedom from this fearful
sin, which if you have obtained, though you have wounded spirits, as Solomon
Prou. 18.14.
speaks; though your souls were subject to a thousand Ulcers, as Chrysostom
Paulus eos curauit qui sexcenta vlcera habebant, Chrysostom. in Philip. Hom. 4.
says, yet may I say of your sins as our Savior said of Lazarus sickness,
John 11.
they are not unto death. For if they were, your hearts would be like the
Anuile in beating back the hammer of repentance. Only this sin does
distinguish between the sins of the elect and the reprobate. There is no
other into which the child of God may not fall, but into this he cannot. As
the Lord said to Abimelech, Genesis 20.6.
I kept thee that thou should not sin: So may I say truly, The Lord
keeps all his servants that they cannot fall into this sin. Their spiritual
building may by diverse temptations be sore shaken and battered, but the same
can never be utterly demolished, because they have laid their foundation upon
the immovable rock. Are there any here that would gladly be assured in their
souls, that they are free from this sin (as I know by ample experience, that
tender hearts are apt to entertain troublesome fears) hearken then unto me,
and I will give you in a few words a most infallible direction for your
assurance. Examine your selves, and search your hearts, if you have faith to
believe Gods promises, Repentance to bewail your sins, assure your selves
you are free, you are far from the committing of this sin against the holy
Ghost. The force of faith our Savior shows in the fifth of John, with a double
asseueration for confirmation thereof. John 5.25.
Verily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation.
August. in Psalm. 205. Oppugnat diabolus* non expugnat.
He that gets the fort of faith shall be safe, as Saint Augustine says; Satan
may assault him, he can never subdue him. The woman with the bloody issue may
be a comfortable instance in this respect. Mark. 5.33.
She came trembling, and said, If I may but touch the hem of his garment I
shall be safe. It is good when the heart speaks rather then the tongue. But
what said she? If I may but touch, a weak action, the hemme of his garment,
the remotest part, with a trembling hand, a feeble apprehension, yet says
she, If I may do this I shall be whole. So be you assured, that if you can
lay hold upon Christ Jesus, with the hand of a true faith, though it be feeble,
virtue shall come forth of his wounds to cure the wounds of your souls, and
the bloody issue of your sins. When the man in the Gospel Mark 9.
brought unto Christ his son possessed with a dumb spirit, whom the
Disciples could not cast out, he besought him thus, If thou can do any
thing, Verse. 22.
help us, and have compassion upon us. To whom our Savior answered, If thou
can believe, Verse. 23.
all things are possible to him that believes. If thou can says the poor
man; nay, if thou can says our blessed Savior. If the man have belief in
Christ, then Christ has relief for the man, and so may I say to you, beloved;
If you have grace to believe, then have you not so sinned against grace and
mercy, but that the Lord has plentiful redemption for you in store. Christ
Jesus himself calls you, the Church exhorts you, the spirit of God inuites you,
to take the pardon for your sins and the pawn of your inheritance. The
spirit and the spouse says come, and let him that hears say come, and let
him that is a thirst come, and let whosoever will take of the water of life
Revel. 22.17.
freely. Behold here is that Aqua coelestis, that whosoever tastes of, he
shall never thirst any more; here is that Aqua John 4.14.
vitae, which whosoever takes and drink he shall never see death, Yea though
he were dead, yet shall it restore him to John 11.25.
life. Therefore I may say to every Christian believer, as our Savior said to
the woman os Canaan, Mat. 15.28.
O woman great is thy faith; be it unto thee as thou desire.

But for as much as diverse delude themselves with a vain conceit of that Faith
they have not, and others are dismaide because they doubt of their Faith which
sometimes they feel not, therefore I must further exhort every one of you to
try your hearts and examine your lives concerning your repentance. For that
gracious promise shall ever be found yea and Amen. That he which is soundly
and seriously penitent, so that he turn away from his evil ways, he shall
not die but live. Ezekiel. 18.22.
Yea for the assurance of this, you have the Lords oath, Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I live says the Lord, I delight not in the death of a sinner.

Psalm. 51.15.
The sacrifices of God are a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart,
the Lord will not despise; It is (...) not a sacrifice, but sacrifices, because
it is instar omnium, in stead of all, as Tremelius truly says: Which
whenever we offer up, the Lord smells a savor of mercy and compassion, as he
smelled a savor of rest in the sacrifice of Genesis 8.21.
Noah. O bring then this sacrifice to the Lords sacred Altar, and behold you
shall always find the door of his mercy open to receive you, and the arms
of his compassion stretched out to embrace you, as the prodigal child found
at his return, of whom Saint Ambrose says, filius timet conuitium, pater
adornat conuiuium. The son feared some sharp reproof, but the father
prepared a dainty banquet. When Nathan reproved David for his 2 Samuel 24.10
sins, it is said that David's heart did scourge him: A fit Metaphor to
express the nature of Repentance, which is flagellum peccati, even the scourge
of sin, which is flagellum animae, the scourge of the Soul. Do your hearts
smart and smite you, and are your Souls troubled for your sins? be not
dismaide: For as the Angel troubled the Poole of Bethesda, for the curing of
the diseased: So Gods blessed spirit of compunction has been with you and
troubled your souls for your cure and consolation. To conclude therefore, if
all that I have now spoken has wrought in you an indignation and dislike of
your selves, and a detestation and loathing of your sins, with an earnest and
a resolute purpose to banish and abandon them: Then dare I be bold to pronounce
that you are free from this sin against the holy Ghost, yea, the God of
heaven has thereby sealed you a pardon for all your sins; Though they were
as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, though they were red as skarlet,
they shall be as white as Wool. Which mercy that we may obtain, let us
humble our selves in Prayer.

Let us pray.
O Lord our God, who art able to preserve us blameless, and to present us
faultlesse before thy glory with joy, even for thy tender mercies sake defend
us from this dreadful sin of Apostasy. Keep us by thy power that we fall
not, restore us by thy mercy when we are fallen, preserve us by thy grace that
we never finally fall away. O let not the gates of thy mercy be shut upon us:
neither suffer the gates of hell to prevail against us: But grant good Lord,
that albeit our frail nature cannot obtain an absolute freedom from sins
of infirmity yet we may never set our selves against heaven, or sin with a
high hand. Renew a right spirit within us, that we may bewail our sins; Take
not thy holy spirit from us, that we may reform our lives: Establish us with
thy free spirit, that we may be confirmed in thy truth. That being effectually
sanctified in the kingdom of grace, we may be eternally blessed in the
kingdom of glory, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, our alone
and all-sufficient Savior, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons
and one eternal God, let all praise, power and dominion be ascribed by all thy
servants, both men and Angels, this day and for ever Amen. AMEN.

FINIS.
THE CHRISTIAN PETITIONER. Showing how we must sue in the Courts of HEAVEN,
both for Reward and Remission. A Sermon Preached at OXFORD, the seventh day of
July, being the Act Sunday.

By JOHN DENISON Doctor of Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplayne.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at the sign of
the greene-Dragon in Paul's Churchyard. 1620.

A SERMON PREACHED AT OXFORD, the 7. of July being the Act Sunday.
NEHEMIAH. 13.22. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and pardon me
according to thy great mercy.


Diverse writers, both divine and humane (Right reverend, Right Worshipful and
well-beloved in Christ Jesus) do very fitly compare both evil men, and manners,
in Civil and Christian government, to badde humors in the body, and the
Magistrate to the Physician, to whom the cure thereof does belong. Now as the
soundest bodies have their bad humors, which must be purged; so the best
governed Commonwealths and States do in time grow subject to corruptions,
which must be redressed. The truth of this is most apparent in this present
Scripture; For Nehemiah coming by Artaxerxes warrant to the government of
Jerusalem, found the house of God profaned by Eliashib, who of sacred
structures had built a Chamber for Tobiah his kinseman. This abuse, as it
grieved Nehemiah sore, so did he like a worthy Magistrate redress it; and then
came, not to king Artaxerxes, but to the King of Kings, to whom especially he
had done that service, saying, as it is in the fourteenth verse, Remember me, O
my God, concerning this, and blot not out the kindness I have showed to the
house of my God. Again, as he found Gods sanctuary polluted, so did he find
his Sabbath profaned; for whereas almighty God had consecrated that day to a
spiritual Mart, there were some who had employed it in carnal Merchandise,
where Nehemiah having reproved the delinquents. and reformed the abuse, comes
with a new Petition to the Lord of the Sabbath, saying, Remember me, O my God,
concerning this, and pardon me according to thy great mercy.

Of whose speeches, I may fitly use Bernards words concerning Saint Paul, Sic
vniuersa depromit, Super illa verba, Romans 14.17. Sermon 2.
and sic intonat spiritu, and virtute, vt in serie ordinem, in sensu
plenitudinem, in vtroque connexionem mirabiliter extendat. In such a powerful
and pithy manner does he utter his words, that you may behold in his method,
order; in his matter, copy: and in both an admirable connection. Which that we
may the better observe, we will consider the words.

1. First, in their excellent connection, and therein I note. 1. A notable
harmony. 2. A natural precedence.
2. According to their evident distribution, and therein I observe a double
petition. 1. The one put up in the Lords Court of Exchequer. Remember me, O my
God, concerning this. Wherein I note. 1. The subject. What he does desire.
Remember me. 2. The object, of whom he does desire it, O my God. 3. The motive,
why he does desire it. Concerning this.
2. The other in the Court of Requests, Pardon me according to thy great
mercy. Where I note. 1 The matter he desires to be granted. Pardon me. 2 The
manner how he desires to have it effected. According to thy great mercy.




The Harmony.
AS skillful Physicians do so commixe their medicines, that whilst they
comfort the stomach, they may not inflame the Liver; And as good builders will
have care, that in raising one part of the house, they do not cast down
another: so does worthy Nehemiah, (a singular pattern of piety and wisdom)
in these his Petitions. For whilst he prepares a cordial anodyne, Remember
me, O my God, concerning this, least the same might puff him up, he mixeth
with it this corroding plaster, Pardon me according to thy great mercy. Whilst
he raises the Fort of his confidence, in the expectation of a blessed reward,
he lays the foundation thereof upon an humble conceit. Thus must we unite our
virtues in a golden chain, 2 Pet. 1.5.
as Saint Peter exhorts, and see that our actions do symbolize, like the
elements in compounded bodies, as the Philosopher speaks. I may truly say of
these two Petitions, that here is in them concordia discors; Yet like different
ingrediences, they make a sovereign medicine, like discordant notes in
Music, they yield an excellent harmony, and consort with David's ditty in the
hundredth and first Psalm, Psalm. 101.1.
I will sing of mercy and judgment, to thee O Lord will I sing. For here is a
strain of mercy, and a strain of judgment, and both sung to the Lord. To
come with the first strain alone, Remember me, would suppose too much
presumption; to come with the other only Pardon me, might argue a total
neglect of a Christian conversation; but being both united they are like sweet
flowers bound up together, and yield a delicate smell, they are like the
present carried by Jacobs Sons into Egypt, Genesis 43.11.
they find gracious acceptance. Me^ ^re in danger (says Saint Augustine)
sperando, Aug. Tract. 33. in Johan.
and desperando. Some fall by presumption, and some are cast down by
desperation; but here is a preservative against both that Scylla and Charybdis.
It is Satan's usual practice, having himself passed through great extremes
(as being cast down from heaven to hell, and changed from a glorious Angel to
a damned spirit) still to be laboring men to extremes, Zeph. 1.12.
If he cannot make them frozen in their dregs, like the Israelites, he will
seek to possess them with too fiery spirits, as he did the Disciples, Luke
9.54.
he will either seduce men by preciseness, even to needelesse contention, or
induce them to profaneness in a wicked conversation; either work them to
loose behauior with the filthy Libertine, or to vain ostentation with the
vaunting Pharisee. But there is a golden mean to be kept between these
extremes, and happy is he, who with worthy Nehemiah can find it. He that
will sail safely, must as well look to the balase of his Ship, as to his
sails; Faith and Hope are the sails, Fear and Reverence the balase of the
soul. Faith hoiseth up sail, and makes forth for the prize, and price of the
high calling, Phil. 3.14.
calling for her reward, Remember me, O my God, concerning this; Fear and
Reverence do moderate her pace, lest she dash against the rocks of
presumption, and cries, Pardon me according to thy great mercy. Thus shall you
see all Gods servants sailing toward the haven of eternal bliss, of whom
Saint Paul is a notable president; Romans 7.25.
In my mind I serve the law of God, but in my flesh the law of sin In my
mind I serve the law of God, here comes in, Remember me, O my God,
concerning this. But in my flesh the law of sin, here comes in, Pardon me
according to thy great mercy. As the unregenerate man, being totally
transported to vanity and iniquity, has nothing to say but only pardon me;
so the most sanctified servants of God, so long as they carry about this mass
of corruption, having a double motion, like the lower spheres, the one of
grace, the other of nature, as they have some thing to ask reward for, so have
they something to crave pardon for. If therefore at any time your minds be
dejected with a sense of your frailties, get the testimony of a good
conscience, that you have seriously and sincerely inclined your selves to the
service of God, so may you say with comfort, Remember me, O my God, concerning
this: and if with the Swanne you begin to swell, in viewing the feathers of
your imperfect perfections, cast down your eyes upon the black feet of your
many infirmities, and that shall make you say in humility, Pardon me according
to thy great mercy. This, if you be the Lords servants, will be the mixture of
your actions; this, if you come into the Lords Court, must be the tenor of
your Petitions.

The Precedencie.
Again, as these Petitions do yield an excellent harmony, so must we note
their natural Precedence: First, Remember me, then pardon me. For every one
should endeavor a restraint of sin, before the remedy, and propound to
himself a reward of piety, before a pardon for infirmity. We must first
affect by our desires, and effect by our endeavors, that which may imbolden us
to say, Remember me, O my God, concerning this; and then, wherein our frail
endeavors come too short of the mark, we may opportunely supplicate the
eternal Majesty, with the Petition following, Pardon me according to thy
great mercy. This is Saint John's method for holy conversation, My little
Babes, 1 Ioh. 2.1.
these things I write unto you that you sin not: but if any man sin, we
have an Advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous. Here the first and fundamental
care of a Christian, must be to avoid the sin, and only after the
surprizall, must he look toward the Mercy seat, and have recourse to the
gracious Advocate Christ Jesus. The careful Physician will rather use
preserving antidotes to prevent a disease, then healing medicines to cure it;
the industrious sailer will rather endeavor to keep the water out of the Ship,
then labor to pumpe it out: So the discreet Christian must rather prevent the
committing of an offense, then crave pardon for the committing of it, as Cato
the Censor said of Aulus Albinus in Aulus Gellius, Aul Gell. noct. At. lib.
11. ca. 8
he must rather forth of his industry expect a reward with worthy Nehemiah,
then forth of his negligence look for an indulgence with the unthrifty
servant, Mat. 25.
Salomons counsel to a surety is fit for a sinner, If thou have stricken hands
with a stranger, Prou. 6.1.
and art ensnared, make haste to deliver thy self, but his method of safety is
more notable, Pro. 17.18.
Touch not the hand, become not surety for another. If sin and Satan have
ensnared thee, then free thy self by Repentance, but if thou be free, avoid
the snare by prevention. Eccles. 21.2.
First fly from sin as from a Serpent, as the Son of Syrach exhorts, but
if thou have taken this Serpent into thy hand, rest not till like Moses Serpent
it be turned into a rod again, to scourge thy soul with remorse; But first (I
say) fly from it, Pro. 14.27.
That the fear of the Lord may be a well spring of life, to avoid the snares
of death. Thus was Adam forewarned, that he might be fore-armed, not for cure,
but for prevention. For he had before his fall only that commination as a
defensitiue, Genes. 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, and not till
after his fall that consolation; Genes. 3.15.
The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent. Which makes me
to disclaim that conceit of learned Zanchius, who supposes, that Adam was
cast into a sleep, De oper. Dei. De creat. hominis. lib. 1. cap. 1.
that so he might be informed concerning the spiritual marriage of Christ and
his Church. For this had been to discover the remedy, before a sense of the
misery, and to offer an occasion of precipitation, rather then a means of
prevention. The good Soldier, when he goes into the field, has his mind
upon weapons, not upon wounds, and propounds to himself a reward of victory
by the hand of his General, rather then the benefit of cure by the hand of his
Surgeon: so says Saint Augustine, August. hom. 27. inter. 50.
hostem praesentem euade; So does Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6. most amply and
excellently stir up every one that will be a Soldier in Christ's Camp,
Ephesians. 6.11.17
to take unto him the whole armor of God, to resist the Devil, and to
withstand his assaults, and so to manage the combat, that he meditate nothing
but the conquest. It is one of Satan's especial stratagems, to delude poor
sinners with a preposterous course, persuading them lo lift up their eyes to
the hand of mercy, to imbolden them to sin, when they should behold the arm
of Justice, to prevent the offense. And, in truth, it is the worlds general
error, whereby millions of Christians do betray their souls into the hands
of the Devil; whilst the fore-conceipt of remission is made by them a plaster
of presumption; their account of impunitie is a path to impiety, and the hope
of a pardon hinders them from the expectation of a reward. For when they are
tempted, Attendunt ad misericordiam, Aug. in Psa. 100
non timent iudiciam. They do not consider what danger they incur by
yielding, and what benefit they might have by victory, but presently they think
upon Gods mercy; and they esteem their sins, as Lot said of Zoar, Genes.
19.20.
Is not this a little one, and my soul shall live. They say with Naaman, even
before they come into the house of Rimmon, God be merciful unto me concerning
this. 2 Reg. 5.18.
Thus do they look up to the brazen Serpent, before their souls have been
stung with the fiery Serpent, and they add presumption to their transgression.

To conclude this point. Behold here, and detest the odious, and preposterous
course of the Romanists, who give Absolution upon intended villainies, and grant
pardons and indulgences for pains due to future sins. What is this (I pray
you) but to open a gate and a gappe to all abomination, and to give poor
souls free passage to hell? And observe, I beseech you, this safe and saving
method; when you are tempted to sin, set before you the wrath of God, which
is like a flaming fire, and remember, that tribulation and anguish shall be
upon every soul that sins. Romans 2.9.
When you are drowsy in Gods service, think upon the blessed recompense of
reward, Romans 2.10.
and consider that to them, Who by continuance in well-doing seek glory, and
honor, and immortality, shall be everlasting life, that the one may be a
happy retentiue from vice, the other a powerful motive to virtue. And be you
assured of this, that he which will not apply the plaster of grace to prevent
sin, shall with more difficulty obtain the salve of mercy to cure it; he
that has not endeavored to bring something into the Lords Exchequer for his
reward, shall hardly find favor in his Court of Requests, for the obtaining
of a pardon. And so much for the Connection of these words.

The Subject.
REmember me. When almighty God appeared, and spoke to the Israelites upon
mount Sinai, as we read in the twentieth of Exodus, Exodus 10.19.
they being not able to endure that manifestation of his Majesty, desired the
ministry of man. The same infirmity which changed the ministry, changed also
the style of the Almighty, according to that in the sixth to the Romans, I
speak to you after the manner of men, Romans 6.19.
because of the weakness of your flesh. As the Nurse speaks to her little
Babes in an Infants language, so does almighty God speak to us, not having so
much regard to strict propriety, as our shallow capacity, using such phrases
as this, of his forgetting, calling to his remembrance, and the like, infinite
places throughout the passages of sacred Scripture: of which kind of speeches
Chrysostom says well, If we consider the eternal Majesty, indignum fuisset
hoc verbum: this speech had been unfit, but if we remember our infirmity,
Apposite est dictum, it was spoken very fitly. The works of God are
incomprehensible, therefore the holy Ghost speaks to us of earthly matters in
humane phrases, wherewith we are acquainted, to acquaint us with heavenly,
from which we are estranged. It is enough that the patient receive cure, though
he conceive not the property of every ingredience in his medicine; If we be
made partakers of the influence of grace, it is well for us, though we know not
the nature of every divine constellation; If God do so remember us, that he
do us good, let him express it in what phrase he will, let him effect it by
what means he will: we must acknowledge his wisdom, and rejoice in his
favor. Men, when they remember their friends, will do them good, God when he
does his friends good, is said to remember them. For as in the work of
creation, there went with Gods dixit his benedixit, and with his ordinauit his
ornauit, so in the administration of all things with his remembrance, there
goes a Recompense, and with his regard a Reward. But what? is oblivion
incident to that all-seeing and all-searching spirit, who is able, even vno
actu, in one instant, to take exact and perfect notice of every object, action,
and cogitation in the world? Has God forgotten to be gracious? must he be put
in mind of his servants, that Nehemiah here says, Remember me? Nothing less;
for though a woman should forget the child of her womb, (which is so
unnatural, that it is almost impossible,) yet will not God forget his
children. Esaias 49.15.
If all kindness and compassion were lost in Women, Men and Angels, yet might
it be found in our gracious God. Plini hist. not. lib. 7. cap. 24.
Cyrus in Pliny is famous for his strength of memory, being able to call all
his Soldiers by their names; but what is that to the exact and infinite memory
of almighty God, Psalm. 147.4.
Who tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by their names?
This faculty even in Angels, compared with God, is but as a Star, in Man as a
Candle to the glorious Sun. Yea, what proposition is there between things
finite and infinite? When King Assuerus could not sleep, he caused the
Chronicles to be turned over, where he found the good service of Mardochai
recorded, Hest 6.1.
and he rewarded it. Psol 121.
Behold, he that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor fleepe. He keeps a
Register, Malach. 3.16.
and a book of Remembrance is written before him, for them that fear the
Lord. And in this Chronicle, all our good service, even every action of
obedience is recorded, that it may be rewarded. When men are careful to
remember any thing, they use to put some ring, or some such other thing upon
their finger, or by some such other means to revive and relieve the memory: so
the Lord does grave his children upon the palms of his hands, Esa. 49.16.
that he may not forget them. And in this sense does Cassiodorus expound that
place in the eight of the Canticles, Cant. 8.6.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and a signet upon thine arm. Behold, such
actions and attributes are ascribed to almighty God, not that he needs any
thing to assist his infinite memory, but all this is to inlighten our shallow
conceit, and to help our great infirmity; Phil. 4.6.
and therefore whereas S. Paul bids us in all things make known our case to
God: S. Augustine Aug. Epist. 121.
by way of explication, says, Non Deo, sed nobis, Not so much to inform God
concerning our wants, as to confirm our selves in expectation of a supply.
Thus the remembrance of Gods careful remembrance must yield us comfort, and
the meditation of his gracious favor, should be a check to our diffidence, a
prop to our confidence, and a motive to obedience. Does God grave us upon his
hands, set us as a seal upon his heart, and a signet upon his arm, and yet we
doubt whether he does remember us? Does God take notice of the Israelites
grieuances in Egypt? Exodus 3.9.
Does he look upon them through the pillar of fire; Exodus 14.24.
and whilst they are marching, is marshalling their affairs, making the sea a
Gallery, and the clowdie pillar a Canopie unto them, and yet we doubt whether
he does regard us? How justly do we incur that weighty reproof of the
Disciples, Mat. 6.30.8.26
O ye of little faith? How worthily do we deserve to be styled with the
Israelites, A faithless generation? Psalm. 78.9.
But let us look up to the eye of Gods providence, and the hand of his
protection; let the Remembrance of his care be the Center of our Confidence,
and let us evermore cast forth the holy Anchor of our constant hope in this
fair haven. If we be like the wounded man by the high way side, whom neither
Priest nor Leuite regarded, Luke 10.
like poor Lazarus at the rich man's gate, Luke 16.
whom no man remembered, or like the lame man at the poole of Bethesda, whom no
man relieved; Yet let us remember, John 5.
that Christ Jesus is our gracious remembrancer in heaven. Luke 23.42, 43
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, says the penitent
Thief; This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, says our blessed Savior.
Behold, he that had not one word of defense for himself, or rebuke for his
enemies, has a comfortable answer for a distressed Soul. When Lazarus was
sick, as we read in the eleventh of John, Ioh. 11.3.
his sisters sent to our Savior this message, Behold he whom thou love is
sick; Aug. in Joan. Tract. 49.
Non dixerunt veni (says S. Augustine) amanti tantummodo nunciandum fuit: They
needed not to desire his presence, or crave relief, it was sufficient to
relate their wants, because Christ loved Lazarus. Jude verse 21.
Let us keep our selves in the love of God, as Saint Jude exhorts, then let
our prayers be our messengers to heaven, and we shall find that we are not
forgotten. If we be not presently relieved, let us not fear that we are
utterly neglected, distulit sanare vt posset resuscitare (as Saint Augustine
says) Christ deferred to restore Lazarus to health, because he meant to raise
him up from death. Gods suspending of his present favor, is commonly the
preparing of a greater blessing; O tarry the Lords leisure then, wait
patiently with Noah: so shall your prayers, sent forth of a sanctified heart,
return from heaven with a comfortable echo unto your souls, like Noah's Dove
with an olive branch into the Arc. Job. 1.
Does Job serve God for naught? says Satan, why no, nor shall any else. Let
us bring in our bills into his Court, and we shall receive present pay: Christ
has it ready in his hand; Behold (says he) I come shortly, Revel. 22.12.
and my reward is with me, to give every one according to his works.
Bellarmine in his fifth book De iustificatione and eight Chapter, picketh a
needelesse quarrel against Calvin: Negare videtur operandum esse intuitu
mercedis. Calvin (says he) seems to deny that the view of reward should
stir us up to good works, but this is a most injurious imputation: For
Calvin only denies, that the view of the reward should be our principal
motive to good works, which is most true. For the glory of God must be the
primum mobile of our obedience. The sanctified Christian would serve God
(though not so chearefully) albeit no reward were promised, though none were
propounded. As light substances by a certain natural property do ascend,
whereas ponderous do descend; so the servants of God being made partakers of
the divine nature (as Saint Peter speaks) have as it were, 2. Pet. 1.4.
a natural inclination to divine actions. Romans 8.14.
Those that are led by the spirit of God, can run the way of Gods
commandments. Psalm. 116.32. Quanto purius and coelo vicinius elementum, tanto
magis obedit motui coeli.
The purer and nearer to the heavens the Element is, the more does it incline
to the motion of the heavens: So the nearer we come to the nature of God, the
more propensly are we inclined to the motions of his blessed spirit. If our
sanctification were as total as it is universal, we needed not so much as
the Cords of Hos. 11.4.
men, even the bands of love to lead us, much less the thunderbolts of Gods
judgments to terrify us; but the same being only in part, though in every
part, we have need of Gods two spurs, Promises and Threatenings, to excite us.
Further, may it please you to observe, that (Whatsoever our condition be) it is
not unlawful in the actions of obedience, whilst we seek the advancement of
Gods glory, to have an eye to our own eternal comfort: As here Nehemiah
whilst he remembers God in sincere obedience, desires God to remember him by
a gracious recompense: For diverse subordinate causes may concur with the
principal as so many entertayses with the maine posts, in supporting the
house. Moses that excellent servant of God looked to the recompense of the
reward. Heb. 11.24.
Saint Paul proposed to himself, 2. Tim. 4.
The Crown of righteousness. Yea our blessed Savior had an eye to the glory
that was set before him. Heb. 12.2.
How much more then had we need of the view of reward, that the same may be
as a hand to wind up the plummets, and to continue the motion of our
obedience. Qui arat, arat vt metat; qui pugnat, pugnat vt vincat, etc.
Chrysostom. op. imperf. hom. 42. 1. Cor. 9.10.
Chrysostom says very well to this purpose, alluding to Saint Paul's words,
Therefore do we sow that we may reap, fight that we may conquer, and conquer
that we may be crowned.

Thus is it lawful both at the end and entrance of our works to expect and
call for our reward, at the hands of our gracious God, to whom we have tendered
our service, as here Nehemiah does, saying. Remember me, O my God.

The Object.
Psalm. 123.
O My God] Behold, as the eyes of servants look to the hands of their Masters,
so do the faithful look up to the Lords hand of direction, and benediction.
Exodus 29.
The Cherubins still do cast their eyes upon the Mercy seat, and their
Elogium is, Psalm. 103.
ye Angels that do his will: Yea, Christ himself professes that he came not
to do his own will, but the will of God, and to finish his work. Thus
sanctified men, John 4. and 6.
the glorious Angels, and the most blessed Son of God, do all teach us to
tender our service to God, and to consecrate our actions to his glory. As the
heavens in their circular course return to the same point, where they began.
As created substances resolve into their materiam primam, out of which they
were framed, and as the rivers return, paying tribute to the Ocean, whence
they received their streams: so all our gracious actions must begin in God,
and end in him; as they flow from the Fountain of his Grace, so must they fall
into the Ocean of his glory, according to the Apostles conclusion in the
eleventh to the Romans, Romans 11. vlt.
Of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever,
Amen.

The Lord is the souls Center (without whom she is like Noah's Dove without
rest) and his glory must be the vltimus terminus of our cogitations and
actions. Mat. 5.16.
Therefore must our light shine before men, that they may see our good works,
and glorify our heavenly Father. So shall he who is the Creator and Center of
the Soul, be also the rewarder of the same, honoring us whilst we honor him.

All our service is lost, which with the Pharisees we tender only to men, but
that shall obtain an immortal reward which is consecrated to God, who will
answer our humble Petition with that gracious remuneration, Mat. 25.23.
Euge bone serve, Well done thou good and faithful servant, enter into thy
masters joy. The due consideration of this, makes Nehemiah stand forth, and
offer his Petition to the Lord, not timerously quasi Elephanto stipem, Sueton.
in vita Aug. Caesaris. Cap. 53.
as Augustus Caesar said, but with singular confidence, claims an especial
interest in Gods favor, saying not only, O God, but O my God. But may I not
take up Saint Paul's demand; Romans 3.29.
Is God the God of the Jews only? Is he only Nehemiahs God? Will he
ingrosse Gods favor to himself alone? Chrysostom answers this very well,
Chrysostom. in Genes. Hom. 39.
The servants of God (says he) speak thus, Non concludentes eius Dominium,
sed amorem amensum declarantes: They do not hereby confine Gods boundless
sovereignty, but rather express his exceeding love and mercy. This is the
usual tenor of Saint Paul's gratulations throughout his Epistles, Romans 1.8.
1 Cor. 1.4. Phil. 1.3.
I thank my God. By which affixe he plainly shows, that his hope is firmly
fixed in God. Thus does David in many places, but especially in the two and
twentieth Psalm, where he does ingeminate the Phrase, as it were doubling his
files, crying out, My God, Psalm. 22.1.
My God, why have thou forsaken me? Chrysostom. vbi supr.
Yea, thus all the servants of God, as Chrysostom says, do forth of their
zealous affection appropriate God to themselves; and reason. For though all the
world be the Lords vassals, yet is he the God of the faithful in a three-folde
special respect, as the Schoole-man says. Aquin. super Romans 1.
secundum specialem curam, Secondly, secundum specialem cultum, Thirdly,
secundum speciale praemium. Secundum specialem curam, In respect of his
especial care and providence, Psalm. 34.15.
For the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers. Genes. 19.
When fire and brimstone turned Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, the Lord
delivered righteous Lot. Exodus 9.23.
When the dreadful fire and hail did burn and batter Aegipt in the land of
Goshen, in the habitation of Israel there was no hayle. When the general deluge
made the world a fish-poole, Genesis 6.8.
Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed
whom God will favor. Secundum specialem cultum, In respect of their especial
homage and religious service they do to God. August. Retract. lib. 1. cap. 13.
For Religio, (as Saint Augustine, after Lactantius retracting his own etymon,
says) is a religando, because it is the bond of that mutual league betwixt
God and Man, I will be their God, Ierem. 31.1.
and they shall be my people. In this sense God is called the God of Abraham,
and the God of Israel; God chooses to himself the man that is godly. As for
the wicked, Psalm. 4.3.
and workers of iniquity, who make their chests their Temples, their backs
their Altars, their bellies their Gods, that they may sacrifice unto the same
their Pride, their Covetousness and Luxury, the Lord will profess concerning
them. Mat. 7.23.
Depart from me I know ye not. Secundum speciale praemium, respect of his
especial reward; for so he says to Abraham, of whom he had made an especial
choice, Ego sum merces tua admodum ampla, Genes. 15.1.
I am thy exceeding great reward. Well might the Lord call his reward multam
and valde multam, Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 36.
exceeding much and many, as Chrysostom says: Psalm. 34.10.
For they that fear God want nothing that is good. Whether it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death* Whether it be things
present, 1 Cor. 3.22.23
or things to come, they are all yours, because you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. Seeing then that God is the God of the faithful, in these especial
respects, let every faithful Christian in especial manner apply God to
himself, and say with Thomas in the twentieth of John, John 20.28.
My Lord and my God. This particular application the Romanists cannot abide,
they count it vain presumption, and why? because men of all sorts, though very
different in conversation, will appropriate God to themselves, when some of
them must needs be deceived. Their argument is like this, Fools and mad men
may be deceived in apparent truths, therefore wise and judicious may. The
Frantique Athenian was ready to arrest for his own every ship that arrived,
therefore no sober minded Merchant knew his own. If our expectation of reward
were grounded upon merits, as the Papists is, we might justly stagger as they
do, Nemo absque reuelatione certo scire potest se habere vera merita. Bellar.
de Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7.
(for Bellarmine confesses, that no man without especial revelation, can be
sure that he has true merits:) but for as much as our hope has her dependence
upon Gods mercy, and Christ's merits, we may without wavering approach before
the throne of grace, Romans 8.
and cry Abba Father. Surely I should the less marvel at this Romish
doctrine, Bellarm de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 4.
if Bellarmine and other Papists did not teach, that the souls in Purgatory
have an infallible certainty of their salvation. Rhem. Annot. in Apoc. 14.
For, admitting a Purgatory, no probable, no possible reason can be given, how
they should come by this certainty, except they be more beholding for the same
to the infernal spirits, then they have been to their wretched teachers. But
leaving them to their vanities, let us find by a diligent scrutiny, that we
have the spirit of God witnessing with our spirits, Romans 8.16.
that we are the sons of God, as the Apostle speaks. For then may we say
with Saint Augustine, Augustine. Psalm. 32.
Dicat anima mea, Deus meus es tu, qui dicit animae meae salus tua sum. Seeing
that God says to my soul: I am thy salvation, let my soul reflect upon God
again, and say thou art my God. Seeing that Christ has made us a plaster of
his precious blood, let us apply the same to our wounded souls; seeing he has
procured our pardon, let us get it under the great seal of his blessed Spirit;
This is his will, who having given us the legacy of eternal life by his last
Testament, would have the same severally transcribed by the preaching of the
word, and particularly sealed to us by the blessed Sacrament. Believe me my
brethren, It is no confused apprehension of Gods mercy, that can yield any
sound comfort. But as when Elizeus applied his eyes to the childs eyes, his
hands to his hands, 2 Reg. 4.
and his mouth to his mouth, then the child revived. So the particular
application of Christ's merits has life in it, it reuiueth our dead souls, and
relieueth our daunted spirits. Hence we have the benefits of protection, of
benediction, of consolation; Christ Jesus sends that message to us, Go to my
brethren, and say unto them, Ioh. 20.17.
I send to my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God. We make our
boast of God all the day long. Psalm. 44.9.
Yea, hence it is that we approach with boldness into his glorious presence,
calling for the reward of our obedience with Nehemiah; Remember me, O my God,
concerning this.

The Motive.
COncerning this] That is in the hypothesis, concerning the observation and
sanctification of the Sabbath, a matter of singular moment, a duty of great
necessity. The four Commandments of the first Table are most divine, like
the four streams in Paradise, whereof this is the last, but not the least,
like Joseph, who being the youngest, provided for his elder brethren. For so is
this present fourth Commandment a means of the better observation of the
three precedent. It stands between the two tables, like the sensus communis,
between the external and internal senses, and is serviceable to both. I may
truly say, that where the Sabbath is not sanctified, there is neither a sound
Religion, nor a Christian conversation to be expected. How God esteems the
strict sanctification of the Sabbath, may appear by the exact delivery of the
Commandment. For he has fenced it about like mount Sinai, Exodus 19.12.
with her marks and bounds at the delivery of the law, that no profaneness
might approach near unto it. First, by his watchword, Remember; Secondly, by
his bounty, Six days thou shall labor, and do all that thou have to do.
Thirdly, by his soueraignety, It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God. Fourthly,
by the latitude, Thou, thy Son, thy Daughter, thy Man-seruant, thy
Maide-seruant, the Stranger that is within thy gates, must sanctify it.
Fifthly, by his example, The Lord rested the seventh day. Lastly, by his
benediction, He blessed and sanctified it. The six marks are like the six
water-pots in the second of John, Fill them up to the brimme with a holy
observation, then draw out and carry to the Master of the Feast, even to Jesus
Christ, the Lord of the new Sabbath. Remember, I say, to sanctify the Lords
Sabbath, and then may you say with confidence, Remember me, O my God,
concerning this. Yea, the same shall be unto you a pledge of the eternal
Sabbath in the Kingdom of heaven, which shall be a day without evening, and
shall yield you rest without labor, and joy without ending.

When Almighty God had made the heavens and earth, he placed Men and Angels in
the same as his Tennants, to bring him in the rent of obedience: And though we
be much impouerished in our spiritual estate, and the graces of God confiscate
through Adams fall, we must every one of us bring in something to the Lords
Exchequer, like the Israelites to the Tabernacle, of which we may say, Remember
me, O my God, concerning this. Genes. 22.
When Abraham went to sacrifice Isaac upon mount Moriah; When Moses forsook
the pomp of Pharaohs Court to sustain affliction with Gods people; Heb. 11.
1 Reg. 18.
When Obadiah hid and relieved the Lords Prophets; When Job Job 31.
caused the loins of the poor to bless him; When Mary Magdalen washed our
Saviors feet, Luke 7.
and wipte them with the hairs of her head, every one of these had whereof he
might say, Remember me, O my God, concerning this. Yea, Mat. 10.42.
he that gives but a cup of cold water for Christ's sake, may look for his
reward: Behold what comfort shines from hence to you Fathers and Brethren, who
have spent your strength in the service of God, and the conversion of sinners,
Dan. 12.3.
great is your reward in heaven; You shall shine as Stars in the firmament
for ever and ever.

What shall become of those vile wretches, who have devoted themselves to all
villainies, and even sold themselves to work wickedness? These may conclude
the acting of their wicked designs, without So Tremel. does well translate
(...) Prou. 1.11. impune.
dread or danger of punishment, as it is in the first of the Proverbs; but
assuredly all their foul acts must be remembered, and their impieties punished.
As the Prayers and Alms of Cornelius did pearce the heavens for a blessed
reward, Acts 10.4.
so the pride and luxury of Sodom did cry out thither for a dreadful revenge.
Genesis 18.20.
As Well the stony hearted men that scoft at Christ, as the tender hearted women
that wept for him, as well those that buffetted him, as those that embalmed him,
as well he that spat in his face, as she that powered the box of ointment on
his head, shall be remembered, the one indeed to their endless honor, the
other to their perpetual shame and contempt. Yea, those that with the
unfruitful servant have hid their talents: Mat. 25.25.
those that have been such niggards unto their own souls, that they have not
prepared some acceptable service to present the Lord withal, whereof they
might say, Remember me, O my God, concerning this, even concerning this they
shall be remembered; For the Lord shall say of them, take and bind that
unprofitable servant, and cast him into utter darkness; he shall say to them
as Abraham said to Dives; Luke 16.
Son remember that thou have in thy life time received thy pleasure; Now ne
guttam, August.
qui ne micam; Thou which would not give one crumme of bread to relieve
poor Lazarus, shall not have one drop of water to cool thy tongue. Many there
are who by carnal proiects, as building and purchasing for their posterity,
think to make their houses famous, and their memories eternal, as David well
observes. Psalm. 49.11.
These are like Nero, of whom the Historian says; Sueton. in vita Neron. cap.
55.
Erat ei aeternitatis perpetuaeque famae cupido, sed inconsulta; He did affect
eternal fame, but he took no wise course to effect it. It is like David's
censure in the thirteenth Verse of that Psalm, This their way utters their
foolishness. And no marvel, for God deals with them as the Ephesians dealt
with Erostratus, who would be famous by burning the Temple of Diana; As they
enacted a law, that no man should speak of Erostratus; so almighty God
enacteth a law of oblivion against these carnal minded men, their memorial
perishes for ever. This land did once so ouer-flow with charity to the Church,
that the statute of Mortmaine came in, like the Rivers Euphrates and Tigris to
Babylon, Ita Iunius in Genes. 2. Solini errorem corrigens.
to prevent the rankenesse of the soil. But there came a time, when that
statute repealed was, like Nilus set at liberty for the watering of Egypt.
Though bleare-eyed Leah be more fruitful then beautiful Rachel, Superstition
commonly more sumptuous then true Religion? yet if you consider the Hospitals,
Grammar Schools, our admirable Library, our Colleges builded, enlarged, and
augmented with indowments, and other works of charity, since the light of the
Gospel, blessed be God, we may well say that Gedeons fleece has been watered
as well as his floor. Judge. 6.
Our age has yielded gracious Dorcases, who have been full of good works and
almes-deedes: Acts 9.
and worthy Centurions, who have loved our nation, Luke 7.
and builded us Synagogues. All these instruments of Gods glory may come with
comfort into the Lords Exchequer, and for every one of their worthy acts, may
say, Remember me, O my God, concerning this. Though some, perhaps, will be
ready to mutter forth with Judas, John 12.4.
quorsum haec profusio? What needs this waste? Yet others, I trust, will say
with Jacob, Genes. 17.
sit up and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me. Surely our souls
shall ever bless these worthies; both present and succeeding ages shall
eternize their memorable acts, so long as the Gospel is preached here amongst
us, which (I trust shall be so long as the world stands. Mat. 26.13.
) This which they have done shall be spoken for a memorial of them; as our
Savior said concerning the Woman with the box of ointment. Their name is like
a good ointment (as Solomon says) the sweet perfume whereof, when they are
gone forth of the room of this present world, shall be fresh and redolent,
even to the children yet unborn. Yea, when timber, stones, and books shall
all be worn and dissolved, the books of heaven shall be opened, Revel. 20.12.
where all their monuments of charity are written in a most indeleble
Character, and shall be recompensed with an invaluable reward, even an eternal
crown of glory.

And all you who hear me at this day, let my counsel be acceptable unto you;
get something, for which the Lord may remember you, and the remembrance whereof
may be a comfort to you at the hour of death, provide with Joseph in the time
of plenty against the day of scarsity; John 9.
the night comes when no man can work. Be of Ulysses mind in Euripides,
Eurip. in Hecuba.
(...); Let me see my tomb honored whilst I am alive. Rom 12.1. 2 Cor. 9.7.
God loves a living sacrifice, and a cheerful giver. Think with Titus
Vespaan you have lost that day, wherein you have not done some good. O what a
blessed hour shall that be, wherein your souls shall expire with Hezekias
words, I beseech thee, O Lord, Esaias 38.3.
remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
have done that which is good in thy sight? Then may you say with Deborah, Judge.
5.21.
O my soul, thou have marched valiantly. Yea, then may you say with David,
Psalm. 116.7.
return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee. Death is
the worlds strict doore-keeper, and will see, that as you brought nothing into
the world, 1 Timothy 6.7.
so you shall carry forth nothing again. Yet can he not hinder you from that
happiness which the Oracle of heaven has proclaimed, Revel. 14.13.
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and
their works follow them. Consider I beseech you, that only your good works,
will be your companions to heaven, They shall be your honor in life, your
comfort in death, and your crown at the last Resurrection: And so much for the
first Petition.

The second Petition. 1. The matter of it.
PLutarch and diverse other Historians report of Manlius Torquatus, that when
his son Manlius, Plutarch in vita Quint. Faebij. Max.
contrary to his Edict, had valiantly encountered, and slain an enemy, he
first crowned him for his valor, and then beheaded him for his disobedience.
So stands the case between God and us; whilst he sees something in us
which may be rewarded, he finds something also which deserves to be
punished. As Saint Augustine says, Aug. in psalm. 100
Nisi Deus per misericordiam parceret, non inueniret quos per iustitiam
coronaret: Except God should spare us in mercy, he should find none whom he
might crown in justice. This makes Nehemiah, when he has cried out, Remember
me, O my God, concerning this, to add this next Petition, And pardon me
according to thy great mercy. Desiring not to be Rewarded with young Manlius in
strictness of justice, but as David prays, Psalm. 103.4.
to be crowned with mercy and loving kindness. If thou do well shall thou
not be accepted, Genes. 4.7.
says the Lord to Kain? Or as Tremelius translateth it, Nonne erit remissio,
shall thou not be pardoned? The Hebrew word yields both significations, (...)
the present text does challenge both; For Gods Remission and his Remuneration,
like Mercy and Truth must meet together, Psalm. 85.10.
like Righteousness and Peace they must kiss each other. According to that of
Ambrose, Ambros. lib. 7. in Luc.
Arbiter omnium dedit and pietati praemium, and infirmitati remedium, The Judge
of all the world has provided both a reward for piety, and a remedy for
infirmity. Thus Daniel comes into the Lords Court, where having deeply
deplored the Israelites misery, and earnestly implored the Lords mercy, he
knitteth up his Petition in this manner: Dan 9.18.
We do not present our supplications before thee (O God) for our own
righteousness, but for thy great tender mercies. Thus Job dares not stand to
his trial at the bar of Gods Justice, Job 9.15.
but will call for a Psalm of mercy, and will supplicate his judge. Infinite
are the places, throughout the passages of sacred Scripture, where the most
sanctified servants of God do confess their infirmities, disclaim their
merits, and appeal to Gods mercies; and reason. For as S. Augustine says, Woe
to the most laudable life of men, if it be examined in strictness of justice.
Suppose (beloved) we be not conscious to our selves of any gross sins; that
we have neither the crying sins of the Sodomites, Genes. 18.
nor the crimson sins of the Israelites, Esa. 1. Act. 8.
nor the bitter sins of Simon Magus; Yet alas many are the infirmities of our
souls, many the deformities of our lives, yea many are our secret sins. In
our best actions we scatter many imperfections, and still we fail, either in
the end, the matter, or manner, or measure of our obedience. So that if our
best actions should come to a strict trial, Lord, how ignorant would our
knowledge be found? How froward our patience? How superficial our Repentance?
How proud our Humility? How wavering our Hope? How frail our Faith? How cruel
our Mercies? We may well say with David, Psalm. 130.3.
If thou, O Lord, be extreme to mark what is done amiss, who can be able to
stand? Vtique illud quis nullus est, Chrysostom. in ps. 130.
says Chrysostom, Surely, that who, is no body at all. Job indeed in the
vehemence of passion desires to dispute his case with God; Job. 23.4.
but upon cold blood God bids him gyrd up his loins, and arm himself with
arguments. Job. 40.2.
For he knows that Job is not able to answer one of a thousand, but must
come into the Lords Court of Requests with this Petition. Pardon me according
to thy great mercy.

Pardon me] The Hebrew word Vecusah; being derived of Casah, (...) of (...)
to hide, does very well express the manner and nature of our pardon. For
according to the use of the word in the sacred Scriptures, it may have
reference either to Gods eye or his Act; His Eye, and then it notes his
conniuence, like that in the seventeenth of the Acts. (...). Act. 17.30.
God winked at. His Act, and then it implies the covering of our sins, with
the mantle of Christ's merits; Psalm. 32.1.
and both import an absolute pardon, without relation, to merit, punishment, or
satisfaction; and indeed it is as oposite to them, as the two tropicks are to
another, as contrary as Fire is to Water. This Pardon is expressed in the
Scripture with great variety of the like phrases. Sometime God is said to pass
by our sins, Amos 8. To put them away, Esa 44. To cast them into the Sea,
Mich. 7. To forget them, Ierem. 31. Not to mention them, Ezech 18. To wash them
away, Psalm. 51. To cast them behind his back, Esaias 38. To cover them, Psalm.
32. and to pardon them, as it is here, and in many other places. Thus God
passes by our sins, as though he saw them not. Puts them away, that they
hurt us not. Casts them into the Sea, that they drown us not. Forgets
them, so that he punishes them not. Does not mention them, as though they
were not: washes them away, that they defile us not: Casts them behind his
back, as though he regarded them not: Couers them, that they appear not, and
pardons them that they condemn us not. Behold here an absolute pardon, for our
singular consolation, and the Papists extreme confusion: For they depend upon a
ridiculous pardon of the sin with reservation of the punishment, wherein they
would make God an hypocrite like themselves, with their mental reservation: To
whom I may say in Daniels words to Nebuchadnezzar; Dan. 4.16.
Let the dream be to them that hate thee, and the interpretation thereof to
thine enemies: so let this pardon be to all treacherous and incendiary Papists,
and the reservation of punishment to them who are enemies to the grace of God,
and our gracious Sovereign. Miserable, O miserable were our condition, if our
pardon were not absolute; For as one bad humor left unpurged may be the death
of the body, one small cranny unstopped may be the drowning of the ship: so
the least sin unpardoned must needs be the death, and drowning both of soul
and body in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. But blessed
be God, Colos. 2.14.
we know that Christ Jesus has fully satisfied the justice of God, Revel. 1.5.
cancelled the bond of our debts, and washed us in his precious blood. He was
condemned that we might be justified, he was punished that we might be
pardoned, Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 22.
Non gutta, sed vnda sanguina largiter per quinque parts corporis emanauit, as
Bernard says; There flowed out of five parts of his body, not drops, but
even streams of blood, that with him might be plenteous redemption, and he
might redeem Israel from all his sins. Auant therefore to the Merchants of
Rome with their stained Merits, their superarrogant works of supererogation,
their blasphemous satisfactions to God. What needs there a miserere, where
there is a mereri? What need is there of mercy, where there is merit? A man
may fitly say of these men, as Bernard speaks of the boasting Pharisee, Bern
Annunci. Domini, Sermon. 3.
Nimirum plenus est, nec habet in eo gratia Dei locum, surely these men are so
full of their merits, that they have no room for Gods mercy.

Again, how miserable is the condition of those men, who do daily run through
as many gross sins, as there are signs in the Zodiac, yet have no power to
find remorse, or seek for remission? and those who in stead of this humble
Petition, Pardon me according to thy great mercy, do take up Kaines desperate
complaint, My Sin is greater then can be pardoned. Far, Gene. 4.13.
O far be it from us, thus to abuse Gods mercy. Let us be truly penitent for
our sins, and then let us put up our Petition, and crave pardon for the same,
yea let us never be quiet, till we have our quietus est, Psalm. 39.8.
even a general acquittance for all our transgressions. And here again I must
briefly advertise you, that you must resume the former compellation to this
Petition, Pardon me, O my God. It is odious to God, and dangerous to men, to
seek for Romish indulgences; it is impious to think that we may appeal from
God to the Virgin Mary for mercy. Bernardino de Busto.
It is blasphemous to affirm, that Christ has imparted to his Mother the
disposing of mercy, and reserved to himself only the dispensing of Justice,
Gabriel Biel in Canone Missae.
as certain Papists teach. He that rewards us, must also pardon us,
according to that of Esaias, Esa 43.25.
I, even I, do put away, do put away thy iniquities; Here that I, so
redoubled, is emphaticall, and exclusive, as it is in the eleventh Verse, I,
even I, am the Lord. I, even I, as if he should say, I, and none but I. We
indeed by preaching of the word may draw your pardons, but God in mercy must
grant them, and by his spirit must seal them, 2 Samuel 12.13.
according to Nathans words; Dominus transtulit, the Lord has put away thy
sin.

Give me leave in a word or two, to pass from the act to the person, Pardon
me. Me; here the comfort is more ample and excellent in the original, then in
our translation, and no marvel, for no translation can keep a proportion
quoad pondus with the original, the Hebrew which we translate me, (...)
is gnalai, upon me, or over me, as if he should say, let thy pardon protect
me, and let thy mercy be spread over me, like the glorious Canopie of heaven.
Let it be like the clowdie pillar, which was as a veil and covering to the
children of Israel. So that Nehemiah craves here a protecting Pardon, both a
protection and a Pardon, and the Lord grants them both in one Patent; It is
like David's words in the fifth Psalm, For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous,
Psalm. 5.13.
and with favor wilt compass him as with a shield. Here also the Hebrew
fountain runs fuller of divine comfort then the English stream, for the
Hebrew word signifies to compass with a crown. (...)
Thus with Gods pardon there goes his protection, with this protection, his
crown and benediction, and all these comforts do flow from the fountain of
his mercy, as it follows; Pardon me according to thy great mercy.

The manner.
When I come to speak of the mercy of God, I enter into a Labyrinth without
end, and diue into an Ocean without bottom; It fares with me as with the
traveler, who has far to go and little time to spend, but let me crave
your patience, and I will have to the end of my journey. The word Kesed here
translated mercy, plus est quam (...), (...) S. Pagn. e Rab. Kimchi.
says a learned Linguist, it is more then natural love, which you know
runs with a strong current; Therefore when you hear of Gods tender mercies,
think upon the affection of a tender hearted mother, and remember yet, that
the mercy of God does as far surmount the same, as the resplendent Sun
exceeds the little spark of fire in brightness. No man has seen God at
any time, yet has he manifested himself unto us by his Son incarnate, Bern.
in Cant. Sermon. 61.
Per cuius vulnera patebant viscera, through whose side wounded with the
spear, you might behold the bowels of compassion wounded with love.

Gods mercy seldom goes alone, but usually it has some epithet annexed to
it; as here it is called his great mercy. Rab, and quantitatis and qualitatis
est, say the Hebrews, (...)
so that it comprehends all whatsoever has excellency in quality, or
amplitude in quantity. (...)
It is Kerob casdeka, secundum multitudinem, according to thy many mercies, as
diverse do translate it, or secundum magnitudinem, according to thy great
mercy, as here we read it, and neither amiss. For as the Hebrew word, so Gods
mercy have both the discreet and continued quantity. When Jacob had got the
blessing of Isaac, as we read, Genes. 27. Esau said to his Father in the
anguish of spirit, Have thou but one blessing, bless me, even me also my
Father: Yet the good old man, though an indulgent father, had but one that was
worthy the name of a blessing. But happy are we, our heavenly Father is not so
penurious. He has more then one mercy, he is (...). 1 Cor. 1.3.
The Father of Mercies; Ephesians. 2.4. Exodus 20.6. Psalm. 51.1.
and the God of all consolation; He is rich in mercy. He has mercy for
thousands. He has a multitude of mercies. It would ask much time to manifest
this, through the whole mine of sacred Scripture; I will only bound my speech
within a few rich veins of Ore, in the Psalms. In the 59. Psalm you shall
find Gods preventing mercy; In the 23. his following mercy; In the 40. Psalm
his tender mercy; In the 119. his reviving mercy; In the 26. his redeeming
mercy; In the 6. Psalm his healing mercy; In the 86. his confirming mercy; In
the 103. his crowning mercy. If I should spend many hours in recompting the
particular mercies of God, and had that That yielded seven Echoes.
Heptaphon of Olympus, yea the tongue of men and Angels, you might say unto me
upon the close of my speech with the Queen of Sheba, 1 Reg. 10.
Thou have not told us the one half. Behold, so abundant are the mercies of
our God, and therefore, poor sinners need not come to this blessed fountain,
like the people to the poole of Bethesda, one at once, but be they as many as
the stars in the firmament, or the sands on the seashore, let them approach
together to the Mercy-seate and they shall find, that God has in readiness a
mercy for every misery, as it were a present salve for every sore. The Lord
keeps a continual Iubilee; his Court of Chancery stands always open; his
euer-flowing and ouer-flowing fountain, Zach. 13.1.
is still set open for sin and for uncleanness. Where the spirit and the
Spouse say come, Revel. 22.17.
and let him that is a thirst come, and let whosoever will come, and take of
the water of life freely.

Again, as Gods mercies are many in the discreet, so are they great in the
continued quantity: Yea they are exceeding great, 1 Samuel 24.14. Gods mercy (as
one says well) has all the dimensions. Psalm. 36.5.
Thy mercy, O God, reaches unto the heavens; there is the height of his mercy.
Psalm. 86.13.
Great is thy mercy, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell,
there is the depth of his mercy. Psalm. 104.24.
The earth is full of thy goodness, there is the breadth of his mercy. Psalm.
98.4.
All the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God, there is the
length of his mercy. Yea, the mercy of God is transcendent, and beyond all
dimension, and no more possible to be comprehended by us, then the heavens to
be compassed with our spanne. Therefore when Saint Paul does pray, that the
Ephesians may know the love of Christ, according to these dimensions, he
adds, which passes knowledge. Ephesians. 3.18.19.
Though God be excellent in all his works, yet is his glory most eminent in
his mercy. His punishing rod is of Iuory; Psalm. 2.9. Exodus 25.17.
but his Mercy-seate of pure Gold. Gods mercy must needs be great, which
extends it self in some sort, even to hell and to the damned. Romans 11.22.
First in his patience toward the vessels of wrath, waiting for their
conversion, till he be pressed as it were a cart under sheaues. Amos 2.13.
Secondly in his indulgence in punishing a sinner. For whereas ex se materiam
sumit miserendi, (as Bernard says.) He takes occasion, only forth of his
own goodness, to show mercy: yet no man's sin is punished without his just
demerits. Thirdly, even to the damned in hell, there is a privative mercy
extended, quoad intensionem, (...) wound, except you will be like desperate
Porus, Justin. lib. 12.
who would not suffer his wounds to be dressed. We read in in the six and
fortieth of Ezechiel, that they which went into the Temple at one door, were
commanded to go forth at another. It is no improbable conjecture, that they
might not turn their faces from the Mercy-seate. That is an excellent speech
of Augustines, or rather Anselmes. Aug. Medit. 38.
Etsi Domine, ego commisi vnde me damnare potes, tu tamen non amisisti vnde me
saluare potes: O blessed Lord, though I have committed those transgressions,
for which thou may condemn me: yet thou have not lost those compassions, by
which thou may save me. Psalm. 130.1.
Out of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord, says David; Abyssus abyssum
inuocat, says Bernard; One deep calls upon another, O let the deep of
misery, call upon the deep of mercy. If your souls were in such a straight,
that you saw hell opening her mouth upon you, like the red Sea before the
Israelites; the damned spirits pursuing you behind, like the Egyptians; on
the right hand, and on the left a thousand dreads and dangers, yet would I say
unto you in Moses words, stand still, Exodus 14.
and behold the salvation of the Lord: For he that puts his trust in the
Lord, Psalm. 32.10.
mercy imbraceth him on every side.

This mercy of God is like the Sanctuary to the legal offendour, like Mount
Ararat to Noah's tossed Arc, like Noah's hand to his weary Dove; like Assuerus
golden Scepter to the happy petitioner. O come then, and with Queen Hester
touch the top of this Scepter, so shall you be received with her into the Kings
presence, yea into the Kingdom of heaven; where all your petitions shall be
turned into gratulations, your prayers into praises, and your Elegies into
Hallelujaes; which mercy the God of all mercies grant us even for Jesus Christ
his sake, our alone Savior and Redeemer, to whom with the Father, and the holy
Ghost, three persons and one immortal God, all honor, power, praise,
Majesty, and Dominion be rendered, and ascribed by all the servants of God in
heaven, and in earth; this day and for ever. Amen. AMEN.

FINIS.

