A TREATISE, TOUCHING ANTICHRIST. Wherein, the Place, the Time, the Form, the
workmen, the Vphoulders, the Proceeding; and lastly, the ruin and overthrow of
the Kingdom of Antichrist, is plainly laid open out of the word of God: where
also many dark, and hard places both of Daniell and the Revelation are made
manifest.

By Lambert Danaeus.

Meet in these days to be considered, where-in, the kingdom of the Beast is
by force and treachery sought to be revived: And published for the
encouragement of those which join in the intended actions against the Spaniard
and otherwise, for the further overthrow of Antichrist, and enlarging of Christ
his kingdom, with the pure preaching and sincere government of the same.

Revel. 18.4. Go out of her my people.

1. Cor. 10.11. These things were written to admonish us.
Upon whom the ends of the world are come.
LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Orwin, for John Porter, and Thomas Gubbin, 1589.

blazon or coat of arms

To the Right Honorable his very good Lord, Sir Christopher Wraie; Knight,
Lord Chief Justice of England: a liberal benefactour, and worthy founder in
Magdalen College in Cambridg, Ihon Swan wishes such condition, as has
promise, both of this life, and of the life to come.
WHat may be thought meet to be spoken in the behalf of this book (right
Honorable) I suppose may be found sufficient in the preface ensuing made by
the Author himself, and addressed unto his Lord, the Lord Casimire. But what
occasions moved me unto the translation of the work and to offer it to your
Honor, it may perhaps be looked for that my self should signify. We have
seen Antichrist even in this our Realm, (as well as in many other places of
Christendom) to have taken a notable, both fall and foil. Jn so much as who
so had lived in the days of the famous King Henry the eight. (Whom it
pleased God to use as the chiefest instrument to dismount the monster, and give
him his deadly wound) to have seen then the zeal and forwardnes that was in
the Nobility, the painefulnes of the Clergy, both by pen and in pulpit, the
triumphs and joyful acclamations of the people, he would have thought that
neither Antichrist himself would ever have looked back, with hope to have set
foot in amongst us again, nor that in the heart of any one true Englishman
(especially after so long a farewell) he might find any residence or
favorable entertainment. But (tantae molis erit Romanam euertere gentem) it
fell out otherwise. For not long after it appeared that it was an easier matter
to hurl out the Pope then popery at a sudden. In so much as Old Docter
Turner.
one in a pretty pamphlet, entitled, The hunting of the Fox, by the industry
of such hounds as there he set on work, and by print of the Beasts footing
which in many corners he observed, he descried, and withal cried out that the
Fox was still in the land. And as for our time, late, and that dangerous
experience has toulde us (both in respect of Rome and Rhemes abroad, and of
Jesuits and Seminary Priests sent over unto us, and of hollow hearted and
traiterous subjects fostered amongst us, (who all have made way to this late
cruel attempt of the Spaniards) that both the Pope himself has long since
cast more then a glauncing eye toward England, and that many amongst us (yea
such as have bin borne in time of her Majesty's most happy Reign) have liked,
and longed for that unhappy event of that ungracious aspect. But long may they
look in vain as hitherto they have done, by Gods merciful providence over
us, and by the careful government of such as are our Magistrates. Whose labor
and watchfulnes as it becomes each christian (in love of the Church) to
support and further by all such good means, as wherewith God has enabled him:
So J being not able otherwise, have endeavored hereby to do the best I may;
not for the help of the learned, who are able themselves to consult with the
Author in the original: but of such as to whom without such help this work
might seem to be a treasure hid in the ground. And they be the men that be
most endaungered, as not being able to discearne the Beast though daily they
see his footing before their face; and therefore had most need of a Mithridate
to withstand his infection. And in my simple opinion, there is no one book
among many that has bin penned of late to this purpose; which more fitly, and
effectually perperformeeh the same then this does, in thwarting the enterprise
of the Rhemist, and cracking the credit of this Romish master: which also
might daunt the desperate attempts of his favorites amongst us, considering the
Beast under whose banner they fight.

This little labor of mine being finished, considering with my self the place
which your Lordship sustaines to the service, and saftie of her Majesty's
person, her country and commonweal; and good of the Church: J was easily
induced to presume to make offer of the same unto your honor. And in so doing
withal J conceived hope, to compass that which the Author himself affected
in making his dedication unto Prince Casimire, namely, that under your
Lordeships name and patronage, it may be the more willingly accepted, and the
more safely pass through the hands of men. The which J beseech your good
Lordeship in such favorable sort to accept as you did the former. The Lord
of Lords preserve your Lordship to see the happy and joyful return of many a
new year, and prosper your Honorable endeauours tending to the advancement of
his glory and supplanting his, and her Majesty's enemies, to the good of the
Church, the safety of the Realm, the furtheraunce of Religion, and learning,
and your own endless comfort in Christ Jesu. Amen.

From the College of Wye in Kent, the first of January. 1589 Your Lordships
most bounden, John Swan.

To the famous and mighty Prince and Lord, John Casimire County Palantine of
the RHINE, Duke of BAVER etc. his very good Lord and Master.
WHereas in these our days, (wherein the light of the glorious Gospel begins
to revive and spring a fresh) there be many points called into controversy:
there is not among them any one (Most noble Prince) more difficult, or less
agreed upon by such as write, then that question which concerns Antichrist.
The knowledge whereof, although it be most necessary, both for the
understanding of that truth which God himself has reueiled, and exceeding
profitable for the stay of the Church: yet in this point the opinions of the
ancient Fathers, have been so variable and diverse, that we are almost
altogether to seek, what we are to follow and hold in this behalf. And this
diversity of theirs, came to pass by this means partly, for that they lived
in those days wherein all the marks and tokens of this Jniquitie, (the which
notwithstanding the Spirit of God bewraied and poynted out beforehand) were not
manifest, as not come to light (for as yet Antichrist was not come to his
height or perfection:) and partly also for that the minds of men were so
fore-stalled by prejudice of an other matter, and so dazeled, yea and blinded
with the glorious show of the Sea of Rome: that they could never be persuaded
that such mischief could possibly ever rise from thence. And although in time
by little and little, those foresaid tokens began to appear and show
themselves, whereby that horrible Monster might be discerned; and withal
although that Sea it self began now in that behalf to be suspected by many:
yet so great was the dreadful power and authority of the Bishop of Rome, that
they who had espied the light of the truth, durst not for their lives mutter or
speak the least word. For if they did, they were by and by not only condemned
in the next Synods as Scismaticks, but also put to death by Magistrates as
Heretieks more pestilent and heinous then any that ever lived. And so by means
of fear and terror they held their tongues. Notwithstanding, in the time of
our Ancestors, namely about the year 350. when Leo the first was Bishop of
Rome: one Hilarious Bishop of Vienna in France, did openly gaine-saie the
tyranny of the Roman Bishop which then began to advance and enlarge it self.
After that, about 400. years ago there arose one Arnold in Italy, surnamed
Brixianus, who with strong arguments and vehement persuasions (for he was a man
accounted for his time both learned and eloquent) handled plainly, and urged
pithilie this point and that very commonly, publicly and even in the midst
of the City of Rome itself: by which his labors and force of the truth, he
moved many indeed, but yet generally he could not prevail.

So great a coil it was always found,
To pluck the Romish Sea to ground.
In so much as one Bernardus Clareuallensis (a man who otherwise stood not so
greatly affected to the tirannie of the Roman Bishop; yet by means that men
in those days were generally so bewitched with a reverend opinion of the
Majesty of that Sea:) took upon him to toss, and canuasse that censure of
Arnolds although it were most true and just. And this ancient and received
opinion touching the sacred authority of the Bishop of Rome, continewed many
generations and was never in the mean time controuled by any, save only the
Greek Bishops, and that but by a few of them. And in truth therein the
Grecians showed themselves to be of a more free judgment, and wiser
disposition then were our men, and the Bishop of the Latin Churches, for they
(as appears by the writings of Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica, an eloquent man)
earnestly avouched that Antichrist, was not only come, and seated in the
Church of God, but that the Bishop of Rome himself was the very party, and
this they enforced with such pregnant and strong proofs: as the best proctours
that ever that Sea had, were never able as yet to overthrow. But as for the
Western Bishops, they indeed disagreed in this point, but not upon any good
ground or settled judgment, but only carried away by the prejudice of common
custom: nay, they being deceived by the great subtilty of Satan (who now began
to work the mystery of iniquity as Paul had fore-tould) proceeded further,
and gave their helping hand to the spreding abroad of that pestilent infectio^
(the suppression whereof it behooued each christian to have endeavored) and
very busy and pettish they were in helping and upholding it, and in putting
Oil as you would say, to the fire. And so in process of time the said Bishop
of Rome became as big as Monstrous Giant which had a hundred Arms.
Briareus (as it is in the Proverb) who before was as little as a foolish
Leueret. At first in very deed, under the reign of the Henry's, and after of
the Fredericks, Emperors of Germany the Kingdom of Antichrist received great
strength and encroched upon the consciences of men of all sorts. For although
even from the days of the Apostles themselves, Satan began to lay the
foundation thereof, yet by reason of the bright shining light of the Gospel,
which in those days was kept in all integrity in the Church, he took
repulse, and so by means of the work which GOD himself had (as it were) newly
proclaimed and taken in hand he was enforced to be quiet and to defer his
business unto some other time. Afterward, look what he had long since begone
and somewhat brought forward he found the means to finish and bring to
perfection under the Reign of Constantinus Bearded or which had a great beard.
Pogonatus, an Emperor of Constantinople. Now Satan being by the means and
industry of Antichrist (as it were his legate) once set over the Christian
Church as it were in a Chair of Estate: he nestled himself therein so sure,
that after it proved a thing almost inpossible by any power or policy to
remove him thence: but (even as the strong armed man of whom Christ speaks
in Matthew) look how more vehemently he was assaulted by the valiant Soldiers
of Christ's Church Arnold, Wickliffe, Husse, Jerome of Prage, and some more such
like. So did he as busily oppose against them more wicked and unclean
spirits, as a supply of fresh Soldiers in way of reskew. For the pomp and
power of Antichrist was maintained by such men as were of as lewd a disposition
and of as brazen faces as ever lived; and that not only long ago: but even of
late in our days as by Eckius, Faber, Cochley and such other prating Iackes,
of the like stamp, by whose toyle-some travails, mingled with cauills, coggs,
and couzning tricks, the cause was a while cherished and vpheald. But God, the
father of all mercies, in great compassion, pitying the estate of the world;
vouchsafed in this old age thereof to raise and send amongst us the light of
his glorious Gospel: the power whereof, is the only instrument to bring
Antichrist underfoot. Therefore, he lightened the minds of our understandings,
displayed the foggie Mists of Antichristian darkness, and stirred up his worthy
servant, as valiant Champions, to bruise and break, to quell and kill the
power of Antichrist. For in this quarraile wherein Antichrist was to be
encountered, many have dealt with very prosperous success. As first and
cheiflie M. Luther, and after him, (for let me speak it without the offense of
some, he was not the last of the Prophets) Hen. Bullinger, and Ralfe Gualter:
all which, were great and excellent men both for learning and godliness, and who
of set purpose wrote treatises against Antichrist (as for John Calvin, Theod,
Beza, Ierom Zanchus, very worthy Captains, and continual wrestlers with
Antichrist: I purpose to pretermit as also those more ancient fellows, Math.
Parris, Mich. Cesennate, Io. de Poliaco, Militzius of Bohem:) by whose learned
writings the foundations of the Antichristian Kingdom, have bin shaken, yea
and shiuered.

Notwithstanding, seeing that there still remain in the minds of some, Note
this and apply it to our time through out the book.
some rubbadge, and relliques of that old building, I also have endeavored
(most worthy Prince) according to my power, to scatter and set packing, into
the pit of perpetual forgetfulness those shreds and sheards, and that by the
force of the mighty gunne of Gods holy word. For such is the nature of this
quarrel and controversy, that it requires the helping hands of many
workmen: the state whereof is such, as by means of some dark places in the
Scriptures it could not on a sudden so thoroughly be seen into, but daily
more and more be cleared and made plain. Again, there have of late started up
new Proctours, and Pettie-foggers to plead and prate in defense of this usurped
tyranny, I mean the Jesuits (a kind of Droanes among the Monks, the vilest
dreggs of all popery, and as may be supposed, the last brood that the
ha^mering head of Satan has to hatch:) who endeavor by might and maine, to
make up the breaches which their kingdom has sustained. Subtle workmen they
are, who although they may seem to counterfeit the Sirens, yet in truth they
are but Iayes, and Magg-pies: in life and practices drawing nere to the fish
Mugill is a fish ravenous and swift.
Mugil, and the foul Larus, a bird that makes a great noise, having laid but
a little.
Larus. And being but yesterday skipped out of the Cock-boat, (arrogating to
themselves the works of other Monks) are by and by with a mischief mounted on
Cock-horse. Now although these vpstart Hucksters, bring indeed nothing else, but
the stale arguments, and as it were the foreworne and forelorne stuff and
baggage of the Papists, save only that they have disguised, painted and trickt
it after the best fashion, and keep a craking like Parrats, as if they were
come from the farthest Jndies: yet among the rude people, they are taken for
marvelous men, and such as have brought strange, and that very precious
marchaundise. These fellows taking themselves for the principal supporters of
the Antichristian Kingdom, they vaunt and brag it out Iustelie, (as indeed
they sweat sore, poor souls, in doing the best they can:) It is meet
therefore that somewhat were said, to thwart their wilful and obstinate
frowardnes especially if we consider the times and days wherein we live.

Now as for this my defense of the Kingdom of Christ against Antichrist
himself and his whole Which before he called the tail of Antichrist and the
rubbadge of his building
rabble, to the end it may be gladly accepted, and safely pass through the
hands of men, I cannot see (most gracious Prince) to whom I might better or
upon more just occasions dedicate the same then unto your honor. For from
your very cradle you have bin so trained up in godly education by your
worthy Father Frederick County Palantine and Prince Electour, (a man of
renowned, or more then Heroical mind) and so endued by God himself with such
a kindlike and virtuous disposition: that you among many may justly be
supposed to be borne and given, by GOD himself unto his Church for the
overthrow of Antichrist what a professed enemy your self have bin against the
enemies of Christ (according to the example of David) both the former course of
your life does sufficiently declare, and the general speech of all the Godly
in France will witness the same unto al ages. For France thankfully
acknowledges you and your famous father (next unto God) to be her Patrons,
Reuengers, and such as enfraunchised her into the liberty she enjoys: and
therefore she (that out of mine only mouth you may perceive the minds of all the rest which are godlilie affected) takes this right heavily, that she is
not able to commend and set out your excellencies deserts toward her in such
sort as is meet. For what Orator is able to frame any still so stately, but
that it will seem unworthy your virtuous deseruings. You being of such young
years, as wherein few, or none can tell what warr-fare means: (did take upon
you twice) for the name of Jesus Christ, and for the defense of his Church
against Antichrist and his mighty confederacy: to lead an army with great
difficulty and danger into France: you, by the only brute and fame that went
of you, did twice terrify the power and host of the Frenchmen, whose
dreadful force is known and felt in other nations. You have twice procured
peace among Nations, Cuntries, and Houses, for such as were exiles, and the
freedom of the Gospel to Churches distressed. You to shut up al in a word,
have restored unto us our lives, naie, that which is dearer to us then life
itself, the light of the Gospel, the which in deep despair, almost we
never looked for.

The which great benefit, of us al received from your Highness, to the end I
might in some measure, according to my hearts desire, commend unto posterity:
and so leave behind me some record of my thankful mind for the same: I have
thought good in all humble and dutiful manner to offer unto your Excellency
this simple work. The which I entirlie befeech your said Highness to take in
good worth. Farewell, dated the first day of August, in the year of this last
age. 1576.

Your Highness loyally affected Lambert Danaeus.

A table of the Contents of this book.
TWo points to be granted for the better handling of the discourse ensuing:
touching Antichrist. cap. 1. page 1. A double division of the disputation
following, the one general, the other more particular. cap. 2. page 3. The
foretelling of the coming of Antichrist was a famous prophecy and given out
by many. cap. 3. page 4. Why it was requisite that the kingdom and state of
Antichrist should be fore-tould. cap. 4. page 5. That Anti. should not be one
singular or particular man, but that by that name was signified a multitude of
men, and a long succession: and further, why Antichrist, is called an Apostata
or back-slider. cap. 5. page 6. Why the kingdom and state of Antichrist is
called by the spirit of God indefinitelie or without limitation, an Apostasy.
cap. 6. page 10. Why Paul calls Antichrist a man. cap. 7. page 12. Why
Antichrist is called the son of perdition, Apollion, the Beast, a Woman, and
an Harlot, cap. 8. page 16. Which Beast of those three that are mentioned in
the Revelation does point us out Antichrist. cap. 9. page 23. How and in what
manner Anti. is said to fashion a new, and to revive and set on foot the Image
of the former wounded Beast, that is the Roman Empire, seated in Italy, and
settled in Idolatry. cap. 10. page 34. Why Anti. is termed (...), (that is
adversary to Christ) and not (...) (adversary to God) where also comparison
is made (in some points) between the Doctrine of Christ or the Gospel, and
the positions of popery. cap. 11. page 40. Why Antichrist is called
indefinitelie (or without limitation) a false Prophet, and (Papa) a Pope. cap.
12. page 48. That Antichrist did herein especially vsurp the name of God, when
he caused himself to be called the universal Bishop of the Christian
Church. cap. 13. page 50. That Anti. did wickedly arrogate to himself, the
power of God. cap. 14. page 53 Of the place where Antichrist should sit, where
it is apparent, that neither Mahumet himself, nor his accomplisses, be the
men whom the Scripture terms Antichrists. cap. 15. page 56. That Rome which
is in Italy, and is repaired out of the dust and ruins of the old ouerthrone
City: is the Seat or Chair pointed at, and painted out by God himself, for
Antichrist that should come. cap. 16. page 58 In what respect the assemblies of
the Papists and of Antichrist are called the temple and Church of God: wherein
answer is made to many of their objections. cap. 17. page 67. Of the time of
the coming of Anti. and first that it is plainly to be gathered out of the
Scriptures that he was not to be reueiled before the Roman Empire should begin
to totter, and that the kingdom of Christ should by the preaching of the
Gospel begin to grow and increase. cap. 18. page 73. Whether Antichrist could
come and settle himfelf before the Imperial regiment of Frenchmen were ended.
cap. 19. page 78. That the time of the coming of Anti. wherein he should seat,
and settle himself in the Church, was by the spirit of God prescicely, set
down to be 666. years from the time to this prophecy of John was made known,
the which term of time did expire much about the reign of Constantine
(Pogonatus) the bearded, an Emperor of Co^sta^tinople. cap. 20. page 80. That
those thousand years after which it is said Satan should be loosed, cannot
appertain to the time of the coming of Antichrist. cap. 21. page 89. That the
practices which were used to frame and set up the kingdom of Antichrist were
devilish and deceiptfull. cap. 22. page 90. That the Antichristian kingdom
was to rise by little and little, and not at a sudden, according to the
fore-warning of the spirit of God. cap. 23. page 93. That these three things
were the chief and principal grounds of the kingdom of popery. First the
diverse heresies that sprang up in the church touching the natures and office of
Christ. Secondly, the bitter bickerings that were among the Bishops: and
thirdly the large bounties of Emperors and certain other men (who both were
able, and superstitiouslie bent) which they bestowed on the Church of Rome.
cap. 24. page 97. By what other degrees and occasions the authority of the
Roman Bishop and kingdom of Antichrist was either slilie drawn forward, or
strongly established, cap. 25. page 101. That the authority and power of
Antichrist was at no time received, without the resistaunce and gaine-saying of
some good Bishops. cap. 26. page 104. Of the destruction and overthrow of the
kingdom of Antichrist, which is to be brought to pass by the only breath of
the Lords mouth, and not by any power or strength of a fifth, sixth, or seventh
Monarchy to be raised, or looked for. cap. 27. page 107. What those ten Kings
signify which in the Revelation are said should devour and consume with fire
the harlot and her flesh. cap. 28. page 111. Whether it be lawful for
Christians and such as profess the Gospel, to wage war with the Papists, in
purpose to overthrow the kingdom of Antichrist and to root out his doctrine.
cap. 29. page 117. That the kingdom of Antichrist shall at the last be quite
taken away by the last coming of Christ. cap. 30. page 121. That the kingdom
of Antichrist was to be broken and brought under foot by parts and pece-meale,
and not at once, or in a short time. cap. 31. page 123 That there is no
corruption of Christian Relligion prophesied of, which should succeed this
kingdom of Antichrist. cap. 32. eadem. Whether besides the fourth and Roman
Monarchy, there remain any other, a fifth, to be erected. Where a very hard
place of Daniell is expounded. cap. 33. page 125. That the enlarging of the
kingdom of Antichrist, was (in imitation of Christ) to be performed by these
two means especially, namely, the public preaching of a kind of Doctrine,
and the vaunting show of diverse miracles. cap. 34. page 137. Who be those
three spirits whereof mention is made in the Revelation, and are said to be the
chief ministers of the Antichristian kingdom. cap. 35. page 140. Why the
miracles that were wrought, for the credit of the kingdom of Antichrist are
termed by S. Paul, Lying wonders. cap. 36. page 144. That not every
particular man which heretofore lived, or is yet alive, either, did or does
approve of the kindgome of Antichriste: no not when it had prevailed and gotten
the upper hand. cap. 37. page 147. That only the reprobate and such as are
forsaken of God, have, and shall stiflie and obstinately stick to the kingdom
of Antic. cap. 38. page 148. What just cause the Lord had to punish the world
with this plague of blindenes, that it should admit of this miserable state of
the Antichristian kingdom: and further, wbat monstrous contempt of Gods word,
went before this Antichristianitie. cap. 39. page 149. An aunsweare unto three
certain principal arguments of the Papists wherewith they would justify
themselves and approve this said kingdom of Antichrist. cap. 40. page 153.
A proposition and position proouing, the Pope to be Antichriste. page. 157.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
THis I may protest (gentle reader) that touching the places of Scripture which
I have cited and interpreted out of Daniel and the Revelation, my purpose was
to offer them to the censure of other, and that I am not in mine opinion so
resolut, or pere^ptory, that I will not admit of other men's judgments which iump
not herewith. Provided always, that they contain nothing contrary to the
word of God, or disagreing from the accomplishment or issue of things, the
which in my mind, is the best interpretour of prophecies that can be.

Places of Scripture cited and by the way expounded in this treatise.
Daniell.
Chap. 2. verse 34. and 44. cap. 18. page 74. Chap. 7. verse 8. and 20. cap.
13. page 50. verse 13. cap. 18. page 74. Chap. 11. verse 40. 41. 42. 43. 44.
45. cap. 33. page 125. 126.
2 Thessalonians.
Chap. 2. v. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. through out this book.
Revelation.
Chap. 11. verse 7. cap. 9. page 23. Chap. 12. verse 3. cap. 9. page 23. verse
18. cap. 7. page 13. Chap. 13. verse 1. 2. 3. cap. 9. page 27. verse. 11. cap.
9. page 23. verse. 15. cap. 10. page 40. verse. 18. cap. 20. page 88. Chap. 16.
verse 13. 14. cap. 35. page 140. verse 16. cap. 19. page 65. Chap. 17. verse 9.
cap. 16. page 59. verse 12. and 17. cap. 23. page 93. verse 16. cap. 28. page
111. Chap. 19. verse. 20. cap. 9. page 32. Chap. 20. verse 2. and 7. cap. 21.
page 99.

Two points to be granted for the better handling of the discourse ensuing
touching Antichrist.

The first Chapter.
BEing purposed to entreat of Antichrist: I have thought good first to set
down the very words of S. Paul him self, wherein expresselie he handles
this Argument. 2. These. 2.3.4. etc.













of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders.







Now addressing my self to the making plain of this Scripture: I am to
require that these two points be yielded me. First, that seeing this matter or
controversy is altogether very obscure; it may be lawful for me to vouch the
writings of the ancient Fathers, least if in so doubtful a question, I should
seem to rest only upon mine own fancy, my speech and opinion should be the
less regarded. But, if it be seen to rely also upon the judgments of the
Catholic writers, and to be approved by their censures: then both my words
are like to have the greater weight with them; and so shall I be cleared from
all suspicion of envy: whereby otherwise I might be suspected to be carried
in hatred and prejudice against the Pope, and Popery.

Secondly I require, that seeing the Scripture is the best expositour of it
self, and that those things here spoken of by Paul, receive great light out
of the Revelation, where this point is more fully handled. It may likewise be
permitted unto me to confer some places thereof with this of Paul, and, but
briefly to expound them, least if I should stand long upon the interpretation
of them, I should seem to some, to be too tedious, and to ouer-reach the set
limits of my purposed argument.

A double division of the disputation following, the one general, the other
more particular.

The second Chapter.
ANd whereas in this question or argument concerning Antichrist, there are
three things especially enquired after: 1 The one, touching the word, or name
what it signifies. 2 The other, concerning the thing, or the party himself,
what Antichrist is: This last, touching the thing or person, contains many
branches to be considered of, as namely: 2 Who it is that should be
Antichrist, as, whether he should be any one certain or particular man, or
diverse and sundry men? 3 Where, and from whence he should arise? 4 When, or in
what time, or age? 5 What manner a one touching the condition of his person, or
manner of his doctrine? 6 The means, or steps whereby he closely should creep
up? 7 His power, whereby he should be able to maintain himself, and that in
flourishing estate? 8 His workmen, and Abettours, what they are? 9 Who they
are on whom he should exercise his power? 10 Lastly, after what manner he
should be destroyed?


So in the whole we have ten heads touch ng this treatise or argument: all
which, Paul in this place has briefly, but very pithely unfolded. And in
truth, even as in the kingdom of Christ the like heads both for the number and
quality of them are observed: so also touching Antichrist, it was meet that
the same should be bewruied, and made known, both for the better forewarning
and comfort of the Godly.

The foretelling of the coming of Antichrist was a famous Prophecy, and given
out by many.

The third Chapter.
But first, some have moved this doubt or question, whether this speech of
Paul be to be accounted a prophecy and extraordinary revelation from God, or
only an advised and plain interpretation of the Scripture, which before had
uttered (but somewhat obscurely) that which Paul here more plainly
delivers. For, as for Paul, we know he was an Apostle: and, as himself
witnesses, Apostles are in their functions and callings distinguished from
Prophets, Ephe. 4.11. Therefore some are of opinion, that this place of Paul,
is but a grave and sound exposition of some other places of Scripture either
out of Daniell cap. 7. and 11. or out of Math. 24. or Luke 21. But (in my
judgment) it may more truly be affirmed, that this place of Paul, as others
such like, is a mere prophecy, and extraordinary, as we know Paul had many
such gifts given him, 1. Cor. 14. 2. Cor. 12. among which also, the gift of
prophesying is one, a proof whereof, we have 1. Tim. 4.1. and in other places
of his writings, we find other notable and extraordinary revelations, as
namely, 1. Cor. 15.21. And it makes no matter, though the gifts of Apostleship
and of prophecy, be several and diverse: for this indeed is true, if we
consider and weigh them by themselves, as they be in their own natures: but,
notwithstanding God many times bestows them both upon one and the selfsame
man. As for example, Peter by a special revelation from God, foretold his
death, 2. Pet. 1.14. Again, John the Evangelist was a Prophet (as appears by
the Apocalypse) and also an Evangelist. Further, we are not to account it
absurd, that this one and the selfsame matter should be foretold both by
Christ himself, and after by John in the Revelation, in as much as it often
comes to pass, that many Prophets have spoken of one and the same thing. For
it is well spoken of Bernard, There was one spirit (says he) that guided all
the Prophets, although they foresawe, and fore-shewed one thing at diverse
times, in diverse manners, and with sundry signs.

Why it was requisite that the kingdom and state of Antichrist should be
fore-tolde.

The fourth Chapter.
Paul has in one word signified what it is that would after ensue, when he
says, that there should come a departing, or falling away: for by that word,
he has laid open the whole estate of the thing that should follow, and the
whole power and effect of the kingdom of Antichrist. Doubtless it is a
fearful and horrible matter that Paul speaks of, that the Church of God,
which was planted by so great labors of so many Apostles and holy Pastors,
and after watered with so much blood of so many Martirs, should after by the
force of Satan be overthrown, and brought to confusion. The consideration
whereof, can not but in the hearts of all the godly work great grief, as well
such as lived before the accomplishment hereof, as such as lived after.

Whereupon some marvel, why it stood with the pleasure of the spirit of
God, to foretell so much, seeing the knowledge thereof could not but greatly
grieve the godly, and make the wicked more obstinate and insolent against the
Church, when they should consider, that according to the word (...), it should
come to pass, that true doctrine should be (...) and trampled under foot, and
that false doctrine (...) plausibly, and publicly received. Whereunto I
answer, that this was done and fore-tolde in a double respect, both in regard
of the godly, and ungodly.

In regard of the godly, first, that they should not take offense when they
should see those things come to pass (which they know were foretold) and
that by the will and just judgment of God. Secondly, that they, or we, should
not therefore make the less account of the Gospel as less glorious and
heavenly, for that it should come to pass that it should be publicly, and in
every place rejected, and that men should universally and in heaps fall from
the embracing of the same, therefore we see how in respect hereof this point
of prophecy was requisite for the comfort of the godly, and stay of the Church.

And as for the wicked, it serves to tell them, that the wrath of God is then
ready to be poured on their heads, when they shall see those things fullfilled,
after which, the last judgment of God, and their utter destruction should
immediately ensue.

And therefore in these two respects, both Christ himself in the 24. of Math.
and the spirit of God throughout the whole Revelation, did plainly foretell,
what should befall the Church, reueiling even the most woeful and dangerous
conditions. So that no man is to think that this was unseasonably, or
unreasonably b^wrayed.

That Antichrist should not be one singular or particular man, but that by that
name was signified a multitude of men, and a long succession. And further, why
Antichrist is called an Apostata, or back-slider.

The fifth Chapter.
THus much being spoken, let us in hand with the former place of Paul, wherein
(touching the words) there is some difficulty, or doubt. For our books have
usually the word (...) (that is, a defection) being a nowne substantive (or
primative) and which includes more then one man: And yet Augustine reads
(...), a deriuatiue, and which intends no more then one, and therefore he
translateth it, the Reneger, in his book De ciuitate Dei, and 19. Chap. But
all the Greek, and most ancient coppies agree, and the greek interpretours
themselves do read it as we do (...). Doubtless that erroneous reading which
Augustine followed, bred a great error: for thereupon some have in such sort
interpreted this place, as if Paul had spoken of one only man (whom he so
pointed out, and termed him only by the name of Antichrist) and not of a whole
brood or body of a multitude. But both the meaning of Paul, reason it self,
and the issue of things can in no wise admit this reading or exposition. For
Paul speaks not of any one man, but of a crewe clustered together, an
assembly, and kind of fraternity of men agreed and sworn together, in
horrible and blasphemous manner, against God himself. Therefore he uses the
primative word Apostasy: and after in the twelfth verse he unfolds himself,
and speaks plainly in the plural number, That all they might be damned etc.

Again, reason it self inforceth, that it cannot be understood of one man,
but of a multitude and kingdom. For one, and the selfsame man, cannot
possibly live so many years, as there were between the days of Paul. and
the overthrow of the Roman Empire, after which the very Antichrist was to come.

Lastly, the event hereof declares that it is to be understood universally of
the estate of the Church and of the whole world, the which has continued many
ages, and as yet is in ure, and not of the life or age of any one man: For the
life of one man (though he were of a great age) is but short, if it be compared
with the time of this defection, which has lasted now full out 900. years.
And as touching this Apostacy, or falling away, it is a woeful or most
miserable Estate, or condition of things, which should take place in the world
before the second coming of Christ, wherein should be not only a fearful and
lamentable persecution and slaughter of the Church: but also a killing, and
almost a final quelling and putting out of all Christian faith, from the face
of the earth, because that commonly, publikly, and in every corner, a doctrine
most false and contrary to the Gospel, should be admitted, approved, and
published, and that in the midst of the Church it self.

This exposition of mine is warranted, first by the words of Christ himself
Luke 18.8. When the son of man shall come, do ye think he shall find faith
upon the earth? And of Math. 24.12. The love of many (whereby Faith in that
place is meant) shall wax cold. Therefore that miserable estate of the Church
(made known unto us by the name of Antichrist) reaches to many, and concerns
not one alone. So also it is warranted by the Prophecy of John in the
Revelation Chap. 17.1. and 18.3. where so great and so far spreading power of
this Apostacy is in such sort described, as that it is there termed an
Harlot, (flat opposite and contrary to Christ) which with her poison and
corrupt doctrine should infect the Kings and Nations of the earth. Lostly, it
is warranted by the 1. John Cap. 2. verse. 18. where it is apparent that the
name of Antichrist is attributed to many. Upon the which place Master Calvin
writes thus. Paul (2. These. 2.3.) speaking of the Apostacy, or falling away
that should ensue, plainly gives it out, that it should be a body, or as
you would say, a kingdom of defection.

This being so, we may from hence gather and conclude, (and that upon an
Antecedent (or thing gone before) that before the last coming of Christ this
was to be fulfilled, namely, that the Gospel should be preached over the face
of the earth, the Church generally enlarged and planted, and the doctrine of
salvation publikly received, the which our Savior himself fore-tolde Math.
26.13.

But for the due and orderly handling of this point, let us see what this word
Apostata signifies. Apostates or back-sliders are otherwise taken and defined
among the Lawyers, then they he among the Divines. The Civil law terms that
Soldier an Apostate, which flies from his Camp, and with-draweth himself
from the alleagiance that he owes to his Captain. So does Modestinus the
Lawyer write [in L. Desertores. D. de re milita:] for he terms him a
Runnagate, and Apostate Soldier, who has been straggling long from his tents,
although after he be brought back again.

But among the Divines [L. Apostatae C. de Apostatis] Apostates are otherwise
accounted: namely, such as betray and renounce their holy and Christian
profession once made and received. On the other side, the Schoolmen and
Papists do yet make an other reckoning of Apostates, and describe them to be
such as break the rule and leave the order of religion, the which with a vow
they once took upon them. But doubtless in this place of Paul which we have
now in hand, he neither talks of Military discipline, nor of Popish
professions, which as yet were not hatched. Therefore the Apostacy or
defection that he speaks of here, must needs be understood either of a
departing from the Christian faith, or from subjection under the Empire of
Rome. And in deed, some have understood it of the Roman Empire, (as
Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 15. August. lib. 20. De ciuitate Dei. cap. 19. Jerome ad
Algas. quaest. 11.) which opinion how true it is, let us consider. To speak
briefly in the point, this is my judgment, that this place of Paul cannot be
meant only of the Empire of Rome, and that in many respects. First, Paul
entreats not in that place of earthly kingdoms, or change of Common
wealths, but delivers doctrine touching Christian faith. Again, the issue
of the matter (which is the best expositour of this Prophecy that can be) does
show no less. For the kingdom of Antichrist was not so much a withdrawing of
subjection from the Roman Empire, as a denying of obedience unto the word of
God. Further, Damascen (lib. 4. cap. 27. de orthodoxa side) makes for me,
affirming that Antichrist should come after that the doctrine of the Gospel
were once spread abroad. Lastly, all the ancient (...), when once they affirm
that Antichrist himself is already come, by and by, for proof thereof, they
make instance of the heresies which he maintains contrary to sound doctrine,
not mentioning any sedition or insurrection of the subjects against the sacred
Majesty of the Roman Empire.

Therefore this Apostacy, which is the ground and pillar of the estate of
Antichrist, is a backsliding or departure from the true doctrine of Christian
faith.

Why the kingdom and state of Antichrist is by the Spirit of God,
indefinitely, or without limitation called an Apostacy.

The sixth Chapter.
NOw, whereas S. Paul terms it by a general word Apostacy, he gives us
thereby to understand, that this departing should not fall out in one or two
Churches only, but in the whole body (as it is called) of the universal and
visible Church. And therefore Paul speaks without circumscription, for such
indefinite speeches are aunswerable in quantity to universals, as the
Logicians teach. And this is confirmed and made plain by that in the
Revelation, where the whore is said to make drunk with her poisoned cup, not
only one Church or Province, but all the Kings, Nations, and inhabitants of the
whole world. And yet not every particular man and member of the Church of God
shall become a back-slider, (for God will always keep some unto himself,
even in the midst of that general defection, as he did six thousand in the
days of Eliah, who were the true Church) but an incorporation (as you would
say) a conspiracy, and the greater number of such as should challenge unto
themselves the name of the Church of God, shall depart from the faith of
Christ, and shall betake them to a doctrine clean contrary thereunto, and
this to be done every where, openly, by common consent, and public authority:
the which we see to be done in Turkey, in Mahumetisme, and in Popery. From
hence therefore we may gather two points worthy the knowledge and observation:
the first, that, that argument is not so strong and unanswerable to persuade
the truth of any doctrine, which is taken from long continuance and tradition
of our Elders. For when once this general defection shall have set in foot,
how may a man then safely make this collection, This doctrine is true, and
Apostolic, because it is publicly received, taught, and allowed commonly in
every Congregation. For Paul has said that it should come to pass, that a
doctrine contrary to that of the Gospel should be admitted, yea, and that
with approbation, into the very Churches in every place, publicly. Indeed the
ancient Writers were wont to use this argument (of succession and consent:)
and before this defection it was both a forcible, and sound kind of proof:
but now, it is nothing so. The second is, that a man can not rightly gather and
conclude, that the true Church and true doctrine is there to be found, where
there has bin inuiolably kept and observed a continual and orderly succession
of persons. For seeing this defection was to take place and continue long in
the very Church of God, even through many successions of persons and ages of
men: how may a man thence gather and conclude substantially, that therefore the
Church of God is to be found in the midst of these back-sliders, because that
there are to be seen a continual succession of persons, whereas those persons
be the very Apostates themselves.

Lastly, from thence may be observed, that this is a false position in Popery,
which notwithstanding the Schoolmen maintain with tooth, and nail, namely,
that the Church can not err: nay, it is certain that it can, and that not
only one particular Church, or two, but many plentiful Congregatio^s, yea,
whole Counsels, and to make short, the universal Church it self, whose
fall, the spirit of God forewarned, and the event or issue thereof has since
verified.

Against all which offenses, this is the only and omnisufficient remedy, to
resort to the word of God, whereby the true Church, true Doctrine, and true
Pastors, are to be discerned and severed from the false and counterfaite: and
thus have we hitherto considered why Antichrist is termed an Apostata. For now
my purpose was but briefly to prosecute this point, intending afterward to
cross this sea again with more full sails, having hitherto only wayed
anchor, and launched forth a little.

Why Paul calls Antichrist a man.

The seventh Chapter.
Paul proceeds further, and adds, and that man of sin: here he speaks
directly and plainly of Antichrist: as first of his name, and then of his
person, or of his quality and doctrine. Touching his name, he terms him,
The man of sin, and Son of perdition. And here again, that is called into
question, whereof I have already disputed, namely, where as Paul calls
Antichrist a man, whether it be to be understood of any one private man that
should live in the world at some one time or other, or else of the whole rabble
of men in their successions, which in that Apostacy should bear a swindge for
many years, whom Paul likeneth to a man, and so terms it in the singular
number: although in truth it be a troop and crewe, gathered and compact
together of many men, yea, of all the nations and kingdoms of the world. In
like manner as Paul, 1. Cor. 4.1. by man in the singular number understands
many, which kind of speech is usual and familiar to such as follow the
Hebrew phrase, the which Paul in his writings does greatly affect and imitate.

But withal, this is diligently to be observed, which Damascen affirms,
namely, that Antichrist should not be one of the Devils that should take upon
him the flesh and substance of man (even as our Savior took unto him our
humane nature) although notwithstanding such as should become Antichrists,
should be possessed with a devilish disposition, and carried in enmity against
God. Truth it is, the Papists will have it understood of one singular and
private man, who one day should live and keep a stir, and further, that he
should arise out of the tribe of Dan: but in this their dotage, they rely upon
no ground of Scripture, and therefore they are unmeet in this point to be
dealt withal. Others there are (and that learned men to) that are of opinion
that this is to be understood indeed of one man, but such an one, as among
all the route of Apostates, should be the most perverse, the chief, and
ringleader of all the rest: for (say they) there is one head of the godly and
faithful, even Christ Jesus. And touching the name of this one principal, and
arch-Apostata: they think it is as well covertly insinuated in this place of
Paul, as also especially bewrayed in the 13. of the Revelation, verse. 18.
where the figures and letters of the said name are said to make up the number
of 666. And (to say the truth) this opinion is generally received, and seems
to be somewhat likely. Unto these points I will address mine answer. And
first touching the first. Although it be very true, that there is one
principal head of all the unfaithful, yet he is not any particular and
mortal man (such as it appears Math. 24. that famous Antichrist should be)
but even Satan himself, that old Serpent, who also is called the Dragon. And
as for the second opinion, me thinks it is weak and wauereth in it self, in
as much as that place of the Apocalypse, cap. 13. verse. 18. is wrongly
interpreted of any certain name, title, or calling of any one man, the letters
whereof should contain the number of 666. For the Spirit of God in that place
medleth not with the Arithmeticall signification of letters wherewith any word
is framed: but of the time and number of years wherein those things should be
accomplished that are there spoken of. For the Scripture never uses to deal
in such manner of Sorcers and foolish mystery by letters, which is but flat
iuggling of the Cabalists, and damned dotages of the Magicians: but, it uses
to speak very plainly, when it fore-telleth of the coming of any, as namely,
when it fore-sheweth the coming of Cyrus and Josias, and that an hundred
years before they came indeed. Therefore look what men are any where by the
Spirit of God spoken of, they be mentioned under their plain, proper, and
peculiar names, and not by such circumstance of words: as, Cyrus, Josias, Jesus
Christ etc. as I said before. And to the end we may the better see into the
matter, let us examine the words of the text it self, Revel. 13. verse. 18.
Here is wisdom. Let him that has understanding, coumpt the number of the
Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred threescore
and six.

Now I would demand of what tongue, or language that word or name should be,
the letters whereof must be searched after, whether it should be an Hebrew,
Greek or Latin word: for (as August. affirms, lib. 12. de Genesi ad literam)
these three languages were always accoumpted principal among al men. Truly
they that first brought up that interpretation, whereof I speak (as namely
Irenaeus lib. 5.) do even folter in the matter, and labor their wits in
devising any one word, whose letters would amount unto the number of 666. And
yet Eusebius (lib. 5. histor. cap. 8.) follows that which he saw Irenaeus to
have set down before him: I could my self devise many such words, but it
would be to no purpose. For this name Claudius Ruber, contains the like
number that these do, Italica, Ecclesia, and Lateinos, and Teitan: the which
nevertheless Irenaeus thinks should be the very names of this egregious
Antichrist. Again, the ancient writers before ye days of Irenaeus fetching
the matter out of the Greek, affirm: that this word (...), and these two
(...) should be meant, which should make up the number 666. namely the letter
l: to signify 30. a: 1. t: 300. e: 5. i: 10. u: 50. n: 70.: 200. For these
numbers being added together amount unto 666. And that sum also is contained
in the two other words, according to the Greekish manner of supputation or
numbering by letters. i: 10. t: 300. a: 1. l: 30. i: 10. k: 20. a: 1. e: 5. m:
20. m: 20. l: 30. k: 8. s: 200. ^: 10. a: 1. Al which likewise being put
together make 666. And no doubt but the truth of the thing, bred and fostered
this opinion in them. Far in the Italian Church (the head whereof the City of
Rome always was) they saw before their eyes, that the very kingdom of
Antichrist began then to be rejected, and so by such beginnings as then
appeared, the Spirit of GOD guided those good men to foresee and fore-shewe,
that there also in time it would grow to his height and perfection. And as
touching Jrenaeus himself, he rather thought that the word (...), should be
the proper name of Antichrist. Hereunto may be added the Hebrew word Romuth:
which signifies a Romain: whereof the letter: signifies (in their manner of
numbering also) 200.: 6.: 40.: 10.: 10.: 400. But these are but quiddities: and
come not near the true exposition of that place of the Apoc. which I
alleged: the which that we may attain unto, we must make recourse unto the
holy Scriptures, and unto such like places as this is, as namely unto that of
Daniell, cap. 7. where not only one particular man, but a whole and universal
state of a kingdom, is set forth under the name and shape of a Beast, as here
of a man. So the kingdom and all the Kings of Persia are shadowed under the
figure of one Bear: of the Macedonians under the shape of a Leopard. So also
all such as should be the principalles and hold the helm (as you would say)
in that Apostacy, are resembled by the name of a Beast in the singular number.
Whereby it appears, that this place of the Apoc. is to be referred unto the
whole manner and continuance of a certain succession, and not unto any one
man. Lastly, it is not to be doubted but that by these words (the man of
sin, etc.) the prerogatives and Potentates in this Apostacy are poynted out.

What the true and proper meaning is of this place (of the Revel. Cap. 20.
touching the number of 666.) I will hereafter discuss, when I come to talk
of the time which the Spirit of God did set before the coming of Antichrist.

Now the purpose of Paul in setting of him out in this place with such ouglie
and fearful names: was to the end, that all men should the more readily,
fly from him, and that the godly and faithful ones, should even tremble to
hear the very name of him.

Why Antichrist is called the son of perdition, Apollion, the Beast, a
Woman, and an Harlot.

The eight Chapter.
But there are other terms given also, unto Antichrist in the Scripture: which
are likewise of us to be observed. As first Paul calls him, The child of
perdition: and the man of sin: that is, a most wicked and lewd man, according
to the Hebrew speech (even as Judas, the betrayer of our Savior, is called the
lost child (John 17.12.) And therefore, he that should sit as chief in that
Apostacy being described rather by his properties, then by a proper name, is
called a most wicked, and cursed kaitife. And in this respect it skilleth not,
though all of us, even the faithful themselves are called the children of
wrath and sons of disobedience. Ephesians. 2.3. and 5.16. For that is true in
deed: But here Paul speaks of a certain sect of miscreants more pernicious
and damnable then all the rest, of a more reprobate mind and despightfull
against the truth: and therefore more detestable for impiety and mischief: The
which cankred crew he therefore terms the man of sin, and reprobation. And
surely it is well noted of D. Gualter, that Antichrist is called the son of
destruction, both in the active, and passive signification, for that he both
destroys others, and is destroyed himself: whereupon in an other place he is
called Apollyon, (as namely Apoc. 9.12.) because he is the author of all
pestilent infection, and destruction both of body and soul. Therefore he is
well termed by Paul, The son of perdition, whom the Spirit of God calls
(...), destroyed, or destroying.

And although he be in other places commonly called by others, Antichrist, (as
in the 1. of John, and 4.) yet it seems that Paul made choice rather thus to
describe him for two respects. First, because that manner of expressing him,
carries with it a greater vehemency, and represents more effectually his
detestable wickedness and blasphemy, when he is said to be a most vile and
abominable wretch. Secondly, because, that by this means, we are better
directed in judgment, of what kind of Antichrist to understand this place.
For (as Origin says upon Math. Hom 30.) the name of Antichrist is general and
pertaines to many: but here, one of them only is meant, the worst, the most
mischeuous, and horrible: so that hereby he is poynted and painted out, who
among all the other Antichrists should be the captain and chief Antichrist.

Furthermore, the same Antichrist is also called a Beast, and an Whore
(Revelation 17. and 18.) And it makes no matter though he be termed there of
John by the name of a Beast and Harlot, and here of Paul, by the name of a
Man. For here in this place I take it, that his kind, and nature is signified,
and there, by the names of Beast, and Harlot, that his manners, and disposition
are laid open. And therefore this estate, or body of this Apostacy, together
with the head and principal member of the fame, is in the Scripture,
especially compared unto these three things.

To a Beast, in respect of cruelty, and blockish ignorance.

To a Woman, in regard of covetousness, haughtiness, and weakness of mind.

To an Harlot, for their dissolute manners: and chiefly their Idolatry, which
is the greatest kind of whoredom that the Scripture speaks of.

And touching the cruelty of this kingdom: Lactantius (lib. 7.) tells, that
it should be exceeding great, writing thus of Antichrist (cap. 17.) That shall
be a time (says he) wherein Justice shall be trodden under foot, and
Innocence contemned, wherein the wicked shall cruelly pre a upon the godly,
all things shall be confounded and turned vp-side down against law and
nature. And this saying of Lactantius agrees fitly with that of the Revel.
(cap. 17.6.) where Antichrist is said to be that Harlot, that is made dronken
with the blood of Martyrs, and Saints of God. Whereby appears that
Antichrist should (as he does) always raise bloody persecutions against ye
faithful. Chrisost. (Hom. 40. on Math.) Affirms no less, now touching this
less, now touching this matter of persecution, when, or by whom was it ever
more practiced, then it has bin, and still is, by the Bishop of Rome, and that
whole retinew? And let this suffice briefly, to be spoken of the cruelty of
this generation. Concerning the ignorance of it: I find it thus written in a
book, entitled, De Antichristo, and attributed unto Austin: The kingdom of
Antichrist shall be furnished with Magicians, Witches, Southsayers and
Inchaunters, which shall teach, and persuade with all manner of impiety,
falsehood, and detestable practices.

And where (I pray) may this be found more verified, than among the Papists,
and in the kingdom of Popery. And sure the Popish Clergy (which is the main
pillar of this state and Apostacy) being described by Peter in his 2. Epist.
cap. 2.12. and 15. is said there to be a kind of brutish Beasts, which despise
that they know not, and which always forsake the right way. And, experience it
self has showed it, that they are as great lubberly doles, as ever lived, in
so much as their Monks were accoumpted great Clerks, and principal Doctors
among them: and yet among themselves, this Proverb began (speaking of a Dunce)
As great a Moame as a Monk.

As for the covetousness of that order and kind of people, I need not speak
much of it, being the case is so clear. For Peter in the place before
alleged verse. 14. They have hearts exercised with covetousness. And in the 18.
of the Revel. verse. 3. They are called Merchaunts Bernard, who bare as much
favor as might be to his Eugenius, and after unto Innocentius the 2. yet
(treating of the Psalm which begins, Who so dwells:) he speaks on this
manner of these Popish professors, The dignities and promotions of the Church,
are sought after for filthy lucre sake, and to keep revel route withal, and
for these roumes, and their revenues, they labor, and contend in very
shameless manner. Again, in his Sermon of the conversion of Paul, entreating
direccly, and plainly of the government of the Church, under the Bishop of
Rome, at last he flatly determines of him in this sort, He is the very
Antichrist. Again, upon the Canticles, Sermon 33. (that I prosecute not many
places of this Author touching this point) he uses the very same speech, and
assertion. Further, what shall we think of that famous Epistle of the Church
of Leodium against Paschall the 2. which is extant in the 2. Tome of the
Councels: does it not add great testimony and credit in this behalf? The
words whereof are these. We do utterly dislike those Legates, a Latere, sent
from the Pope, that run prolling about to scrape up pence, and fill their
bags, as in the days of Zosimus, Celestine, and Boniface, the Counsels of
Affricke approved. For (that we may judge them by their fruits) there insued
by their means no amendment of manners, but oppression of men and spoil of
Gods Church.

Touching the matter of Haughtiness, or Ambition: where in all the world was it
ever greater? Surely Peter (2. Pet. 2.) touches, and tainteth this true of
Clergy men with the note of extreme insolency, as men who set not a button
by lawful Magistrates. And seeing the Man of Rome makes open challenge, that
himself is set above all Kingdoms, and Kings in the world (as did Leo the 12.
in a Bull, and Preface, beginning Concordat: And Boniface the 8. upon a day of
Jubilee, causing to be carried before him in the sight of the people a Key and a
Sword:) what could be more plainly and fitly spoken, then to compare both
Antichrist himself and his whole Hierarchy, unto the weak and impotent
affection of a sielie woman. All the world knows (and the thing it self
shows no less) what often and bitter contentions and bickerings have been
raised, about the getting of the triple Crown. And indeed Austin himself,
even in his days observed no less, (as he reports in his 6. Book against
Julian cap. 4.) yea very heathen men have observed and recorded the same in
writings, as namely Ammianus. Marcellinus of Pope Damasus. Again, Bernard upon
the Canticles (Sermon 33.) speaking of that stately State, and of those that
were preeminent in it: There are arisen (says he) vain men, itching after
renown and glory, and feign they would become somebodie, and procure
themselves a name. And lastly, in his 4. Book De Consideratione unto Eugenius
the Pope, after he has described and detested, the pride and pomp of the
Bishops of Rome: at last he shuts up the matter in these words. Herein
(says he) thou show thy self to have succeeded not Peter, but Constantine:
Peter is he, who never knew what belonged to such solemn showing himself
abroad in braueries of precious stones, or silks, or gold, or riding upon a
white palfray, or being guarded with a troop of tall fellows, or environed
with a company of ruffling seruing-men. But to say the truth, Bernard speaks
sparingly to compare the Bishop to Constantine, he should rather have named
Dioclesian, (that cruel tyrant) or Caligula, both which by means of their
precious and glorious attire, would needs be accounted and reverenced as
Gods. Again, Hilarious (contra Auxent) speaking of the state of Antichrist.
These fellows (says he) do ambitiously affect the countenance and maiesticall
port of the Secular power, and so think to uphold the flourishing estate of
the Church by a show of worldly pomp. And lastly he says: They make great
account of this, to be greatly accounted of in the world. All this he speaks
of Antichrist. And I pray what was more usual, or common to be seen in the
Papacy, than the practice hereof? Or what was there ever more puffed up and
insolent, then that route of the Romish rabble? Insomuch as the Bishop of Rome
decreed, and established it, that his Cardinals should take the upper hand of
Kings themselves: which is evident to be seen in their Clementines. And thus
much of their Ambition.

As concerning their Idolatry, the pen of every writer is plentiful in
showing how outrageous it should be in the kingdom of Antichrist. Austin in
his treatise De Antichristo, He shall revive (says he) the worshipping of
Devils: he shall set up and magnify the wicked, and shall violate, and reject
the law of the Gospel. And all these things (says he) shall he do in the
midst of the Church. Whereupon it is that in many places of the Revel. as cap.
17. and 18. The Kings of the earth are said to commit fornication with the
Harlot: which is to be referred unto the matter of Idolatry. But what, and
where was there ever Idolatry so gross and apparent, as was, and is, in Popery?

As concerning their riot and licentious behavior, there was no want of that
to be found in that kingdom, and that in the very bosom of the Church: by
occasion whereof, it is said, Revel. 18.9. that the kings and nations of the
earth, did not only commit whoredom, but also lived with her in licentious
wantonness: (...), drenched and drowned in all manner of pleasures, as Paul
speaks of wanton Widows 1. Tim. 5.11. This looseness of life is both
common, and commended among the very Bishops, and Priests, and other Prelates
of the popish Clergy: the which also began not of late to be espied, but such
as lived above 400. years ago, (as namely Bernard) bewrayed, and bewailed it
often, and that in vehement manner, (as in his 5. book De considerat. and upon
the Canticles, Sermon 33.) the which place, because it expresses, as it were
in colors, the loose behauiours of the Romish Prelates, I have thought good to
exemplify it word, for word. They bear out themselves (says he) in an
honorable port, with the goods of the Church, whereunto notwithstanding
themselves bring no credit, or worship at all. Hence, comes that whorish
tricking, that Stage-like attire, that Prince-like pomp, which daily we see in
them. Hence, proceeds the gold that they use in their bridles, saddles, and
spurs: in so much, as their spurs are more glittering then their Alters.
Hence, came their stately tables, their variety of dishes, and quaffing cups:
hence issued their ionketing bankets, their dronkennes, and surfaicts: hence,
followed their Viols, Harpes, and Shawmes: hence, flowed their Cellers, and
Pantries, so stuffed with wines, and viands of all sorts: hence gat they their
Lee-pots, and painting boxes: and hence, had they their pursses so well lined
with coin: fie upon it? such men they will needs be, and yet they are our
great masters in Israel, as Deanes, Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbishops.
These works of theirs are little inferior unto that filthiness, which they
commit in darkness. And lastly, he adds these words, For, he is the very
Antichrist. Let any that list, peruse the whole place, as also the said Fathers
Epistle unto Eugenius: and again, set him read the little book of Nicholas
de Clemengis, wherein, he complains of all the orders of the Papacy: And
lastly, Peter de Vineis, in his Epistles: To conclude, let him read, and
observe what Platina himself (who otherwise for the most part shows himself
the Popes claw-backe) writes of these matters in many places, but especially
what he reports of Samosatenus in the life of Dionisius the first, where he
shows that never was there seen, or heard of more retchlesse, and lewd
behavior, then was found in the pontifical, and Romish minions. Jerome also
in his Prologue, De spiritu sancto, confirms this same, where he terms
Rome, Babylon, and that purple colored whore, spoken of in the Revelation.

Therefore to conclude, seeing this place of Paul is not to be understood of
any one man, but of the whole body, and order of Apostates, which should
succeed, and last for many ages, boasting it self under the name of the
Church: it may now easily be discerned, who be the men, and what corporation,
or state that is, whereof Paul in this place forewarned: and no man can doubt
(except such as are wilfully blind) that the Papists are they.

Which Beast of those three, that are mentioned in the Revelation, does point
us out Antichrist.

The ninth Chapter.
THe which that it may yet more plainly apeare, let us see which beast it is
under whose shape or figure Antichrist is expressed and showed unto us in the
Apocalypse. And first, it is manifest out of Daniell, that by the name of a
beast, a certain state, or condition of things is signified, Cap. 7. and 8.
Now the Beasts that are mentioned in the Revelation, are in number three,
(besides the Dragon himself, who is the Devil (as the Angel there expounds
it) the father and begetter of those other three Beasts.) The first whereof is
that which there is said, to come up out of the bottomless pit, and is not
otherwise described unto us by any express form or shape, Revel. 11.7. and
17.8. The second is that which comes up out of ye Sea, and is there likened
unto many beasts, as unto a Leopard, a Bear, and a Lion: which also is there
described to have seven heads, and ten horns, even as his graundsire the
Dragon had, Cap. 13.1. and 12.3. The third is that, which is there said to be
like unto the second, but having two horns like unto the horns of the Lamb,
and this to rise out of the earth, Cap. 13.11. And unto this Beast in other
places, is added, as a companion, a false Prophet, by whose help the Beast can
work many things, and is maintained in flourishing state; whose father also
the Dragon is said to be, Cap. 16.13. and 19.20.

Concerning the first Beast mentioned in the 11. Chapter, it is all one with
the third, as we may perceive by the effects of them both. For by either of
these Beasts, one, and the selfsame order and state of men is signified, which
was hatched by the Dragon their Sire, and vphelde and maintained by the same
false Prophet. But, in the said 11. Chapter there is first briefly and in
general that set down, which after in more particular, and plentiful manner
is described, where the beginning, the end, the drift, practice, and purpose
thereof is displayed, that so we might take the deeper knowledge of it, Cap.
13. and 17. And it is all one, to rise out of the earth, and out of the
bottomless pit: for the pit in the Scripture, is said to be under the earth:
but yet he is said to rise out of the pit, and out of the earth, in diverse
respects. For this Beast is said to rise out of the earth, in respect hereof,
for that they that should sway, and rule this state and kingdom, should rise
of the riffe-raffe, and skomme of the people. Again, he is said to rise out of
the pit, because those raskals brewe, and breathe out nothing else, but that,
that is dogged, dunghill-like, and devilish, and flat opposite to God, and
godliness. Therefore in regard of the base condition of those, by whom this
government is manadged, this Beast and this kingdom is said to rise out of the
earth, that is, of the very raskally people. For, for the most part, such are
the Cardinals of Rome, and such others as are crept up into the Prelacie, and
Primacie in the Kingdom of Popery. And in regard of their precepts, rules, and
doctrine, the same Beast, and this order of men, is said to rise out of the
pit, that is, out of Hell, for that it sauoureth, teaches, follows, and
enjoys nothing but diuelishnes, that is (as the Spirit of God teaches,
Revel. 2.24.) the deepenes of Satan, and out of doubt such is the doctrine of
Popery. Therefore the first, and second Beast is all one, but herein the
difference, that the description of the first being but rudely or confusedly at
first set down, is after distinctly handled and laid open, that so we might
the more easily take knowledge of it. So it is also in Daniell, (with whom the
Revelation is principally to be compared, both in respect of the order by them
both observed, and of their style or manner of writing,) where, after the
Prophet had in vision seen the 4. Monarchs, and so briefly set down Cap. 7.
those things which made for the comfort of the Church, and were to be observed
in the two latter Monarchs: afterward he rippeth up the same matter again,
and handles it more distinctly and severally, Cap. 10. 11. and as there, so
here, there are two Chapters interlaced between the first general
propounding, and the last more particular handling of those matters. Wherefore
seeing the first and the third Beast signify all one thing: the question is
only of the second, whether by it rather then by the third, Antichrist is
purtraited, of whom, Paul in this place speaks. Truly, that I may speak my
mind briefly in this behalf, I think, that by this second Beast, mentioned
Apoc. 13.1. is signified evidently the Roman Empire, being Idolatrous, such as
it was, while the Emperors had their residence in Rome, before they removed
their seat to Constantinople. For that Roman Empire, together with the
succession of the Governors in the same, is purtraited out unto us under the
tipe of seven heads, and ten horns. But these ten were after abridged and
brought unto two: for afterward there were but two horns of the Roman
Empire, that is, two Princes seats, or places of residencie: whereof the first
and most ancient was at Rome in Italy, the second and latter at Bizantium,
otherwise called Constantinople in Thracia, whether Constantine the Great
translated his mansion or abiding place: whereupon it came to pass, that both
in general Counsels, and in the Decrees of Emperors, mention is of two Romes:
one, the old, which is the true Rome, built by Romulus: the other, the new,
which is Constantinople, which also began to hold up the head, by virtue of
the privileges and prerogative of old Rome. But between these two horns of
this one, and the same Roman Empire, this was the difference, which also is of
us diligently to be observed, that so long as the horn (or seat) was in
Italy, the Roman Emperors were Idolatours, and their Decrees and
Constitutions blasphemous against God. But after time, the said Emperors began
to be Christians, which began in Constantine the great, (for whereas some
writers affirm of Phillip, whom Decius slew, that he embraced the Gospel,
certain it is, that he would be a Christian no otherwise but covertly, and not
by public profession) then I say first of all, and by upon the neck of it,
this same Roman Empire was translated from Italy, and old Rome into Thrace,
and therein unto Constantinople. For that this should so come to pass, the
Spirit of God in the Apoc. had fore-shewed, as after we shall declare. But yet
I grant that Constantine had no regard unto that Prophecy, when he removed at
first from Rome, to Bizantium, and there settled his Imperial Pallaice, but he
respected only a more commodious government of those matters and kingdoms of
his that lay Eastward, which at that time were miserably disquieted by the
Parthians, and Persians. For Constantinople did seem to be so situated
(whereas otherwise Constantine had once thought to have settled elsewhere) as
that it was as you would say the navel or midst unto the whole Roman
jurisdiction, which as we know, spread it self far and near: and yet it
could not possibly otherwise fall out, because that so the Roman Empire might
become double-headed, and have those two horns which God before had reueiled.
So the providence of God guided this whole enterprise of Constantine, and so
fulfilled what himself had decreed. And touching this dividing of the Roman
Empire into these two heads and horns, it is warranted out of the Revel.
13.11. and Zech. 4.8. and this is the very true interpretation of that
Prophecy, where it is said, that the Beast had two horns. And here let this
be observed, that hereafter I will coumpt and call that the first Beast, which
in my former division and exposition I made the second, and again, I will
term that the second, which before I called the third: for that head of the
first Beast which appeared to be hurt and wounded deadly, was indeed one of
the seven before spoken of. But that those seven were in the end reduced unto
two only, it appears hereby, for that the second Beast, which before we
called the third, and which conuayed unto her self all the power that the
former had, is said to have only two horns, Cap. 13. 11. And it may not seem
strange, that in this second Beast I interpret otherwise of the signification
of horns, then I did in the former. For there by horns were specified the
persons of Kings, as afterward shall appear, because it is added, that those
horns had Diademes, or Crowns on the^. But as for the horns of the second
Beast, they rather note a State, then any persons, because that these horns
are said to resemble the likeness of the Lamb, so that they signify an
estate or quality of a Kingdom. To conclude, this interpretation is to be
held as a principal ground, for the better understanding of many places in the
Revelation, whereinto we shall a great deal more easily see, if we shall
observe this distinction or division of this Roman Empire into two imperial
heads. Let us therefore fall in hand with the exposition of the place of the
Revelation, Cap. 13. 1. 2. 3. the words whereof are these.







The ten Kings that are spoken of in this place, are to be coumpted from that
time wherein, and from that Emperor under whom this Prophecy was written. And
that was Domitian, the son of Vespasian. In which account, notwithstanding,
all they are not to be reckoned for Emperors and Kings, who succeeded in the
Empire. For, as for some of them, they were never approved, but refused both
by the Senate and people of Rome. Some again did skarse take a taste as it
were of the pleasure and pomp of the Empire they lived so short a time.
Therefore they only are to be reckoned in this Catalogue of ten Kings, who
both entered with public consent of all the orders, and continued in the
government the space of some years. And lastly, whereas any two of them did
reign together, there they both are to be accoumpted but for one King, and the
Kingdom to be ascribed unto him that was first in place. Wherefore, these be
they which seem to me to be the ten Kings, and to be understood by that place.

1 Traian the Emperor who ruled, by the consent of all the people, years 20.
2 Aelius Adrianus, liked, and loved of all, reigned 21. 3 Antonius Boionius,
borne at Nimmes in France surnamed Pius. 23. 4 M. Antonius Philosophus,
together with his brother L. Verus. 18. 5 Commodus, the son of Philosophus,
ruled alone. 13. 6 Septimus Seuerus Afer (for Aelius Pertinax and Didius
Iulianus, did skarcely or rather not at all enter upon the Empire, neither were
they ever admitted as Emperors, either by the Senate or Soldiers: but) this
Seuerus reigned, years 18. 7 Alexander Mammeus: for (as for Antonius
Caracalla, he was admitted unto the government by his Father Seuerus, while he
yet lived, so that he was but a copartner, and one that held out the course of
his fathers kingdom. And touching Heliogabalus, he reigned but two years,
skarcely known in the mean time, either to the Senate or to the Provinces.
Again, his government is to be ascribed unto the years of this Alexander, who
began his rule even in the days of Heliogabalus. And lastly concerning
Macrinus, who was the next, he was never accepted by any of the orders, neither
in the time of his short advancement did he ever see Rome, so that in regard
of his small continuance, he is not to be accounted among the Emperors: but)
this Alexander ruled, years 13. 8 Galienus (under whose time I comprehend the
poor advancement of Valerian, who is unworthy once to be named an Emperor,
since he endured a miserable bondage under Sapor the King of the Persians: And
as for Julius Maximinus, and the Gordians, their Empire was never quiet, as
also that of Phillippes, who was never accoumpted of, or any whit feared among
the Provinces: And lastly concerning Decius and Vixius Gallus who insued, they
skarce bad the Kingdom Good Morrow: but) Galienus governed.15. 9 Aurelianus, a
man much made of by all men, a famous and stout Emperor, although his
government lasted not long, namely 5. 10 Dioclesian: (for touching Tacitus and
Florianus they never saw the Diadem, nor yet Carus Probus; but many at that
time laid hold on the Emperie: Insomuch as none of these pettie-foggers may be
coumpted Kings, in the roll of those ten before spoken of, but) Dioclesian
bare sway, years.25.
And concerning all these, they were solemnly invested: but as for the others,
they touched the Sword and Scepter as it were with the tip of their fingers, or
only looked upon it, but they never could get the Crown free to sit quietly on
their cappes. Now, as by the succession of ten Kings, this Beast flourished: so
in the Revel. (cap. 17.16.) it is said she should be persecuted and brought to
nothing by ten kings. And thus much of the ten kings there spoken of.

Touching the seven heads there attributed unto this Beast, that is, unto
this old and Idolatrous Roman Empire: some will have them to be the seven
men of Germany, who succeeded in the Empire, after that the Pope had diuerted
the Empire unto the Germans: but before that translation of the Empire, while
as yet it was Idolatrous and remained at Rome, they were either the seven
dignities and preeminent offices of the City, (as first, the Consul-ship:
secondly, the Pretour-ship: thirdly, the Captain of the Guard: fourthly, the
chief Chamberlain: fifthly, the Treasourour: sixthly, the Gentry: seauenthly,
and the Senate) or else they were the seven Provinces, whereby the Roman
Empire was especially sustained, whereof the first and principal was Italy it
self: second, all France as far as the Rhene, and the Mountain Pyrenaei:
thirdly, all Spain: fourthly, Germany, with Slauonia: fifthly, Macedonia,
whereunto Greece and Thrace is annexed: sixthly, Egypt with all Africa:
(although I am not ignorant, that in it were diverse Provinces and
Lieutenauntries, as appears by the knowledge of the Romish Jurisdiction: but
herein, we are not to consider how they ordered and disposed matters, for their
security and quick dispatch of affairs, but what the places were from whence
their revenues grew, and from whence they usually fetched their new supply
of Soldiers) seauently, Syria, and Asia the less. But as for that region and
part of Syria which coasts along the River Euphrates, and was indeed under the
Roman obeisance, it served rather to waste their substance, and consume their
men, then to be an help and supporter of the Roman Empire, in regard of the
continual wars that they had with the Arabians and Persians: and therefore
this Coast is not to be accounted among those seven Provinces before spoken of.

Now, as touching these seven heads of the first Beast, that of Italy was the
chief: And as for this, it was first ouerrunne and rent from the Empire, and
so wounded by the Goths, that it might justly have seemed to have been quite
dashed and defaced for ever, had not Antichrist afterward revived and restored
it again: but that by an other devise and practice, namely by the pretense and
show of godliness and Christian religion. Therefore the Beast in this place
spoken of, is the very Monarche and Empire of Rome: which, as it is here, so
also is it in Daniell (cap. 7.3.) said to arise out of the Sea. Furthermore,
whereas this said Empire, is there in Daniell termed by the name of Beast,
whereof in that place there is no form or fashion set down: (for this being
there the fourth, should exceed the three former, which Daniell saw; in
fiercenes and sauadge cruelty) so also in this place (of the Revel.) is she so
monstrously set out, as nothing can seem more ouglie, cruel, and horrible.
For she is described to have 1. The feet of a Bear. 2. The mouth of a Lion.
3. And in all her other lineame^ts, like to a Leopard


Well, we have heard the one head of this Beastiall Empire, to have been sore
wounded, namely, that which was in Italy. For all the Roman Imperial
dignity, which was contained within the border of Italy, was for a while by
the Goths turned topsie-turuie: but not long after it was there again revived
by the industry of an other Beast, that is, the Pope and Roman Antichrist: as
after in this treatise shall more fully appear.

Wherefore, to draw to an end, by the third Beast, Antichrist is prefigured,
which did put life into that other monstrous Beast, so sore wounded in the
head, that is, framed, formed, and set on foot the Image of that old
Idolatrous Roman Empire, such as it was while it kept at Rome. For this head
and horn of the Empire, which I say was Idolatrous: when once the Emperors
themselves began to embrace the Gospel, and to plant themselves at
Constantinople, it was wounded even to the death, and in all likelihood
dispatched for ever. Yea, even such poor fragments as seemed to remain of it,
did Odoacer Herulus afterward quite deface: (Revel. 17.16.) and so the Goths
possessed the same long after, namely, through-out the lineall descent of ten
Kings, orderly succeeding each other, while in the mean time the princely
Pallaice, and Imperial seat, Rome it-selfe, lay flat in the dust. And in
truth we shall find the agreement great in all points, if this third Beast
which represents Antichrist, and that other which represents ye Roman
Empire, shall be resembled and compared together: the which, seeing it makes
much for the better clearing of this point, I will briefly touch their mutual
resemblances in manner as follows.

The third Beast is said to have 1 The horns of the Lamb, 2 But yet to
speak like the Dragon.


So Antichrist, that is, the whole rablement of shauelings, and principally the
Chiefetaine of the order 1 Pretends a mild disposition, and the doctrine of
Christ. 2 But in very truth he speaks like the Devil, impious and
blasphemous things against God.


Secondly, touching the labor and practice of the^ both they iumpe together:
for the third Beast -- 1 Blows life into the dead carcass of the wounded
Beast, which otherwise had perished for ever. 2 Proclaims and procures that
all me^ should hear some mark of that former Beast, either the name, or number
of her: that is, should publicly take upon the^ one profession or other of her
orders.


Even so Antichrist, and the Pope of Rome 1 Raised from death to life, and
restored to ye world the dead image of the Roman Empire so farforth as it was
Idolatrous, and seated at Rome. 2 Carefully provides that every man make
public show (by one mark, office, dignity or other) of ye idolatry which by ye
preaching of the Gospel was (to a man's thinking) quite overthrown.


But the Beast is said to do this, by the power and working of the Dragon, and
by the help and ministry of a notable false Prophet. Why, this also fitteth
very rightly with the Papisticall Hierarchy: for that false Prophet is the
Pope, and the Dragon, the Devil himself. So, the Romish, and Papisticall
dominion, is heald up, and brings things to pass by the power of Satan
(which is given him from God) as the event has proved. It works also by the
means and industry of that great false Prophet, which is the Pope, and such
as he consecrateth, and imployeth about the broaching and maintenance of his
Apostaticall doctrine, as namely, Bishops, Monks, Kings, and others his
drudges, and bond-slaues.

These all, every one, as much as lies in his power, endeavor and help
forward that work, which the third Beast in the Revelation has in hand,
namely, to put life again into the Image of that Beast which had his deadly
wound, and to restore unto it the power and authority which it had before,
while they labor with all their possible care and diligence, that all men
should take upon them some ensign or token of the profession and worship of
the former Idolatrous Beast. And in very truth, the Roman Emperors
themselves, who were Idolatours, were never so earnest and sharp set in
enforcing men to Idoll-seruice, as these men have done, and that in seueare
manner, and sauadge kind of cruelty.

Lastly, the very phrase or manner of writing in the Revelation, is wondrous
like to that in Daniell, Cap. 3. which seems of purpose to be affected by the
Spirit of God, least perhaps we should think that in both places, one, and the
selfsame thing were not meant.

How and in what manner Antichrist is said, to fashion anew, and to revive and
set on foot the Image of the former wounded Beast, that is, the Roman Empire
seated in Italy, and settled in Idolatry.

The tenth Chapter.
But the very word Image, does evidently lay open unto us, both the thing
it-selfe, and the intent and meaning of the Spirit of God, the which therefore
is the more advisedly to be considered of all, and expounded by me. Why? may
some say, did ever the Pope cause men to worship any of the Roman Emperors,
specially any of those that were Idolatours? Whereunto I answer, that by the
name of Image, (which by him is quickened) not the persons of the Emperors are
signified that made their abode at Rome: but rather by that name was meant and
specified the State and form of the Roman Empire (I mean, the Italish, and
Idolatrous Empire) the which being stark dead, the Pope has again raised and
made whole in every point. For even at this hour the kingdom of Popery does
as lively represent the old state of Idolatry, as if it were spit out of the
mouth of it, the which every man may easily perceive by the comparing of them
both together, and by the several instances which hereafter ensue.

The state and condition of the Roman Empire, as well as of all other
Kingdoms, relieth upon two special and principal grounds, whereof, the one
respects Religion, and the service of God, the other outward and humane
policy, that is, the well ordering and guiding of the common wealth it-selfe.

Touching Religion, and the service of God, I pray ye what a manner of thing
was it in the Roman Empire being Italian and Idolatrous, that is, so long as
Rome was the mansion place where the Emperors kept? it was wholly Idolatrous,
and more wood and furious in infinite superstitions, then any Nation of the
world beside, (whatsoever Dionisius Halicarnasseus, an Heathen, in his second
Book of Antiquities, does think and give out to the contrary.) And even so in
the Papacy, there was, and is, (as after shall appear) as gross and
outrageous Idolatry, as ever was heard of. In both of them there were used
Processions, purging by Sacrifices, Holy Water, Prayers, and Sacrifices for
souls departed, and Candles set up in the worship of the dead.

Concerning the government or policy of the Idolatrous Roman Empire, it
consisted both of matters essential, and accidentarie. I call such essential,
as without which, a common wealth can not stand, such as these three are.

1 The kind of government it self, as namely, a Kingdom, or an Aristocratie.
2 The Magistrates, who should maintain the same. 3 The Laws, that keep and
preserve the public quiet.
Accidental, I term those, on the which, the safety, and prosperous state
of the weal public does not depend, as, the uniformity of one language, the
attire of the body, the City, where the Princes Pallaice is seated.

Now the Roman kind of government or policy, at such time as John wrote his
Revelation, was, to see to, Aristocraticall, in respect of the authority of
the Senate, but in very deed it was a detestable tirannie, and sauadge kind of
Monarchy, by means of the absolute power and authority, which one only
Prince and Emperor had over all.

And even so in the Antichristian and Popish Jurisdiction, the form of
government seems to be Aristocraticall, as, wealded by the advice and
direction of the Beast, but in plain truth, it is a plain tyranny. For,
there is but one that has a maine and deadly stroke in all matters, namely,
the Bishop of Rome, who has to meddle in every matter, and at whose beck all
men must bow, like slaves and peasaunts. Whereupon it is that I gather and
conclude, that in respect both of Church Matters, and also of such as concern
the commonwealth, Antichrist reuiueth, and restores unto us the Image of that
Beast that was so deadly wounded, that is, of the Roman and Italian Empire,
which was so fowly defaced, and brought to confusion. Now let us go on, and
consider of the Magistrates of that Empire being yet Italian and Idolatrous.

The Magistrates at Rome were of two sorts: Supreme, and Inferior. The supreme
Magistrate was, the Emperor. And he, contrary to the received custom of all
other Nations, took upon him to be both a King and a Priest. For in all other
places, almost, these two offices are severed, and administered by diverse: As
indeed the office of a Priest, and of King are distinct, and diverse. But, the
Roman Emperor not content with these two dignities, which are the highest
under the coape of heaven: took upon him yet a third, and became also a
Tribune of the people, and that not annual, but standing and perpetual:
Insomuch as this one high Roman Magistrate (so long I say as the Empire was
Idolatrous and kept it self in Italy) held in his hand at once, these three,
the greatest and mightiest prerogatives: namely, the Sovereign kingdom and
power over all, the high Priesthood and chief stroke in matters of religion;
and the peremptory power of a Tribune, whereby he might at his pleasure nippe
in the head, all decrees whatsoever the other Magistrates were disposed to have
established. To conclude, he so handled the matter, as that he might be
coumpted to contain in himself a kind of Deity, to be Sacred, not to be
touched, most holy, not to be reproved or comptrouled, unviolable. Now the
Pope of Rome, being the highest in that State, made as bold to usurp and
incroach upon these three Soueraignties, namely, the super-eminent power and
rule over all (for he, forsooth, is to be supposed far above all
Jurisdictions, himself having power to censure them) the high Priesthood, as
arrogating to himself liberty to establish what he list in religion. And
lastly, the stately Tribune-ship, whereby he likewise became sacred, free from
all men (without touch of Beast) exempt from co^ptroulement, and lastly, one
that sets in foot among the decrees and proceedings of other Bishops.

Touching the inferior Magistrates of Rome, they were, the Senate, or bench of
Aldermen, the Lieutenants of Provinces, and such others, who had not in their
power any Soueraign authority of the Empire, but only such Jurisdiction, as by
way of commission was given unto them from the high Magistrate, the Emperor.
And even so in the kingdom of Popery, the Cardinals stood in stead of a
Senate, or bench of Aldermen, for Church matters: For they, and only they,
forsooth, are said to make a Roman Consistory. Then the Archbishops and
Bishops, were as it were Lieutenaunts of several Provinces: and lastly, such
other like having delegatorie power from the Pope, but no supreme authority in
themselves, but fetch it from him whom alone they make the fountain or
wel-spring, in whom they say all Ecclesiastical power does consist, which from
him flows and is derived unto others: And as for those others, they do
receive it from him, as rivers from the head, in whom all fulness does consist.
Lastly, who is so ignorant that sees not that the distinct offices of Bishops,
and Metropolitanes, touching both their places of residence, and liberties of
function, were devised in way of imitation of that Roman Empire, insomuch as
the Metropolitanes Sea, must needs be there where sometimes the Lieutenaunts of
the whole Provinces made their abode. For thus much Anacletus himself, a Pope
of Rome, witnesses in his second Epistle; as also all those Canons do the
like, which are extant 9. quaest. 3. in the Popes Decrees. So it falls out
likewise in this respect, that Antichrist and that Roman route, has set up
again the whole Image, and resemblance of that Italish and Idolatrous Empire.

Let us talk of Laws: wherein I said the third essential point of political
regiment consisted. The Roman Laws what kind of ones they were under the
Emperors, for the descicion of private controversies, appears out of the
Pandects, compiled by Tribonian, as also out of the Code of Justinian,
Theodosius, and those books that are entitled (...). In like sort the
Papistical laws, such as were directed for the taking up and ending of matters
in debate, were called Decretall Epistles (in resemblance of the Imperial
rescripts) being indeed nothing else, but an imitation, repetition, and poor
fourbishing of the very Roman laws, practiced under the old Idolatrous
Emperors: which will appear evident, to as many as shall read them, and even
their own Canonistes acknowledge no less: for I will not further enlarge this
matter, by heaping up further proofs in this behalf. Thus much therefore
touching the essential points of the Roman policy, the which in every
respect does very trimly fit and agree, with the regiment and administration
practiced in the kingdom of Antichrist and Popery.

Now let us take view of those parts which I termed accidental: for even
those also are revived and set on foot by the Papacy. And those accidentarie
points are especially three, as is before specified: whereof the first is the
Latin tongue.

Touching which language, the Roman Emperors caused it by decree to prevail
and bear rule in all matters iudiciarie: insomuch as all sentences definitive
in causes judicial (even among such people and nations (so far as the Romish
jurisdiction stretched) as were utterly ignorant in that tongue) should be
delivered and given out in the Latin tongue: (as is to be seen in the L.
praetor. D. de re iudicat.) So likewise in the Papisticall and Antichristian
government, this tongue only plays Rex among them, although notwithstanding
the Greek and Hebrew, are far to be preferred before it, both in respect of
worthiness, and for the commendation of antiquity.

The second accidental point, is, the attire of the body. And as for the
attire used at Rome, it was in old time of two sorts, either common and
usually worn, or else proper to certain personages: as Emperors,
Magistrates, and such like.

The common and public attire used of all; was a Gown and a Cap (no Hat)
whereupon Virgill wrote thus. The Romans; rulers of the world were clad in
Gowns: whereas the Grecians did use a short Cloak for the attire of their
bodies, and Corkt shoes for their feet. So in the Papacy, a Gown is their
garment, and a Cap the attire of the head, and that as it were a peculiar and
proper ornament for their Priests. But in the Law of God the Levites were
enioined to wear Hats. Exodus 28.40. So then, nothing is more common in Popery,
then a Gown, or more comely and trim in their opinions. To conclude, they
made accoumpt of a Gown, to be an habit meet only for Worshipful
personages: but as for a Cloak, they coumpted it unseemly, base, and a kind
of discredit to wear it: even as (on the other side) it was sometime highly
accoumpted of among the Pharisees, as our Savior does signify Mark. 12.38.
The officers of Rome, being at any time sent with commission into any Province,
went attired with a kind of Coate-armour: Or an Herehaughts attire.
which was a garment like unto a soldiers or trauailers Cloak, short, and
ritchly beawtified: by which ensign, as it were of honor, Magistrates were
discerned from those that were in their retinue, or that served in the Camp.
Even so unto Metrapolitanes, and Archbishops, in the pride of Popery, was
allotted by law a roabe (like unto a Coape) see Titull. de vsu pallij in
Decretalibus, because they forsooth resemble the Lieutenants of several
Provinces, who, as they had under the^ many Shires, and inferior officers, so
the Archbishops had under the^ many Diocesses, and Bishops, whom they call
their Suffraganes. Lastly, other Magistrates of the said Roman Idolatrous
Empire, as namely, the Senators ware as an ensign of honor, a garment called
Latus Clavus, which was a roabe powthered with purple studds: but as for the
vesture called Dalmatica, none but the Emperor might wear that. So in the
Popish prelacie, such as bear office in the Church, and are more venerable
persons then ye rest, have their Stoales, which is a garment as like unto the
Senators Latus Clavus as may be: but their Dalmatica (as they also term it)
no Clearke of the Church must be so bold as wear it, not the Deacons, no nor
the Bishops themselves, without a special dispensation from the Bishop of Rome
their great Emperor, no more then any might wear Purpure, the Emperors
royal roabe, or the Dalmatica, save only such, as to whom the Emperor
vouchsafed so much by express grant, (as appears Can. communis Did. 23.)

There remains to speak of the place where the Emperors Court, and
Metropolitanes Chair were planted. That of the Emperors was in Italy, and
even in Rome itself, as being then unlawful for the Emperors, (while they
remained Idolatrous) to keep the Imperial Court elsewhere, then in Rome. So
also in the Papacy, the Sea and Metropolitan Chair of that Kingdom is in
Italy, and even Rome is the appointed place for it, neither is there any City
in the world besides, which may justly be reputed the right seat for
Antichrist, or meet Sea for the Bish. of Rome.

Which things being so, as namely, since we see so many points of agreement and
resemblance between the Roman Idolatrous Empire long since defaced, and this
kingdom of Popery newly erected: who may once make doubt that Antichrist is
he, who unhappily revived and restored the Image of the fifth Beast so deadly
wounded, that is, of the Roman Empire, which was Italian and Idolatrous? And
who can justly deny that the Papisticall seat is the very rig^t counterfaict
and picture of that wounded Beast. And thus much of that Beast which in the
Revel. represents Antichrist unto us.

Why Antichrist is termed (...), that is, (adversary to Christ) and not
(...), (adversary to God.) Where also comparison is made (in some points)
between the doctrine of Christ or the Gospel, and the positions of Popery.

The eleventh Chapter.
But let us come to consider of other names of his, he is called Antichrist, 1.
John. 4. 3. by the which word his condition and quality, that is to say, his
doctrine, is briefly set out unto us. The force of which word, Paul
expresses, when he says, he shall become an adversary unto Christ, and God
himself: arrogating to himself their power and majesty, in so much, as
nothing ought to seem more vile, horrible, and detestable, then this Monster,
that so all the faithful, and children of God, might from their very hearts,
hate, abhor, and detest him, as in the Revelation they are warned to do, Cap.
18. 4. Go out of her my people, etc. And Cap. 14.9. If any man worship the
Beast and his Image, he shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God. Math.
24.26. If they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert, go not forth,
etc. Therefore it was requisite, even in this respect, that Antichrist before
his coming, should be set out in his proper colors. Again it was profitable
in regard hereof, least we should take offense to see such extreme impiety,
and should think that God had cast off all care, both of the Church, and of
his glory: but that even in the midst of all this vilianie, we still continue
sound and true Christians. And where-as Paul says, that Antichrist, or that
man of sin, the ringleader of that disordered route, should show himself
(...), an opposite and adversary to Christ: he therein alludeth unto the word
(...), which is as much to say, as Adversary to Christ, opposing himself
not only against one article of the Christian faith, or against one part only
of the Gospel, but against all godliness: and therefore Paul spoke more
effectually, and expressed a greater contrariety, in tearming him (...)
opponent, then if he had called him only (...), an enemy: for he is thwart and
opposite unto Christ (...), simply, in every respect, and not (...), in some
one point or other. Truth it is, that all Heretics are called Antichrists,
especially such, as deny the person and office of our Savior, 1. John. 2.18.
and 4.2. but that is only in some particular respect, but this most wicked
Antichrist has gathered together the dreggs (...) of all Heresies, and powered
them abroad, to the great blasphemy of Christ. And hereby (by the way) the
censure of Austin is confirmed: where-in, speaking against some that were
ignorant in the Greek tongue, he teaches this, that, Antichrist is not so
called, for that he should come before Christ, (whereupon they harped by
misunderstanding the word,) but for that he should prove contrary to Christ
and his word: whereupon he is called (...), Antichrist: as if we should say,
(...), opposite to Christ, the word being Greek, not Latin.

But it may seem strange, that seeing he should become an adversary unto the
whole body of the Scriptures; he was not rather termed (...), adversary to
God, or some such like name, then (...) opposite to Christ. But the reason may
be this, that seeing Christ appeared in the latter age of the world, and that
his doctrine, (whereunto he chiefly opposes himself) was made manifest, and
was received in this last time: It was meet, that he that should oppose
himself in the said latter age and time, unto Christ and his doctrine, should
rather be called and described unto us under the name of (...) (Christ's foe)
then of (...) (Gods foe) or (...) (Gospels foe) or by any other name or title.
But certain it is, that this observation agrees fitly with that of the Revel.
cap. 16.13. and 19.20. where the chief instrument of this Apostacy is called
by a kind of prerogative The false Prophet: as if he, among all the false
Prophets that ever were, should be the most dangerous and detestable. And
again, the Beast it self, under whose figure and shape, the condition and
manner of this defection, is by the Spirit of God reueiled unto us; is said to
be full of names of blasphemy, whordome, and uncleanness, Revel. 17.3.4. the
which in mine opinion, no man may justly make doubt, but that it is to be
referred unto the name and doctrine of Antichrist.

Therefore this place seems to require this at mine hands, that for the
better understanding of this point, and the plainer proof of mine assertion: I
should speak of, and handle the doctrine of Antichrist, and compare it briefly
with the doctrine of the Gospel. And in this point we shall the better
proceed if we shall bear in mind these two things.

The first is, that this Antichrist, of whom I speak, is such a fellow as
assaulteth and overthrows, not only one point of Christian doctrine (as many
Heretics in time past did, as namely, Simon, Valentinus, Marcion, Nicholaus,
Cerdo, Manes Sabellius, Arrius, and such like:) but undermines, corrupts,
and destroys the whole frame of Christ's doctrine and Gospel: which practice
of his is bewrayed unto us even in his very name or title, as being
indefinitely, or without limitation, termed in every place where this matter
is handled, (...), the opponent or opposite person. Other Heretics are limited
within the compass of one or two errors of theirs, as if any deny that Christ
is come in the flesh, he is an Antichrist: but a Simonian Heretic. Hymenaeus,
and Philetus were in the days of Paul, accounted Heretics: but that was in
some one certain respect, as namely, because they impugned the point of the
resurrection of the flesh: These wicked men although they then believed and
taught, yet Paul is plain that this Antichrist, of whom here we have spoken,
was not yet come. Whereby it is evident, that this man is an odd fellow,
differing from the other simple Heretics, as being a more foul blasphemour
then the whole pack of them all.

The second is, (which here I do but propound and barely affirm, purposing
afterward to make it plain by substantial proofs) that this saying of Paul
concerning the opposition, or contrariety of the doctrine of Antichrist to the
Gospel of Christ, neither can or may be understood or taken for the sect and
religion of Mahumet. For although it be so, that the same also be dissenting
and repugnant to the doctrine of Christ, yet neither does Mahumet himself sit
in the temple of God, neither do they that profess to be of his sect,
acknowledge themselves to be Christians, or Pastors, or Prelates of the
Christian Church, (the which both Antichrist himself and his adherents do) but
do openly, and professedly in boasting manner give it out, that they abandon
both the name and company of Christians.

Now let us come to consider of some particular points of the Papists doctrine
(who notwithstanding will needs be accounted the only Christians and
Catholics of the world) and see how truly the Spirit of God has called it a
doctrine opposite and contrary to Christ and his word. For herein the ancient
writers agree with us, in referring this speech of Paul unto the Popish
Synagogue, that is, to that Church, which boasts it self: but falsely, under
the glorious title of the true Church of Christ. Bernard upon the Canticles,
Hom. 33. They are the ministers of Christ (says he) but they serve Antichrist.
Hilarie against Auxentius: Under the color of preaching the Gospel, he shall
be contrary to Christ, in such sort as the Lord Jesus shall be renounced,
even while men think he is preached. Lastly, Chrysostom upon Math. Hom. 49.
That we may be able (says he) to discern the doctrine of Antichrist from
that, that is true and sincere: we are willed to make our repair to the holy
Scriptures: for (says he) if we respect outward names, titles, and
professions, we shall see that they profess themselves to be Christians. And
after that he adds: Yea, they will outwardly pretend greater chastity, and
mortifying of the flesh, then shall appear to be among the true Christians.
The which we see and acknowledge to iumpe very fitly with the profession of
Popery, and to paint the same out unto us in her proper colors.

Well, let us see the jar and squaring that is between the doctrine of the
Gospel, and that of Antichrist. And that is to be found especially in these
three points. The first, touching God and his essence. The second, concerning
the matter of salvation and the means thereof. The third, the worship of God
both inward and outward, namely, of Ceremonies.

Concerning the Lord God: the sacred Scriptures teach us principally, and in
general these three heads. The first, that he is God only Mark. 12.29. Deuteronomy.
6.4. The second, that he is of an heavenly nature, not consisting of any
earthly dregs or humane corruption Act. 7.48. Isai. 66.1. The third, that he
is the King of al things, especially the Lord and only master of our souls
and consciences. 1. Pet. 4.19. and 1. Pet. 2.25. Whereupon these three
conclusions will necessarily follow. First, that the true God cannot but hate
a multitude of Gods, or if any one be joined to him as a fellow. Secondly,
that he cannot abide to be represented by Idols. And lastly, that he cannot
admit of any other, to prescribe laws for the binding of men's consciences.

Touching man's salvation and the causes thereof, the Scripture teaches us
these two principal things. First, that the same is absolute and perfect,
performed by the only death and sacrifice (once offered upon the Cross) of
our Savior Christ very God and man. Heb. 9.20. Secondly, that it proceeds
freely from Gods gracious goodness toward us. Romans 3. and 4.

Lastly, concerning religion and the worship of God, the Scripture teaches us
this in general. First, that it is to be drawn only out of the word of God:
not taken from the traditions and precepts of men. Math. 15.9. Deuteronomy. 12.8.
Again, touching the outward actions of the Church, which are solemn signs
and seals of our salvation, called Sacraments: we are taught out of the same
word of God, that God only is the author of them. 1. Cor. 11.23. And touching
outward Ceremonies, which are also a part of Gods outward worship: the same
word of God would have but few of them, such as were profitable, and tended to
edification, to be admitted. Wherein also, no part or jot of our righteousness
consists, neither is the conscience of a man burdened with the^: but only
they are to be observed for the decent order of the public assembly, that so
an outward uniformity and comeliness might be kept among Christians, as Paul
writes. 1. Cor. 10. and 11. And in his Epistle to the Galat. and the Epistle
to the Hebr. cap. 8. and 9. and 10.

But as for the doctrine of Popery, what article shall we find there,
agreeing hereunto? For as concerning that of one God: their Divinity has
clean rased out that point: for they have chopped and changed the Majesty of
the highest, and have conueighed the same as it were by peece-meale unto a
number of new vp-starts and pettie-Gods of their own. For look how many
Saints they have canonized, so many Gods have they coined and foysted in, to
become Lords of the earth and disposers of mighty matters. Insomuch as one
has the ruling of the rain committed unto him: an other the disposing of
fair weather: the third is made master of diseases: and an other the restorer
of health. And touching the heavenly essence and divine nature of God: first,
they made GOD himself an earthly lump, when they teach that the Pope is an
earthly God, and when they will needs bear us in hand that their Waifer-cake,
or crust of bread made of Branne, is a very true God. Secondly, they have set
up a number of Idolles, which they worship, and appoint men to worship God by,
and through them: and in this point they showed their wonderful excessive
outrage. For, never among any Nations, no not among the Grecians (from whom
they say this Idolatry first proceeded) was there the like furious madness
showed in (...)
Idol-worship, as was, and is to be found among the Papists. For they erect
still new Idols, and yet retain their old: they bring in forraigners, and
withal worship their home-Gods: unknown and known Gods, they worship all
alike: to be brief, they like mad men, have brought in amongst us the perfect
state of Paganism.

And as touching our eternal salvation and the causes thereof: they, as though
the work thereof were not fully finished and perfected by the only sacrifice
of our Savior, do daily celebrate and thrust upon us the sacrifice of the
Mass for the remission of sins. In so much as that detestable and horrible
toy of the Popish Mass, has clean defaced and defeated the true and only
means of our salvation: In such sort as men now a days rest not themselves
upon the only death and bloodshed of Christ Jesus. (As for that abominable
Mass of theirs, some writers take it to be the same which Daniell calls
Mahuzim. Cap. 11.38. but herein they are deceived. For Mahuzim in Daniell is
taken in a good sense, namely, for the defenced Tower of Sion, and for all that
coast of Iewrie, through which there was no passage: by which title the true
God in that place is set out.) But further they will not grant that this our
salvation proceeds freely from the mere grace and favor of God, but will
needs have it as due to our deserts; and that it can be compassed and obtained
by the power of free will and virtue of men's works.

Lastly, concerning the Sacraments, the outward worship of God and Ceremonies:
the wisest sort of the Papists themselves (that I seek no further nor spend
many words in this matter) do both see and acknowledge how therein their Church
has been instructed, otherwise then the word of God will warrant. And herein
it skilleth not though the Papists give glorious titles to their gew-gawes,
calling them deep and profound Mysteries. It is profound stuff indeed, but
it is the deep subtilties of Satan, as the spirit of God speaks. Revel.
2.24. For the spirit of God has fore-tolde that these toys should be termed
Mysteries. The Beast shall have and bear in her forehead a name written, A
Mystery. Revel. 17.5. whereby she craftily covers and closely broacheth her
blasphemies against God. For by this godly show and blaze of Mystery,
Secrets, etc. she puts upon her vile superstitions, a iollie countenance of
synceritie and godliness. To conclude, whereas it is expressly written Revel.
17.5. that in the forehead of the Beast should be written the name of A
Mystery: Experience has proved it true. For in old time the Bishop of Rome
had written in the place of his A round attire of the head.
Bonnet, this word, A Mystery, even as long ago it was appointed that the
high Priest should have written in the fillet of his Myter, Holiness to the
Lord. And further, even in that their Bishops ware forcked or double-horned
Myters: they tell us themselves, that it is done in way of a mystery. And
finally, every one of those Beasts do carry in their foreheads that mystery,
whereof John speaks.

But yet objection is made heereunto, that the Pope and all Papists do profess
the name of Christ. I answer, that even thereby it does much more appear that
they are the very Antichrists of whom we here entreat. For so much the more
deadly foes they are unto Christ, in that they take upon them his name and
doctrine, and yet quite and clean overthrow the same: even as close thieves,
and secret foes are ten times more pernicious, then outward and known enemies.

Why Antichrist is called indefinitely (or without limitation) a false
Prophet, and (Papa) a Pope.

The twelfth Chapter.
FVrthermore, this Antichrist is called also by his property, in way of
preeminence (...).
The false Prophet, meaning the worst that ever was, Revel. 20.10. For this is
he that is said to be the Beasts and Dragons inseparable companion, and chief
companion. Moreover, he is also called (Papa) a Pope, that is, a reverend
Father. Touching which word, many have made search what it signifies, and from
whence it should be derived. Some think that it is compounded of these two
sillables pa, pa, which among ancient Writers are brifely set down for these
two words Pater patriae, which style, was wont to be given to the Roman
Emperors. Others will have it to come of Pupae, which signify little Puppets
Such as children play withal.
And some again are of opinion, that it rose of the word Pater, being wantonly
pronounced as children use to do. These diverse deriuations or guesses, John
Corasius, a very learned Lawyer, makes mention of. And yet none of all these
(by his leave) does sufficiently satisfy or content me. It is more likely
therefore (in mine opinion) that this word Papa, commes from the Sicilian
tongue, which therein signifies dignity and great honor, as Suidas
observes, saying, (...). A Father is called among the Syracusians Papas, and
by doubling the letter, P. Pappas. And Homer uses the very same word, Odyss.
6. lib. whereupon, the ancient Writer Didimus writes thus, (...).

Papa is a fawning word proceeding from a yongling unto his elder. And this
name was sometime given indifferently unto all Bishops, as appears by the
Epistles of Sidonius Apollinaris, Gregory the great, and of others before
their time, as namely, Cyprian, Jerome, and Austin, in whose writings we shall
commonly find Bishops, called Papae. But in process of time, by means of
claw-backs, it was reserved only for the Bishop of Rome, as if he were the
highest and loade-starre of all the rest, that is, the only Bishop of all
Bishops, and to whom only true honor belonged. As indeed at last it came to
pass after time that this opinion was once received into the Church, that the
Bishop of Rome was the head thereof, in whose power only consisted the right
of disposing of preferments, and dispensing with the keys of the Church, and
that all other Bishops had no further stroke in matters, then was allowed
them by way of commission.

Now, by these so many and so diverse names: namely, Apostata, Antichrist, Man
of sin, Son of perdition, A Beast, Apollyon, The Harlot, a woman, the false
Prophet, a Pope: both the whole body of Popery, and the Prince and head
thereof are in the Scripture set out unto us, to the end that his treachery
might be the better known.

Thus having hitherto spoken of the names by which he is signified, it is time
to come now to the handling of the thing it self.

That Antichrist did herein especially usurp the name of God, when he caused
himself to be called the universal Bishop of the universal Church.

The thirtenth Chapter.
Having therefore hitherto spoken of the person and name of Antichrist, whereby
he is called, let us now consider of the magnificence, and stately styles which
the Prince of that sect chalengeth to himself. Paul proceeds, and says,
He shall exalt himself above all that is called God, or, that is worshipped.
Assuredly, the Spirit of God could not more effectually or lively set out unto
us the very form of this state and matter, or represent the nature of the
Romish or Popish kingdom more plainly then here he has done: the which by
the success of things which since have fallen out, and are now to be seen, is
proved most true. Therefore in this place of Paul, the state of Popery, not
Mahumetisme, is described, and that very expressly: for the Captain of this
order, is said to take upon him the honor, power, and deity of God himself,
and that in the midst of the Church of God. Whereby it appears first, that
this defection whereof Paul here speaks, is not to be understood of the
sect of Mahumet, or the Turks, (because they neither sit in, nor pretend the
Church of God) but very directly of the state of Popery.

This speech of Paul, might seem to agree with that of Daniell, Cap. 7.8. and
20. where mention is made of a little horn which arose among the ten other
horns, and is said there to speak presumptuous things. But in my judgment
their opinion is truer, who refer that place of Daniell, not to Antichrist,
but unto the government of the Roman Emperors, and especially to Vespasian,
who in regard of his unknown pedigrew, is there termed a little horn.

Therefore touching this which Paul speaks here, that Antichrist (the
Prince of this Apostacy) should usurp the name of God: the question is,
whether it be to be understood of the very name and title of God, or only of
the power of God, which he should wickedly arrogate to him-sefe. Some therefore
do not think that the very express name of God is here meant, but only that
he should rush into the office, and usurp and challenge to himself the power
and majesty of the highest. But, undoubtedly, seeing that the thing it-selfe,
which is the complishment of this so renowned a prophecy, does proclaim it
openly, that the Bishop of Rome, the highest Potentate in the state of Popery,
has made intrusion upon them both, in taking upon him as well the very name,
as the authority of the Lord God: this place, without all question, is to be
understood of both.

And touching the name of God, the Roman Bishop has not made squaimish, but
very flatly, and without any circumlocution, has both admitted of the name
himself, and never refused it at the hands of others. For is he not by them
called a God in the earth? does he not suffer the very Emperors themselves to
kiss his feet? nay, with an impudent face he acknowledges himself to be so
called, he admits plausibly of it, and inwardly ioyeth at the stately title,
(as appears, Distinct. 21. throughout the whole Treatise.)

Further, where-as not only he suffers himself to be called the universal
Bishop of the whole Church, but accoumpteth that title and honor of right to
belong unto him: does he not (in effect) usurp and take upon him the name of
God? for who else is the universal Bishop of the Church, but God himself,
and Christ Jesus, who, only, and rightly, is called (...), and (...), the
chief Shepherd, and high Priest, 1. Pet. 2.25. and 5.4. Hebr. 6.20. and
7.26. and 9.11. And what is it else (I pray) to be called Prince of Bishops,
and head of the Church, then to be called a God? as Cyprian in the Counsel of
Carthage affirms? The first and ancient Bishops, yea of Rome it-selfe, did
so shun, and were so afraid of this blasphemous and abominable title of
universal Bishop, as being (in their judgments) properly belonging to none
but to Antichrist, as that they, in truth acknowledged, openly affirmed, and
publicly proclaimed, that he was the very Antichrist, of whom Paul speaks
in this place, who soever would take upon him to be so called: so does Gregory
the great give it out, (Book 7. Epist. 3. to Eubolius Bishop of Alexandria,
and 80. to the same Bishop.) And again, Epist. 78.79. read also what is
written (in way of detestation of this proud title) in the Canon of the first
Session, taken out of the third Counsel of Carthage, and out of the Epistles
of Pelagius Bishop of Rome, in Ca. nullus. Did. 99. Moreover, read what the
same Gregory wrote to Mauritius Augustus, Epist. 194. and 188. lib. 6. Item,
read the Counsel of Carthage, celebrated under Mauritius the Emperor, (who
lived in the year of the Lord, 595. and died 604.) At the first there arose an
unhappy contention between John Bishop of Constantinople, and Pelagius Bishop
of Rome, about this title. Now John being Bishop of Constantinople, had
Mauritius the Emperor of Constantinople on his side: and so he began to be
called the universal Bishop, and that at the instance and commandment of
Mauritius the Emperor, who was so earnest in the cause, that in anger he
called Gregory a fool, for refusing to do so, yea, and proceeded so far in
displeasure against the Romans, as that he stirred up those of Lombardie,
which then was a part of Italy, to wage war against them about that
quarrel. After John, succeed Cyriacus Bishop of Constantinople, who also by
the commandment of the Emperor was called the universal Bishop. But then
Pelagius Bishop of Rome began stoutly to oppose himself against these two,
yea, and that while Mauritius himself as yet lived. And after him, Gregory
the great would none of that title, but with-stoode it very earnestly, and
when it was offered him, he like a good and godly man refused it. But Boniface
the third being tickled with an itching humor after such stately pre-eminence,
and having opportunity thereunto, by means of the great favor of Phocas (who
succeeded Mauritius in the Empire) obtained that he who was Bishop of Rome,
rather then the Bishop of Constantinople, should be called universal Bishop.
Now the occasion of this their contention rose by means hereof, for that the
Bishops of Constantinople were wont publicly to consecrate the Emperors of
Rome, as John installed the said Mauritius, and also crowned Tyberius, as
Euagrius reports, lib. 5. cap. 13. and Zonaras Tom. 3. Whereupon they began
to look aloft, and wax insolent toward the Bishops of Rome, as being more
worthy then they. On the other side, the Roman Bishops relied much upon the
dignity of old ancient Rome, and looked thereby to have themselves and their
Sea respected. And by this means, that pestilent garboyle began in the Church.
In which quarrel, the other Bishops did not sit still, and play the lookers
on, but showed themselves partakers: and in the end, after much contention,
the Roman Bishops prevailed, through subtle practices, but more, by means of
wicked treachery. In so much, that on his side the prerogatives of the Roman
Sea, were by the Emperor himself proclaimed, and the Bishop himself blazed
out with the title of Universal Bishop: the which, (to say the truth) could
not otherwise come to pass, for that Antichrist must needs have bin seated at
Rome, and not at Constantinople, as hereafter shall be declared. And thus much
touching the name of God usurped by him.

That Antichrist did wickedly arrogate to himself the power of God.

The fourtenth Chapter.
AND concerning the power of God, no doubt the said Roman Bishop takes that
upon him, and aduaunceth himself above the divine Majesty. For, whereas the
high power of God shows it self especially in these two points. In the
disposing of kingdoms Dan. 4.22. and in the free government of his Church:
that beastly fellow has incroached upon both these. And as for the disposing
and getting, gift and grant of kingdoms; the Bishop of Rome does openly lay
claim unto that, as appears (out of the 2. cap. Extrauag. of Superiority,
and Subjection) although Gregorious Magnus did first call himself the Servant
of Servants, whereby he might teach his successors humility: But as for them,
they keep, indeed, the outward name and inscription, but as for the royalty
that agrees not with this poor title: they take that upon them with a
mischief. And touching the free disposing of matters in the administration of
the Church: like a wicked wretch, he says, it belongs properly and only unto
him, (as appears Can. Cuncta. 9. quaest. 3. Can. si Papa. did. 4. Can.
neminis est, de sedis Apostolicae iudicio iudicare 17. quaest. 4.)

Therefore his own Decrees do prove this point to be true. For he appoynteth
at his pleasure, new Sacraments: and those that were instituted by Christ, he
does repeal, toss, turkisse, and take away. He prescribes laws to bind men's
consciences: and as for such laws as our Savior himself authorized, he
plays fast and loose with them as he lists. Can. sunt quidam 25. quaest.

Lastly, like a brazen faced merchant, he aduaunceth himself above a general
Council. Can. nunc autem did. 21. Now, what is all this but flat, and fair to
take upon him the power of God? He brings under his subjection all powers,
Principalities, Kings, and Magistrates. Can. si Imperator. did. 96. Yea the
very Empire it self (then the which there is nothing in the whole world,
greater, more sacred, and magnificent) together with the very Emperor
himself, whom with much ado he admits to come to the humble kissing of his
feet, in that that he likeneth himself to the Sun, and the Emperor to the
Moon: so that the foolish fellow makes himself to be above all power, making
but a mock of that of Peter. 1. Pet. 2.13. The which cursed point of
blasphemy of the Pope, is to be found registered, cap. 2. Extrauag. de
maioritate and obedientia, cap quinto, and seq. Extr. de translat. Episcop. and
left in record for remembrance of his impiety, to all posterity. Lastly,
Helmodius reports in his history of Saxony, that Alexander the 3. would in
no case acknowledge Frederick to be lawfully admitted, and all because the
poor Emperor held the wrong stirrope while his holiness should mount on
horseback. But among other authors, it were good to read in this behalf
Bernardus, as well in his second book to Eugenius Bishop of Rome, where in
conclusion he breaks out into these words. Thou have more need (quoth he) to
have a Rake in thine hand, than a Scepter to perform the office of a Prophet:
As also in his Epistles, namely 230. where at last speaking of the tyranny of
the Bishop of Rome, he makes an exclamation in this sort. At first indeed ye
began to play the Lords but over the Clergy, contrary to the counsel of
Peter: and within a while, 1. Pet. 5.3. 2. Cor. 1.24.
contrary to the advice of Paul (Peter's fellow-Apostle) you will have
dominion over the faith of all men. But ye stay not there, ye have taken upon
you more, namely, to have a peremptory power in religion it self. Now, what
remains whereon ye might further incroach, except ye will go about to bring
the very Angels under your subjection, etc. What can a man say more then this,
whereby we might conceive that any did take upon him the power of God? So that
now no man can justly make doubt, but that the Roman Bishop is the head, and
chief-taine in the kingdom of Antichrist: And that such as embrace and
maintain his doctrine, are to be reputed and reckoned in the number of
Antichrists.

Of the place where Antichrist should sit, where it is apparent, that neither
Mahumet himself, nor his accomplisses be the men, whom the Scripture terms
Antichrists.

The fiftenth Chapter.
WE are withal to consider of the place where Antichrist (that is the Prince
of this Apostacy and of all that generation) should sit. S. Paul has
endeavored to determine the same, (but that seems to be done by him somewhat
obscurely) when he says he should sit in the Temple of God. But yet great and
careful search had been made, what those words of his should signify. Origin
upon Math. Hom. 29. by the Temple of God understands the Scriptures and word
of God. Therefore (says he) there shall then be in the Church, a false
Scripture, for in stead of the true word of God a false doctrine shall
prevail. Truth it is: Paul (1. Tim. 4.1.2. etc. and 2. Tim. 3.1.2. etc. and
4.3.) has plainly avouched, that in the latter times men should depart from
the faith, and should embrace and spread abroad devilish doctrine. The which
also the very word of Apostacy (which we have before out of Paul taught,
should happen under the kingdom of Antichrist) does sufficiently prove.
Again, Austin lib. 23. De Ciuitate Dei, cap. 19. interprets ye word (...),
For, the Church of God, and not In the Church of God: as if it were written, He
shall sit for the Temple: or, in stead of the Church of God. But as for this
kind of speech he might have been well enough acquainted with it, out of 1.
Cor. 6.19. and 1. Pet. 2.5. where we see that the Temple of God is taken for
the people and place where God is worshipped: which by an other name is called
the Church. Therefore Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, he
shall exercise that his power, among the very faithful and children of God.
For this defection was to fall out even in the midst of the Church it self. In
so much as they that were the authors and maintayners of the said Apostacy,
should notwithstanding boast and vaunt themselves under the name and glorious
show of the Church of God: and to make short, they only forsooth, will needs
be termed and reputed for the true Church. And that they only are the true
Prelates and Bishops of the same. Whereby especially appears that which I
have often insinuated, namely, that the Sectaries of Mahumet, are not the men
of whom Paul spoke, and prophesied in this place: although the doctrine of
Mahumet and of Popery began much about a time. (For Mahumet, which was the
last of the two, began under Heraclius: and the Papisticall tyranny, began
somewhat before, under the Emperor Phocas. So that these two Kingdoms being
so opposite, and repugnant to Christ's, differ not much above ten years,
touching the times of their several beginnings.) But yet seeing the followers
of Mahumet, do openly renounce the name of Christ's Church, and will at no hand
admit, much less pretend that title or calling: and seeing on the contrary
side the Papists, do so greedelie affect, hold, and appropriate to themselves
the style of the Church, the title of the Temple of God, and the name of
Catholics: there is none, if he would be accounted of any right judgment,
that can make any further doubt, who it is, of whom this place of Paul is to
be understood. And this opinion and interpretation of mine is helped hereby,
for that the very schoolmen themselves do flatly deny that Mahumet is the
right Antichrist, or he whom Paul meant in this place. And again, Bernard,
over and besides those things which he wrote unto Eugenius Bishop of Rome, and
ruler at that time of the Popish Synagogue (wherein it easily appears, that
he acknowledged the Sea of Rome to be the Seat of Antichrist.) Yet further
upon the Canticles Sermon 33. he says, that Antichrist should be a noone
Devil, because he should rise and sit in the South. And as for the situation
of Rome, it is toward the South, as by the Geographicall description of
Climates may easily be proved. Lastly, in the Epistle of the Church of Leodium
written to Paschall the second Bishop of Rome, and is extant in the second
Tom. of the Counsels: it is flatly affirmed, that Rome was meant by Peter
under the name of Babylon, 1. Pet. 5.13.
and that it is at this day the very true and right Babylon.

And as for that which Viguierus brings out of the Comments of his
schoolmen, namely, that Antichrist should be borne in Babylon and live in
Judea, in the Cities of Bethsaida and Corazin: It is very sottish, and is not
to be warranted by any place of Scripture: but he like a subtle merchaunt,
was disposed by that means to corrupt the true meaning of that place, and
pervert the sense of the Scripture, that so no man might once think of the
Pope of Rome.

That Rome, which is in Italy, and is repaired out of the dust and ruins of
the old overthrown City: is the seat or Chair pointed at, and painted out
by God himself for Antichrist that should come.

The sixtenth Chapter.
But whereas Austin writes (lib. 20. De Ciuitate Dei cap. 19.) that it is
uncertain, and not plainly expressed in the Scripture, in which of the Churches
of God Antichrist should sit, as, whether at Rome, or at Jerusalem, but only
that it is generally said, that he should not sit in the Temple of Idols, but
should rule in the midst of Gods Church: this saying of Austin, I say, is but
feeble, and is at no hand to be yielded unto. For if other places of the
Scripture be compared with Paul, we shall find that it is clearly set down,
not only in what place generally, but even in what City perticularly,
Antichrist should sit and strengthen himself, and exercise his power. And that
very City is Rome: which to be true, experience and the issue of things
(which is the expositour and true accomplishment of this Prophecy) has and
does sufficiently declare: from whence we may and must, fetch a most plain
and clear interpretation of this place, and of certain other obscure and
dark speeches in the Revelation.

Now, that Rome is the place, long since allotted by God, to be the seat of
Antichrist, it appears hereby: First, whereas the state of Popery is (as I
have showed before) nothing else but a lively Image of the old Empire of Rome,
such as it was while it kept in Rome and remained Idolatrous: it could not
otherwise choose, but that as Rome is the Seat and Metropolitan City for
that Empire, so likewise the Chair of this counterfeit and new fourbisht
Kingdom, should be planted at Rome, repaired and made new (the which also as
Blondus, in his book that treats of Rome affirms, is a very picture, and
platform of old Rome restored.)

Secondly, that place of the Apocal. 17.18. does most evidently convince it,
where it is flatly affirmed, that the seat of the Beast should be That great
City, which at that time had rule over all the world, and stood upon seven
Hills: which is evident out of the 9. verse of that Chapter, in these words.

Here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven Mountains,
whereon the woman sits. Wherein Rome is most certainly and plainly
desciphered, which at that time was Maistris of all the world, and was commonly
called the Septicollis.
seauen-hild City, because it contained within the compass and circuit of her
walls, seven Hills. In respect whereof Virgill in the second book of his
Georg. handling matters of husbandry, writes thus.

This life the old Italians led: both Remus and his brother,
And so Etruria waxed strong, by this means and no other:
And so did Rome arise at last, the brauest town of all,
Which does enclose seven several hills in compass of her wall.
And again, in the 6. book of Aenaeados (bringing in Anchises speaking to his
son Aenaeas of the acts which Romulus should perform) he says: Behold (my
son) by this man's means shall Rome arise on hie,
And stretch her power as far as land, her courage to the Sky:
That famous Rome, The names of these Hills are Capitolinus. Aventinus.
Esquilinus. Quirinalis. Viminalis. Palatinus. Caelius.
that goodly town, both stately, stout and tall,
Which does enuiron seven hills in circuit of a wall.


Thirdly and lastly, this mine assertion receives further strength and light
from an other place of the Revel. 16.16. if it at least be rightly understood:
which is thus. And they gathered the^ together, into a place called in Hebrew
Armageddon. Wherein, this is it which he foretells, that all they which
should be sent by the false Prophet, that is, by Antichrist, to wage war
against GOD and his Saints, which are the faithful: should assemble
themselves in a place which is called in Hebrewe (indeed after the common
manner) Armageddon. But as it ought to be read, Geddon-Harma. That is, where
the high place was cut down: as if ye should term it, the Ruin of Rome. For
all they that seek the overthrow of Christ's kingdom, in favor of
Antichrist, do usually repair to that place, where that ancient, high, and
stately Rome sometime stood, and where now new Rome is restored (the very
place of old ruinous Rome) together with all that coast, wheresoever any ruin
appears of that ancient Rome.

How is it then, that, all those do especially resort to this place, who
perform service to the false Prophet and to the Beast? Marry because even by
the decree and appointment of God, both the Beast and his false Prophet, (which
is, the man of sin, of whom Paul speaks) were, and still are, to have
their certain abode in that place. Whereby we see that from hence we may most
certainly gather and conclude that Antichrist may not sit in any other place at
a venture, but only at Rome, that is, in that very place, where sometime that
ancient Rome was built, and where now are to be seen the sheards and rubbage
of that old building. Experience has proved this to be true: For the Pope
sits and dwells in new Rome, as in the true and proper Metropolitan
Chair belonging to his Kingdom. And it is so certain true, that Rome (which
is the Metropolitan City in Italy) is the certain seat appointed by God
for Antichrist to sit in, that for every choice of a new Prince of this
Apostacy, every one that has interest in that election, must of necessity
repair to that place, as it is expressly provided for in the 6. of the
Decretalls. Lastly, that City is the shop, where all mischeuous counsels, and
pestilent practices against the Church of God, are devised, which after are in
most despitefull manner put in execution against the Saints of God: and to
conclude, she is the Princely pallaice of the papisticall kingdom, and of
Antichrist himself, and that so limited and appointed by the full and
general consent of all the route and rabbie of that traitorous generation. For
why are the Popes of Rome, (who retain still their power and authority over
their Antichristian Churches, wheresoever they shall become) more tied, to be,
and settle at Rome, then either at Bononie, or Avenion, or Viterbie, or Paris,
or Venice, the which notwithstanding are very great and famous Cities, and in
respect of commodities, requisite for the maintenance of our life, and of great
concourse in way of traffic and marchaundice, are to be preferred far above
Rome, or all the soil and territory belonging unto Rome? If heereunto it be
said, that the reason thereof is, because the Pope is Bishop of Rome: I
answer, that they who use to give dispensations to others, that they may be
non-residents, and discontinue from their proper Bishoprics, may become
non-residents themselves if they will, and, as they term it, despence with
themselves in that point, and so use their own liberty. Again, when as the
abode of this Roman Bishop was for the space of 70. whole years together
continued at Avenion, was not the Pope in all that while Bishop of Rome, as
well as now he is, although he were not at Rome? Stephen, Bishop of Rome, what
time as he made so often iourneys to Pipin King of France, when as he was so
shrewdly molested by the Lombards that were deadly enemies unto the Sea of
Rome, when I say, he went so often, and stayed so long in France, I trust he
ceased not in the mean time to be Bishop of Rome, therefore that reason is of
no force. But in truth, the very reason why Rome, rather then any other place
in the world, or then any other City, how famous so ever (as Alexandria,
Antioche, Jerusalem, Constantinople sometime were: and as Venice, Florence,
Bononie, Paris, Anwerpe, Avenion, London, now are) should be the fi^te and
certain seat of this kingdom of Popery and of Antichrist, is, because the
word and prophecy which the Spirit of God had given out unto John touching the
place of Antichrist, must needs be fullfilled: for the place of this so
detestable a Sea, was expressly limited and laid out, namely, to be in that
precinct, where that ancient, famous, and stately Rome sometime stood. Now
this could not possibly come to pass, before that oulde and noble Rome, which
was the place of the Idolatrous Empire, was overthrown. For this place is
called Geddon, that is, a rasing, Harma, of the high place. And thus it could
not be termed, but after such time as that high Rome was sacked: which was
thoroughly performed by the Goths, before the chair of Antichrist was in that
place erected. For the Bishops of Rome never challendged unto themselves the
name of Universal Bishop, or took upon them such power of Antichrist, before
that oulde Rome was quite defaced. Indeed, she was often before surprised, and
ransanckt, but in the end, she was by the Goths brought to utter ruin, when
once the Roman Empire was translated thence unto Constantinople. For to let
pass that she was once taken by the Frenchmen, (because indeed that makes
nothing for this purpose,) after this prophecy of John, she was surprised
thrice, and at last, according to this decree of God, laid flat in the dust:
the first whereof was performed by the Goths, while Arcadius and Honorius
were Emperors, in the year of our Lord 414. but then she was not clean
ouer-turned: the second was by the Vandalls, Marcianus being Emperor Anno
449. but neither as yet was she destroyed: the third and last was, when
Justinian the first was Emperor, under the conduct of Totitas, King of the
Goths, which was that final overthrow, and utter ruin of Rome, whereof that
place of the Revelation is directly to be understood: for then indeed she was
foulie handled, then was she turned clean topsie-turnie, then were her walls
beaten down, then was she so terriblie set on fire, that the raging flambes
thereof made havoc for the space of forty days together, in so much, as it
consumed the whole City in the year 540. but somewhat before that time,
namely, from the year 534. (as Onuph. lib. 3. Fast. observes) by means of
the wars wherewith they were continually afflicted by the Goths, they had
clean left off their custom of creating yearly new Consulls at Rome, and in
the Western parts, namely, under the Empire of Justinian the first, and after
the Consull-ship (which was the last) of Decius, Theodorus Paulinus. And after
that, in process of time, the Roman Bishop under the Empire of Phocas, began
to usurp and take upon him that proud style, to be termed the universal
Bishop of the whole world. So we see that after the said ruin of Rome, he
sittes me with that stately title in that very place where oulde Rome was,
about the year of our Lord 600.

True it is, that Constans, the second Emperor of Constantinople, Nephewe unto
Heraclius, indeauoured his best to restore the Empire, and accustomed dignity,
unto Rome again: and so likewise after him would other Emperors, as the
Italians, Berengarius, yea, and some Popes themselves (as Sigonius reports)
but they could not, for the secret counsel of God was against it: so that
meet it was, and so it ought to be, that she should remain in rags, and
heaps of rubbish, that according to the Prophecy even of Sybilla, Rome might
become a (...)
ruin, and she that was (...).
renowned, should afterward be drowned, in so much, as such as are not well
acquaynted with the City, might seek for Rome, being in the midst of her.

Again, if we regard the men and the manners of the Citizens, and inhabitaunts
of this new Rome repaired, we shall find that both they and their disposition,
are very fit and agreeing with the kingdom of Antichrist, the which I had
rather should be set out by S. Bernard, (who was a great mainteiner all the
time of his life of the Roman dignity) then by me. He therefore, Lib. 4. de
considerat. ad Eugenium 3. Papam, cap. 1. writes thus of the Romans. They are
the men (says he) that have the doing in all things that concern the
Popedom: but what is more apparently known to the world, then the
frowardness and insolency of that nation? a people not pliable to peace,
trained up in tumults: a nation fierce, cruel, intractable, never yielding but
where it is not able to resist: what one among a thousand shall ye find in
that City, that will prefer ye to the Popedom, without a present bribe or
hope of reward? try me (if ye will) whether I have any skill or knowledge of
their behavior. They are principally wise to do a mischief, but stark fools
to do any good: they are hated both of God and men, as having offered injury
and violence to them both. Impious they are against God, foole-hardie in
matters of religion, seditious among themselves, envious to their near
neighbors, discurteous and currish toward Strangers and Forraigners:
themselves loving no man, are beloved of none, and seeing they would be feared
of all men, it can not be but they should stand in fear of all. They be such
as can not abide to be inferiors, and yet know not how to behave themselves
in superiority: treacherous and unfaithful they are toward their betters;
proud and intolerable toward their inferiors. Impudent they are in begging,
and insolent in denying: importunate in vpseeking, never quiet till they are
sped, and most unthankful when they have obtained. They have taught their
tongues to boast of Mountains, when they mean to perform as small matters
as Moale-hills: plentiful in promises, but as sparing in performance:
smooth-tonged flatterers, and dogged back-biters: meale-mouthed dissemblers,
and despitefull traitors. Thus far that famous Doctor Bernard, of Roman
manners. But before the days of Bernard, one Saluianus, Bishop of A City in
France.
Marseill, (who lived Anno Domini 480.) in his Book De prouidentia Dei,
writes thus of those men: Therefore (says he) the name of a Roman Citizen,
was some-time not only in high price, but obtained also at a great price: but
it is now voluntarily refused, yea, abandoned of all men, in so much as it is
not only coumpted contemptible, but abominable. Now, can there be a greater
proof of the impiety of Rome then this, that many men of good calling (to
whom otherwise the flourishing state of Rome should be a credit and dignity)
should notwithstanding in regard of the wickedness and cruelty of Rome, be
glad to renounce the name of Romans? thus far Saluianus. Now these fellows,
in process of time proved never a whit better: nay, another bird of their own
neast, and one greatly accoumpted of among them, I mean Mantuan, speaks thus
of them, Practice ye may at Rome what you will, save godliness only?

But touching that place of the Revelation, Cap. 16.16. that it ought so to be
reformed and read as I have set down Geddon-Harma I learned of Joseph
Scaliger, a man very excellent in antiquities and other knowledge. For it is
certain that those words were written thus in Hebrew Geddon-Harma, and
therefore according to the manner of the Hebrews, we must in reading the words
go from the right hand, toward the left: but the Notarie, who afterward
exemplified the words, when they were translated out of the Hebrewe, into
Greek or Latin, following the order that is usual with the Greeks and
Latins in their reading, and so beginning at the left hand, proceeding to the
right, put down Harmageddon in stead of Geddon-Harma.

Now this place of the Revelation is taken and applied (although some think
otherwise) in resemblance and imitation of that which is written, Daniell 4.11.
in these words, Hew down the tree, where the word Geddon is first, and then
Harma follows next. And that Hebrew word Harma, signifies among the Hebrews
an high place, or (as Hierome would have it) a porche, or as may be gathered
out of Judges 1.17. a place destroyed: and being written with an asperation,
the letter (H) before it, a stately and famous City, such as old Rome was.
Lastly in the very word there is an allusion unto the name of Rome, being
written in Hebrewe, which is expressed with the very same pricks, letters and
all. So does Hierome think, Isa. 21.11. that in the word Rome, Rome was
alluded unto. So John Mercer, a very skillful man in the Hebrew tongue, upon
the Cant. 4.6. thinks that in the word Mor, allusion was added unto the mount
Moria, which was one of the heads of Sion hill. Very certain it is, that the
allusion or resemblance is very fit and proper, in that Roma should be termed
Horma, that is, that high and stately place, whether ye respect the hills and
situation of the soil, wherein it was built and reared, at what time John
wrote these things: or the brute and fame that went of it, because that City
was more glorious then any other, and was coumpted (as Austine speaks) the
Lady and Mistress of the whole world, yea, even Virgill in the first of his
Eclog. testifies hereof in this manner: I like a fool did liken Rome (friend
Melib.) to a Village,
And to our simple country town that sta^ds by plough and tillage,
But she does shadow all the rest, and shows her head far higher
Then does the Caedar tree exceed the Bramble and the Briar.


And again: That royal Rome that spreads her power abroad both far and nigh,
(As far as does the Ocean sea) her glory to the sky.


Upon all these evidences we may boldly give sentence, that the seat of
Antichrist, the place where-unto all resort that fight against God, is
expressly determined and set down, and that is Rome, which at this day
stands, but built upon the grave, ruins, and ashes of that ancient and
famous Rome, which was laid in the dust by the Goths: that is, which is seen
to be re-edified and inhabited again, in the very place where ye former
proud City was overthrown. Re-edified, I say, but to a clean contrary
purpose to that of the restoring of the second Jerusalem, after the captivity
of Babylon, which likewise was reared again in place of the old. For,
Jerusalem was renewed, to the end that God again might therein be served: but
this Rome was new raised, that God again should therein be blasphemed.

In what respect the assemblyes of the Papists and of Antichrist, are called
the Temple and Church of God: wherein answer is made to many of their
objections.

The seauententh Chapter.
NOw this question is great, and right worthy the handling, namely, how and in
what sense Paul gives the name of the Church unto this defection or Apostacy,
and the name of the temple of God, unto that company and crewe of the
backsliders. Is Popery the Church of God, may one say? Indeed this point has
troubled, and still does trouble many, and those not unlearned, who are
therefore kept still in Popery, for that they think and esteem the same as
the Church of God, although corrupt, and having blemishes. Now for the better
clearing of this matter, we must thus distinguish. Things that are called after
one and the selfsame name, and have a resemblance or likelihood, the one of
the other, they are either just of the same nature and property, or else they
agree but in part, or in some respect.

This may be perceived in the state of mankind. For although all that bear
the name of men, are so called, for that they are creatures endued with reason,
yet among them, some there are, who but in respect only, may seem justly to be
so called, as namely, fools, and monstrously misshapen creatures, which rather
resemble beasts then men. But, on the other side, some there are, who in full
measure, and absolute manner, deserve to be so termed, in regard of the
perfect use they have of reason. Again it may be perceived in the condition of
an house, for where-as, (to speak properly) that is to be termed an house,
which consists of a roof, walls, and foundation, framed and compact
together, to with-stand the violence and annoyance of the weather: yet some
houses there are which perform not thus much in good and perfect sort, as
being faulty in the roof, or decayed in the walls: and some again there are
that perform it fully. Therefore the former are termed houses but in part,
which Logicians call (...), in some respect: and these latter, simply good, as
they speak, (...), absolute. Now the cause why these things which be not so
absolute and perfect, are notwithstanding termed as the other are, is this,
for that these imperfect things have a kind of nature and similitude, in a
sort aunswerable unto the other perfect things whereof they bear the name. For
there are more things in the world then several names whereby to term them,
neither is every thing called with a proper or peculiar word belonging to it,
whereby it comes to pass, that one and the selfsame name is attributed
unto several things, and yet not altogether in the very same sense. Therefore
this kind of naming is not single or simple, (as the Schoolmen speak) but
double and doubtful. And even so it falls out in the word Church, which is
indifferently given both to the true, and false Church. For if we have an eye
to the true and proper definition of a Church, we shall find that it will agree
only with the true Church: the definition whereof, may be this. A company of
the faithful which serve God sincerely, and retain among them the public
marks of their adoption, which himself did institute, as the sacred word, the
Sacraments, and discipline: whereby it falls out, that by these three notes,
as being her true and proper badges, the true Church of God does consist, is
marked out and severed from the erroneous and false Church, to wit, by the true
worship of God, which is framed as himself has ordained in his holy word,
(Ioh. 10.25. My sheep hear my voice) by the sincere use of the Sacraments,
which God himself appointed: and lastly, by due discipline and correction of
manners. Look therefore what society and company of men have not these
marks among them, I mean none of them at all, it cannot be called the Church
of God: but if it have but one of those notes, then is it called a Church; but
only in some respect. But look what congregation retains more of these
marks, the same may with better right be called a Church, than that which has
fewer. Now, if we shall make search after these marks in the state of Popery,
we shall find, that the same may be called a Church: but only in respect,
because it observes and retains but a very dead, and dark print of the
former notes: namely, the use and mark of one Sacrament, to wit, Baptism: the
which by the special providence of God, remained (touching the substance of
it) vncorrupt, even in the darkest time of Popery: but touching the accidents
or circumstances used in the administration of it, it was altogether defiled,
corrupt, and profaned. Therefore the kingdom of Popery and of Antichrist is
the Church of God, but depending, as it were by one poor mark, and a sielie
slender thread. But as for the congregations of the Gospel, they are rightly
and simply termed the true Church of God, which is by all these marks to be
discerned by the world, and resorted unto by the faithful. The like difference
was once between the kingdom of Judah and Israel, in the last whereof was
retained Circumcision only, least that the mark of their adoption by God,
should be clean put out among them. Again, the same discrepance is to be
seen between that house which we use for our daily mansion, where we have
our household, and all things necessary about us: and between an old
tottering Cottage, wherein sometime we dwelt, but after left it and let it lie
desolate: for we use to call them both our houses: but to speak properly, that
only is to be accounted our house, which presently we inhabit, and not that
which we have in such sort given over. But hereunto objection is made in this
sort: if Popery be the Church of God, then is it the Spouse of Christ: and if
his Spouse, then is there none other assemblies that may be taken for the
Church of God: For no man either may or can have two wives: therefore it is
meet ye should adioyne your selves unto the congregations of the Papists?
Whereunto I answer, that there is but one Church, (namely, that only which is
the true Church of God) which is to be reputed for the Spouse of Christ: as
for the other assemblies, they are to be compted but Harlots. And as Austin
speaks lib. 1. contra. Donat. cap. 10. Whatsoever the assemblies even of the
very Heretics and Scismatikes, have among them agreeing with the word of God;
that the true Church of God acknowledges, and challenges as properly
belonging unto her: for all other congregations are so far forth to be
approved as they do consent with the true Church: and so much to be disproued
as they disagree from the same. Therefore the state of Popery, in as much as
it swarueth from the true Church, and is flat Papisme, may as justly be termed
the Spouse of Christ, as that woman that was married long ago, but afterward
put from her husband for adultery by her committed, may be called his wife:
who although she received long since the bill of Diuorcement, and that all
duties of marriage ceased between him and her, yet, in regard of some Rings,
which it pleases her still to wear, which were once pledges between the^ of
former marriage, is termed sometime by the name of a wife. Therefore we
acknowledge yt to be most true, which is written Math. 24.28. Where the dead
bodies are, thither will the Eagles resort. So every man ought to adioyne
himself to that congregation which is the Church of God: But this I say, that
this must be understood of the true, and not of the false Church: And that that
is the true Church of God, wherein either all the former marks, or at least the
principal and chief of the^ are to be found apparent. But look in what
assemblies the traditions of men are urged, in stead of the pure word of God,
and in stead of his true worship, mere Idolatry is maintained: in stead of
the true Sacraments of Christ, the devises of men are foysted in (all which we
see openly practiced in Popery:) we utterly deny that those companies are the
Church of God, or that they are the same society whereunto Christ would, or
willed us to resort. Lastly, whereas commonly we say, that the promises of God
do belong unto the Church: that also we hold, is to be understood only of the
true Church, and at no hand either of the Papisticall or heretical Synagogue.

Now, out of this that has been said, it is easily to be gathered, that those
are not to be accounted Scismatikes, that renounce Popery, because that in so
doing they do not depart from the true Church of God: (from which whosoever
starteth is justly to be charged with making of a Scisme) but rather they are
to be acknowledged for such as have severed themselves from that blasphemous
Apostacy, and cursed crewe of Apostates: (that is, from a disguised mark or
vizar of the Church) in which action of theirs, they are as greatly to be
commended, as those that with all speed rid themselves from filthy and
infectious places. But if hereunto the Papists make reply (as they are
obstinate in maintaining their errors) and say, yea, but ye were baptized in
this Church of ours, why therefore are ye not either rebaptized, or else why do
you not continue in, and reverence that Church wherein ye were baptized, and
whereunto at first ye gave up your names? I answer, it needs not that we
should be baptized again, in as much as we have once already been sprinkled
with Christian baptism: the which Sacrament (as I have already showed)
touching ye substance and material point of it, was kept and continued among
the Papists. Therefore having already received the Baptism of Christ, we
are not again to be new Christened. Austin has often answered to this
effect to the Donatistes. And yet notwithstanding, we neither might, nor may
for all this, continue still in the Popish Church: neither is it perjury, or
Apostacy from him, to whom we gave up our names, if we abandon their
societies. For in our Baptism, (the outward signs whereof we received at the
hands of the Papists themselves) we gave not our names to the Pope: but to
Christ, into whose name also we were at that time incorporate, being thence
called Christians: him we professed, and acknowledged to be the guide of our
faith, and not men, not the Pope, nor any Bishop: but we, partly through the
great unfaithfulness, and partly through the ignorance of our Pastoral
teachers, were (and that a great while together) carried from our Captain
Christ Jesus. And so in the dark ignorance of our blind understandings, by
them so besotted, we followed the Pope in stead of our Savior. But now having
the eyes of our minds lightened, through Gods gracious goodness, we see and
acknowledge our error. And therefore with all our hearts in sincere affections,
we vp-seeke, with purpose ever after to stick to our first and true Captain,
to whom only we gave up our names, to wit, Christ Jesus. Austin in his 40.
treatise upon the Gospel of S. John, says, we are Gods coin: but being his
money, we were carried straggling from his Treasourie: and through our fault, the
print which he had stamped in us was worn out. At last he came and reformed
that, which himself before had fourmed in us. Now I pray, call ye this
treachery for a man to vp-seeke his General, and his Banner, the which for a
time through ignorance he had lost? Or is this to be a Renegate? If any man
think this answer of ours not to be so current: let him hear Austin in his
sixth treatise upon the Gospel of S. John, speaking thus unto those that were
baptized by the Donatists. Hold thou (says he) that which thou have already
received: it is not altered, it is only acknowledged, it is the stamp of my
Lord and King: it shall be no point of sacrilege in me, I do but refourme the
stragler, I do not temper with the stamp. For such as John had first baptized,
Christ did after admit unto him. And by baptism we become their Disciples, in
whose name we are baptized. 1. Cor. 1.13. But if they further object and say,
that, if we deny the Papisme to be the Church of God, because it has some
corruptions: and in regard of some ill behauiours that are amongst them, we
shall in so doing fall into the error of the Donatists, who would acknowledge
no congregation to be the lawful Church of God, which had in it any
imperfection or blemish at all: I answer, that in the profession of Popery,
we do not respect the lewd demeanours and dispositions of men: neither do we
in consideration thereof deny it to be the true Church of God: but we weigh
the unlawfulness or pollution of the thing it self, the doctrine they teach,
the nature of their Church, and the very groundwork whereupon it stands,
and finding that it is not the same whereupon the true Church is established,
we cannot yield, that Popery is the true Church of God.

Of the time of the coming of Antichrist. And first, that it is plainly to be
gathered out of the Scriptures that he was not to be reueiled before the
Roman Empire should begin to totter, and that the kingdom of Christ should by
the preaching of the Gospel begin to grow and increase.

The eightenth Chapter.
THe fourth point that is to be considered in this discourse, is touching the
time of Antichrist: which is a point worthy, nay, necessary to be known,
that so Antichrist might the better be descried and avoided. Now, touching the
time of his said coming, such as have written thereof are of diverse opinions.
For one Arabianus, (as Platina reports in the life of Victor) affirmed and
taught that even then in the days of the Emperor Severus, Antichrist was
risen. And hereunto was he persuaded by the view of the corrupt manners of the
Church, and by sight of an infinite number of heresies, which the^ were sprung
up. But (to make short) Paul determines fully of this matter, when he says,
that then Antichrist was to be made known and manifest, when that which
hindered was once taken out of the way: For ye know (says he) what it is that
withholds: his words are ((...)) which now hinders or with-houldeth. Now,
great search has been made what those words should signify. For, some do
take them in such sense, as if thereby were meant, the Roman Empire: and some,
as if nothing but the publishing of the Gospel were thereby to be understood,
which was first to be spread over the face of the whole earth: which opinions
although they seem to be diverse and repugnant the one to the other, yet they
may be well, and that easily reconciled. For we shall find either of them
true, if we consider advisedly of the matter: For both of them came to pass
before the kingdom of Antichrist (whereof now we speak) was settled and
established: I mean both the overthrow of the Roman Empire, and the
propagation of the Gospel over all the world. This reconcilement of these two
opinions, and this exposition of mine, is confirmed by a very plain place of
Daniel. cap. 2.34. and 44 and 7.13. The words whereof are these. cap. 2.34.





Cap. 7.13. I beheld in visions by night, and lo, one like the son of man
came in the clouds of heaven, and

that this one speech and assertion is sufficient to show, that Austin was
never the author of that book, seeing that in his time, neither were the
French Kings so famously known, neither was the Empire sustained by the
Frenchmen, which began long after in the days of the Emperor Valence. Now
out of all these things which have bin spoken, that is gathered, and concluded
which I have affirmed, namely, that both the Gospel was first to be preached,
and the Roman Empire to be deminished, before that the Kingdom of Antichrist
could plainly be descryed or established. And touching this overthrow of the
Roman Empire, Paul has indeed made some signification of it, but somewhat
obscurely, and that he seems to have done in two respects: first, for that he
spoke unto Christians, and those that were not ignorant of this prophecy, and
of this piece of work: for they had heard the Apostles in their public
preachings in the Churches, often handling that matter, as it appears by
their writings. Secondly, to the end that none should thereby take displeasure:
or that any danger should thereby grow unto the Church from the Roman
Emperors, for that some of the Christians should seem to prognosticate, and
heartily wish their destruction. But although Paul had utterly concealed this
point, yet it might sufficiently be understood out of Daniell the 2. and 7.
that such a thing should come to pass.

Yet that place of John, 1. John. 2. seems to make against both this mine
assertion, and also this place of Paul, wherein John affirms, that in his
days Antichrist was already come. But unto this place of John, an answer
may be easily made, namely, that the foundations and ground-works of this
kingdom and Apostacy, were indeed long ago framed, by means of heresies
and heretics, but yet the whole frame and building of the said state and
kingdom, was then at last reared aloft in stature and strength, to the view
and open sight of all men, after that the kingdom of Christ began to be
proclaimed, and the Roman Empire to be reuersed.

That the time of the coming of Antichrist, wherein he should seat and settle
himself in the Church, was by the Spirit of God prescicely set down to be
666. years, from the time that this prophecy of John was made known: the
which term of time did expire, much about the reign of Constantine Pogonatus
the bearded, an Emperor of Constantinople.

The twenteth Chapter.
But in this point concerning the time of the coming of Antichrist, this
question (which contains indeed much more difficulty in it) is moved:
whether the time, within the compass whereof, the kingdom of Antichrist was
to be erected, be to be found in any place of Scripture certainly set down and
determined: wherein, it is very certain, men are of diverse judgments. Some
deny it flatly. And therefore Austin, lib. 18. De Ciuitate Dei, Cap. 25. and
53. says, that that time is altogether hidden, and unknown, and is very
earnest herein, that neither the month, nor the year, nor the time of his
coming, and of his kingdom, can be learned. But they that are of that
opinion, seem to be deceived: and herein they err, for that they
vnskillfully, and falsely do attribute those things unto one man (as I have
declared) whom they take should be the only Antichrist, which are to be
understood of the whole state and body of Antichrist. But, that which the
Scripture does in plentiful manner deliver touching the kingdom of
Antichrist, is to be taken of a whole bead-rowle of men, and of a long
succession of matters and times. Some therefore are of another judgment,
namely, that the time is expressly set down and determined, wherein the said
kingdom of Antichrist should begin: and yet even herein also some dissent
from others. For some think that the year 1000. is the prefixed time, some
500. others 400. after the birth of Christ: but seeing that all these, because
for their assertions they ground upon no certain and direct place of the holy
Scriptures, but rest only upon doubtful conjectures of their own framing, we
will take an other, and that a more sure course, grounding our selves (except I
be deceived) upon a more firm foundation. For if we mark well what the Spirit
of God in the Revelation has delivered, we shall find that the time wherein
the state of this Apostacy was to be established, is expressly set down. And
that time in very truth is not so much to be reckoned from the time of
Christ's passion or birth, as from the time wherein this point of prophecy was
reueiled unto John, which falls out in the year 666. as appears out of the
Revelation, Cap. 13.18. although Irenaeus does write, Lib. 5. cap. 25. that
this place of Scripture has bin notably corrupted, the words whereof are
these:

I have said already, Chap. 7.
that these words, The number of a man, are not to be understood of any
magical or mystical word, which by the arithmeticall computation of the
letters therein comprised, would yield the just number of 666. For this manner
of noting out a time, is altogether strange and unknown in the holy
Scriptures. And to be short, it is more meet and agreeing with the brain-sicke
Cabalists, then proper to the Spirit of God. In the which odd faculty,
although Irenaeus sometime took some painful study, yet he derided the same
in Valentinian, Lib. 2. cap. 40. Again, those that have waded therein, (as did
Irenaeus and others) we see how uncertain they are in themselves, and how
repugnant the one to the other: for look how many heads there are among them,
so many several judgments shall we find.

Now the cause why they all stumble especially upon this stone, is, for that
they do not attentively mark the very words of John: and yet the Spirit of
God in that place speaks very simply and plainly. For after he had
foretold the state of Antichrist in the said 13. Chapter, and also described
what manner of one he should be: he also in plain sort did set down the time,
wherein all those things should be fulfilled, namely, the year 666. which he
terms the number of a man, that is a plain number, and easy to be known,
not hard to be reckoned, (even as in Esaias, Cap. 8.1. a writing that is plain
and easy, is called the pen of a man,) and in such sort to be coumpted, as
men usually in those days were accustomed to number. And these years begin
not at the time of Christ's birth, but, rather of his suffering, and from the
time of John. Therefore the Spirit of God tells us, that in the supputation
of these years, we must use the ordinary, and common kind of reckoning then
practiced. And the reason why the Spirit of God is so careful about
aduertising us hereof, is, least when question is made of the coming of
Antichrist, we should think that those years were in such sort to be
coumpted, as in Daniell Cap. 9.25. where the years of Christ's coming are
reckoned by weeks of years: for we should be deceived if we should take that
course. Truth it is, that God would have the time and coming, as of Christ, so
of Antichrist, expressly set down unto us, but yet both of them after a
diverse manner of reckoning. For the time of the coming of Christ, was to be
coumpted among the Jews by weeks of years: but the time of the coming of
Antichrist, by a familiar, popular, and common kind of numbering, such as all
men did ordinarily use. For that kind of coumpting by weeks of years, is
intricate, hard, and not so familiarly known unto every man: but this manner
of reckoning, which is, by adding of year unto year, is usual, and truly,
very plain and common. God used the former, when he dealt with the Jews,
among whom, the number of seven, was a solemn matter, and religiously
accoumpted of, and who were already accustomed to observe and coumpt many
things by multiplication of seven weeks, as namely, the years of Iubile. But
he used this latter, being more common, which is done, by adding each
several year, as it followed in succession unto that, that went next before,
when he had to do with the Gentiles, among whom, the Church was to be
planted, and with whom, that solemnity of seauens, or weeks of years, were
never known nor practiced, but only this other common manner, whereby they
only added every year as it followed, unto those that were past, and went
before.

Again, the Interpretours of Daniell, Cap. 9. bring another reason, why God,
in pointing and limiting out the time of the coming of Christ (wherein the
great comfort of the Jews should consist) used rather the number of seauens,
namely, to the end that he might compare the time of their exile and
banishment, which was, by the space of seauentie years, with the time of their
comfort, and his mercy toward them which should ensue, which was seven times
seauentie years, that is 490. which number of years, those seauentie weeks
prescribed by Daniell do amount unto.

Then after this sort must we number the years, and coumpt the time of the
Beasts coming, because the Spirit of God himself does prescribe unto us the
same manner: whereby it falls out, that that time wherein the kingdom and
state of Antichrist began publicly, openly, and that especially to be framed,
and set up in the Church of God, was in the year after Christ 666. Although
withal I am not ignorant, that after the time of Christ, there were diverse
kinds of supputation of years in the Church of God, while some began to
reckon at the conception of Christ, others reckon at the government of
Alexander, and some again reckon from the first year of Dioclesians Empire:
but verily, I my self do think, that in this place, those 666. years are to
be reckoned, both from the death of Christ, and from the time that this
prophecy was reueiled in: and especially for the more easy and ready
reckoning, let us begin to reckon from the time of Christ's suffering, so in
the 666. year after his Passion, that blasphemous kingdom of Antichrist,
whereof the Spirit of God had forewarned, had openly, and euerie-where seized
upon the Church of God. Most certain it is, that at that very time, and in
that very year, the Papisticall and execrable Mass, a very defacing and
blotting out of the death of Christ, began euerie-where privately in Churches
to be celebrated in the Latin tongue, as Bale writes in the first of his
Centuries, Cap. 80. namely, in the time of Vitalian Bishop of Rome.

Again, this number 666. limited for the reueiling of Antichrist, may seem to
some to be so set by God, for that it contains about the third part of those
two thousand years, wherein some think the world shall stand and continue,
from the time of Christ, unto the end of the world, only there is a little
ouer-plus of years in this multiplication over and above the just number of
2000. and those are to be allowed to this end and purpose, that Antichrist
might have a time wherein he should reign, and after have a fall. But touching
this which I have affirmed of the numbering of 666. years: how true it is, let
us now more attentively consider. For the issue of things, and the
accomplishment of the Prophecy it self, ought to be accoumpted an
omni-sufficient witness and proof of mine assertion. The which, that it may
the better appear, this I say, and affirm, that it is most certain, and out
of all controversy, that the strongest bulwark, or rather groundwork of the
Antichristian kingdom, began then publicly, and in very deed to be laid,
and to be reared up in the midst of the Church, when one only man, by the
public consent of Christians, began to be called and acknowledged by the name
of Bishop of Bishops, or, Universal Bishop: and this began, and that by the
authority and will of the Emperor himself, about the year of our Lord six
hundred and four, as is manifest out of Chronicles.

For Boniface the 3. Bishop of Rome, was pronounced by the Emperor Phocas (as
I have showed before) universal Pope and Bishop of all the world, and that
with this prerogative, that this privilege to him granted, should continue
for ever to his successors being Bishops of Rome and there seated. This was
done by Phocas in the first year of his reign, which is reckoned by all
Historiographers to be the year of our Lord 603. Neither did Phocas deal
thus liberally with the Roman Bishop for nothing: For whereas the said Phocas
had villanously murdered his predecessor Mauritius the Emperor: by this so
bountiful a bribe bestowed on the Roman Bishops (who always could do much in
the City with the people of Rome) he redeemed, and so recovered the favor of
the people, by the help and commendation of the said Bishop. For before the
people of Rome bare deadly hatred against this Phocas, for the butcherly
murder so treacherously performed by him upon Mauritius; and in regard
thereof they would none of him for their Emperor. Therefore by the industry
of this Boniface Bishop, in way of recompense of so liberal a largis, Phocas
was brought in favor with the people of Rome: who thereupon began in solemn
sort to cry, God save the Emperor. It may peradventure be supposed also, that
Phocas was moved hereunto, in regard of a constitution of Justinian, (which is
to be read. lib. 2. Nouella. 131.) concerning the four holy Counsels, where
the Emperor wills the Bishop of Rome to sit first in the Synod, and the
Bishop of Constantinople after him in the second place. Now, touching this
privilege granted by Phocas, it was afterward confirmed in a Synod assembled
at Rome, under the said Boniface the 3. Anno 607. as Sigisbertus affirms. The
which Synod consisted of three score and two Bishops, thirty Priests, and
three Deacons, wherein there was full power granted to the Bishop of Rome, to
ratify and disanull the election of other Bishops. After that, in the Synod of
Affricke (which was near about this time, and was assembled under Constance
the Emperor, nephewe unto Heraclius) this title and inscription was made him:
Unto Theodor Bishop of Rome, advanced to the top of the holy Apostolic
dignity, unto the holy Father of Fathers, to Theodor the Pope, and highest
Prince of all Prelates: the Synod of Affricke* etc.

Thus then we have found out the foundations of this Antichristian Apostacy
and perjured state (described here by Paul) publikelie laid, about the year
of our Lord 604. but yet we see that here wants of the former number of
years: for it is to be six hundred sixty and six. How then? Forsooth from
that time forward the power of this kingdom and of this universal Bishop,
that is, of Antichrist, began more and more to incroach, in so much as now, all
matters appertayning to the Church of God, began to be directed at his
appointment. And to speak briefly, then began the increasing, the parts and
the whole constitution and frame of this Apostacy, openly in the face of the
Church to be laid out, fashioned, and strengthened even as a little Infant,
which being within the mothers belly, receives there the knitting together
and fashion of his members.

But as yet the foul puppie (Antichrist) was not fully brought forth. For
hitherto the power of this universal Bishop was ouer-shadowed by the
authority of the Empire, whereunto as yet he acknowledged himself subject. A
proof whereof may be this, that the election of the Bishops of Rome, were
yet now by the Emperors of Constantinople ratified and confirmed, and the said
Bishops were subject to their censure and reformation, yea and deprivation,
and that after the time that Phocas granted them this privilege.

But at last, after time the authority of the Roman Bishop began to increase
in Italy, and the Majesty and power of the Roman Emperor, who kept at
Constantinople, began to quail daily more and more, or rather began now to
be even at the last cast in Italy: and lastly, when at Rome the Roman
Bishops became the Emperors Legates or Vicegerents, or rather became caruers
for themselves, and began in their own name, and as of their own authority
to meddle in Church and Common wealth matters, to dispose of public and
private affairs, and by the consent of the people to rule the whole roast:
then at last they easily entreated the Constantinopolitan Emperors to yield
over unto them (and that by public edict, and under a fair Charter) all that
their interest and jurisdiction, which they had over the Roman Bishops: And
further, that they would will and command, that whosoever hereafter were by
the people and Clergy, elected Bishops of Rome, should forthwith, without any
confirmation thereof had from the Emperor, and without sending him a sacred
Epistle (as they termed it) whereby they protested unto him their loyalty;
be reputed for lawful Bishops of Rome, and be by and by accounted to have
all law in their own hands, not subject to ye comptroulement or censure of
any. Whereby it came to pass, that now the Roman Bishops needed not the
confirmation of any, no not the consent and approbation of the Roman Emperor
himself (who then kept at Constantinople) but even of their own swindge, as
being now become their own men, took upon them that authority, power and
dignity. So that from that time forward, the said Bishops began to live as men
free from all jurisdiction of the Emperor, that is, without the check or
reach of any man or Magistrate whatsoever: yea they began to be compted like
unto GOD himself, not to be judged or called into question by any mortal
wight. ( Canon. nemini. 17. quaest. 3. and Canon. Nemo. quaest. 3.) Now this
without doubt may seem to be the full height of the Antichristian kingdom,
and without all controversy it is to be so esteemed, especially considering
that it was erected, came to light, and obtained so ample authority at such a
time. And this so great and ouer-spreading power of the Roman Bishop, whereby
he was exempted from all censure and jurisdiction of the Empire, was granted
first unto him by Constantine Pogonatus the bearded, an Emperor of
Constantinople, whose reign is reckoned to be about ye year 666. or as some
reckon 668. But yet Charles Sigonius (lib. 2. of the kingdom of Italy) had
rather refer the grant of this privilege unto the year 684. Howsoever it
be, certain it is that Benedict Bishop of Rome, was the first that ever used
the benefit of this ouer-lashing and licentious liberty. And it is an easy
matter for a Clearke or Scriuener to miss in the count of a year or two:
which is to be reformed by making recourse to the Revelation. For it is well
known to all men, what great diversity is sometime found among the
Historiographers about the supputation of years and times, and that by reason
that the Christian Church has not always observed one and the same manner of
reckoning. Therefore in so great a sum as this, it is like enough that a few
days should either be added or detracted. Whereby we see it now appears,
that the kingdom of Antichrist was framed and set up the very same time and
year that the spirit of God had fore-tould: namely, Anno Domini 666.

And as for the kingdom of Mahumet, it began about the year 623. under the
Empire of Heraclius, and in the 30. year of his government: So that the
kingdoms of Antichrist and Mahumet differ not much touching the time of their
rising. And as for this of Mahumet, it increased so mightily in a small space,
namely, within the compass of 32. years: that by means of his Galleys and
Navy, he suddenly brought under his subjection the greatest part of Asia the
great, Phaenicia, and part of Affricke in the time of Constance, the son of
Constantine the younger, nephew to Heraclius. Anno Domini 655. So that we see,
the former year and number of 666. mentioned in the Apocal. cannot appertain
to the kingdom of Mahumet. And as for the kingdom of Antichrist, it did
neither so speedily nor so easily spread it self abroad as did that of
Mahumet.

That those thousand years after which it is said Satan should be loosed:
cannot appertain to the time of the coming of Antichrist.

The 21. Chapter.
YEt there is one thing more, which as it may seem, may be objected unto that,
that has been spoken. And that is Revelation 20.2. and 7. where it is written
that after a thousand years Satan should be let loose, and should trouble the
whole world, and gather together Gog and Magog. That is, the Gentiles, aliaunts
and strangers from the Church of God, to make war against her. Some
therefore suppose; that by this place, rather, the time of the coming and
kingdom of Antichrist is set down and limited. But how variable and diverse
the interpretation and judgments of the ancient writers have been touching
the sense and meaning of that place, appears by Austin lib. 20. De Ciuitate
Dei cap. 8. 9. and lib. 21. cap. 22. Yet I will speak what I think, and
which, after advised consideration had of all things, touching that place, I
suppose is to be determined thereof, namely, that those thousand years (as is
evident, most manifestly, even by the event) do not a whit concern or set out
the time of the coming of Antichrist: but rather that they are to be reckoned
and accounted, after that the said number of years of 666. were once expired.
Whereby it comes to pass, that by succession, in this sort, of times, we
have plainly set down unto us, what shall fall out and be performed, almost
to the end of the world. For before the said thousand years were to take
place, those things should be accomplished which were spoken of Cap. 16.12.
namely, that Euphrates should be dried up, and a way opened for the Kings of
the East to come and make invasion upon those Territories and Countries, which
were before subject to the Romish jurisdiction. Which surely is come to pass:
For undoubtedly those Kings of the East, which passed through Euphrates, being
dried up, (that is, which gave them easy passage through the midst of her
Channel) and surprised the Segniories; that belonged to the Roman Empire,
were the Turks. Therefore it must needs be that the Turks Empire, should
first be raised before those thousand years could be fulfilled. But if we
begin to coumpt those years from the time of Christ's suffering: then assuredly
before the original of the Turks (which is reckoned to be about the year
after Christ one thousand two hundred) those thousand years will be fully
expired, and so the Apocalips, that is, the prophecy of the Spirit of GOD,
shall seem false. The which but once to think, is extreme impiety.
Wherefore, I am still of the mind I was of, and begin to reckon those 1000.
years from the year six hundred sixty six: which two numbers being put
together amount unto one thousand six hundred sixty six. After which term
of time, those things are then to come to pass and be fulfilled: which the
Spirit of GOD in the 19. of the Revelation, and the Chapters following has
laid open: although withal I know it to be wicked to appoint, or search,
after the very time and moment of the latter judgment, Acts. 1.7. Neither
have I that drift, or purpose in this mine assertion.

That the practices which were used to frame and set up the kingdom of
Antichrist, were deuilish and deceiptfull.

The 22. Chapter.
THese points being thus made plain, we are now to lay open the means and
steps whereby Antichrist was crept up by little and little, and whereby
Satan was to finish and bring to perfection this work of his. And although
the same for the most part are already touched in that that goes before, yet
Paul has briefly expressed the same, when in a word he terms all this
mischievous work A mystery. For thereby he shows, that so great a
wickedness should be practiced, and performed by Satan, covertly, craftily,
closely, and subtilely. For by the word ((...)) A mystery, no excellency is
showed of that deuilish and Apostaticall doctrine, but only the craft and
deceit of the work-maister, and author of this kingdom, (who is that old
Dragon and Serpent, who also is called the Devil, Revelation 20.2.) and yet
some take this word Mysterium, in such sense, as though Paul had therein of
purpose affected to express the great Antithesis, or contrariety that is
between the doctrine of Christ and of Antichrist. That as the sacred Gospel
of GOD is in very many places of the Scripture called in way of praise and
commendation A mystery: So Antichrist should also term his pestilent and
damnable doctrine, by the very selfsame name of A mystery: whereby it might
seem to carry the greater countenance of holiness and majesty amongst men,
and so be the more plausiblie received. And certain it is, Reuela. 17.5. that
the Beast which represents Antichrist should put upon his most wicked
Superstitions the name of A mystery. And this majesty and solemn title he
pretends to add credit unto his false doctrine, and also to the end men
should not make too narrow search into these matters, and at last indeed epsy
them what they are. And truly this strong kind of delusion, was derived unto
the Papists (as many things else were) from the very Heathen themselves, who
cloaked their Ceremonies of Bacchus, their abominable Church-rites, and
execrable Church-robberies, under the name (as it were under a seemly veil)
of A mystery, least such filthy pollutions should even stincke before men. So
also the profane Sacrifices of the Goddess Ceres, and likewise those bawdie
solemnities used in the worship of Pryapus, and those banqueting Iunkettes
which therein were carried about and openly showed, (as Eusebius reports in
his Book De praeparat. Euangel.) were set out by the Pagans, with the
plausible title of a A mystery: As though they were no defiled things, but
mystical, hidden, dark, and (in a word) very venerable by means of their
profound significations.

And (trust me) it was just so in the time of Popery. (The thing it self and
long experience has proved it to be most manifest and true.) For, under what
title and color did they more commend and cover their Idolatries,
Superstitious Ceremonies, yea and apparent blasphemies? but only hereby in
tearming them Mysteries, Secrets, understood but of few, and which were not to
be published or made known. So, all the masking attire of their Bishops at
their first consecration, and after at their installing, being already
consecrate. So all the Stage-like furniture and implements at the celebration
of their blasphemous Mass: So their Habites in Monkerie, and to make short, an
infinite company of horrible blasphemies, and wicked actions of theirs, are
borne and boasted out as sacred and holy, because (forsooth) they are solemn
and mystical in their significations: whereas notwithstanding, in very truth
they contain nothing else then mere coniurings against God himself, and
plain blasphemies against the blood of Christ.

Therefore, the means whereby this kingdom and impiety is established, is,
and ever was, crafty couzoning, and deceit, and that under the goodly
pretense of godliness and of holy mysteries: intrapping by that means the
simpler sort, who were not able to judge of the matter by the rule of Gods
word.

That the Antichristian kingdom was to rise by little and little, and not at a
sudden: according to the fore-warning of the Spirit of God.

The 23. Chapter.
NOw S. Paul has with-all signified unto us by the word Works, or, is a
working, that the said kingdom, and woeful state of Apostacy, should rise by
degrees as it were, and not be brought to his fulness in a short time. The
which caution given out by him, contains in it an advertisement, that was
very meet and necessary, even for the Church that then was, whereby they
should the more warily perceive and shun the subtilties of Satan.

Therefore this assertion of Paul teaches us thus much, that this kingdom of
Antichrist was to be raised up a little at once, and not to be perfected either
in a moment, or in a day or hour. But yet the Schoolmen are of another
opinion: for they think that it should start up and advance the head on a
sudden. But Paul affirms another thing, namely, that Satan, the crafty
contriuer of it, should closely and by sleights work and set forward the same:
and at last, after long protract of time, and many circum-uentions spent,
should obtain his purpose. But before we open the same any further, or teach
more at large the truth thereof, I think meet first to answer an objection
which may seem to be raised out of Revel. 17.12. and 17. the verses whereof,
are as follows.



kingdom unto the Beast, until the works of God be fullfilled.

For so is this place to be set together, as that the 17. verse do immediately
follow the 12. for that there is a mis-placing of verses, and a renting asunder
of the Chapter, through the fault of the Printers: which also has happened in
other places of the same book, as the learned Theodor Beza has observed and
taught upon the 15. verse of the 16. Chapter.

It seems therefore that this is meant hereby, namely, that the Beast should
receive her said power of those ten Kings for an hour, which if it were
true, it would give great strength unto the opinion of the Schoolmen. But
mine answer hereunto is, that this place of the Revelation does not
properly appertain unto that Beast which represents Antichrist, but rather
unto that which is a figure of the Roman Empire; and that not as it was
afterward, when it was removed unto Constantinople: but as it was while it
remained in Italy. For it is said that it should come to pass, that before
those ten Kings should arise, which should utterly overthrow Rome, and the
dignity of the Roman Empire, there should ten other appear, (and that at
one time or instant) which should endeavor to raise again in Italy the
Empire of Rome, and give and restore unto that first Beast her ancient
Kingdom, but, should nothing prevail. Wherefore that place of the Apocalypse
is directly to be understood of those who attempted to restore and set in
place the said Empire, not in the East and Constantinople, but in Italy and in
Rome it-selfe: who also, as the Spirit of God has specified, should be in
number ten, but as yet (when John wrote) were not begun, or come at all: and
further, should arise, all, much about one time or instaunt, and contend for
the re-establishing of the said Romish Empire. After whom, ten other should
succeed, who contrariwise should devour the said Empire, that is, should
utterly, and from the very foundations turn vpside-downe, and put out the
same.

Therefore ouer-passing the opinions of other men, and specially of those, who
think that those ten Kings, which should favor the Beast, were such
Emperous as lived before the days of the Emperor Domitian, (for their opinion
swarueth clean from the meaning of that place.) This I affirm, that this
place of the Revelation, (which is read, Chapter 17. verse 12. and 17.) is to
be understood of those ten Emperors and Kings, who reigned last of all in
Italy, after such time as the royal mansion of the Empire was transported
unto Constantinople, at what time the Constantinople Emperors had mutch ado
so hold the possession of Italy, which at last came to pass immediately after
the death and murder of Valentinian the third, that valiant Emperor that was
of the bloud-Royall, about the year of our Lord, 459.

For it appears by Histories, that incontinently after the said murder,
ten Kings at once did start up in a moment (or very short time) who reached
after the Empire in Italy, and labored by might and main to recover the
decayed credit and countenance of the same. Therefore they are the ten Kings
or Emperors which should receive power for an hour. And to the end this my
opinion and interpretation may appear the more true, I will now recite them in
order as they were. Therefore, the first of these was.

1. Maximus, who was the very murderer of the said Valentinian, and was
himself in the second month of his Empire slain by Gensericus King of
Goths, and cast into the River Tibris. 2. Avitus, who in the first year of
his Government, was deposed by Richimer a Gothe. 3. Maiorianus, being at that
time made Emperor at Ravenna, died before the third year of his Empire was
expired. 4. Severus made Emperor likewise at Ravenna, was poisoned within the
term of three years after he came to the Crown. 5. 6. Anthemius, and
Richimer a Gothe, admitted to the administration of the Empire, and
participation of Affinity by Anthemius: he likewise was taken away within the
time of four years of his regiment. 7. Olybrius, son in law unto
Valentinian the third, created Emperor, who lived but seven months. 8.
Glycerius, made Emperor at Ravenna: he also lived not one whole year, but was
slain by Julius Nepos. 9. Julius Nepos was foorth-with slain by Orestes
Master of the Horses. 10. Augustulus son of Orestes, after he had bin
Emperor one year, was deposed by Odoacer. This man was the last of the
Italian Emperors. And after these, other Kings began to rule in Italy, which
not once thought upon the reducing or restoring of the Italian Empire unto her
former dignity, but labored their utmost, her utter overthrow: for they were
barbarous men, such as were the Rugians and Goths, who began now openly to
bear rule in Italy.
Now all these Kings, of whom I have spoken, reigned almost but an hour, that
is, a very short time and space, yea, they reigned and died much about a time,
in as much as all of them came to the Crown within little less then the
compass of ten years: and it may be, that the Image thereof, (I mean the
state of Popery) may herein resemble her (...).
platfourme, and agree iompe therewith, in having her ten last Popes very
short lived, for a final conclusion, and ruinous confusion of that kingdom.

Therefore both the number of the Kings which is specified in the Scriptures,
and the very short time of their government, confirms my interpretation, and
proves it to be most true: which I had rather follow, then that exposition
which Primasius gives of this place, understanding by an hour any time,
whatsoever, either short or long, whereunto, the 8. Chapter, verse 1. of the
same Revelation, is repugnaunt.

That these three things were the chief and principal grounds of the
kingdom of Popery: First, the diverse haeresies that sproong up in the Church
touching the natures and office of Christ: Secondly, the bitter bickerings that
were among the Bishops and thirdly, the large bounties of Emperors, and
certain other men (who both were able and superstitiously bent) which they
bestowed on the Church of Rome.

The 24. Chapter.
WHich being so, we are now to lay open, by what steps this seat and
tyranny of the Roman Empire, stepped up to such a tipe and magnificence, and
how at last it attained his final furniture and perfection of building, in the
place of Geddon-Harma.
desolation, that is, where the sheards and ashes of ruinous Rome were to be
found. The first and original ground-workes in laying and establishing the
kingdom of Antichrist, were three, to weete, the errors of Heretics, the
contentions of Bishops, and the superstitious devotions, and excessive
liberalities of Christian Princes: for so, that, their foolish and immoderate
largisse bestowed upon the Church, is rather to be termed; then true
devotions: for they were too-too ouer-lasshing and cockering, favorers toward
the Church, and chiefly, the Church of Rome. And touching these three causes,
which I called ground-works, of the Antichristian kingdom, it may easily be
perceived, that they likewise were three mighty and effectual steps or
degrees, whereby Antichrist by little and little reared himself unto that
huge, and tyrannous power which afterward he attained.

And first, touching errors in matters of faith and religion, truth it is,
that the Roman Church, yea, all the Western Churches remained more pure and
sound then the Eastern, and those in Syria, by two especial means, the one,
for that in the Weast there were continual persecutions stirred up by the
Emperors of Rome, the other, for that the wits of the Western men were
always more gross and dull, whereby it came to pass, that they of the
Eastern Churches repaired often, in matters of doubt, unto the Church of Rome,
and required their judgment and help, in condemning newsproong Heresies, and
so by this means, the credit and estimation of the Bishop of Rome, began more
and more in wonderful sort to increase, and be highly reputed of in the Church
of God: for the many and diverse Heresies that then were, did not only shake the
Christian faith, but made it as a matter greatly doubted of, among many, in the
East especially, where-by also they made ready way for that general
backsliding which after insued. And therefore those Heresies are called by
Chrysostom, Armies of Antichrist, especially such, as sprang last, whereby,
bitter contention was raised, and heald, repugnaunt to the word of God,
touching the natures of Christ, and of their union or lincking together, of the
office of Christ, and of the merits of our works, such as those were which
were stirred up by Arrius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and Pelagius: which Heresies
were both most detestable, and most forceible, to overthrow the uprightness
of men's judgments. And therefore by this means, upon a sudden, the
superstition of Mahumetisme, began in the East, and by occasion of the
continual dissentions that were among the Christians, touching such points of
Doctrine, it was admitted willingly, and prevailed greatly. For the Eastern
Churches were now tainted, turmoiled, and foulie deformed, with an infinite
number of heresies: for look how many heresies there are about matters of
faith, and doctrine, so many foul blots and blemishes there are in the
Christian Churches. And truly, Chrysostom. upon Math. Hom. 49. observes very
well, that after such time as Theodosius ye great, had once granted temples and
places of public assemblies even unto heretics, it came to pass that the
Churches received great deformity, and wonderful increase of heresies.
Therefore the Churches of ye East seeing they had lost all credit and reputation
of Christian profession among their neighbors and countrymen at home, they
entreated Symmachus, then Bishop of Rome, that he would by his censure condemn
the heresies of Acatius, seeing that as then the Eastern Bishops had no such
power and authority over their people: so also they desired of Agapetus yt he
would depose Antimus Bish. of Constantinople, as an heretic. And to make
short, all Ecclesiastical histories are plentiful in such examples. This
therefore was the first means, whereby the kingdom of Antich. began to get
footing. The second means hereof was, the continual dissentions, garboiles,
brawles, and woeful contentions of the Bishops among themselves, whereby not
only themselves became odious among men, but even the doctrine of Christ,
whereof they were the pillars, began to grow into utter contempt. These sturs
were very common in the Eastern Churches, but not so usual in the West, by
means of the continual persecutions that were there: for idleness and long
rest, does make me^ more wanton and dissolute, whereby it came to pass, yt the
Bishops that were thus molested, were glad and feign to fly unto an other
Bish. of greater countenance, whereby they might be eased, and kept from
wrongful dealings offered the^ by other Bishops. Now as for the Bish. of Rome,
he no doubt by means of the famousnes of the City it self, seemed the most
principal, who also was ready and willing to yield his helping hand in the
redress of other Bishops their distressed estates: for both Athanasius being
put out of his Bishoppricke by the Arrians, made his repair to the B. of Rome,
as unto a sure refuge: and after him Fabianus, and before him many other did ye
like, as appears by histories, infinite it were to reckon up all exampls in
this behalf, in so much as in process of time this repair unto the Roman
Bishops in times of exigence, procured him great authority among all nations
in Christendom: and that indeed so great, as that the said Bishops did
there-by easily take occasion to abuse it. Whereupon, Bernard Lib. 1. and 4.
de considerat. ad Eugenium, complains greiuously that the Bishop of Rome
bestirred himself so, as where-by he showed that he had indeed all fulness
of power, but not of justice, when once it began to be justified by Apostolic
authority, that monstrous men, and very prodigious beasts should be admitted
unto Bishoprics, and high Ecclesiastical preferments. This therefore was the
second degree whereby the Antichristian kingdom was advanced. The third and
last, was the excessive and coying favors, that certain Princes, and
especially Emperors bare to that Sea: for this third point was likewise a
principal pillar in that building, for in those days not only all men of all
sorts contended to their utmost, even like mad men, to lade those Bishops with
immoderate wealth and possessions: but even Emperors themselves heaped upon
them honors, privileges, and other dignities belonging to the majesty of an
Emperor, or the office of a civil Magistrate, in so much, as they submitted
unto the censure and approbation of the Bishop of Rome, both their own
Decrees, and the Constitutions of the Synods. Justinian the Emperor sent
Ambassadors unto John Bishop of Rome, to procure his approbation of the book
of Civil Laws, which he had made, and published, as appears by the Epistle
prefixed before the said Coade of Justinian. Yea, some Emperors have over
submissie given it out thus, that, Their Laws do not disdain in way of
imitation, to resemble the holy Canons, as though (forsooth) the majesty and
authority of Imperial Edicts, were far inferior unto that of the Popes
Decrees and Canons. And in truth, where-as those Emperors did (not so
prouidently) bestow upon those Bishops so great revenues: what else did they
bring to pass in the end, but only a dispersion of deadly poison in the
Church? the which some of the Popes own claw-backs have written, was heard in
the life of Silvester the first, distinctly uttered in the air, what time so
large revenues were granted to the Church of Rome, by Constantine the great.
Ierom upon Malachi writes plainly, that the Church after that it came to the
protection of Christian Princes, it increased in power and riches, but
decreased in virtue and godliness. Lastly, to what end were there so many
privileges granted by them, both to places and persons Ecclesiastical,
especially to the Church of Rome, whereby they were exempted from all power and
jurisdiction, even of ordinary Magistrates, so that they might be without
check of any, having liberty to live as licentiously as they list.

These were the unhappy beginnings and proceedings of so great tyranny,
whereby the kingdom of Antichrist, and this general Apostacy was founded,
increased, and made strong. And yet this so great power received also some
furtherance even by Justinian the Emperor, and somewhat before the time of
Phocas, by virtue of a law of his in Nouella authent. 131. de quatuor sanctis
concilijs.

By what other degrees and occasions the authority of the Roman Bishop and
kingdom of Antichrist was either stilie drawn forward, or strongly
established.

The 25. Chapter.
But Satan the crafty work-maister wrought not only by these engines and
subtle practices, in aduauncing the kingdom of Antichrist, but applied also
other devises of his, as if he were to set abroach all the policies he had, and
utmost endeavor he could, in weauing this webb. For unto these beginnings and
proceedings were adjoined other causes and occasions, as hang-bies; which were
neither small in themselves, nor feeble in their force: Namely, first the fame
and renown of the City of Rome it self, which was called the head of the
world. Secondly, the decayed estate of the Empire, and the empty seat thereof
being at that time translated unto Constantinople. Thirdly, the bountiful
benefits of certain Bishops of Rome bestowed upon all Jtalie in general,
and more perticularly and specially upon Rome it self, as testimonies of their
love, and pledges of their care which they had of their Citizens and sheep.
For Leo the first, Bishop of Rome, went out and met Attilas, who was making
invasion upon Italy, and turned him back, having pacified him with a very
mild speech, in so much as that furious Beast (at whose very name al men
trembled) being soothed up; without once touching any part of Jtalie returned
into Pannonia. Pelagius the first, Bishop likewise of Rome, did so assuage
Totilas, a most cruel tyrant, by humble suite and petition, as that when he
had already surprised Rome, and in great rage was devising how to bring it to
utter ruin: yet he obtained thus much of this angry and furious Totilas, that
even Totilas himself should inhibite further fierings and slaughter to be
committed in Rome. There are other great good turns recorded of other Bishops
of Rome, employed either upon all Italy, as by sending or intertayning
Ambassadors: or else perticularlie upon Rome it self: which things, worthelie
procured to them and their successors, great and special favor, not only at
the hands of Jtalians and Romans, but also of strangers and men of foreign
Nations. Whereby it came to pass, that for remedy against the injuries
offered of some officers, and Lieutenants, yea such as were without the
precincts of Italy; appeals were made unto the Bishops of Rome. So did Victor
Bishop of Fausienna, call for assistance at the hands of Gregory the first,
Bishop of Rome, against the Judges in Affricke, which committed many things
with wrong and violence. So likewise he took into his protection Isidore
Mustellus, and Constantius, against the hard proceedings of their Bishops. And
in like sort he yielded his helping hand unto Adrian Bishop of Thebes, against
Larissaeus and the Metropolitanes of Iustiniana (epist. 46. induct. 11.) So
also did the said Gregory write very sharply unto Brunchilda the Queen of
France, for that she did wickedlie permit the Jews within her Dominions, to
intertayne and keep Christians as their bond-slaues. And to conclude, thence
it came to pass, that very barbarous people, and the Princes of Gotland
(although as yet they were aliaunts and strangers from the profession of
Christianity) had the Bisshoppes of Rome in very great accoumpt, and
endeavored to increase and set out their creditte and estimation to their
utmost. For Atalaricus King of the Goths, caused by public edict and
proclamation, that Boniface the fourth, and John, Bishops of Rome, should be
highly reverenced and worshipped by the people and Senate of Rome. And after
him Theodoricus, a King likewise of Goteland, commanded the same to be
performed. To make short, that I might herein comprize and shut up all things
as near as I can, the principal pillar of this authority and tyrannous
power, was founded upon that famous saying of Christ, so much tossed and boasted
of, but misunderstood, Feed my sheep. John 21.16.17. The which the Bishops
of Rome contending with tooth and nail, will needs have to be understood of
Peter and his successors only, and in no case of Paul or of John, who was
most beloved of Christ, or of their successors, affirming that they are the
true and proper successors of Peter, unto whom alone this power does
appertain. Whereupon it began that Peter was termed the Prince of Apostles,
and the Bishopps of Rome (which boast themselves to be his successors) make
challenge of this privilege, as tied so straight unto this seat and City of
Rome, as look whosoever shall be thereunto installed, are without all
controversy endued with the like power. But what says Bernard unto Eugenius
Bishop of Rome, touching this matter? Epist. 237. Surely in great disdain he
writes thus. A true successor of Paul, will say with Paul, not as being
Lords over your faith, but furtherers of your joy. And he that is an heir of
Peter, will give ear unto Peter, speaking thus, not as bearing rule over the
Clergy, but as patterns unto your flock. Who will perform this unto me,
that I may see before I dye the Church of God as it was in old time; when the
Apostles let down their nets, not to catch silver or gold: but to catch
souls? Whereby it sufficiently appears, that he thought nothing less, then
that the Bishops of that Sea were to be reputed the true and lawful
successors of Peter or Paul. These therefore were the beginnings,
proceedings, degrees, and supporters, whereby the kingdom of Antichrist was
strengthened, and at Rome especially established.

That the authority and power of Antichrist was at no time received, without
the resistance, and gainsaying of some good Bishops.

The 26. Chapter.
ANd yet this power and Empire neither came to perfection at last, neither was
usurped at first without the great grutching and resistance of many. For at
all times, yea after the Apostacy was once begun, there were ever one or
other, either good men, or Bishops, which openly gain-sayd it, and condemned
it as wicked, opposing also themselves against it frankly, and to their utmost
endeavor, by whose means the Lord did sufficiently fore-warne his Church, if
it could be wise, to beware of this yoke of bondage. And truly in the year
600. what time as yet it was in the swaddling cloutes and beginnings; all the
Greek Churches, and especially that of Constantinople, and which was dispersed
over Dacia, and Illiricum, or Slavonia, stood stoutly, and cried out against
that usurped power. Those Bishops which accused Symmachus, Bishop of Rome,
before Theodoricus King of the Goths, among other crimes which they laid to
his charge this was the principal, for that he reputed himself as a lawles
man, without the check or comptroulement of any, that is, not subject to the
censure of any man, or Magistrate whatsoever (as appears in Canon Nullus.
distinct. 99.) Dinoth an Abbot in Britain, that is, in England, did likewise
lustely oppose himself against the same. Gildas in his treatise ( De
castigatione Ecclesiastici ordinis, of the correction of the Ecclesiastical
state) teaches that this pertains to all Bishops, and not unto any one,
where it is said, Whatsoeurr thou shall loose, etc. Again, some of the chief
and best learned Bishops of Germany and France, (as appears out of the
story of Aventine in his Epistle to Anastasius) resisted both the beginnings
and goings forward of that kingdom. For I will not speak of the Counsel of
Carthage, where, when as the Roman Bishop would have brought in this tyranny,
he was openly by the whole assembly accused and convinced of forgerie. The
which treacherous trick, Mark, Bishop of Ephesus objected likewise publikelie
against him in the Counsel of Florence, Anno 1439. Lastly, Belisatius,
Captain of the guard under Justinian, did of himself depose the Bishop of
Rome, being suspected of traiterous dealing against the City.

In the year of our Lord 700. when as this throane of power and Apostacy was
somewhat settled, and that by the good liking and consent of a great many: yet
Paulus Bishop of Creta, gain-sayd it, and at no hand would grant lisence
unto John Bishop of the City Lampio, to make an appeal unto the Sea of Rome.
The Church of Ravenna admitted of no other head than her self, neither would
she (although she were in Jtalie) be subject unto the Church of Rome, as
touching Master Pope. Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, did likewise write a
very learned book against the primacie of the Pope. And as yet Greece made
open resistance, against this power and tyranny of the Roman Bishop, and
always disclaymed the same, and that in such wise, as when John Palaeologe
Emperor of Constantinople, and Joseph the Patriarch of that City, and
certain other Bishops of Greece (among whom Bessario was one) had in the
Florentine Counsel (Anno Domini 1439.) approved of this power of the Roman
Bishop over all Churches: they were for so doing reproved, and excommunicated
by the other Churches of Greece and the Eastern parts of the world. Nay,
which is more, the Pope himself does yearly by covenant, give a piece of
gold unto as many Greek Bishops, as will vouchsafe in the celebrating of
their Masses, to call him chief Priest. In the year of our Lord 1140. (at
what time Bernardus Abbas Clarevallensis lived) Arnolde Brixianus, an eloquent
man, and a Monk, declaimed lustily all his life time, against this Primacie,
and tyranny of the Pope, as Sigonius writes (lib. 11. de Regno Italico) of
who^ also mention is made by Bernard himself in his 195. Epistle, whom
therefore Innocentius the second Bishop of Rome, condemned for an Heretic,
when now all the world began to allow of this Romish cruelty. Therefore we
see that in all ages there were some which openly, even in the assemblies of
Synods, cried out against this usurped power: until at last (as was fore-tould
by the Spirit of God) Antichrist and his doctrine prevailed and bare rule, (for
so it pleased God to revenge the contempt of his word) while in the mean time
every man held his peace, and submitted himself thereunto in most miserable
and slavish manner: which continued to the wonderful great hurt of all
Christendom, until such time as John Wickliefe was raised, and stirred up by
God in England, who opposed himself manfully against it, and was the first man
that with great valor cut the very sinnewes of it a sunder. After whom, by the
great goodness of GOD, John Husse, and Ierom of Prage, were given us, the
very two Olive branches spoken of Revelation 11.4. After them succeeded
Luther: and after him John Calvin, and others, valiant and courageous Soldiers
armed with the Spirit of GOD, who with great courage set themselves against
this doctrine and tyranny: the which, for the most part they have, by the
grace of GOD, shaken and brought to naught, although notwithstanding it
supporte it self, as well as it may, with Fig Tree boughs.

Of the destruction and overthrow of the kingdom of Antichrist, which is to
be brought to pass, by the only breath of the Lords mouth, and not by any
power or strength of a fifth, sixth, or seventh Monarchy to be raised, or
looked for.

The 27. Chapter.
THE sixth point that we are in this treatise of Antichrist to consider of, is
directed altogether to the comfort of the Church: for it handles his
overthrow and destruction. Now, it is very requisite and necessary that this
same should be added, least that the godly should faint and be discouraged,
while they should be infourmed of the greatness and long continuance of this
kingdom of Antichrist. But now with joyful hearts they hear, that it is to
be overthrown and clean taken away, by the same Spirit of God, that gave
them intelligence of the other. Therefore if question be made what shall
become of this Apostacy and unhappy kingdom of Antichrist? Paul makes
answer, that it shall be quite defaced. And if it be demanded how, or with
what weapons? he likewise answers, By the Spirit of God his mouth. Lastly,
if it be further inquired, when, or at what time this shall be performed?
Paul likewise answers thereunto, saying: At the glorious appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore this one head, contains these three distinct and several
branches. And doubtless touching the overthrow of this most wicked kingdom
of Antichrist at the last: both reason it self persuades no less, and the
authority of holy Scriptures, which are of reverend, and sacred estimation
among us, does convince it. With reason (I say) it stands, for that the
kingdom of Christ and of Antichrist cannot stand together, (for they are
things repugnant and clean contrary one to an other) and seeing that GOD has
made promise that the kingdom of Christ should be both free, and last for
ever, it must needs be that the kingdom of Antichrist, which hinders the
same, should be taken away. For otherwise it could never come to pass that
Christ should freely bear rule over all. And, that a perpetual and
everlasting kingdom is promised unto Christ; these places prove. Psalm 2.8.
Daniell 7.14.27. and 2.44. Luke 1.33. Now, this universal defection whereof I
have spoken, is reckoned among the chief and principal enemies of Christ and
his kingdom, which he at the last should subdue. 1. Cor. 15.25. Wherefore it
must needs be that the same should be in the end overcome, and trodden under
feet. And touching the sacred authority of holy Scriptures, this is most
plain and evident, that the most ancient Prophecies of the Lords Prophets,
have beat upon this point, that the kingdom of Antichrist should be
overthrown. Dan. 7.27. Revelation 19.20. And lastly, under the type and figure
of that renowned and famous Antiochus, (who is set out unto us, to represent
Antichrist) the same matter is laid open unto us. Dan. 8.23.24. and in the
verses following.

Therefore let us comfort our selves and be of good hope, and let us stand
stiff in this our strife, for the recovery of Christ's kingdom, in as much
as from the Lords own mouth we are assured, that at last the truth of the
Gospel shall prevail, Christ shall get the victory, and the kingdom of
Antichrist be clean spoiled. Truth it is, that it leans upon many
supporters, and is maintained with great force, and it seems a matter of
infinite labor, difficulty, and doubt, to bring to ruin the Roman route.
But who can resist the will and decree of GOD? Who can let, that it be not
executed? Seeing there are so many plain prophecies of the overthrow of this
kingdom. Therefore we are not only to conceive hope that it shall so come to
pass, out of that general rule set down, Esaias 60.12. Every nation and
kingdom that will not serve me, shall be destroyed: but much more are we
there-in to be strengthened out of this particular prophecy of Paul, set
down of purpose in this place.

But withal, out of this very place, the doting dream of the Manichies is
confuted, wherein they affirmed that that original power, which as check-mate,
is opposite in all things unto the true God, and to Christ, should be of an
everlasting continuance.

In the second place we are to consider by what means this so mighty and
large a kingdom of Antichrist, shall at last be disanulled: Paul answers,
that it shall be done by the breath of the Lords mouth. Therefore it must
needs come to pass, that the same shall be brought to naught after an other
sort then men think, or then other kingdoms be overthrown. For by this
manner of speech, or circum-scription, Paul sets out the word of God joined
with the true sense and power thereof. And the reasons that may be yielded of
this so strange a judgment, may be diverse: as first, that seeing the kingdom
of Antichrist (which is a mere backsliding from the Christian faith) did at
first arise, and was afterward vp-heald by disguising and deprauing of the word
of God: so by the faithful and sincere publishing of the same, it should be
brought to ruin. Again, seeing that this state and condition of things is a
kingdom of darkness and ignorance, it must needs fall by the light and
knowledge of the word of God, and by virtue of the truth thereof, when once it
begins to shine. For as by the rising of the Sun, darkness is dispelled, and
by the dawning of the day, the night vanishes: so, the bright beams of the
Gospel breaking forth, the kingdom and doctrine of Antichrist must needs be
descried, and wholly destroyed. Lastly, Daniell 2.44. and 7.27. and 11.45.
makes no mention of any other kingdom, which should be raised after the
preaching of the Gospel. For Daniell speaks but of four Monarchies, after
which is promised a kingdom of Saints and holy ones, which should continue
for ever: and so has he made known unto us, what shall be the state of the
world, even unto the latter day: but the Spirit of God mentions not any other
Monarchy which should succeed, and supplant Antichrist and his kingdom:
therefore it must needs be, that this last, even the Monarchy of Christ,
should last for ever. And touching the kingdom of Christ, it consists and
works mightily by the preaching of the word of God: therefore by these
weapons, and by this means, the kingdom of Antichrist is by Christ to be
overthrown. And as here the word of God is called the breath of the Lords
mouth, so in Esaias 4.11. by the spirit of his lips, is meant the word of God
working effectually, because the bare sound of the word, without the spirit of
God, is simply, and of it-selfe, of no force: therefore, whatsoever good is
wrought in us by the preaching of the word, is to be ascribed wholly unto God
alone. Now, the reason why there shall not follow a fifth Monarchy after the
fourth, this (in my opinion) can not so justly be alleged, which
notwithstanding some make accoumpt of as of a very sound one, namely, because
in this latter, and languishing old age of the world, there can no such might
and force of mankind be raised up, as may be thought meet for the
establishing of a Monarchy. For unto the erecting of the same great power, were
requisite, and great policy for the continuing thereof: both which are now
wanting to the world, it being become so aged and crooked an old man as it is:
for it is now in his decayed estate, all forces of his nature being almost
spent: this is their reason. Whereunto to make answer, this I demand, can
not God as easily now raise up men as strong in body, and as politic in wit,
as before he has done, when he set up the former Monarchies? For what is the
reason why he can not do the like if he listed, being in himself he is
omnipotent, and remains always unchangeable and like himself? what then is
the stay or impediment hereof? forsooth because it stands with the Lords
pleasure to have this victory atcheiued by the only power of his word, and
preaching of the Gospel, to the end that so he might the better commend his
said doctrine to us, in showing unto us the infinite might and majesty of the
same, the which notwithstanding men commonly neglect and set light by. This
mine opinion is confirmed by that in the Revel. 19.21. where the Angel of God
shows, that the false prophet (the Prince of this damnable crewe) and his
adherents, should be slain with the sword of the Lords own mouth. And, no
doubt, the sword of Gods mouth, is the force, and efficacy of the very word of
God, the which is apparent both out of Heb. 4.12. and also out of another place
of scripture, which is Revel. 19.15. and 1.16. the like is also taught Iere.
1.18. and hitherto is to be referred that of the Psalm. 149.6. where it is
written, that the Saints shall have in their hands a two-edged sword, that is,
the power-full word of God, to destroy and bring to confusion the wicked and
ungodly.

What those ten Kings signify, which in the Revelation are said, should
devour, and consume with fire the Harlot, and her flesh.

The 28. Chapter.
But hereunto objection is made out of Revel. 17.16. an hard place indeed,
which, least it should trouble us, we were best propound and expound the same:
thus therefore it stands.

Now seeing we cannot conceive how this may be performed by the power of the
word preached, but only by outward weapons, as Swords, and such like: it
seems in some sort to be contrary and repugnant unto this assertion of
Paul. How then? surely it is evident unto all, that that place does not at all
appertain unto that Beast, that represents Antichrist unto us, but to that
Beast which did purtraicte out unto us the Roman Empire, such as it was while
it remained in Italy, which, that it should be overthrown in Italy, by ten
Kings, is here made known. And this exposition agrees very truly with the
event and history of things done, from whence, we are especially to fetch this
accomplishment and interpretation of this prophecy. For if we do respect who
they were, who indeed were the chief authors of the utter overthrow of the
Roman Empire in Italy, doubtless they were those Kings being ten in
number, whom John here specifieth: although they did not lineally or
immediately succeed each other in their several races, yet they all, and
every one of them both made invasion, and bare rule in Italy. Of these,
Rhadagasius was the first, who being made King of Goths, Anno Domini 409. made
assult upon Italy, in the time of Honorius the Emperor, with 200000. Goths,
but with ill success. For being put to foil by Stilicon (chief Captain
under Honorius,) and taken at the City Fessulae, he was by him hanged.
Therefore this Rhadagasius, is not reckoned among those ten Kings, which
raised the dignity of the Roman Empire in Italy, seeing that his invasion
did no hurt either to Italy itself, or to the Empire of Rome, except only
herein, in giving aim as it were by his example, and so opening a way and
passage to others to follow him into Italy, gave them encouragement ventrously
to undertake the enterprise. These therefore that follow, are the Kings that
are mentioned in the Revelation.

1. Alaticus, for he was the first of those ten Kings, being himself also
a Gothe, which began now to deface the Roman Empire, and Rome it-selfe in
Italy. He lived in the days of Honorius the Emperor, and succeeded
Rhadagastus, being chosen King by the remainder of his dispearced army. This
man, was the first of any Barbarian, next after the Frenchmen, that inhabited
about the River Sequana, or Seine, and after the Empire was there once settled,
that surprised Rome in the year of Christ 414. in the year of the Empire of
Honorius 18. and five years after the death of Rhadagasius. But yet he did
neither raze the City, nor did outrage the faithful and well-disposed people
there inhabiting.

2. Adaulphus, is the second, who also being King of Gotland, was possessed of
Rome, and was the first that began to rage, and execute cruelty in the City,
but being somewhat pacified, by the suite and intercession of Placida, Sister
to Honorius, he did not utterly sack and deface the same, as he had purposed.
He lived in the time of Honorius.

3. Gensericus, King of the Vandalls. This man being sent for out of Africa
into Italy, by Eudoxia, wife unto Valentinian the third, took Rome in the
year of our Lord, 459. and in the sixth year of the Emperor Martianus. This
now is the third of those ten Kings, which by the decree, and determinate
counsel of God, burned with fire that detestable Harlot. Truth it is, that
Attila lived also about these times, who likewise performed great exploits,
and greatly afflicted the Roman Empire. But this he did in the Provinces, and
not in Italy it-selfe. For when in the second year of Martianus the Emperor,
he was desirous to invade Italy, and having taken Aquilea, seemed to set
forward toward Rome: Leo, the first, Bishop of Rome, and part of the Roman
Senate, went out to meet him on the way, and being come unto him, humbly
entreated him to spare the City of Rome: by whose petitions, he was so moved,
as that he thereupon caused his army to return into Pannonia, not marching one
foot further within the bounds of Italy. Therefore this Attila is not to be
accoumpted among those ten Kings, which devoured the flesh of the Beast, that
is, of the Roman Empire, and wasted the City it-selfe with fire.

4. Odoacer, is next, being in number the fourth of those ten, and lived in
the days of Leo, the first, Emperor. This Odoacer was of Campania, and
entering upon Rome, called himself at first, King, not Emperor of Italy. He
did clean cut off the race of all the Italian Emperors. He made hauock of
Rome by the space of 14. years, in so much, as after Augustulus, which was
subdued by him, there was never any called an Italian Emperor.

5. Theodoricus, King of Goths, being sent for into Italy by Zeno the
Emperor, to assist him against Odoacer, held himself the Roman Empire in
Italy, by the space of fifty years: and to the end he might make it known,
how little he esteemed Rome, he kept his Imperial residence at Ravenna. This
man was the fifth.

6. Athalaricus, who succeeded his Father Theodoricus, under Anastasius the
Emperor. For now the Empire of the Goths began by a continual succession
of their Kings, to take rooting and footing in Italy. And under the government
of this Athalaricus, the Goths continued their defacing of the dignity of the
Roman Empire in Italy.

7. Theodatus, was the seventh, and he also was a Gotish King, who succeeded
Athalaricus in Italy.

8. Vitiges, the eight, King likewise of Gotland, after Theodatus, who wasted
and spoiled almost all Italy. He besieged the City of Rome it-selfe, which
had shronke and revolted from the subjection of the Gotish Kings, upon
confidence of assistance from the Lieutenants and Emperors of Constantinople.
This man therefore (as Sabellicus reports) utterly defaced, and put out all
the laws, customs, privileges, records of Antiquities of ancient families
of the ancient Romans, which he found remaining in Italy. He lived under the
reign of Iustine the first.

9. Totilas King of Goths, succeeded Vitiges, and this is ye ninth of those
10. Kings. He lived under Justinian the first, Emperor of Constantinople. This
man both besieged, sacked, and utterly rased the City of Rome: and to
conclude, even as ye Spirit of God had fore-shewed it should come to pass, he
burnt it with fire: and this fire raunged and raged by ye space of 40. days,
without ceasing, in so much as the City, being then so thoroughly consumed,
might justly be judged to be that Geddon-Harma (the ruin of Rome) spoken of in
the Revel. that is the only shreads and sheards, and utter overthrow of that
famous and ancient City. For after this vastation, it remained only a ruinous
and desolate place. And this befell in the year of our Lord 546. This scourge
continued as is fore-shewed, Revel. Cap. 13.5. by the space of 42. months,
that is, three years and a half. For when the third year was expired, after
this burning and utter overthrow of Rome done by Totilas, Belisarius, chief
Captain under Justinian, began first to renew the same, gathering together
such scraps and fragments thereof as were left, and at last, to enuiron with a
wall the plot or soil where once the old Rome stood, which is the very
same, wherewith even at this day that part which they call old Rome, is
beawtified.

10. Teias, who also was King of Goths, is the tenth, who succeeded Totilas in
the Kingdom, and vexed or wasted Italy but a short time, seeing that little
or nothing was left of that ancient City, neither was there scarce any print
or mark left of the old Roman Empire. This man being taken prisoner by
Belisarius, was carried unto Constantinople.

Now touching these matters, if we begin to reckon the time from Alaricus, they
were achieved within the compass of about 132. years: but if we begin, as
others will rather have it, at the time of Odoacer, they were 60. years, and
somewhat more in doing.

Which points being thus made plane: we now perceive and see, that God would
not have the kingdom of Antichrist overthrown with worldly, or carnal
weapons (as the scripture speaks) but spiritual: that he will not contend
with him with an iron Sword, but with the spirit or breath of his mouth. Other
earthly and humane Monarchs have used earthly and carnal weapons, both to
the raising of themselves, and razing of others. So did the Persians overrun
Assyria with weapon and bloody war. And so again did the Macedonians subdue
the Persians by dint of Sword. And so likewise did the Romans, tame, and
bring under the Macedonians. But the Lord who at first made and framed the
whole world, by virtue of his word, who also sustaineth and rules the same by
the power thereof, and will also reign in his Church by the Preaching of his
word: and lastly, who has given unto Christ a spiritual, not an earthly
Kingdom: will use a spiritual sword, the effectual preaching of the Gospel,
for the foiling of his foes, even as it is in Zech. 4.6. and Esaias 9.5. For the
saying of Lactantius is right famous, and most worthy of credit, which he
has in his fifth Book, and ninetenth Chapter, It stands with good reason,
that thou should maynteyne and defend thy religion with patience, or with
death, whereby keeping thy faith sound and upright, thou make it acceptable
unto God, and gaynest credit and authority unto Religion.

And here that makes no jar, which is said, Psalm. 2.9. that Christ should
have an iron Scepter, whereby he should crush his enemies in pieces like a
potters vessel. For indeed that place attributes unto Christ such power and
might, as against which, his most obstinate and mighty foes should never be
able to resist: but yet it does not properly or literally mention the mean
or instrument, wherewith the enemies of the Church shall be destroyed. For
that must rather be brought to pass by the word of God, then with weapons: for
the weapons of Christians, and of the Church of God, are spiritual (as Paul
speaks, 2. Cor. 10.4. Revel. 19.15.) and not carnal or worldly.

Whether it be lawful for Christians and such as profess the Gospel, to
wage war with the Papists, in purpose to overthrow the kingdom of
Antichrist, and to root out his doctrine.

The 29. Chapter.
YEt we are not hereupon to think as some have done, that the outward use of
weapons is by the Gospel utterly condemned (as Tertullian lib. De Idolatria
and Apologetico. Lactan. lib. 5. cap. 22. and cap. 19. make report.) Indeed
the Marcionites were of that mind: and even at this day some Anabaptists,
have renewed the same error. But, if so be that the party be such, as may take
war in hand, it is not so of it self unlawful. And such a party is the
Magistrate, as appears Romans 13.4. Luke 3.14. But here we have in hand, to
show the difference that should be between Christ's kingdom, and the
kingdoms of this world. For as touching the kingdom of Christ, as it is of it
self spiritual; so does it use spiritual weapons, such as are the word of
God, the power of the Spirit, and the light of the truth. But as for politic
and earthly kingdoms, in as much as they are to regard the commodities, and
have consideration of things belonging to this life, and are for that end and
purpose established: they do maintain and defend themselves by outward
weapons, by the Lords permission, yea sometimes by his express will and
commandment. And hence now arises, and falls into this point, that famous
and profitable question, so often handled and inquired after. Whether any man
may at any time, in defense of the Gospel, put on armor, and bend the sword
against the Papists (who undoubtedly are the state, stay, and kingdom of
Antichrist) and use such weapons, as are called carnal, as we read to have
been done in Germany, England, Scotland, Flaunders, and France, yea and so
practiced at this day. And this doubt may seem the deeper, and increase the
more, for that Constantine the great, being now become a true and perfect
Christian, did notwithstanding, and that by the counsel and consent of all the
Christian Bishops, take war in hand against Licinius, his fellow and
companion in the quarrel of religions namely, to the end he might give aid and
release unto the Christians, whom the other did deadly persecute. For they were
compelled by Licinius, to sacrifice unto Idolles, against their consciences.

Now, I do not herein make question, touching the persons or the men
themselves, whether Constantinus might lawfully, in any respect, wage war
against Licinius, or no, who was his fellowe-mate in the Empire. For there is
none, I think, that doubts but he might, seeing he was a chief and high
Magistrate as well as Licinius: and equals are not subject the one to the
other. But now I consider and reason of the cause of war, whether to deliver
and set free the Christian profession from persecution, and to remove
Idolatry, Constantine might justly move, and wage war. This question is
somewhat intricate and doubtful: for it often troubles men's consciences, and
especially by means of this place of Paul: The Lord shall destroy Antichrist
by the breath of his mouth. For the better understanding whereof, I must first
make this distinction.

The ends or occasions of matters for which such enterprises are taken in
hand: are not all of one force, nature, and degree. For some are proper, some
accidental. I call that a proper cause or occasion, whereunto the drift of our
purposed determination and endeavor tends, and that in such sort, as we seem
to respect it only, as though there were thereto adjoined no other reasons, or
inducements, that might lead us thereunto: as when a pined man eats, the
direct cause of his eating, is the slaking of his hunger. Accidental I call
that, which concurreth and falls out together, with the proper and principal
occasion, but not directly or of necessity: therefore we do not at the first
in our aduisement, aim especially thereat. For though that occasion were
wanting, yet would we notwithstanding in hand with the action: as though
delicate dressing were not added to the meat, yet would an hungry man fall to
eating. Now by this distinction, if we hold and make use of it, it will be no
hard matter to fit an answer, unto the former scruple or doubt. For he that
makes war against the Papists, or other Idolaters, or else against the
Turks, or Heretics, either he does it chiefly and only to take away their
error and superstition; or else not: but, whereas other occasions and those
just ones, of waging war, went before, the which he being a Magistrate had an
eye unto: it falls out withal, that those against whom he is to proceed,
be Papists, Idolaters, Turks, or Heretics. Truly, reformation of error and
heresies, is not well sought for by force of arms: neither should the
certainty of Christian doctrine seem to depend upon the uncertain issue and
event of war.

Therefore, neither Christ himself, nor his Apostles, do at any time teach,
that force is to be used against such as are not well affected to the
Christian faith, as if that were a lawful and ready way to take away their
error. For look what religion is embraced upon fear, and dispersed by
compulsarie means: the same is to be compted rather Mahumetisme, then
Christian profession. But, when as they that are enemies to religion, shall
have offered other just occasions of war: as, if either the Papists, or
Turks shall break truce, and violate the conditions of public peace: then it
falls out that the defense and maintenance of Christian religion, is joined
with the quarrel of public right and justice, and so enforced against the
Papists, or Turks, being aliaunts, and strangers from the profession of
Christ, and Christianity: but not in this respect for that they differ from us
in religion, but for that they are perturbers and breakers of the public
quiet. And so it comes to pass, that then and upon such an occasion, weapons
are justly taken in hand, against such as are dissenting from us in profession
of the faith, but that is not in regard, that they are Heretics, Idolatours,
or Papists; but in as much as they are seditious, disturbers of ancient rite,
and open enemies to public peace. And this distinction and censure is
certainly most true.

And touching that of Constantinus Magnus, and of the war that he had with
Licinius: it is most certain, that there had passed between Constantine a
Christian, and Licinius an Heathen, certain couenaunts and leagues for the
maintenance of the peace of the Common wealth, and those solemnly ratified,
by the consent of both parties: as Eusebius reports in the life of
Constantine the great. The which conditions, seeing Licinius was the first that
brake, when against express covenant, he fell to persecuting the Christians:
we cannot make doubt, but that upon very just occasion, war was waged
against him. For among those conditions this was a principal one: that ye
Christians might freely make profession of their religion, throughout the whole
Empire of Rome; that their meetings should be approved as lawful assemblies,
and that neither Constantine nor Licinius himself should stir up persecution
against the Christians, in regard of their faith in Christ. Seeing therefore,
that this first and chief point of their league and common agreement, was
afterward treacherously violated and broken by Licinius; Constantine did
justly and upon good ground move war against him, but not as being an
Idolatrous King, or to the end to redress his error which he heald of Christ:
but to the end that those public couenaunts, and known laws of the Empire,
and particular conditions agreed upon between them, should be kept in force,
being it was not lawful for either of them to violate the same. Other people
and Nations have done the like, who in that respect are said to have waged
war for the Gospels sake. For there were at first certain couenaunts drawn,
and public laws made, and after proclaimed, by consent of both parties, for
the peace and safety of the whole kingdom: wherein, among other things it was
expressly provided for, that the Christian religion should not be disturbed,
put out of place, or stopped, and that no man should by any, be molested or
sustain wrong for that quarrel. The which point of truce and league, in as
much as afterward it was not kept by the Who hold for a principle, that Fides
non est seruanda cum haereticis: by heretics, understanding true Christians.
Papists, but openly violated by them: hereupon those grievous wars, which
are called deadly and civil, are stirred up: and so, most lawful it is to
persecute the Papists with fire and sword. Now by this that has been spoken,
it plainly appears unto all men; that those wars of the Papists, which
they call Inquisitions.
Cruciadas, being taken in hand only for the establishing of their religion:
are damnable and detestable. The which Martin Luther did very worthelie
observe, and publish.

That the kingdom of Antichrist shall at the last be quite taken away, by the
last coming of Christ.

The 30. Chapter.
But let us return unto Paul, and to the overthrow he reports of the
Antichristian kingdom, from whence my discourse has somewhat digressed. Paul
therefore (speaking of the rooting out of that unhappy state) adds, and with
the brightness of his coming: that is, the coming of Christ. What these words
should signify, diligent search has been made: For some thereby understand
the publishing of the Gospel, because that then Christ does notably appear,
when his Gospel and doctrine is published. In so much as in their opinion, the
coming of Christ is then said to be, as often as his kingdom is made known
and shines by the preaching of the word. Some again take this appearing and
coming of our Lord, in such sense as Paul often speaks, namely, for that
last coming of Christ, which is mentioned in the Creed, and is meant by
Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. and 3.13. So that they understand this place only of the
last appearing of Christ, and not of the preaching of the Gospel. And truly
this judgment seems unto me to be the truer. For it is strengthened by an
other like place of Paul. Tit. 2.13. And again, it is confirmed and made
plain by that addition and difference, which Paul joins to it. For here
mention is not made of every coming of Christ unto us, but only of that which
is bright and glorious, whereof the Scripture speaks: which shall be then when
Christ shall appear to be judge of quick and dead, and to show himself to
be the true King and Lord of all. The which his coming is therefore called
bright and glorious. And, The day of the Lord, and his coming from heaven. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. and 1. Cor. 1.8. And lastly, it is defended by the very event of
things, which is a right expositour of this Prophecy. For, if we shall say,
that immediately upon the first glimmering and preaching of the Gospel, the
kingdom of Antichrist should be overthrown, and clean turned vp-side down:
the Prophecy will be found false. For it is now somewhat long since the
Gospel has been preached: and yet notwithstanding we see the said
Antichristian kingdom not clean taken away: nay, it stands in strength and
flourishes unto this day. But if we shall understand these words of the last
coming of Christ: truly then this Prophecy shall appear to be most true.
For then, at least the power and tyranny of Antichrist shall cease, and be
wholly and utterly abolished. And herein Austin (lib. 18. De Ciuitate Dei cap.
4.) was of the same opinion with us, who says: That even in the last judgment
Antichrist shall be put to confusion, and that in the Lords own presence. And
yet I do not doubt, or think otherwise, but that the more sincerely, and
abundantly the word of God shall be preached: much the sooner shall Antichrist
be diminished, and brought from his state. But here Paul speaks of his full
and final overthrow, and not of a certain shaking, and weakening of him.

That the kingdom of Antichrist was to be broken and brought under foot, by
parts and peece-meale, and not at once or in a short time.

The 31. Chapter.
OVt of the former discourse these three things are to be gathered by us. The
first, that the kingdom of Antichrist is to be cast down by moments, or by
little and little, and not at once and altogether: or, as they use to say, at a
choppe. For as the Empire of Rome, (whereof this is a resemblaunce) was defaced
by peece-meale, as I have showed, and as is taught in Dan. 2.44. So also must
the Image thereof be brought low by a little at once. And for this cause it
is that the Lord will have it so, least if it should be laid in the dust on a
sudden, there would too great a fear and astonishment possess the hearts of
men, whereby they could not be able to take due regard and consideration of
so great a work: neither could they so well conceive that the same was brought
to pass by the hand of the Lord, and by the power of his word, as now they
do, when things are wrought by leisure, and when themselves do mark and
perceive by what means they are brought to pass. Thus much for the first.

That there is no corruption of Christian religion prophesied of, which should
succeed this kingdom of Antichrist.

The 32. Chapter.
SEcondly, this is to be observed, that the kingdom of Antichrist shall stand
and continue to the end of the world, although not in so good plight, power,
and flourishing estate, as sometimes it was, and as yet is: yet after a sort,
it shall hold up the head. For whereas Paul says, that it shall be shaken
to shiuers at last, at the glorious and last coming of Christ: surely me
thinks we may gather, and that directly on the contrary part, that GOD has
given unto Antichrist a time to reign, even unto that last time of the world.
Many there are indeed which prognosticate, I know not of what other kind of
disease, and state of religion, which should be in the world, and of an other
kind of corruption in Christian religion which should ensue, but such an one,
as is diverse from Popery. For they imagine that Popery shall fail, and that
an other kind of Apostacy or defection (but of an other stamp) shall
succeed. But I like not this. For although it be true that this tyrannous
state is to be plucked down by parts, and as you would say by gobbets, and by
falling away of several Provinces: yet shall there always remain in the
world, some form and print of the Papisticall state: as it seems to me,
we easily may and ought to gather out of this place of Paul. And this my
censure is confirmed by a plain proof taken out of the Revelation Cap. 19.20.
and 21.10. For there, after John had prophesied of the Beast that was taken and
cast into the lake of fire: and again, of the false Prophet that was slain
(both which do plainly represent the kingdom of Antichrist:) there is by and
by upon the same mention made of the last resurrection. Wherefore, there is
neither speech of any Angel, nor of any pestilent annoyance that should be
looked for to remain in the world, after, that the false Prophet was once
slain, that is, after the Antichristian kingdom was destroyed, but only
either life or death eternal that should ensue.

Whether besides the fourth and Roman Monarchy, there remain any other, a
fifth, to be erected, where a very hard place of Daniell is expounded.

The 33. Chapter.
THirdly, and lastly, that which out of the former discourse is to be gathered,
is this, that heere-after there remains no other Monarchy to be erected in
the world, after time that of Rome, and this Image thereof, (that is the Roman
Antichrist) is decayed: and so we may see, that what-so-euer was to come and
fall out, from the first beginning of Monarchies, unto the end of the world,
was made known beforehand unto Daniell, Cap. 11. Therefore upon the end and
accomplishment of those things which are spoken of in that Chapter, immediately,
the last resurrection is not only mentioned, but also the estate and condition
thereof, to the great comfort of the godly, is described, Cap. 12. And yet
should not the faithful in regard hereof be the more slack in assaulting the
kingdom of Antichrist, as though their labor should be frustrate, and to no
purpose. Nay assuredly, their endeavors shall take good success, and by
little, and little, they shall cast down that, which God would not have to
fall at a moment, or without one blow. Therefore they that do either sincerely
preach, or faithfully embrace the Gospel, do daily grind, waste, knap off,
and to be short, they always diminishe somewhat of the Antichristian
kingdom. But against this our third and last collection, that seems to be
objected which is in Daniell Cap. 11. verse. 40. and those that follow, which
are these.

pass through.

Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Amon.

Aegipt shall not escape.

Aegipt, and of the Lybians, and of the Black-Moores, where he shall pass.

East, and the North shall trouble him: therefore he shall go forth with
great wrath, to destroy and root out many.



This place of Daniell, if any other be, is doubtless, very intricate and
obscure. Whereby it has happened, that the judgments of expositours, have bin
discrepant and diverse among themselves. For some expound it so, as that they
refer it unto Tigrenes and Mithridatis who made invasion upon the Roman
Empire. Some again had rather refer it unto Antiochus. And again some unto
Pompey the great, and Julius Caesar. But, there be many things which will not
admit of any of these interpretations. The latter writers, refer it only to
the Kings of Asia, and Aegipt, who are spoken of in all that chapter. The which
judgment, and interpretation, as I do not surely reject: so am I withal
resolute in this, that those two Empires are tipes, and figures to the Church,
of such things as should befall, even after the coming of Christ. Therefore
this is mine opinion: First that those two Kingdoms (whereof Daniell speaks
in the last place) are neither said should be Monarchies, neither are they so
called, but only kingdoms: the which two, shall ouerturne, al whatsoever
shall be left remaining, of the Roman Empire in the South and East. And of
these two Kingdoms or Kings, the one, says Daniell shall come out of the
South, the other from the North. And this Northern fellow shall strike the
greater terror into this said Monarchy. Yet both these Kings, or Kingdoms,
shall with ships, Chariots, and Horsemen, that is, by sea and land, assault
the fourth Monarchy; and the remnaunts thereof. And again, either of these
Kings shall successively, one after an other, lay hold upon Aegipt, that is,
subdue the same, and thereof possess great treasures of Gould and Silver.
Lastly, they shall possess Lybia, that is, the Region of Cyren, and
Aethiopia, which is Arabia. These points therefore I take to be uttered by
Daniell, as indifferently touching, and concerning both the said Kingdoms,
but not respecting the fourth Monarchy, and Kingdom of the Romans. Afterward,
in the 44 verse, these two kingdoms are compared together, and that of the
South is said should be disturbed by that of the North, which lies
Easternlie. So that the Southern Kingdom should be in time the first, and
that of the North the latter. And as for both of them, they should pitch their
tents between two Seas, and the holy hill, that is toward Iudaea: but in the
end, they shall come to their end, and final destruction, and none shall
yeald them succor.

These things are thus set down in Daniell: the which if we do understand as
some do expound them, of Pompey and Caesar: they are then most obscure and
dark, and nothing agreeing with the course of things that have happened. But
being understood as I have directed, then are they most plain, and agreeing
with the issue of things that are done. And to begin withal, these things can
at no hand be referred to the Romans, because they were first made possessours
of Lybia and Affricke, before they set foot in the holy Land, that is
Judaea: (for so does Daniell according to the manner of his time, call that
Region, as also their Neighbors and people, bordering upon them by their
peculiar names, such as were well known in those days: the Ammonites, and
Moabites, although his prophecy tends unto those times, and those things,
which he fore-sheweth should then be accomplished, when as neither Iudaea
should be called the pleasant land, nor the Ammonites, and Moabites, should be
termed by those names: which point, we are to observe, least otherwise these
titles do trouble us, and least we think that those things where-of Daniell
speaks, were to be taken, and then only to be fullfilled, while both Iudaea
had as yet the promises of God, and the Moabites were known by that name or
title. He speaks therefore of those Regions but in that manner, and with such
names, as where-by in those days they were known to the Jews to whom he
writes. But yet the things, which he fore-telleth, were then to come to pass,
when as neither Iudaea was any more the place of Gods rest, nor the house that
contained the people of God, the which at the last fell out and came to pass,
after the Gospel was once published, and Christ had suffered death.

This mine opinion is hereby confirmed, for that he speaks of such things as
should fall out in the latter days, that is, in the last age of the world;
after the accomplishment where-of, the Angel in the Revel. 10.7. tells of no
time that should succeed, that is, after the fullfilling of these things: there
is no time prefixed or set down by the Spirit of God, which we should look
for. For after the voice of the seventh Angel, the mysteries, or hidden
things of God, which are reueiled in the Prophets, especially in this place of
Daniell, Cap. 11. verse. 40. and so forth to the end of the Prophecy, are to
be finished. And so do I understand the words of Daniell, At the end of time,
Cap. 11.40. as also, Cap. 12.9. and 1. that in the last time, and as you would
say, the last age of the world, there should these two last Kingdoms spring
up, which here he describes and points out, where-of the one should rise
out of the South, the other out of the East and North. And these two shall, (as
I said,) quite overthrow, what-so-euer shall remain in the South and
North-East of the fourth Monarchy, that is, of the Roman Empire, the which
they shall distress by Sea and Land. True it is, Daniell speaks of both
these new Kingdoms together, joining them (as it were) in one word: because
he does but only glaunce at, and briefly shut up a story far distant from
his time, and the same very obscure, whereas notwithstanding they should be
severed asunder both in time and place, whereof the one should arise first, and
the other after: as appears out of the very text. And that this my judgment
is true, it appears hereby, for that afterward these two kingdoms are
compared together, as distinct and diverse, as namely being two, whereof the one
is said should overthrow the other, to wit, that of the North-east should
vanquish the Southern, the which also it self should in the end meet with his
end and ruin. Lastly, whereas Dan. says ver. 45. Lehar tseuhi-Codesh In the
glorious and holy mountain: he poynteth out a place, namely Iudaea, as Zech.
14.4. Therefore those two Seas, within the which those two kingdoms should
pitch their Palace, Pauilion, or Seat royal; are set out by Daniel, and are
said to be not Western Seas, such as are ye French, the Italian, the
Adriaticke, or the Spanish Seas, because they bend not toward Iudaea: but they
are more Easternly, running along all that coast which lies between the
Syriacke, or Aegaean, and the red Sea. For those two Seas do border out the
upper Countries, and lie toward Iewrie (as every man may easily perceive by
Cosmographie.) And to make short, Asia and Syria, are said to be all that
region, wherein the Lord fore-telleth these two kingdoms should arise, which
shall bring to naught the remainders of the Roman Monarchy: whereof the one
should rise in the South, toward the East and North-east. For so do I refer
indifferently unto either of these kingdoms, that which Daniell utters in
the singular number. Therefore those two shall overthrow the fourth Monarchy
in those places where they shall pitch their tents, and in that part of the
world which is contained between those two Seas, namely, that called Aegaeum
or Syriacum, and the red Sea, or Elaniticum, lying by South, East, and North.
Now, it was very behoofefull that the seat or soil of these two kingdoms
should be set down, and withal that it should be expressed of what Seas
this Prophecy should be meant, (because that Rome it self is situated
between two Seas: which notwithstanding in this place of Daniell, is in no
case to be understood; and many places there are in the world which are
enclosed within two Seas: as Greece, Peloponnesus, Pontus, and Asia the less)
least therefore this speech should be doubtful and past finding out: he has
described the whole coast of those Countries by the soyles that front the same,
and by the Seas that are adjoining. And again, the very knowledge of
Geographie does show in what coasts, and places of the world this overthrow
should be performed by these two Kings or Kingdoms that should arise: not
assuredly in the West shall this ruin of the fourth Monarchy be brought to
pass, but in the South and North, or rather North-east.

For, as for the Roman Monarchy, it had (as I have said) two principal
heads: the one lying Easternly at Constantinople, the other Western in Italy:
whereupon the Emperors themselves did so divide the jurisdiction among them,
that the one should be Emperor and keep his residence in the East, the other
in the West.

And so also does the Scripture make the like division. Zech. 14.8. That
portion and head of the Roman Empire that I called Eastern: contained al
whatsoever the Roman Monarchy had lying in the Southern regions, in the
East; among the Scithians, or the Northern people dwelling somewhat toward the
East. And that other Western or Italian Empire, possessed all the other
Provinces. Now, this Italian Empire was overthrown by the Goths, and
Vandales, as I have showed before, and that long before the overthrow of the
Eastern, almost six hundred years. But as for the Eastern or
Constantinopolitane Empire, which remained of the Roman Monarchy: it was long
after, namely, about the end of all things, and in the latter and old age of
the world, somewhat shaken by the Saracens, and at last clean shiuered by the
Turks. And undoubtedly, in mine opinion, these be those two Kings here spoken
of by Daniell. Whereof the one came out of the South, namely the Saracens; the
other from the North-east, to wit, the Turk. And these two people or Nations,
the Saracens and Turks, did so spread and ouer-flowe upon the face of the
earth (as Daniell speaks, verse. 40.) that they clean trampled underfoot
whatsoever remained of the fourth Monarchy, either in the East, North, or
South, the whole Western part being by others long before overrun: In so
much as in all Asia, Syria, Pontus, Aegipt, there does not now so much as a
print, or the least mark appear of the majesty and power, which the Roman
Empire once sustained.

And touching the ruin and overthrow of this piece or part of the Roman
Monarchy, or rather of this that lay Easternlie, than of the other occidentall
Empire: God would have it fore-shewed by Daniell to the Jews, because the
people that inhabited the Easternlie head of the said Roman Monarchy, were
better known to the Jews, then those of the West, which dwell beyond the
Syriacke Sea, and so were removed far of: neither had they as yet done any
harm unto the Jews. As for the overthrow of the Italian or occidentall
Empire, it is plainly reueiled in the Apoca. So that by comparing of both these
together, I mean of Daniell and the Revelation, we have made known unto us
whatsoever concetnes the decay, either of the oriental and
Constantinopolitane, or the occidentall and Italian Empire, or whatsoever else
is behoofefull for us to know for our comfort touching the state of the world,
either in the East or West parts, even to the end thereof.

Now let this mine exposition be compared with the event or issue of things,
which is the best interpretour that can be of divine Prophecies, neither can
the Spirit or true Prophet of God report an vntroath. This is it therefore which
I affirm (which both is true and has testimony from stories) that ye
Constantinopolitane or Easterly head and Empire, which remained of the fourth
Monarchy, was first impouerished by the Saracens, in that part of the North
which looks toward the East: but afterward being made to stoop, (as more
shrewdly handled by them and brought to a low ebb) it was quite dashed and
defaced by the Turks.

We know by the Roman histories, that there were deadly and continual wars
between the Constantinopolitane Emperors and those of Parthia, and after with
the Persians who did succeed the Parthians. For after the death of Alexander
the great, when as for a while the Parthians had lived under the obeisance of
his successors, namely, the sons of King Saleucus: they then began, under
the conduct of Arsaces, by plucking their neck out of yoke, to enfraunchize
them selves into liberty, and to rear up a kingdom among them, calling the
Kings of the Parthians, Arsacides, after the name of their first Captain.
These reigned unto the time of Alexander son of Mammaeus, Emperor of Rome,
and to the fourth year of his kingdom, which was in the year after the birth
of Christ 228. In which very year one Artaxerxes a Persian, killed Artabanus
King of the Parthians, the last of the race of the Arsacides. This man
therefore snatching to himself the Empire and kingdom of Parthia, conueighed
it unto Persia. And the posterity of this Artaxerxes and Persian Empire,
continued unto the days of Heraclius the first, Emperor of Constantinople,
which was in the year of Christ six hundred thirty six, and so lasted in the
whole almost three hundred twenty nine years. About this time now began the
kingdom and Empire of the Saracens. For in the days of Heraclius and
Mahumetes reigned Syrochas the last Persian King save one: at whose hands
Heraclius by composition, recovered whatsoever his Ancestors had at any time
before taken from the Empire of Constantinople. So these two kingdoms of the
Parthians, and of the Persians, which mutually succeeded each other, were
terrible indeed for the time, as appears by histories, unto the Roman
Monarchy, and to the Constantinopolitane Emperors: but yet they neither
sacked, nor greatly shaked the Eastern, or Constantinopolitane Empire: nay,
the Emperors of Constantinople heald it out lustely with them at even hand,
and stoutly made their part good against them. But the first battery that made
the said Constantinopolitane Empire to stoop, was (as I said) in the East,
South, and North, performed by the Sarracens, who make the first of these two
Kingdoms, spoken of by Daniell, which was to rise from the South, and so
spread it-selfe over the face of the earth, in such sort, as it should assail
the fourth Monarchy, both by Sea and by land, in Asia, Syria, and the
North-East. And in truth, the Sarracens did so sore annoy the said Eastern
Empire, that it was never able afterward to recover it-selfe, but began
there-vpon by little and little to droupe and drop away: for they with great
expedition, even like lightning, ouer-ranne Syria, Cilicia, Cappadocia, and
Mesopotamia, all which provinces, they pulled and possessed from the
Constantinopolitane Emperors: where-in, the very words which Daniell uses,
Cap. 11.40. speaking of the Kingdom of Sarracens, are to be observed. This
nation (says he) shall come and shall ouerflowe and pass over, and shall
speedily overrun the countries of the East and South: for so was it
performed by them, after a very strange and miraculous manner, and with
wonderful expedition (as the words of Daniell being joined and set together,
do purport) like unto that speech of Julius Caesar, I approacht the place, I
viewed it well, and got the field: as if they did fly, and were not stopped in
their passage, either by defenced Cities, or deapth of Seas, or force of men:
for within the compass almost of threescore years, the Sarracens became
possessours of all the East, as also of Aegipt. Again, they ouer-ranne all
Affricke, and lastly, took view of Spain, and of whole France: only the
western people (excepting only a part of Spain) these Sarracens did rather
assay then subdue the^: but as for those of the East and South, which pertained
to the Constantinopolitane Empire, by force and arms they made a plain
conquest of them, and heald them in subjection, as namely, Aegipt, and also
Lybia, which is Cyrene, where-in for a great space they bare rule: in so much
as at that time the Sarracens having slain Hormisda, the last King of the
Persians, defaced utterly the mighty Persian Empire. They also made invasion
upon Iudaea, and that pleasant land, which Daniell calls the place of desire,
and grievously afflicted the same, for as then was Iudaea subject unto the
christian Emperors, to wit, those of Constantinople. In such sort, as they
heald the same in their possession a long time as they did Aegipt, and enjoyed
the gold, silver, and all the treasures that were to be desired of those
nations by the space of 192. years, and unto the year of our Lord 1051. what
time they were themselves vanquished by the Turks. Now that the Sarracens are
a Southern people, there is no man that is ignorant. Thus therefore stands
that which Daniell affirms of the first kingdom, which should overthrow the
Roman and fourth Monarchy, and that in the East and South. And this
tempestuous stuxre happened in the world, and came from the Southern coast
thereof, where-as the Countries of the Agarens, or Sarracens do lie.

Further, this kingdom of the Sarracens pitched his tents between those two
Seas, the Syriacke, and the red Sea, where of Daniell speaks: for they kept
their princely pallaice, and chief provinces in that part of the world, which
is enclosed within these two Seas. And where-as here objection is made, that
the Sarracens had two Imperial places of abode, the one at Babylon, the other
in Cairus, which was Memphis, a City of Aegipt: it makes no matter. For the
chief and principal regions of their Empire, lay in that coast which is
enclosed with those two Seas. Again, their chief kingdom and longest
regiment was in Syria and Arabia, which by Daniell is called Aethiopia, where
is the City Meschita, and the temple or sepulcher of that abominable Mahumet.

But now we are to talk of the Turks, to the end that this whole place of
Daniell, which no doubt is very dark and obscure, may be made manifest. For
these make that second Kingdom, which was to rise out of the North-East, and
which utterly brought to naught the fourth Monarchy in the East, South, and
into the other regions which were environed with the foresaid Seas: which also
set foot into Aegipt, oppressed Iudaea, and enjoyed gold, silver, and the
pleasant things of the whole world, by the space now almost of 300. years.
These therefore wasted by Sea and land, with wonderful success the Easternely
head of the said fourth Monarchy. And these also pitched their tents, and kept
their chief Pallaice and place of residence in that part of the world, which
is enclosed within these two Seas, where-of I have spoken, about the hill
Taurus and Syria of Damascus, before the coming of the Tartarians, and before
they had surprised Constantinople. For in that part, at first, the greatest
part of the Turkish Empire was established. Now there is none that makes doubt
that the Turks are risen of the Scithians that dwell in the East. And these
were more terrible to the Romans, then were the Sarracens, as also Daniell
describes, who also are reported should succeed, and in time to come after
the said Sarracens: for the kingdom that is said should come out of the
North-East, is spoken of by Daniell in the second place. And this prophecy
agrees with the story of things done. For the Turks did suppress the Empire
of the Sarracens, at what time they were by Hormisda King of Persia stirred up
and allured out of their countries: and afterward (which also Dan. fore-tould
should come to pass) they were made fellow-partners of the Empire, by Mahumet
the Sarracen, being Sowdan of Persia, Sogdiana, and Media, because he was not
able to match in power with Calipha, the Saracen of Babylon. Thus therefore the
Sarracens being set by the saddle, the Turks enjoyed the Empire, and reigned in
Asia and Syria full out the term of 192. years, but afterward, being
molested by the Tartarians, and Assumbeans, Kings of the Parthians, their power
was somewhat appalled, and almost brought to the last cast. After that, in the
year of our Lord 1300. under the reign of Romanus Diogenes, Emperor of
Constantinople, the house of Ottoman restored the Turkish Empire to his former
dignity, the recovery where-of, was the full and final overthrow of the
Eastern and Constantinopolitane Empire. So, the bounds of the Turkish Empire,
are now become the very same, which were the limits of the Oriental Empire of
the Romans, but as for the Occidentall and Italian, he shall never say his
fingers on it, because this portion of the fourth Monarchy, seems in the
Revel. Cap. 13.12.13. etc. to be allotted unto Antichrist. And where as it is
further added in Daniell, verse. 45. that none should become an helper either to
the Sarracens or to the Turks, experience has proved it true: for God did so
raise up, and advance these Kingdoms, as that they were not helped by the
power or furniture of any other foreign nation, (nay, they were rather hated
of all others) but they used and rested upon their own only aid and
provision, wherein the work of God appears the greater, by the swift and
sudden promotion of these Kingdoms. And it is said of Ismaell, Genesis
16.12. of whom, no doubt the Saracens are descended, His hand shall be against
every man, and every man's hand against him: he shall dwell in the presence of
all his brethren.

To conclude, where-as the last objection is made out of the Revelation 20.8.
touching Gog, and Magog, which should conspire with the false Prophet, I
confess I am as yet ignorant what Nation is thereby signified. Certain it is,
that Gog is a proud people, such as are all the enemies of Christ, and of the
Church: and this manner of speech is taken out of Ezech. 38. and 39. And as for
Magog, it appears he came of Iaphet, Genes. 10.2.

That the enlarging of the kingdom of Antichrist was (in imitation of Christ)
to be performed by these two means especially, namely, the public preaching
of a kind of doctrine, and the vauliting show of diverse miracles.

The 34. Chapter.
NOw follows the seventh head of this discourse, to wit, by what signs and
means Antichrist was to establish and hold his outrageous power and tyranny.
We have already taken view of the ways where-by he attained the same. It
pleased the Spirit of God, that these points should be severally handled, to
the end that the godly should be the less offended, when they see them
accomplished, both because they are brought to pass by the will of God, for
the trial of the faithful, and again their coming was fore-tolde, to strike
the greater terror into the hearts of the wicked.

Now Paul tells us here, with what aides and supporters this kingdom was
heald up and strengthened, the which he makes to be of two sorts, the one,
chief and principal, as, the working of Satan, and that, mighty and
effectual: the other, inferior, as serving to the other, which he calls
Signs, and wonders: but with-all he adds, what manner of ones they should
be, namely, Lying: and again, to what end they tended, to wit, to deceive
men, and hold them in all wickedness and error. All which points contain in
them both singular comforts, and profitable considerations and forewarnings of
those things which afterward insued. And touching the matter of consolations,
assuredly they are most sweet and behoouefull, seeing there can nothing more
acceptable be reported, then that all those things which are done against the
doctrine of Christ, (and that to the great admiration of men, in such sort, as
that they should term them Miracles and Wonders) are notwithstanding nothing
else but detestable practices of Satan, and false miracles. And as for
fore-warnings, this place is also furnished with such, where-by men are enabled
to perceive how it comes to pass, that all the world is so easily drawn
into that error. For where-as some do indeed observe the same, they wonder
and are astonished, marueiling how such a thing could so easily be brought to
pass. And in the end, thus they resolve upon the matter, saying, except the
religion of Antichrist (which indeed is nothing else but a flat blasphemy)
were the true doctrine of God, it would never have bin so easily received, nor
established upon such a sudden: but the answer is easy. God had fore-tolde
that all these things should thus come to pass, and that he would give such
power unto Satan: the which prophecy, and with-all, just judgment of God,
could not but be accomplished. Now, why God would have it so, and that upon
very just cause, the reason shall be after rendered.

And to the end this mine assertion might be thoroughly strengthened, I have to
allege a place very like unto this, out of Math. 24.24. And again another
which is in Revel. 16.14. And lastly, the example of the Magitians and
Enchaunters, which resisted the truth, as Paul alleges, 2. Tim. 3.9. all
which do make plain by what means the enemies of the heavenly truth have
always withstoode the same, so that we are not now to think it strange, if
this very practice be ascribed, to the policy of Antichrist and Satan, (who
has in hand to work this whole mystery of iniquity) and to the sleights
which he uses in mainteining this his kingdom against the doctrine of Christ,
and indeed, reason it-selfe does yield no less. For seeing that the kingdom
of Antichrist, is in truth, a very deprauation of the kingdom of Christ, but
yet an imitation of the same, it must needs be, that as the kingdom of Christ
is vpheald by these two things especially, to wit, the doctrine of the truth,
and the power of Gods spirit, as Paul witnesses, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. So the
kingdom of Antichrist has to oppose other two things, namely, his errors
against sound doctrine, and his miracles or works of Satan, against the
miracles and power of the holy Spirit, that he might cast a mist before men's
eyes, and handle the matter so as he might be taken for Christ himself. For
so at last does he easily obtain so much, as that he is reputed for very
Christ, when as he makes open show of the very works of Christ, of his
doctrine and miracles, and like a wicked wretch treacherously counterfaict the
same. Therefore in stead of the truth, Antichrist has nothing else but lies
and wicked error (wherein he does injury to God) in stead of the power of
Gods Spirit which works miracles, he blurteth out his wonders. For Christ
sending his Apostles, joined these two together, Mark. 16.15. etc.

And first where-as Paul says, that the coming of Antichrist should be by
miracles: the word Coming, is to be referred not to his first appearing, but
to the whole strength, furniture, frame, and maintenance of the said kingdom:
for, these words, his coming, signify thus much, his establishment, stay, and
ouer-spreading power, shall be achieved by the means and force of Satan,
working miracles. Which two points have indeed lustely enlarged the state of
Popery, and with-all, they do very lively point, and paint out the same unto
us. For what is more common or usual among them, then this vaunting of
infinite miracles? and what one thing do they more earnestly urge and seek
for at our hands? Assuredly the Turks, and followers of Mahumet rose at first
by hatching a new kind of wicked doctrine, but as for miracles, they neither
boast that themselves did ever perform them, neither do they require such at
the hands of others. But as for the Papists, they repose the top and toe, the
But, and mark, and assured ancker-hold in the matter of miracles: and hear is
it that they so crake of them with such open mouths, and cast them in our
teeth: so that Popery can not be better described unto us, nor more plainly
desciphered for the very kingdom of Antichrist, then by this speech of Paul.

Who be those three Spirits, where-of mention is made in the Revelation, and
are said to be the chief ministers of the Antichristian kingdom.

The 35. Chapter.
BY the former exposition, it is easy to be known (I mean so farre-forth as
concerns this place of the Apocalypse) what those three Spirits do signify,
which are sent by the false Prophet unto all the Kings of the earth, to plant
and establish his kingdom. And they are said to be like unto Frogs, but the
place it-selfe is in the 16. Chapter, verse 13.14. which are these.





Some in expounding this place, do think that this number of the three is put
down (as set and limited) for that which is uncertain and infinite, as it is
spoken in Solomon, A threefold coard is not easily broken. Therefore in their
opinion these three spirits are every spirit stirred up and sent abroad by
Satan for the maintenance of this kingdom of lies, such as infinite numbers of
me^, and claw-backs of Antich. have bin, both living as yet, and dead long
since, such as was Eckius, and others, who defended the same with tooth and
nail, and promoted it to the utmost of their power. But others seem to come
nearer to the true meaning of ye place, for they take regard of ye number of 3.
as indeed it is to be observed: but yet they do not fitly enough restrain the
same only to Divines, or Sorbonists to Monks, and professors of the
Decretalls. For my part therefore having advisedly weighed and considered of
all things, I take these three Spirits, to distinguish three chief and
principal degrees and conditions of men, by whom, as it were by Legates and
choice instruments and especial Patrones, both Popery it self and the whole
kingdom of Antichrist was at first framed, erected, and enlarged, and whereby
even to this day it is cherished and maintained. For whereas Christ had for the
publishing of his kingdom these three especial degrees and orders of
Ministers, to wit, Apostles, Doctors, or Evangelists and Bishops: So
Antichrist has on the other side his Cardinals, Schoolmen and Bishops.

The Cardinals of Antichrist will needs seem to resemble and be answerable
unto the Apostles of Christ, whose power is to stretch to every corner, and not
to be limited within the precincts of any one Country. And as touching Doctors
and the first Evangelists, which at the beginning of preaching the Gospel,
were inseparable companions of the Apostles: they are matched (a Gods name)
with the Schoolmen (as they are called) that is, the whole rabble of
Sophisters, and orbet of Doctors, either such as professed and lived a seculare
life, or a regulare, as themselves term it, that is, a Monkish or
Cloyster-life. Lastly, concerning Christian Bishops; the Bishops of the Popes
orders, and of the Devils making are in stead of them.

And undoubtedly all those orders and degrees, are the very pillars of
Popery, who are sent by the Pope, or that false Prophet, in diverse manners and
upon several occasions unto the Kings of the earth, either as Messengers, or
as simple Legates, or Legates a latere, according to the qualities of the
business that this kingdom had to dispatch, and all of them assemble themselves
to war against the godly and Saints in Geddon-harma, that is, in that place
where old Rome once stood: which place assuredly is the very shop wherein
all treasons and practices against God and his anointed, are forged.

Now, this sentence and interpretation of mine, is ratified by the circumstance
of the time, and by observation of the Similitude which John has used, and
(which is especially to be observed in these Prophecies) by the very event or
issue of things, which is an omnisufficient witness and expositour of this
Prophecy. So then, these Spirits are said both to be three, and also to be
distinct and diverse the one from the other, although they be all set forward by
one and the selfsame author Satan, or rather his son, that detestable
false prophet, that is the Pope. And as for those Cardinals, Sophisters, and
Popish Prelates: who can more justly be said to be their Sire than Satan
himself? and what is their doctrine, their life, and practice but only
deuillish?

Further, these three are said to be unclean Spirits. For being that they are
stirred up by the Devil, who is an unclean Spirit: it cannot be chosen but
that they must be like their father, and practice of his works.

Lastly, touching the time wherein these things began: that also strengthens
and vp-houldeth my censure. For John shows that these began to be sent after
such time as a way was laid open, for the Kings of the East, and the river
Euphrates, which before time was as it were a sacred bound-marke of the Roman
Empire in the East, and severed the same from foreign Nations, when
Euphrates. I say, began to be as it were dried up, and to give passage to the
Eastern people, which brought under foot the Constantinopolitane Emperors.
This people and Nation were the Turks, and Tartarians, who being the first
that ever passed over Euphrates, brake up, and as it were dispaled the ancient
limits of the Roman Empire, and so made in-roades and invasions (as I have
said) into the Roman Monarchy. And this happened about the year of our Lord
105. After which time especially, the Schoolmen and Popish Monks (for there
were other Monks long before that, both more holy and better to be borne
with, then those that now are of the Popish profession) began to have Dens
and Cloisters, as it were Castles and Block-houses of Popery in every place to
be founded, built, and dispersed, namely, after the year of our Lord 1200. as
appears by histories. But as for Cardinals: the order of them began long
since the other, who nevertheless crept up since the power of the Turk began
to be so great, and have obtained such credit at the hands of Kings, that
they can at a beck turn and wind them to what purpose they list. For
although Gregory the first (who lived before such time as the Turks made
invasion upon the Roman Empire) in his Epistles 15.77. and 79. make mention of
Cardinals. Yet that majesty and power that now is allotted to a Cardinalship,
is but an invention of this later time and age: the which some ascribe unto
Gregory the 11. who reduced the Court of Rome, from being seated at Avenion,
unto Rome: but some other who do most favor Cardinals, do attribute it unto
former Bishops. Lastly, touching the name of a Bishopric: that assuredly is
most ancient, in as much as it is often spoken of in the holy Scripture, as
1. Tim. 3.1.2. etc. But such as it is now in the state of Popery, it is fresh
and new, as being brought up long after the time of the Apostles, or of such
as lived near after them, yea, after the days of Bernard Clarevallensis: in
so much as the Audaeani, who lived in the days of Constantine the great, by
occasion chiefly of the unwonted insolency of Bishops, and such as was never
heard of before, shronke back from the society of the Church. And assuredly
the Bishoplie Jurisdiction that now is in the Church of Rome, is not
Evangelical, but flatly Sathanicall and Deuillish, which has turned all
things to ambition, covetousness and pride: whereof I will speak the less in
this place, because both Master Calvin, lib. 4. of Christian Institution Cap.
7. And Charles Molinaeus in his book Contra paruas datas, do seem to me to
have very sufficiently handled this point.

To conclude, the similitude which John uses in calling them Frogs, yields
sufficient strength unto this mine interpretation: for as Frogs are unclean
creatures, living in mire, full of noise, tedious and importunate in their
continual croaking: so also are these three orders of a very sluttish kind of
life, and always most clamorous, in vexing the virtuous and Saints of Gods:
which to be true, the very thing it self, and their importunate outcries and
inuectiues in every place of the world against the assemblies of the faithful,
do plainly declare.

Why the miracles that were wrought for the credit of the kingdom of
Antichrist, are termed by S. Paul, Lying wonders.

The 36. Chapter.
Having thus made these things plain, let us prosecute the other points which
concern the subtle practices of Antichrist (...), says Paul (by effectual
working) and (...), with all power. By which words he gives us to understand,
not only that Satan should work, but also that he should work effectually
and with all his might. That the power of Satan should be great, and his craft
and subtlety deep, it is plainly fore-tould. In respect whereof it is said
of Christ, that Satan should prevent, surprise, and seduce, almost the very
elect and chosen of God. Whereupon Austin upon the 9. Psalm says: Satan
shall in those days perform so great works, that many thereby will be
ready to think, that God has cast off all care of humane affairs: Power he
will exercise in his kingdom and subtlety he will show in his miracles. For
nothing (says he) is more fitting with fools, the^ that which they see and
perceive with their senses, lib. De vtilitate creden di ad Honorium cap. 16.
The which that Satan might perform, he works and makes show of miracles:
which Paul in this place calls ((...)) Signs, and ((...)) wonders. Now,
some there are that put difference between these two words: but in mine
opinion it needs not. For Paul's purpose is to show that Antichrist should by
the help of Satan work no usual and common kind of miracles, but such as
were rare and wonderful, that so he might draw men into errors: and to be
short, that he should counterfaite as near as was possible, those excellent
works of Christ, whereby the truth of the Gospel was at first sealed. Of
these miracles, some are such as the Papists dream are ordinarily and daily
performed by their men; and some again are such, as they tell us were long
ago done about the graves of their Saints and religious persons: whereby a
number of Superstitions were ratified, and especially that foul and
blasphemous error of praying to Saints, as being our Mediators, or
Intercessours to God. And of this sort they can reckon us up a thousand. For
the Papists can fetch with a wet finger a miracle to persuade any point they
list, be it never so sottish and repugnant to the word of God; whereby they may
persuade fools to give credit to every head and part of their erroneous
doctrine. The which I would largely lay open, but that their books are full
stuffed with such toys. But where it is added by Paul, that these are but,
Lying miracles, wrought in all craft, and deceiuablenes of unrighteousness: It
is meant we should give but little credit unto them, and be assured, that
(notwithstanding the same) the doctrine of Antichrist is nothing true. For
seeing they are but lying signs, and that we are at no hand to believe lies:
we are likewise in no case to give credit to those signs and miracles.
Therefore we say with Austin, lib. De vnitate Ecclesiae cap. 18. Let them give
over these allegations, which are either the cogging couzonings of deceiptfull
men, or the strange illusions of lying Spirits. For either they are false that
are reported, or if there be any performed by Heretics; we are the more to
beware of them. Now, these signs of Satan are called Lying, in two respects.
First, in regard of the things themselves, for that for the most part they be
but mere illusions: not the thing it self which seems to be done, and so
appears to the eye. Secondly, in respect of the end for which they are
wrought. For they are performed by Antichrist to deceive men, and to draw
them into all kind of impiety and unrighteousness: As Austin also
testifies, lib. 20. De Ciuitate Dei cap. 19. So then by these two epithers or
titles, all the credit is cracked of this wonderful skill and faculty of
working miracles, and whatsoever might thereby be established, is by the
Spirit of GOD quite dashed, least otherwise by means thereof, we should at any
time suffer our selves to be deluded and seduced by Antichrist.

Now, out of all that has been spoken, it is easy to be gathered, that only
the unfaithful and such as do not appertain to the number of Gods elect,
shall stick to the doctrine and kingdom of Antichrist, who ground their faith
not upon the word of GOD, but upon certain great and wonderful miracles: and
as for such fellows, it was an easy matter for Satan always to deceive
them. But this shall never happen to such as are godly, truly faithful
indeed, and the chosen children of GOD, both because they are heald up by the
hand and Spirit of the Lord, least their faith fail: and also because they
have regard only to the word of GOD, from the prescript whereof they will not
suffer themselves to be carried. Whereby it comes to pass, that the whole
kingdom of Antichrist is nothing else then a confederate route that give
credit unto the lying deceipts of Satan, men estraunged from the ways of
salvation, whom we for our parts are neither to allow nor like of.

That not every particular man which heretofore lived, or is yet alive, either
did, or does approve of the kingdom of Antichrist: no not when it had
prevailed and gotten the upper hand.

The 37. Chapter.
NOw follows the right and last point of this discourse, which depends upon
the former. For herein question is made, who they be that shall stick to
Antichrist, and to what end they should so do: and this point seemed needful
to be added in two respects. First, that GOD might by that means comfort the
godly, least otherwise they should doubt that themselves should also with
others be carried away with the stream, and drowned in the gulf of so great
impiety. Indeed we are according to the advertisement of our Savior,
carefully to stand upon our guard: and with all the powers of our minds to
cleave fast to sound doctrine: but least in the mean time we should faint for
fear, as thinking that God has no such care of us: we are to rest our selves
upon this assurance, that only the Reprobate shall follow Antichrist: for God
promises to deliver and set us free from the participation and fellowship of
so great a blasphemy. Secondly, this point was also in an other respect to be
added, namely, that so a reason might be rendered of so great a judgment of God
executed upon men. For otherwise men would in wondering be either amazed at it,
while they should hear of so huge and horrible a dispersion and havoc of the
Church that should ensue: or else they would power out opprobries, and
blasphemous speeches against God himself, as if he were too too rigorous and
severe a Judge. But when ye cause is yielded for which al these things are
inflicted and brought to pass, and withal declared upon whom these judgments
do seize and take place: then is all this murmuring of men easily appeased, and
the godly and such as fear God are thereby taught and instructed. A like place
unto this is that of Math. 24.24. whereby we see that the word of God is
always agreeable and like unto it self. But herein the Schoolmen have
showed themselves foolish and ouer-curious, in presuming to set down the
number of them that should repair and rely upon Antichrist. The which
Viguerus, and Methodius have attempted. But it shall be a great deal more safe
for us, to stay our judgments upon the word of God, and hold, that indeed
the number of men is infinite (compting them by the poule, or one by one) which
shall embrace this blasphemy, but yet not every particular man which shall
then be living, shall be seduced. For as it is in the Reuela. 18.3. All people
and nations, and inhabitaunts of the earth should drink of the wine of
Antichrist, and the whore of Babylon: yet not every several man shall drink
of that cup. For by the great mercy of God, some were preserved from that
infection; which perseuered in the true faith: although indeed the number of
such was but small. For as Christ does not bring every man to salvation; so
neither does Antichrist bring al to perdition. For whereas Paul says, 1. Tim.
2.4. God would that all men should be saved: That, without all doubt, is to be
understood not of every particular of each Nation; but that of each Nation,
some shall be saved: the which in like sort is to be understood of
Antichrist, when he is said in the Revel. to infect and besot al men with his
contagious dregs.

That only the reprobate, and such as are forsaken of God; have, and shall
stiffely and obstinately stick to the kingdom of Antichrist.

The 38. Chapter.
WHich, seeing it is most true, let us now see who they be that shall in such
obstinate manner give their consent and approbation, of such heinous impiety
against God, and his sacred word. And those are the unbelievers, and reprobate,
who are not the children of God; and therefore Paul terms them (...),
forlorn, or lost children. And these be the very persons, whom the Scripture
in other places, as namely, Jude, in his Epistle calls, Men ordained, and
appointed to such condemnation, Jude verse. 4. And Christ says, that They are
not plants of his Fathers planting, Math. 15.13. John 15.2. They are therefore
only the rebels, reprobates, and cast-awayes from God; that shall always with
stiff necks stand unto Antichrist, but not one of the elect and true children
of God: where-in also the judgment of God against them appears to be just,
for such perish, as are worthy of death, and none other. For the word (...),
lost, signifies such as are worthy and have deserved loosing. Wherefore
neither the godly nor the faithful being supported by God, shall at any time
be overthrown by Satan; no, not though they live in the midst of this
defection: although notwithstanding the number of them (as I have said) was
always little; themselves dwelling in deserts, and being such as were unknown
among other men: for then was accomplished that which was prophesied of by
John, namely, that The Church of God should fly into the wilderness, Revel.
12.16. and there should lie hid for a season.

What just cause the Lord had to punish the world with this plague of
blindness, that it should admit of this miserable state of the Antichristian
kingdom: and further, what monstrous contempt of Gods word went before this
state of Antichrist.

The 39. Chapter.
FVrthermore, why God would have these wicked and rebellious wretches to slip,
and fall into that so grievous an Apostacy, Paul yields a reason, and that
a very sufficient and just one. For although the Lord has always most
upright inducements for all his decrees and judgments, For all the ways of
the Lord are truth and judgment, Psalm. 25.10. and though it be not necessary
that we should be made privy thereunto: yet, to the end that The wisdom of
God should be justified by her children, Matthew. 11.19. and that they there-by
might be the more strengthened, it pleased the Spirit of God to yield a reason
and cause, of this so great and fearful a judgment of God upon the whole
world, which afterward insued. And this was it, because the world through
disobedience, and unbelief, had deserved that heavy wrath, and those grievous
punishments at the hands of God. For was not this a very foul and monstrous
kind of ingratitude toward God, that his sacred Gospel, where-of they could
not be ignorant, but had already heard it before preached, yea, and had well
perceived the power and majesty of it, should notwithstanding be loathed by
them, and trampled under foot? and that in stead thereof, the devises of men,
the errors of Heretics, impieties and superstitions of all sorts, against the
holy word of God himself, should publicly be brought in, and with the great
liking and approba^ion of all sorts of men, admitted into the Church, defended,
yea and preferred before the truth of God it-selfe. What impiety could be
greater? what injury, I pray you, more excessive and heinous, could there ever
be offered by mortal men, unto the living God, who is jealous of his glory?
Therefore this punishment brought upon the world and the Church, is a right
(...), that is, a most just revenge inflicted upon the mockers of his name and
word (...), deriders and scoffers, men that are set down in skorners chair.
Whence it is that Paul calls the same punishment (...) verse. 12. a
condemnation, (...), (says he) that these contemners might be damned, and
committed to torture. Therefore this seueare proceeding is a just punishment of
extreme wickedness, blasphenne, and unthankfulness of men toward God. For
the word (...) (judged) does in this place signify, not so much an examination
which God makes of the cause, as a judicial censure, a verdict of
condemnation, and execution of punishment. And herein assuredly the said
Antich. as well as the devil himself, was the executioner.

Again, we are with-all to take especial observation of the vehemency of the
speech which the Spirit of God in Paul, has used to express these
abominable wretches: for there-by it will the more appear, how excessive the
contempt was, which they had of the Gospel and word of God, the revenge
where-of is so horrible, and indeed so great, that it seems there could not
possibly be invented a greater. To this purpose therefore appertains that
which Paul adds, and that not idly or to no purpose, in these words.

1. They received not: then, the Gospel was offered unto them: so that
there-by their neglect and unthankfulness appears so much the greater.

2. The love: that is, that sweet and comfortable doctrine. so greatly to be
desired, which stirs up, draws to it, and cheereth the hearts and
consciences of men.

3. Of the truth: which is a thing of it-selfe worthy great price and
estimation, and to be preferred far before the devises of men what-so-euer.

The which truth, Paul commending by the effect it has, says, By it men
might be saved. For that preaching of the Gospel, is the instrument or means
whereby they are brought unto Christ, in whom only our safety does consist.
Therefore the word Truth, is in this place by way of preeminence, set down for
the doctrine of the Gospel. It was therefore a detestable and sauadge kind of
unkindness, for men in that sort, to set light by such great and precious
gifts of God, nay, it was more then barbarous and beastly carelessness and
impiety, which deserved this seueare punishment, and sharp revenge. Lastly,
Paul does yet further amplifye this grievous contempt of God (although
notwithstanding it is heinous enough of it-selfe) least peradventure it should
seem to us a light matter, or a small offense. And he does aggrauate the same
both in regard of the manner how they embraced; and of the height whereunto
like madmen they advanced this their rebellious and blasphemous behavior
against God. For he says they did it (...), having pleasure in it, with such a
desire, so willingly, and in such greedy and earnest manner, that therein they
greatly pleased themselves, they liked and allowed of it, they took great
delight in it; and wittingly and willingly made accoumpt of it, as of a most
pure and precious doctrine: and lastly, that they preferred it before the
heavenly word of the Lord God himself. And assuredly this is the highest
step of madness that can be, for men, not only like sots to admit, and approve
of lies in stead of truth; but to rest and repose themselves there-in quietly,
contentedlie, and in joyful sort: yea, with stretched-out arms to embrace the
same, to soothe and solace themselves in it, although in the mean time their
consciences do there-in greatly grutch and repine against it. Lastly, the same
Paul adds this as an vp-shot, of this villainy and raging madness committed
against God, that the same matter which these men so greedely pursue, and so
entirely embrace, is nothing else then mere Unrighteousness. Where-in, their
condemnation was the greater, and their punishment the more just. For it is
most just and upright, that such as allow of, and maintain unrighteousness,
should be most seuearely punished, Psalm. 94. And where-as he calls this
impiety simply Injustice, or Unrighteousness: he thereby gives us to
understand, that in this state of Antichrist, which is the state of Popery, God
is not offended, or his kingdom violated in one point, or after one sort only;
but that all kind of iniquity being by them admitted, is committed and done
with great liking and allowance. For as that is called righteousness, where-by
we yield unto God and man, that which is their due, and show our selves
conformable to the will of God in all our actions both in-ward and out-ward; so
is that Unrighteousness, where-by we are injurious to God and our neighbor,
shrinking from the will of God either in points of doctrine, or matters of life
and conversation. The which to be practiced and found rife in Popery and the
kingdom of Antichrist: there is none that can make doubt except such as never
saw the shadow of it, or tasted the least drop of her venom. But such as have
learned but only the first rudiments of that state (which too many have done)
and afterward by the goodness of God are brought to see the true light of the
Gospel, shall assuredly perceive more clear, then the sun at noone day, how
all corruption both of sound doctrine, and holy life, takes place among them:
yea and approved with commendation. Therefore seeing the heinousness of this
Unrighteousness, was, and is so great, and that grown to such an height or
degree, it is no marvel though this so grievous a punishment ensued in the
world, that the reprobate and faithless men, which most wickedly contemned the
truth of God, either offered to them or acknowledged by them, should fall into
this so cruel a tyranny of souls and consciences.

An answer unto three certain principal arguments of the Papists,
wherewith they would justify themselves, and approve this said kingdom of
Antichrist.

The 40. Chapter.
THis whole discourse of Antichrist, out of S. Paul might now seem to be
fully finished, but that there remains an hard objection of the Papists,
whereunto I think good for a final conclusion of this treatise, briefly to
oppose an answer. This their objection relieth upon three several arguments,
which they urge very sawcely in way of defense both of themselves, and of
their said synagogue and doctrine.

1. The first whereof respects and rests upon the multitude of those, which
both heere-tofore have professed, and as yet do hold the same Apostaticall;
that is, Papisticall doctrine: but hereunto the answer is easy. For seeing
that Paul has very clearly delivered this point, namely, that it should fall
out, that only the elect and children of God, should persevere and continue in
the true doctrine, and those in number be but few; but as for such as despise
the Gospel, and are seduced by Satan, they are almost infinite (for the way is
narrow that leads to eternal life, but broad is the pathe that tends to
destruction, as our Savior affirms) there can not undoubtedly be brought any
proof from the greater number and troop of men, to assure us of the true
marks of the Church, and to confirm us in the certainty of the truth, and of
the doctrine we profess. For by that reason were the Turks now rather to be
reckoned the true Church of God, then are the Papists, for there are more Turks
and Mahumetanes, the Papists. And again, in times past, the Idolatours before
the coming of Christ, were to be coumpted the Church of God, rather then the
Jews; for the number of Idolatours were always greater, then was the number
of the Jews. But Christ calls his Church, the true Church, which is the only
Church of God: A small stock. Luke 12.32. Chrisost. Hom. 28. ad popul.
Antioch. It is better (says he) that there should be one, that does the will
of the Lord, then a thousand wicked. Ye may see if ye will (beloved) that a
great multitude of such as do not the will of the Lord, is not a whit better,
then such as are not at all. Thus much Chrysostom.

2. The second argument is taken from the general liking that has bin of that
erroneous doctrine, the which (as they say) has bin approved by diverse men,
and sundry Synods. But I answer with Paul, that so it was to fall out that
this Antichristian, and Apostaticall doctrine, should not only be allowed of by
some men, but also be willingly received into the very Church, in such sort,
as that men should securely and wonderfully repose themselves in it: and all
because that then, they took no due regard unto the word of God. Therefore
this reason fails, as having in it a fallation, setting that for a cause (as
also the former did) which is none at all.

3. Lastly, the third argument which the Papists use against us, is drawn from
prescription long time, where-in the said Apostacy has bin entertained, and
as yet reigns among men in great security. Unto this argument also I make
answer out of Paul, that it was so to come to pass, that God should send
such strong and effectual error, and that upon just occasion, that men would
give ear and credit unto those lies, not for a day, but for a very long
season. Therefore this plea of long possession that error makes, is so far
from ratifying the same, that it makes it more great and grievous, in that it
has seduced the m^e, and so long incroached. The same answer Innocentius the
third, Bish. of Rome, did likewise make in a certain Decretall Epistle of his:
for against piety, against good manners, against ye express word of God, a
custom being taken up, and doctrine admitted, may at no hand prevail by plea
of prescription, or long continuance of time, Canon Consuetud. did. 11. For
such things as at first are not allowable, cannot be justified by continuance
of time (as the Lawyers themselves are plain in this point, L. Quae ab
initio. D. de Regul. Iur.) Now if there be many other matters which by the very
rules of the Papists themselves, and their decrees, cannot be ouerborne by
never so long prescription of time (such as are the rights and duties belonging
to the Kings treasury or Exchequer, and as appertain to the commonwealth,
namely, such things as have bin left and forsaken, for fear of hostile
invasion: again, such things as are compassed within certain precincts and
limits: and lastly, such as are the prerogatives belonging unto the Church of
Rome it self.) Why may not the like privilege be awarded unto the word of God
(who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings) and unto his Church, so, as no
prescription of time, be it of never so long continuance, may prejudice the
Lord himself? and that especially, seeing that those which began first to
take this advantage of time, dealt not sincerely, nor in plain truth, and
simplicity, without which, there can no prescription prevail in the Church;
so then it follows not, that the doctrine of Popery is therefore true,
because it has bin plausibly admitted for a great while together, for Daniell
and the Spirit of God have fore-tolde it so should come to pass: and therefore
it could no otherwise fall out.

To conclude, in the 2. Kings, Cap. 17.41. the superstitions of the kingdom of
Israel are condemned, and such religion as Jeroboam had prescribed, for the
worshipping of God, although it be affirmed to have bin observed, from the
Ancestors unto the children, and childrens children, and so forth. And
whereas men wonder how God should suffer his Church to err so long time
together, the answer thereunto is easy and ready, that God never permitted
his Church so long to be seduced, but only suffered the wicked, reprobate, and
such as fall from him, to wander and go astray, and give credit unto lies, and
that upon desert of theirs, and as I have said, most justly on his behalf.
For although Papistry was never the true Church of God; yet in the kingdom of
Popery, and in the very midst of the Papists themselves, God did often
wonderfully preserve his Church.

Now out of all this that has bin spoken, I hope not only that this place of
Paul may be easily understood, but withal that this point is as clearly laid
open out of the word of God, as the noone day. That the Pope (who is not so
rightly termed the Bishop, as the butcher of Rome) and his adherents, are that
kingdom of Antichrist, which in diverse places of the Scripture is specified:
the which, since it is the drift and purpose of this treatise and labor of
mine, here an end, concluding with this prayer unto God, that he the Father
of mercies, would vouchsafe to give to such as have thus long been blinded,
eyes, whereby they might see the light of the Gospel reueiled: and to such as
do already see, will, whereby they may embrace the truth of the same, in their
hearts and minds, and constantly make profession of the same, in holy
conversation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
A Position propounded, and defended at a Commencement in the University of
Cambridge, Anno Domini 1582. By a famous Scholar, and worthy Writer in this
our age.
The Bishop of Rome is that Antichrist, of whose coming the Scripture has
fore-tould.
THE enterprise is great (right Worshipful and worthy) and full of doubt and
difficulty, which I have taken in hand, to affirm and maintain, and that in
so solemn an assembly of learned men, as this is, that the Bishop of Rome,
who professes himself to be Christ's Vicar in earth, the successor of Peter,
the head of the Christian Church, the chief of all Bishops, the most Catholic
of all Catholics, a kind of Oracle of religion, and a mortal God among men:
to avouch I say, and hold, that the same man is the very Antichrist, an enemy
to God, a traitor to Christ, an adversary to religion, the ringleader of
heresies, and a murderer of Gods Church. But as ye are here present in bodies,
so be present in attention: and if heretofore by means of that common error,
which generally has prevailed, ye could not peradventure give right censure of
that wicked monster: yet now at length, laying aside conjectures, think
uprightly of the matter, and whom the Scripture has fore-tould, time has
discovered, and the Church has many ages been burdened with: acknowledge him
for Antichrist, spit in his face, and curse him even to the pit of hell. For
why should we not both judge freely, and speak plainly in the case? or why
should we at all doubt, and stagger in a matter so manifest, and of such
moment? If the Bishop of Rome be the Antichrist (of whom we can make no other
account, except we will be wilfully deceived) why should we either look
longer for an other, or why should we not call this the very Antichrist? I hope
that after I have done, none of you will doubt, but that, that iollie Bishop
which keeps such a coil, is the very and only Antichrist: in such sort as who
will not be lost for ever, ought utterly to detest him and abandon his
society. And herein I purpose to deal so, as the right order of disputation
requires: namely, first, in way of confirmation, by authority of the
Scriptures to warrant mine assertian, and as for such arguments as may seem to
make against me, I will not meddle with them in mine Oration. For now it is my
part to make plain and strengthen the cause, and afterward to shake of the
adversaries objections when I shall come to aunswering. And first to begin
withal, I will take that unto me as granted, which of necessity must be
yielded, that Antichrist is in the Scriptures set out unto us, by his true and
infallible marks, so that we are neither to imagine of any other, not spoken
of in the Scriptures, but that we confidently affirm him to be Antichrist,
unto whom all those things do so fitly agree, which we read in the word of
God concerning Antichrist. For either it must needs be so, or else the Spirit
of God has not well described him unto us, the which cannot be affirmed
without blasphemy.

Therefore I will set down this as the ground of my judgment and defense, that
the Scripture has delivered unto us whatsoever was meet for the Church to
know, touching Antichrist: and that he without all controversy, is the true
(or rather the false) Antichrist, in whom those marks are to be found,
whereby the Spirit of God would express Antichrist, and set out as it were, in
his lively and proper picture, to the view of all men. And as for those things
which are set down in the whole body of the Scriptures concerning Antichrist,
I uphold that every one of them does agree to the Bishop of Rome, and that they
all cannot be attributed unto any other. Now, the name of Antichrist is in the
Scriptures taken in two sorts, general and proper, or particular. For as the
name of Christ is sometime applied unto all those who have some resemblance of
him in their being anointed, (such as were the Prophets, Kings, and Priests,
in like sense whereof the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 104. Touch not mine
anointed) and sometime again, is taken for the very Son of God made
manifest in the flesh, our redeemer and Savior Jesus Christ: So also in the
Scriptures the name of Antichrist is sometime taken for every adversary of
Christ, (as in the 1. Ioh. 2. There are many Antichrists come already: that
is, there begin to incroach many back-sliders, which endeavor to corrupt the
pure word of God:) and sometime again more properly for that chief Antichrist
which mallapertly thwarteth Christ himself, not only in one or two points, but
in the whole frame of religion and kingdom of Christ. And even in such sense
did John speak of Antichrist in that very place, when he says: Little
children, it is the last hour: and as ye have heard that Antichrist should
come, etc. And of this kind of Antichrist are those things to be understood,
which Paul writes in his 2. Epistle to the These. cap. 2. I am not therefore
to entreat of those petty and paltrie Antichrists, which are many in number,
and should sow the seed of the Apostacy, and horrible Antichristianisme, which
was to ensue: but of that Captain Antichrist, which should in all points be
opposite to Christ, and of whom the other were but forerunners. And when I say
that the Bishop of Rome is this great Antichrist, my meaning is, that he is the
Captain and head of that Apostacy, which the Scripture poynted at, and
fore-shewed, should take place in the Church. For we are not to imagine, that
the whole power of Antichrist is included in that Bishop only, but that
pontifical kingdom which is opposite and contrary unto the kingdom of
Christ, is in truth to be termed Antichrist. And seeing the Bishop of Rome is
the head of this kingdom: I call him Antichrist, being but a part of the
whole. Wherein I wholly follow the manner and direction of the Scripture:
which, when it speaks of that Antichrist, it mentions sometime a whole
kingdom and body, as it were, as when Paul says: Except there first come a
defection, or falling away: and, Now the mystery of iniquity works: And
sometime again it specifieth but some one, being chief and principal in this
kingdom, of whom depends the whole body of this wickedness: as when he
says, Setting and aduauncing himself against whatsoever is called God, or is
worshipped, and bearing it out as if he were at God. These two points cannot
be understood of the whole body, but of the head, the Bishop of Rome
himself. Thus then, seeing it appears what I mean by the name of
Antichrist, let us come to the matter and thing it self, and examine what we
find in the Scripture concerning Antichrist, whereby all men which are not
already infected with ye dregs of Antichristianisme, may acknowledge and
confess, that the Roman Bishop is (as I say) this Antichrist. And herein of
purpose I will affect brevity, indeuouring to comprize many things in a few
words, and much matter in a small compass.

All the ancient Fathers, almost, and many of the late writers, and those very
learned Divines do affirm, that Daniell in his 11. Chapter about the end did
speak of Antichrist. For the things that are there spoken by him, are to be
referred to Antiochus only, figuratively, but are properly and in truth to be
understood of Antichrist. There are none of the Popes Proctours themselves, to
my knowledge, that make doubt, but that the Prophet in that place does speak
of Antichrist. Which if it be so, we may even out of this place learn, who,
and what manner of fellow this Antichrist should be. For in that treatise of
Daniell we may behold, not a slight counterfeit, but a lively picture of the
Bishop of Rome. For first (says the Prophet) He shall do what him list. And
indeed, the Pope has now these many years done even what he pleased in many
matters, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical. For he takes upon him to create,
translate, and put down Kings; to discharge subjects from their oath of
obedience, and to have the like authority over al Empires and Kingdoms, to
root out, pull down, bring to ruin and destroy: again, to build and plant
them at his pleasure. And this power he has put in practice, not only
heretofore against many Kings and Keysers, but of late he itched, as ye know,
to exercize upon our gracious Sovereign. And as for Ecclesiastical matters,
he therein challenged to himself much more licentious liberty. For therein al
his sayings, placards, and degrees, were to be accounted as Oracles,
proceeding from the Spirit of God, whatsoever liked him, must be taken for
Catholic: and whatsoever displeased him, was to be reputed heretical. Though
he should draw with him infinite souls of men into hell: yet it were impiety
for any man to say, What do you? (did. 40. Si Papa) And it is an old
principle among Papists, which none of them dare deny, that the bare Will of
the Pope is reason enough. Further, the Prophet says: He shall exalt and
magnify himself above all that is God. The which also Paul very flatly
affirms of Antichrist. Now, how the Pope perfourmeth this, I shall afterward
show, when I shall come to handle that place of Paul. Thirdly, the Prophet
adds: And he shall prosper, until by the wrath of God he be brought to
naught. Who is ignorant how wonderfully the kingdom of Popery increased,
until such time as the Lord reueiled Antichrist unto his people. Fourthly, it
follows: neither shall he regard the God of his Fathers. And sure the
Romanistes have devised us a new God, which is not the true God of the
Christians. They have a counterfaict God and a strange Christ, a new heaven,
and such a religion, as our Fathers the Apostles never knew, but such an one
as themselves could invent and frame for their own turns: the which I will
after make manifest. Fifthly, the Prophet writes, He shall not care for the
desires of women. The Papists, although they be not the least effeminate men
that ever were, yet they condemn marriage as utterly unlawful among them, in
all their orders and professions: in so much as they prefer abominable
Sodomitrie, and filthy raging lust, before honest and holy Matrimony.
Sixthly, He shall worship God with gold, and silver, and precious stones. Among
the Catholics, the spiritual and true worship of God is clean decayed, and
all their religion stands in outward show, and stately furniture of their
Churches and Images, and masking pomp in celebrating their Masses. Lastly, he
adds, He shall increase his glory, and shall make his accomplisses to rule
over many, and shall divide the land among them. What riot, what glory, what
magnificence, what power, what riches and treasure can be greater the^ that the
Papists possessed? Whatsoever was pleasant in all Christendom, whatsoever was
gainful, delightsome, fatt, and to be desired; was wholly (not long since) in
the Popes favorers. Wherefore, I think assuredly that no man doubts, but
that these things do so touch the Bishop of Rome, that they do not agree so
fitly with any other whosoever.

But seeing there be some that be not as yet resolved, that Daniell in this
place spoke of Antichrist; or if he did, yet, that he there spoke but
figuratively, as, under the person of an other: let us come to the new
Testament, wherein this Antichristian monster is plainly and clearly set out
unto us. And yet I will not prosecute every place, but make instaunce only of
such proofs, as are most plain and pregnant. There was never any Christian
that as yet made doubt, that in the second Epistle to the These. cap. 2.
mention is made of Antichrist. Wherefore, let us advisedly consider and make
search into that place, and let us compare the Bishop of Rome, with that
Antichrist of the Apostle, who must needs be the very Antichrist, that by
his true and proper marks, we may learn to acknowledge the very truth of the
thing. The Thessalonians had wronglie persuaded themselves, that the coming of
Christ, and the end of the world drew near. The Apostle endeavors to rid
them of that error, and withal delivers doctrine most necessary for all
Christians. The simple and plain proposition whereof is this: Antichrist shall
come before the coming of Christ. This Antichrist he diversely describes,
that every Church and Congregation might know what a manner of one he should
be. Let us severally consider of each part of this description, set down by
the Apostle. First he says, Except there come first a backsliding or falling
away. Now, it is a falling from the faith that he means, for his purpose was
not to speak of the chaunges of Empyres, or overthrows of Kingdoms; and
again. the word Apostacy does signify no less, 1. Tim. 4.1. (...): That
is, They shall shrink from sound doctrine. And further, all the Fathers give
it out, that the coming of Antichrist shall be joined with a miserable
overthrow of religion and godliness. And whereas the Apostle calls it
simply an Apostacy (which should ensue,) he thereby shows that it should
be a general, and not a particular defection. For he speaks absolutely,
without limitation. And this may also more manifestly appear, by comparison of
other places. Luke 18.8. The son of man when he comes, shall he find faith
upon earth? This is that Apostacy and want of faith whereof Paul spoke. Math.
24.12. Iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold. And John
in the Revelation foretells, That the Kings of the earth should commit
fornication with the Harlot: And, that the inhabitants of the earth should be
made dronken with the wine of her whoredom, And, that all Nations shall drink
of her cup. And lastly, the event of things which is the best expositour of
these matters, does prove that I say to be most true. For partly by
Mahumetisme, and partly by Popery, faith has been long since, almost clean
put out; in so much as well nigh there is no remnant left in the world, of the
true and ancient faith and sincerity. After this, the Apostle begins to
describe Antichrist by his proper marks. And that, that man of sin be
disclosed, even the son of perdition, which is an adversary. In these words
he sets out Antichrist as it were one man, who although he be not indeed any
one single or particular man; yet is he by the Apostle described under the
person of one, both in regard of that kingdom which he makes opposite to
Christ's, and is one, and also in respect of that one and the self-same spirit
of Satan, wherewith all the Antichrists in the world are carried. As the
kingdom of Antichrist is one, so also is the kingdom of Antichrist one; and
for that cause as Daniell long before had laid open several kingdoms, which
were continued a long time by lineall descent and succession of Kings and
people, under the names of a Leopard, a Lion, and a Bear: so also would the
Apostle set out Antichrist, and the whole body of the Antichristian kingdom,
under the figure or resemblance of a most wicked man. And seeing the Bishoply
kingdom does fight and contend with the kingdom of Christ: and seeing that in
the same, the Bishop as a principal Monarche does bear the sway: we rightly
term the Pope ((...)) by a kind of prerogative, Antichrist. The Apostle
faith, that this man was to be reueiled: that is, should openly affect and
possess a kingdom, and exercise his tyranny: the which, it is certain the
Pope has practiced above nine hundred years, even ever since that time
wherein he would needs be called the head of the Church, and take upon him the
chief stroke in the Church. And to the end we may evidently perceive, that
the Bishop of Rome is that Antichrist (as I affirm) let us prosecute the other
parts of this prophetical description laid out by the Apostle. He lays open
Antichrist in the fourth verse following, by three adjuncts or properties: for
first, He shall oppose and exalt himself against all that is called God, or
that is worshipped: Secondly, He shall sit as God in the temple of God:
Thirdly, He shall show himself that he is God.

These words contain much matter in them, and offer great variety of speech:
but, I of necessity must observe a mean. First therefore Antichrist was to
become (...) opposite to Christ, an adversary, contrary, in such sort as he
should advance himself above Christ. So that Antichrist should take upon him,
not only civil reverence, but even divine worship. Can any man hereof make
doubt, but that this does most fitly agree with the Bishop of Rome? For he will
needs be greater then God himself, and sets himself full butt against
him. And that he would needs be greater then God, we shall easily perceive;
if we consider what power and authority either of them do challenge to
themselves: It belongs only to God to prescribe laws, to bind our
consciences, who only has the sovereignty over our souls. The Bishop of Rome
will needs bear rule over men's consciences, (wherein he attributes to
himself a divine interest) yea inioyneth in more hard and severe manner, then
he supposes that God himself ought to do. For who knows not that a man
might with greater security transgress the laws of God, than the Popes
Constitutions; and that he that should offend the said Bishop, should in more
severe manner smart for it, than he that should with notorious wickedness
offend the Lord. To be stained with fornications, adulteries, and unspeakable
impieties, required no great penance, such sins could be done away at a
light and easy price; but to have tasted once either of Porke or Beef upon a
Friday, that could never be wiped out, but by the blood of him that offended:
and yet the one stands forbidden by God himself, and the other by none but by
the Bishop. They make it for the most part but a mockery or May Game to break
the laws of God, but to transgress the Bishops, is right mortal and deadly.
To hurt God by perjury and blasphemy they make it no great sin: but, to
offend the Bishop only by vnreuerent speech, is a huge trespass, and worthy to
be revenged by most extreme torture. There are a thousand such like, wherein
the Bishop establishes his authority to be reputed as far more authentical
and holy, then the power of God: Then, what is it to advance himself above
God, if this be not? shall we look that Antichrist should pluck God out of
heaven, and climb up into his Celestial seat? and the said Bishop is also an
adversary unto Christ, and that not in any one parcel only, but simply, and
((...)) in the whole; I will in few words make it plain, for neither is cold
more repugnant unto heat, or black to white more contrary, then is Popery to
Christianity, and the Bishops profession, unto the doctrine of the Gospel.
For what a kind of God do they make of him, when they serve such an infinite
number of Idols, and fill the whole world with their Idolatry? for where ever,
either among the Graecians or Aegiptians, or the old Romans, were Images more
common, or more frenticke idoll-worship, then was; and as we know is in the
Romish Church? and that of a sorry slender crust, a God can be made as soon as
a Priest shall have breathed out a few words out of his filthy mouth: I
beseech ye (brethren) what a madness is it, and what sacrilegious blasphemy
against God? Therefore they have no God at all, and much less have they any
Christ, whom they have dishonored, mangled, and torn in pieces in such
wonderful sort. We are taught in the Scriptures that Christ is a man; but a
man he can not be if he be infinite, without circum-scription or limitation of
place or person, such a Christ as the Papists have dreamed upon, they make
Christ, both man and God, of that Mathematical superficies which they use in
their Mass, which is so subtle and thin, that it contains in it no
thickness at all. I would here know of them, how, in that little body or
substance, they distinguish or sever the deity of Christ from his humane
nature. And what a kind of body is that, which is of no quantity, which can
be perceived by no sense, which possesses at once an infinite number of
places, and those far distant? thus therefore they destroy the person of
Christ, and as touching his office, they are there-in more foulie and
dangerously deceived. For, what part at all do they heere-in leave sound and
entire unto Christ? If Christ be our Priest, and if there be two parts of this
Priesthood, the one, that he should offer himself for our only and
perpetual sacrifice, the other, to be our intercessour, and make prayers for
us. How is it that the Papists do offer up Christ every day, and how is it that
they suborne an infinite number of Mediators? If Christ be our Prophet, why
will they not stand content with his doctrine, to what end do they require
further humane laws and traditions? If he be our King, what need we an other
Bishop to be our King, which should rule over our consciences, and the whole
Church of Christ? wherefore if he be Antichrist that denies Jesus to be Christ
the anointed, as John has taught us: it is evident that the Bishop of Rome is
Antichrist, who has taken away the Kingdom, Priesthood, and Prophetical
office of Christ. I can not run over each place of the doctrine of the
Gospel, that therein I might show how the Bishop is contradict unto Christ,
in every point; and these have I lightly touched, and in few words run over,
because I am not now to handle common places: but briefly to yield the reason
of this my defense and assertion. Wherefore to let pass other points, and to
conclude this place, I affirm, that the whole doctrine of the Gospel, that
sets out unto us the causes and means of our salvation, and which
prescribes either the outward or inward worship of God; is by ye Popes means
depraved, spoiled, and clean overthrown: the which being so, it follows,
that the Bishop is rightly called (...), an opponent or Adversary. 3. And
least any man should dream, that Antichrist should be an outward enemy, such
as Mahumet is, Paul adds, that He should sit in the Temple of God, that is,
in ye midst of the Church: therefore he should prove an household enemy, not a
foreign foe, and shall withstand Christ covertly, not openly, although
notwithstanding he shall be a deadly enemy unto Christ, yet shall he pretend
great faith, religion, friendship, and familiar conversation with Christ,
whereby we may see how much more dangerous an enemy he is. So the Bish. of
Rome, although he be repugnant unto Christ in all things, yet has he placed
and seated himself in the midst of the temple and people of God. For he holds
that himself is the Vicar of Christ, and that his synagogue is the true Church
of Christ, and that all his are the true Catholics, and cries out, that all
such as separate themselves from him are Heretics. Thus does he challendge to
himself the title and name of the Church, and detracteth it from all others;
and this is it which Paul means, in saying he shall sit in the midst of
Gods Church. Many shall come says Christ in my name, saying: I am Christ. Now,
what is it to come in the name of Christ; but to usurp the place or name of
Christ's Vicar? And this has not only bin performed openly by the Pope, but
also it has fallen out, that besides him, no other did ever attempt it. 3. And
does not the Bishop openly boast him-self to be God? read Gratian distinct.
21. He acknowledges the name, he takes it upon him, he coumpteth it properly
to belong unto him, and reposeth himself in it. His clients clawe and worship
him as a God, they salute him by the name, and make more accoumpt of his
authority and precepts, then those of God. Herein I faigne nothing, I speak
that that is evident and well known unto all. The Bishop of Rome gives it out
that he is an earthly God, and vaunteth that he can do what-so-euer God can;
Sin only except: an impudent and blasphemous mouth, hitherto all points do
iompe and agree. But we have not yet run over the description set down by
the Apostle, if these things be not sufficient, mark what follows: Now (says
Paul) ye know what withholds, namely, that he might be reueiled in his
time. Herein he shows what it is that did stay or keep back the coming of
Antichrist. This same ((...)) which withholds, Tertullian, Hierome, and
Chrysostom, do understand of the Roman Empire, the which so long as it stood
in flourishing estate, Antichrist could not rise to that power and
pre-eminence; and therefore that room might be made for Antichrist, it was
requisite that the Emperor of Rome should give place. What this means we
shall easily understand, if we shall bear in mind that which John fore-warneth
in the Revelation, as we shall see anon; namely, that Rome was to become the
head and Metropolitan City for the Antichristian kingdom. Seeing therefore
that Antichrist was to rule in Rome, necessary it was that the Emperor should
leave Rome empty for him, for it could not be possessed by both of them
together. Now the issue and event of things has showed it self, to be a most
plain and plentiful interpretour of this prophecy. First, Constantine
translated the Empire from Italy, and Rome into Greece unto Which is
Constantinople.
Bizantium: then the Greek Emperors began by little and little, to lose all
their interest in Italy, so that at last Rome, the ancient seat of the
Empire, together with a great part of Italy, began to fall into the Bishops
hands. But where-as some understand this matter of the Preaching of the
Gospel, which the Apostle should signify, was first to be spread over the
face of the whole earth: I will not gainsay, but that both may be
understood, viz. that the Empire was to be moved out of Rome, and the Gospel
to be preached over all the world. And touching the time where-in both these
were performed, it agrees fit. And where-as the Apostle writes, that the
mystery of Iniquity does already work: he gives us to understand, that
even in his time the foundations were laid of that pontifical defection. And
further he plainly testifies, that this Antichrist should continue even to
the coming of Christ, when he says, that the Lord shall consume him with the
spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish him with the brightness of his coming.
Antichrist may be appaired somewhat, and diminished by the preaching of the
Gospel, but he cannot be wholly dispatched before the coming of Christ. Now
how Antichrist was to get a kingdom, and obtain a tyranny, Paul does herein
declare, when he says, His coming shall be by the working of Satan, with all
power and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiueablenes of
unrighteousness among them that perish. It were impossible to utter any thing
more fitly agreeing with the kingdom of Popery: for, except the Bishop had a
mighty, power-full, and devilish force in working, he could never have so
prevailed by his couzonages, deceipts, tricks of legierdimaine, and false
miracles.

Hitherto we have heard Paul preaching of Antichrist, and if Paul were a true
Prophet, as we doubt not but he was a most true one, it is necessary that the
Bishop of Rome should be Antichrist: I do but point at the heads of very
weighty matters, for I may not now make long discourses. Let us come to the
Apocalypse, where-in, are most certain evidences, and plain testimonies of
this our Antichrist: these, what they are, let us consider. In the 13. Chapter,
after that John had made mention of a Beast which had seven heads, one head
where-of being grieuouslie wounded, was afterward made whole again, (which
Beast, can not but be understood of the Roman Empire:) then it follows in
the 11. verse. And I saw an other Beast, coming up out of the earth, and it
had two horns like unto the horns of the Lamb, but it spoke like unto the
Dragon. The Papists themselves make no doubt, but that this Beast is
Antichrist: and I will prove that it is the Bishop of Rome himself, who
professes himself to be the Lambs Vicar, and to be like unto the Lamb: but
yet if we mark well his speech, we shall acknowledge him for a Dragon, and the
very Devil. For who ever did vomit out more horrible blasphemies against God,
then this Beast has done? go over the rest that follows unto the end of
the Chapter, ye shall see all things fall out just by the providence of God.
Who is it that put life into the dead image of the Beast, but only the Bishop,
who in his new erected kingdom, has lively expressed and represented the
old Roman and Idolatrous Empire. For, look what cruelty, covetousness, lust,
riot, Idolatry, was long ago found rife among the ancient Emperors, the
Bishops have restored all that unto the world again. And it is most certain
and apparent, that he compels all men that will live at all, and deal in
his business and affairs, to bear his mark in their foreheads, and right
hands. For except they give up their names unto him, and esteem him to be
reverenced both in word and deed, they can not live in safety: Kings,
Emperors, Bishops, rich, poor, the common people, learned, unlearned and
all, must serve him, kiss his feet, and worship this Beast. And as touching
the number of 666 Irenaeus, a very ancient Father, and one that lived near
unto the time of the Apostles, has opened the same. If we must needs make
accoumpt of Apostolic traditions, why may we not think that this was a
tradition of the Apostle? Truly the Pope is a Latin by nation, faith, public
liturgy, yea and all his adherents he will needs have to be Latins: he that
is not a Latinist, they cry out that he is a Grecian, a Scismaticke, and
Heretic. If it seemed probable unto Irenaeus that this should be the name of
Antichrist, (...), Latinus, it ought to seem much more probable unto us, who
have had perfect proof and experience of this Antichristian Latin.
Notwithstanding, if any had rather refer it unto the time of his reueiling, I
will not greatly disagree. For if unto the year 79 where-in John lived, and
wrote his Revelation, we add the number 666. and consider the estate of the
Church what it was in the year 763. we shall see that Antichrist was then
grown to years, ruling in Rome, terrible with two swords, and worshipped by
Christian men as a God. What need we seek more? or what could be more
plainly fore-tolde? have we need also of a toarch-light? And yet there are
more evident proofs then these, which are mo^ forceible to persuade, although
we were disposed to oppose our selves against them. The Spirit of God did
foresee that question and doubt might arise, touching the place where this
Antichrist should reign, and therefore he would also fore-warne all Christians
of the place, and so pointed out the City wherein Antichrist should sit. And
that is Rome, which John both calls Babylon, and the woman that sits upon
seven hills, and the City that bears rule over the kingdoms of the world.
He that doubts that Rome is this same, I can not tell whether he have any wit
at all: the ancient Fathers understood the mystery. Tertullian contra
Iudaeos, says, Babylon represents in John our Prophet, the figure of the
City of Rome. Jerome upon the 47. Chap. of Esaias, in his Epist. unto Asella, in
the end of his second book against Iovinian, and in ye prologue of his book
de spiritu sancto, testifies ye Rome is Babylon, and calls her the purple
colored Harlot. Austine in his 18. Book, De Ciuitate Dei, Cap. 22. affirms
that Rome is an other Babylon, and a daughter of the first Babylon. Orosius.
lib. 2. cap. 3. shows by many reasons, that Rome is in all points
correspondent unto Babylon. But why do we seek after the testimonies of men,
and why do we require further proofs, seeing John himself declares, that
this City, is that which is founded upon seven hills. Let them name me if
they can, any one City in the whole world, in Europa, in Asia, or Affricke, in
the Indies, or newfound America, where-in are to be found seven hills,
besides this our City of Rome, the which all men know to be built upon seven
hills: the brauest town of all, that does enclose seven several hills in
compass of a wall. The names of which hills are as yet well known,
Capitolinus, Palatinus, Aventinus, Caelius, Exquilinus, Viminalis, Quirinalis.
And although it were so, that there could be found such an other, yet this
City only was ruler over all Kings and Nations. Therefore it is out of all
controversy, that it is Rome whereof John speaks: yea and Rome not only as
it was in times past, while her Emperors were Tyrants, (which the very
Papists acknowledge, because they can by no means avoid it, but that needs
they must grant that Rome is there meant) but as it was afterward, when the
Pope bare rule, which I will enforce out of the words themselves: for John
describes Rome both touching the old state of the Empire, and also touching
the state thereof, being after renewed and restored, as it is evident in the
13. Chapter. And as for the ruinous and decayed estate thereof, it was the Pope
only that restored it, and which gave life unto that Image, which was as it
were stark dead: therefore he mentions and means both the states thereof.
Afterward, he in the 17. Chapter, verse. 8. speaks plainly of the Beast
which should arise out of the bottomless pit. Now as for the old Roman
Empire, it was in force while John was yet alive: wherefore it is most certain
that John spoke of the Bishops kingdom that should after ensue. And this is
that seauen-headed Beast where-of he speaks. Thus therefore it is evident,
that those things which John here wrote, are to be understood of the
kingdom and monarch of the Bishop: other-wise, all things will be out of
frame, and disagree. To what end should I heap up many things? what need I
adioyne unto these heavenly oracles, being so manifest, so certain, and so
many in number, the testimonies of men, which are uncertain and doubtful,
therefore I here end, gathering out of all that has bin spoken, this most
manifest and strong conclusion: The Conclusion with a repetition.
If he be Antichrist which opposes himself unto Christ, which lifts up
himself against all that is called God, or is worshipped, which has brought
an Apostacy or backsliding into the Church, which sits in the Temple of
God, which boasts himself that he is God, which when the Italian and Roman
Empire was overthrown, usurped unto himself a kingdom and tirannie, which
immediately after the ascension of Christ, began in his forerunners, which
shall last to the end of the world, which has Satan for his fellow-worker,
which braggeth of his signs and wonders, counterfaiteth himself like unto the
Lamb, and yet speaks like unto the Dragon, which restores the Image of the
first Beast, which in every respect is a right Latin, which possesses Rome,
the mystical Babylon, the City with seven hills, which is clad in Purple,
which is an Harlot, and which has all the marks of Antichrist, that are
diligently and plainly set down in the Scriptures by the Spirit of God,
(which of necessity must needs be so, except we think that Antichrist is ill
set out by the holy Spirit:) then is the Roman Bishop and no other,
Antichrist. But the antecedent (or first) is true, therefore the consequent (or
that that follows) is also true. Thus have I hitherto handled my matter in
way of propugnation, or defense: now will I also, by the grace of Christ,
maintain the same against the oppugnation or battrie, that the grave Doctors
shall bring against it.

FINIS.
Bernard a Monk of Cluniacke lived about 400. years ago. He wrote unto
Peter, Abbot of that Monastery, three satyricall inuectiues: in the two latter
whereof, he takes up roundly, and that not unjustly, the tyrannous behavior
of the Clergy and Bishop of Rome.

Some of these verses I have copied out as they stand extant in a Book of his,
entitled, A Catalogue of witnesses of the truth: which I have caused to be
written out, not so much for the elegancie of the style or verse, as for
testifying the truth, and to show what opinion, men in those days had of the
Roman Antichrist.

LEX mala, furibus his subeuntibus, intrat abunde.
O mala secula, venditur infula pontificalis:
Infula venditur, haud reprehenditur emptio talis.
Ve^ditur annulus, hinc lucra Romulus auget et vrget.
Est modo mortua Roma superflua quando resurget?
Roma superfluit, arida corruit, afflua, plena:
Clamitat and tacet, eriget and iacet, and dat egena.
Roma dat omnibus omnia, dantibus omnia Romae,
Cum pretio, quia iuris ibi via, ius perit omne,
Roma nocens nocet, atque viam docet ipsa nocendi,
Iura relinquere, lucra requirere, pallia vendi.
Saepe notarius est ibi carius emptus, vt ille,
Quae cupis, exaret, and sacra praeparet ipse sigilla.
Si tua nuntia praeuenit vncia, surge sequaris.
Si datur vncia, stat prope gratia pontificalis:
Sin procul haec valet, haec tibi lex manet and schola talis,
Dives es indiga, pinguis es arida libera seruis:
Libera subderis, aereqae venderis ipsa proteruis,
Saepe reuenderis, hinc reprehenderis ore Iugurthae:
Sylla vorax rapis, and cupis, and capis, and trahis ad te.
Roma ruens Rota, foeda satis nota cauteriat te:
Gurges es altior, arca voracior, alta lacuna:
Infociabilis, insatiabilis, omnibus vna.
Quo bibis amplius, hoc inhiantius, huc date, clamas,
Dic rogo, sufficit: at mihi deficit, ipsa reclamas.
Si tibi det sua, non repleat tua guttera Croesus:
Marca vel aureus, amodo, non Deus, est tibi Jesus.
Mittis in extera tollere munera sola flagrantes,
Quem tua dirigit huc manus, exigit ille tributum,
Nec bona secula, sed bona fercula, mollequefulcrum.
Suetus ab vbere, non nisi currere, vel peditare,
Celtica curribus exit equestribus arua meare.
Qui modo gressibus ibat ovantibus, incomitatus,
Clerus equestria vix animalia pascit auena.
Serica pallia dat tibi Gallia, Roma caprinum,
Errat tibi pedes, ambulat hic eques in resupinum:
Gens fluit obuia, fit sibi gloria, pulchra videri.
Ductus in atria pontificalia molle recumbit,
Pocula praecipit, agmina suscipit, oscula iungit.
Roma quid exequar, imo quid eloquar, aut tibi promam?
Vncia te rotat, vncia te notat non esse Romam.
Tu populos tibi, te rutilans sibi marca subegit.
Semper enim lucra progenies tua, vult, agit, egit.
Haec sitis ebria stat tibi propria, mart, togaque
Te cremat, impiat, vrit, inebriat, excruciatque.
Das sacra culmina, das moderamina sacra probrosis,
Arida mitibus, afflua ditibus ambitiosis.
Fas mihiscribere, fas mihi dicere, Roma fuisti:
Ecce relaberis, atque resolueris ordine tristi.
Vrbs sine viribus, and sine patribus obruta marces.
Dardanias premit, Ausonias emit aureus arces.
Fas mihi scribere, fas mihi dicere, Roma peristi.
Obruta moenibus, obruta moribus occubuisti,
Vrbs ruis inclyta, tam modo subdita, quam prius altta:
Quo prius altior, hoc mihi pressior and labefacta.
Clauda redis, caput alta iacis apud omnipotentem.
The same in English.
AN ill custom, when these thieves took place, came in apace.
O wicked world, a Bishops pall is sold:
A pall is sold, and yet such sale is not comptrolde.
The Ring is sold, and thence the Pope does heap and hunt for gould.
Rome is now dead: I marvel when she will again raise up her head.
She ouer-flowes, and yet she wants, her plenty proves scantie:
She cries in scilence, she is lofty and lowly, and bountiful in beggerie.
Rome gives all to all, to all that gives all to Rome
Through wealth, and gifts, for so goes there the law, all right goes down.
Thus hurtful Rome does hurt, and teaches to be wicked.
To leave all law, and gape for gain and sell a Popish tippet:
Often times a Clarke is dearly got which might indite
That which thou would, and get the seal unto thy write.
If that a bribe prepare the way, then come thou here,
Tell on thy tale the Pope his grace approaches nere:
If this do fail, then look to quail, so goes the gear.
Thou art rich and poor, both fat and lean, yea bond and free.
Free, but thrall, and sold to such as crooked be.
Yea often chopped, so art thou checked by Iugurthes mouth:
Like Sylla thou snatchest, thou couetests and catchests, and draws to thy
self:
Rome like a wheel is turned, and with foul spots is burned.
A greedy gulf, a griping grave, a filthy Iakes:
Both bottomless, unsatiate, and all alike she makes.
By drinking thou art dry, and louder thou do cry, come bring me more:
I pray thee cry, ho: but thou say, no, I hunger sore.
Though Croesus gave thee all he has, 't will quench no thirst:
I think thou make gould thy God, not Jesus Christ.
Thou send'st abroad a greedy brood that pill and poule:
They come from thee, to seek for fee, and take up toule:
They seek no good, but dainty food and easy bedds.
The man that from his youth did use to run and go,
Has learned to praunce ye fields of France with Chariots to and fro.
The Clarke that late could trudge alone upon his feet,
With Oats enough to feed his horse can hardly meet.
France does afford him silke^cloakes, and Rome does yield him skarlet:
His guard on foot does flock about, and he rides like a varlet.
The people gaze, and he does count it glory to be seen:
And being come to Court, then down he fits him soft:
He calls for cups, and welcomes all and kisseth often.
Rome what shall I do, what shall I say, or tell thee what is done?
Wealth weakens thee, wealth threatens thee not to be Rome.
Thou conquerest men, but glittering gould does conquer thee:
For why, thy brats still play their parts to seek for fee.
This dronken thirst does stick by thee, in time of War and Peace:
It burns thee and soyles thee, it turns thee and foyles thee, and never does
cease.
Thou give Church-promotions to such as are infamous:
Thou art full hard to simple souls, but helpest the ambitious.
Then let me write it, and let me speak it, Rome once thou wast,
But now thou blinkest, and now thou shrinkest, till all is lost.
A town disfurnisht of her strength, and of grave heads, will fall at length.
It Was gold yt once did conquer Troy, it is gold yt now does Rome annoy.
Then let me write it, and let me speak it, Rome thou art gone:
For want of munitions, and good conditions thou art undone.
A famous City (the more is the pity) is brought in the briar:
And now sunk deeper, then late she was steeper, and showed her self higher.
Thou art come halting home, and yet thou look aloft.
John a Monk.
Curia vult marcas, bursas exhaurit, and arcas:
Si bursae parcas, fuge Papas, and Patriarchas.
Si dederis marcas, and eis impleveris arcas,
Culpa solveris quaque ligatus eris.
Intus quis? Tu quis? Ego sum. Quid quaeris? Vt intrem.
Fers aliquid? Non. Staforis. Fero quod satis. Intra.
The same in English.
The Court of Rome does aim at Marks, it sucks ye purse, and soakes ye Arkes:
If that you mind to spare your Arkes, come not at Popes nor Patriarchs.
But if you frankly give them marks, and with good gold stuff up their Arkes,
I warrant then you shall be free, from any kind of penalty.
Who Is within? Who Is there? I. Why, what would ye? Come in.
Bring you ought? No. Stand still. But I do, Go ye then in.
John a Monk, writes that Rome being founded by thieves; retains still
somewhat of her old qualities: for (says he) she is called Roma, (quod rodat
manum) of greasing the hand.
Roma manus rodit: quod rodere non valet, odit
Dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit.
Curia curarum genetrix, nutrixque malorum
Ignotos notis, inhonestis aequat honestos.
The same in English.
Rome is a raker, and spiteful hater of th'emptie hand;
She hears the giver, but others never, but lets them stand.
Her Court a cage of cares: of mischiefs eke the mother,
She uses knaves like honest men, and strangers like a brother.
A forewarning, taken out of Munster, agreeing with that of S. Paul.
ROme rowlling long about, in errors, bond and thrall,
Shall fall at last and cease to be the lofty head of all.
But first the Church shall shrink, and so the faith shall fail,
And Rome shall reele, the Empire eke shall first begin to quail.
Again the close Apostacy that little was suspected,
But crept and couched craftily, shall plainly be detected.
Allowance shall be made of foul and filthy bed;
So, shamefastnes and fear of God shall cease to show their head.
Then comes The man of sin, whom Christ shall with his breath
Confound: and after make an end of all things on the earth.
Gregory the great, in his 30. Epistle unto Mauritius the Emperor lib. 16.
SHall it not (think ye) be compted a vain and ridiculous matter, that
Antichrist when he comes shall say, he is a God? But yet withal it shall be a
very dangerous point. If we respect the quantity of the word; it consists
but of two sillables: But yet withal if we regard the weight of wickedness
that goes with it, we shall see it includes all the mischief that may be.
I affirm this bouldly upon good assurance, that whosoever he be that calls
himself, or is desirous to be called an Universal Priest: he in that
haughtiness of his is a forerunner of Antichrist, in that by swelling pride
he prefereeth himself before others.

An abstract out of the Epistle of the Bishopps of Germany and France,
written under Anastasius the Pope, under the reign of Clodovius, gathered by
Aventinus.
FVrther (to speak literallie of it) we cannot conceive of that new kind of
pitiful compassion, which the Italian Physicians use in curing the infirmities
of France. They which take in hand to help our Bishops, are themselves
shaken with continual Fevers. They are blind, which make promise of sight
unto others: And having the Quinsey of covetousness in their own throats,
(whereby they are not able to enter in at the narrow gate) they suppose our
men to be botchie and hugg-sholdred. They suffer their own sheep to wander,
and yet take upon them to reclaim our sheapheards to right paths, while they
pretend, that the remedy for all spiritual diseases, that is, absolution of
souls and consciences, is to be had at Rome.

Gualter Mapes censuring the Pope and his Decrees, the Popish Clergy, and
especially the Bishopps: describes their manners in the verses following.
VAe genti inutili cornutis ducibus,
Qui multant mutilos a natis frugibus:
Dum habet quilibet foenum in cornibus,
Non pastor ovium, sed pastus ovibus.
Non tantum cogitat ille de miseris,
De claudis ovibus agnisue teneris,
Quantum de computo lactis aut velleris
Sic ovem perditam reportat humeris.
Si vulgi invenerit excessus parvulos,
Causatur fidci laesos articulos:
Trahit ius ovium in caulae tribulos,
Vellens exuvias and mungens loculos.
Errantem sequitur grex errans previum,
Quem pastor devius ducens per devium,
Post lac and vellera dat carnes ovium,
Luporum dentibus and rostris avium.
Hic scriptas reperi consuetudines
Officialium raptim imagines
Frauds, insidias, and turpitudines,
Quae magnos codicis excedunt margines.
Hij sunt quos retinens mundus inhorruit,
A quorum facie totus contremuit,
Quos dum in cautibus Rhodope genuit,
Ad omnes scelerum motus exacuit.
The same in English.
WOE worth the worthelesse nation, with all that cornerd crew,
Which suck and soake the sielie souls, of all that is their due.
And carrying Foenum in cornu gerit.
Hay (like pampered Bulls) upon their forked head.
They take no keep of sielie sheep, but with their flesh are fead.
Of wandering sheep, or limping lambs they make no such account,
But only search by what means best their profits may amount.
So they may have the milk and fleece, the sheep may go to wrack:
And thus (good sir) they take the pain to bear them on their back.
But if the common people chance to tread their shoe awrie,
Then, out alas, (as all were lost) they straight begin to cry.
But they (mean while) do dragge their sheep into a fould of briars
To try their titles: till their skins be pulled over their ears.
I mean into th'Officialls Court: whose tricks I know full well,
Whose gross and crafty couzonages it were a shame to tell.
Their canckard customs they maintain, with sad and sober looks:
Which to rehearse in prose or verse, would fill up many books.
The shepherd thus does lead ye dance, ye sheep they follow after,
And down they fall in desperate dikes, as in place of slaughter.
And having lost both milk and fleece, none cares for the rest:
The flesh is cast abroad to be deuou'rd of bird and beast.
These are the men that in ye world their pleasures fully take,
Whose only fearful cou^tena^ce, does make ye world to quake.
Some craggie rock did them beget, and gave the^ stony hearts,
And made their faces impudent, to play such wicked parts.
Frauncis Petrarche, the very Prince of Italian Poets, (who lived about 260.
years ago) has left in written Verses, what opinion men had in those days
of the Church of Rome.
FOntana di dolor, albergo d'ira,
Schnola derrorie Tempio d' Heresia
Gia Roma, hor Babylonia falsa eria
Per cui tanto si piagne, and si sospira
Offucina d'inganni, o pregion d'ira
Oue' I ben muore, Imal si nutre e cria:
Di viui inferno: un gran miracula fia,
Si Christo teco al fine non s' adira.
Fondata in casta and humil povertate
Contra tui fundatori alzi le corna
Putta sfaciata: dou' hai posto spene?
Ne gli adulteri tuoi: ne le mal nate
Richezze tante: hor Constantin non torna
Ma talga l'mondo tristo, chel s'estiene.
The same in English.
O Sowrce of sorrow, and cottage of care,
A school of errors, a temple of haeresies,
Sometimes Rome, but now false and wicked Babylon,
For whose cause so many sobs and sighs are spent,
A shop of treachery, a prison of wrath.
Where good decays, and evil is bread and cherished,
A hell and torture of the living: it will be wonderful,
If at last Christ be not incensed against thee.
Thou whose beginnings were chaste, poor, and humble,
Do advance thine horns against thy founders.
An impudent harlot: and where-in do thou trust?
In thine adulteries? in thy so great
Ill gotten goods? now Constantine commes not again,
But let the world enjoy that, which it has sustaynd.
FIamma dal ciel su le tue treccie pioua
Maluagia, che dalfiume, and dale ghiande
Per l'altrui impouerir se ricca e grande,
Poi che di mal oprar tanto ti gioua
Nido di tradimenti: in cui si coua
Quanto mal per lo mondo hoggi si spande
Di vin serua, di letti, e di viuande
In cui luxuria fa l'vltima proua
Per le camere tue fanciulle, e vecchi
Vanno troscando, e Beelzebub in Mezo
Comantici, colt fuoco, e con gli specchi
Gia non fustu nutrita in piume al rezo
Ma nuda, al vento, e scalza frali stecchi:
Hor viui si, ch'a Dio ne venga il l'ezo.
The same in English.
LEt fire from heaven rain down upon thine heirs
Thou wicked wretch: (who from water and akornes
By impouerishing others, art become rich and mighty.)
Seeing thou have such pleasure to do evil,
Thou neast of treasons where-in are hatched
All the evils which at this day ouer-spread the world:
Thou bond-slaue to wine, to leacherie, and banquetings,
Where-in riot perfourmeth his utmost endeavors
Through thy chambers: wenches and old fools
Go skipping, and the Devil in the midst
With bellows, fire, and looking-glasses.
Thou wast not at first brought up with plumes for shadow,
But naked to the wind, unshod among thorns,
Now live, but so, as God may conceive a loathing of thee.
L'auara Babylonia ha colmo 'l sacco
D'ira di Dio, e di vitij empi e rei,
Tanto, che scoppia, and ha fatti suoi Dei
Non Gioue, a palla, ma venere, e Baccho
Aspettando ragion mi struggo, e fiacco
Ma pur nouo Saldon veggio per lei
Lo qual fara, non gia quand'io vorrei
Sol vna sede; e quella fia in Baldacco,
Gl'idoli suoi saranno in terra sparsi
E le torri superbe al ciel nemiche
E suoi torrier di for, come dentr' arsi
Anime belle, e di virtute amiche
Terrano 'l mondo e poi vedrem lui farsi
Aureo tutto, e pien de l'opre antiche.
The same in English.
Covetous Babylon has her sack so full
Of the wrath of God, and of vices impious and wicked,
That with it she bursteth, and has made her Gods
Not Jupiter and Pallas, but Venus and Bacchus.
Searching out the reason, I consume and weary my self,
But at length I see a new Sowldan for her,
Which shall make (though not so soon as I would)
Only one seat, the which let it be in The place where the Suldan keeps.
Baldacco:
Her Idols shall be scattered on the earth,
And her lofty towers enemies to the heavens,
And her turrets shall be burnt as well without as within,
But sweet souls and lovers of virtue,
Shall possess the earth, and after we shall see it be made
All gold, and full of her ancient works.
These Verses of Petrarche have been thus turned into English Verse by Thomas
Hovel.
1.
O Forge of false deceit, prison to ire,
Where goodness dies, and evils all are bread,
To those that live, thou art a hellish fire,
The ruin eke of many wretches dead:
A wonder strange, though spared thou be yet,
If Christ in fine not tread thee under feet.
Thy ground was first on humble poverty,
But now thy pride does press thy founders down,
Thou shameless strompet seeking sovereignty,
Where rests thy hope? what, in thy triple crown?
In thine adulteries, or base-borne riches
Begot in guile? Vain are all such Witches,
Since Constantine may now return no more,
The mournful world that sighs thy state to see.
Consume and cut thee quick unto the coare,
That all too long is forced to bear with thee.
Of Rome the fall here Petrarche does unfold,
As view they may that list the same behold.
2.
A flambe from heaven stream down upon thy head
Thou wicked one: that from the water cold,
And Acornes wild that whilome was thy bread,
Art mighty made, enritcht by others gold,
Since thy delight is settled all one ill,
Shame thee destroy, and sorrow soon thee spill.
Thou nest, in whom the treasons hatched are,
That through the world abroad are spread this hour,
Slave to wine, chambering, and delicious fare,
Where lust does try the strength of all her power.
In closets thine, young girls and aged Sires,
With Beelzebub do dance in foul desires.
He, bellows, fire, and looking-glass does bear
Amidst them all, but why, I blush to tell
Naked to winds, and bare-foote late thou were,
No beds of down unto thy share befell:
Course clothes did serve thy corpse from cold to shrowde,
Scarce God thy Peer, thou now art grown so proud.
3.
Thou Babylon that build'st thy nest so high,
By covetous frawde thy sack to brimme do fill,
With Gods great wrath, and vices out that fly,
Whose poisoning smelles a world of souls does kill,
Gods to thy self thou make not Jove nor Pallas,
In Venus and Bacchus is all thy sollace.
In searching long what should of thee ensue,
My self with toil I feeble brought and low:
But at the length me seemed a Sultan new
I saw prepared, to work thine overthrow,
That will erect The Souldans palace.
Baldocco seat for those,
Which (though not when I would) shall thee depose.
Thine Idols on the ground shall scattered lie,
Thy towers proud, to heaven that enemies be,
And turrets all, by fire down shall fly,
Then shall just Souls the friends of virtue see
The goulden world anew begin to reign,
And ancient works show forth themselves again.
FINIS.
A Table, containing the words and matters handled in this treatise.
A
A Daulphus king of Goths, possessed Rome. Page 113 Alaricus surprised the
same. Page 112 Antichrist who it is, and why he is called an Apostata. 7.10.
11.41. Why called that man of sin, and perdition, Apollyon, a Beast, a Woman,
an Harlot. 13.17.18. etc. Why a false Prophet, and a Pope. 37. Where he should
sit. 47. and when he should come. 73. 74. etc. Antichrist how he is said to
restore the state of the old Empire. 34 Why he is called Antichristus, and not
Antitheos. 40.41. etc. Antichrist gathers together the dregs of all heresies.
Ibidem Antichrist corrupts not only one point of religion, but all and every
point of Christian doctrine. Ibidem Antichrist vsurps the name of God.49.50.
etc. challenges his power. 53. 54 Why the congregations of Antichrist be called
the Church of God. 67 Why it was requisite to have the state and kingdom of
Antichrist fore-tolde. 5. 6 That the kingdom of Antichrist shall last till the
end of the world. 123 That the kingdom of Antichrist shall be utterly destroyed
by the last coming of Christ. Page 121. 122 Antichrist should sit at Rome.
Page 39 Antichrists kingdom, whether it be to be beaten down with force of
arms 117. etc. Antichrist is no one man. 6. 7. 12. 13 The manner of planting
his kingdom was devilish. 90. 91. That it rose not at a sudden, but by
degrees 92. etc. That it was established by three special means. 97. 98 That
the overthrow of the kingdom of Antich. should proceed from the only breath
of Gods mouth. 98. 120 That the enlargement thereof should be wrought by two
means. 137 That his authority was never generally admitted, without the
gayne-saying of many. Page 104 That not all shall cleave to it, no not when it
preuayleth most. 148. etc. Antichristian doctrine compared with the Gospel.
40. 41. etc. Places of the Apocalypse interpreted concerning Antichrist, 8. 24.
21. of the three Beasts. page 24. etc. Apocalypse and Daniell compared
together. 25 Apparel of the ancient Romans was some-time of two sorts. 39
Apollyon. 16 Apostata, what it means: page 10. 11 Apparel of men and attire
used long ago at Rome. 38 When the beginnings of Antichrists Apostacy began.
86 Arsaces being Captain, the Parthians set themselves in freedom, and
thence their Kings were called Arsacides, page 132. The last of the Arsacides,
by by whom slain. Ibid. Artaxerxes a Persian, having slain Artabanus,
translated the kingdom of the Parthians to the Persians. 132 Athaliricus
playde Rex in Italy. page 114 A place of Augustine touching Antichrist. 18.
and 21
B
Belifarius deposed Silverius Bishop of Rome, upon suspicion of treason. 15
Bernard his judgment of the Pope of Rome and Antichrist. page 19. 20. 44. 55.
64. 103. The three Beasts, mentioned in the Revelation. 23. etc. Under the name
of a Beast, a whole state of things is signified. 15 The second Beast,
signifies the idolatrous Empire of Rome. 23 The first and third Beast signify
one thing. 24 Why Antichrist is likened to a Beast. 17 The number of the Beast
666. comprised in the word Lateinos. 14 The third Beast and Antichrist compared
together. 31. 32. 33 The seven heads, and ten horns of the Beast. 27
Bishops, some-tyme called Popes. 49 Contentions of Bishops, one cause of
establishing Antichrists kingdom. 97. etc. Bishop of Rome accused, for saying
he was not to be judged of any. 105 Bishop universal, who. 50. 51 Bishop of
Rome takes on him the name of God, and challenges to himself his power,
comparing himself to the Sun, and the Emperor to the Moon 54 All the
ancient Bishops of Rome refused the blasphemous title of universal Bishshop,
and who first usurped the same. 52. 53 Why God punished the world with
blindness. 150 Boniface the eight Pope, his ambition. 20 Bishop of Rome his
ambition. 20. 19. covetousness. 20. Idolatry. 21. riot. 21. 22.
C
Caligula would have himself worshipped as a God. 20 Cardinals, the Pope
decreed that they should go before Kings. 20 Their institution. 143 Church,
whether it can err. 11 The true Church is to be measured by the only word of
God. 11 Which is the true Church of God. 69 It can not be gathered which is
the true Church, by succession of persons. 11 There is one Lord and lawgiver
for men's Consciences. 45 Constantine the great commanded the idolatrous
Churches to be shut up. 75 Constantine translated the Empire from Italy, into
Thrace. 25 The counterfayted donation of Constantine. 78 At the last coming of
Christ, the kingdom of Antichrist is to be wholly destroyed. 121 Christians,
whether they may make war against the Papists. 117. 118 A place of
Chrysostom touching Antichrist. 44
D
An hard place of Daniell expounded 226 Dioclesian would needs be worshipped
as God 20 True doctrine to be tried only by the Word of God. 11 Doctrine of the
Papists what. 24 Comparison between their doctrine, and the Gospels. 43. 44
Donatists their error. 73
E
Emperors in number 10. mentioned in the Revel. 13. at what time, and what
Emperor they began. 27 Emperors, their large bounties on the Church of Rome,
was a third cause of strengthening Antichrist. 97. etc. Empire, where it was
chiefly to be seated. 25 Empire idolatrous, how revived by Antichrist. 34.
etc.
F
False Prophet, why Antichrist so called indefinitly. 42 The foretelling of
Antichrist was a famous Prophecy. 41 Form of Roman government, what it was
when the Revelation was written. 35
G
Gensericus king of the Vandalles, surprised Rome. 113 Goths destroyed it
utterly. 63 Gregory the great refused to be called universal Bishop. 52
H
Antichrist compared to an Harlot. 16 Heresies touching the nature and office
of Christ, were the first causes that gave strength to the kingdom of Anti. 97
Harma-geddon, otherwise to be read Geddon-harma. 60 Heads seven which are
attributed to the Roman Empire. ^0 Hierome calls Rome Babylon. 22 Hilarie his
sentence touching Antichrist. 20 Hymenaeus denied the resurrection of the
flesh. 43
J
Image of ye Beast renewed. 34. 35 Idoll-temple shut up by the commandment of
Constantine the great. 75 John Bishopp of Constantinople, called universal
Bishop. 52 John Wickliffe opposed him against the Bish. of Rome. 106 Italica
Ecclesia, some think to be signified by the number 666. 14 Irenaeus, a place
of his touching the number of the Beast. 14
K
Kings, in number 10. mentioned Reuelat. 13. when, and in whom they began. 27
Kings 10. that should eat the flesh of the whore, who they are. 111. Kingdom
of Antichrist to be overthrown by the breath of the Lords mouth. 107. 115
Kingdom of Antichrist planted by deuillish devises, and crept on by little and
little. 90 Kingdom of Antichrist stablished by 3. special means. 97 Kingdoms
the Pope takes upon him to dispose. 53. 54
L
Lactantius a place of his touching the cruelty of Antic. 18 Lactantius
touching the Roman Empire. 77 Lateinos, contains the number of 666. 14
Laws, imposed upon men's consciences by the Pope. 54 Leo the 12. his ambition.
20 Luke a place of his touching Antichrist. 8
M
Magistrates of Rome were of two sorts. 36 Man of sin the Pope. 12 Mass,
when first it began. 84 Mahumet sits not in the temple of God, neither is
properly Antichrist. 43.57 The beginning of Mahumetisme. 88 Mahuzim what it
means in Daniel. 47 A place of Matthew touching Antichrist. 8.13 Mauritius the
Emperor would have John of Constantinople called universal Bishop. 52 Miracles
used to credit Antichrist. 144. etc. Monarchy, none to succeed the Roman.
125 A mystery written in the forehead of the Harlot. 47
N
Name of God usurped by the Pope. 53 Nicholas of Clemingis wrote against the
Papacy. 22 The number of the Beast 666. expounded. 14 Where other words are
named that contain the like number. 81
O
Odoacer surprising Rome, called himself King of Jtalie. 114
P
True Pastors are to be measured by the word of God. 12 Parthians having
Arsaces for their Captain, infranchized themselves into liberty. 132 The
Empire of Parthians translated to the Persians. 132 A place of Paul touching
Antichrist. 1 Pelagius Bishop of Rome, by petition pacified the Tirant Totilas.
102 Peter the Apostle prophesied of his own death. 4 A place of Peter touching
the Popish Clergy. 18 Papa what it signifies, and why Antichrist so called.
48 In what sense the assemblies of the Papists and of Antichrist are called
the Church of God 67 The Papists arguments for themselves and the kingdom of
Antichrist. 153 Comparison between Popery and the Gospel. 40. etc. The
government of Popery what it is. 35 Philetus an Heretic. 43 Phocas an
Emperor and murderer of Mauritius. 85. He caused the Pope to be called
universal Bishop. 52 Priesthood confounded with the kingdom at Rome. 35
Promises of God belong only to the true Church of God. 71 Peter, Paul and
John, had the gift of prophecy. 4 Son of perdition. 16 Power of God usurped
by the Pope. 52
R
Revelation, many places thereof expounded. 8. 14. 21. 23 Resurrection of the
flesh denied by Hymenaeus and Philetus. 43 Rhadagesius king of Goths. 102
Rome, the seat of Antichrist. 40 Rome, how often surprised. 62 At Rome no
place for godliness. 65 Rome poynted out to be the seat of Antichrist. 58.
etc. At Rome the kingdom joined with the Priesthood. 35 Roman Magistrates of
two sorts. 36 Roman manners detestable. 65 Form of Roman government what it
was when John wrote. 35 Roman Empire when first it was translated from Italy
to Constantinople. 26 The two horns of the Roman Empire. 25
S
Salvation to be freely given us of God, the Papists deny. 46 Sarazens, their
first beginning. 131 Schoolmen deny Mahumet to be Antichrist. 57
Schoolmen, their opinion of Antichrist. 93 Servant of servants, Gregory the
great first called himself. 54 Simon denied Christ to become in the flesh. 43
The three spirits mentioned in the Revelation as ministers of Antichrist, what
they be. 140 Siluerius Bishop of Rome suspected of treason, was deposed by
Belisarius. 105 Symachus Bishop of Rome accused, for that he deemed himself
not to be judged of any. 104 Son of perdition the Pope. 16
T
Teias king of Goths wasted Italy. 115 Teitan supposed by Irenaeus to be the
name of Antichrist. 15 Temple of God where Antichrist should sit, what it is.
56 How the congregations of Popery can be called the temple of God. 67
Theodatus king of Goths. 114 Theodoricus king of Goths surprised Rome. 114
Totilas forbad the fiering of Rome. 102 Totilas quite defaced Rome. 114. 115
V
Viguerus his conceit touching Antichrist. 58 Vitiges wasted Italy. 114
W
Weapons whether forbidden Christians by the Gospel. 117 Whether Antichrist be
to be subdued by war. 117. 118 Wickliefe. 106 Why Antichrist is compared to
a woman. 16 Worship of GOD what it was while Italy was Idolatrous. 33
Y
Years 666. expounded. 80. 81 Years 1000. examined. 89
FINIS.

