THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT of the Marquis d'Ancre. TOGETHER WITH HIS
Araignment.

His Obsequies. His Wifes tears on his death.

The Reunion of the King with his men of War.

The rousing of the Soldat Francois.

All declaring the divine judgment of God on the death of the said Marshall
d'Ancre.

Out of the French Copies printed at Paris and Roan.

BY WISDOME^PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston for William Arondell, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard.

1617.

THE DIVINE IVDGEment of God in the death of the Marquis d'Ancre.
OH the just judgments of God! oh profound and incomprehensible counsel of
the Almighty! oh sovereign decree of the divine providence! That man is
unhappily perished, that sought to ouerwhelme us in misery. He that with a
disloy all heart would have procured a tragical end to France, has tragically
ended his days by the hands of true-hearted Frenchmen: and has buried
himself in his own pride, that would have buried the greatness of Princes, and
built an absolute power in the ruins and decay of this perpetual Monarchy.
But what do I say, buried; O wonderful prodigy, O prodigious wonder! That
same man has bin by the people unburied, and deprived of the sweet repose of
the dead, who in his life time had deprived France of a peaceable
tranquillity, has bin ignominiously hung up as a treacherous and calumniating
Haman, on the same erected gallows, which his own natural cruelty and art
of wickedness had ordained for such good Mardocheoses, as undertook to
complain of his tyranny, or to discover the many practices of his treasons
and disloyalty against our King. Moreover, they hung him with his heels
upward, as if his head so monsterously culpable, durst not so much as behold
the* heavens; was with great disgrace and infamy shamefully dragged through
the stinking puddles and dunghils of the City of Paris; he that long since had
drawn upon himself the cords and snares of the divine justice, and who had
infected France with the ordure, corruption and stinking savor of his vices;
he which sought to dismember the body of the State, himself was dismembered
and torn in pieces; was burned and consumed in the flaming fire, who would
have burned and consumed the liberty of the people with the fire of his
violence; his ashes were scattered in the wind, to show the puff of his own
ambition, which was so suddenly turned to ashes. He believed that the bright
sky of his authority was free from any clouds, the clear sun of his
dominion without eclipse, the lightsome day of his glory void of darkness,
the vast sea of his greatness without tempest, the roses of his good fortune
grew without pricks, and that all the felicities of the world were perpetually
to shine upon him: But he suddenly found his authority lost, his dominion
smothered, his glory extinguished, his greatness trodden down, his good
fortunes changed, and felt that his former prosperities, were but a sweet
impoysoned bait of fortune, turned into the gall and bitterness of all mishaps.

He was put to death by the Kings command, that would have commanded the King;
he ended his days with violent death, that violated the respect due unto his
Majesty, violated Justice, violated the laws; and he that was indeed
altogether nothing but violence it self, having climbed so high, that he
could not well be brought low, but by death it self; which Justice confirms,
the Law approves, and equity commands, Right counsels, Reason ordains,
Histories allow, and that precedents teach; and that cannot be taken in evil
part, without contradicting the approbation, authority, commandment,
counsel, ordinance, confirmation, and teaching of the whole world; and to
accuse of iniquity, Justice, law, equity, right, reason, histories, examples,
and all that may be termed vprightnes in the whole universe. The infection of
his life, therefore has been most justly, but yet with too much honor mingled
with his blood, in the midst of his (as I may term the^) Court-gallyslaues;
who did inconsideratly adore the blind Idol of his greatness. Whence may be
learned, that vice never goes unpunished; although to be vicious, of it self
is punishment sufficient. Mounsier de Vitry, most faithful to the King, having
brought both his heart and hand together to the execution of so heroicke an
act, that Histories shall perpetually record to the memory of men, and shall
flow from the pen of the most learned within the Temple of immortality.

No, no, it was not earth, but Heaven had the greatest stroke in his death; it
was the hand of Angels more then men, and the sentence of his tragical end was
first pronounst in Gods counsel, before the King decreed it. By which it may
be gathered, how near this good and wise Monarke is united unto the eternal
God in his mind and soul; seeing that the will of the most High, who holds
the hearts of Princes in his hand, agrees so well with the Kings; and that the
Protector of the whole world, has been well pleased with the desires of this
great King, thereby to manifest his consent unto his wishes. He ended the
course of his life entering into the Louure, where he thought himself so
firmly anchred, that he was never to depart thence; and felt the icie stroke
of death by pistols and fiery weapons, who in the midst of his frostie
cowardice and temeritie, was the kindler and flaming firebrand of sedition;
who with an ardent appetite greedily longed to trouble all France with the fire
of Civil war.

And whereas the sky had bin long before (even in the fairest month in the
year) ouerspread with a gloomie darkness, as being inwardly touched with
remorse of our sensible griefs which ascended thither; seemed to mourn at our
sinister mishaps, and to mingle its continual drops with the bitter tears
which ouerflowed the eyes and hearts of all truehearted Frenchmen, who could
not without extreme grief undergo that unreasonable tyranny; or as if it
would join its moisture together with the blood, which the ouerruling of this
execrable Tyrant caused to be spilt, by a furious and more then Civil war:
even at this instant began it to reassume the brightness of its countenance,
and to cherish the earth with its seasonable mildnes, even at the fearful
image of this man's death, nearly resembling that Herennius who was struck with
lightning, the sky being without clouds, and the air bright and clear; as
if by the calmenes of the weather, the calm of Peace would be represented unto
us, which France is shortly to enjoy, by means of this long wished for death;
and that with his blood he was to extinguish the flames of war, which his
ambition had unhappily kindled; a war that fought against the public peace,
the union of subjects, the joy of friends, the Kings authority, the strength of
Frenchmen, and the good of France; a war that was the motive of many wars,
and such a war whereof his Majesty desired as much to see an end, as of a
war that turned good things into bad, so a peace would have turned bad into
good.

He ended his life in the beginning of a week, as if thereby the heavens did
presage unto us, that his end was to be the beginning of our happiness. Before
moon, in token that we were to re-behold the Eastern part of the Son of
Justice, which was eclipsed by the earth of his avarice, and now began a new to
peep out upon the Horizon of France, in the Orient of the happy reign and
Empire of our good King: whose admirable virtues shall never be seen to set,
and is to reign in all prudence and absolute authority; having rather his
head on his Crown, then his Crown on his head, and his hand rather within his
Scepter, then his Scepter in his hand: and moreover to govern himself by the
grave advice of his best and principal Officers, and so much the rather, for
that by bad counsel, most commonly a great King is made a little one; and
contrariwise by good counsel a petty King is made a great one.

He is confined to the center of death rather in the month of April then
March, in regard that he had no thing in him that was martial or generous;
and could better lay his hands on the Kings coffers and treasure, then on a
sword: and to conclude, was constrained to give up the ghost in the midst of
the spring, in the flower of his age, who was altogether thorns in his heart,
as if the ground were not able to bear any longer, among those pleasant
flowers and fair Flower-deluces, which are displaied in this mild season,
this Cantharide and mortal poison of the Flowers of France.

FINIS.
THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF Sr. CONCHINI DE CONCHINO the late pretended
Marshall of France, brought into the world by one of his Gentlemen, who was
slain near to Nanterre, and appeared unto the Pesant that slew him.

WHEREIN ALSO IS DISCOVRsed the meeting of the said Conchini with Rauiliack, in
form of a Dialogue.

Out of the French Copy.

BY WISDOME^PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Felix Kyngston for William Arondell, at the Angel in Paul's
Churchyard.

1617.

THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF Sr. CONCHINI DE CONCHINO the late pretended
Marshall of France, brought into the world by one of his Gentlemen, who was
slain near to Nanterre, and appeared unto the peasant that slew him.
Wherein also is discoursed the meeting of the said Conchino, with Rauailac, in
form of a Dialogue.

THis very night, about twelve a clock, as I walked in the Moone-light, there
appeared unto me a fearful vision; it was a very tall man, whose head seemed
to look out at the window of a Tower in which he was enclosed, and his feet
appeared beneath it: I was greatly amazed at the first sight of him, having
never seen so strange an Apparition before: nevertheless having somewhat
better advised my self, and considered this Tower, I be thought me, Might not
this be some one of the Conchinies seruitors; for they were accustomed in
fighting to arm themselves with Cittadels. Thereupon I resolved to draw near
unto him, and took a long pole in my hand; which I had no sooner done, but in
a broken voice I understood these words, Stir not, my friend, stir not I
pray thee, will thou twice kill me? By his voice I knew the coward, and said,
Behold, this lusty Champion, who being the other day overthrown, is now
returned again, it boads him no good luck; I came near him and he retired,
(so much are those kind of men used to turn their backs), and would have
shook off his vnweeldy currasse, that compassed him round about, to be so
much the lighter; I ran after him, being assured he was some poor devil of
very little courage, that would thus run away. Then began he to cry aloud,
Down with your weapon, down with your weapon, I threw away my pole that serud
me for a sword, and being near him I said, Whosoever thou be, thy humor is
but base and cullion-like to fear death, having no life at all in thee: but in
a trembling note he answered me, It is the nature of cowards, especially of
rich ones, to fear blows, and avoid quarrels: but said I, let us leave this
talk, and tell me wherefore thou come hither: is it to revenge thy masters
death?

Ghost. No, but he has armed me as thou see, and sent me to the Parisian
Gentlemen, to give them notice, that he has made them Executors of his last
Will and Testament.


Peasant. Wherefore then do thou repair to me, and not to them?


Ghost. I did always fear those men, who have so often hardly dealt with my
master and his servants.


Peasant. But tell me, where is thy Master?


Ghost. He is below, where he breaks, ruins, and makes havoc of all:
saying, he will come and revenge his death, and Cerberus finds much ado to
withhold him.


Peasant. What, thy master then is become a very shrewd fellow.


Ghost. Somewhat more courageous then my self, for he is persuaded that being
once dead, he can be slain no more; therefore was he not very valiant, but he
reserved himself to give the last stroke for Soissons, if others could not
have compassed it, and had very shortly besieged it, had not the river
prevented him. Moreover, did he not always remain in Normandy, expecting
the enemies coming hither to surprise him? besides, he was so good a servant
to the King, that he would never leave his company.


Peasant. But for my part I believe, heloued his Crown better.


Ghost. He made me not privy to all his secrets; but this I can tell you,
that he has already stirred up many wars in hell; yea he attempted to
usurp the very seat of Pluto, and quarrelled a great while with Rauaillack,
for precedence.


Peasant. That name is odious among the French, but there is no remedy, let us
hear the story of it.


Ghost. Upon a time being all assembled, to take some order for the sending
hither of a fury to redeem my mistrisse, he offered to take place before
Rauaillack (for two persons of one humor can never agree together); Rauaillack
maintained that in the world he had done Pluto better service then my master;
that he had killed a great King, and had filled all France with troubles: my
master truly answered, that he indeed began the troubles, but if that himself
had not for many years together carried a great hand in the business, the
peace had soon returned; and though he had not given such a blow, yet his
heart was good enough to do it; for it plainly appeared that he and the King
could not reign together: with other such reasonings that were by Rhadamant
thus determined, that it was to be confessed, that if Rauaillack were taken
for the master, his apprentice would in the end surpass him.


Peasant. O my God, how I fear his return being banished out of hell! which if
it happen, on my faith I Will sell all I have, and go to hell, for I esteem
nothing so great a hell, as to be subject to the power of that Tyrant. These
things are detested by all good-minded French men: I pray thee let us there
leave them, and return we to the cause of thy coming: and first of all let us
hear a word of the estate and fortunes of thy Master.


Ghost. My Master has been raised in this world, from the lowest, to the
highest degree of state; and in hell he argued for precedence with Pluto
himself.


Pesant. It is said, that at best he was but a Gentleman.


Ghost. Yes, if there be any in Florence under the great Duke, his father was
Secretary to his Excellence.


Pesant. And is that nothing?


Ghost. Not in regard of Marshal of France.


Pesant. And his grandfather, was he not a mechanical fellow?


Ghost. Be it so; I may say of him, as was said of an ancient Roman: he was
not made noble by his race, but his race was ennobled by him: to conclude, he
that burned the Temple at Ephesus was never so famous as he.


Pesant. Is his wife as well descended as he?


Ghost. No, she at first was a School mistrisse.


Peasant. I believe it well, for yet she very well loves to play the Mistrisse.


Ghost. But I have heard in hell, that her name Galliga signifies sorrow to
Frenchmen, for Gaya in Italian is sorrow, and the Latin word Gallis is to
Frenchmen. But to return to our purpose, this is his will: First and foremost,
he gives all men to understand, that in dying, God did grant unto him that
grace which he does not to all the world, that is, not to see the devil at the
hour of his death.


Pesant. Truly I believe it: for (as I have heard) he had not so much leisure.


Ghost. Item, he wills and ordains that all his goods be distributed to
each one in this manner: that all and every Castle and strong hold which he
usurped, under color of the Kings will and pleasure, be restored to his
Majesty. Item, to his wife he gives his beauty, because he knows she stood
in need of it* and for her comfort, he hoped to see her shortly: and that to
come to him her way lies by the Greaue. Item, to his son he gives and
bequeatheth the high way to Florence, to walk in, provided always, that it
may be lawful for him so to do. Item, to his brother the one half of his
cowardice, because he was too valiant; and the other half to the regiment of
Normandy.

But now tell me, what has been done here in the world since his death, that I
may report it unto him.


Pesant. A strange metamorphosis, every thing is changed, wars into peace;
thunder, lightening, rain and hail, into fair weather: The dumb speak, and
those that did speak, are taken speechless: he that was taken but for a
child, has appeared to be the most valiant and magnanimious King in the
world, the true son of Henry the Great: and those that erected gallows for
the Kings good servants, are hung thereon themselves.


FINIS.
Phoebus once mounted, Phoebe decline's her state,
Cut-throtes and Thieves are now quite out of date:
Truth's spoken freely, to the shame of liers,
Good men at length have got their long desires.
Upon CONCHINI his descent into Hell.
When Conchini came to Hell,
The Fiends withstood him, and did yell*
And cried out on God amain,
Do not we, here suffer pain
Enough already, in this place?
Where we have no resting space:
In these Caves we (were thou contented)
Enough already are tormented.

