THE PROGENY OF CATHOLICS AND PROTESTANTS. Whereby On the one side is proved
the lineal Descent of Catholics, for the Roman Faith and Religion, from the
holy Fathers of the Primitive Church, even from Christ's very time until
these our days: AND On the other, the neuer-Being of Protestants or their
nouel Sect during all the foresaid time, otherwise then in confessed and
condemned Heretics. And all this is convinced by the manifold and clearest
acknowledgements of Protestant Writers, both foreign and domestics.

By thine own mouth I judge thee, naughty servant.

Luc. 19.22. At ROVEN, By the WIDOW of NICOLAS COVRANT. M.DC.XXXIII.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
I Have ever been of opinion (good Christian Reader) that as nothing in this
world is more pleasing to the eye of a Christian soul, then a pure aspect or
knowledge of the true Church, which is the lovely and most beautiful Spouse of
CHRIST himself, and the only Arc of Man's salvation; so is the same never
more clearly represented unto us, then in the cristallin glass of reverend
Antiquity, the purity and truth whereof was ever so highly esteemed, as that
it was not only required Censorinus de Die Not. c. 1.
by the Lying Gods of the Gentiles, that all the firstlings of the people should
yearly be offered in Sacrifice unto them, but it was further likewise approved
and Exodus 22 29.
prescribed by the only-true and everliving GOD, that the first fruits yea and
the firstborn both of men and beasts, in regard of their primacie being his
worthiest creatures, should peculiarly be applied, offered, and devoted to the
highest service of his Greatest Majesty. In best proof and example whereof the
perfect Coloss. 1.15.
Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of al creature, CHRIST JESUS, was
not only offered to God himself in the Temple, and there redeemed, but also
offered upon the Cross for the Redemption of others, as the sweetest Holocaust
to his Heavenly Father.

Yea this Prioritie or Ancestrie is so specially affected by the wisdom of
God, and so directly maligned by the Enemy of man, as that in the very first
planting of the Church of Christ it is said, that he first sowed Matthew.
13.24.25.
good seed in his field, and after the enemy came, and ouersowed cockle;
thereby not obscurely intimating unto us, that true Faith, Religion, and the
Word of God, which is this Matthew 13.19. Luc. 8.12.
good seed, was first and ancient to Sects and Heresies. And so, as in temporal
Nobility that Stem is most honorable, which is lineally derived from the
ancientest blood; and in earthly possessions that Title strongest, which
pleads longest Prescription or ancientest Evidence; and as also it may not be
denied, but that Truth has precedencie to falsehood, and substance to shadows:
so must it needs be granted or rather supposed as an infallible truth, that
that Ghospel, Faith, and Church, which is first or eldest, is the only true
Ghospel, Faith, and Church of CHRIST, and al other Congregations afterward
arising or going out from thence, are but only the malignant inventions of the
Enemy, who even from the beginning of the world was chiefly ever busyed in
obscuring, perverting, and detorting that, which at first was always created
Genes. 1.31.
very good, very gracious, and most pleasing in the al-seing Eye of the
Omnipotent Maker.

In which respect for the ever finding out of the prime truth in all occurring
difficulties, we are specially forewarned, as to recurre to Antiquity, so to
suspect Novelty. Moses a little before his death desiring to leave some
wholesome documents to the Children of Israel, directs them, saying: Deuteronomy.
32.7.
Remember the old days; think upon every generation; ask thy father, and he
will declare to thee; thy elders, and they will tell thee. In like sort Baldad
(Job's friend) advised him in his greatest extremities, to Job 8.8.
ask the old generation, and search diligently the memory of the fathers; for
we are (says he) but as yesterday, etc. Yea wisest Solomon his advise is:
Eccles. 8 11.12.
Let not the narration of the ancients escape thee; for they learned of their
fathers; because of them thou shall learn understanding, and in time of
necessity to give answer. According to which, God himself by the Prophet
Hieremie teaches: c. 6.16
Stand ye upon the ways, and see, and ask of the old paths, which is the
good way, and walk ye in it, and you shall find refreshing to your souls. So
that the old way is the way of truth; and the same is to be learned by our
Elders and Fathers.

Now of the contrary, God reproves such as Ier 18.15.
walk, etc. in a way not trodden; and Salomon's lesson is, that thou Prou. 22
28.
transgress not the ancient bounds, which thy fathers have put. From whence I
take it to be, that as in the Scriptures our true God is called Dan. 2.23 and
3.26.52. 1. Tim 4 10
the God of the Fathers and of the Faithful, so false Gods and new doctrines
are termed Deuteronomy. 32.17.
New and fresh ones, whom their fathers worshipped not.

Agreably heerunto S. Paul likewise advises S. Timothy 1. Tim. 6.20.21.
to keep the Depositum, avoiding the profane novelties of voices and
oppositions of falsely called knowledge; which certain promising have erred
about the faith: thereby showing profane innovation to be the shipwreck of
faith. Upon which place likewise thus writes that worthy Patron of Antiquity
Vincentius Lyrinensis: lib. aduers proph. nouit.
He said not antiquities, he said not Ancientnes, but profane Novelties. For
if novelty is to be avoided, antiquity is to be kept; if novelty be
profane, ancientnes is holy and sacred. And again: This with all Heresies is
as it were solemn and allowed, that in profane novelties they may always
rejoice, and scorn the decrees of Antiquity: But on the contrary, to
Catholics this is almost proper, to keep the things left and committed by
holy Fathers, and to condemn profane novelties etc. Whereupon he says of
Nouelists: What do they promise but new and unknown doctrine? For you may
hear some of them to say: Come, o you foolish and wretched, who commonly are
called Catholics, and learn the true faith, which none but we do know, which
for many former ages lay hid, but now of late is revealed and shown etc. Are
not these the words of that Drab? says Vincentius.

But indeed it was ordinary with the ancient Fathers to confute Heretics by
their own Innovation. So Tertullian upon this ground reproves the Nouellists
of his time for their then usurping and intruding by their latter vpstart
doctrine upon the then more ancient Catholic possession, saying to that end
unto them: De Prescrip. c. 37.
Who are you? When, and from whence came you? What do you in my [grounds] not
mine? By what right [Marcion] do thou cut down my woods? By what license
[Valentine] do thou overthrow my fountains? etc. It is my possession; long
since I possessed it; I possessed it first. Yea he prescribes in general lib.
cont. Prax.
that to be true, which is first; that false, which is later.

Answerably unto which writes S. Hierome of the Luciferians: Cont. Lucifer fin.
In this that they are afterward begun, they show themselves to be those,
which the Apostle foretold were to come, to wit, Heretics; of whom he
demands further: Ep. ad Pamach. et Ocean.
Why do you go about after 400. years to teach that, which we knew not
before? until this day the world was Christian without that doctrine. With
whom agrees S. Gregory Nazianzen saying: Ep 2. ad Chelid.
They tell us (as Protestants still do) of a wisdom hidden since Christ; a
thing deserving tears. For if Faith began within these 30. years, seeing
almost 400. years (and as I may now say 1600. years) are past, since Christ
was openly known, so long then was the Ghospel in vain, in vain also our
faith, in vain Martyrs suffered death, in vain also such and so great Bishops
did govern the people.

From this very Argument of Innovation S. Athanasius confuteth the Arians in
these words: de Decret Nycen. Synod.
Behold, we have proved this doctrine to have been delivered to us from fathers
to fathers: But you (new Jews, and the sons of Caiphas) what progenitors of
your name are you able to show? Of whom also says S. Hilarie: Lib. 6. de
Trin. ant. med.
This our fourth Age has brought forth over late for me these [pretended] most
godly Doctors.

S. Austin writing against Donatus up braydeth his new or late birth in this
manner: Lib. 3. de Bap cont. Donat. c. 2.
From whence has Donatus appeared? Out of what earth has he budded? From what
sea has he swum? From what heaven has he fallen? And he obiecteth thus unto
the Manichees: de Vtilitate Cred. c. 14.
But you being so few, so turbulent, and so new, every man knows, you can
produce nothing worthy of credit. In like sort writing against the Pelagians
he urges Cont. Julian. Pelag. l. 2 c. l.
that Christian people ought to prefer the sayings of Saints before your
profane Novelties, and rather choose to adhere to them, then to you. Yea
Cassiodorus relates, that the Divine. Instit lib. 1. p. 11.
most holy Fathers not suffering the true Faith to be wronged, ordained
Ecclesiastical Rules in the Council of Chalcedon, striking with the Divine
sword (of Excommunication) the obstinate Inuentours of new Heresies; And,
Decreing that none ought to bring-in new questions; but content with the
authority of the old approved Doctors, should obey the wholesome Decrees
without deceit and falsehood; for there are some, who think it commendable, if
they can conceive any thing against the ancient (writers) and invent something
new, whereof they may be deemed skilful. But I will conclude this with this
sweetest saying of S. Bernard: Ep. 174.
Against the custom of the Church nothing at al will please me presumed
Novelty, the mother of Temeritie, the sister of Superstition, and the daughter
of Leuitie. What I have received from the Church, I securely deliver. So secure
it is, in all arising difficulties to recurre to Antiquity, and to eschew
Novelty.

And as thus we have seen from Scriptures and Fathers the special account ever
made of reverend Antiquity or Ancestrie, and the sharp reprehensions of
profane Novelty: so are there none, who seem more joyfully to applaude and
approve the force of the foresaid Argument, then the learned Protestants of
these our days: amongst whom for brevity in a Case so manifest to produce
only one of our own domestics, who for his supposed worth in judgment and
learning may suffice for many, D. Morton affirms Appeal for Protestants p.
s 11. See also White in the Way to the Chur. Pref. to the Reader n. 17.
that our Savior Christ by his Parable of the diverse seeds, first wheat in
the day, and then tares in the night, does teach us, that Truth may challenge
prioritie of Error yealding principality unto Truth, says Tertulian, and
posterity unto lying. And so it must needs be; because as there must be first
iron, before there can be rust, which canckereth the iron; so must there be a
virgin-truth before error, which is nothing else but an adulteration thereof.
So that Primum and Verum, that is, primarie Antiquity and Truth are both
inseparable twins, begot and bred in the same instant. And again Ibid p. 512.
But tell us, what is Novelty? When the Apostle exhorted his Timothy to keep
that, which was committed unto him, and to take heed of profane Novelties, he
did in effect instruct him to preserve the doctrine received, not to suggest
any doctrines newly conceived, as says Lyrinensis, who accounts it
(according unto Salomon's description) a whorish trick, to call any out of the
ancient and beaten way, and to say, Come unto me. In like sort Ibid p. 679.
As it becomes the children of God, who commanded that the firstborn even of
the woman that was hated, should be respected before the younger son of the
beloved wife, we, albeit hated by our Romish Adversaries, yet only desire, that
they would hold (as S. Chrysostom teaches) (...), that is, every Novelty a
vanity; and in all Controversies suffer the firstborn to find a
pre-eminence, by preferring each doctrine according unto the prime antiquity.

Now in this desire of preferring Antiquity, al Catholics most joyfully will
join hands with M. Doctor Morton, desiring nothing more, then that al
Questions at this day controuerted between the Roman Church and the Protestant
Congregation might strictly be examined and finally decided by the square of
Antiquity. And for this cause have I compiled this Treatise following,
intending thereby to set down the true Progeny both of Catholics and
Protestants, from what Ancesters they are lineally descended, and of what
continuance their names and families have formerly been. And although the guard
and strength of Truth in this point of Antiquity is ever such, that she
rests still accompanied, attended, and fortified with surest friends,
strongest towers, and best munition, yet never may she repose in greater quiet,
or more gloriously appear with greater honor, then when her sovereign right,
titles, and prerogatives are plainly admitted, granted, and acknowledged by the
sworn and professed enemies of Truth. And yet, according to that of S. Austin,
Cont. Donatist. post. collat c. 24.
Truth is more forcible to wring out confession, then any rack or torment.

No wit of man can find out Arguments more conuincing in themselves the truth
of Religion, then the plain Texts and literal sense of holy Writ, the
infallible decrees of the Church and General Councels, the unanimous consent of
ancient Fathers and Histories, and often the common light of Nature and Reason
itself; yet ad hominem (as the Schoolmen term it) and for the final
prevention of al further Plea, shifts, and euasions in the Adversary, no
course more speedy, no victory more certain, no objection more unanswerable,
then the plain, simple, and sincere confession of the Adversary himself.

In Civil and temporal differences concerning lands and possessions, very
forcible and hopeful are the Arguments drawn from the ancient and authentical
Evidences, from lawful and uninterrupted Prescription, from the plain and
literal word and sense of the Law, from the swarming consent of Judges and
Council learned, and from sufficient testimony of most credible aad approved
witnesses; yet not one, no nor al of these jointly concurring, are any thing
so potent for the speediest and surest decision of the Cause, as the free
acknowledgement and assent of the Adversary, only enforced through the rack of
clear and undeniable Truth.

So Moses having sundry ways proved the Goodness and Power of God Almighty
above the Gods of the Gentiles, urges as the strongest argument, that the
Gentiles his Deuteronomy. 32.31.
Enemies are also Judges in his behalf. Which course likewise observed S. Paul
against the Idolatrous Athenians, urging to the same purpose the authority of
their own Act. 17.28.
Poets; and against the Cretensians he argues, that Tit. 1.12.
one of them said, their own proper Prophet: The Cretensians always liars,
naughty beasts, slouthful bellies. This testimony (says S. Paul) is true.

But this kind of reasoning learned this blessed Doctor from his best Master
Christ our Savior, who at the last day will urge as the clearest proof against
the Naughty servant his own confession, saying: Luc. 19.22.
By thine own mouth I judge thee, naughty servant. Yea this kind of victory
as most glorious in itself, and most disgracious to the enemy, God himself
used against his own enemies, when he caused the Madianit^s Judges 7.22.
with their own swords to murder one another; as also against the Egyptians,
when he said: Esaias 19.2.
I will make the Egyptians to run together against the Egyptians; and a man
shall fight against his brother, and every man against his friend, city
against city, kingdom against kingdom. A confusion and ruin, then which
none greater. So likewise when the Amalachite had confessed to David, that he
had killed Saul, David commanded him to be slain saying: 2. Reg. 11.16.
Thy blood be upon thine own head; for thine own mouth has spoken against
thee saying: I have slain the anointed of our Lord.

And as the Prophets and Apostles thus affected this kind of Argument, so was
it still pursued by the ancient Fathers. So S. Ireneus disputing sundry ways,
how God the Son reuealeth unto us his Father, affirms Aduers Haeres. l. 4.
c. 14.
that it is necessary, that the truth receive testimony from al etc. from
domesticals, because they are friends; from externals, because they are
enemies; for that proof is true and without contradiction (says he) which
produces testimony from the Adversaries themselves. Agreably said Nouatian
(whilst he was Catholic) Firm is that kind of proof De Trinit. c. 18.
which is taken even from the adversaries of truth. S. Augustine endeavoring to
prove against the Jews, that some that lived before Christ's time were saved
that were not Jews, affirms that li 18. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 47.
nothing is stronger to convince al others, if they shall contend heerof, or to
confirm ours, if they shall conceive aright, then that ^hese divine Prophecies
concerning Christ be produced, which are written in the books of the Jews
themselves.

Tertulian avouches, that In Apologet.
none will lie to his own shame, but rather for his honor; and that therefore
more credit is to be given to such as deny in behalf of themselves. And Tullie
urges his Adversary, saying: Orat. P. Quint.
Thy testimony, which in another man's cause is small worth, against thyself is
weighty. So that the Argument drawn from the confession of the Adversaries is
the proof most conuincing against the Adversary himself.

A truth so clear, that none more fully acknowledge the same, then our modern
Protestants, amongst whom writes D. Morton thus: Appeal Ep. Ded.
Which kind of assistance of learned Adversaries the Apologists themselves have
laid down for the greatest reason of satisfaction; and we do accordingly
admit. For if it be held an excellent point of Physic, Ex vipera theriacum, to
turn poison into an antidote against poison; and in God accounted a high
degree of vengeance, to turn the Egyptians against the Egyptians; and in
David celebrated as a principal matter of triumph, to cut of Goliath his head
with his own sword; and in Christ observed as an unanswerable kind of
conviction, to judge the evil servant from his own mouth; and acknowledged in
S. Paul as the most expedite means of confutation in the men of Crete, to
oppose against them their own Poet, whom he calls their Prophet; then may
we justly presume better of our cause, wherein our Romish Adversaries will prove
our rightful Aduocats. For it must needs be acknowledged (say other Academ. Ne
men's. Resp. p. 84.
Protestants) for a great piece of work, to convince the Adversary from
himself. In like sort says D. Whitaker: De Eccles. Contr. 2 q 5. p. 366
Bellarmine makes the confession of the Adversaries to be the Thirteenth Mark
(of the Church) Surely the argument must needs be strong, which is taken from
hence etc. For the testimony of the Adversaries will be effectual against
themselves etc. And truly I do acknowledge, that Truth enforces testimony
even from her enemies etc. With him agrees D. Field saying: Of the Church. p.
182.
The next Note, whereby Bellarmine endeavors to prove the Romish Synagogue
to be the true Church of God, is our own confession. Surely if he can prove,
that we confess it to be the Church, he needs not to use any other
arguments.

Common Places. Part. 2 p. 329.
Doubtless (says Peter Martyr) among al testimonies, that testimony is of
greatest account, which is testified by the enemies. Peace of Rome. Ep. Dedic.
fol. 1.
I offer to your Highness (says M. Hal) their fight against themselves, and
therein for us. What can be more advantage to us, or shame to them? One blow of
an enemy dealt to his brother, is more worth then many from an adverse hand.
Al our Apologies cannot hurt them so much, as their own divisions. And M.
Cook acknowledges, that the testimony (15) of a friend against a friend, In
his Pope Ioane. Pref. And see Dilingam cont. Bellarm. ep. Dedic.
and of an enemy for an enemy, is invincible. Lastly our late and most
liberal Writer D. Beard avouches Retractiue from Romish Religion p 149. see
White in the Way to the Chur. Pref. to the Reader. n. 18.
that Truth like a chaste matrone, though it be slandred, yet is so bold and
powerful, that it fears not to be tried by those that are the greatest
enemies thereof.

Now this kind of invincible and unanswerable argument have I specially chosen
and pursued throughout this Treatise following, as well thereby to take the most
speedy and surest course for the final deciding of Controversies, as also
clearly to prevent the endless shifts, euasions, and deceipts, so generally and
so cunningly practiced by all kind of Sectaries. For who would not think, but
that any man of judgment and learning diligently perusing the large and
learned Works but only of Cardinal Bellarmine and Iodocus Coccius, men so
studious, payneful, and sincere in describing the pedigree of the Church of
Christ, but that he would easily see, judge, and confess the ancient primitive
Church, Faith, and Religion, the most approved General Councels, and learned
Doctors, the most authentical Records, Histories, and Monuments of those
purest times, al of them to testifye, to depose, and confirm the self-same
Truth, Faith, and Religion, which the present Roman Church at this day
believes, practices, and professes? And yet what a world of tricks,
fallacies, and inventions has the Enemy suggested to our modern Heretics,
for the blemishing and obscuring of that clearest glass of the Primitive
Church, wherein our present Roman is so lively represented? Who would think it
equal to oppose a dark and casual saying of S. Austin (for example) against his
known practice and labored proof to the contrary? And who would not blush to
oppose S. Austin (to his fowlest disgrace) as contrary to himself? What more
desperate course can be taken, then to censure his most certain writings for
counterfeit, because they contradict and confute their impious Novelties? What
greater schism can be raised against the Church, then to pretend her chiefest
Bishops, Doctors, and Pastors in the chiefest articles of Faith to be at
mutual and deadly wars amongst themselves? What more audacious temeritie and
base ingratitude can Malice itself offer to those our so noble Progenitors,
then to alter and corrupt their learned writings, which as clearest evidences
for the Catholic Faith they bequeathed to Posterity? And yet these and many
more then these are the ordinary Sophismes of our late Sectaries. For the
surest and final prevention of al which, what shorter or more expedite course
can I take, then (Protestants for example appealing to the Primitive Church,
and her Doctors and Pastors) to produce themselves confessing al these to be
their Enemies, and the Teachers and Patrons of Papistrie? How more unanswerably
can I convince, that S. Austin believed and taught our Catholic doctrine of
Purgatory, and Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, then if sundry Protestants
of greatest knowledge and reading, not believing the same doctrine themselves,
do yet acknowledge and reprove the same in S. Austin? Now whether in this
Treatise following I perform this, and that by the confessions not of few, or
of those of the least esteem, but of very many, and those of the primest
Protestants that are or ever were, and these not only reproving S. Austin, but
with him S. Ambrose, S. Gregory, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Leo, S.
Epiphanius, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Gregory Nyssen, S. Cyril, S. Hilarie, S.
Basil, S. Cyprian, S. Ireneus, S. Ignatius, S. Dionisius, and the rest of the
most renowned Doctors of the purest and most approved times, and this not only
in the Doctrine of Purgatory, but in all the points of chiefest weight; I remit
myself wholly to the seuerest Censures of al Judicious and Diligent Readers.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE. TO M. DOCTOVR MORTON SVPERINTENDENT OF LICHFIELD AND
COVENTRIE.
GOOD M. Doctor, As yourself were occasionally the principal motour for me to
compose this Treatise following, so have several reasons since summoned
themselves to my serious thoughts, for the further presenting of the same unto
you. For who now more renowned in the new English Church for his supposed
learning, then yourself? Who more paynefully has labored for the promoting of
the Protestant Ghospel, then D. Morton? Who higher advanced merely for the
former respects from his lowest fortunes, then the Superintendent of Lichfield?
And therefore I cannot but expect, tbat your kind acceptance will afford some
luster unto it, at least in the eyes of your illuminated Brethren. Whereof I
rest also very confident, in that the method generally observed therein, by
concluding my intent from the confession of my Adversaries, is the course
specially affected and studied by yourself in all your writings, which cannot
but beget some better liking in your settled judgment thereof.

But that indeed, Sir, which did chiefly induce me above the rest both to
compile and dedicate this Work, as you see, was your Appeal for Protestants
made in answer to the Protestants Apology for the Roman Church. For having
diligently perused and examined this our Apology, and finding the Arguments
there framed to be most concluding, the testimonies produced to be most
pertinent, and all this ever to be backed and strengthened with the answerable
acknowledgements of Protestants themselves, I must confess, my thirsting
curiosity was such, as that neither my thoughts nor desires were at rest,
until with like diligence I had perused and examined your Protestants Appeal.
Which finding to be such, as I will shortly describe, I was hence encouraged, to
make yet further use of the foresaid Apology, conioyning therewith some
labors of my own in that kind; which as I desire they may be profitable to
al, so to yourself most earnestly I wish.

And so now briefly to discover to yourself and al other judicious Readers the
manner of your answer used throughout your whole Appeal, M. Brierlie, a
Catholic Roman Priest, presuming to present unto his Majesty of Great
Britanie our Sovereign Lord King James, his humble Petition in behalf of the
Catholics of England, so grievously pressed and persecuted, during the Reign
of Q. Elizabeth his late Predecessor, amongst innumerable Motives, which as so
many darts would presently wound a heart so sensible of his Subjects miseries,
injuries, and oppressions, he specially selected the sweetest harmony and most
pleasing concord in matters Divine and Celestial, between the Ancient,
Apostolic, and Catholic Faith of the Primitive Church of Christ, and our
present Roman; nothing doubting, but that the bare presenting of the lovely
face of so gray Antiquity would timely beget in so generous and noble a Mind
an immouable love and liking to al her true heirs and lawful posterity.

But M. Brierlie further knowing the malignant Enemy his ordinary imposture,
in sending forth Emissaries for the dazeling and deluding of the best aspects,
in prevention thereof and al other imaginable deceit in that kind, the self-same
Emissaries, his greatest enemies, he specially picked for his chiefest
Aduocats; strangely, but indeed most strongly affecting the equity of his
Cause to be finally decided by no other Judge then the Adversary thereof. For
whereas the indubitate writings of the ancientest Fathers, the sacred Decrees of
al General Councels, the credible Histories of al times and places, the surest
records of al Laws and Countries, yea al monuments of greatest Antiquity do
jointly contest and depose, not only for the universal and uninterrupted
continuance of our Roman Faith from Christ's very time until the Date heerof,
but also for the sympathy or rather Identitie of our same Faith with the Faith
of the Apostles and their first Disciples: M. Brierlie often observing al these
our honors and helps to have been so strangely defaced, blemished, and
obscured by the art and malice of the foresaid Emissaries, as that their true
face and beauty were never suffered to be seen or known to vulgar Protestants,
purposely therefore forbear, to present Antiquity only in her native colors,
and chiefly to rest contented with that stained dye and luster, which the
Protestant pencil, through her clearest splendor, durst not deny her;
producing to that end the plentiful and clearest testimonies of almost all the
primest Writers, that ever Protestancie brought forth, al of them as it were
conspiring in flat charging, reproving, and impugning the learned Doctors
and most renowned Bishops of the eldest and purest times for the self-same
doctrines and practice of Religion, which the Roman Church at this day
exercises.

Now supposing M. Brierlie his sincere and faithful demeanor heerin, what
could the wit of man produce more palpable and concluding for our foresaid
harmony with the Primitive Church? For if the volumes of Fathers and Councels
be so clear in themselves for our Catholic, Roman, and Papistical Faith, that
the learned Protestans most plainly studying and perusing the same, are
finally enforced through evidence of their words and deeds to acknowledge and
reprove the self-same Doctors and Bishops for Roman Catholics, then M.
Brierlie his desire and intent of proving our Roman Faith and Church to
continue most agreeable with the Primitive Faith and Church of Christ and his
Apostles is fully accomplished.

And that M. Brierlie his candor may more clearly shine, and his so
unanswerable Arguments be the better conceived, I will therefore dispel those
thick clouds, wherewith yourself (M. Morton) has most painefully labored to
cover or darken the foresaid brightness. What then must we expect from you for
an Answer pertinent, and direct, and as proceeding from a judicious and learned
Doctor, yea from a Minister of simple truth, but either ingenuously to
confess with the Puritans and so many your other Protestant Brethren cited by
M. Brierlie, that the said Primitive and purest Church of Christ was one and
the same for Faith and Religion with our now Roman: or else that M. Brierlie
had cunningly corrupted, maimed, and defaced the sayings and writings of your
foresaid Brethren in his own behalf. If you seeing the first to be most true
would have honestly subscribed thereunto, as many more learned Protestants then
yourself had formerly done, then your Answer or Appeal had been altogether
needles. The second you durst not avouch, knowing right well, that M. Brierlie
his affected nicenes and precisenes in so particularly quoting his Adversaries
Books, Chapters, Pages, lines or letters would over strongly contest for his
Religious integrity, industry, and fidelity in handling the same.

What then is imaginable for you (M. Doctor) to answer against such pregnant
testimonies of other Protestant Doctors? Nothing at al, but what M. Brierlie
foresaw, and accordingly premonished (and whereof yourself also takes notice in
the beginning of your Appeal) would be only trifeling, unworthy, extrauagant,
and impertinent.

As first, when your other Brethren are plentifully produced confessing and
reproving the Fathers for teaching our Roman Faith, yourself often very
honestly join with them, acknowledging the same in our behalf, and against
yourself; so that in this Case in steed of Answer or Appeal you make a strong
Apology for M. Brierlie and the Romish Church. Do not you yourself speaking
of the Antiquity of our Doctrine concerning the Popes Primacie confess and
say: Prot. Apol. p. 72.
Be it granted (for so it is) that the Papal Primacie, beginning in Boniface
the Third, is now 900. years old? Do you not arise and write of S. Gregory,
that Ibid. p. 31.
whether or how far etc. S. Gregory did reach his arm of Jurisdiction beyond
his Dioces, is a question, by reason of his diverse obscure speeches and some
particular practices, diversely answered of our (Protestant) Authors? Do you
not charge S. Leo to have been in this respect Ibid p. 283 285.
peremptory and ambitious; and that he was so Ib. 294. 295.
peremptory, that for his presumption he found in his time brotherly checks?
Yea do you not confess, that certain Ib. 294. 295.
Sentences of S. Cyprian may seem at their first view unto the inexpert Reader
to observe in the Church of Rome both a Grace of impossibility of erring, and
also a prerogative of the Mother Church of al others? But though yourself may
be deemed an Expert Reader, yet no otherwise do you euade those cleerest
sentences, then by affirming, that such like speeches are but the languages of
Rhetorical Amplification, which commonly the Fathers use by way of persuasion
rather then by asseueration. And seeing you admit that the Fathers did commonly
use such speeches by way of persuasion, you must needs admit, that they being
holy and learned men did also believe and affirm the same. Yea you approve
such Ib. page 300.
Protestant Authors as reprehe^d Victor for arroga^cie and transgressing the
bounds of his Jurisdiction in Exco^municating the Churches of Asia. Lastly,
whereas in proof of Antichrist's short reign Ib. page 143.
M. Brierlie produces M. Fox teaching, that almost all the holy and learned
Interpreters do by a time, times, and half a time, understand only three
years and a half; affirming further this to be the consent and opinion of
almost all the ancient Fathers; Do not you likewise subscribe thereunto and say:
Ib page 144.
Now therefore, etc. why might not these Fathers be said to have erred in
prefining the time of Antichrist? etc. So that you are enforced to confess,
that in the Fathers opinions al our precedent Popes are cleared from being
Antichrists.

In like sort concerning Unwritten Traditions, you grant that S. Gregory uses
Ib. page 62.
to confirm some things by Tradition; and that the ancient believing Jews Ib
page 377.
pretended unwritten Traditions. As teaching Purgatory and Prayer for the
Dead, you reprove S. Gregory touching, that Ib page 19. 20.
the Sacrifice of the Altar is profitable for the Souls departed. And again
Ib p. 498.
S. Austin speaks with a Peradventure; but S. Gregory kindled the fire with
a Credo. But you somewhat passed Peradventure, when you writ that Protestant
Ib. page 495.
Authors have observed S. Augustine to have been the first, who opened the
window unto the doctrine of Purgatory, by whose own direction (say you) we
have a good warrant to dissent from him.

You further admit, that Invocation of Saints was the doctrine Ib page 27.
of S. Gregory; and that his Ib page 28.
not suffering Images to be broken, when there was so public and general
Idolatry committed with them, seemed unto (your) Osiander although not a
direct, yet an occasional approving of Idolatry, or rather a cloaking thereof.
Yea you admit further, that Ib page 586.
about the four hundredth year Images erept out of private men's houses, and
went into the public churches standing there. And as for Relics, you Ib page
583.
wish that Hierome had been a Vigilantius in the case of the Relics of Saints.

You further affirm, that the Ib page 38.
Apologists do truly object, that Osiander noted S. Gregory to have been a
vehement vrger of single life in the Clergy. You confess, that Ib page 604.
Vigilantius and Iouinian are condemned for impugning the unmarried life of
Priests; and that the Ib. page 480.
Council (of Nice) restrayneth them from marriage, who were unmarried, when
they entered into Orders; And Ib. page 88.
we find (say you) that the Age next abutting upon the Apostles time did
practice a perpetual vow of Virginity. You likewise avouch, that Ib page 46.
Monachisme is a state of life greatly commended by S. Gregory, who had been
himself a Monk. And speaking of ancient Ib page 89.
Votaries, you write that the Apostle requires in his widows the age of three
score years; and after times would not admit Virgins under 25. years old, nor
veyled Nuns til forty; for which you cite several Councels.

As touching the Fast of Lent, you write: Ib page 303.
This Fast we confess was of great antiquity, and etc. had in general use and
observation; which S. Ambrose teaches to have been ordained by the Divine
institution of Christ. And Ib. page 04.
S. Augustine does sometimes write of the forty days Fast, that it has a
Divine authority. And where other Protestants do charge us with the Heresies
of the Manichees and Tatianists for abstaining from certain meats upon
prescribed days Ib page ^00.
yourself does clear us and defend us therein; as also against the Heresy of
the Manichees Ib page 139. 140.
Communicating under one kind. And as concerning Ceremonies, you avouch that
Ib. page 53.
in the innouating and multiplying of new Rites Gregory himself was not the
least agent. And Ib. page 58.
Be it known to al our Adversaries, that the too many Ceremonies used by
Gregory cannot excuse their now far more multitudes; nor can some of his not
good etc. You charge him further to have used Ibid. p. 53.
Superstitious manner of Consecration of Churches; In which Ibid. p. 57.
he indeed requires lights. And as for Holie-water, you say, that Ibid. p. 5^.
true it is, that Aqua lustralis was used, but etc. as an invention of Pope
Alexander, who lived An. 109. And it was applied in the days of Gregory by
Augustine to the Consecration of Churches, together with Prayers for the
casting out of the filth of Idols and Devils. And so likewise concerning the
mingling of water with wine in the Chalice Ibid. p. 142.
you refer this new Romish custom unto (the said) Pope Alexander the
supposed author thereof.

Lastly as touching Free Will, you acknowledge, that Ibid. p. 201. 201.
Protestants have particularly and by name observed, that Justinius, Ireneus,
Clemens, Tertulian, Origin, Cyprian, and others, albeit many times they
pleaded for the Free Will of the corrupt nature of man etc. Thus not being able
to give other answer, yourself confess with M. Brierlie, that our Catholic
doctrines of the Pope's primacie, of the Pope not being Antichrist, of
unwritten Traditions, of Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, of Invocation of
Saints, of Images, Relics, of the unmarried life of Priests, of Monks and
Nuns, of the Fast of lent, of mingling water with wine in the Chalice, of
Consecration of Churches, of lights in Churches, of Holie-water, and Free Will,
were al of them taught in the times of the Primitive Church of Christ; and that
not by any infamous and condemned Heretics, but even by the clearest Lamps of
those Ages, namely by S. Gregory, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Leo,
S. Cyprian, Justinius, Tertulian, Origin, Victor, Alexander, Clemens, Ireneus,
the Council of Nice, the 3. of Carthage and others. And so to conclude this
first observation, you see yourself, that in steed of Answer you make a good
Apology for the Roman Church.

But to leave this your so plain dealing, and to come to some of your more
slipperie tricks: whereas M. Brierlie obiecteth sundry Protestant Writers
confessing and reproving the Fathers of the Primitive Church for the self same
points and conclusions of Faith, which the Roman Church now believes and
practices; you for your easiest answer most commonly pass over al or most of
the said Testimonies with deepest silence, not answering any thing at al unto
them; so that as unanswerable you concealed them in your Answer. But what child
or Idiot professing Arianisme, Pelagianisme, Donatisme, or the like, might not
with like facility have answered all the books and proofs made by S.
Athanasius, S. Augustine, S. Hilarie, and other learned Doctors against the
foresaid heresies? Now to give you example heerof, even in the first entrance
M. Brierlie in his 1. Section intending to prove that the Faith of S. Gregory,
and whereunto England was converted by S. Austin, was the same with our now
Catholic Faith, confirms the same by the testimonies and grants of D.
Humfrie, Osiander, the Centurie-writers of Magdeburg, D. Fulk, Daneus, M.
Harrison, and M. Bale, the three first instancing the same by many particular
points of Religion, and the rest confessing in general, that our Conversion by
S. Gregory and S. Austin was to Popery or the Papistical faith; Now all this
being comprehended by M. Brierlie his Book within the compass of less then
one quarter of a sheet of paper, you spend in answer thereto above 60. pages,
and yet in never one thereof do you fully and directly answer to any of your
said Authors cited against you, yea some of them you do not so much as mention
or take the least notice of; and the like might I show throughout your whole
Book.

At other times you admit, that the Protestant Writers alleged by M. Brierlie
did indeed reprove the Fathers for several points of Papistrie; but therewith
you are displeased, and oppose yourself against your own dear Brethren,
charging them to have done the same without just cause, and with greatest wrong
and injury to the said Fathers. But now you go by the ears with very many
Protestants, no less, if not more, renowned, then yourself. And what man of
ordinary sense and reason will not give more credit to many of the primest
Protestants, inhabiting several nations, through evidence of truth, thus
writing and confessing against themselves, and in behalf of Catholics, then to
you, M. Morton, through want of good conscience or solid judgment, impugning
the truth and your more ancient and learned Protestants?

Again, you being unable directly and punctually to answer the foresaid
testimonies of your Brethren acknowledging and reproving the Fathers for
teaching our Catholic Faith, you think to bleare the eye of an ignorant
Reader, by obiecting sundry sayings of the said Fathers, as making against
those several points of Faith, for which they were formerly confessed by other
Protestants; and this is an ordinary shift throughout your whole Book. But
yet this does less satisfye then all the rest; for first if the other
Protestants perusing the Fathers writings, no doubt with as great diligence as
yourself has done, had found such pregnant places in behalf of themselves, as
you now pretend, they would never have written and diuulged the direct
contrary thereof to the utter ruin of their Cause and the eternal shame of
themselves. Besides, sundry Protestants citing several Texts of the Fathers as
making for Papistrie, and you here alleging several others as impugning the
same and making for Protestancie, what should this infer, but that the
Doctors and Bishops even of the Primitive Church should make mutual
contradiction and wars amongst themselves in the chiefest articles of our
Christian Faith and Religion? yea, which is more absurd, it would further
conclude one and the same Father, S. Austin (for Example) to be contrary to
himself; for as you do here often allege him in proof of several particulars
of your new Reformed Faith, so do many Protestants produce him as impugning
the said particulars. Now what more gross absurdity can be uttered, then that
S. Austin not in one but in many points of Faith should thus contradict
himself? Lastly such sayings of Fathers as you here produce in behalf of
yourself, are but the known objections made and answered by Cardinal Bellarmin
and other Catholic Writers.

M. Brierlie affecting through his whole Book to confirm and convince his
wished intent by the clearest testimonies of his Protestant Adversaries, you
will needs follow the same course, producing in that behalf the plentiful
sayings of our Catholic Writers; but with a double difference, your Conscience
well knew. For first M. Brierlie alleged such Protestants as for learning and
judgment were most renowned and respected through the whole Protestant Church;
such were Luther, Melancthon, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Chemnitius, the
Centurists, Calvin, Beza, Whitguift, Bale, Whitaker, Jewel, Humfrie, Reynolds,
Parkins and sundry such others. Secondly, these Protestants he produces as
confessing the Fathers to agree with us Catholics, not only in matters of
dispute, indifferency, or such as are not yet determined by the Church or
General Council, but even in the chiefest and most important Articles and
Conclusions of Faith, controuerted at this day between Catholics and
Protestants.

Now as for the Catholic Writers alleged by you, M. Morton, a great part of
them are such as for their known errors have their writings already censured
and condemned by their Mother Church; such were Erasmus, Valla, Cassander,
Nilus, Agrippa and such like; and from these only do you fetch such
testimonies as concern matter of some moment; for as for other approved
Catholic Writers, as S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, Lombard, Scotus, Bellarmine,
Sanders, Allen, Parsons, and innumerable others, though you cite them often,
yet never as denying any one Article or Conclusion of Faith, defined at any
time by the Church of Christ, but only as dissenting amongst themselves in
matters disputable and indifferent; nor ever as confessing the Fathers of the
Primitive Church to make for Protestants in matters of Faith, as now
controuerted between them and Catholics.

And as for the testimonies gathered from the former and worser rank of
Catholics, they can nothing prejudice our Catholic Cause. For first, as
before, their errors and books are censured, condemned, and prohibited by
that very Church, wherein they were Baptized or first became Christians, to
wit, the Roman. Secondly, most of the said Authors finally recanted their
errors, submitting themselves and their writings to the Censure of the
Catholic Church. And lastly, as it may not be denied, but that in the State
Politic the Prince with his Council may justly punish, censure, and correct
such men with their errors, as shall seek to innouate in any thing against
the former received and established laws of the whole kingdom; so much more
is the like iustifyable, expedient, and necessary in the Spiritual government
of the Church of Christ.

I might here proceed to sundry other such like euasions of yours; but I fear
to exceed the ordinary bounds, and therefore will conclude, assuring the
judicious and impartial Reader, who shall diligently peruse your swelling and
ample Appeal written in answer to a small part of M. Brierlie his first and
least Apology, that certainly he may expect in lieu of a Due and satisfyable
Answer, first, that yourself is often enforced to confess with M. Brierlie and
against yourself, that the ancient Fathers in several important points of
Religion were Roman Catholics. Secondly, that many of the strongest
allegations brought by M. Brierlie are not so much as named, and much less
answered by your dumb Spirit. Thirdly, that you are often compelled to impugn
and disgrace your own Protestant Brethren, utterly denying and disclaiming in
that, which they through the Sunshine and splendor of truth have
plentifully acknowledged, though against themselves, you so Appealing from them
no less then from M. Brierlie himself. Fourthly, that finding yourself not
able to euade such conuincing proofs taken only from Protestant Doctors by
any direct and pertinent Answer, you fill up your paper with such Sayings of
Fathers, as are either corrupted by yourself, or frequently already answered
by Catholic Writers; which is no other answer neither, but that Protestants
amongst themselves do allege the Fathers, yea one and the self-same Father as
fighting with himself; the affirming whereof is as gross an absurdity, as my
self would desire my greatest Adversary to be plunged in. And lastly, that for
such testimonies as you draw from Catholic Writers, they are either such, as
are already condemned by the Catholic Church, or else are not concerning any
Article or Conclusion of Faith, but only matters indifferent and disputable in
Schools.

Now as every one of ordinary judgment may clearly see, that these poor
shifts patched together are but beggarlie rags serving to hide or cover from
the weak sight of an ignorant Reader, the loathsome sores and shameful
deformities of your diseased Body, the Protestant Church; so has M. Brierlie
his sincere and solid proceeding not only encouraged others to make the whole
world acquainted with so precious a jewel, by translating his Apology into
Latin, but has also induced me to make further use thereof for the special
good, as I hope, of our own Country: To which if you also out of conscience
and true knowledge would also dedicate your further labors, I doubt not but
you would become a dutiful Child to your Mother Church, and a paineful labourer
in Christ's Vinyeard; for which I will not cease to entreat his Infinite
Goodness; and will ever rest

Yours in him N. N.

THE FIRST BOOK, WHEREIN IS PROVED BY THE CONFESSION OF PROTESTANTS THAT THE
CATHOLIC ROMAN CHVRCH has continued Ever most Known and Universal, even from
Christ's very Time, until the Date hereof.
THE ANTIQVITIE OF THE TRVE Church; and the force of the Argument drawn from
the Authority thereof: As also of the great necessity of finding-out this
true Church. CHAP. I.
AS we may not doubt but that the Church of God, speaking in general, is equal
in Ancestrie with our first Parents in Paradise, and so in regard of her
Birthright, and prime Antiquity, long precedent and preferred before the
Scriptures themselves; so even of the Church of Christians, it may not be
denied, but that, as in the same instant, with Christ her Head and Spouse, she
received her first being, life, and birth in this world, according to that of
Ad c. 3. Lucae.
S. Ambrose: God built his Church in the chief Cornerstone CHRIST JESUS; so
was this her greatest nobility of birth, not only to continue for some few
generatio^s, but ever to remain for all posterity. Agreeable to which the
Prophet Daniel foretold of the Church cap. 2.4.
that it is A kingdom that shall never be destroyed, but shall stand for ever.
And so shall be according to Esaias, as cap 60.15.
An eternal glory and joy from generation to generation.

So that in steed of further discussing the Ancientest Birthright and
not-interrupted continuance of Christ his Church, I will now only treat of the
force of that Argument which is drawn from the Authority and Determination of
the said so Noble and Ancient a Church. Wherein for greater expeditio^, I will
pretermit most plentiful proofs both from sacred Scriptures, and learned
Fathers, and in steed thereof will for the present rest satisfied with the freest
Grants and ample Acknowledgements of the learned Protestants; who first as
they ever pretend to build their whole Faith and Religion upon the Written
Word, so do they further aknowledge the same to be only known and discerned
from forged and adulterat Scriptures by the sacred Authority and Testimony of
the Church of Christ.

In which respect Ans. to a Counterf. catho page 5.
D. Fulk avouches, that The Church of Christ has Judgment to discern true
writings from counterfeit, and the Word of God from the writings of men, and
this Judgment she has of the Holie-Ghost. With whom accords Def. of the
Apolog. p. 201.
D. Jewel affirming, that, The Church of God has the Spirit of wisdom,
whereby to discern true Scriptures from false. In like sort M. Ecc. Pol. page
86.
Hooker teaches, that, of things necessary, the very chiefest is to know,
what books we are bound to esteem holy; which point is confessed impossible
for the Scripture itself to teach. Whereof he further says, Ib pa. 102.
It is not the Word of God which does, or possibly can assure us, that we do
well to think it is his word: for if any one Book of Scripture did give
testimony of al, yet still that Scripture which gives credit to the rest,
would require another Scripture to give credit unto it. Neither could we come
unto any pause whereon to rest, unless besides Scripture there were something
which might assure us etc. which something afterward he acknowledges. Ib. pa.
146. and 116. And see Aretius his examen. p. 24. And Bachmanus his Centuriae
tres etc. p. 267.
To be the authority of Gods Church. Agreably hereunto D. whitaker does
confess, that this weightiest controversy concerning Canonical Scriptures, is
to us determined not by Co^t. Staplet. p. 370. 357. HooK. Eccl. Pol. p. 147.
Testimony of the Spirit, the which (says he) being private and secret, is
unfit to teach and refel others, but as he further teaches Ibi. p. 300. 298.
24. 25. And against Raynolds. p. 44.
by the Ecclestical Tradition: An argument whereby may be argued and convinced,
what books be Canonical and what not. And another Protestant Writer, Auth. of
the scripture and the church. f. 71 72. 73. 74 75.
much commended by Ibid. in the Preface.
Bullinger, affirms, that The church is endued with the Spirit of God (and
that) The diligence and authority of the Church is to be acknowledged herein,
which has partly given forth her Testimony of the assured writings, and has
partly by her Spiritual Judgment refused the writings which are unworthy. Yea
he further assures us with Tom 6. co^t. ep fund. cap. 5. Tert. lib. 1 de
Praescrip cap. 6.
S. Augustine and Tertullian, that Scrip. and the church p. 72 74. 75. And see
Melancthon in epist ad Rom cap. 14. pa 358 359.
we could not believe the Ghospel, were it not that the Church taught us and
witnessed, that this doctrine was delivered by the Apostles. So that the
authority of Gods true Church is so great, as that by her warrant we are only
assured of the Written Word of God itself, and for such by her wisdom (given
by the Holie-Ghost) discerned to us from al forged, Apocryphal, and counterfeit
writings: A power and authority, then which none stronger, seeing the certain
knowledge of the true word of God is the chiefest foundation of our Christian
Faith. Now if in this question so important, we may securely follow and
believe, the Sentence and Determination of the Church, how much more then in
other doubts of smaller respect?

Add further hereunto in surest confirmation of the Churches authority, that
it is likewise granted and taught by the learned Protestants that the true
visible Church can not wholly err in matters of Faith: Insomuch as they
expressly confess of this very point, that Bertr. de Loque in his discourse of
the church p. 198. Phil. Act. mon. p. 1401. Bilney ibid. p. 464. Ridley 16.
page 1361. and 1286. Baynha^ ib. p 493. Fox. ib. page 999. Bancroft in his
sermon preached. 8. Febr. 1588. page 42. 43. The Divines of Geneua in their
Propositions and Principles disputed etc. p. 142. Zanchius de Relig. pa. 157.
Rhegius in Discus. The. p. 213. Hunnius in Act. Colloq. Ratisb. fol. 205.
KecKermannus in System. Theol. page 387. Povvel of things indifferent p. 7
The controversy etc. is not of the Catholic (or universal) Church, for we
al agree (say they) herein, that she cannot orre touching Faith etc. wherefore
this question is touching (only) a particular church. Now if the true Church
can not err in matters of Faith and Religion, then is her Authority sacred,
her Decrees infallible, her Children secured, and al difficulties arising
easily composed.

Yea from hence also may we justly collect, amongst al controversies
whatsoever, the absolute necessity of finding-out the true Church; seeing the
finding-out thereof, is the surest finding of the right path, which leads
directly unto al truth. In which regard says D. Field most iudiciously Epi.
dedicat. of the church.
The consideration of unhappy divisions of the Christian world, and the
infinite distractions of men's minds, not knowing in so great variety of
opinions, what to think or to whom to join themselves etc. has made me ever
to think, that there is no part of heavenly knowledge more necessary, then
that which concerns the Church: For seeing the controversies of Religion in
our time are grown in number so many, and in nature so intricate, that few
have time and leisure, fewer strength of understanding, to examine them; what
remains for men desirous of satisfaction in things of such consequence, but
diligently to search out, which, among all the Societies of men in the world, is
etc. that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the Pillar
and Ground of truth, that so they may embrace her communion, follow her
direction, and rest in her judgment? But what Catholic can speak more plainly
and fully then D. Field here does either for the necessity of finding-out the
true Church, or for our following and observing her directions and Sentence
when she is found? And agreably hereunto D. White speaking of the
Common People, says Ep ded. to the way to the true church. And see ParKins on
the revel. p. 344. And James his retraite sou^ded to Brovvnists. fol. 1. 6.
If by certain marks, they could find which is the true Church, there would
remain little difficulty in the rest, for so much as therein they should find
the truth in every controversy: The like necessity urges Calvin saying,
Inst. li. 4. c. 1. sec. 4.
Because I have now determined to dispute of the visible Church, let us learn
by the only testimony of our Mothers praise, how profitable, ea how
necessary to us is the knowledge thereof, seeing there is no other entrance into
life, unless she conceive us in her womb, unless she bring us forth, unless etc.
under her custody and protection she defend us until we dye etc. Add that out
of her bosom no Remission of sins is to be hoped for. With whom agrees M.
Mornay, of the chur. p. 1.
God would (says he) that the Church should be honored for the Mother of al
those, of whom he vouchsafes to be Father. Seeing therefore that God allows
none for his children but those that are borne again and brought-vp in this
Church; if we desire our salvation, it is necessary we know her, in whose lap
we have it etc. we must not seek salvation for any but in her. And again,
vol. 1. 3.
Into the visible Church al they must retire themselves in this world, that will
be gathered in the invisible Church in the world to come. M. Parkins confesses
that Ib pa. page 308.
The Arc out of which al perished, figured the Church, out of which al are
condemned etc. out of the Militant Church there are no means of Salvation, no
preaching of the Word, no invocation of Gods name, no Sacraments, and therefore
no Salvation. And speaking of such as be, without, that is, says he, forth of
the Church, they are dogs, enchanters, whoremongers, adulterers etc.

Now from all this I will only briefly conclude, that the Church of God is not
only most ancient, and in that regard greatly to be honored, reverenced, and
preferred, but being likewise confessedly directed by the Spirit of God, in
discerning and judging the truth in matters of Faith, that therefore in all
doubts arising in matters of Religion, we may with greatest safety and quiet
to our minds, repose our souls and consciences upon the Authority, Judgment,
and Determination of the said Church.

Yea further seeing it is agreed upon by all parties, that out of the true Church
there is no Salvation; how lamentable is the state of obstinat Heretics, who
through pertinacie in error and infidelity, are quite cut-of and cast out of
the Church? And how much to be deplored are uncharitable Schismatics? who for
false, frail, and earthly respects, do foolishly divide themselves from the
Arc of Salvation, living continually like brute beasts, without al spiritual
food and nutriment to their souls, deprived of supernal grace, conveyed by
Christ's holy Sacraments, debarred from the sweetest communion, and purest
conversation with their dearest Mother, and all this, for no other respect or
pretense, then that only, which by S. John was blamed in the Pharisees, who Io.
12.42 43.
did not confess (Christ) that they might not be cast out of the Synagogue.
For they loved the glory of men, more then the glory of God.

THAT THE PRESENT ROMAN CHVRCH, AND Religion, for these last thousand years
after Christ, have still continued most Known, and Universal, throughout the
Christian world. CHAPTER. II.
NOW for our certain finding-out of this true Church so necessary to
Salvation, we are to suppose for the present, that the true Church is ever to
continue even from Christ's time, until the end of the world: wherefore to make
this good in our behalf, and against our Adversaries: Sundry and strongest are
the proofs, wherewith the Euer-during and Universal continuance, of the Roman
Catholic Religion, for these last thousand years, might evidently be
convinced; As the Catholic Coronations and State-gouernment of al Christian
Emperors, Kings, and Princes: The fairest Records of al Laws, Canon, Civil,
or Municipal: The ancient Seas of Bishops and Archbishops: The famous Monuments
of Monasteries, Hospitals, Churches, and the like: And al Doctors, and men
most renowned either for Learning or Sanctity, who by their writings or works
have testified to al posterity, that the Religion of their days, and several
Countries wherein they lived, and which themselves believed and professed, was
one and the same with our present Roman.

Yet to omit al these, and much more which might be urged to the same effect:
In a case so manifest and confessed, I will content my self with the plentiful
acknowledgements of my greatest Adversaries, who through the clearest splendor
of our Roman Religion and Piety, during all the foresaid Ages, are enforced,
even by the rack of truth, and stro^gest Evidences, though to the foulest
disgrace of themselves, and manifest confirmation and condemnation of their
Sect or Religion, plainly to admit, grant, and confess the foresaid
continuance of our Roman Religion, and that most Universal in all Nations for
these last thousand years.

For though D. Morton ouer-boldly attempteth to affirm, that M. Brierly his
passage Prot. App. p. 574.
from the days of Gregory etc. unto these present times etc. for the
inviolable co^tinua^ce of our now Romish Faith, is praecipitare, no^
desce^dere: an issue void of consent, and a reckoning (as we say) without their
Host; yet what Bellarmin, or other Jesuit in the world, could speak more
fully for us Catholics in this behalf, then does the Protestant In his
consideration of the Papists reasons page 105.
M. Powel in these words? I grant that from the year of Christ 605. the
Professant company of Popery, has been very visible and perspicuous? Or In
his discourse upon the Catalo. of Doc. i^ the epi. to the Reader.
Simon de Voyon affirming that, Anno 605. when Pope Boniface was stalled in the
Papal Throne, the^ falsehood got the victory etc. The^ was the whole world
overwhelmed with the dregs of Antichristian filthiness, abominable
superstistions and Traditions of the Pope, then was that universal Apostacy
from the Faith, foretold by Paul. And In his exposition of the Creed. v. 1.
page 266.
M. Parkins having spoken of the second sign of Christ's coming, which there
he makes to be the revealing of Antichrist in Boniface Anno 607. alleges
the^ next after, as a third sign, and as being distinct from the other, a
general departing of most men from the Faith, saying respectively thereof,
during the space of nine hundred years etc. the Popish Heresy (so do
Heretics style it) has spread it self over the earth (and so universally in
his opinion through-out al parts of Faith, that says he next afterward) and
the faithful servants of God, were but as a handful of wheat in a mountain of
chafe, In his Reioynder to Bristow p. 34
which can scarce be discerned. And again, Ib. p. 310.
we say for the space of many hundred years, an universal Apostacy ouerspred
the whole face of the earth, and that our (Protestant) Church was not then
visible to the world, but lay hid under the chafe of Popery; and the truth of
this, the Records of al Ages manifest.

M. Morton Protest. Apeale p. 71.
would euade these testimonies of M. Parkins, by answering, that he speaks
this only of the Article of the Popes Primacie, and not in regard of so large
continuance, and general belief of the other points of our now Catholic Faith,
which yet is most untrue, Parkins speaking in general, of a general departing
from the Faith, and of an universal Apostacy, In so much as the Protestant
church or Religion was not, according to Parkins, then visible to the world. In
which sense also In his Answer to a counterf. Cath^. p. 36.
D. Fulk confesses that The (very) Religion of the Papists came in and
prevailed Anno Dom. 607. etc. And so universally, that, says he, The
revelation of Antichrist, with the Churches flight into the wilderness, was Anno
607. So clear and confessed it is, that our now Roman Religion has continued
universally for these last thousand years. A truth so evident also, that most
Protestants do from thence infer and avouch, that all the Popes of Rome for
these last 1000. years have been Antichrists. De Antichrist. in praef. p. 1. 2.
M. Powel affirms that the Pope has been Antichrist at al times since
Gregory the Great. According to Cont. Bellar. par. 1. page 371.
Danaeus, The Kingdom of that Antichrist has now manifestly continued more
then nine hundred years, from the Emperor Phocas to the time af Luther. D.
whitaker De Eccles. co^t. Bellar. p. 144.
affirms Boniface the Third (who lived Anno 607) and al his successors, to
have been Antichrists In his Answ. to a counterf. catho. pa. 27. and in his
confut. of Purgatory pa. 344 and ParKins v. 1. page 266.
D. Fulk avouches, that the Popes from Boniface the Third, were blaspemous
Heretics and Antichrists. In his treatise of Antic. p. 4.
D. Downeham auerreth, that The whole row or rabble of Popes, from Boniface the
Third downward, were Antichrists. In his Trial of the Romish cler. pa. 330.
M. wotton terms Boniface the Third, the first revealed Antichrist. And
Hist. sacr. par. p. 189.
Hospinian censureth him, and al his successors, to be verissimos
Antichristos, most true Antichrists.

D. whitaker De eccl. co^t. 8. l. co^tro. 2. q. 4. p. 144.
delivering his own, and other Protestants opinion herein, says: we affirm
Gregory the Great, to have been the last true, and holy Bishop of that Church
etc. For those that followed were true Antichrists etc. And because they ask
and demand of us some certain time, we assign them this, to wit, of
Antichrist's first coming. So manifest it is, that all the Roman Bishops after
these last thousand years, being thus censured by so many Protestants for
Antichrists, have no less professed and maintained the present Roman Religion,
then Gregory the Fifteenth, who now governs that Sea, and is charged by
Protestants, to be Antichrist himself.

And as all the Popes for these last thousand years, are thus censured for
Antichrists, so is the article of the Popes Primacie or supreme authority,
over the whole Church in all matters Ecclesiastical plainly acknowledged by D.
Morton himself to be no less ancient: For whereas M. Brierlie produces the
testimonies of Parkins, Napper, and Broccard, for the continuance of our Roman
Religion in general for these last thousand years, D. Morton restrains their
meaning (though undeservedly) only to the point of the Popes Primacie saying:
Prot. Appeal. p. 71
The alleged Authors speak of the Primacie of the Pope. And again, Ibid p.
72*
Be it granted (for so it is) that the Papal Primacie beginning in Boniface the
Third, is now nine hundred years old. So ancient and universal is this so
transcendent Article of the Popes Primacie in matters Spiritual. A point of
such importance that D. Reynolds affirms, therein, confe. p. 568.
the very being and essence of a Papist to consist. And D. Whitaker avouches
that contra Duroe. page 503.
It is the head of Popish Religion, of which almost all the rest depend.

But what more forcibly can be produced for the further confirming of our
Churches foresaid co^tinua^ce for these last 1000. years, then the public
exercise of our Churches Liturgy the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, during the
foresaid time? Seeing not only according to D. Sutclif, Answer to Exceptions.
pa. 11.
In the Mass the very Soul of Popery does consist; as also according to D.
Whitaker, contra. Duroe. page 426.
Nothing is more holy and divine in our conceit: But withal the Mass
including sundry articles of our Catholic Faith; as true external Sacrifice,
the Real presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist, Priesthood,
Prayer to Angels and Saints, Prayer and Sacrifice for the dead and sundry such
like, thereby does plainly convince the universal continuance of our Catholic
Religion. D. Luther In colloquiis Ger. de Missae.
affirms that Private Mass has deceived many Saints, and carried them away
into error, from the time of Gregory, for 800. years. With him agrees M.
Tindal Act. Mon. p. 1338
in these words: I doubt not but S. Bernard, Francis, and many other holy
men, erred as concerning Mass: Osiander says of S. Bid Cent. 8. p. 58.
He was wrapped in all the Popish errors in which we dissent at this day from
the Pope, for etc. he admired and followed Popish Masses. And yet says
Osiander, He was a good man. In Iaecobs defense of the churc. etc page 13.
M. Johnson says, Did not John Husse, that worthy champion of Christ, and
others also of the Martyrs of foretimes say, and hear Mass, even to their
dying day? etc. did not diverse of them acknowledge, some the Popes calling and
Supremacy, some seven Sacraments, some auricular Confession? etc.

The Centurists, speaking of the eleventh Age after Christ, confess and say
Ce^t. 11 c. 4. col. 233.
The Idolatrical Mass did bewitch all the Doctors of this Age. And they charge
the tenth Age Ce^t. 10. c. 6. col. 307.
with the Stage-like spectacle and Sacrifice for the living and the dead. Cent.
9 c. 6. col. 245. 246.
They affirm likewise the same of the ninth Age, numbering up the ceremonies of
the Mass yet to this day usual. The eight Age likewise is reproved by the^ for
the cent 8. c. 6. col. 361.
Stage-like spectacle and Sacrifice for the living and the dead. The seventh
Age is reproved for the use of cent. 7. c. 6. col. 154. 457. and Osiander con.
7. pa. 189.
Mass celebrated in Latin, and for using cent. 7. c. 4. col. 113. Osiand.
cent. 7. col. 186.
Mass for the dead. And the like they affirm of the other Centuries.

D. Dove In his defense of Church-gouern. pa. 68.
acknowledges yet further in plainest terms, that, Al our Parish-churches
were not only the Popes ordinance, but also ordained for celebration of Mass,
and so employed from their first erection until this late reformation of the
Church etc. De Sacrif. Miss. page 377.
D. Hutter public Professor in the University of Wittemberg says: I do
willingly grant the Popish mad Idolatry the very Sinew (or strength) whereof,
is the Sacrifice of the Mass, to have invaded almost the whole world,
especially these last thousand years. But from thence I gather most evidently
this Mass to have been the cup wherewith the Roman Antichrist infected and
bewitched all the Kings of the earth, and almost the whole world. In his
relics of Rome. f. 344.
M. Beacon (whom other The Ministers of Lyncolnsh. in their Abridgment etc. p.
65.
Protestants affirm to be a Divine of chief note in their church) is of
opinion, that, The Mass was fully finished by Pope Gregory the First, about
Anno Domini 600. etc. and from Charles the Great, unto Charles the Fifth, the
Mass reigned as a most mighty Queen in all the churches of the West part of
the world. And the like is confessed by De Antich p. 101.
Danaeus saying: From the year of Christ's Passion 666. that blasphemous
kingdom of Antichrist was openly, and publicly established in the Church of
God, which the Spirit of God foretold: verily this very time and year that
execrable, and Papistical Mass etc. began to be celebrated every where in
Latin. But In Apocal. in 9 p. 199.
Chiltraeus charge S. Gregory that he established many foul errors, and
especially the Idolatrous Invocation of Saints, and Masses for the dead, which
from that time as a Deluge have ouerflowed the whole Church. D. Hutter, De
Sacr. Miss l 1. c. 6. p. 103. and p. 377.
in this question of Mass and Sacrifice, gives a Supersedeas to all the
Fathers that lived after the first five hundred years, saying, we do not
respect later (Fathers) then of the first five Ages. De captiuit. Babyl. c. 1.
Luther acknowledges that, The Mass is believed every where to be a
Sacrifice which is offered to God. To these agree the Sayings of holy Fathers,
so many examples, and so great practice constantly observed through the world.
And a little after Luther further says, Let it not trouble thee that the whole
world thinks and does the contrary. But though Luther labored, not to be
troubled at his despising and rejecting of the Mass, when the whole world did
think, and do the contrary; yet I hope sundry other Protestants, not of so
seared consciences, observing themselves to have thus Apostated from the whole
world, in this so important a Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, will not
only be troubled, but much incited to re-vnite themselves to the whole
Christian world. Neither was this so general practice of the Mass only used or
allowed by the Clergy, or vulgar people; for Calvin Instit. li 4. c. 18 sec.
18.
affirms, that The abomination of the Mass has made drunk (or besotted) all the Kings and people of the earth, from the greatest to the least; And again,
Ib. sect. 1. 43. Hist. Sacram epsti. dedicat. 1.
The Roman Antichrist, and his Prophets have taught the whole world this
opinion. In like manner says (43) Hospinian: All the Kings, Princes, and people
of the earth hitherto from the first six hundred years, were made drunk with
the Mass, as with a certain enchanted cup. The like whereof was confessed
before by D. Hutter. So clear it is that the public service used in all
churches for these last thousand years, and whereunto al kings, Princes, and
people were used to resort, was the holy Liturgy, or Sacrifice of the Mass.

From the premises then we have our Protestants Apology, for the most visible
and universal continuance of our Roman Church and Religion for these last
thousand years; the splendor whereof being such and so generally extended, as
that their Protestant Church, themselves confess, was not so much as then
visible to the world. Secondly the Faith and doctrine taught by all Popes during
the foresaid time, was so wholly consonant to ours at this day, as that therefore
they are no less censured for Antichrists, then our Pope now reigning.
Thirdly, the Popes Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, and the Sacrifice of
the Mass, being the two weightiest points of al matters now co^trouerted, are
here confessed to have been generally believed, and practiced during the same
precinct. Fourthly it is likewise granted, that eue^ Al our Parish-churches,
were the Popes ordinance, and for celebration of Mass, and so employed from
their first erection, until this late pretended Reformation of the Church by
Luther. The truth of al which is so palpable, as that I have used no other
proofs in confirmation thereof, then only the clear testimonies and free
grantes of the greatest Adversaries to the Roman Churh; as for externals, of
Luther, Calvin, the Centurie-writers, Osiander, Hospinian, Danaeus, Simon de
Voyon, Hutterus, Chytraeus, For domestics, of Whitaker, Fulk, Downeham,
Parkins, Powel, Wotton, Tyndal, Johnson, Dove, Beacon and Morton.

A FVRTHER CONFIRMATION OF THE UNIVERSAL continuance of our now Roman Church
and Religion, for these last thousand years, is taken from the Confessed
belief and profession of such Persons, as living within the foresaid time, were
most Famous and Notorious, in one respect or other. CHAPTER III.
IN further evidence then of our Catholic Churches Reign, and general
Dominion for these last thousand years, I will descend to particular statio^s
or periods of time, and such especially, as for some importa^t respect, are
most known and notorious: And first I will begin with the time of Luther
himself at his first appearing Protestant, when I find the whole face of the
world to be so Roman Catholic, as that himself was an Tom. 7. Wit. f. 228
anointed Priest and an Simo^ de Voyon in his discourse upon the Catalog. etc.
p. 180. and Luther ad Gal. c. 1. fol. 35 after the English translation.
Augustin-Friar etc. And, lived in his Monastery, punishing his body with
watching, fasting and prayer, Luther ibidem.
Honored the Pope of mere conscience, Kept Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience;
And, whatsoever (says he,) I did, I did it with a single heart, of good Zeal,
and for the glory of God. But when he fell into his Apostacy, so directly
contrary to the then present or precedent profession of Religion over the
world, his troubled conscience burst out into these words: Luth. to. 2. Germ.
fo. 9. and tom 2. Vvittemb. de Abroga^da Missa priuata. fol. 244.
How often did my trembling heart beat within me, and reprehending me, object
against me that strong argument: Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds err?
Were so many Ages ignorant? What if thou errest, and drawest so many into
error to be damned with thee eternally? And Tom. 5. Annot. breuiss.
again: Do thou, o sole man and of no account, take upon thee so great
matters? What if thou being but one offendest? If God permit such, and so
many, and al to err; why may he not permit thee to err? Hitherto appertain
these arguments, the Church the Church; the Fathers the Fathers, the Councels;
the Customs; the Multitudes and Greatness of wise men: whom do not these Hills
of arguments, these Clouds, yea these Seas of Examples ouerwhelme? says
Luther. And again Tom. 1. Vvitemb. Pref.
At the first I was alone, Tom. 2. fol. 63.
and alone rolled the stone, yea Loc. com. class. 4. cap. 30. page 51.
undertook so great a business upon me alone: And confessed it is, that Luther
at his first revolt from being a Catholic Friar, was the first, sole, and only
man, that began Protestancie; thereby departing (as himself confesses) from
the Church, from Fathers, Councels, and so many Worlds, so many Ages precedent.

This point is so certain, that M. Jewel In his Apology of the Church of Eng.
part. 4. c. 4. And in his Def. of the Apol. pa. 426.
confesses, That the (Protestant) truth was unknown at that time, and
unheard of, when Martin Luther and Hulderick Suinglius first came unto the
knowledge and preaching of the Ghospel: And Bucer In Epist. An. 36. ad Episc.
Heref. praefix. Enarrat. Buceri in 4. Euang.
calls Luther, The first Apostle to us of the purer Ghospel; yea the
Lutherans Schlusselburge Theol. Calvin. li. 2. fol 130.
do affirm it impudency, to say, that many learned men in Germany before
Luther did hold the doctrine of the Ghospel. In Augustan. confess. explic. Arti
7. de Eccl. p. 137. 138.
Georgius Miluis argues that, If there had been right believers that went
before Luther in his office etc. there had then been no need of a Lutheran
Reformation: therefore we say that Luther was raysed-vp by Gods special
appointement and extraordinarily. So likewise Trac. de Eccl. page 145.
Morgensterne judges it ridiculous (to think) that in the time before Luther,
any had the purity of doctrine; and that Luther should receive it from them,
and not they from Luther. Considering (says he) it is manifest to the whole
Christian world, that before Luthers time, al churches were overwhelmed with
more then Cimmerian darkness; and that, Luther was divinely raised up to
discover the same, and to restore the light of true doctrine: In so much as
Epist. ad Argentinenses and in Praef. in corp. doctrinae.
Luther says of himself, we dare glory that Christ was first made known by
us. And he terms In Deutronom. in pref. fol. 2.
his doctrine, resurgens vel potius oriens Euangelium, the Ghospel rising
again, or rather first beginning. A truth so clear that De fraetru^ Orthodox.
Eccl. pa. 264.
Camerarius auouching Wicliffe to have been helped, or instructed, by the
waldenses, and Husse by Wiccliffe; speaking yet of Luther, affirms to the
contrary, that Luther received his doctrine neither from Husse or Wiccliffe,
but was instructed of himself, as he declares of himself in his writings. In
which respect also says M. Wotton, Luther might truly say, that he was the
first which had in these times published Christ, especially in the chief point
of the Ghospel, which is, In his Trial of the Romish Clerg. Title. pa. 392.
Justification by faith in Christ; and in this respect it is an honor to
Luther to have been a Son without a Father, a Disciple without a Master.
Agreably whereunto also says M. Act Mon. pa. 770.
Fox: Luther plucked down the fondation of Papistrie, by opening one vein long
hid before, the touchstone of al truth, and the only principal origin of our
salvation, which is, our free Justification by Faith only: yea Luther is so
confessedly the first Author or Beginner of Protestancie, that one of his own
Brood writes that, Prognostica finis mundi.
The Spirit which tells things to come, works not but in time of the
Ghospel; which Luther, as it is confessed, toward the end of the world did
first bring-in. And again, Ibid. pa. 13.
The seduction of false Prophets is not manifest but under the Ghospel; which
before Luther, as we said, never went since the Primitive time of the Apostles.
Some Protestants In his Articles. Art. 19. p. 130. Dove in his Recusancie pa.
32.
(says D. Couel) make Luther and Calvin Authors of the Religion among us.

By all which it appears that Luther was borne and bred a Catholic, and that
at the same time, the Religion known and practiced over the Christian world,
was the present Roman; from which Luther then reuolting, confesses himself to
be the sole and only man who first preached the Protestant Ghospel, and so is
confessed by other Protestants to be the first Author of their Religion, to be
their first Apostle, and to be a Son without a Father, a Disciple without a
Master. At the same time of Luther reigned here in England King Henry the
Eight, in whose time our Roman Religion was so universal, that D. Willet
confesses that Antilog. p. 273.
In King Henry's the Eight time the Mass continued, and the whole body of the
Roman doctrine, the Supremacy excepted. Sleidan also says of K. Henry:
Sleidan in Engl. l. 13. fol. 174.
He exiled the name of the Bishop of Rome, but kept still his doctrine. Yea
says M. Fox, Act. Mon. p. 1472.
He set forth, and by full consent of Parliament established the book of Six
Articles, containing the sum of Popish Religion. In which he was so resolute
as that himself in Person not only Ib p. 530.
disputed, but also commanded Ib. p. 533
Sentence to be pronounced against the Protestant Lambert. And this
notwithstanding, the Popish Church under his Reign is, by D. Fulk Against
HesKins etc. p. 564
acknowledged to be a true Church, and the King himself to be Ib. sect. 82 And
Humf. Jesuit. part. 2. p. 304.
A member of the Catholic Church of Christ; yea says M. Hal, the Church as
then was A true Apology against Brownists. c. 11. p. 30
visible Church of God. And for as much (says Consecration of English Bish. p.
67.
M. Mason) as it is the custom of Papists to brand the Reign of King Henry
the Eight, with the odious name of Schism, let me a little dispel those clouds
and mists, wherewith they darken the glory of that Heroical Prince. So
grateful are they to K. Henry, though well they know, that sundry of their
Protestant Predecessors he burned for their Heresies.

In the Age next before Luther and K. Henry lived John Husse, who though some
Protestants (through their greatest penury) make bold to challenge for a
member of their Church, yet is it to the contrary confessed by In Colloquiis
Germ. c. de Antichristo
Luther himself, that The Papists burned John Husse, when as yet he departed
not a finger-breadth from the Papacy; for he taught the same which the Papists
do, only he found fault with their vices and wicked life; against the Pope he
committed nothing: Again, They do not well (says Explicaet. Art. 30
Luther) who make me a Hussite, for he held not with me. Tom. 1. p. 493.
He taught horrible and devilish blasphemies.

Agreably says In Apoc. c. 11. p. 290.
M. Fox: The Papists traduce Husse and Hierom of Prague (who lived in the same
Age) as Heretics; why so I beseech you? etc. I add further, if he be an
Heretic who varieth from the Decrees of the Roman Church, what dit Husse at
any time teach or defend in the Council, wherein he did not rather seem
superstitiously to consent with the Papists? What did the Popish Faith decree
concerning Transubstantiation, which he likewise with the Papists did not
confirm? Who celebrated Mass more religiously then he? or more chastely
observed the vows of Priestly Chastity? Add further that in doctrine of
Catholics concerning Free Will, Predestination, Informed Faith the cause of
justification, and Merit of good works, what other thing did he hold then is
taught at Rome? what Image of any Saint did he ever cast out of his Church at
Bethlem? etc. what therefore shall we say him to have committed, for which he is
not together with the Roman Sea to be condemned, or with it to be absolved? In
like full sort, says D. Field In his Appendix to the 5. Book of the Church
part. 1. p. 87.
touching John Husse and Hierom of Prague, I could never yet find, in what
point of Faith they dissented from the doctrine of the Church then constantly
resolved on: but they bitterly inueighed against the Ambition, Pride,
Coueteousnes, and negligence of the Clergy. And more in particular M. Fox Act.
Mon. p. 216.
confesses that Husse believed the seven Sacraments, and Act. Mon. p. 209.
and 197.
Transubstantiation; M. Jacob Def. of the Churches etc. p. 13. And Act. Mon. p.
227. 216.
adds the Popes Primacie; whereof also says In Assertionibus art. 30
Luther, John Husse seems not to withstand, but that the Monarchy of the
Pope may be; yea he further there affirms, that Husse attributes much to the
Roman Idol. Lastly Husse being a Catholic Priest, Def. of the Churches etc. p.
13.
M. Jacob affirms, that he said Mass to his dying day. So manifest it is
that in the Age of John Husse, the public Service of the Church, was the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Religion then known, and believed by Husse and
others, was our present Roman.

Where I can not but much admire the absurdity and beggerie of M. Fox and
others, in Act. Mon. p. 190. and 241. And D. Downham of Antichrist. p. 40.
registring John Husse for a most holy Martyr of their Protestant Church, and
further In Apoc. c. 11. p. 249.
affirming, that It can not seem otherwise, but that John Husse, and Hierom of
Prague, are without al controversy, the two witnesses etc. whereof the Prophet
speaks properly and expressly in this place, to wit, of the Apocalipse: whereas
it is most certain that Husse was condemned and burned, chiefly See Simo^ de
Voyon upon the Catalog. of Doctors. p. 159. Fox Act. Mon. p. 230. Osiand.
cent. 15. p. 469.
for his urging of Communion to the Lay People under both kinds, and for
maintayning Wicclifs seditious Doctrine against Princes, Priests, and Bishops
if they committed mortal Sin; in other points of Faith living and dying a
Roman Catholic. In the Age precedent to John Husse lived John Wiccliffe, who
was a Catholic Priest, Stows Annals p. 464
even the Parson of Lutterworth in Lecestershier, who according to M. Stow Ib.
p. 425
first inueighed against the Church, for that he had been deprived by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, from a certain Benefice etc. And having upon this
occasion severed himself from the Church in which he formerly was, He with his
Disciples went barefooted, and basely clothed in coorse russet garments down
to the heels; and, Ib. p. 426
seemed to contemn al temporal goods, for the love of eternal riches;
adjoining himself to the begging Friars, approving their poverty, and
extolling their perfection: Reteyning still his former Catholic opinions
concerning Vviccleus de Blasphe. c. 17
Holie-water, Vviccl. de Euchar. c. 9.
the Worshipping of Relics and Images, the Sermon de Assumptione.
Intercession of our B. Lady S. Mary, the De Apostasia c. 18.
Rites and Ceremonies of the Mass, whereof In Professione fidei. c. 28.
Przibauus (an Heretic who lived near the same time) says: John Wiccliffe, in
his book of Apostacy, and eighteenth chapter, allows all the Rites of Mass
from the beginning almost to the end etc. In 1. ad Cor. c. 1.
Wiccliffe himself calls Extreme Unction a medecin to cure sin; as
appears (says he) James. 1 And he affirms that it is made with oil of
olive consecrated by a Bishop: In Postilla super ca. 15. Marci. and super. 1.
Cor. 1.
yea he els-where numbreth and mentions all the seven Sacraments: And lastly
in his epistle to Pope Urban (written not three years before his death)
endeavoring to purge himself to the Pope, he plainly acknowledges that the
Bishop of Rome is the Vicar of Christ upon earth: Adding thus further, If I
have erred in any of these points, I will submit my self to correction even by
death if necessity so require. By all which we may see that John Wiccliffe in all the former points (now contradicted by Protestants) was wholly Catholic; As
also the Age wherein he lived: A truth so evident, that Osiander Cent. 6. 10.
11. p. 439.
confesses that, Wiccliffe had no companions of the same time, who might
brotherly admonish him etc. and D. Humfrey In vita Iuelli. p. 263.
acknowledges that, In these last times he was almost the first Trumpeter of
this Ghospel of Protestants. So little did the fame or infamy of Protestancie
sound in the Christian world at Wiccliffs first beginning.

In the Age before John Wiccliffe lived the Heretics Albigenses, who because
they were in opinion and Sect wholly FulK de successione Eccles. cont. Staplet.
p. 332. 333. SparK. in his Ansvv. to Albines p. 58. Abbots against D. Hill. p.
57. More in his Tables. p. 173.
agreing with the Waldenses, and only differing in Titles and Names according
to the diversity of places and times wherein they lived; I will therefore,
omitting them, come to the Waldenses, who received their name from Waldo a
Catholic Layman, Act. mon. p. 628.
a rich Marchand of Lions, and one so unlearned (says M. Fox) that he gave
rewards to certain learned men to translate the holy Scriptures for him, and
certain other works of the Doctors: by which he did confer the form of
Religion in his time, to the infallible Word of God: whereupon (says M. Fox
Further) Act. Mon. p. 41.
sprung up the doctrine and name of those which are called Waldenses. But Waldo
being destitute of al ordinary calling, and despayring to obtain it from the
Church of Rome (out of which he was gone forth) contemning the same, he taught
that Illiricus in Catal. Test. veritatis p. 731. 732. 740. 745.
Laymen and women might consecrate (the Sacraments) and preach: for the
practice whereof the Waldenses and Albigenses were Simons on the Revel. p 165.
excommunicated by the Pope: And yet this their revolt from the Roman Sea
notwithstanding, In Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 3. p. 270. Fox Act. Mon. p. 628.
D. Humfrey and M. Fox do both grant, that Waldo did forsake al things, that
being poor he might follow Christ, and the Euangelical perfection, which D.
Fulk Against Rhem. Test. in Math. 19. f. 38. ParKins in his Reform. Cath. p.
241.
and M. Parkins reject for Popish: In so much that Chronogr. p. 94.
Pantaleon affirms, that he and his followers were a very order or Profession
of begging Friars, whereupon according to M. Fox, Act mon. p. 41. 629.
they were called, The poor men of Lions, professing, as In Jesuit. part. 2. p.
270.
D. Humfrey urges, a kind of Monastical life; wherein they were so forward,
that they afterward made Vrsperg. in chron. Ar. 12^2.
means to Innocentius the Third then Pope, to have their Order by him
confirmed, but could not prevail: It is further confessed by In ep. 244 p 4^0
Calvin, that they believed the Real presence, and by Against Symbolizing part.
1. c 3. p. 162.
M. Parker that, they retained the Sign of the Cross in the blessing of their
meats. And De Ecclesia p 24.
Morgensterne speaking unto them, says: You confirm the decree of Antichrist
concerning the number of the Sacraments; though that you have also often done
in other articles; as in the Doctrine of Single life, of Vows, of the sacred
Scripture, of good Works, of Justification, Baptism of Children, and
Purgatory.

Now from these premises it evidently ensues, that Waldo, immediately before
his Apostacy, was a Roman Catholic, and not a member of any other Church to
him then known, or in being; and so his first proceedings are confessed by Of
the Estate of the Church p. 338.
Crispinus to have been in time of thick darkness (of Popery) and as a first
and little beginning, of the instauration of the Christian Religion, to wit, the
Protestant. So undoubted it rests, that the Religion universally and
publicly professed in the time of Waldo, was not any Protestant, but the
Roman Religion.

In the same Age lived S. Bernard, of whon says D. Whitaker De Eccl. p. 369.
and against Rainolds p. 125. 126.
I do think Bernard was truly a Saint. And other Protestants ackdowledge, that
he was Osiand cent. 12. p. 309.
A very good man: Pasquils Return into England. p. 8. 130.
A good Father, and one of the La^ps of the Church of God. D. Morton demands:
Prot. Appeal. p. 458
Why may not Protestants acknowledge S. Bernard for his life a Saint, and for
his doctrine a Lamp? etc. This then, so true a Saint, good man, and clearest
Lamp, was so wholly Roman Catholic, as that D. Whitaker speaking to us, says:
Resp. ad Camp. p. 105.
Bernard, whom your Church these many years has brought forth one godly man
etc. And Gomarus alleges him to us In speculo Eccl.
Bernard your Saint. Yea he was Simon de Voyon in his catal. p. 126.
the Abbot of Clarauaux, and so dear to the Pope, that M. Bell terms him,
Challeng. etc. p. 148. And see Abbot in his 3. part of the def. etc. In his
Aduertisment thereto annexed. page 20. Wotton in his Trial of the Roman
clergy p. 265. Tossanus in Synopsi de Patribus. p. 58.
The Popes dear Monk and Reverend Abbot: Osiander and Hospinian report, that
Cent. 12. p. 309. Hospini. de origin. Monach. f 175
He was the founder of a hundred and forty Monasteries. And Danaeus affirms,
that 1. part. alt. part cont. Bellar. p. 440.
Hierom and Bernard were Monks, and Authors and favorers of that error. And
though D. White Way to the true church p. 388.
blush not to object his Authority against the Popes Primacie, yet his
Writings, Doctrine, and Practice were so direct to the contrary, that
therefore he is expressly reproved by Against Rhem. Test in Luc 22. F. 133.
Whitaker. li. 2. cont. Dur. p. 154.
D. Fulk, and D. Whitaker: The Centurists also, avouch that Cent. 12. Col. 1637.
He worshipped the God of Maozim, even unto the last breath of his life, he was
a most sharp defender of the Sea of Antichrist etc. For which by other
Protestants, he is termed Lib. German. quo causas recusati concilij Trid.
reddunt f. 257.
An impudent Writer, heauing the Pope up into an Idol, a corrupter of Gods
honor, and preacher of Antichrist: Yea so sincerely was he affected to the
Pope and the Church of Rome, that the Centurists report him to Cent. 12. Col.
1639.
say to the Count of Aquitaine, whatsoever is out of the Roman Church, that by
Gods judgment is of necessity to perish, even as those things which were out
of the Ark were drowned in the Deluge etc. As also, he that persecuteth the
pope of Rome (whom the Centurists here call Antichrist) he persecuteth (says S.
Bernard) the Son of God himself. Neither was any of this Papistrie noted as
then to be singular in S. Bernard, but to the contrary it is confessed by M.
Jewel and M. Whitaker, that S. Bernard lived in the midst of the Popes Rout and
Tyranny: D. Morton as formerly, calling S. Bernard for his life a Saint, and
for his doctrine a Lamp, to prevent objections thereby arising against him,
prouidently adds that, he neither was Saint nor Lamp Prot. Appeal p. 458.
Simply, as unspotted with errors, but Comparatively or etc. in his
generation, that is, in respect of the Age wherein he lived: when a deluge of
iniquities, and mist of Popish Superstition had ouerspred the outward face of
the Church: So truly Papistical was S. Bernard. At this time of S. Bernard,
lived also S. Malachias, of whom Osiander writes thus Cent. 12. p. 315. 256.
Malachias an Archbishop in Ireland, from his childhood was given to learning
and Religion, and at length entreated and much enforced, he undertook to be the
Archbishop of Ireland. He was very familiar with S. Bernard, admiring and
imitating his Monachisme, and embracing Popish superstitions. He worshipped the
Pope of Rome for God. To him very many miracles are ascribed etc. So truly
Roman Catholic was S. Malachias. Def. of the Apol. p 557. Whit. cont. Dur. l.
2. p. 154.


In the Age precedent to these lived Berengarius, who being a Catholic Priest,
and the Archdeacon of Angiers, dissented afterward from the Roman Church, in
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; which yet before his death he so fully Fox
Act. Monu. p. 13. Vvestphalus his Apologetica etc. fol. 6. Osiand. Cent. 11. p.
158. Centurie-writers. Cent. 11. col. 458.
recanted, and conformed himself to the Roman Church, as that the same is
plainly acknowledged by M. Fox, by Westphalus, Osiander, and the Centurists,
who record his recantation verbatim as it was.

Before him lived the most renowned Emperor Charles the Great, who was so
wholly devoted to the Roman Religion, as that the same is plentifully
aknowledged by Osiand. in ep. cent. 8 p. 101. Cowpers Chron. fol 173. Fox in
Apoc. p. 436. Crispinus of the Estate of the Church p. 221. Bulling. in 2 Thessalonians. p. 533.
Osiander, D. Cowper, M. Fox, Crispinus, and Bullinger. In so much that In
Epist. Dedic. Hist. Sacram.
Hospinian affirms, that The Emperor (Charles the Great) commanded not only
by public Edicts, that the Ceremonies and Rites, as also the Latin Mass of
the Roman Church, and the other Decrees, Statutes, and Ordinances of the Roman
Bishop should be observed; but himself also by imprisonnents, and other kinds
of punishments, compelled Churches to the same. Yea such was the union between
the Popes of Rome, and Charles the Great, in matters of Faith and friendship,
as that, according to D. Cowpers Chron. f. 174.
relation, there were Certain Bishops sent by Adrian to Charles, who held a
Council in France against the condemnation of Images etc. And of the other
side, whereas Paulus Lib. 2. Hist. Franc.
Aemilius relates, that Charles the Great sent twelve Bishops unto a Council
holden at Rome by Pope Stephen, in confutation of the error of the Greeks
against Images, the same is so true, that the like report thereof is made by the
Cent. 8. col. 570.
Centurie-writers. So assured it is that this Age in the opinion of
Protestants, was most superstitious and Papistical.

Before Charles lived S. Bid, whom Cent. 8. p. 58.
Osiander terms a good man; and D. Cowper Chron. f. 171.
confesses, that he was Renowned in all the world for his learning and godly
life: For which he was also privileged with the Surname of Reverend Hollinsh.
Chron at An. 735. Covvpers Chron. at An. 724 fol. 168. Fox Act. Mon. p. 128.
and by D. Jesuit. part. 2. p. 326.
Humfrey, is specially registered among The Godly men raised-vp by the
Holie-Ghost. D. Morton says Prot. Appeal. l. 1. p. 70.
Although we deny not that Bid did hold diverse Romish Doctrines, yet do we
find sufficient cause in his writings, why we may allow him his Title, of
Venerable and good man. M. Bale further testifyeth, that S. Bid Cent. 2. c. 1.
was so practiced in profane Authors, that he scarce had his match in that
Age: He learned Physic and Metaphysick out of the purest fountains: He knew
the Mysteries of the Christian Faith so soundly, that for his exact knowledge
both of Greek and Latin, many preferred him before Gregory the Great: There
is scarce any thing worth reading to be found in all Antiquity, which in due
places is not read in Bid: If he had lived in the times of Augustine, Hierom,
Chrysostom; I doubt not but he might have contended for Equality with them: He
put forth many books full of al kind of Learning. M. Fox acknowledges that,
Act. Mon. p. 127.
He was a man of worthy and memorable memory, and famous learning; The whole
Latin Church at that time gave him the Maistrie in Judgment, and knowledge of
the holy Scripture. M. Bell grants Downfall.
that Bid for virtue and learning (was) renowned in all the world. And M.
Cambden records, that Bid. Descrip. Brit. p. 670.
the singular glory of England, by Piety and Erudition, obtained the name of
Venerable; wrote many volumes most leardnedly. So truly godly, learned, and
renowned was S. Bid, even in the judgment of Protestants.

But now to observe in particular, whether the Faith and Religion taught,
believed, and practiced by this so worthy a man, was Roman Catholic, or
English Protestant; Cent. 8. p. 58.
Osiander (who before called him A good man) in express terms confesses,
that Bid was wrapped in all the Popish Errors, wherein we (Protestants) at this
day dissent from the Pope: For he admired and embraced the worship of Images;
the Popish Mass; Invocation of Saints etc. In which respect also M. Fox Act.
Mon. p. 128. 129.
acknowledges, that he lived in great credit and esteem with the Popes of that
Age, whom M. Fulk Retentiue ag. Bristovv p. 278.
terms, Antichrists, and thereupon rejects S. Bedes authority, saying: The
last Testimony out of Bid, who lived under the Tyranny of Antichrist, I will
not stand upon; M. Sanders may have great store of such. For Against Rhem.
Test. in Heb. 10.11.
Bid lived in a superstitious time, long after Antichrist did openly show
himself etc. He affirmed that, Men understood that the healthful Sacrifice,
auayled to Redemption both of body and soul everlasting; and, Ib. in 1. Pet.
3.19.
In some things (was) carried away with the errors and corruptions of his
time. By which it clearly appears, that in the Age of S. Bid, the Popes of
Rome were so Roman Catholic, and the external government of the Church thereto
so answerable, that our modern Protestants do therefore traduce those ancient
Popes for Antichrists, and their Government for Tyranny.

In the Age before S. Bid lived the two most famous Brethren named Eualdi,
whom M. Bale terms In Catal. Scrip. etc. Ce^t. 14. p. 145. Osiand. Cent. 7.
p. 559.
Papistical Martyrs suffering for Papistrie. And though D. Morton Prot. Appeal
p. 67. 68.
endeavors to obscure this by affirming, that Protestant Writers were
doubtful whether the said Brethren dyed by the hands of Christians or Infidels,
which later himself thinks more probable, yet this hinders not, but,
according to his Brother Bale, and Osia^der cited by himself, that they dyed
for our Roman Faith. Yea so little was this doubt, that D. Morton himself says:
If notwithstanding (Catholics) shall insist in their claim of these Two,
suffering death in maintenance of Papal Jurisdiction over foreign Churches,
miserable will be their issue; especially considering that we have many Twoes
to oppose against these, even a thousand and two hundred religious Britans, who
in a resolute resista^ce of that Jurisdiction and Authority of Austin the
Legate of S. Gregory, dyed under the hands of Pagans, and (as Galfrid
speaks) suffered Martyrdom. But to omit that Protestants Carthvvright in his
2. Reply. part. 1. p. 475.
themselves charge this Galfrid with untruth; and too too childish errors,
whereof his own See l. 8. c. 19. and l. 9. c. 4. and l. 10. c. 3. and l. 12. c.
4. etc.
writings will be best witnesses, as also that D. Morton does untruly and
undeservedly, refer the death of these religious Britans, occasionally to S.
Augustine; I can not yet but observe the greatest penury of ancient Protestant
Martyrs, when D. Morton is glad to claim for such, those who lived and dyed
Catholic Monks, even the Monks of Bangor: So great a Bangor does our Doctor
make, in making Protestants Ministers and Martyrs of Religious Monks.

THAT THE FAITH OF S. GREGORY AND S. Augustine, and whereto England was by them
converted, was our Roman Catholic, and not Protestant. CHAPTER. IV.
TO arise even to the height or beginning of these last thousand years, and
first to examine the Faith of S. Gregory and his time: Concerning him D.
Morton writes Prot. Appeal. p 5.
we willingly confess that S. Gregory was an happy Father of the Faith of
many, and delivered to the^ the saving knowledge of Christ crucified. And as
concerning our Countries Conversion by him, he further says: Prot. Appeal. p.
60.
This happiness of our English Conversion to the Faith of Christ, and worthiness
of our Conuerter S. Gregory, we could easily acknowledge without any further
ado etc, And again, our (Protestants) Authors looking on their right hand,
beholding how Pagans and Heathnish people etc. by the light of the Ghospel,
through the Ministry of Austin the Legate of S. Gregory, were brought unto
the Fold of Christ, did together with the Angels of heaven, rejoice in
remembrance of this their happiness, and therefore called it a gracious
Conversion: And that most justly, seeing our said Conversion was confessedly
from Paganism to the true Faith of Christ; for so Hollinshead testifyeth that,
Description of Britannie l. 11. c. 7.
S. Austin was sent by Gregory to preach to Englishmen the Word of God; who
were yet blind in Pagan superstition. And Anno 596. Gregory sent Austin into
this I Will to preach the Christian Faith unto the English Saxons; which Nation as
yet had not received the Ghospel. Agreably also hereunto says M. Cambden:
Descript. Britan. p. 104.
Austin having rooted-out the Monsters of Heathnish superstition, ingrafting
Christ in English-mens minds, with most happy success converted them to the
Faith. And the like is acknowledged by M. Fox Act. Mon. 110. 115. 172. Bale
Cent. 1. c. 73. Cent. c. 1. VvitaKer cont. Dur. p. 394. Cooper. chron. anno
599. Stow. 596.
M. Bale, D. Whitaker, D. Cowper.

Now this Faith was so certainly the Faith planted by Christ and his Apostles,
that M. Fox calls it Act. Mon. p. 111. 120. 122
The Christian Faith Ib. p. 115. 116.
the Faith and Doctrine of Christ: Ib p. 121.
Christ's Religion, and that Church, The Church of Christ, and The Ib. p. 112.
perfect Faith of Christ. Cowper styleth it, Chron. anno 636.
The right Belief: Stow, Chron. p. 9.
The Christian Faith and Ibid. p. 72.
pure and incorrupted Christianity. Cambden, Descript. Brit. p. 519.
The true Religion of Christ. In vit. Paulin.
Godwine, The Ghospel; and sundry such like.

Now this our Conversion to this Faith of Christ by the means of Saint
Gregory, was in truth, a Blessing so great, that Cont. Duraeum l. 5. p. 394.
502. 397.
D. Whitaker most humbly thus writes thereof; we will ever most gratefully
remember that great benefit which Gregory bestowed upon us: And, I confess S.
Gregory to have been a good and holy man etc. He was a learned and holy
Bishop. Jesuit. p. 2. p. 624.
D. Humfrey terms him therefore, Gregory in name Great, and indeed Great;
and M. Bell Survey of Popery p. 187.
calls him, S. Gregory surnamed the Great, the holy and learned Bishop of
Rome. According to Cent. 1. c. 68.
M. Bale, He was the most excellent of all the Bishops of Rome for learning and
life: That against his will, and striving to the contrary, and at last
compelled, he succeeded Pope Pelagius: That he was a learned and good man,
founded Hospitals, invited Pilgrims to his Table, sent things necessary to the
Monks of Jerusalem, and maintained three thousand Virgins. Ibid. c. 7.
He reduced the Goths from Arianisme to the Church, professed himself by
writing the Servant of Gods servants, that thereby he might appear most far
from al Ambition and desire of command. In like sort is S. Augustine honored by
M. Godwine Catalog. of Bish. p. 7. and See Ca^bd. Descript. Brit. p 515. and
178. Bale Cent. 13. c. 7. Cent. 14. c. 13.
with the Title of our Apostle. Whereof also says M. Mason Consecration of
English Bishops p. 57. 58.
for as much as Lethardus gathered but a few clusters, and the main Vintage
was reserved for Austin, let us enlarge the signification of the word, Apostle,
and extend it to Austin; and moreover (though improperly) to Gregory and
Eleutherius etc. whose proceedings toward the Prince were Chistian, honest,
and orderly. They came to plant the Faith of Christ etc. They came to preach
obedience etc. Their Ghospel was a Ghospel of peace etc. They converted People
etc. They sought to build the Church etc. Yea S. Austins desire to convert the
Pagans, and his dutiful respect to the Prince, deserve to be written in Letters
of gold. So worthily does this Prostant here think of S. Eleutherius, S.
Gregory, and S. Austin. And no less are his most deserved praises blazed by
M. Hollinshead recording that History of Engl.
Austin and his company arrived at Canterbury, where he made his abode by the
Kings permission, exercised the life of Apostles, in fasting, watching, and
prayers; preaching the word of God to as many as they could, despising al
worldly pleasures as not appertayning to them etc. Also Ethelbert was
persuaded by the good example of S. Austin and his company, and by miracles
showed, to be Baptized: The like hereof is testified by Act. Mon. p. 105. 116.
M. Fox. D. Bilson also acknowledges that of Obedience p. 57.
Austin and his fellows came with Religion to God, and submission to Princes.
Stow reports that Chron. p. 65.
S. Austin and his fellows lived in the fear of God. And D. Godwine
acknowledges that Vita August.
He was a Monk of great virtue; calling him S. Austin.

But now to be satisfied, what was the Faith and Religion taught by these two
so holy men, S. Gregory, and S. Austin; or what the universal and public
profession of Christians al over the world at those times was, whether
Catholic or Protestant, I will appeal to our Protestant Doctors: Amongst whom
writes M. Bale, that Cent 1. c. 68. etc. 70.
Gregory burdned the Church and Religion of God more then al, with more then
Jewish ceremonies: He ordered the Rites of Mass, commanded Masses to be said
over the dead bodies of the Apostles, devised Litanies and Procession,
permitted the Image of the Blessed Virgin to be carried about, confirmed
Pilgrimage to Images by Indulgences for the peoples Devotions: He was
maintayner of Pardons, granted Indulgences to those that visit Churches on
certain days, made four Books of Dialogues for strengthening Purgatory,
admitted Adoration of the Cross, and Masses for the Dead, called Englishmen to
Romish Rites by Austin the Monk Cent. 1. fol. 3.
who was sent from Gregory to season the English Saxons with the Popish Faith.
And Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 5. p. 5. and 627.
D Humfrey affirms, that they brought into England the whole Chaos of Popish
superstition. M. Harison charge Description of Britanie before Holinsh.
Chron. vol. 1. p ^7.
Austin to have converted the Saxons from Paganism, to no less hurtful
superstition then they did know before, making a^ Exchange from open, (...)
secret Idolatry. In so much as he Ibid. p. 29. 27.
concludes in plain ^ea^^es, tha^ Augustine came and brought-in Popery. In
like sort Apologia pro coena Domini p. 33.
M. Ascham charge him to be The ouerthrower of true Religion, and the
establisher of al Popish Doctrine. D. Abbots tearming S. Austin Answ. to. D.
Bishop. p. 197.
A black Monk, affirms, that this Ibid. p. 20
Italian Monk brought new observations from Rome, and the English received the
same: And that, this Ibi. p. 198
Romish Priest requires the British Bishops to be subject to his Romish
Authority: And, this Romish Archbishop brought-in Novelties and Superstitions,
and did contaminate the Faith of Christ; Mellitus, Laurentius, Iustus, al of
Austins Company, and condition. D. Fulk affirms that Against Rhem. Test. in
1. Cor. 4.
Austin did not beget the Nation of Englishmen to Christ by the pure Ghospel
etc. but with mixture of men's Traditions: And that Christian Religion which he
found in the Britans, he labored to corrupt with Romish Inventions. M. Bale
avouches that Cent. 1. c. 70.
Austin entered not with the Ghospel of Christian peace, but with the Banner of
his Apostleship, with a Silver Cross, Litanies, Procession, Images, painted
Pictures, Relics, and Ritual books. And that Ib. c. 73.
King Ethelbert first of al English men received of Gregory the First, Bishop
of Rome, by Austin, the opinion of the Roman Religion, with all inposture or
deceit; and dyed the One and twentieth of his received Papisme. As also that
Cent. 8. c. 85.
Austin brought-in Popish Monkerie, and besides the Popes Traditions (o
Heretical mouth) brought nothing but man's dung. Cent. 13. c. 1.
Austin the Roman brought hither Romish rites without sound doctrine. The King
received Romanisme with the annexed Idolatries: He brought in Monks, Altars,
Vestments, Images, Masses, Chalices, Crosses, Candlesticks, Banners, Holy (as
they call them) Vessels, holy Water, and Books of Roman Customs: Their
chiefest studies were about the oblations of Masses. Cent. 14. c. 31.
Yea Austin disposed al things in England to the form of the Synagogue of
Rome, and made Englishmen honourers of the Pope. Finally Catal. Scrip. Illust.
cent. 14. p. 117.
Austin by his interpreters taught our people the Papistical Faith. Whereupon D.
Fulk terms our Against. Purgat. p 333.
Conversion from Infidelity, our peruersion. Resp. ad Bellar. p. 1. p. 780.
And Danaeus calls it, The inebriation of the whore (of Babylon) mentioned
Apoc. 17. Concerning these two last testimonies of D. Fulk and Danaeus, D.
Morton says Prot. Appeal. p. 60.
These Apologists with more art then truth, do object unto us, our own
Authors calling it a peruersion and inebriation, herein perverting their
direct meaning, and propounding their testimonies as spoken absolutely
concerning every particular point of Roman Faith, which was only respectively,
and restraynedly intended: But as this Gloss is only his voluntary
Imagination, and indeed a direct perverting of his own Brethren, so is it
sufficiently confuted by so many Protestant Doctors last cited, and next
following, who most agreably confess, that the Faith (speaking in general)
taught here by Austin, was the Popish Faith, the whole chaos of Popish
Superstition: Yea Popery it self.

Wherefore to proceed Trial of the Romish. Clergy. p. 377.
M. Wotton avouches that, Neither was England converted by your proud Monk
Austin, but perverted rather. And Answ. to. a Popish Appologie. f. 8.
D. Fulk affirms that, Austin an unlearned Monk came into the Land to corrupt
the sincerity of the Faith, which the Britans had received etc. Yea S.
Augustine was so wholly ours that 2. Reply. part 1. p 301.
M. Cartwright calls him, Romish Augustine. And Tetrastylon Papismi. p. 122.
D. Willet expressly places Augustine and Gregory among the first Fathers of
superstition, and Captains and Ringleaders of Popish Divines. Sir Edward
Hobbie terms him In his Letter to M. Higgons. p. 92.
Proud and insolent Augustine, your Great Gregory's delegate. M. Price styleth
him, that A^sw. to. Leech. l. 1. c. 4. p. 69.
Proud petty Monk Austin. And M. Jewel affirms that Austin was Reply. Art.
3. p. 185.
Neither of Apostolic spirit, nor any way worthy to be called a Saint, but
an Hypocrite, a superstitious man, cruel, bloody, and proud above measure. M.
Mason affirms that, His superfluity of ceremonies might well have been
spared. He was too forward to display the Popes Banner, Consecration of Eng.
Bishops. p. 58.
and his behavior toward the Brittans was full of Pride and disdain. The
Cent. 6. c. 10. col ^49.
Centurists write: when (Austin) had troubled the Britan Churches Thirteen
years, and subdued them to the Roman Antichrist he dyed etc. But Cent. 6. p.
290.
Osiander proceeds much further, affirming that, He Subdued England to the
lust of the Roman Antichrist; and therefore after his death went undoubtedly to
Hell, there to receive his reward. A reward unjust, and a Sentence ouer-cruel
for so great benefits as he bestowed upon us, even by D. Whitakers, and other
Protestants most grateful former aknowledgement. But hence it clearly appears
that the Faith of S. Gregory, S. Austin, and whereto England was by them
converted, was Roman Catholic.

Neither was this pretended Popish superstition the private opinions of S.
Gregory and S. Austin, but the universal Doctrine and belief of that Age.
Insomuch that Hist. Sacram. l. 2. p. 157
Hospinian confesses that, In the Age of Gregory the Great, al kind of
superstition and Idolatry as a certain Sea owerflowed, overwhelmed, and wholly
ouerdrowned almost all the Christian world; No man not only not resisting, but
al adding and affording rather what strength they could. And Defense of the
Answ. to the Admonition p. 442.
D. Whitguift speaking of Anno Domini 659. so wholly distrusteth the Doctors of
those times, that he resolutely avouches: He would be loath to allege any
Council of that time, to prove any thing in Controversy. So confessedly was
the universal Church of Christians, at the time of S. Gregory S. Austin, and
Englands Conversion, in the opinion of Protestants, altogether Popish,
Antichristian, and Romish; and indeed, the One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church, prescribed by our Creed: The Sect of Protestants during the
same time, being not so much as divised, stamped, heard-of, or being in any,
though most base, or obscurest part of the world.

Now all this, as well of the high and most deserved praises given to S. Gregory
and S. Austin, for their virtue, learning, and other singular gifts; as also,
that the Faith and Religion which themselves professed, and whereto they
converted this our Native Country from execrable Paganism, was truly the
perfect Faith of Christ, and pure and incorrupted Christianity: And lastly,
that this so pure Faith, was our now Roman Catholic Faith; I have here
convinced by the testimonies and acknowledgments even of her greatest Enemies;
as namely by Osiander, Danaeus, the Magdeburgians, Hospinian, Hollinshead,
Cambden, Fox, Bale, Whitaker, Cowper, Humfrey, Bell, Godwine, Bilson, Stow,
Mason, Abbots, Fulk, Harison, Ascham, Wotton, Carthwright, Willet, Hobby,
Price, Jewel, Whitguift, and Morton; al of them Protestant Writers.

THAT THE PRESENT ROMAN CHVRCH AND Religion, continued and Flourished during
the whole time of the Primitive Church, containing the first Six hundred years
after Christ. CHAPTER. V.
Having thus proved the confessed being, and public general practice and
profession for these last thousand years, of our Roman Faith and Religion; I
will now endeavor the self same proof and confirmation for the first Six
hundred years after Christ: Which for greater perspicuitie, I will divide into
two several Stations or times; The First, from Constantin the Great, to
Gregory the Great; the Second, from Christ and his Apostles, to Constantin
again.

In which behalf I find it affirmed by Upon the Revel. f. 110.
M. Brocard, that The Pope fell from Christ in the time of Syluester (who lived
with Constantin) and that for a Thousand two hundred and sixty years, the
Church was oppressed and trodden down by the Papacy, even from Syluesters time
to these days. In like sort avouches M. Brightman In Apoc. p. 462.
that ever since the time of Constantin the Great, Rome has been the whore of
Babylon, and the Roman Bishop has been the Beast, and Antichrist Ibid. p. 471
And again says he: As above we have made manifest, it necessarily follows,
since the time of the Heathen Emperors, the Pope of Rome to have been that
greatest Antichrist, of whom the Scriptures have so diligently forewarned, and
the City of Rome from that time, to have been the Whore etc. foretold in the
Apocalypse. M. Leigh Great Britanies great Delivery f. B. 2
adds hereunto that, The Popes ever since the first Three hundred years
after Christ have been Devils. But no man speaks more plainly then M. Napper
(whom Upon the Revel. p. 262.
M. Dent terms a learned Writer, and an excellent man) This so learned a
Writer plentifully acknowledges Upon the Revel. p. 68. And See p. 43.
that Between the year of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian and
Papistical reign began, reigning universally and without any debatable
contradiction 1260. And that Ibid. p. 145
Even 1260. years, the Pope and his Clergy, has possessed the outward
visible Church of Christians. Ibid. p. 239
Never suffering for the space of 1000. years after Syluester the First, any
to be seen vouchable or visible of the true (Protestant) Church etc. I will not
here stay to confute the wilful vanity of D. Morton, who for his best answer
to this so clear testimony of M. Napper writes thus Prot. Appeal p. 72.
But this witness (alas for the darkness of Judgment of these Apologists)
speaks not of the whole Profession of the Romish Church, but only of one
article predominant therein, namely the Doctrine of Popedom etc. But seeing he
speaks in general of the outward visible Church of Christians, which
includes al Points believed by that Church; and that the same Church during
the said time, was so wholly possessed by the Pope and his Clergy, that not so
much as any one of the Protestant Church was then to be seen, I may more
justly say: Alas for want of honesty, or learning, or both in D. Morton. And
this the more I might inculcate, seeing his own guilty Conscience at last
bewrays himself saying Ibid. p. 662.
If one of our Adversaries themselves (when six of their principal Doctors
were produced against him) was licenced to except against them etc. how much
more lawful might it be for us, to deny the testimonies but of two Authors,
not of eminent note for Learning and Judgment etc. So willing indeed is M.
Doctor to detract from the Authority and testimonies of his own dear
Brethren, M. Napper, and M. Brocard: And where he would gladly mince the
matter, by affirming that they were but Two, the perusal of this Chapter, and
other parcels of this book, will clearly discover, that there were many more
Twoes of this opinion. Wherefore to proceed, M. Brightman Apoc. p. 503.
thus urges Bellarmine: As concerning the continuance of the Apostacy (from
the true Faith) we have learned by the Apocalypse that the same has prevailed
more then 1260. years, and that more clearly then any of your Subtilties can
euade. Ibid. p. 539.
And again: Antichrist has reigned from the time of Constantin the Great, to
this day; whereof the Apocalypse affords such Demonstrations, as never any
Jesuit can confute. Yea Ibid. p. 477.
further: The Pope of Rome is the Beast, which 1300. years received power etc.
therefore from 1300. years he is the Antichrist. So certain it is, by M.
Brightmans strongest Demonstrations, grounded upon Scripture, that the present
Roman Religion, has continued for these last 1300. years; during which time
the Pope in his opinion has reigned as Antichrist.

Answerably hereunto Against Staplet. and Martial. p. 25.
D. Fulk relates, that some Protestants have written that the Pope has
blinded the world these many hundred years; some say 1000. some 1200. some
900. etc. And In Apoc. p. 263.
Winckelmanus speaking of the beginning and end of the Churches persecution by
Antichrist, reports that there are some Protestant Writers who make the end
Anno 1517. when M. Luther first began, and so the beginning should be Anno 257.
others place the end Anno Christi 1521. when Luther at the Assemblies at Worms
excellently gave testimony to the truth; and so the beginning should be from
Anno Christi 261. etc. De Antichristo. p. 96.
Danaeus also, speaking of Antichrists first coming, confesses that some
Protestant Writers teach, that he came in the Year 1000. others 500. others
400. from Christ's birth. So clear it is, that the Pope of Rome, for these 1300.
years, in the opinion of Protestants, has reigned as Antichrist.

But as the Popes for these last 1300. years, are thus censured for
Antichrists, so are the most ancient and first Christian Emperors, condemned
for Papists and favorers of Antichrist. For though D. Morton, speaking of the
Popes authority, affirms that it has been Prot. Appeal. p. 661.
often and notoriously contradicted in Antiquity etc. by right Christian and
renowned Emperors: Yet M. Brightman speaking of the very first most ancient
and Christian Emperors auerreth the contrary, saying Apoc. p. 344.
Into which Catalogue come Constantin the Great, Constantius, Constans,
Constantin; and their Sons, Julian, Iouinian, Valentinian, Gratian,
Valentinian the Second, Theodosius etc. for these then reigning, the Beast was
notably defended, and his dignity much increased. Agreably says Reioynd. to
Bristow. p. 2.
D. Fulk: I never meant to acknowledge the Emperors Constantin, Iouinian,
Valentinian etc. to be such as I would wish for: For both in their Religion and
manners, diverse things are found, which I could wi^h had been more agreeable to
the Word of God. So that for the second 300. years after Christ it rests
evident, and for such acknowledged, that The Pope and his Clergy, possessed
the outward visible Church of Christians; never suffering for 1000. years after
Syluester the First, any to be seen vouchable or visible of the (Protestant)
Church. For which very cause all the Popes of those Ages are censured for
Antichrists, and the very first Christian Emperors, for their favorers and
defenders.

To make now the like trial of the Roman Churches Continuance, and her
universal and public profession and practice of her Faith and Religion for the
first 300. years after Christ, to wit, from his blessed Apostles to Pope
Siluester the First, and Constantin the Great: Whereas our Catholic Writers do
often object the Custom of the ancient Fathers in provoking the Heretics of
their times with the Succession of the Roman Bishops, according to the example
of Ireneus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierom, Augustine, and Vincentius
Lyrinensis Against Purgat. p. 373.
D. Fulk for his best answer, is enforced to confess, saying: That these men
specially named the Church of Rome, it was because the Church of Rome at that
time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it continued in the doctrine of the
Apostles. Conference with M. Heart. p. 442.
D. Raynolds being provoked in the like kind, acknowledges in like manner
that, The succession of the Roman Bishops was a proof of the true Faith in the
time of Augustine, Epiphanius, Optatus, Tertullian, and Irenaeus etc. Instit. l.
4. c. 2. sec. 2. 3.
And Calvin himself setting down our foresaid Allegation, affirms of
Catholics that, They indeed set forth their Church very gloriously etc. They
report out of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, Augustine, and others, how highly
they esteemed this Succession; whereto he gives the like answer and reason,
saying: Considering it was a matter out of al doubt, that from the beginning
even until that time, nothing was changed in Doctrine; the foresaid Doctors
took in argument, that which was sufficient for the overthrowing of al new
errors, to wit, that the Heretics oppugned the doctrine which even from the
very Apostles themselves had been inviolable, and with one consent retained.
And in his book of Institutions set forth in French, he writes expressly, that,
It was a thing notorious, and without doubt, that after the Apostles Age until
those (foresaid) times, no change was made in doctrine, neither at Rome, nor
other Cities.

In like sort says Zanchius De vera Relig. p. 148.
In times past, the Roman Church and the succession of their Bishops, until the
times of Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Some others, was (such) as that not
undeservedly these Fathers were accustomed to provoke and cite the Heretics of
their time to her, and others such like De Ecclesia p. 278.
D. Whitaker speaking of certain Apostolical Churches, and amongst them of Rome
by Name, collecteth thus: From whence we understand why Tertullian provoked to
these Churches, to wit, because as then by perpetual succession they kept the
Doctrine of the Apostles. Agreably to which, almost in the same words says
Against. Purgat. p. 374
D. Fulk: The Church of Rome retained by succession, until Tertullians days,
that Faith which it did first receive of the Apostles Fox his Act. and Mon. p.
1359.
M. Ridley avouches that, The Patriarch of Rome in the Apostles time, and long
after, was a great maintayner and Setter forth of Christ's glory; in the which,
above al other Countries and Regions, was preached the true Ghospel, the
Sacraments were most duly administered etc. After the Emperors became
Christians the Ghospel there flourished most. And Reply to Harding. p. 246.
D. Jewel freely grants, that As Well S. Austin, as also other godly Fathers,
rightly yielded Reverence to the Sea of Rome etc. for the purity of Religion
which was there preserved a long time without Spot. And again Ibid. p. 628.
The godly Fathers (of those foresaid times) sought to the Church of Rome,
which then for purity in Religion, and Constancy in the same, was most famous
above al others. Survey of the Popes supremacy p. 85.
M. Bunnie speaking of the very same times affirms that, At that time, there
was no Church that did more sincerely keep that which the Apostles taught etc.

These so frequent, and free testimonies of our Adversaries, for Romes
Continuance in the true Faith and Religion, from the Apostles until the time of
S. Austin, are so clear from al exception and further Comment, that D. Morton
in steed of other answer says Prot. Appeal. p. 573.
This general consent of our so profoundly Judicious Protestants, in appealing
unto the Primitive Church for the space of the first Four hundred and forty
years after Christ, thus acknowledged by our Adversaries, may well serve for a
just reproof of their slander, who usually upbraid Protestants with Contempt
of al Antiquity; for here even old Rome is commended by Protestants. By all
which it is most evident, not only that the Roman Church with continual
succession of Bishops, has still continued even from the Apostles until the
times of S. Augustine, Epiphanius, Optatus, etc. which was for Four hundred and
forty years after Christ; but withal during the same time, for purity in
Religion and constancy in the same, she continued most famous above al other
Churches.

But to arise Upon the Reuelat. p. 191. And See Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 55.
M. Napper avouches that, During even the Second and Third Ages (next after
Christ) the true temple of God, and light of the (Protestant) Ghospel was
obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself. Whereto are assenting In Bancrofts
Survey c. 27. p. 343.
M. Carthwright and Beza; And Against Symbolizing with Antichrist part. 2.
sec. 8. p. 128.
M. Parker says: I know right well, that within the Two hundred years after
Christ, there were crept into the Church many idle Ceremonies etc. There began
in this mixed Age, Exufflation of the Baptized: Consecration of the Font with
oil and Cross: Oil in Baptism: the Reserving of the Sacrament: Exorcisme:
Offering and prayer for the dead: Fasting on certain days, with opinion of
Necessity and Satisfaction: and the seeds of Monkerie: See then among what
weeds the Cross grew up, and in what a dunged soil of many supersti ions!
says M. Parker. But Epist. de Abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statutis Eccles.
Sebastianus Francus auerreth for most certain that, Presently after the
Apostles times, al things were turned vpside down etc. And that for certain,
through the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together with the Faith
and Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure etc.

M. Bunnie Treatise tending to Pacification. sec. 14. p. 89.
using al warines to acknowledge more then of necessity he must, confesses
yet (as enforced) of the whole time since the Apostles to this present, that
The Church of Rome has ever continued after a sort in profession of the Faith,
since the time that by the Apostles it was delivered to them etc. And has also
in some manner preserved, and hitherto maintained both the Word and Sacraments,
that Christ himself did leave unto us; which surely (says he) is a very
special blessing of God, and an evident work of the Holy Ghost.

D. Field Of the Church. l. 3. c. 6. p. 72.
speaking of the Latin or Roman Church before Luthers appearing, affirms
that, It is frivolous that some demand, where our Church was before Luther
began; for we say, it was, where now it is. If they ask us which? we answer,
it was the known and apparent Church in the world, wherein al our Fathers lived
and dyed, wherein Luther and the rest were Baptized, received their
Christianity, Ordination etc. Not forbearing to make his Title of that Chapter
in these words: Of the Latin Church that it continued the true Church of God
til our time etc Now it is plentifully heretofore confessed, that the known
and apparent Church of the world for many hundred years together before
Luther, and wherein Luther was Baptized, ordained Priest, and a Professed
Austin-fryar, was the only Roman, or Latin Church, which as then reigned
universally; the Protestant Church, during the said time, being confessedly
latent, unknown, invisible, and indeed not in being; as shall be proved at
large hereafter.

But for the surer sealing-vp of al which has been said in this behalf, I
desire lastly to be observed, that whereas D. Whiteguift Defense etc. p. 351.
justly urges against M. Carthwright, this general rule or proof of
Apostolic Doctrine, saying: For so much as the original or beginning of these
names, Metropolitan, Archbishop etc such is their Antiquity, can not be found,
so far as I have read; it is to be supposed they have their original from the
Apostles themselves; for as I remember S. Austin has this rule in his hundred
and eighteenth Epistle. And it is of Ibid. p. 552. And see Suinglius tom. 2.
fol. 94.
credit with the Writers of our time, namely with M. Suinglius, M. Calvin, and
M. Gualter; and surely I think no learned man does dissent from them. In like
sort says Answer to objections against the Cross in Baptism p. 26.
D. Fotherby in behalf of the Cross: If it be but an humane Invention, let us
know I pray you the first Inuenter of it, and when it was first decreed, and
how it came so soon to be so generally observed, which if you can not show us,
I think we may with greater probability esteem it to be an Apostolical
tradition: And so of the contrary according to Contra Duraeuml. 7. p. 479.
D. Whitakers opinion, no man denies, but that it much avails to the
confuting of Heresies to know their beginning.

Now according to these Rules, it is so certain, that the present Roman
Religion was delivered by the Apostles, and thus continued to us, that In
Vvhitegu Def. p. 352.
M. Carthwright infers from the foresaid Rule, That thereby a window is open
to bring in all Popery. And, I appeal (says he) to the judgment of al men,
if this be not to bring in Popery again, to allow of S. Austins Saying etc.
But now a little to observe, what our last Refiner M. D. Morton, determines
concerning this foresaid Rule of S. Austin: Whereas D. Whiteguift (whom M.
Morton styleth their Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 228.
learned Archbishop, and an Ibid. p. 225.
Author of worth) did formerly avouch that the said Rule was of Credit, even
with (the Protestant) Writers of our time, namely with M. Suinglius, M. Calvin,
and M. Gualter, and that he thinks no learned man does dissent from them: Yet
M. Morton) who would take it unkindly, and that deservedly, to be censured for
Unlearned) does thus far adventure directly to discredit and disauthorize the
foresaid Rule, as shamefully to curtle it, both in breadth and depth: The Ibid.
p. 345.
breadth (says he, though most untruly) reaches no further then unto matters
of Ceremonies and other Customs of the Church etc. Secondly, the depth of the
same position, if it be rightly sounded, will be found to be a truth of strong
Probability only, and not of an absolute infallibility: which is to say in
good English, that the said Rule only concerns trifles, and matters of small
moment, as also, that it is not a certain true Rule, but peradventure true, and
peradventure false: which strongly implies, that our Doctor, in matters of
faith and moment, now disputed between Catholics and Protestants would be
loath to be squared and tried thereby: And so in substance acknowledges that
which he reproves in M. Carthwright, that thereby a window is open to bring in all Popery. So evidently in deed does the foresaid Rule prescribed by S. Austin,
and approved by so many of the learned Protestants, strongly confirm and
convince the uninterrupted Current, and continuance of our Roman Religion, from
the Apostles themselves to these our days.

Agreably to the premises Consideration of the Papists supplication p. 43.
M. Powel expressly, and ingenuously confesses: We can not tell by whom, or at
what time (says he) the enemy did sow (the Papists Doctrine) etc. Neither
indeed do we know who was the first Author of every one of your blasphemous
opinions. Reioynder to Bristow p. 265.
D. Fulk answering to the demand of the Roman Churches change says thereto: I
answer, my Text says, it was a mystery not revealed, and therefore could not
be at first openly preached against etc. And though D. Whitaker taught before,
that, No man denied, but that it much auayled for the confuting of Heresies to
have known their beginning, Yet the same Resp. ad Rat. Comp. p. 101.
D. Whitaker is enforced to confess, that, The time of the Roman Churches
change can not easily be told; Yea to such absurdities are Protestants brought
in this point, that, Vrbanus Rhegius being urged to show wherein the Roman
Church had changed her Faith, at last betaketh himself to this desperate
boldness, saying In lib. Apologet. p. 192.
But to conclude though it were true, that the Roman Church had changed nothing
in Religion, would it therefore presently follow, that she were a true Church?
I think not, says he. And yet I think hardly any one Protestant can be picked
out so ignorant or impudent as will openly avouch, that the Roman Church was not
a true Church, when S. Paul writ unto the Romans in these words Ep. Ad Rom c.
11. verse. 5.6.7.8.9.11.12.
By (Christ) we received Grace and Apostleship, for obedience to the Faith in all Nations etc. among whom are you also the called of Jesus Christ. To all that
are at Rome the beloved of God, called to be Saints. Grace to you, and Peace
from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. First I give thanks to my God
etc. for all you, because your Faith is renowned in the whole world etc. without
intermission I make a memory of you always in my prayers etc. And, I desire
to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual grace to confirm you;
that is to say, to be comforted together in you by that which is common to us
both, your Faith and mine. Now if the Roman Churches Faith was once thus the
same with S. Paul's Faith, then if she never changed her said Faith (as this
Protestant supposes) she must needs continue a true Church.

All this Sun shine notwithstanding, D. Morton will needs defend his brother
Rhegius herein, because Prot. App. p. 675.
diverse Heretics who lived in the Apostles times, such as were the Simonians,
Basilidians, Nicolaitans, albeit they lived in the days of the Apostles, yet
did they not profess the Doctrine of the Apostles, which sufficiently
demonstrateth the infirmity of the Consequence: But I must confess, I did not
expect such weak Demonstrations from D. Morton; for the Consequence was not,
that Heretics lived in the Apostles days, therefore their Doctrine, is the
doctrine of the Apostles; as our Doctor would abuse an vncautelous or
unlearned Reader, but as himself before thus confessed: The Church of Rome has
not altered any article of Faith since the Apostles times, ergo the now Faith
of the Church of Rome is the same with that which was taught by the Apostles.
This Consequence is so clear (supposing that the Church of Rome in Saint Paul's
time professed the true Faith, which I have formerly proved, and no Protestant
dare deny) as that al further proof would discover no less tediousnes in the
Writer, then the denying thereof, has bewrayed ignorance and temeritie in M.
Doctor. So clear it is, that no Protestant whosoever, is able to assign any
known beginning of our Roman Religion since the Apostles times.

Wherefore in plain terms they ascribe the beginning thereof to S. Paul's
time. To this effect says D. Willet Synopsis Controu. 2. q. 3. p. 56.
Therefore S. Paul calls Papistrie a mystery of iniquity which began even
to work in his days. M. Midleton Papisto-mastix. p. 193.
avouches, that we are sure that the Mystery of inquitie did work in Paul's
time, and fell not a sleep so soon as Paul was dead, waking again 600. years
after, when this Mystery was disclosed etc. And therefore no marvel, though,
perusing Councels, Fathers, and Stories from the Apostles forward, we find the
print of the Popes feet etc. M. Parkins desiring Reformed Cath. p. 329.
To stop the mouths of Papists, who demand of us (says he) where our Church
was foure-score years before Luther: They are answered (says he) that our
Church has been since the days of the Apostles, and that in the very midst
of the Papacy. So supposing the Papacy, or Roman Church, to have continued
since the days of the Apostles.

Lastly the truth hereof is so certain, that the same is acknowledged by our
seuerest Survey of the BooK of common prayer in the Preface to the King p. 18.
Puritans, who speaking to the Kings Majesty give this wholesome persuasion:
Let not your Majesty be now deceived by the Popish Argument of supposed
Antiquity, as Joseph was with the old and mouldie bread of the Gibeonites etc.
And the rather (o christian King) take heed, because Antichrist began to work
even in the Apostles days. So undoubted, and to be supposed it is, that the
Argument drawn from the longest Continuance and greatest Antiquity is a
Popish Argument; And the Doctrine of the Pope or Church of Rome was so timely
working, as that it was in being even in the Apostles days.

For our Conclusion then, we have it here confessed, that ever since the time
of Constantin, and Pope Siluester, which contains some 1300 years, al Popes,
and the Church of Rome, have been so agreeable in Doctrine and Faith with our
Present Pope and Church, that therefore they are al censured for Antichrists,
and Rome for Babylon; the imagined Protestant Church, during the same time, not
having any one visible member in the world: And not only this, but that even
our first Christian Emperors are reproved by Protestants, in regard of their
very Religion, and their honoring and defending of the foresaid Popes. And as
for the Roman Churches continuance from Christ's time until the Raygne of
Constantin, it is plentifully acknowledged, that as she was founded by the
Apostles, so she continued in the doctrine of the Apostles, even until the
very times of S. Augustine, who flourished almost 100. years after Constantin;
in so much as during all the said time, the very Succession of Roman Bishops,
is granted by Protestants, to have been a good proof of the true Faith.

And whereas S. Austins Rule of making al such Doctrine truly Apostolical, as
has no known beginning since the Apostles, is approved, and applauded by the
learned Protestants; yet themselves likewise confess, that the allowance of
this Rule, is the opening of a window to bring in all Popery, so truly
Apostolical is the Doctrine of Papists. Add lastly, that the Antiquity of our
present Papistrie, is confessedly no less gray headed then the times of S.
Paul, and the other Apostles, and the continuance thereof ever since such, as
that perusing Councels, Fathers, and Stories from the Apostles, we still find
the print of the Popes feet. Now my kindest Aduocats in this so important a
Plea, are no other then Calvin, Suinglius, Zanchius, Danaeus, Beza,
Winckelmanus, Sebastianus Francus, Rhegius, Brocard, Brightman, Leigh, Napper,
Parkins, Whitaker, Powel, Fulk, Raynolds, Ridley, Jewel, Bunnie, Carthwright,
Parker, Field, Whitguift, Fotherbie, Willet, Midleton, and Morton, al of them
Protestant Writers, and men much renowned by their other Brethren.

A FVRTHER PROOF OF THE PRESENT ROMAN Religions Continuance from the Apostles
times to these days, is taken from the Christian belief of the Indians,
Armenians, Grecians and Brittans, al of them Converted in the days of the
Apostles. CHAPTER. VI.
IT is recorded by sundry Historiographers, and acknowledged for most true by
the learned Protestants, that many Heathen Nations were converted by the
Apostles themselves to the Faith of Christ, whereof peculiar instance is given
of India, Armenia, Graecia, Britanie etc. The Conversion of India is confessed
by Cent. 1. p. 37.
Osiander, and Comment. de Regno Christi p. 45.
Nicolaus Phillippi affirms S. Thomas to have been their first Apostle
Chemnitius Exam. part. 2. p. 7.
teaches, that S. Bartholomew preached the Ghospel to the Armenians. And as
for the Conversion of Greece, it clearly appears by Saint Paul's Epistles to
sundry of that Nation, as to the Corinthians, Ephesians, Thessalonians, and by
the Apocalypse chap. 1. verse. 11. Now as concerning the first Conversion of
Britanie, it was so undoubtedly Apostolic, as that Britannia etc. p. 40.
M. Cambden avouches that, It is certain that the Brittans received the
Christian Religion in the very infancy of the Church: In proof whereof he
there alleges sundry ancient Authorities: Ibid. p. 157. And See M. Hal in
his Apology against the Brovvnists. p. 58.
Further also teaching, that in (Britannie) flourished the Monastery of
Glassenburie, which takes its ancient beginning from Joseph of Arimathia etc.
for this the ancientest Monuments of this Monastery do testify etc. Neither is
there cause why we should doubt thereof. In like sort says Description of
Britanie annexed unto Holinshead etc. v. 1. p. 23.
M. Harison, That Joseph preached here in England in the Apostles times, his
Sepulcher yet in Glassenburie, and Epitaph affixed thereto is proof sufficient.
Remedy against Schism p. 24.
M. Henoch Clapham is so confident of the Britans conversion in the Apostles
times, as that he avouches, that our Schismatikes may as well ask me, what
assurance I have there was a King Henry, as demand what assurance I have of
the other? Against Rhem. Test. in 2. Cor. 12. fol. 316.
D. Fulk thefore calls them, The Catholic Brittans, with whom Christian
Religion had continued in succession since the Apostles times.

This then supposed, that all the former Countries were converted to
Christianity, by Christ, his Apostles, and disciples themselves: The next
point to be examined is, whether the said Faith and Religion which as then they
learned, received, and believed, and which for sundry succeding Ages they
practiced and professed, is more agreeable to the present Roman or Protestant
Faith.

And first as concerning the Indians Comment. de Regno Christi. l. 1. p. 45. 46.
D. Philippus Nicolai relates, that, India in sundry places is inhabited by
them in great number, who received the doctrine of the Ghospel from S. Thomas
the Apostle etc. upon the seventh day according to our custom they meet in
the Churches, that they may be present at the Sacrifices, and hear Sermons:
they use in their Sacrifices wine made of dried Grapes, giving bread, they not
only give the body of Christ, but also by drinking of the consecrated Chalice,
they give his blood, having before made confession of their sins etc. At the
entrance of the church, like unto the Papists, they are sprinkled with holy
water; with the same rite and the same religion they bury the dead etc.
praying unto Christ for their eternal Salvation etc. The Priests are so shaven
upon the head, that they have upon the crown the Image of the Cross. Amongst
them there are Societies of Monks, and companies of Sacred Virgins, shut up in
several houses. Chastity is kept by all them with a great desire of honesty,
abstinence, and religion etc. They strictly observe the fasts of Aduent, and
Lent etc. And In the honor of S. Thomas they keep a Festiual day. Yea he
further writes Ibid. p. 64.
of the remote Cataians of India, that they have their chapels, in which for
the safety of their Merchants trauayling in strange countries, Sacrifice is
offered with Popish ceremonies and Masses. Now by this testimony of so learned
a Protestant, it appears that the Indian Christians first converted by S.
Thomas, retain yet and practice these Catholic points of Faith: The real
presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the Eucharist: Confession of sins
before Receiving: Sprinkling with holy water: prayer for the dead; Shauing
Priests Crowns: The Image of the Cross: Companies of Monks and Nuns, their
Chastity and abstinence: The Feasts of Aduent and Lent: The keeping of holy
days in honor of Saints: And lastly, The Popish Mass and Ceremonies.

To come now to the Armenians Cent. 15. p. 477.
Osiander confesses that, In the year On thousand four hundred and thirty
(Pope) Eugenius then called a Council at Florence etc. To which Council the
Grecians, Armenians, Iacobins assented. M. Marbeck Com. Places. p. 258.
acknowledges, that at the Council of Florence the Christians of Armenia and
India consented to the Roman Church, and that the Greeks agreed: And where as
Vol. 2. Generat. 39.
Nauclerus records that Anno. 1145. The Ambassadors of the Armenian Bishops,
as also their Catholic, that is, their universal Metropolitan, who has under
him more then a thousand Bishops, came to Pope Eugenius being at Viterbo, and
having ended their journey after a year and a half, they offered their
Subjection to the Apostolical Sea; the same history is mentioned by M.
Symondes Upon the Revel. p. 223. 150. 250. And See Volater. Geograph l. 10.
and other Writers. And of the great agreement between the Armenians and the
Roman Church we may read Gomarus Speculum Ecclesiae p. 163 172.
and l. 2 c. 23. fol. 183.
Villamont in his voyages printed in French. But D. Philip descends more
particularly, and says of the Armenians: They have their blemishes; For in the
form of their Liturgy mention is made of Invocation, Comment. de Regno
Christi l. 1. p. 35. And see Cathol. Tradit. p. 207.
and Intercession of Saints; and of oblation of the Sacrament: As also Ibid. p
22.
Let the Christian Readers know this, that not only the churches of the
Graecians, but also Rutans, Georgians, and Armenians, and Indians, and
Aethiopians, who are become Christians, do hold the true and Real Presence of
the Body and Blood of our Lord, wheresoever the Eucharist is celebrated etc.
And Ibid. p. 56.
again: There are not wanting, who think that as yet there remain in sundry
places of Arabia some Mozarabes Christians, whom it is evident, in Africa and
Spain in former Ages, to have embraced the Religion of Christians, not much
unlike to the Popish Rites. By all which it appears, that the ancient
Armenians receiving their Religion from the Apostles, do agree with us
Catholics in Invocation of Saints: Cent. 16. p. 970.
The Real Presence: The oblation or Sacrifice of Christ's Body: In
acknowledging their obedience to the Church of Rome, and in brief, in their
Religion in general, not much unlike to that of the Papists.

Now as touching the Grecians Estate of the Church. p. 253.
Crispinus affirms, that, Acta Theologorum Vvittemb. and Ieremiae Patriarchae
Constantinop. de Augustana Confess. p. 55. 102. 128.
Anno. 870. the Greek and Latin Churches became divided only for the Primacie,
and diversity of Ceremonies: so fully did they at that time consent in all
other points. Osiander speaking of the other Oriental Churches further remote,
auerreth that, Anno 1585. the Christians who inhabit near to Mount Libanus,
became at last conquered, and subject to the Turkish Empire: Neither is that to
be maruailed at, for the Christians in the East have not sincere Religion, but
are, in most part of Articles, Popish. Sir Edwin Sands In his last leaf but
five.
in his Relation of the State of Religion used in the West parts of the world,
avouches that, The Greek Church does concur with Rome in opinion of
Transubstantiation, and generally in the Sacrifice, and whole body of the
Mass: In praying to Saints, and Auricular confession in offering Sacrifice and
prayer for the dead, Purgatory, and worshipping of Pictures etc. Yea the
Protestant Divines of Wittemberg do fully testify, that the Greek Church yet to
this day professes and teaches, Invocation of Saints and Angels Ib. p. 243.
368.
Relics Ib. p 243. 244 247. 251.
Worshipping of Images Ib. p. 86. 96. 100. 240. 380.
Transubstantiation p. 102. 104 And see Cath. Tradit. p. 129. 137.
Sacrifice The signifying p. 97. 99. 100.
Ceremonies of the Mass: p. 87. 10. and in Prefat.
Auricular Confession p. 79 89.
Enjoined Satisfaction p. 78 238
Confirmation with Chrisme p. 242. 326.
Extreme Unction p. 77. 242. And Cath. Trad. p. 197.
and all the seven Sacraments: Also p. 93. 102. 109.
Prayer for the dead p. 93. 104.
Sacrifice for the Dead p. 93. 109.
Alms for the dead: p. 224. 296. 367.
Freewil p. 132. 257.
Monachisme p 111. 129. 135.
vows of Chastity p 126.
The fast of Lent, and other set Fasting-dayes: That p. 129.
Priests may not marry after Orders taken: And lastly, to omit many others,
That p. 131. 138. 142.
the Tradition and doctrine of the Fathers is to be kept. So plainly in all
these chief Articles of Faith, does the Grecian Church remain unchanged, and
wholly consonant with the Roman.

But now at last to come to our Neighbors the Britans, whom we have proved
before to have been converted in the Apostles times; concerning them I will only
declare two things: First, that the Faith which at first they received, they
kept for six hundred years, even until the coming of S. Augustine into
England, unchanged, and the same, in all matters of weight and substance. The
Second, that the Faith and Religion which S. Augustine taught in England (and
which is formerly confessed to have been altogether Catholic or Romish) was
the self same Faith and Religion, which the Britans believed and professed,
some Ceremonies excepted.

Now as touching the First; M. Pageant of Popes. Cent. 1. c. 70.
Bale confesses that, The Brittans being converted by Joseph of Arimathia,
held that Faith at Austins coming. And Cent. 1. c. 90.
There was always amongst the Brittans preaching of Truth, most sure Doctrine,
and such Worship, as was by Gods commandment, given of the Apostles to the
Churches: whereupon he calls the then Brittan Church Cent. 1. c. 73.
the true Church of Christ. D. Fulk Answ. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 49.
affirms that, The Brittans before Austins coming, continued in the Faith of
Christ, even from the Apostles times; yea he calls the Brittans of S. Austins
time In 2. Cor. 12.12.
Catholics etc. with whom Christian Religion had continued in Succession since
the Apostles time. M. Fox Act. Mon. p. 463.
avouches that, The Brittans after the receiving of the Faith, never forsook
it for any manner of false preaching of other, nor for torments; and that In
his Protestat.
Religion remained in the Brittans vncorrupt and the Word of Christ truly
preached til the coming of S. Austin. But M. Midleton Papisto-mastix p. 202.
confirms this point further by succeeding testimonies of the ancient
Fathers, almost in every Age before that, in which Gregory lived, saying: The
Religion clearly taught in the Word of God brought hither first by Simon
Zelotes (Niceph. l. 2. c. 4.) Joseph of Arimathia (Gild^s) S. Paul the Apostle
(Theodoret de Curand. Graec. affect. l. 9.) al or some of them (was) watered
still on in the days of Tertullian (l. cont. Iudaeos) Origin (in Ezech. hom.
4.) Athanasius (Apol. 2.) Hilarie (l. de Synod. cont. Arian.) Chysostom (hom.
quod Christus sit Deus) Theodoret (Hist. l. 1. c. 10. and l. 4. c. 3.) Al which
Ancient Fathers speak honorably of the Church, Religion, and Prelates of
Brittanie. So exceeding far were the Brittans from being changed in their
Religion before the time when S. Augustine came into England.

Therefore to come to the second and main point, which is the true harmony and
agreement between the Apostolic Faith of the Brittans, and the Catholic Roman
Faith of S. Augustine. D. Morton laboring purposely to show Prot. Appeal. p. 75.
what, and of how great importance, the differences were between the Brittan
Bishops, and the Church of Rome, at Austins coming, can only instance in the
difference of Ceremonies, or ministering of Baptism, in keeping of Easter, and
in denial of Subjection unto Austin: which though he much endeavor to prove to
be matters of great importance, yet if they be considered in themselves, and
without pertinacie in the Defenders, they may with M. Brierlie most truly be
said to be few and small points: And the more if they should once be compared
with our other Roman Articles of Real Presence, Adoration of the Sacrament,
Mass, Confession, Freewil, Merit etc. In any one whereof D. Morton was not
able to give the least Instance of difference between the foresaid Brittans and
S. Austin: Wherefore to proceed in this same point: It is reported by
Hollinshead (out of S. Bid, hist. l. 2. c. 2) that S. Austin by the help of
King Edilbert obtained a meeting with the British Bishops and Doctors; where
he said unto them Beda hist. l. 2. c. 2. Hollinsh. vol. 1. p. 103. Godwine in
his Catalogue of Bish. p. 6.
If you will obey me in these three things: That you will celebrate Easter at the
due time: That you will minister Baptism, wherewith we are borne again to God,
according to the custom of the Roman and Apostolic Church: That you will
preach with us the Word of God to the Nation of the English: Al other things
which you do, though they be contrary to our customs, we will peaceably
suffer. In like sort says the l. 3. c. 13. p. 133.
Author of the History of Great Brittanie: The Brittan Bishops conformed
themselves to the doctrine and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, without
difference in any thing specially remembered, save only in the Celebration of
the Feast of Easter etc. Ibid p. 219. And See Ca^bdens Brita^. in English. p.
578.
And again, when they perceived the Saxons in some measure to approve it, they
began to make open Profession of it, as seeming therein to agree even with their
Enemies (the Saxons) howsoever otherwise in respect of language, situation, or
Law of Nations, they were divided. Yea the Beda hist. l. 2. c. 2. Hollinsh.
vol. 1. p. 102.
Brittan Bishops after conference had with S. Austin, confessed that they
understood, that it was the true way of justice which Austin preached: Whereupon
as Confut. of Purgat. p. 335.
D. Fulk acknowledges, Saint Austin did at the last obtain the aid of the
British Bishops to the Conversion of the Saxons Catalogue of Bishops. p. 11.
Lastly D. Godwin, writing of Theodore (who was Archbishop of Canterbury some
Fifty or Sixty years after S. Augustine) avouches, that unto him, all the
British Bishops, and generally al Britanie yealded obedience, and under him
conformed themselves in all things unto the Rites and discipline of the Church
of Rome. So evidently does that Primitive Faith of the Brittans in all most
substantial points wholly agree with that Faith which S. Austin taught us, and
which the Protestants have fully acknowledged to be Catholic, Roman, or
Popish: And yet is the said Faith taught us by S. Gregory and S. Austin,
termed by Chron. f. 161.
D. Cowper, the right belief: And by Act. Mon. p. 112.
M. Fox, the perfect Faith of Christ Ibid. p. 124.
and the true Faith of Christ: And thus from the premises it necessarily
follows, that our present Roman Religion, being so consonant, or rather the
same with that first Faith, which the Indians, Armenians, Graecians, and
Brittans, received from the Apostles themselves, that therefore no less
ancient, or continuing is our Roman Religion, then the Religion of the Apostles.

M. Brierly having produced diverse testimonies of Protestants, in proof that
the Indians, Graecians, and Armenians were converted to the Faith of Christ in
the Apostles times, as also, that the remnant of Christian Religion which they
yet preserve, is Roman Catholic, not Protestant: M. Morton directing a large
Reply hereto, does not so much as answer to any one of the foresaid testimonies
of his Brethren, Osiander excepted; of whom he says Prop. Appeal. p. 79.
We approve not Osianders censure etc. concerning the Christians in Mount
Libanus, tearming them Popish, for some flying speech. But he may now as well
say, we do not only, not approve Osianders censure, but neither the Censures,
and opinions of D. Philip, Nicolai, Gomarus, Willamont, Crispinus, the Divines
of Wittemberg, Cambden, Harison, Hollinshead, Hal, Clapham, Fulk, Marbeck,
Symondes, Sands, Bale, Fox, Midleton, Godwine, and Cowper; al of them
Protestants, and yet al of them thus affording their helping hands, for the
proof of our agreement in Faith and Religion, with the Doctrine delivered by
the Apostles themselves.

THE SECOND BOOK, WHEREIN IS PROVED THROVGH ALL THE CHIEF ARTICLES OF RELIGION,
AND THAT BY THE Confessions of Protestants, that the same Faith Which is now
taught by the Roman Church, was anciently taught by the Primitive Church of
Christ.
THAT GENERAL COVNCELS DO TRVLY represent the Church of Christ: And of the
Credit and Authority given by Protestants to the said Councels. CHAPTER I.
AS in Politic government, our Parliament, consisting of Prince, Peers,
Knights, and Burgesses, does truly represent the whole Body of the
Commonwealth; and withal is endowed with full power and authority to enact and
establish Laws, which every particular Subject is bound to obey and observe:
So in government Ecclesiastical, a General Council, consisting of the Head of
the Church, the Bishops, and Pastors, does truly represent unto us the whole
Body of the Church itself; and in like sort is enriched with plenarie power
and virtue, to create Decrees and Statutes, which may bind the souls and
consciences, of every particular member of the said Church.

To which purpose D. Whitaker confesses expressly that De Conciliis p. 1. 10.
The Church is represented in a General Council. And again Ib. p. 19.
Neither is that speech altogether to be disliked, that a Council is the
Church Representative. M. Ridley further avouches that Act. Mon. p. 1288.
Councels do indeed represent the universal Church, and being so gathered
together in the name of Christ, they have a promise of the gift, and guyding
of his Spirit, into al truth. And the same Doctrine is proved by D. Bilson
saying Perpetual Government. p. 392.
As in Civil Policy, not al Persons are called together, but certain Chief
to represent the State, and consult for the whole Commonwealth: So in the
Government of the Church, it is as sufficient in right, that some of every
place excelling others in dignity, should be sent from every Realm far
distant; and by that means, they had the consent of the whole world to the
Decrees of their Councels.

The Council thus lively representing the Church, it is hereupon further
granted by D. Bilson, that, as Ib. p 372.
To have no Judge for the ending of Ecclesiastical contentions were the utter
subversion of al peace: so, according to him Ib. p. 370
Synods (are) an external judicial means to discern error; the same being as
he teaches Ib. p. 372.
strengthened with the Promise of our Savior; and accordingly observed by the
ancient Fathers, who, says he Ib. p. 374.
In all Ages, as well before, as since the great Council of Nice, have approved
and practiced this (course) as the surest means to decide Doubts. With whom
agrees Melancthon saying In Council. Theol. par. 2. p. 1.
Let them assemble General or National Councels etc. Because it is written: Tell
the Church. This was the custom in the Church from the very beginning etc.
And Councels are the proper Judgments of the Church. And Ib. p. 2. And see l.
1. Epist. p. 211.
It is requisite that there be Judgments in the Church; neither can other
Nations but be scandalized if they shall hear that we refuse the Judgments of
al Synods.

And whereas some object, that Councels may err, M. Hooker Ecc. Pol. p. 27.
answers thereto himself, and further concludes that Ib. p. 28.
The will of God is to have us do whatsoever the Sentence of Judicial and Final
Decision shall determine; yea though it seem in our private opinion to swerve
utterly from that which is right etc. And that without this, it is almost
impossible we should avoid confusion, or ever hope to attain peace. And this
Sentence, says he Ib. p. 28.
is ground sufficient for any reasonable man's conscience to build upon,
whatsoever his own opinion were, as touching the matter before in question.
The same truth is taught by his dearest friend D. Couel assuring us, that, If
Modest Examination p. 110.
Synods want, the Church neither at any time was, nor indeed can safely be
without Tempests, yea sundry Protestants, do jointly teach and gather from the
Council of the Apostles mentioned in their Acts Act. 15.2. etc.
the necessity of Councels White. in his Def. p. 661. Carthwr. 16. and p.
678. Raynolds in his Confer. p. 254. 255 Bilson in his Perpet. Govern. p. 373.
for the deciding of Controversies; and further acknowledge the presence and
assistance of the Bilson ib. p. 372. 373. 374. Ridley Act. Mon. p. 1288.
Holy Ghost in direction of them into al truth.

From hence it is, that sundry Protestants do nothing doubt, to submit
themselves and their writings, to the Judgment and Determination of a general
Council. So their learned Beza in a Preface Ad Acta Colloq. Montisbel. Resp.
p. 1. p. 2.
to one of his books, thus submits himself: Let al these be submitted to the
Judgments of al true Doctors and Orthodoxal Divines, and especially of a
free, holy, and lawful Synod (if God shall grant it at any time) M. Hooker
testifyeth that Pref. to Eccl. Pol. p. 28 2^.
M. Beza in his last book but one, professes himself to be now weary of such
combats and encounters, whether by word or writing, insomuch as he finds that
Controversies are thereby made but brawles, and therefore wishes that in some
common lawful assembly of Church, al these strifes may be at once decided
Diverse Degrees of Ministers in his Epistle to the Ministers of the
Low Countries. B. 3. fine
I heartily wish (says D. Sarauia) that there may be a general Council, that as
it becomes me, I refuse not to be judged of my Judgment: But if otherwise
etc. Let us expect the Judgment of God. And another Protestant Writer
testifyeth of himself, and of his other Brethren, that Author of Cath.
Traditions p. 57. And see Hospin. Concord. Discord. fol. 186.
The learned and greatest men among them, do protest to submit themselves to a
general and free Council. In like sort D. Sutclif avouches in behalf of
Protestants in general, that Reuievv of Kellisons Survey p 42.
It is false that (Protestants) will admit no Judge but Scriptures: For we
appeal (says he) still to a lawful general Council etc. And, In the mean time
we content ourselves with National Councels, and their Determinations. As also
Ib p. 102.
Private men do submit themselves to the Determination of a free general
Council, and in the mean while to their National Churches. Lastly the
authority of general Councels is so great, and the scandal in contemning them
so offensive, that a Protestant Writer ingenuously confesses that Cath.
Traditions p. 58.
A man can not now adays read the writings of the ancient Fathers, nor the
Histories of the Apostolic Churches, no not the holy Scripture it self,
without finding very many ceremonies and fashions of speaking, not used among
the Protestants of France; from whence it happens that many do change their
belief, being offended at the contemning of Councels etc.

From al which I will briefly conclude, that seeing by the free testimonies of so
many of the learned Protestants both strangers and neighbors, General
Councels do truly represent the Church of Christ, and are the surest means for
the deciding of Ecclesiastical Controversies, being therein directed, and
inspired by the Holie-Ghost himself, and so freed from error in the decrees of
Faith and manners: And seeing also for these strongest Reasons, Protestants
pretend to submit themselves, their writings, and their doubts finally also, to
their Determination; that therefore for the decision of Controversies in
Religion, Catholics and so many learned Protestants do jointly agree herein:
That the Authority of Ecumenical Councels is sacred, infallible, and most
powerful, and for such, acknowledged and respected by the humble submission
thereto, of either Party.

THAT THE ARGUMENT DRAWN FROM the Authority of the Primitive Church of
Christ, and of her Doctors and Pastors, is an Argument of force; And for such
approved by sundry learned Protestants. CHAPTER II.
THere is no period, or difference of time, wherein the Church of Christ has
more gloriously shined, either for purity of Faith, or Sanctity of life, then
during the time of her primitive being: which, according to the account Ievvel
in his Sermon at Paul's Cross And in his Reply. p. 1. Humfrey. in vita Iuelli
p. 123. 124. VvitaKer Resp. ad Ranones Campiani. p. 90.
of the learned Protestants, extended itself to the full term of the first
six hundred years, after Christ our Savior his glorious Ascension: In greatest
confidence whereof D. Jewel (whom M. Mason Consecration of English. Bish. p. 267,
styleth and esteems a Jewel) made his so aduenturous a Challenge, when he
publicly exclaimed at Paul's Cross: O Gregory, O Austin, O Hierom, O
Chrysostom, O Leo, O Denis, O Anaclet, O Calixt, O Paul, O Christ! If we be
deceived, you have deceived us; this you taught us etc. And, As I said before,
so I say now again, I am content to yeald and subscribe, if any of our
learned Adversaries, or if all the learned men that be alive, be able to bring
any one sufficient Sentence, out of any old Catholic Doctor or Father, or
out of any old General Council etc. for the space of 600. years after Christ,
which makes against any one of 27. Articles by him there repeated and
defended. And this he protested to preach, not as carried away with the heat
of Zeal, but as moved with the simple truth.

This proffer of D. Jewel was so pleasing to D. Whitaker, that he most
valiantly renewed it, in behalf of al Protestants Resp. ad Rat. Ca^p. p. 90.
And see p. 9.
saying to our glorious Martyr Campian: Attend, Campian, the speech of Jewel
was most true and constant, when provoking you to the Antiquity of the (first)
six hundred years, he offered, that if you could show, but any one clear and
plain Saying, out of any one Father or Council, he would grant you the
victory. It is the offer of us al: The same do we al promise, and we will
perform it. With like courage steppeth forth Of the Church l. 5. in his
Appendix thereto Part. 1. p. 33.
D. Field: We say (says he) with Bishop Jewel in his worthy Challenge, that
all the learned Papists in the world, can not prove, that either Gregory, or
Austin, held any of these twenty seven Articles of Popish Religion mentioned
by him. Neither will D. Morton yeald a foot herein, stoutly auouching that Prot.
Appeal. p. 354.
It has been the common and constant profession of al Protestants, to stand
unto the Judgment of Antiquity, for the continuance of the first four
hundred years and more, in all things. Yea he further publicly professes that
Protest. Appeal p. 573. 574.
Protestants in oppugning Doctrines which they call new and not Catholic etc.
are so far from suffering the limitation of the first 440. years, that they give
the Romanists the scope of the first five hundred or six hundred years, as our
Adversaries themselves do acknowledge. For D. Stapleton writing of the opinion
of Luther, Calvin, and Melancthon, says, that they did yeald unto the trial of
truth, by the testimony of Antiquity for the space of the first Five or Six
hundred years. M. Campian a Jesuit, reporting the Challenge of Bishop Jewel
for the mayntenance of these Articles, which he then propounded for Catholic,
says, that he appealed unto the Judgment of Antiquity, for the first six
hundred years. And again Ibid. p. 512
Protestants in the disquisition of truth, do not absolutely bound the name of
Antiquity within the compass of the first Centurie of years, but are content
to allow it a longer extent, and therefore in all Doctrines which are truly
Catholic etc. they refuse not to be tried by the testimonies of the ancient
Fathers, in the first five hundred years after Christ. Yea Ib. p. 680.
we repose our security in those two impregnable fortresses of the Catholic
Faith: one is the ancient Tradition of the Primitive Church, as the Protestants
are confessed to profess etc. So willingly do the learned Protestants provoke
and appeal to the Primitive Church of Christ, for the certain trial of truth
in matters of Faith and Religion. Al which they pretend to do, because, as
Luther says Tom. 2. Germ. f. 243. Epist. ad Marchionem Bran^eburg.
It is dangerous and horrible, to hear or believe any thing, which is
contrary to the unanimous testimony of Faith, and to the doctrine of the
holy and Catholic Church, which she from the beginning agreably kept for
above One thousand five hundred years. And as Chemnitius truly observes Exam.
par. 1. f. 74.
No man doubts but the Primitive Church, received from the Apostles and
Apostolical men, not only the Text of Scripture, but also the right and native
sense thereof, whereupon says he Ibid. p. 64.
we are greatly confirmed in the true and sound sense of Scripture, by
testimony of the ancient Church. Which according also to other Protestants
Harmony of Confess. p. 400.
Is the true and best Mistress of Posterity, and going before l^adeth us the
way. Yea says D. Beard Retractiue from Romish Religion. p. 372,
without al question, al truth was taught by the Apostles to the Primitive
Church, and no part thereof was left unrevealed etc. Besides, it is as certain,
that, that Church which next succeeded the Apostles, was the most pure and
absolute Church, whether for doctrine or manners, matter or form, that ever
was in the world; and therefore to degenerate from that, must needs be to
degenerate from the purity and sanctity of Religion. And again, it can not
be denied, that etc. though the Primitive Age of the Church, after the
Apostles, was most pestered with Heretics, yet evermore the truth prevailed,
both in regard of birthright, and predominance. D. Morton Declares that
Protestant Appeal p. 513.
In the maine question of discerning the true books of holy Writ, the
Protestants do appeal etc. unto the Judgment of the Primitive Church,
attributing unto it the right and Authority, of assigning and determining what
is the perfect Canon of Scriptures. With whom agrees Chemnitius saying Exam.
part. 1. p. 69.
Andradius affirms that the testimony of the Church is either always to be
rejected, or always to be received: I answer etc. where the Fathers set down
this Tradition of the books of Scripture, they prove it by testimonies of the
Primitive Church; if with the same course of certayntie, they shall do the like
of other Traditions, whereof sometimes they make mention, it is to be respected,
and they are to be received by the same law. D. Sarauia confirms the
authority of the Primitive Church, from her special assistance by the
Holie-Ghost, saying: The De diuersis Ministrorum Gradibus. p. 8.
Holie-Ghost, who governs the Church, is the best interpreter of Scriptures;
from him therefore is the true interpretation to be sought; and seeing he can not
be contrary to himself, who ruled the Primitive Church, and governed it by
Bishops, it is not agreeable to truth, now to cast them off. D. Jewel
acknowledges in general that Def. of the Apology p. 35.
The Primitive Church which was under the Apostles and Martyrs, has evermore
been accounted the purest of al others without exception. D. White testifies
that way to the Church Ep. Dedic. nu. 8
The Primitive Church, and all the Doctors thereof, would never yeald, I will not
say in an opinion, but not so much as in a form of speech, or in the change of
a letter, sounding against the Orthodoxal Faith: whereof he further gives
sundry pertinent examples, concluding that, So religious were they that had
Religion; that they would not exchange a letter, or a Syllable of the Faith,
wherewith our Savior had put them in trust. And in another place he avouches
that Ibid. p. 385.
In the first six hundred years, there was no substantial or fundamental
innovation received into the Church. So plentifully are the deseruedst praises
of the Primitive Church, during the first six hundred years, freely given and
set forth by our greatest Protestants, thus much acknowledging and admiring the
purity of her Doctrine, and appealing to her Tribunal, for the Determination
of their doubts.

And I can not but here admire, the potent force and violence of truth, which
racketh from her deadliest Enemies, the true Confession thereof: For what
Church during those primitive and purest times, was, even in the judgment of
Protestants, so faithful, so chaste, so constant in soundnes of Faith, and
sincerity of manners, as the Catholic Roman Church? What Bishops ever so
renowned either for feeding of their flocks, or for patient suffering of so
many and so cruel torments, yea and death it self, as the Popes and Bishops of
Rome? Ep. Ded. of. F. Persons in his Ansvv. to him.
Does not Sir Ed. Cook himself say? We do not deny but that Rome was the
Mother Church, and had thirty two Virginal Martyrs of her Popes arow: What
Doctors, what Fathers, what Pastors, more duly honored by all Posterity,
then such as were strictly linked in Faith and Communion, with the then Roman
Church? D. Whitaker, being to answer D. Sanders his truest assertion, that the
Roman Church was not changed during the first six hundred years after Christ,
through clearest evidence of truth, acknowledges the same, saying l. De
Antichrist p. 35. etc.
During all that time, the Church was pure and flourishing, and inuiolably
taught and defended, the Faith delivered from the Apostles. D. Jewel confesses
that Reply to Harding. p. 246.
As Well S. Austin, as also other godly Fathers rightly yealded Reverence to the
Sea of Rome etc. for the purity of Religion, which was there preserved along
time without spot. And that, The Godly Fathers (of those gray headed times)
sought to the Church of Rome, which then for purity in Religion, and
constancy in the same, was most famous above al others, Sundry other such
like testimonies, duly dignifying the ancient Roman Church, I willingly
pretermit, having treated elsewhere of the same subject more at large.

But who likewise more peremptorily pretend, the truest harmony between their
Doctrine, and the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, as also the just defense and
patronage of their due credit and esteem, then our Modern Protestants? For to
omit D. Jewels former complaint, that if Protestants be deceived, it was
Gregory, Austin, Hierom, Chrysostom etc. that deceived them; not any one
Sentence, in any one Father or Council of the first six hundred years,
making, in his opinion, against Protestancie: D. Sutcliffe confidently
avouches that Examination of Kellisons Survey p. 17.
The Fathers, in all points of Faith, are for us (says he) and not for the
Pope. D. Willet makes his solemn Protestation Antilog. p. 263.
I take God to witness, before whom I must render account etc. that the same
Faith and Religion which I defend, is taught and confirmed, in the more
Substantial Points, by those Histories, Councels, and Fathers, that lived
within five or six hundred years after Christ. And again Ib. p. 264.
It is most notoriously evident, that for the grossest points of Popery, as
Transubstantiation, Sacrifice of the Mass, Worshipping of Images,
Justification by works, the Supremacy of the Pope, Prohibition of Marriage,
and such other, they (to wit the Papists) have no show at al, of any evidence
from the Fathers within five hundred years after Christ. Pierre de Moulin, a
French Protestant, is so undertaking herein, that Defenc. against Coefteau p.
139.
In this Challenge (says he) I will lay down my Ministers cloak, ready to be
frocked in a Monks Cowle, if I shall find a man that will satisfy me in this
point. Melancthon says Ep. ad Cratonem.
for the settling of our minds, I think the consent of Antiquity to be of great
force etc. The best Masters and guides to us, may be, Ireneus, Tertullian,
Augustine, who left to Posterity many things of this kind. And Epist. ad
Frider. Miconium.
As I willingly advise with such (writers) living, as have some use of
Spiritual things: So I think these Ancients, whose writings are approved, are
likewise to be consulted. For I think, the Church generally believed that,
which they have written: And, it is not secure, to depart from the common
opinion of the old Church. Yea others term it in some of their Brethren,
Paradoxical, to disclayme and dissent from the ancient Fathers, whereof one
says The Author of a Brief Answ. to certain object. ag. the Descension of
christ into Hell. p 1.
where you say we must build our Faith, on the Word of Faith, tying us to
Scripture only, you give just occasion to think, that you neither have the
ancient Fathers of Christ's Church, nor their Sons succeding them, agreeing
with you in this point, which implies a defense of some strange Paradox. D.
Bancroft, doubts not to prefer the ancient Fathers, before the learned
Protestants Survey p. 378. and p. 64.
For M. Calvin, and M. Beza, I do think of them (says he) as their writings
deserve; but yet I think better of the ancient Fathers, I must confess it.
Yea, he purposely undertakes their just defense against the Puritans; for
where S. Austin said to Julian the Pelagian Contra Julian. l. 2. c. 10
Truly I have what to do, I have whither to fly, for I may provoke from these
Pelagian darkness to these so clear Catholic Lights (of the Fathers) which I
now do. But tell me what will thou do, whither will thou fly? I from the
Pelagians to these, thou from these to whom? etc. But thou dare call them
blind; And has time so confounded lowest things with highest? Are darkness
called light, and light darkness, that Pelagius, Celestius, Iulianus (al of them
Heretics) do see, and Hilarie, Gregory, Ambrose etc. are blind? This so
worthy a Saying of S. Austin, being alleged against the Puritans, by D.
Bancroft, he thereupon infers Survey. p. 352. 353. 351.
Surely I do not perceive, why I may not without offense, apply the same words
to those men in those days etc. Were there never learned men, before you were
taught the Principles of the Geneua Discipline? etc. Do you know what was in
the Apostles times, better then they, who succeeded the Apostles etc. Is the
light that showed it self so many ways in the Ancient Fathers, become such
darkness, that Carthwright, Trauerse, Fenner (to whom I might as truly add,
Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza etc.) and such like, should be thought so
clearlie-sighted? And shall Ireneus, Tertulian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierom,
Chrysostom, Austin, Gregory, Hilarie, and all the rest of those whorthie men be
reckned blind? So clearly does D. Bancroft the Protestant, late Primate of
England, acknowledge the shining light and glory of the ancient Fathers, and
defend their authority, from the imputations of Nouelists.

D. Morton joyfully acknowledges Prot. Appeal. p. 33.
That the ancient Fathers etc. did obtain in the Church of Christ, honorable
Titles; as Augustine, the great Mall, or hammer against Heretics. Basil, the
light of the world: Chrysostom The Doctor of the whole world: Athanasius, the
Pillar, as it were, of the Church: Nazianzene, by a phrase of excellency, the
Divine: Origin, the Master of the churches: Cyprian, the President of the
whole world: And lastly, Ambrose; A man called by God, unto an Apostolical
Presidencie. Now as for the Confidence which Catholics place in the ancient
Fathers, D. Morton testifyeth for us, that Ib. p 348
Never did the ancient Jews more boast, of their original and descent from
father Abraham, then do the Romanists glory, in their pretended consent of
ancient Fathers.

And though it be true, that the ancient Fathers were men: yet Eccl. Pol. p.
115.
The strength of man's Authority (in M. Hookers judgment) is affirmatively
such, that the weightiest affairs in the world depend thereupon. Yea Ib. p. 116.
whatsoever we believe concerning salvation by Christ, although the Scripture
be therein the ground of our belief, yet is man's Authority (says he) the key
that opens the door etc. The Scripture could not teach us these things,
unless we believed men.

And whereas the sacred Scriptures do foretell, sundry things to be performed by
the Church of Christ in succeeding Ages, the answerable accomplishment thereof
in particular, being matter of fact, can be to us at this day no otherwise made
known, then upon the Credit of humane Testimony, commended to us by
Ecclesiastical Histories: In which respect D. Whitaker truly teaches that
Cont. Duraeum l. 7. p. 472.
History plainly testifyeth, all that to be accomplished which the ancient
Prophets have foretold, concerning the Propagation, amplitude, and glory of
the Church: So that there is no doubt (says he) but that Ecclesiastical
History, does strengthen the Predictions of the Prophets. Now from the
Premises we may briefly remember, that not only al Catholics, but even the
Primest Protestants that ever were, do thus willingly appeal, for the decision
of Controversies in Faith and Religion, to the Censure and Determination of the
Church of Christ; which for the first six hundred years was confessedly
sincere, holy, and religious: Acknowledging withal, the integrity and purity
of the Roman Church during the said time, and professing, to believe and teach
no other Faith and religion, then that which was taught and believed, by the
ancient Fathers of the same Church.

This then supposed, I will now descend in particular to the chiefest articles
of Faith, disputed at this day between Catholics and Protestants: And will only
examine, whether the Roman, or Protestant Church, is now more agreeable with the
confessed Faith and Religion, of the Fathers of the Primitive Church, in the
foresaid points. And for the cleerest preventing of the manifold shifts and
euasions, used by Protestants when they are urged in this kind, I will only
produce such proof from the Primitive Church and Fathers, as is recorded and
confessed by Protestants, and by them disliked and rejected, as agreeing with
our Roman Faith, and condemning Protestancie.

THAT THE FATHERS AND DOCTOVRS OF the Primitive Church, believed and taught,
that S. Peter, was ordained by Christ, the Head of the Apostles, and of the
whole Church, and that the Church was founded upon S. Peter, it is Confessed by
Protestants themselves. CHAPTER. III.
BEcause the deciding of this present Controversy of the Churches Primacie, is
indeed the speediest, and most certain means, for the final dissoluing of al
doubts in Religion, either already begun, or hereafter to arise: I will therefore
more particularly, and at large, set down the manifest, and confessed Doctrine
and practice of the Primitive Church, concerning the same.

And first, as al government whether Politic or Ecclesiastical, the more it
rese^bleth the government of this world, by the Creator thereof, ONE GOD, or
the government of the Church, during our Saviors abode upon earth, by ONE
CHRIST, the more it is to be approved, commended, and followed: so nothing is
holden more Sovereign, or more needful for the procuring or preserving of
unity and concord, in any Body or Community, then the unity of one Head,
or government Monarchical.

Hereupon the Bell. de Romans Pont l. 1. c. 10. and l. 2. c 12.
Catholic Church does believe and teach: That S. Peter was ordained by Christ
the Supreme Ecclesiastical Head, not only over the rest of the Apostles, but
even over the whole Church: And that the Bishop of Rome succeeds him in the
same Power and Authority. The direct Luther l de Potestate Papae and in
assertione Art. 25. Calu. l. 4 Instit. c 6. Morton in his Appeal l. 2. c. 5.
Sect. 11.
Negative whereof, is not only taught by the Protestant-Church, but withal it
further believes and maintayneth, that the Bishop of Rome, in steed of being
the true Successor of S. Peter, and the Vicar of Christ, is the true
Antichrist, or Man of Sin, whereof so much is foretold in the sacred
Scriptures.

To discover now the Faith and practice of the Primitive Church, and to begin
with the confessed Primacie of S. Peter: And first, that for the preserving of
unity and preventing of Schisms, he was appointed by Christ the Supreme Head
of that slender Body, or little Church of the twelve Apostles. Whereas S. Hierom
(l. 1. cont. Iouinianum.) teaches, that Amongst the Twelve one is chosen, that
a Head appointed, the occasion of Schism should be taken away. From hence In
his Examination etc. against the Plea of the Innocent. p. 106. 107.
D. Couel, having spoken of the necessity of One above the rest, to suppress
the seed of dissension, thus argues most strongly: If this were the Principal
means to prevent Schisms and dissentions in the Primitive Church, when the
Graces of God were far more abundant, and eminent then now they are: Nay, if
the Twelve were not like to agree, except there had been one Chief among them
(for says Hierom, among the Twelve one was therefore chosen, that a Chief
being appointed, occasion of dissension might be prevented.) How can they
think, that equality would keep all the Pastors in the world in peace and
unity etc. For in all Societies Authority (which can not be, where al are
equal) must procure unity and obedience.

In like sort the Cen. 4. Col. 556.
Centurists confess, that Optatus l. 2. cont. Donat. writes: It can not be
denied, but that thou know in the City of Rome, the Episcopal Chair to
have been first bestowed upon Peter, in which Peter, the Head of all the
Apostles, sat, whereupon he is called Cephas; In which one Chair unity should
be kept by all, least the other Apostles should every one defend his own; So
that he should be esteemed a Schismatic and sinner, who should erect another
against that singular Sea; therefore there is one Chair etc. Cent. 4. Col. 1100.
They also reprehend him, for that he extolleth overmuch the Chair of Peter,
and the Succession of the Roman Bishops. And In his Retentiue etc. p. 248.
D. Fulk charge Optatus with absurdity, for saying of Peter: He deserved to
be preferred before all the Apostles, and he alone received the Keys of the
kingdom of heaven, to be communicated to the rest. Retentiue against Bristows
Motives p. 248.
D. Fulk Retentiue against Bristows Motives p. 248.
speaking of S. Leo and S. Gregory Bishops of Rome, confesses that, The
mystery of iniquity having wrought in that Seat near five or six hundred
years before them (so anciently before them did the Roman Sea in his opinion
begin to be Papal) and then greatly increased, they were so deceived with long
continuance of error, that they thought the dignity of Peter was much more
over the rest of his fellow Apostles, then the holy Scriptures of God do
allow. Yea the Cent. 3. col. 85.
Centurists recite and reprove Origin (hom. 17. in Lucam) for calling Peter,
the Prince of the Apostles. And D. Raynolds In his Conference p. 485.
cites S. Dionysius (de diuinis nominibus. c. 3.) tearming Peter, the chief
and most ancient Top (or Head) of the Apostles. Apocalypsis in cap. 13. p. 343.
This point is so evident in the Fathers, that M. Brightman thinks, It has
its original from a corrupt Doctrine, to wit, the false boasted Authority of
the Chair of Peter, whereof almost at every word the Roman Bishop braggeth;
and which the Ancient Saints Tertullian, Cyprian and others, extolled with
immoderate praises, not knowing with what impiety they prepared the way etc.

But the Fathers further proceed, teaching that the whole Church was built or
founded upon S. Peter. To which purpose the Rhemists citing S. Gregory, D.
Fulk answers: The Ag. Rhem. Test. in Math. 16.19.
Authority of Gregory etc. being a Bishop of Rome himself, and so near the
time of the open revelation of Antichrist in the Romish Sea, is partial in this
case, and therefore not to be heard. And again Leo Ibid. verse. 18.
Bishop of Rome, striving for the dignity of his Sea, as his Predecessors
Zosimus, Boniface, and Celestin, had done before etc. is no equal Judge in this
case. The Cent. 8. col. 555.
Centurists charge S. Hilarie, that he speaks incommodiously of Peter the
Apostle, that he lies under the building of the Church, and is made the
Foundation thereof. They Cent. 4. col. 557. and see col. 1250.
likewise affirm, that S. Hierom says incommodiously of Peter, that our Lord
built his Church upon him: And for the like Saying, they Cent. 4. col. 558. and
see col. 1250.
reprove Nazianzene. Yea they Cent. 3. col. 84.
charge Tertullian, that, not without error he seems to think that the Keys
were committed only to Peter, and that the Church was built upon him. And they
Cent. 3. col. 84.
confess, that, Cyprian in many places affirms, the Church to be founded
upon Peter, as l. 1. ep. 3. l. 4. ep. 9. etc. And they Cent. 3. col. 85.
charge Origin Tract. 5. in Math. to say, Peter by promise deserved to be made
the foundation of the Church Resp. Ad Bellar. disp. part. 1. p. 277.
Danaeus reproves the Fathers in general, for that, they (says he) naughtily
expounded of the Person of Peter, that Saying of Christ, Math. 16. Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock, I will build my Church Instit. l. 4. c. 6. sec. 6.
Calvin says: The Church to be built upon Peter, because it is said, upon this
Rock etc. some of the Fathers have so expounded, but the whole Scripture
gaynsayeth. Yea the Fathers kept a yearly Festiual day in honor of S. Peter's
Sea or Chair: which point Bellarmine confirming by the testimonies of sundry
Fathers, Danaeus In Resp. ad Bellar. Disp. part. 1. p. 275. 276.
only answers, that the Fathers assertion thereof, was the Judgments and
Testimonies of the Church then corrupted and bewitched, or made blind with this
error.

And whereas Anacletus ep. 3. Leo ep. 53. and Gregory l. 6. ep. 37. do al of
them teach, a special pre-eminence to be given even to the Seas of Alexandria
and Antioch, before other Apostolical or Patriarchal Seas, in respect of S.
Peter, who first founded them, Danaeus In Resp. ad Bell. part. 1. p 275.
in his answer to Bellarmin obiecting them, in steed of a better evasion,
barely writes: What he brings out of Anacletus, Leo, and Gregory, is in
vain, seeing they plead for themselves in their own cause. But D. Field of the
Church l. 5. c. 31. p. 162.
ingenuously confesses, that There were in the beginning only Three
Patriarcks, to wit, the Bishop of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch: The reason, as
some think, why the Bishops of these Seas were preferred before others, and
made Patriarcks, was in respect had to blessed S. Peter, who was, in sort
before expressed, in order and honor the First and Chiefest of the Apostles
etc. Al Churches are rightly called Apostolic, but these more specially, in
which the Apostle Peter sat: And in proof of this he alleges Anacletus, Leo,
and Gregory before mentioned. D. Fulk In his Confut. of Papists quarrels. etc.
p. 4.
affirms in general, that many of the ancient Fathers were deceived, to
think something more of (Peter's) Prerogative, and the Bishop of Romes dignity,
then by the word of God was given to either of them.

Hence then we see, that Catholics defending S. Peter to have been appointed
by Christ the Head of the Apostles, and of the whole Church: As also the Church
to have been built or founded upon Peter, and in this regard Peter's Sea to have
been preferred before the Seas of al other Patriarcks; do herein but symbolize
with the ancient Fathers, Gregory, Leo, Optatus, Hierom, Hilarie, Origin,
Cyprian, Tertullian, Dionysius Areopagita, and the other Fathers in general,
who are here produced and reproved in these respects, by the Protestant
Writers, the Centurists, Calvin, Danaeus, Brightman, Fulk, Field, Couel and
Raynolds.

IT IS CONFESSED BY PROTESTANTS, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
believed and taught, the Bishop of Rome to Succeed S. Peter in the Primacie of
the whole Church. CHAPTER IV.
Having hitherto proved the Primacie of S. Peter over the whole Church; the
next point to be considered, is, whether the said Primacie, not being
personally tied to him, as to dye with him, but rather being to survive and
continue in his Successors, to the Churches good, even to the end of the
world; whether, I say, the said Primacie, is derived to the Bishop of Rome, as
the Successor of S. Peter. And herein D. Bilson In his true difference etc.
part. 1. p. 147.
confesses most plainly, and in general, that The Ancient and Learned Fathers,
call the Roman Bishop, Peter's Successor. The Centurists Cent. 5. col. 1262.
charge S. Leo, that, He painfully goes about to prove, that singular
pre-eminence was given to Peter above the other Apostles, and that thence rose
the Primacie of the Roman Church. And the like is confessed of S. Leo by D.
Raynolds In his conference p. 42. 43.
who further grants, that Conference p. 218. 219.
The Fathers say, Peter was Bishop of Rome, naming Hierom, Eusebius, Ireneus.
And Chron.
D. Cowper calls Linus, first Bishop of Rome after Peter. Osiander Cent. 4.
p. 294.
speaking of the ancient Council of Sardis decreing Appeals to Rome,
professes to deliver the then common opinion, and reason thereof, saying: It
was the ancient, common, and received error, that Peter was the first Bishop
of Rome, therefore this honor was thought due to the Successor of Peter,
according to the common opinion etc. Bucer In Praeparatorijs ad Concilium.
says: We plainly confess, that among the ancient Fathers, the Roman Church
obtained Primacie above others, as that which has the Chair of S. Peter, and
whose Bishops have almost always been accounted the Successors of Peter. Yea
the ancient Fathers were so confident herein, that they taught the Primacie of
the Roman Bishop, to be the ordinance of Christ himself, and not any Humane or
Ecclesiastical Institution. So Gelasius (In Decretis cum 70. Episcopis)
teaching that, The Roman Church is preferred before the other Churches, not by
any Synodical Constitutions, but has obtained the Primacie, by the
Euangelical voice of our Lord saying: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will
build my Church. The Cent. 5. col. 1274.
Centurists hereupon infer, and confess that, Gelasius contended that the
Roman Church, by the law of God, was the First (or Chief) of al Churches. In
like sort De Regno Christi l. 2. p. 149.
Philippus Nicolai grants that, Pope Julius (who lived Anno. 370.) as
Socrates and Sozomene relate, sent Letters to the Eastern Churches, in which,
as the Letters witness, he often declares the right of calling General
Councels, to belong to him alone, who by singular Privilege, even by Gods
ordinance, is the Prelate of the first Sea etc. to wit, the Roman.

This Divine ordinance was so believed, reverenced, and obeyed by the Fathers
of the Primitive Church, as that, nothing is more manifest in all their
writings, or other histories, and Records of Antiquity, nor more fully
acknowledged and disliked by the greatest Enemies thereof, the Protestant
Writers. And to begin with S. Gregory, whom M. Bale In Act. Romans Pont. p. 44.
styleth Gregory the Great, of all the Roman Patriarks, the most excellent in
life and learning: This so excellent a Patriark, is charged out of his own
writings by the Centurists, Cent. 6. col. 425. 426. 427. 428. 429. 430 431.
432. etc.
with claim and exercise of Jurisdiction and Primacie, over al Churches.
Carrion Chron. l. 4. p 567 568.
affirms, that, Though he tragically declaymeth himself to abhor the name
of Universal Bishop, yet indeed he shows himself earnestly to desire that
which the Title imports. And Peter In Cap. 8. Iudicum. And see the liKe in
Philippus Nicolai De Regno Christi. l. 2. p. 66.
Martyr in this scoffing manner reprehendeth him, saying: This little Saint
Gregory, would have the thing it self of Universal Bishop, although he
straightened the name and Title: For as the Histories of those times teach, and
his own Epistles witness, he did not abstain from governing other Churches.

M. Bale In his Image of both Churches fol. 11. See Bullinger in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
p. 531. And Melancton in Ep. Ad Romans p. 405. q. 2. p. 17.
acknowledges, that, John of Constantinople, contended with Gregory of Rome,
for the Supremacy; in which contention Gregory laid for himself S. Peter's
keys, with many other sore arguments and reasons. The Protestant Author (15)
of Catholic Traditions reports, that Maurice the Emperor would have taken
away the Primacie from Gregory Bishop of Rome, and given it to John Bishop of
Constantinople etc. Gregory did oppose himself against him, least he should
loose his place, urging how insolent that Title was. The Centurists Cent. 6.
col 425
confess, that Gregory, upon the fourth Penitential Psalm, greatly
inueigheth against the Emperor, who challenged to himself the Roman Church,
being the Head of al Churches, and would make her a servant, being the
Mistress of Nations; Christ also saying: I will give to thee the Keys. And,
Cent. 6. col. 425.
Gregory glories that the Emperor, and Eusebius his fellow-Bishop (of
Constantinople) do both of them acknowledge, that the Church of Constantinople,
is subject to the Apostolic Sea. Yet the Magdeburgians do further charge S.
Gregory, and by collection out of his own writings by them particularly
alleged, that Cent. 6. col. 426.
He challenged to himself power to command Archbishops, to ordain or depose
Bishops at his pleasure: And Cent. 6. col. 427.
took upon him right to cite Archbishops to declare their cause before him,
when they were accused: And also col. 427.
to Excommunicate and Depose them: Giving col 428
Commission to their Neighbor (Bishops) to proceed against them: That col.
428. and 401
In their Provinces he placed his Legates to know, and end the causes of such as
appealed to the Roman sea: That col. 428.
He usurped power of appoynting Synods in their Provinces col 429. And see more
col. 430. 432. 433. 434. 435. 436. 437. 438.
And required other Archbishops, that if any cause of greater importance fell
out, they should refer the same to him etc. appoynting in Provinces, his
Vicars over other Churches to end smaller matters, and to reserve the greater
causes to himself.

Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 7. sec. 12.
avouches that, There is no word in the writings of Gregory wherein more
proudly he boasts of the greatness of his Primacie, then this, to wit, I know
not what Bishop is not subject to the Apostolic Sea, when he is found faulty
etc. He assumeth to himself power to punish those who offend. D. Raynolds
finds no better shift for the foresaid Saying of S. Gregory, then impudently
to say that Conference. p. 547.
Either Gregory wrote not so, or he wrote an untruth, to cheer up his Subjects
Cent. 6. p. 289. See Philippus Nicolai de Regno Christi. li. 2. p. 67. and 351.
Osiander acknowledges that, Augustine was sent from Gregory the Great Bishop
of Rome, into England, that he might subdue the same to the Jurisdiction of the
Roman Bishop Cent. 6. p. 290.
and to the lust of the Roman Antichrist; for which (says Osiander) Austin was
after his death undoubtedly damned to Hell. Yea D. Morton Prot. Appeal. l. 1.
sec. 28. p. 31.
a man most sparing to tell the truth, yet yields thus far, saying: Whether,
or how far, Two hundred years after, S. Gregory did reach his Arm of
Jurisdiction beyond the limits of his Diocese, is a question, by reason of his
diverse obscure speeches, and some particular practices, diversely censured of
our Authors. But besides the cleerest premises, this Question of D. Morton,
is made none by D. Raynodls, teaching, that Confer. p. 550
The Primacie which Gregory, Leo, and others give to the Sea of Rome, does so
exceed the truth that etc. And Ibid. p. 545.
that Gregory is somewhat large that way: Yea that he and all the Popes for
three hundred years before him Ib. p. 549
avouch more of their Sea, then is true and right, in the opinion of
Protestants: With whom accords D. Fulk saying: Gregory In 2 Thessalonians. 2.
was a great worker and furtherer of the Sea of Antichrist, and of the mystery
of iniquity. And In John. 21.
we go not about to clear Gregory from al usurpation of Jurisdiction, more
then to his Sea appertayned. So certain and out of al question it is, that S.
Gregory the Great, was a true Roman Catholic, in his Doctrine, and practice
of the Popes Primacie.

By the premises then it is evident, that the objection so much urged by
Contrae Camp. rat. 6. p 97. FulK in his Answer to a Counterf. Cath. Jewel in
his Reply. art. 4. p. 225. 226. 227. Mortons Appeal l 1. c. 2. sec. 29. p. 32.
D. Whitaker, D. Fulk, D. Jewel, D. Morton and sundry other Protestants, from
S. Gregory his rejecting and disliking of the Title of Universal Bishop, is
altogether impertinent; seeing S. Gregory rejected the same in that sense,
which John Bishop of Constantinople applied to himself, to wit, that he was the
sole Bishop, and none Bishop but he. A thing so evident, that the Protestant De
Ecclesia l. 2. c. 10. p. 570.
Andreas Friccius (whom In his com. Places. part. 4. p. 77.
Peter Martyr terms an excellent learned man) in like sort expresses the
same, saying: Some there be etc. that object the Authority of Gregory, who
says, that such a Title pertayneth to the Precursour of Antichrist, but the
reason of Gregory is to be known, and it may be gathered of his words, which
he repeateth in many Epistles, that the Title of universal Bishop is contrary
to, and does gainsay, the Grace which is commonly powered upon al Bishops. He
therefore that calls himself the only Bishop, takes the Bishoplike power
from the rest; wherefore this Title he would have to be rejected etc. But it is
nevertheless evident by other places, that Gregory thought that the charge and
Principality of the whole Church was committed to Peter etc. And yet for this
cause Gregory thought not, that Peter was the forerunner of Antichrist. So
plainly does this Protestant answer this so often urged objection from S.
Gregory; and so evident also it is, that S. Gregory himself claymed and
defended the Primacie of the Roman Bishop and Church over al other Bishops and
Churches whatsoever. But to arise from S. Gregory to other Doctors and
Fathers more ancient, his next predecessor Pope Pelagius is for the self same
cause much reproved by Osia^der Cent. 6. p. 242,
in these words: Pelagius greatly inueigheth against John of Constantinople,
because he assumed to himself the Title of Universal Patriarch, and showed by
that profane Title of Universal, to abolish the name of other Patriarchs etc.
But in the mean time he contendeth the Roman Church to be the Head of al other
Churches, and he bableth many things of the Privileges given by Christ to S.
Peter.

The Centurie-writers speaking of the Fathers errors which lived in the fifth
Age, plainly and at large confess Cent. 5. col. 774.
that, In this fifth Age the Roman Bishops applied themselves to get and
establish dominion over other Churches. So they acknowledge that Pope Celestin
(of whom In his Defense. p. 588.
D. Whitguift says, He was a godly Bishop) gave privilege of using the Title
of Pope and the Miter to Ciril of Alexandria, whom he had substituted in his
place to be President in the Council of Ephesus. He is also charged by M.
Carthwright In his 2. Reply. part. 1. p. 512.
to have claymed superiority over al Churches, taking upon him as it were the
name of Universal Bishop. Cent. 5. col. 1246.
Osiander affirms that, He contended in behalf of the Roman Churches Primacie
more impudently then did his Predecessors. Cent. 5. col. 1285.
Nestorius (the Heretic) then Bishop of Constantinople, he allotted ten days
space to repent, which if he did not, he should not only be excommunicated, but
(his name) should be blotted out of the Catalogue of Priests. And for the
accomplishment of the premises, he made Cyril of Alexandria his Legate. The
Centurists Cent. 5. col. 778.
charge the Popes of those times, that, They usurped to themselves power of
commanding other Bishops, that whom they would, and should propose in foreign
Churches, they might ordain Bishop, or whom they would not have, might depose.
So Celestin in his Epistle to Cyril of Alexandria, and John of Antioch, and
Rufus of Thessalonica, commands them, that they design Proclus Bishop at
Constantinople.

D. Raynolds affirms, that the Conference. p. 457.
Popes of the Second Three hundred years after Christ, claymed some
Soueraintie over Bishops. And that Ib. p. 383.
Sozimus, Boniface, Celestin, did vsurp over the churches of Africa, while S.
Austine was alive etc. Ib. p. 544.
They would have Bishops and Elders appeal to Rome. And that Ib. p. 550.
Popes (namely Innocent, Leo, Gelasius, Vigilius, Gregory) taught that the
Fathers by the Sentence of God decreed, that whatsoever was done in Provinces
far of, should not be concluded before it came to the notice of the Sea of
Rome. And this they say, al churches took their beginning from the Roman, that
al Bishops had their honor from Peter. And herewith he confesses that in
those times, Popes Ibid. p. 540.
were learned, and Catholics, and were Ibid. p. 552. 554. 555.
sued unto by S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, and S. Austin; and the African Bishops
sought unto them for their advise and counsel, for their authority and credit.

To come to S. Leo, for whom of the Church. l. 5. p. 284.
D. Field (speaking of this very point) profereth thus largely: Surely if they
can show, that Leo says any such thing as the former Popes are taught to say,
we will most willingly listen to them; for we acknowledge Leo to have been a
most worthy Bishop, and the things that go under his name, to be his
indubitate works. And M. Mason Consecration of Engli. Bishops p. 115.
terms him, Pope Leo, a holy and learned Pope.

Now for D. Fields and al other Protestants further satisfaction in this point,
I will but only recite what other Protestant Writers acknowledge and censure of
that most worthy Bishop Leo. In Confess Geneu. c. 7. sect. 12.
Beza affirms that, It is manifest, that Leo in his Epistles does clearly
breath-forth the arrogancy of the Antichristian Roman Sea. In his Conference
with Heart. p. 50.
D. Raynolds writes, I do freely profess, that I mislike those haughty
speeches in Leo, and I think that the Mystery of iniquity so wrought through
his so ambitious advancing Peter, that etc. De Conciliis contra Bellarm p. 37.
D. Whitakers censure is, As for Leo the First, I little care; he was a great
Architect of the Antichristian kingdom. And yet this notwithstanding the same
Ibid. p. 34.
D. Whitaker acknowledges, that, Leo was a learned and godly Bishop, but yet
(says he) over ambitious. The Cent. 5. col. 1013.
Centurists report, how that Theodoret a Greek Father, being deposed by the
Second Council of Ephesus, did make his appeal to Pope Leo, and that thereupon
the most godly Leo restored to Theodoret his Bishopric. They likewise Cent.
5. col. 778.
confess, that Leo confirmed Maximus Bishop of Antiochia in his Bishopric:
and established to Pro^erius Bishop of Alexandria the ancient rights of that
Sea according to the Canons and Privileges, as is showed in the 68. and 69.
Epistle of Leo. And they affirm Cent. 5. col. 779.
that the Popes of those times, took unto themselves power to excommunicate
other Archbishops and Churches: So Leo excommunicated the Eastern (Bishops) and
Foelix Acacius, Gelasius condemned Acatius and Peter, sending letters into the
East; And that Cent. 5. col. 780.
They endeavored to challenge that Authority over Archbishops, that if they
did any thing, they should be thought to do it by Authority of the Roman
Bishop, as though they were his servants and slaves. So Leo Epist. 84. shows
that the Bishops of Thessalonica always supplied the place of the Apostolic
sea, and he admonished Anastasius (then their Bishop) that in remote Provinces,
in some sort he should visit himself, and decree nothing, but what he knew
would be approved by him. Also They Cent. 5. col. 779.
dared to exact of Archbishops, that if there were any thing they could not
determine by their own Judgments, they should refer it to them. So Leo
epist. 84. prescribes this law to the (Bishop) of Thessalonica. In like sort,
they Cent. 5. col. 781.
assumed to themselves power to call General Councels, as appears in the 93.
epist. of Leo etc. And they rejected as unlawful such Synods as were assembled
without their Authority etc. Leo sent Paschasius Bishop of Sicilie to be
President in the Council of Chalcedon. And Col. 782
The Fathers often for honor sake desired their Decrees to be confirmed by
them. So the Council of Chalcedon writes to Leo: we desire that thou will
honor our Judgment with thy Decrees, and as we desirous of good have agreed,
so thy Height (or greatness) may fulfill in thy sons what is fitting. And yet
D. Raynolds confesses of this Council, Conf. p. 563.
that it (67) was a company of 630. Bishops, sound in Religion and Zealous of
the glory of God: affirming further, that the said Council Ib. p. 562
named Pope Leo their Head; and that he was, President of the Council. But to
conclude this of Leo, wherein for D. Fields further satisfaction, I have been
the larger, it is plainly confessed by the Centurists Cent. 5. col. 12. 62.
that Leo, very paynfully goes about to prove, that singular pre-eminence was
given to Peter above the other Apostles, and that thence rose the Primacie of
the Roman Church. For which very cause, D. Morton charge S. Leo, to have
been Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 283. 285.
Peremptory etc. and ambitious. As for Pope Leo Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 294.
295.
(says he) he was so peremptory that for his presumption he found in his time
some Brotherly checks. To proceed, Prosper (de ingratis c. 2.) affirming Rome
to be the seat of Peter, and the Head of Pastoral Honor over the world, is
censured for the same by Resp. ad Bellar. par. 1. p. 594.
Danaeus, to be the Popes flatterer. In like sort, Vincentius aduersus Haer. is
charged Ibid. p. 313.
by him, to have plainly flattered the Pope of Rome, when he termed S. Faelix
and S. Julius, Bishops of Rome, to be the Head of the world, and S. Cyprian and
S. Amhrose, the Sides.

But to pass to others, the Cent. 5. col. 778.
Centurists affirm, that Gelasius in his epistle to Faustus, does impudently
lie (affirming) that it is established in the Canons, that Appeals of the
whole Church should be brought to the Examen of the Roman Sea, and from her in
no place Appeal should be made. And again, Cent. 5. col. 780.
Gelasius in his epistle to the Dardanians, affirms that he has given the
charge of the Church of Alexandria, to Acacius of Constantinople, and therefore
that he ought to relate al things unto him. Yea Cent. 5. col. 779.
they further confess, that Gelasius, in the Tome of Excommunications, denies
that Peter of Alexandria, Bishop of the second Sea, can be absolved by any
then the Bishop of the first Sea, to wit, the Roman. As also Cent. 5. col.
1274. and M. Symondes upon the Revel. c. 5. p. 58.
Gelasius held, that Councels are subject to the Pope, and that al should
appeal to him, but none from him.

They Cent. 5. col. 778. And Symondes upon the Revel. p. 57.
likewise charge Pope Sixtus, that In his 3. Epistle to the Eastern (Bishops)
and 5. chapter, he decrees, that against a Bishop, appealing to the Sea
Apostolic, nothing shall be determined, but what the Roman Bishop judges. But
to omit sundry other particular Popes In his Trial of the Popes Title. p. 117.
M. Bunnie confesses, that, Innocentius tells the Bishops of Macedonia, that
they should have regard to the Church of Rome, as to their Head, and that it is
wronged, because they did not at first yeald to his Judgment etc. The Bishops
of Rome gave also out Decrees, which they would bind al to observe, as
appears in Siricius and Innocentius: It sauoureth of too great arrogancy,
that Sozimus threatens severity, if any despise the Apostolic authority,
So did Leo; what should I seek to speak of every one, their own Decretals do
sufficiently bear witness.

Yea it is acknowledged in general Cent. 5. col. 778.
that the Popes of this fifth Age, ordained and required, that in the causes of
Bishops, it might be lawful to appeal to them, as is manifest by the Acts of
the 6. Carthage Council. And In his Def. p. 342.
D. Whitguift avouches, that, It is certain that then (Viz. in the time of
the Carthage and African Councels) the Bishops of Rome began at least to claim
Superiority over al Churches. Now the Council of Carthage was assembled about
Anno 419. and the African Anno 423. Yea it is granted by In his second Reply.
part. 1. p. 510. VVhitguift in his Def. p 344 Sarauia de diuersis gradibus etc.
p. 493.
M. Carthwright, and other Protestant Writers, that the Council of Chalcedon
(whose authority is established to our Adversaries by Act of Parliament, Anno
1. Elisabeth. c. 1.) did offer the name of universal Bishop, to the Bishop of
Rome.

And hence it is that the Centurists Cent. 5. col. 774.
affirm of these ancient Roman Bishops, that, They had flatterers, who
affirmed, that without permission of the Roman Bishop, none might undertake the
person of a Judge Cent. 5. col. 775.
Who then likewise auerred that, Antiquity had attributed the Principality of
Priesthood, to the Roman Bishop above al. And accordingly, that Turbius
Asturiensis, flattered Pope Leo, and acknowledged his superiority. And whereas
Theodoret speaking of the Roman Sea, says: That holy Sea has the Government
of all the Churches of the world, M. Jewel finds no better answer hereto, then
to say Art. 4. Diu. 21.
That man naturally aduanceth his power, at whose hands he seeks help: As
though Theodoret would give an Antichristian Title (for so Protestants account
it) for avarice, or S. Leo would accept it for flattery. Thus much as touching
those Fathers and Bishops who lived in the Fifth Age after Christ, and their
confessed testimonies, of the Jurisdiction really executed by the Popes of
those times, not only over their Neighbor Churches and Bishops in Italy, but
over remote Countries, and the other greatest Archbishops and Patriarcks of the
world, as of Antioch, Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Constantinople, and by them
then, accordingly acknowledged and obeyed.

To come now to the Fathers that lived in the Age precedent, which is the time
wherein Constantin the Great, lived, although the Church began as then, but as
it were, to take breath, from her former long endured persecutions, whereby
neither her Writers were so many, nor her face of outward Government so
known, as in the times succeeding: Yet is there not wanting even for that
time, sufficient confessed testimony in this kind.

In this Age lived Pope Damasus, a man for virtue and learning so highly
deserving, as that Decades in English. on the page next before the first Decade.
Bullinger, not only calls him, Blessed Damasus Bishop of Rome etc. but
withal sets down the Imperial Decree of the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian,
and Theodosius, for the embracing of the Religion, taught by Damasus, and Peter
of Alexandria In his Def. etc. p 345
M. Whiteguift confesses that, Damasus, was a Virtuous, Learned, and Godly
Bishop The Estate of the Church p. 137.
And Crispinus reports how much he was esteemed of, by Hierom, Athanasius,
and Nazianzen. This so much esteemed a Pope for learning and virtue, is charged
by M. Cartwright In his Reply part. 1. p. 502.
to speak in the Dragons voice, when he shameth not to write, that the Bishop
of Romes Sentence, was above al other to be attended for in a synod. Crispinus
The Estate of the Church p 137.
charge Damasus, that he was, too much given to eleuate the Dignity of his
Sea: For (says he) he begimeth his said Epistle to them of Constantinople: In
the Reverence, dear children, which you owe to the Apostolic Sea, you do much
for your selves etc. Upon the Revel. c. 5. p. 54. and See Cent. 4. col. 550
M. Symondes acknowledges, that Damasus wrote to the Councels of Africa, that
the Judgment of the causes of Bishops, and al other Matters of great
importance, may not be determined, but by the authority of the Apostolic Sea.
And whereas Socrates (l. 4. c. 30.) reports, that Peter, Patriarch of
Alexandria, being thence expulsed by the Arians, was upon his journey and
request to Damasus, Bishop of Rome, and return from thence which Damasus his
letters, restored and confirmed thereby in his Sea of Alexandria: This same
History is acknowledged by the Cent. 4. col. 1367. and col. 532.
Centurists. And M. Bunnie In his Trial of the Popes Title. p. 117.
acknowledges that, Damasus in his 4. Epistle to Prosper and other Bishops of
Numidia, commands them, that in all doubtful matters they refer themselves
to him as to the Head etc. Siricius takes upon him to threaten to pronounce
Sentence against such as will do otherwise then he would have them. So firm was
Damasus in defense and execution of the Popes Primacie.

In this same Age lived also Pope Julius, of who^ In his 2. Reply. par. 1. p.
510.
M. Carthwright writes: Julius Bishop of Rome says, it was decreed by the
Laws of the Church, and immediately after the Nicen Council, that the Bishop of
Rome must be called to the Sinod, and that that was void, which was done there
besides his Sentence. De Conciliis quest. 2. p. 42. 43. 44.
D. Whitaker relating the Ecclesiastical Canon of those times, whereby it was
decreed, That no Council should be celebrated without the sentence of the
Bishop of Rome, confesses further, that, Julius challenged to himself the like
authority. And whereas Bellarmin does object this example of Julius, and other
Bishops of Rome, alleging this Canon Resp. ad Bellarm. part. 1. p. 595.
Danaeus his only answer is, that this objection, is of no moment, because it
is produced from the testimony of a Roman Bishop, that is, from a Party in
his own cause. And M. Carthwright In his 2. Reply. part. 1. p. 501.
avouches, that Julius Bishop of Rome at the Council of Antioch outreached in
claiming the hearing of causes, that appertayned not to him. The Cent. 4. col.
529.
Centurists confess, that, The Roman Bishops made a Law, that they might
command al things first to be written to them, as appears by the Epistle of
Julius in Athasius Apologia secunda. For Julius says: Are you ignorant this to
be the custom, that first we be written unto etc. Upon the Revel. c. 5. p. 53.
And see Mornay of the Church in English. p. 264.
M. Symonides testifye^h that, Julius decreed, that whosoever suspected his
Judge, might appeal to the Sea of Rome. In so much that whereas the Arians had
expelled Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Paulus Bishop of Constantinople, and
diverse other Catholic Bishops of the East Church, it is Cent. 4. col. 530.
testified, that, Julius commanded the Arians to come to Rome, and appointed
also a day to Athanasius. Theodoret. l. 2. c. 4. etc. where hearing every man's
accusations and Cent. 4. col. 550.
compl^ynt, He restored every one of these (wronged Bishops) to his own
place, or Bishopric; and that not by entreaty, or arbitrably, but, as the
Cent. 4. col. 550. and 530
Centurists confess, by Prerogative of the Roman Sea. Al which might as ye be
made much more evident by Julius his undoubted Epistle extant in A^hanasius his
second Apology, and alleged by the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 735.
who mention their col 737 and 742.
Citation even unto Judgment col 739. 740.
and at a certain day, and greatly reprehending this col. 529 And see D. field
of the Church l 5. p. 178.
Saying of Julius, Are ye ignorant this to be the custom, that first we be
written unto, that from hence that which is right may be defined? etc. for what
we have received from the blessed Apostle Peter, that I signify unto you. To
conclude this of Pope Julius, Doctor Philippus Nicolai De Regno Christi. l. 2.
p. 149.
avouches that, Pope Julius as Socrates and Sozomene relate, sent letters to
the Eastern (Bishops) in which, as the letters witness, he often affirms, the
right of calling general Councels by a certain singular Privilege, even by
Divine Precept, to belong to himself alone, who, as he says, is the Prelate of
the first Sea. He also affirms that it no less appertains unto him being
the Bishop of that City, that he be acquaynted with the affairs of Bishops,
and other weighty businesses of that kind. After the same manner and with like
ambition Damasus etc. and afterward Innocentius etc. Thus far the Protestant
Philippus. To whom I will only add M. Fox confessing that Act. Mon. l. 1. p. 1.
The Church of Rome in all those Ages above specifyed (from the Apostles)
challenged to it self the Title and ring-leading of the whole universal Church
on earth, by whose direction al other Churches have been governed. And Ibid. p.
8.
whatsoever was done in other places, commonly the manner was to write to the
Roman Bishop for his approbation. The testimony of the Roman Bishop was
sometimes wont to be desired in those days (of Pope Julius) for admitting
Bishops in other Churches, whereof we have examples in Socrates l. 4. c. 37.
when Bishops of any other Provinces were at any dissension, they appealed to
the Bishop of Rome. Neither was this only the private opinion of some
particular Popes of those times, but it was the general received doctrine of
other Bishops and Fathers: In so much as the Council of Sardis (which M. Bell In
his Regiment of the Church. p 158.
terms The famous and ancient Council of Sardis) consisting of 300. Bishops
and above, assembled from Spain Cent. 4. col. 747. and Theodoret. hist. l 2.
c. 8.
France, Italy, Greece, AEgipt, Thebais, Palestine, Arabia etc. and most other
parts of the Christian world, and whereat sundry Fathers of the Nicene Counsel
were Carrion in his Chron. p. 282.
present Cent. 4. col. 764.
decreed Appeals to the Bishop of Rome: Insomuch as the Ibid.
Centurists and Epitome p. 294.
Osiander do both of them acknowledge and recite this 7. Canon of that Council:
It has seemed good to us, that if a Bishop be accused, if the Bishops of the
Province assembled together have judged the matter, and have deprived him, if
the Party deprived do appeal and fly to the Bishop of Rome etc. if the Party
accused desiring his cause to be heard once again, do entreat the Bishop of
Rome to send Legates (a latere suo) from him; it shall be in the power of the
Bishop to do as he shall think good etc. Antich. Disp. bipart. p. 31. sect. 103.
Tilenus speaking hereof avouches that, The Decree of the Counsel of Sardis of
Appealing to Rome, made the Roman Bishop more bold. And in regard of this
Decree, this so ancient a Council is much reproved Instit. l. 4. c. 7. sect. 9.
by Calvin In his com. places in English. p. 4. p. 39.
Peter Martyr Palma Christiana. p. 30. 122. 124.
Frigiuilleus Gaunius, and Cent 4. p. 294.
Osiander. But to end this Centurie wherein our first Christian Emperor
Constantin the Great lived and ruled. The Protest. writer Palma Christiana p.
35.
Frigiuilleus Gaunius plainly confesses, that the said Constantin himself
attributed Primacie to the Roman (Bishop) before al. and that Ibid p. 34.
Thereby it appeared to be fatal, that Co^sta^tin would give power to the Beast,
which (Pope) Julius forthwith put in practice: for Constantin the Great carried
in his Ensigns the Dragon for his Arms etc. so that he was the Dragon Apoc.
13.2. Fidelis Relatio etc. p. 19.
Bibliander acknowledges, that Constantin the Great reigning etc. Siluester
the Bishop of Rome began to lay the foundations of the Papistical Monarchy
etc. M. Bale has almost the same words saying Cent. 1. c. 36.
In these times (of Co^stantin) Syluester began to lay the foundation of the
Popes Monarchy, and finding the key of the depth, he opened the pit, if it be
true which Papists write of him. Yea all the Popes after Syluester to Bonif. 3.
he terms Mitred Bishops preparing by their Canons and Decrees the seat for
the great Antichrist. The Cent. 4. col. 549.
Ce^turists confess in general, that In this age the Mystery of iniquity was
not idle Cent. 4^ col. 550.
And that, The Bishop of Rome challenged by Ecclesiastical Canon, the
dissallowing of those Synods, whereat they were absent: So clear it is, that the
Fathers, Bishops and Councels of this Age agreed with us Catholics in the
doctrine and practice of the Popes Primacie. Now as concerning the Age next
ensuing the 20. years after Christ, in which persecution so raged, as the
Churches government was thereby much the more obscured* yet it is confessed
Cent 3. col. 168.
that Pope Stephen in this Age (did) threaten Exco^municatio^ to Helenus and
Firmilianus, and al (others) throughout Cilicia, Cappadocia, for rebaptizing
Heretics Apocalypsis etc. c. 7. p. 193,
yea M. Brightman is of opinion that, scarcely would any believe those proud
brags of the Roman Sea, wherewith the Decretal Epistles abound, not to have been
forged by succeding Popes and so falsely ascribed to the more ancient, they are
so impudent and vain, but that Firmilianus assures they were their own, at
least a great part of them whose names they bear; for speaking of Stephen then
Bishop of Rome, who (says he) so braggeth of the place of his Bishopric, and
contendeth himself to hold the Succession of Peter, upon whom the foundations
of the Church were placed, and he declares abundantly how boasting the Bishops
then were, amongst the Epistles of Cyprian ep. 75.

The Cent. 3. c. 7. col. 168.
Centurists confess that, Dionysius Bishop of Rome, through the false
accusation of some, excommunicated Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria; but
Dionysius of Alexandria made his Apology, and refuted the errors falsely
objected unto him, as Athanasius reports. Hereby appears not only the
authority of the Bishop of Rome in excommunicating, but also the obsequiousnes
of the Bishop of Alexandria in not contemning, but making his Apology unto him.

They Cent. 3. col. 84.
likewise reprove S. Cyprian for teaching that, There ought to be one Bishop in
the Catholic Church, And, for his calling Ibid.
Peter's Chair the principal Church from whence Priestly unity arises Upon
Jude p. 285.
M. Trig reprehendeth S. Cyprian, saying: Cyprian gives more privileges to
the Roman Church; he calls it the chief Church from whence Priestlie unity
began etc. And to which infidelity cannot have access. Whereupon M. Trig thus
infers: Here we may note, what certainty it is, to build our Faith on the
Fathers etc And the Cent. 3. col. 84. And See Brightman in his Apocalypsis in
c. 13. p. 343.
Centurists charge him, for teaching (say they) without any foundation of
Scripture, that the Roman Church ought to be acknowledged of al other, for the
Mother and root of the Catholic Church. Yea D. Morton Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p.
294. 295.
professing willingly to admit S. Cyprians Judgment as Vmpier in this
controversy, is yet enforced to say: Although the next sentences of S. Cyprian
may seem, at their first view, unto the inexpert Reader, to observe in the
Church of Rome, both a grace of Impossibility of Erring, and also a
Prerogative of the Mother Church of al others, and are therefore censured by
our Centurists for speeches inconvenient: Yet no man exercised and conversant
in his writings, and other Fathers, can be ignorant, that such like speeches
are but the languages of Rhetorical Amplification, which commonly they use by
way of persuasion, rather then by asseueration.

But what testimony, though never so clear in any matter whatsoever, may not
easily be euaded, if it will suffice to answer, that it was but the language of
Rhetorical Amplification, or demy-lying? Or for what cause should S. Cyprian
and other Fathers, utter the foresaid Sayings, by way of Persuasion, in behalf
of the Roman Churches Prerogatives, if they had thought in their own
Judgments and Consciences, that the said Prerogatives had not been due unto
her? So undoubted it is, that S. Cyprian and the other Fathers of his Age,
believed and acknowledged the Primacie of the Roman Church.

But as touching the Age next after the Apostles themselves, whereof as M.
Hutton In his answer to the 2. par. of the Reasons of Refusal to Subscription
p. 105.
observes, but few Monuments are now remaining: As then lived Pope Victor, who
in D. Whiteguifts In his Defense etc. p. 510.
opinion was a godly Bishop and Martyr, and the Church at that time in great
purity: And yet of him says D. Whitaker Cont. Duraeum l. 7. p. 480. FulK in
his Ansvv. to a counterf. Cath. p. 36.
with D. Fulk, The first that exercised Jurisdiction upon foreign Bishops, was
Victor: Insomuch as he excommunicating the Bishops of Asia for not observing
the Feast of Easter Day according to the use of the Latin Church, D. Fulk Ibid.
charge him that, He passed the bounds of his authority. Amandus Polanus In
Sillog. These. Theol. p. 165
accuses him, to have showed a Papal mind and arrogancy. And M. Spark Against
John de Albines in his Answer to the Preface. And see Osiander cent. 2. p. 87.
and 96.
affirms that, somewhat Pope-like he exceeded his bounds, when he took upon
him to excommunicate the Bishops of the East. Beza Pref. ad Princip. Condensem.
before his Translation of the New Testament.
terms Victor the most foolish and most ambitious Bishop of Rome. And Of the
state of the Church p. 47
Crispinus speaking of this Age, avouches, that The Roman Bishops now became
more audacious to forge new Ceremonies, yea and to force upon other Churches
etc. Victor in his 2. Decretal calls himself Archbishop of the Roman and
universal Church. D Fulk Against the Rhem. Test. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. sec. 9. p. 659.
makes the Mystery of iniquity to work in Peter's Sea in the times of
Anicetus, Victor, and Cornelius. In like sort D. Morton iustifyeth such
Protestant Authors as Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 300.
reprehend Victor for arrogancy, and transgressing the bounds of his
Jurisdiction, in excommunicating the Churches of Asia etc.

The Centurists record, that Cent. 2. c. 7. col. 159.
Anacletus in the Epistles which hear his name, in the general regiment of
Churches, so loyneth them together, that to the Roman Church he attributes
Primacie and excellency of power over al Churches, and over the whole flock of
the Christian People, and that by the authority of Christ saying to Peter:
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church etc. The Bishop of
Rome is placed first, as the supreme Head of the Church: who though he err,
yet will he not have him to be judged of others etc. He says also, that
certain Cities received Primates from the Blessed Apostles, and from S.
Clement etc. He prescribes that, If greater difficulties arise, or causes fall
out among the Bishops and Primates themselves, let them be brought to the Sea
Apostolic, if such Appeal be made: for so the Apostles ordained by the
appointment of our Savior, that the greater and harder questions should
always be brought to the Apostolic Sea, upon which Christ built his universal
Church. Math. 16. In like sort they say of Xistus, that In his 2, Epistle (he)
names himself the Bishop of the universal Apostolic Church: And wills
others to appeal to the Apostolic Sea as to the Head. Whereby it is evident
that the ancient Popes, Victor, Anacletus, Xistus, and our Gregory xv. do
wholly agree in their due claim of Primacie. In like manner holy Ireneus, who
according to Hamelmanus, De Traditionibus col. 528.
might yet remember the Apostles own lively preaching, affirming l. 3. c. 3.
that, It is necessary that al Churches do accord to the Roman Church, in regard
of a more powerable principality, is charged for the same by the Centurists,
In the Alphabetical Table of the 2. Cent. at the word, Ireneus.
with a corrupt Saying, concerning the Primacie of the Roman Church.

But to arise yet even to the times of the blessed Apostles themselves: whereas
Papias, as appears by the testimony of Ireneus, alleged by the Centurists,
Cent. 2 col. 172.
lived in the Apostles time and, as D. Fulk In his Answ to A Counterf. Cath. p
35.
confesses, was Scholar to S. John, yet does M. Midleton Papisto-Mastix p.
200.
charge him saying: Papias was the first Father and Founder of Traditions, and
Peter's Primacie or Romish Episcopalitie: De Scrip. Auth. l. 2. c. 20. fol. 166.
Bullinger reports that, forthwith from the very times of the Apostles,
especially from the government of Constantin the Great (under whom some say the
first poysen was powered into the Church) the desire of governing was often put
in practice by certain Roman Bishops etc. D. Downeham Antichristi l. 2. c. 8.
p. 79.
acknowledges, though not the then open Exercise of the (Popes) universal
Dominion, yet the private Doctrine thereof, saying: The Antichrist which is to
be destroyed at the second coming of Christ, was come even in the Apostles
time, although he was not revealed by exercising openly a Sovereign and
universal Dominion. M. Midleton Papisto-mastix. p. 193.
affirms confidently that, we are sure that the Mystery of iniquity did
work in Paul's time, and fell not a-sleep so soon as Paul was dead, waking
again six hundred years after, when this Mystery was disclosed etc. And
therefore no marvel though perusing Councels, Fathers, and Stories from the
Apostles foreward, we find the print of the Popes feet etc.

But Philippus De Regno Christi p. 221.
Nicolai undertaking to speak of the beginning and increase of the Popes
Dignity, avouches yet further, that The desire of Primacie was the common
Infirmity of the Apostles, Catal. Testium veritatis. Tom. 1. p. 27.
and of the first Bishops of the City of Rome. Yea some Protestants doubt not
to derive from S. Peter himself (as being the prognosticon or type thereof) the
confessed claim of his Successors the Bishops of Rome, saying to this
purpose: It can not be denied, but that Peter sometimes was subject to
ambition, and desire of Rule etc. By which infirmity of Peter it was
undoubtedly signified, that these Bishops who boasted of Peter's succession,
were to be subject to the like, yea to greater ambition by infinite degrees etc.
wherefore this so corrupt ambition of Peter, and ignorance and negligence of
divine matters etc. without douht did foreshew, that the Bishop of Rome, in
that he will be the Chief and the Heir of Peter's Privileges, was to be
ignorant and a contemner of heavenly things, and a lover of human riches,
power, and pleasures. And D. Whitaker blusheth not to write, that, De Council.
p. 37.
The mystery of iniquity did work in the Sea of Rome in Peter's time, and did
show itself in Anicetus, Victor, Cornelius, Sozimus, Bonifacius, Celestinus.

Now if it be true which Calvin affirms that, Resp. ad Sadoletum.
It is plain and conspicuous both to learned and unlearned, that the Kingdom
of Christ (by which he means the Protestant Church) was overthrown when the
Primacie of the Roman Bishop was erected, then seeing the said Primacie
confessedly began in S. Peter himself, and since has ever continued in his
Successors the Bishops of Rome, it follows, that therefore the Protestant
Church has been overthrown and ruinated ever since the time of S. Peter; then
which what can be produced more conuincing in proof, that the Protestant Church
indeed never was? But to conclude this with that Princely testimony of K.
Henry. Luther In Assertione 7. aduersus Luther. Art. 2.
cannot deny (says he) but that all the Church of the faithful acknowledge and
reverence the holy Roman Sea as their Mother and Chief, if they be not
debarred access by distance of places, or by dangers in the Way. And yet if
they speak truth, which come hither from India, the very Indians themselves,
distant by so many parts of the Earth, of the Seas, of the deserts, do yet
submit themselves to the Bishop of Rome. Therefore if the Pope has obtained,
neither by the commandment of God, nor by the assent of men, so great and so
universal power, but has challenged the same to himself by his own power: Let
Luther tell me, when he burst into possession of so great Dominion: Can the
beginning of so great power be obscure, especially if it began within the
memory of man? but if he say, that it was above one or two Ages ago, let him
make us remember the same out of History; for otherwise if it be so ancient,
that the beginning of so great a matter be blotted out, let him know, that it
is provided by the Laws, that whose right (or Title) so surpasses al memory
of men, that it cannot be known what beginning it had, it is judged to have
had a lawful beginning: And it is clearly forbidden by the consent of al
Nations, that those things be not changed, which have long continued without
change. So undoubted it is, that this our Catholic doctrine of the Bishops of
Romes Primacie has been generally taught and practiced time out of mind, even
from S. Peter himself, even to the end of the Primitive Church, and ever since:
as has been formerly proved.

To come now to the Government of the Church before Christ's time, The Puritans
themselves do confess that, Engl. Puritan. p. 16. And Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5.
p. 235.
The high Priest of the Jews was typically and in a figure the supreme Head
of the whole Catholic Church, which though (say they) it were visible only in
the Province and Nation of Iewrie, yet those of other Nations and Countries (as
appears by the History of the Acts, even though they were Aethiopians) were
under this High Priest, and acknowledged homage unto him. So that he was etc.
in very deed an Ecumenical and universal Bishop of the whole world. yea,
says M. Jacob, Reasons taken out of Gods word p 5.
The Jewish Church under the Law was National and only One in the world under
one high Priest. Cent. 4. col. 549. And see Carthwright in Wh^tguift Def. p
700. See Osiand. cent. 4. p. 477. Ama^dus Polanus Symphonia p 841. and 849.
And as the Fathers were thus direct and full for the Bishop of Romes Primacie,
so did they answerably reject al pretended spiritual Primacie in any temporal
Magistrate. So the Centurie-writers confess, that Emperors assumed to
themselves unseasonably the judgment of matters of Faith, which thing
Athanasius reprehendeth in Constantius, and Ambrose in Valentinian. Yea Of the
Estate of the Churcb p. 99
Crispinus confesses, that our first Christian Emperor Constantin said; God
has ordained you Bishops, and has given you power to judge of yourselues; by
means whereof we yield ourselves to your judgment. Men may not judge you, but
God alone. Yea Ibid. p. 93 And see the Abridgement of Fox his Acts and Mon. p
67.
Crispinus further acknowledges, that, he gave power unto Clerks for to
appeal from Civil Magistrates to Bishops. And others In the said Abridgement p.
66
grant that, He freed them from al manner of public duties and burdens. As
also that, Napper. upon the Reu^l. p. 145.
He subdued al Christian Churches to Pope Syluester; And Frigiuilleus Ganuius
in his Palma Christ. p. 35.
Attributed Primacie to the Roman Bishop before al. And such was his respect to
Ecclesiastical Governors, as that the Centurists Cent. 4 col. 4^0.
relate that, It is known what reverence and observance he had to Bishops in
the Council of Nyce, where he would not sit down until the Bishops willed him:
And then as Chron. p. 274. And Lubbertus de Concilijs.
Carrion reports, Constantin sat down on a lower Seat amongst the Bishops.
So far was this most renowned and Christian Prince from challenging to himself
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical.

The Centurists Cent. 5. col. 663.
do acknowledge and recite Pope Innocentius his Epistle to Arcadius the
Emperor and his wife, who were adverse to Chrysostom, and took part with
Theophilus, where he thus writes: I the least of al and a Sinner, having yet
the Throne of the Great Apostle Peter committed to me, do separate and remove
thee and her, from receiving the immaculate Mysteries of Christ our God: And
every Bishop or any other of the Clergy which shall presume to minister or
give to you those holy mysteries, after the time that you have read the present
letters of my bound, pronounce them void of their dignity etc. Arsacius whom
you placed in the Bishop-like Throne in Chrysostoms room, though he be dead,
we depose and command that his name be not written in the role of Bishops. In
like manner we depose al other Bishops who deliberatly have communicated with
him etc. To the deposing of Theophilus we add Excommunication etc. From hence
then it appears that the Fathers of the Primitive Church not only denied even
to the greatest Emperors al pretended Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters,
but that also Constantin himself disclaymed from the same, and when other
Emperors offended against the Church, the same Church spared not to punish
them for the same.

The premises likewise do most fully convince, that the Primitive Church never
thought any Pope or succession of Popes to be Antichrist. But contrary to
Protestants, (making al Popes for many hundred years past to be Antichrists)
it is confessed by D. Whitaker l. De Antichristo p. 21.
that, The Fathers for the most part thought that Antichrist should be but one
man, but in that (says he) as in many other things they erred, either because
they yielded too much to the common opinion concerning Antichrist, or because
they waighed not the Scriptures so diligently as they ought: And as M. Whitaker
forsooth has done; M. Carthwright's In his 2. Reply part. 1. p. 508. See
Gracerus his Historia Antichristi p. 11.
censure is, that Diverse of the ancient and the chiefest of them imagined
fondly of Antichrist, as of one singular Person. And as for the time of his
coming and continuance, M. Fox In Apoc. c. 12 p. 345.
acknowledges that, Almost all the holy and learned Interpreters, do by a
Time, Times, and half a Time, understand only Three years and a half: And In
Apoc. c. 13. p. 362.
that this is the consent and opinion of almost all the ancient Fathers.
Bullinger In Revel. c. 11. ser. 46. f. 142
avouches, that, Doubtless al Expositours grounding themselves upon this
Text, have attributed to the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to his most cruel
persecutions no more then Three years and a half. This shortest time of
Antichrists reign was so clearly the Doctrine and belief of the ancient
Fathers, that D. Morton for his truest answer confesses the same, reproving
them al of Error, saying: Prot. Appeal. l 2. p. 144.
Why might not these Fathers be said, to have erred in prefining the time of
Antichrist who have been thus far ouerseen in reporting his Tribe? So
confessedly do the Fathers clear al our Popes from being Antichrists. Of the
Church. 9. p. 286
Philip Mornay proves at large that Antichrist is not to come during the
continuance of the Roman Empire, in which behalf he alleges the agreeable
Sayings of S. Ambrose, Hierom, Austin, Chrysostom, and S. Paul. By all which it
is most evident, that in the opinion of the ancient Fathers Antichrist is to be
but one man, and the continuance of his Reign to be Three years and a half
before the ending of the world, before which the Roman Empire must cease.

To reuiew then the truest harmony between the Primitive and our present Roman
Church in this principal Controversy concerning the Popes Supremacy in Causes
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical; The Fathers and Bishops as then taught: First,
that the Bishop of Rome was S. Peter's successor, and that this Succession was
not any humane or Synodical Constitution, but even the ordinance of God
himself. Secondly, that therefore Popes might Exercise their Jurisdiction and
Primacie over al Churches. Thirdly, And so accordingly they did ordain,
Excommunicate, depose, restore, and cite other foreign Bishops and
Archbishops. Fourthly, they placed their Legates or Vicars in other Countries to
end smaller matters, reserving the greater causes to themselves. Fifthly,
Appeals were made to them from al Christian Kingdoms. Six^ly, and they not
only had power to call General Councels, but they also appointed Presidents in
the same: Yea Councels were then so subject unto them, as that no Council was
holden lawful which was not assembled and approved by their authority.
Seauenthly, Princes and Emperors were subject to their Spiritual Censures: And
yet no Father, Bishop, or King of those times did ever traduce any one of
those Popes with that fowlest note or stayne of Antichrist.

Now the ancient holy Doctors and Bishops which are here acknowledged and
reproved for the foresaid several points and privileges of the Popes Primacie
are, Gregory, Pelagius, Celestin, Leo, Foelix, Gelasius, the Fathers of the
Council of Chalcedon, and of Africa, and the 6. of Carthage, of Sardis: Sixtus,
Innocentius, Siricius, Sozimus, Damasus, Julius, Stephen, Denis, Cyprian,
Victor, Anicetus, Cornelius, Ireneus, Papias, Peter, and the other Apostles.

The Protestants producing and reproving the foresaid Fathers, are the
Centurie-writers, Danaeus, Calvin, Bucer, Philippus Nicolai, Peter Martyr,
Carrion, Bullinger, Melancthon, Osiander, Friccius, Beza, Crispinus, Tilenus,
Frigiuilleus Gauuius, Bibliander, Amandus, Polanus, Hamelmannus, Illyricus,
Lubbertus, Sarauia, Napper, Mornay, Whitguift, Carthwright, Whitaker, Fulk,
Bilson, Trige, Rainolds, Brightman, Bale, Symonides, Bunnie, Spark, Midleton,
Fox, Morton and Field: every one whereof do cite and reprove some Father or
Council before mentioned, concerning some branch of the Bishop of Romes
Primacie.

It is confessed by Protestants, that the Primitive Church of Christ believed
the Books of Tobie, Judith, Esther, Sapientia, Ecclesiasticus, and two first
of Machabees, to be truly Canonical Scriptures. CHAPTER V.
AS it is undoubted by all, that the true Scriptures Prophetical and Apostolical
are most sacred, divine, and of infallible authority; so it remains still in
Controversy which Books be the said Prophetical, Apostolical, and Canonical
Scriptures; for as the Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 47. Trid. sess 4.
Catholic Church has defyned the Books of Esther, Judith, Tobie, two of the
Machabees, Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus to be sacred, Canonical, and of
infallible authority, so are all the said Books rejected by Protestants Luth.
and Zuingl. Praef. Bibl. a se Co^uers. Calu. Inst. l. 1. c. 12.. 8. l. 2. c.
5.. 18. l. 3. c. 5.. 8.
as merely apocryphal and only human.

Now to decide this so weighty a Controversy by the Primitive Church; Whereas
in the Third Carthage Council, whereat S. Austin and sundry other Fathers and
Bishops were present, and subscribed, it is expressly defined, that, Can. 47
Nothing be read in the Church under the name of divine Scriptures, besides
Canonical Scriptures. And the Canonical Scriptures are Genesis, Exodus etc.
five books of Solomon etc. Tobie, Judith, Hester, two books of Esdras, two
books of Machabees etc. Whereas also the same Canon of Scriptures is made and
numbered particulerly by S. Austin De Doct. Christi l. 2. c. 8 Innoc. ep. ad
Exup. c. 7. Gel. To. 1. Council. in Decret cum 70. Ep. Isid. l 6. Etymol. c. 1.
Rabanus l. 2. Instit. cler Cassiod. l. 2. diuinarum Lect.
himself, as also by Innocentius, Gelasius and other ancient Writers; the truth
hereof is so manifest, that the same is confessed by sundry Protestant
Writers, and the same Council and Fathers (in steed of better answer) severely
reprehended for the same. Hiperius Meth. Theol. l. 1. p. 46.
avouches that, In the Third Carthage Council there are added to the Canon
etc. Sapientia and Ecclesiasticus, two books of Machabees, Tobie, Judith etc.
Al which books in the same order numbreth Augustine, Innocentius and Gelasius,
for which he at large afterward rejects their judgment. In like sort de
Princip. Christ. Dogm l. 1. c. 4. p. 8.
Lubbertus: I grant (says he) certain of these books to be admitted by the
Carthaginians, but I deny that therefore they are the Word of God; for no
Councels have that Authority. But to be brief, the Third Carthage Council is
acknowledged and reproved for this very doctrine by D. Raynolds, Conclus.
annex. to his Conf p 699 700. Zan de Sacr. p. 32. 33. Hosp. hist. Sacram. p. 1.
p. 160. Trelc. loc. com. p. 15. Hoe Tract. Tripart. Theol. p. 46. Park. ag.
Symb. part. 2. p 60. Field of the Church p. 246. 247.
Zanchius, Hospinian, Trelcatius, Mathias Hoe, M. Parker, and D. Field, And so
likewise is S. Austin and other ancient Fathers herein acknowledged and
rejected by Hospinian, Hist. sacr. part. 1. p. 161. Hip. Meth. Theol. p. 46.
Zanch. de sacra-Scrip. p. 32. 33. Field of the Church. p. 246.
H^perius, Zanchius and D. Field. But Brentius avouches more in general, that,
Apol. Confess. Wittemb See Bucers Scripta Angl. p. 7^3.
There are some of the ancient Fathers who receive (says he) these Apocryphal
Books into the number of Canonical Scriptures: And in like sort some Councels
command them to be acknowledged as Canonical: I am not ignorant what was done,
but I demand whether it was rightly and Canonically done. Lastly D. Couel not
only most plainly confesses S. Austins like Judgment had of the Book of
Wisdom, but withal further affirms Ib. p 87
of al these Books that, If Ruffinus be not deceived, they were approved as
parts of the Old Testawent by the Apostles. So clear it is, that this foresaid
Books were confessedly believed to be Canonical by the Primitive Church.

Add hereunto, that Of the Church p. 245. 246. Hut. 2. part. of his Answ. p
176.
D. Field and M. Hutton both of them teaching that some of the ancient Jews
received the foresaid Books for truly Canonical, though others of them did not
believe and receive the same accordingly, yet are the said Jews therefore
expressly reproved by Protestants themselves, Bibliander tearming it The rashness
of the Jews; in which his censure he is approved by the Protestant Sceltco in
his book of the Second coming of Christ, Englished by M. Rogers fol. 6.
for the supposed worth thereof. D. Bancroft p. 60.
in the very Conference before his Majesty rejects the objections of the
Jews made against these Books, tearming them, The old cauils of the Jews,
renewed by Hierom, who was the first that gave them the name of Apocrypha,
which opinion upon Ruffi^us his challenge he after a sort disclaymed. Yea D.
Bancroft is so full with Catholics in Defense of the said Books, as that other
of his own Brethren charge him further to say, The 2. part of the Ministers
Def. p. 108.
that, The Apocrypha were given by inspiration from God, which is al one as to
affirm them to be truly divine and Canonical. And as concerning the book
Ecclesiasticus, it is defended to be truly Canonical by the Protestant Writers
Ep. ad Volanum.
Lascicius and Parker, of which later D. Willet Lo^doro mastix. p. 69
says How audacious is this fellow, that contrary to the determination of
this Church (of England) dare make Ecclesiasticus a book of Canonical
Scripture? Against Burges. p. 76 77.


Furthermore, seeing it is expressly taught and defended by sundry Protestants,
that this waightiest Controversy of discerning true Scripture from forged, can
not be decided by the Hook. Ecol. Pol. l. 1 p. 86.
Scriptures themselves, neither by Testimony Whit. cont. Staplet. p. 370. 357.
Hook vbi sup. p 147.
of the Spirit, but Hook. ib. p. 146. 116. Aretiu Exam p. 24.
by the authority of Gods Church, Hence it necessarily follows, that the
Church of Christ having decided and determined this foresaid Controversy, and
that not only by General Churches of later times, but even by the Councels and
Tradition of the true Primitive Church, that therefore al parties are bound to
approve and believe the foresaid Books to be truly Canonical.

Al which will yet be made much more evident by our easy Refutation of their
chiefest arguments usually urged against them. For first it is objected by D.
Whitaker Answ to Rayn. p. 22. 23.
that therefore they are not Canonical, because They were written in Greek, or
some other foreign language, and not in Hebrew, nor had for their known
Authors, those, whom God has declared to be his Prophets. But neither of
these are of force, for it is no little temeritie so to measure the Scriptures
by the tongue wherein they are written, as to restrain the Spirit of God to
one only language. The further falsehood and vanity whereof is abundantly
disproued by example of Daniel, a great part whereof, to wit, from Chap. 2 verse.
4. to the end of the 7. chap.
though not written in Hebrew, is yet by our Adversaries themselves
acknowledged for Canonical. Neither likewise is it true, that God would direct
by his holy Spirit no Authors in their writings, but such as were known, and
also further declared by certain testimony, to be Prophets: For Protestants
themselves can not yet tell, who were Authors of the several Books of Judges,
the Third and Fourth of Kings, the Two of Chronicles, and the Books of Ruth
and Job: Even D. Whitaker De sacra Scrip. p 603.
himself does directly answer his own objection, saying: The Authors of many
Books are not known, as of Iosue, Ruth, Paralipomenon, Hester etc. And we
receive (says D. Willet) Syn p. 4
many Bookss in the old Testament, the Authors whereof are not perfectly
known. Yea Calvin, Beza, and the publishers of certain of our English Bibles
in the Preface or Argument of the Epistle to the Hebrews, do al of them
profess to rest doubtful of the Author thereof, Calvin and Beza there
affirming, that it is not written by S. Paul. So that though the foresaid
Books be not written in the Hebrew, nor have their Authors or Penners known,
yet by like example of other approved Scriptures, it makes nothing against
their Sacred and Divine Authority. of Anno 1584. and 1578 See Calu. in c 2.
Heb ver. 2.


Secondly, it is objected that the said Books were rejected or doubted of by
sundry of the ancient Fathers, as namely by Origin In Ps. 1 apud Eusebius. Hist.
l. 6. c. 19. Epiph. de Pondere and Men's. and Haer. 8. Epicureoru^. Hier Pref.
in l Regum.
Epiphanius and Hierom, who agreed therein with the ancient Jews. But first,
these Fathers in the places cited do not speak of their own opinion, but do
only report what was the opinion of certain of the Jews therein; for Origin
was so far from according herein with the Hebrews, that he expressly defended
Ep. ad Iulium and hom. 1. in Leuit.
against Julius Africanus (who doubted thereof) the History of Susanna, which
Jews and Protestants reject: Yea he auerreth Ep. ad Iulium.
that part of Esther to be Canonical, which Protestants refuse as not being in
the Hebrews Canon. In like sort S. Epiphanius Haer. 76
numbreth Sapientia and Ecclesiasticus among the Divine Scriptures, and
refers Lib. de Pond. and Mensura. post init.
Sapientia unto Solomon.

As concerning S. Hierom, whereas he unto an unwary Praef. in Daniel.
Reader may seem to seclude certain Chapters of Daniel, as not being in the
Hebrews Canon, insomuch that Ruffinus mistaking herein S. Hierom's meaning,
does therefore (as Protestants Whit. cont Camp. p. 18.
still do) reprove and charge him with refusal of these foresaid parts of
Daniel, S. Hierome Apol 2. cont. Ruffin. fin
answers and explaineth himself, saying: Truly I did not set down what
myself thought, but what the Hebrews are accustomed to say against us herein,
calling there further Ruffinus (and in him our Protestants) a foolish Sycophant
for mistaking and charging him herein with the Hebrews opinion. Yea S.
Hierom's thus explaining himself, is a matter certain, that it is accordingly
confessed, by D. Couel Answ. to Burges p. 87. Banc. in the Conf. before his
Majesty. p. 60.
and D. Bancroft.

And it is further evident, that S. Hierom placed the Books of Machabees bees
Prolog. in Machab.
among the Stories of divine Scripture. Apol 2. cont. Ruffin. fin
And of the Book of Judith he says, Pref. in Judith.
with the Hebrews the book of Judith is read among the Hagiographal (writings)
whose authority to strengthen those things which fall in Contention (to wit
with the Jews) may be thought less fit etc. But because we read that the
Nycene Council accounted this in the number of holy Scriptures, Answ. to
Burges p. 87. Banc. in the Conf. before his Majesty. p 60.
I have yielded etc. So clear it is. that the Fathers objected, did only relate
in the foresaid places the opinion of the Hebrews, from which themselves did
yet disclayme.

Secondly, supposing it for true, that the foresaid Fathers have doubted or
rejected the foresaid Books, yet neither hence will it follow, that they are
not truly Canonical; it being certain, that in the Primitive Church the
Canonical Scriptures were not generally received al at once, but in great
variety of pretended 2. These. 2.2. Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 19 and l. 6. c. 10.
Aug. cont. Aduers. Leg and Proph l. 1. c. 20. Gelas. in Decret. cu^ 70. Episc
Sozom hist. l. 7. c. 19. Hamelman. de Tradit Apostol. 1. part. l 1. col. 251
and part. 3 col. 841.
Scriptures special care and search was requisite; whereby it came to pass,
that sundry Books were for the time misdoubted, or by some Fathers or
Councels Conc. Laodic. can vlt.
omitted, or not received, which yet afterward were upon greater search and
consideration generally acknowledged. A point so evident, that D. Bilson
testifyeth in our behalf, that Survey of Christ's sufferings. p. 664.
The Scriptures were not fully received in all places, no not in Eusebius time.
He says the Epistles of James, Jude, the 2. of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John
are contradicted, as not written by the Apostles, the Epistle to the Hebrews
was for a while contradicted etc. The Churches of Syria did not receive the 2.
Epistle of Peter, nor the 2. and 3. of John, nor the Epistle of Jude, nor the
Apocalypse etc. The like might be said for the Churches of Arabia: will you hence
conclude (says D. Bilson) that those parts of Scripture were not Apostolic,
or that we need not to receive them now, because they were formerly doubted of?
So fully does this Protestant Doctor answer his own Brethrens like usual
objection had against the Machabees, and the other Books of the Old Testament
now in question.

And that the foresaid Epistles of S. Peter, S. James, S. John, S. Jude and the
Apocalypse were doubted of by some Fathers of the Primitive Church, and not
generally received by all, it is further confessed by the Deanes of Paul's and
Windsor, who in the Towers Disputation had with that Ornament of our Nation and
most victorious Martyr Edmund Campian, do thus report of themselves The first
Day^s Conf. D. 1.
For proof hereof we alleged the testimony of Hierom in Catal. where he
thus writes; The Epistle of James is said to be published by some other under
his name, and of the 2. of Peter he says, that it is denied of many to be
his: we also alleged Eusebius writing thus, Those Books that be gaynsaid,
though they be known to many, be these, the Epistle attributed to James, the
Epistle of Jude, the latter of Peter, the 2. and 3. of John, And D. Walker in
the same Disputation affirms, 4. Days Conf^r. f^l. 2. 6.
that S. Hierom says, concerning that (Epistle) which is written to the
Hebrews, many have doubted of it. And also concerning the 2. of Peter, he
says, it was doubted of by many, and so with some were the two last Epistles
of John etc. Now if the Books of Machabees, Tobie, etc. be not Canonical,
because (as Protestants before objected) they were rejected or doubted by some
ancient Writers, then by the same reason Protestants must likewise reject the
Epistle to the Hebrew^s, the Epistles of S Peter, S. James, S. Jude, S. John
and the Apocalypse, because these also were no less doubted and rejected by
sundry ancient Writers: Wherefore the weakness and ensuing absurdity of this
objection being thus discovered, we are to observe, that the Canonical
Scriptures are to us at this day discerned and made known, not by that which
some ancient Writers omit, deny, or doubt of, but by that which most of the
Fathers constantly affirm, and chiefly by that which is judged and decreed by
the Catholic Church lawfully assembled in General Council.

Thirdly, some object that there are in the foresaid Books diverse repugnances
or Contradictions, and consequently that they are not inspired by the
holie-Ghost. But to omit, that in those Scriptures which are believed by all to
be Canonical, there are many hidden difficulties and seeming See Mat. 10.10.
and Mar. 6.8 1. Reg. 8.9. 2. Par. 5.10. and Hebr. 9.4 Act. 9.7. and Act 22.9.
Math. 26.34. and Marc 14.68. Mar. 15.25. and Io. 19.14 Luc. 3.35.36 and Genesis
11.12. And see Jewel Def. etc. p. 361.
repugnances, which yet notwithstanding, we are bound to acknowledge the said
Scriptures to be true and sacred; I will for brevity only allege, what other
Protestants think and answer themselves to the foresaid pretended
Contradictions in the Books of Machabee:, Tobie etc. D. Couel Answ. to Burges,
p. 85.
writes: We could without violence have afforded them the Reconcilement of
other Scriptures, and undoubtedly have proved them to be most true: Yea he
particularly answers certain of the pretended repugnances. In like sort
Conradus Pelican Ep. Dedic.
Professor at Tigure, writing his Commentary upon the foresaid Books, says,
I easily yielded etc. especially seeing those Books were always accounted so
Ecclesiastical and Biblical, that even from the Apostles times they were read
in the Catholic Church with much reverence, although they were not produced in
authority against the Jews as Canonical, who received not these into their
Sacred Canon, whereas they do not only not contradict in any thing the writings
of the Law and the Prophets, Ib. p. 87 88. 89. 90.
but also etc. for the most part they clearly carry the right style of the
holie-Ghost; certain knots (or difficulties) intermingled, which are sound more
easy to be loosed, then some have thought etc. Whereupon they were ever
reverenced and read by holy men; yea the Sayings thereof are found to be
alleged by the Apostles. Agreably hereto M. Hutton 2. Part of the Answ. p.
238. 239.
at large answers and cleereth the common objection against Judith, and the
like in behalf of Ecclesiasticus Ibid. p. 247.
and Ibid. p. 246. And see Bucers scripta Anglic p. 713.
Daniel. So weak and impertinent are the Contradictions pretended by
Protestants against the foresaid Books.

Now from the premises, and that by the Co^fessions of our Adversaries, we may
collect, that the foresaid Books of Scripture were only not approved for truly
Canonical by S. Austin, Innocentius, Gelasius, and all the Fathers and Bishops
of the 3. Carthage Council, but also were approved as parts of the Old
Testament by the Apostles, and for such alleged by them, and so from the
Apostles times were read in the Catholic Church with much reverence. Witnesses
whereof are the Protestant Writers Hiperius, Lubbertus, Zanchius, Hospiman,
Trelcatius, Hoe, Scelico, Brentius, Bibliander, Lascicius, Pelican, Raynolds,
Parker, Field, Couel, Bancroft, Hutton, Parkes and D. Bilson; al of them
affording their helping hands in maintayning and defending the foresaid Books
by true Antiquity.

It is acknowledged by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
believed and taught our now Catholic Doctrine concerning Traditions. CHAPTER
VI.
THE Catholic Doctrine concerning Bellarm. de Verb. Dei non Scripto. l. 4 c 3.
Traditions, is, that the sacred Scriptures, or written Word of God do not
expressly contain al points or matters concerning Faith and manners: And
therefore besides the same, is necessarily required the not written Word of God,
that is, Divine and Apostolical Traditions.

To the Contrary, Protestants Luth. in Comment. c. 1. ad Gal. Calvin. Inst. l.
4. c. 8. sec. 8
directly teach, that al things necessary to Salvation are set down in the
sacred Scriptures: And that we are not bound to believe or do any thing, which
is not taught and commanded thereby.

Now what the Primitive Church believed, and whether the present Roman or
Protestant Church does Symbolize and agree therewith, the Sequel, only taken
from the free and liberal testimonies of Protestants themselves, shall evidently
demonstrate.

And to begin with S. Gregory, D. Morton confesses that, Prot. Appeal l. 4.
p 62.
He uses to confirm some things by Tradition. S. Augustine also, whom D. Field
Of the Church l. 3. p. 170.
terms, Austin the greatest of all the Fathers, and worthiest Divine the
Church of God ever had since the Apostles times: This indeed most worthy
Divine, endeavoring to prove that those who are Baptized by Heretics, should
not be rebaptised, freely confesses, that De Bapt. cont. Don. l. 5. c. 23.
The Apostles commanded nothing hereof, but that Custom which was opposed
herein against Cyprian, is to be believed to proceed from their Tradition, as
many things be, which the whole Church holds, and are therefore well
believed, to be commanded of the Apostles, although they be not written. A
Saying so evident for our present Controversy and many others, that M
Carthwright In Whit. Def. p. 103. And in his 2. Reply against Whit. part. 1 p
84-85. 86.
says thereof, To allow of Austin's Saying, is to bring in Popery again. And,
if S. Austins Judgment, be a good Judgment, then there be some things
commanded of God, which are not in the Scriptures, and thereupon no sufficient
doctrine contained in the Scriptures. Calvin also acknowledges the same words
of S. Austin, yet confesses Inst. l 4. c. 10. 20.
not to respect them, affirming also that Austin has nothing besides
conjectures. In like sort S. Chrysostom in express words teaching In 2. These.
hom 4.
that, The Apostles did not deliver al things by writing, but many things
without, and these be as worthy of credit as the other. D. Whitaker De sacra
Scriptura p. 678.
in answer hereto says: I answer that this is an inconsiderat speech, and
unworthy of so great a Father. And whereas Epiphanius haer. 6^. teaches that,
we must use Traditions, for the Scripture has not al things, and therefore the
Apostles delivered certain things by writing, and certain by Tradition: with
whom agrees S. Basil de Spiritu Sancto. c. 27. saying: Some things we have
from Scripture, other things from the Apostles Tadition etc. both which have
like force unto Godliness. D. Raynolds In his Conclusions to his Conf. Conc. 1.
p. 689.
his answer to these foresaid Sayings of S. Basil and Epiphanius is; I take not
upon me to control them; but let the Church judge, if they considered with
advise enough etc. In like sort, Eusebius affirming ( l. 1. Demonstr. Euang. c.
8) that the Apostles published their Doctrine, partly by writing, partly
without writing, as it were by a certain unwritten Law, D. Whitaker De sacra
Scriptura p 668.
says hereof: I answer that this Testimony is plain enough, but in no force
ta be received because it is against the Scriptures.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 1. p. 87. 89. 90.
reproves for their like testimony of unwritten Traditions, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierom, Maximus, Theophilus, Basil
etc. And M. Fulk Against Purg. p. 302 303. 397 And against Martial p. 170. 178.
An^ against Bristowes Mo^^^s p. 35. 36.
confesses as much of Chrysostom, Tertulian, Cyprian, Augustine, Hierom, etc.
Schrederus Opusc. Theol. p. 72.
acknowledges that, Origin and Basil in his book of the holie-Ghost, and
Hierom against the Luciferians do relate many Customs, which they call
Doctrines received by Tradition without writing, as Threefold immersion in
Baptism, Prayer toward the East, the words of Invocation when the Bread of
the Eucharist is showed etc. prohibition to Fast on Sunday etc. Sacrifices for
the dead etc. And D. Whitaker De sacra Script. p. 678 681. 683 685. 690. 695.
696. 670. 668.
acknowledges and reproves for their like doctrine of Traditions, Chrysostom,
Epiphanius, Tertulian, Cyprian, Augustine, Innocentius, Leo, Basil, Eusebius
etc. The Centurists Cent 4. p 299.
condemn all the Fathers of the Fourth Age one by one, reciting their Sentences
and rejecting them. Chemnitius reciting and rejecting the Sayings of Origin,
Ex^m. part. 1. p. 87.
concludes thus: So Origin judges that there are Apostolical Traditions. And
D. Fulk Aga^^st Purg. p. 393
confesses, that Tertulian taught Sacrifice and prayer for the dead, upon
Traditions from the Apostles. D. Whitaker De sacra Script. p. 685.
being to answer S. Cyprians plain Sayings for Traditions writes thus: I
answer first, Cyprian was no Apostle, and therefore his words are to be
examined, and not al things forthwith to be received etc. therefore let us not
regard what he says etc. Lastly whereas S. Dyonisius de Eccles. Hierarchia c.
1. ( S. Paul's Scholar) affirms that the Apostles did deliver (their
Doctrine) partly by writing, partly without writing etc. D. Whitaker De sacra
Script. p. 655.
deuoyd of al answer or evasion says: I do acknowledge that Dionisius is in
many places a great Patron of Traditions. And D. Fulk In his Answer to a
Count. Cath p. 35.
confessing that Papias was Scholar to S. John, yet M. Midleton Papistomastix
p. 200.
affirms, that Papias was the first Father and Founder of Traditions.

But Before al these, lived the ancient Jews, of whom Paulus Fagius writes
that, Comment. in Cap. Patrum.
The Jews are of opinion, that Moses received from God in Mount Sinai a double
Law: the one which they call the Law delivered in writing: the other which they
call the Law which is in the mouth, or delivered by word of mouth: And this last
they affirm to be derived by Moses to posterity by a certain order of
Succession. And the self same is confessed by D. Beard Rotract. from Romans
Relig. ^. 73 74.
M. Rollock likewise avouches that, Treatise of Gods effectual calling, p. 241.
The Church after Moses had both the (Tradition or) sound of a lively voice,
and of the Scripture and written Word of God. And the same Doctrine of
Traditions in the Jews is confessed by Buxdorfius Synagoga Iudaica, p. 13 21.
48, 67.
a Protestant Hebrew Reader in Basile. D. Morton admits that, Prot. Appeal.
l. 2. p 377.
The Protestants will as readily confess that the Jews pretended unwritten
Traditions, as could either Egesippus or Anatolius; but whether they did make
that boast unjustly, or justly, that (says he) is worthy our m st diligent
Scanne.

Well then the Fathers here confessed and disliked by Protestants for our
Catholic Doctrine of Traditions, are S. Gregory, Austin, Ambrose, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Basil, Eusebius, Maximus, Theophilus, Innocentius, Leo,
Cyprian, Origin, Tertulian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Dionisius Areopagita, Papias,
and the faithful Jews before Christ.

The Protestants citing and reproving the said Fathers herein, are, Chemnitius,
Calvin, Schrederus, Buxdorfius, Whitaker, Carthwright, Morton, Beard, Rollock,
Fulk and Rainolds So Apparent it is, that our present Roman Church in the
Doctrine of Traditions, does still insist in the steps of the Primitive Church.

It is Confessed by Protestants, that according to the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, the Sacraments do truly confer Grace and Remission of sins: And
that they are in number seven. CHAPTER VII.
PRotestants Luth. in Assert. 1. Articuli.
teaching Faith alone to justify, do consequently affirm the Sacraments to be
but bare Signs, not causes of our Justification, serving either, even as
preaching, for an object to stir up and nourish our Faith, or for certain
marks whereby the Faithful are discerned from Infidels. But contrary hereto
the Catholic Church Conc. Florent. ln Institut. Armenoru^. Trid, sess. 7. can.
1.
has defined the Sacraments to give or confer Grace to the worthy receiver,
and that they jointly with Faith and other virtues concur to our
Justification. In like sort where Protestants teach only Baptism and the Lords
Supper to be Sacraments, the Catholic Church believes Seven, to wit,
Baptism, Confirmation, Penance, Eucharist, Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme
Unction.

To examine now what is confessed herein from the Faith and Doctrine of the
Fathers of the Primitive Church, and first concerning the efficacy of
Sacraments; S. Austin expressing the difference between the Sacraments of the
Old Testament and ours, affirms that, In Ps. 73 And cont. Faust. l. 19. c.
13. In Ps. 72. In Io tract. 11. and 41.
The Sacraments of the New Testament give Salvation, whereas The Sacraments of
the Old Testament did but promise the Savior. This his saying is so direct
against Protestants, that Musculus blusheth not to say; loc. com. p. 299.
It was spoken by Austine without consideration. And the like reprehension is
made by Calvin. But Inst. l. 4 c. 15. Sect. 7
Musculus not satisfied with reproof only of S. Augustine, reprehendeth further
the Fathers in General, for that, says he, loc. com. p. 299.
They attribute greater efficacy to our Sac aments, then to the Sacraments of
the Old Testament, affirming ours to be effec ual signs of Grace, not only
signifying the same as the others did, but also conferring and giving Grace and
Salvation.

This efficacy or conferring of Grace, the Fathers exemplify in Baptism;
insomuch that the Centurists write thus: Cent 3. c. 4. col 82.
Cyprian dares to affirm that the person baptizing gives the Holie-Ghost,
and inwardly sanctifyeth him, that is baptized: And Cens. 3. col. 247.
Cyprian thinks al sins to be taken away in Baptism: And Cent. 3. col 260.
Origin truly taught concerning the effect of Baptism, that the filth of Sin
was taken away thereby. Trac. 35. in Math. and hom. 15. in Iosuam. In like sort
of other Fathers most ancient, as Justin, Clement, etc. it is confessed by the
Centurists, that they Cent 2. c. 4. col. 47.
Thought Regeneration to be wrought by baptism and the word, unto which (two)
joined together, they attribute efficacy, that is to say, remission of
sins. But Zuinglius avouches in general that, Tom. 2 de bap. f. 70. And see
Luth. To 2. fol. 229.
It was a great error of the old Doctors, in that they supposed the external
water of Baptism to be of any value toward the purging of sin. But the
Fathers were so full herein, that (as D. Whit^k r l 10. cont. Dur. p. 883. Sarc.
loc. com. ^om 1. f. 232
and Sarcerius acknowledge) they condemned the Manichees amongst other errors,
in that They did deny that sins were remitted, and Grace conferred in
Baptism.

From hence the ancient Doctors taught so great necessity of Baptism, that
they firmly believed that Children dying unbaptized could not be saved. M.
Carthwright testifyeth, that In Whitguift Def p. ^22.
S. Austin was of mind, that children could not be saved without baptism. For
which his opinion he further charge him with Ibid. p 516.
Absurdity. And the same is acknowledged by Disp. Ratisb. p 398. Bull. Dec. 5.
Ser. 8. p. 1049. Dil. Disp. breu. p. 4. 5.
Bucer, Bullinger and Dilingam, who alleges to this end sundry particular
Sayings of S. Austin. And Musculus confesses, Loc. com. p. 308.
that Austin and some other Fathers were of the same opinion. S. Cyprian also
is reproved for the same Doctrine by Scultetus Medulla Theol. p 370
saying: These blemishes are noted in Cyprian etc. that he thinks Baptism to
be absolutely and simply necessary. Vrbanus Rhegius affirms, that, In part
1. oper. in Catechismo min. f. 105.
The Scripture and Authority of the ancient Church constrain him to believe,
that little children dying unbaptized are damned.

And by reason of this necessity, the Fathers doubted not, as Calvin says
Inst. l 4 c. 15. sec. 20.
almost from the very beginning of the Church, to use the Baptism of
Lay-persons in danger of death.

Concerning the number of the Sacraments, it is to be observed, that the
Fathers not foreknowing our present Controversy thereof did but speak of them,
as also of other points of Faith, casually, and as occasion was ministered, and
so accordingly S. Austin sometimes mentions but one, sometimes two and
sometimes more, In Ps 103. Con. 1. and De Bap. cont. Don. l. 5. c. 20. and ep.
119. c. 7.
therefore it is sufficient, if the Fathers in this sort do make mention of al
our Sacraments.

And yet in our behalf the testimony of Luther is very strong, who writing of
this point obiecteth thus: Tom 2. Wittemb. de Capt. Babyl. f. 84.
But thou will say, what do you answer to Dionisius, who numbreth up six
Sacraments? etc. I answer (says Luther) that he alone of the old (Writers) is
to be had for seven Sacraments, although omitting Matrimony he only recites
six. And the like is confessed by him of D. Humfrey Jesuit. part. 2. p. 519.
who affirms that S. Dionisius in this respect displeased Luther. Exam. part.
2. p. 7.
Chemnitius confesses out of S. Cyprian, that he numbrelh five Sacraments, and
only euadeth that the Sermon de Ablutione Pedum, is not S. Cyprians, but forged
under his name.

In like sort where Tertulian casually mentions diverse of our Sacraments,
namely Baptism, Extreme Unction, Confirmation, Orders and the Eucharist,
saying most wittily l. De Resur. Carnis. c. 8.
The flesh is washed, that the soul may be cleansed, the flesh is annoyled
that the soul may be consecrated; the flesh is signed that the soul may be
armed, The flesh is covered with Imposition of hands that the soul may be
enlightened with the Spirit; the flesh eats the Body and Blood of Christ, that
the soul may be fatted to God. This Saying is so displeasing to Protestants,
that M. Parker in great choler demands: Against Symb. part. 1 sec. 11. p. 77
and p. 2. sec. 10. p. 132.
Who can brook it? But more in particular concerning Chrisme or Confirmation,
sundry Protestants Ministers of Lincoln Dioc. in their Abridgment. p. 40. And
see Park against Symbol. p. 1. p. 133.
reprove Tertulian, Cyprian, Ambrose, with error of using the Cross in
Confirming those that were baptized. M. Parkins says: Vol. 2 p 653.
This unction pertayned to Baptism in the West, til above Three hundred years
after Christ, for then was there another Confirmatorie unction devised by
Melchiades, or as some say before him by Vrbane the first, who lived about Anno
223. S. Cyprian teaching that, l 1. ep. 12
It is necessary that he who is Baptized, receiving Chrisme should also be
anointed, the Cent. 2 col. 125.
Centurists reprove him for the same, affirming further, that in these ancient
times, unction and imposition of hands followed Baptism, of which Tertulian
etc. which custom Cyprian erroneously makes necessary. Chemnitius Exam.
part. 2 p. 58
also reprehendeth S. Cyprian for saying of Baptism and Confirmation: Then
they may be clearly sanctified and become the sons of God, if they be borne
of both Sacraments. Against Symb p. 133.
M. Parker reproves Ep. ad Iubaianum.
S. Cyprian for tearming The Oil, Signaculum Dominicum; our Lords Seal. And
Chemnitius Exam. part. 2 p. 58. 64. 65.
charge not only S. Cyprian, but also the Laodicen Council, Melchiades,
Cornelius and Tertulian for the Sacrament of Confirmation: For which also
Danaeus Resp. ad Tom 2. Bell. p. 451. 452.
recites and rejects sundry of the ancient Fathers.

Concerning holy Orders, to omit that already it is confessed here, that S.
Cyprian, Tertulian, and S. Denis did teach them to be truly a Sacrament,
numbering them amongst the rest: the very Minores Ordines, inferior Orders of
Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, Exorcists, Acolytes are so plainly taught in the
Primitive Church, that D. Field makes Of the Church l. 5. p. 121 Osia^d. cent
1. p. 131.
no question but these Minour Orders were very ancient, alleging in proof
thereof the testimonies of Cyprian, Cornelius, and Ignatius; And for the same,
the Cent. 4. col. 873. p. 874.
Centurists allege the Fathers of the Fourth Age. Tom. 6. Wittemb. fol. 53.
But Luther confesses that S. Denis (S. Paul's Scholar) affirms that there
are in the Church, Bishops, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectours, Exorcistes etc.

Lastly as touching Extreme unction, Innocentius is reproved by Pagea^t of
Popes. fol. 26. Szeged in Speculo Pontif. p 33.
M. Bale and Szegedine, for that he affirmed Anoyling of the Sick to be a
Sacrament.

Well then, the Points here confessedly taught by the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, are that the Sacraments do not only signify, but truly confer Grace,
Justification, and Remission of sins: That Infants dying unbaptized can not
be saved: That in case of necessity Lay-persons may baptize, and that the
Sacraments are seven in number. Now the Fathers produced and reproved by
Protestants for these Points, are, S. Austin, Innocentius, Cyprian, Origin,
Tertulian, Justin, Clement, Urban, the Council of Laodicea, Melchiades,
Cornelius, Ignatius and S. Denis. The Protestants charging the foresaid
Fathers, are Luther, Calvin, Musculus, the M^gdeburgians, Zuinglius, Sarcerius,
Bucer, Bullinger, Scultetus, Rhegius, Chemnitius, Danaeus, Osiander, Whitaker,
Carthwright, Humfrey, Parker, Field, and Bale. So evident it is, that the
Primitive and our now Roman Church, do most truly agree in the Doctrine and
number of the holy Sacraments.

It is Confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
believed and taught the Real Presence of Christ's true Body and Blood in the
Eucharist: As also our further Catholic Doctrines of Transubstantiation,
Adoration, Reservation, and the like. CHAPTER VIII.
IT is the Conc. Trid s ss 1^ c. 1. and 4.
certain and general Decree of the Catholic Church, that in the Blessed
Sacrament of the Eucharist, after the Consecration of bread and wine, our Lord
JESUS CHRIST God and man, is truly, really, and substantially contained under
the forms of those sensible creatures. And that the whole Substance of bread
is converted into the Substance of Christ's Body, and the whole substance of
wine into the substance of his Blood; which Conversion is fitly called
Transubstantiation. Protestants herein being much divided amongst themselves:
The Luth. l. de Captiuit. Babyl. c. de Euchar. Chemn. l. duabus Christi naturis.
Lutherans teach the Real Presence no less plainly then Catholics; only with
this difference, that they think withal the bread and wine to remain after
Consecration with the Body and Blood; which alteration is called
Consubstantiation. Zuingl. l De vera and falsa Relig.
Zuinglians are of opinion, that Eucharist is only a sign, figure or
remembrance of Christ's Body, no ways truly containing the same. Caluinists
Cvlu. l. de Coena Domini. Beza de Caena Domini.
seem in show more liberal, admitting the Body of Christ to be truly and
really in the Sacrament, and that the Sacrament is not only a Sign or figure,
or that thereby is only given to us the fruits and merits of Christ's Body, but
even the Body itself, yet with this qualification, that the same is not
received by the bodily mouth of the Co^municant, but only by his Faith:
Neither that the bread and wine cease to be, or are converted into the Body
and Blood of Christ, but that, when the bread and wine are received with the
bodily mouth, at the same time the body and blood of Christ are received
spiritually, mystically, and by Faith.

Now in one thing herein I will accord with D. Morton, that Prot. Appeal. l. 2.
p. 105.
This question of Transubstantiation being of so great consequence, that if it
be defensible, Protestants must stand chargeable of Heresy; but it may be
confuted, the Romanists must necessarily be condemned of Idolatry: That
therefore we (both) think it our bounden duty to consult more exactly with the
Senate of Antiquity, which I will now only perform from the free grants and
confessions of D. Morton's own Brethren.

And so to begin with S. Gregory, D. Humfrey Jesuit. parr. 2. rat. 5 p. 627.
speaking of him and S. Augustine demands, what Gregory and Augustine brought
into the (English) Church? To which himself answers, that They brought (with
many other Catholic points by him there recited) Transubstantiation.

To arise to S. Chrysostom, the Centurists Cent. 5. col. 517.
confess, that he seems to teach Transubstantiation. And Musculus Loc. com.
p 336.
recites and reproves a Saying of S. Chrysostom's for the Real presence. The
Centurists Cent. 4. c 10 col. 985 295.
likewise affirm that Eusebius Emissenus did speak unprofitably of
Transubstantiation. And Antony de Adamo in his Anatomy of the Mass. f. 222 And
see Cent 4. c. 4. col. 295. Oecolamp. lib. Epist. p. 756. Vadia^. de Euchar.
Aphor. l. 5. p. 150 and 151
many Protestant Writers do greatly reprove the Books of Sacraments (truly)
ascribed to S. Ambrose, for affirming the opinion of Christ's bodily Presence
in the Sacrament. Insomuch that the Centurists Cent 4. c. 4. col 295
charge S. Ambrose for not writing well of Transubstantiation, and Application
for the dead. In this respect also Peter Martyr In de fens. object. Gardin p 4.
p. 124.
professes to dislike the judgment of S. Cyril: And In his Epistles annexed
to his Common Places. ep. to Beza p. 106. and p. 98
further annexeth, I will not so easily subscribe to Cyril, who affirms such a
Communion, as thereby even the Substance of the Flesh and Blood of Christ,
first is joined to the blessing (for so he calls the holy bread) etc.
Insomuch as in his second Alphabetical Table, at the word Heresy, is set
down, Heresy of Cyril touching our Communion with Christ. And in his Epistle
to Calvin he further reproves for this Doctrine, Cyril, and some other
Fathers. Calvin Lib. Ep. and Resp. ep. 208 p. 392.
speaking of the Real Presence writes thus: Although I see the ancient
Fathers, and especially Hilarie and Cyril to have gone further then was fitting
etc. They in their ignorance catched, fly to a miserable refuge etc. But lest
these new (fusores) forgers should urge their authority, it shall be sufficient
for me not to subscribe etc. So likewise In Apolog. Conf. August. fol. 128.
Melancthon alleges a Saying of S. Cyril, as affirming the Real and corporal
presence; And the like does Bucer In his scripta Angl. p 616. 617
both of S. Hilarie and S. Cyril.

But to arise yet to more ancient times, the Protestant Common^factio cuiusdam
Th ologi de S Caena etc. p. 211. and 2^8
Vrsinus affirms that, In Cyprian are many Sayings which seem to affirm
Transubstantiation, D. Beard says: Whereas the Papists reply, Rect^a. from
Romish Re igion. p. 245.
that they teach no more then Cyprian did Thirteen hundred years since, who
said that Christ did bear himself in his own hands at the last Supper, I
answer (says he) that Cyprian in that place, and the rest of the Fathers
els-where, did often use hyperbolical speeches to extol the dignity of the
Sacrament. So void is D. Beard of better answer to so clear words of S. Cyprian
in proof of Transubstantiation. And whereas S. Cyprian himself testifyeth that,
That bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, not in show but in nature
changed, by the omnipotency of the Word, is made flesh, the Cent 3. col. 247.
Centurists say hereof, Cyprian in his sermon de Caena Domini, thinks that in
the supper there is the true Body and Blood of Christ. And the same also do
they Cent. 3. col. 58. 260.
affirm of Tertulian and Origin. Yea it is reported and acknowledged by many
Protestant writers, that in those very times of Tertulian, Cyprian, and
Origin, Christians were accused that they killed Infants, and eat men's flesh,
which calumny undoubtedly thence arised (says Osiander) in that Christians
believed and conf^ssed, that in the sacred Supper of our Lord the Body of
Christ was eaten, and his Blood drunk.

Moreover S. Ignatius, who by the confession of M Whiteguift In his Def against
Carthwright p. 408.
was S. John's Scholar, and lived in Christ's time, said of Heretics of his
time (accordingly as is acknowledged by sundry Protestants) Hamelmanus de
Tradit Apo. c. 746. Chem. Exa^. part. 1. p. 94 Recitationes de Concilio Scripti
libri Co^cor. p. 177
They do not admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not confess the
Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for
our sins. Marg. Theol. p. 256
Adamus Franci^ci confesses accordingly, that Transubstantiation entered early
into the Church. And Antonie de Adamo In his Anat. of the mass. p. 236
freely confesses that, He has not yet hitherto been able to know, when this
opinion of the Real and Bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did begin.
Melancthon (for his supposed worth in learning termed by Lauatherus, Hist.
Sacr. f. 47.
the Phoenix of his Age) writes hereof saying: lib. 3. Ep Zuingl. and Oecola^p
f. 132.
There is no care that has more troubled my mind, then this of the Eucharist:
And not only myself have weighed what might be said on either side, Osiand.
Cent. 3. l. 1. c. 3. p. 6. The Cent. cent. 2. c. 3. col. 26. 30. etc. 7. col.
123. And Cent. 3 c 3. col 10. Vad. Aphor. a^ Euchar. l. 6. fol. 198.
but I have also sought out the judgment of the old writers touching the same.
And when I have laid al together, I find no good Reason that may satisfy a
Conscience departing from the Propriety of Christ's words, THIS IS MY BODY.
Bucer Scripta Eruditorum aliquot viroru^ de Caena Domini. p. 37. And see
Hospinian part. 1 p. 292. Bucanus loc. com. p. 714.
speaking also of the Fathers in general confesses, that their words and
sayings are with us Catholics, and so evidently, that he therefore purposely to
avoid their terms, as being (says he) Serviceable to Antichrist, and over
much varying from the Scriptures. But Six godly Treat trans. into Engl. p 48.
Let no man think it strange (says a French Protestant) that the Successors
of the Apostles have from time to time corrupted the true use of this holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist etc. And Ib. p. 66
How was it possible that the first Bishops of Rome should draw the Princes,
Senators and Romans unto the Ghospel during (the first) Three hundred or Four
hundred years after Christ, seeing they did not labor, but to corrupt the use
of the holy Sacraments, and to restore the Iudaical Cere^onies, and the
Idolatries of the Heathen? So displeasing to Protestants was the doctrine and
practice of the very immediate Successors of the Apostles concerning the
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Now from this belief of the Real presence of Christ's Body and Blood in the
Sacrament, proceeded first a most special care and warines least any particle
thereof should fall upon the ground. S. Cyril of Jerusalem (Catech. 5.)
speaking hereof thus premonisheth: Take heed lest any thing of it fall from
thee etc. A Saying so plain, that D. Fulk Ib. p. 66
in lieu of better answer, terms it a mere Superstitious precept. And
whereas S. Austin (l. 50. homil. hom. 26.) writes thus of the reverend respect
of those times in this behalf: With what solicitude do we observe, when the
Body is administered unto us, that nothing thereof fall upon the earth? And
Tertulian (l. de corona militis) we take it heavily that any of our Chalice or
Bread do fall upon the ground. And Origin (hom. 3. in Exodus) you that are
accustomed to be present at the divine mysteries, do know that when you
receive the Body of our Lord, you do with all warines and reverence take heed
that no little thereof fall down etc. These so learned and ancient Fathers are
for these Sayings reproved by M. Parker Against Symb. part. 1. p. 148. Vadians
Aphoris. de Euch f 230.
and others* And Oecolampadius speaking Lib. Ep. Oecolampadij and Zuing. p. 690.
of Reservation of the Sacrament, thereupon infers that, Hence was the
Religion of the ancient Fathers, who took it heavily the Eucharist to fall upon
the earth.

Secondly, from the same belief of the Real presence proceeded a special
Reverence, worship, and adoration thereof by the ancient Fathers. Insomuch that
Chemnitius Exam. part. 2 p. 92. And see Chytreus de Bap. and Euchar p. 472.
alleges the several Sayings of Austin, Ambrose, and Nazianzene, al of them
affirming in his opinion, The Adoration of the Sacrament. And whereas Nazianzene
orat. 11. tells, how his diseased Sister Gorgonia, prostrated herself before
the Altar, and calling upon him who is worshipped on it; O miracle (says he)
she departed presently receiving health; D. Fulk In Resp ad Stapleton de
Success^one Eccl. p. 230.
merely trifleth in his answer hereto, being enforced to say, that The
Eucharist upon the Altar was not adored by her, although it was had in great
reverence, and peradventure not without Superstition: But Hospinian Hist. Sacr.
part. 1. p. 470.
plainly terms Gorgonia's fact, wicked and Superstitious. S. Ambrose in
orat. praepar. ad Missam, In his Reioynder to Bristow, and answer to Sanders.
p. 687.
is so plain in this point, that the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 437.
do therefore affirm of those prayers of S. Ambrose, that They contain the
Adoration of the Bread in the Sacrament: And the same is acknowledged by M.
Parkins In his Probl p. 21. Crispi. of the Church p. 87
and Crispinus. And yet are those prayers acknowledged and alleged for the
writings of S Ambrose In his true Differ. par. 4. p 622.
by D. Bilson. Lastly, the general custom of the Primitive Church in this
point is acknowledged Assert. Theol part. sec. 47.
by Marbachius in these words: As concerning the most ancient custom, which
the Church used in showing to the People the Eucharist to be adored in the
Mass etc.

Thirdly, In regard of this Adoration, Consecration being made, the Eucharist
was Elevated, that the people might see and adore it, accordingly as is now
used in the Roman Church. Insomuch that the Protestant Pelargus Schola fidei.
Art. 10. fol 1. 5.
relates that, Basile makes mention in his book of the Holie-Ghost or (...)
or showing, but this was no other then the Papists Elevation, used in the times
of Basil etc. And Altkircharus De Mystico and In^ruento Saerifi^io p. 79. 348.
reciting these words of S. Basile de Spiritu Sancto c. 27. who has left in
writing the words of Invocation when the bread of the Eucharist and Cup of
benediction is showed, affirms the answerable performance thereof to be In
Eleuatione, in the Elevation: yea he alleges Ibid. p. 105.
both S. Basile and S. Chrysostom as mentioning and affirming the holy
Elevation.

Fourthly, from the same root of Real presence, proceeded that ancient custom
in the holy Fathers of receiving the Eucharist fasting, according to that of
S. Austin ep. 118. c. 6. It pleased the Holie-Ghost, and was universally
observed, that our Lords Body should enter into the mouth of a Christian
before other meats, and that for this reason says he, In honorem tanti
Sacramenti: In honor of so great a Sacrament. Hist. Sacr. part. 1. l 2 p 48.
Sepperus de Sa^r p. 804.
Hospinian having alleged this very Saying, affirms thereof, that Austine
insinuates not obscurely this fast to have been an Apostolical Tradition. And
whereas Tertulian l. 2. ad Vxor. affirms that, the Eucharist is to be received
before al meat, the same is confessed in him by the Cent 3 col 132.
Centurists.

Fifthly, in those ancient times in due Reverence to this most holy Sacrament,
the Laytie before Receiving forbore for some time the company of their wives.
A Doctrine so manifest in S. Hierome, that D. Fulk Against Heskins, Sanders
etc. p. 458.
in this case acknowledges Hieroms admonition given to married persons to
abstain from company with their wives etc. which he there terms,
unworthy, and Popish Divinity. And yet Hospinian Hist. Sacr. part. 1. l. 2.
p. 46. see Osia^d. Cent. 4 p. 180.
confesses in general that, In the Primitive Church the Eucharist was received
chastely; And this particularly he demonstrateth in sundry ancient Fathers: for
which very point also Zepperus De Sacram p. 805
reprehendeth the Elibertine Council, Tertulian and Hierome: and S. Hieroms
sundry Sayings to the same effect are confessed and reprehended by the Cent. 4
c. 7. col 487. Chemnit. Exam part. 3. p. 61.
Centurists; and Chemnitius Exam. part. 3 p. 50. 58.
for the same reproves Origin. But Hos inian Hist. Sacr part. 1. l. 2. p. 132.
reprehendeth and alleges herein Siricius, Innocentius, Calixtus, Vrbanus,
the 2. Council of Arles, the Councels of Neocesarea and Carthage.

Sixthly, whereas according to Protestants Doctrine, the Eucharist is no
Sacrament, unless it be received; our contrary Catholic^ Doctrine and practice
of Reservation is so agreeable with the Primitive Church, that D. Fulk Against
Heskins etc. p 77.
confesses hereof saying: That the Sacrament (of some) was reserved in the
elder days of the Church, is not so great a Controversy, as whether it ought
to be reserved: And Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sec. 39.
acknowledges, The Reservation of the Sacrament (to be) the example of the
ancient Church. Chemnitius Exam. part. 2. p. 102.
also testifyeth, that witnesses of this custom of private Reformation of the
Eucharist, are Tertulian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome, Basile etc. And that,
certain of the ancient Fathers greatly commended the same, as Nazianzene,
Ambrose etc. And that it was, an ancient Custom spread abroad and long
continued: Insomuch as Peter Martyr can not but acknowledge that (by the
testimony of Cyril) the Anthropomorphites were specially condemned for their
impugning of the Sacraments Reservation: For whereas S. Cyril ad Calosyrium,
says, I hear they say, that the mystical blessing, if any remnants thereof do
remain til the next day following, is unprofitable to sanctification; but they
are mad in so saying; for Christ is not made another, neither shall his Body be
changed, but the virtue of blessing and lively Grace does always remain in
it. Peter Martyr Contrae Gardener. de Euchar. object. 213. col 838.
mentioning this very sentence of S. Cyril affirms thereof, that whereas it is
added, that the Remnants of the Eucharist reserved til the day following, do
not cease from Sanctification, this I think belongs to a certain received
custom etc. which Custom though it savor of some Superstition, yet Cyril and
others subscribed unto it; for forthwith, even from the times of the Apostles,
by little and little it began to degenerat from that ancient simplicity of Gods
worship. Willee in his Synop. p. 460.
Crispinus Of the Estate of the Church. p. 87.
speaking of Constantins time affirms that, Such as made any great voyage by
Sea or Land, carried the Eucharist. D. Field confesses that, Of the Church. l.
3. c. 34. p. 149.
In the Primitive Church the manner of many was to receive the Sacrament, and
not to be partakers of it presently, but to carry it home with them, and to
receive it privately when they were disposed, as Tertulian and others do report.
And that, The manner was to send it by the Deacons to them, that by sickness or
other necessary impediment were forced to be absent, and to strangers. Yea for
this purpose, they did in such places, where they communicated not every day,
reserve some part of the sanctified Elements, to be sent to the Sick, and such
as were in danger of death. Yea as then was usual the Pixe for the reserving or
carrying thereof; in so much that Assert. Theol. part. 2 sec. 47.
Marbachius confesses, that S. Basile reserved the Eucharist in a golden Dove.
And whereas D. Harding obiecteth for the Pixe, the plain testimonies of
Symmachus, Gregorius Romanus, Gregorius Turonensis and Theodorus; the same are
acknowledged by M. Jewel In his Reply Art. 9 p. 420. Fulk against Staplet. p.
150, 151.
and D. Fulk.

Lastly, the Roman Church does so directly follow the Doctrine and practice of
the Primitive Church in this so weighty a matter of the Eucharist, as that she
observes the external form or figure thereof used in the ancient Church. D.
Bilson In his true Differ. p. 4. p. 566.
acknowledges from S. Epiphanius in Ancorato, that the Eucharist was round in
figure: And M. Carthwright In Whytguift. Def. p. 593 And see Proet. de Sacram p
287. and 281.
confesses, that it was a round wafer-cake brought in by Pope Alexander, which
Pope lived, as Osiander Cent. 2. p* 10. Whitgift. in his Def. p. 594.
and D. Whiteguift confess, Anno Christ 111. which is now above 500. years.
Hospinian Hist. Sacram. l. 4. p. 370.
avouches that, It can not certainly be known, when (Christians) first began
either at home or in the Churche^ to prepare of flower or bread, little and
round Hosts and morcels, like pieces of silver etc. Epiphanius makes mention
of round bread in the Supper etc.

The ancient Jew s also did most plainly foretell the Real presence of Christ's
Body in the Eucharist, and the Sacrifice thereof; for whereas Duraeus urges
from Galatinus, the Hebrews most plain and plentiful Sayings i^ behalf
thereof, D. Whitaker answering thereto, neither confesses, nor yet denies, but
only shufleth them off, saying: Cont. Dur. l. 9. p. ^18.
In this matter we do not desire thy Peter Galatin, neither do we need those
testimonies of the Hebrews: so not denying, but rather supposing the truth of
the foresaid testimonies evidently foreshewing and affirming the Real presence
and Sacrifice of Christ's blessed Body in the Sacrament. And thus we see the
Fathers and Doctors of the Primitive Church to have symbolized with us
Catholics in the doctrine of the Eucharist, teaching expressly: First,
Transubstantiation itself: Secondly, and prescribing a most diligent care that
no part thereof do fall upon the ground: Thirdly, yea and adoring it with special
reverence: Fourthly, and in that regard using Elevation thereof at Mass time,
as we still continue: Fifthly, for which case they receive fasting; Sixthly, the
Married Laytie also forbearing the Company of their wives for some time before
Receiving. Seauenthly, Besides they not only kept and reserved the same for the
sick, and other such necessities; But also used the very form and figure of a
round wafer-Cake observed at this day. Now the Fathers produced and reproved by
Protestant Writers for the foresaid points are, S. Gregory, Chrysostom,
Eusebius Emissenus, Cyril, Ambrose, Hilarie, Austine, Nazianzene, Basile,
Hierom, Siricius, Innocentius, Calixtus, Vrbanus, Symmachus, Gregorius
Turonensis, Epiphanius, Cyprian, Origin, Tertulian, Ignatius, and the Fathers
in general. The Protestants citing and confessing the foresaid Fathers are, the
Centurists, Musculus, Oecolampadius, Vadian, Anthony de Adamo, Peter Martyr,
Calvin, Melancthon, Bucer, Osiander, Vrsinus, Hamelmanus, Adamus Francisci,
H^spinian, Bucanus, Chemnitius, Chytreus, Crispinus, Marbachius, Pelargus,
Altkircherus, Zepperus, Humfrey, Whitaker, Fulk, Parker, Parkins, Carthwright,
Willet, Jewel, Field, and Beard. And now I appeal to al indifferent Readers,
whether Protestants themselves have not sufficiently confessed, that, by the
Sentence or Doom of the Senate of Antiquity, D. Morton and his Brethren are
chargeable with Heresy, as also the Romanists acquitted of Idolatry.

Protestants confess, that the Primitive Church of Christ believed, taught,
and practiced the Sacrifice of the Mass, as also that it is a Sacrifice
according to the order of Melchisedech; and truly Propitiary for the living and
the dead. CHAPTER IX.
IT is the general Con^. Trident. sess. 22. c. 9.
and certain Decree of the Catholic Church, that Christ our Savior at his
last Supper instituted a true and proper Sacrifice of his own Body and Blood,
and that he gave power and authority to his Apostles and to Priests their
Successors to offer the same, as well for the Living as the Dead.

Protestants Luth. de Capt Babyl. c. de Eucha. Chemnit. Exam part. 2. Calvin.
Instit. l. 4. c. 18.. 1. and 2
deny al true, proper, and external Sacrifice to be ordained by Christ, or to
be used in the time of the Ghospel, but only the spiritual Sacrifices of
Praise, thanksgiving, and the like.

Now because D. Morton wishes that, Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 169.
These two questions, whether the Eucharist be a true essential Sacrifice, and
whether it be properly Propitiatory and auaylable in itself for remission of
Sins, or no, might be decided (amongst other means) by the verdict of
ancient Fathers, I will therefore join with him therein, and that only from the
verdict given by his own Brethren.

S. Gregory the Great, is much reproved by many Protestant Writers for his
Doctrine and practice of the Sacrifice of the Mass. M. Beacon The Relics of
Rome. p 344
affirms, that the Mass was fully finished by Pope Gregory the first, about
Anno Domini 600. Melancthon l. 4 Chr. in Henri i. 4 fol. 186. 187
confesses that, He allowed by public Authority the Sacrifice of Christ's
Body and Blood, not only for the living but also for the dead. D. Humfrey In
Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 5 p. 5 and 627.
acknowledges that, S. Gregory and S. Austin brought (into England) the
Archbishops Palle for Solemn Masses. Carrion Chr. l 4. p 567. 568.
avouches that Gregory etc. approved the oblation of the Body and Blood for
the dead. M. Bale Cent. 1. p. 68.
grants that Gregory ordered the (very) Ceremonies of the Mass, and made
up the Canon thereof; And that He commanded Act. Romans Pontif. p. 44. 45. 46. 47.
Masses to be celebrated upon the dead Bodies of the Apostles. And the Cent. 6
col 369. 370 69^. 694.
Centurists charge him with Celebration of Mass. Szegedine writes that,
Gregory is said to be the first Author of this propitiatory Sacrifice about
the year Six hundred; for he appointed certain days in which Sacrifice should
be offered with Solemnity in the Church, Graves aliquot Quaestiones printed
with Brunlerus fol. 161. 162.
and promised ardon of sins to such as came to that solemnity. Certain
Councels also call the Mass a Sacrifice, as the Council of Antioch, the
Seventh of Carthage, the Sixth of Constantinople, and the Council of Arles.
Hospinian In Concord, discord, in Prolog. fol. 5.
writes, That it appears out of S. Gregory himself, that in the Age wherein
he flourished, which was about the year Six hundred after S. Augustine, one
hundred fifty seven, the oblation of the Supper, as a Sacrifice for the
living and dead, was deeply seated and rooted in the minds of men. And again
Hist. Sacr. part. 1. l. 2. p 159.
The Enemy of mankind brought into the Church of Christ by Gregory the Roman
Bishop, this pernicious error (of Sacrifice for the dead) as a certain thick
cloud covering the whole Heavens. In like sort Chytraeus Apoc. in c. 9. p 199
charge S. Gregory, that he established many foul errors, and especially
the Idolatrous invocation of Saints, and Masses for the Dead, which from that
time, as a Deluge, have ouerflowed the whole Church. And again: De Baeptismo
and Euch. p. 453. And see Pelargus in Schola fidei fol. 8. And Praetor. de Sacr
p. 280.
In the times of Gregory the Great were ordained private Masses. Finally M. Fox
reports that about the year Seven hundred and eighty Pope Adrian ratifyed
the order of S. Gregory's Mass; Act. Mon p. 130.
at what time (says he) this usual Mass of the Papists began to be universal
and uniform and generally received in all Churches.

But now to free most clearly S. Gregory and his Age, from al innovation, or
first beginning of this so material a point of Faith: Ancient to him was
Gregory Turonensis, who, according to the confession Cent. 6. col. 336.
of the Centurists, mentions in his Fourth book, etc. 30. Chapter a certain
Priest of France named Cato; Loc. conc. de Caena Domini. p. 339.
who, the plague being great, stayed there and said Masses: That you may
understand (say the Centurists) that the Celebration of Masses had then
fulfilled al places.

Predecessor to S. Gregory in the Popedom was Pelagius, of whom Musculus
reports that, Pelagius placed in the Secret of the Canon of the Mass the
Commemoration of the dead etc. that the virtue and efficacy of the Mass may
be communicated to the dead. And he is further charged with the opinion of
Mass helping the dead, by Upon the Revel. p 81.
M. Symonides.

Before him was Symmachus Bishop of Rome, of whom the Magdeburgians Cent 6. c.
10. c. 664.
say: He had the Marks of Antichrist, for he brought the Mass into form or
order: which form was so agreeable to the Mass at this day, that Hieronymus In
his Eusebius Captiuus etc. in Act. 3. diei f. 142.
Marius avouches, that Symmachus brought the Mass into that order, wherein we
see it disposed at this day.

Before him governed S. Leo, of whom M. Bale In his Pageant of Popes f. 27. And
see in Act. Rom Pont. p. 32. 33.
writes: Leo the First, allowed the Sacrifice of the Mass not without great
blasphemy to God.

Before Leo was the Carthage Council; this Pelargus reproves saying: Schola
fid^i etc. in tract de Council p. 13.
The Fifth Council of Carthage brought in prayer and Mass for the dead. And
Osiander Cent. 4. p. 16.
says of the Seauentie ninth Canon of the Fourth Carthage Council, (whereat S.
Austin was present) This Canon (if it be not forged) showed at that time
prayers and Sacrifices to be made for the dead. Before these Councels was S.
Ambrose, whom the Centurists Cent 4 e 4. c. 295.
charge with not writing well of Transubstantiation and application for the
dead: And that, He uses speeches, which none of the Fathers before him used,
as to say Mass, to offer Sacrifice etc.

Before him lived Gregory Nyssene, of whom Crastouius De opificio Missae. l. 1
sec 164. p. 8 And see Whit. cont. Du oe^m. l. 4. p 320.
writing against Bellarmin, says: Does he not know that the opinion of Nyssen
is of itself absurd etc. for Nyssene says, when therefore Christ gave to his D
sciples his body to eat etc. then hiddenly, unspeakably, and inuisibly his
Body was sacrificed etc.

Before him was Cyril of Jerusalem, of whom Hospinian reports, Hist. Sa r p.
167.
saying: As concerning Cyril of Jerusalem, he says indeed, according to the
received custom of his time, that the Sacrifice of the Altar is the greatest
help of Souls.

Before these times lived S. Cyprian, whom the Centurists Cent. 3^ c. 4. col.
83.
reprove saying: Cyprian says, the Priest exercises the office of Christ, and
Sacrifice is offered to God the Father: Insomuch as they further In the Index of
the 3. Centurie under the letter. 5.
say, Cyprian affirms Superstitiously, that the Priest exercises the office
of Christ in the supper of the Lord.

Tertullian is charged by Osiander, Cent 3 l. 1. p 10. Fulk in his Confutation
of Purgatory p 265. Cent. 3. c. 5. c. 138.
the Centurie-writers, and D. Fulk, for that, He approved Sacrifice for the
dead. Origin is reproved by Chemnitius Exam. p. 3. p. 50. and 58
for teaching that, It is certain that the daily Sacrifice is hindered to them
who serve the necessities of Wedlock; whereupon it seems to me, that he only
is to offer the daily Sacrifice, who has vowed himself to daily and perpetual
chastity.

Before these lived Ireneus; him Calvin Lib de vera Eccl. Reformat. extant. in
Tract Theo. Calvin etc. p. 389.
rejects, for that he expounds the place of Malachie (c. 1. 10. 11.) of the
Sacrifice of the Mass. And the Centurists Cent. 2 c. 4 col. 63.
avouch that, He seems to speak very incommodiously of Sacrifice l. 4. c.
32. when he says, (Christ) taught a new Sacrifice of the new Testament, which
the Church receiving from the Apostles offreth to God over the whole world. In
the same time lived Alexander the First, of whom Szegedine Graves aliquot
quaestiones. fol. 162. And fee Hierom Maerius in Eusebius Capt. in Act. 3.
oieide Missae p. 143.
writes, Alexander the First taught, that which was received from the
Heathens, to be blotted out by this Sacrifice. Yea Szegedine undertaking to set
down the framers of the Mass, begins with the Fathers from the Apostles
times, and the more ancient Councels of the Primitive Church, saying: In
speculo Pontif. p. 68.
The framers of the Papistical Mass were Clemens, Anacletus, Alexander etc.
And, the Ibid. p. 69.
Councels of Bishops for the Papistical Mass were the Councels of Ephesus,
Antioch, the Second of Carthage, of Constantinople, of Arles etc.

Before al these lived S. Ignatius, of whom the Centurists Cent. 2 c. 4. col.
63.
say: Certain doubtful and incommodious speeches occur in some (Fathers) As
in the Epistle of Ignatius ad Smyrnenses Ignatius says; It is not lawful
without a Bishop, to offer, or Sacrifice: Which words they censure Ibid. col
167.
to be dangerous and as the seeds of error. But M. Beacon Reliq. of Rome. fol.
344.
confesses, that The Mass was begotten, conceived, and borne anon after the
Apostles times, if al be true that Historiographers write. In like sort Epist.
de Abroga^dis Statutis Eccl siae.
Sebastiaenus Francus confesses that, Presently after the Apostles, al things
were turned vpside down etc. the Supper of the Lord was turned into a
Sacrifice. And another Protestant (41) Writer speaking of the first Roman
Bishops after S. Peter, says: Let no man think it strange that the Successors
of the Apostles have from time to time corrupted the true use of this holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist. And again: A French written in his six godly Treat.
Engl. p. 48.
How was it possible that the first Bishops of Rome should draw the Princes,
Senators, and Romans unto the Ghospel during (the first) 300. or 400. years
after Christ, seeing they did not labor but to corrupt the use of the holy
Sacraments, and to restore the Iudaical Ceremonies, and the Idolatries of the
Heathen? meaning thereby External Sacrifice and the Ceremonies thereof. In which
sense also Hospinian Hist. Sacram. l. 1. c. 6. p. 20.
affirms that, Even in the first Age, the Apostles yet living, (the Devil)
dared to lay snares more to this Sacrament then to Baptism, and by little and
little did withdraw men from the first form thereof. And M. Ascham Apol. pro
caena Domini p. 31
(a Prime Protestant) plainly acknowledges, Ibid. p. 66.
that no beginning of Sacrifice after the Apostles time can be showed, saying:
At what time, or by what men the Supper of the Lord was cast out of possession
by the Mass, can not truly be known.

Thus have we seen the Fathers in particular even up to the Apostles times
acknowledged and reproved by Protestant Writers for their doctrine and practice
of the Sacrifice of the Mass: But the truth herein is so evident, and the
Fathers doctrine so general, as that for greater brevity they are in gross
rejected by Calvin De vera Eccl. Reform. extant in Tractat. Theolog. Theol.
Calu. p. 389.
The ancient Fathers (says he) are not to be excused, so far forth as it
appears, that they are altered from the pure and proper institution of
Christ: for seeing the Supper was to be celebrated to this end, that we might
communicate with Christ's Sacrifice, they not content therewith, added also
oblation: this Addition I affirm to be faulty etc. And again, In omnes Pauli
Epist. in Heb. c. 7. p 924.
speaking in general of the ancient Doctors of the Church possessed with this
opinion, he further adds, verily as Error is accustomed to draw error with
it, when they had forged a Sacrifice in the Supper of Christ, without his
commandment, and so adulterated the Supper with adding of Sacrifice, afterward
they endeavored of every side to procure colors (or pretenses) wherewith to
cloak their error. As also, Inst l. 4 c. 18. sec. 11.
I see those old (Fathers) to have detorted this Memory otherwise then was
agreeable to the Institution of our Lord, in that their Supper carried the face
of I know not what re^te^ated, or at least renewed Sacrifice etc* for they more
nearly imitated the Jewish manner of Sacrificing, then either Christ had
ordained, or the rule of the Ghospel permitted.

In like sort says D. Fulk: Reioynder to Bristowes Reply p. 28. See Z^pperus
de Sacr. p. 47. and Hospinian H st. Sacr. p 592.
The name of Sacrifice, which the Fathers used commonly for celebration of the
Lords Supper, they took of the Gentiles and Jews; but how prove you they had it
from the Scriptures? And D. Field Of the Church. l. 3. c. 19 p. 107
for his best evasion affirms that, The reason doubtless that moved the
Fathers so much to urge that mystical Sacrifice of Christ in the blessed
S^crament, was, for that they lived in the midst of Jews and Gentiles, both
whose Religions consisted principally in Sacrifice: The Fathers therefore to
show that Christian Religion is not without Sacrifice, and that of a more
excellent nature then theyrs were, did much urge, that Christ once offered for
the Sins of the world upon the Altar of his Cross, is daily in mystery
offered, slain, and his blood powered out on the holy Table: And that this
Sacrifice of Christ, slain for the sins of the world, thus continually
represented, and living in our memories, is the Sacrifice of Christians.

But the Fathers are so full herein, as that they further teach that the
Sacrifice of the Mass is propitiatory or able to appease Gods wrath, and
cause remission of sins. Cent. 4 col. 295.
De Opificio Missae. p. 167.
Chrastouius reciting the Fathers opinion hereof confesses that, The sayings
of the Fathers do not only import Impetration, but a certain intrinsecal force
of appeasing. Origin. hom. 13. in Leuitie. says: This is the only
Commemoration, which makes God propitious to men. Athanasius (in sermon. de
Defunctis apud Damascenum) says: The oblation of the unbloody Host is a
P^opitiation. To which end he alleges likewise further the particular Sayings
of Ambrose, Chrisostom, Augustine, Gregory, B^de, and of the Third Council of
B^ach. S. Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. 5. calling it in this sense, The Host of
Propitiation, And, the greatest help of Souls (departed) for which it is
offered, is therefore reproved by Hospinian, Hist. Sacr. p 167. See Osiand.
cent. 4. p. 227. Hutt. c^ Sacrif. Miss. p 525.
who withal confesses, that it was the received Custom of S. Cyrils time. And
for the same doctrine is rejected S. Ambrose, Cent. 4. col. 295.
S. Cyprian Cent. 3. col. 138. 139 And see Osiand. cent. 3. p. 10.
and Tertulian by the Centurists. In like sort the Fathers describe in
particular this Sacrifice, to be a Sacrifice according to the order of
Melchisedech, which was of bread and wine; wherein S. Austin is so clear, that
D. Morton in his very Prot. Appeal. p. 166.
obiecting of him, yet acknowledges that S. Austin held, That Melchisedechs
offering was a Sacrifice. Lib. de vera Eccl. Reform. p. 389.
Calvin avouches that, It is usual to those knaves (meaning Catholic Writers)
to scrape together whatsoever is corrupt in the Fathers etc. when therefore
they object to us the place of Malachie to be expounded by Ireneus of the
Sacrifice of the Mass, the Sacrifice of Melchisedech to be so handled by
Athanasius, Ambrose, Augustine, Arnobius, let it be briefly answered, the self
same Writers els-where also to expound bread to be the Body of Christ, but so
ridiculously, that reason and truth compels us to dissent from them. And
again, In omnes Pauli Epist. in Hebr. 7. p. 924.
How much the more do I admire so many old Doctors of the Church to be
possessed with this opinion, that they will persist in the oblation of Bread and
wine; for thus they say, Christ is a Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, but Melchisedech offered bread and wine, therefore the Sacrifice
of Bread and wine agrees to the Sacrifice of Christ. D. Fulk Against Hoskins
etc. p 100.
admits that It is granted, that Cyprian thought the bread and wine brought
forth by Melchisedech to be a figure of the Sacrament, and that herein also
Melchisedech resembled the Priesthood of Christ. And again Against Heskins
etc. p. 99. And see against Rhem. T^st. in Hebr. c. 7. sec. 8. f. 405. Whitak.
cont. Dur. p. 818. 819.
more in general: I confess that diverse of the old Fathers, were of opinion,
that the bread and wine which Melchisedech brought forth was sacrificed by him,
and that it was a figure of the Sacrament, which they improperly call a
Sacrifice. De opificio Missae. l. 1. p 28.
It is not lawful (says Chrastouius) for Christian Pastors to cast away the
consent and harmony of Interpretation, and that both for the neernes of the
Apostolical Age, as also for the singular agreement of al, which is had in all
places etc. Al as it were conspiring, that the Sacred oblation of Melchisedech
is proposed, that not only it may be thought to be offered to the Soldiers of
Abraham, but also an unbloody Sacrifice to God. The ancient Jews also were so
agreeable with us herein that the Protestant Bibliander doubts not to affirm,
that De S. Trinitate l. 2. p. 89.
with the Ancient Jews it was a most received opinion, that at the c^ming of
the blessed Messiah al Legal Sacrifices were to cease, and only the Sacrifice
Thoda of thanksgiving to be celebrated etc. and that to be done with bread
and wine, In his Defense etc. p 473. See Parker against Symbolizing part. 1. c.
2. p. 103.
even as Melchisedech King of Salem and Priest etc. brought forth bread and
wine.

The Fathers also likewise much urge the necessity of mingling water with wine
in the Chalice before oblation and consecration. D. Whitguift affirms, that
Cyprian was greatly ouerseen, in making it a matter so necessary in
Celebration of the Lords Supper, to have water mingled with wine, which was at
that time no doubt, Common ^o more then to him. Carthwright In Whitguift. Def.
p. 525.
acknowledges that, In the mingling of water with wine, a necessity and great
mystery was placed, as may appear both by Justin Martyr and Cyprian. And M*
Jewel In his Reply p. 34. See Schultetus in Med. Theo. p. ^70.
also confesses that, Indeed S. Cyprian, and certain old Fathers spoke of it,
and force it much: whereas not one new Protestant does either allow or practice
the same. But D. Morton Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 142.
is content to refer this new Romish Custom unto Pope Alexander the supposed
Author thereof, says he. But may not D. Morton blush to call it New Romish
Custom, and yet refer it to Pope Alexander, who lived almost within a
Hundred years after Christ?

Here then we may conclude, that our Sacrifice of the Mass, was not only
allowed and used by the Fathers of the Primitive Church, but withal
acknowledged by them to be truly a Sacrifice Propitiatory for the remission of
sins: As also that the same was truly represented by the Sacrifice of
Melchisedech offering bread and wine. Now the Fathers confessed and reproved by
Protestants for our foresaid doctrine of Mass, are S. Gregory, Gregory
Turonensis, Pelagius, Symmachus, Leo, Austin, Ambrose, Nyssene, Cyril,
Arnobius, Athanasius, Cyprian, Origin, Tertulian, Ireneus, Alexander, Clemens,
Anacletus, Ignatius: As also the Councels of Ephesus, Antioch, the Second and
Fourth of Carthage, of Constantinople, and of Arles, and the Fathers in general.

The Protestants acknowledging and reproving the foresaid Fathers are the
Centurists, Calvin, Melancthon, Carrion, Szegedine, Hospinian, Chitraeus,
Musculus, Marcus, Pelargus, Osiander, Chrastouius, Chemnitius, Sebastianus
Francus, Zepperus, Schultetus, Fox, Whitaker, Symonides, Ascham, Fulk, Field,
Whiteguift, Jewel and Morton.

It is acknowledged by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
taught and believed the Power of Priests to Remission of Sins; The necessity
of Auricular Confession, The Imposition of Penance, and satisfaction to God
thereby: As also our Roman Doctrine of Pardons or Indulgences. CHAPTER X.
COncerning the Sacrament of Penance, the Bellarm. de Paenitent. l. 1. c. 10.
and l. 3. c. 2. and l. 4. c. 5.
Catholic Church teaches. First, That God has given truly and properly to
Bishops and Priests, as his instruments, Power and Authority to forgive sin.
Secondly, That sinners are bound to confess their Sins in particular to
Priests. Thirdly, That the said Priests are to impose Penance or punishment
upon the Penitent after Confession of his Sins, and that the Penitent in
satisfaction is to perform the same by Prayer, Fasting, Almsdeeds and the
like.

Now the Protestant Church having no true Subsistence, but being a mere
Negation or denial of true Religion, directly Instit. l. 4 c. 19. 15 B za in
Co^f. fi^^ci. 7. art. 11.
denies all the foresaid Points taught and practiced by the Roman Church.

What the Primitive Church believed and practiced herein, I wholly refer to
the plentiful Confe sions and testimonies even of Protestant Writers. And to
begin with S. Gregory, Osiander Cent. 6. p. 288.
charge him, that he teaches untruly of Penance. And the Centurists Cent.
6. c. 10 p. 748.
reprehend him for his opinion of Confession etc. Penance, and Satisfaction.
D. Morton acknowledges that, S. Gregory Prot Appeal l. 1 sec. 23. p. 26.
indeed requires, that after man has confessed his sins, he should take
revenge of himself by penitential exercises etc. S. Hierome tearming Penance,
The second Table after Shipwreck, Calvin Inst l 4. c. 19.. 17.
reproves him saying: But it is the Saying of Hierome; whose soever it is, it
can not be denied but that it is plainly impious, if it be expounded in their
sense.

And as concerning the Power and Authority of Priests to remit sin, the
denial thereof was reprehended in Acesius by the Emperor Constantin; for the
Centurists Cent. ^. col. 653.
report that Acesius his opinion was, that al men should be exhorted to
Penance, but the hope of remission of sins should be expected not from
Priests, but from God: But when Acesius had said these things, the Emperor
added; ^ Acesius, set a Ladder, and clime alone to heaven: This History is
likewise confessed by Osiander Cent. 4. p. 119.
and Chemnitius. Exam. part. ^ p. 188 and part. 2. p. 193.
Now because Priests without knowledge and Confession of sins can not
discern or judge when or what Sins are to be remitted or retained; It is
further likewise confessed, that in the Primitive Church, Confession auricular
and particular of sins to the Priest was taught and practiced. And though
Contra Duraeum. l. 7. p. 490.
D. Whitaker does affirm, that Innocentius the Third was the first that
instituted Auricular Confession for necessary, yet S. Leo who lived almost
eight hundred years before this Innocentius, is charged with like Innovation
by M. Symonides, Upon the Revel. p. 57.
saying: Leo the First, first brought-in Auricular Confession: And then
presently after he cites S. Leo his own words for Auricular Confession. And
whereas long before Innocentius, the Iacobites were condemned for affirming,
that we are to confess our sins to God only; And that, Confession of Sins
to a Priest is not needful, this is acknowledged by the Protestant p. 126.
Author of Catholic Traditions.

But to clear also S. Leo of al Nouellisme in this hehalf; It is confessed by
the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 425. And see col. 426.
that even in the time of Constantin, who lived above One hundred years before
S. Leo, that the Christians as then To this end had a Priest etc. appointed, to
whom those coming who had sinned, should confess the sins they had committed
etc. And the Priest upon that condition absolved those who Confessed, that they
should desire from him Penance for their Sins.

Yea they arise higher, and plainly confess, Cent. 3. c. 6. col. ^27.
that in the times of Cyprian and Tertulian private Confession of thoughts, and
lesser sins, was used and thought necessary; and their words are these:
Absolution from sins was so given, that those who did Penance, first
confessed their sins; For so does Tertulian greatly urge Confession in his
book of Penance; and that private Confession was usual, wherein they confessed
their crimes, as also their wicked thoughts, it appears by some places of
Cyprian, as in the Fifth Sermon de Lapsis, and third book of Epistles. ep. 14.
and 16. where he plainly says: Even for lesser sins, which are not committed
(directly) against God, it is needful to go to Confession, and this he
commands to be done often. l. 1. ep. 3. etc. Thus far the Centurists,

Confession being made by the Penitent to the Priest, the Centurists Cent. 3.
col. 127* and 81. 38. 49. 82. And see Calvin Instit l. 4. c. 12.. 8. And Conc.
Laodicenum Can. 2. apud Osiand ce^t 4 p 386.
further confess that, Penance (or) Satisfaction was enjoined according to
the offense. And that the Priest, Cent. 4. col. 425. 426. And see col 491. 834.
868.
did absolve those who confessed their sins upon that condition that they
would demand punishment for the same. And D. Whitaker Cont. Camp rat. 5. p. 78.
acknowledges that, Cyprian and Tertulian thought by (such) their external
discipline of life, to pay the pains due for sins, and to satisfy Gods
Justice; And that, Not Cyprian only, but almost all the most Holy Fathers of
that time were in that error. So likewise Melancthon In his Libelli aliquot
fol. 10. 11. 16.
disliketh that, Cyprian urges Canonical Penance etc. and confirms the
opinion as though they were necessary, and that for them sins are forgiven
etc. In like sort the whole Nycene Council overcome with the consent of the
multitude and time, approved the Canons of Penance. And for the same doctrine
he reproves the Ibid. fol. 19. and 28.
Carthage Council and S. Chrysostom.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 4. p. 68.
charge the Fathers in general, saying: I am not ignorant that the Old
Fathers do sometimes over largely and with words over lofty command that
Canonical discipline. As that Tertulian says, by these Satisfactions sins
are purged; Cyprian says, by them sins are redeemed, washed, cured; Ambrose,
by them the pains of Hell are recompensed; Augustine, God by them is pacifyed
for sins past: And such like (Sayings) there are, which with true Faith
neither can, nor ought to be taken as they sound. And Hamelmanus avouches
that, Cyprian seems foully to have erred concerning Satisfaction. Yea says
Calvin: Pref. Inst. ad Reg. Galliae. And see Inst. l. 3. c. 4.. 38.
Those things, which every foot occur in the works of the Old Writers or
Fathers touching Satisfaction, move me but little: De Tradit. l. 2. c. 7. col.
97.
for I see that diverse of them (I will say simply as it is) almost al whose
works are extant, either have erred in this matter, or have spoken over
crabbedly and hardly. And again: Inst. l. 3 4 c. 12.. 8.
The immoderate Austeritie of the ancient (Fathers) can no ways be excused, it
differed wholly from the Commandment of our Lord, and was very dangerous; here
their wisdom was to be required. As also: Inst. l. 3 c 3.. 16.
The ancient Writers exceeded measure, with ^mmoderat praises they commended
that corporal Discipline: They were more severe in exacting chastisements, then
Ecclesiastical lenity does permit. And the Centurists speaking of the Third
Age affirm that, Cent. 3. p. 81.
Most of the Doctors of this Age do wonderfully deprave the doctrine of
Penance, yea they spare not to say of the Age next to the Apostles, that Cent.
2. p. 62.
Even then this part of Doctrine concerning Penance began to be weakened. Now
as concerning Indulgences or Pardons of temporal punishment, It is confessed by
M. Symonides Upon the Revel. p. 84.
that, S. Gregory remitted Canonical Penance, and promised clean remission of
sins, to such as frequented Churches on set days. M. Bale In Act. Romans
Pontif. p. 46 47.
affirms that, Gregory confirmed by Indulgences Pilgrimages to Images for
the devotion of the people: And that, He was a defender of Pardons, yet not a
seller: As also that, He first granted Pardons for set days, and to such as
visited Churches. In like manner Pantaleon In Chr. p. 48.
avouches of him that, He first granted pardon of sins to the people
visiting Churches upon set days; In Decret. and in 3. psalm. Paenit. In his
Eusebius Capt. published by P^zelius, under the Title of Act. 1. diei de
Indulgentijs fol. 48.
Hieronymus Marius thinks that, Gregory the First, and Boniface the Eigth
were the chief authors of Pardons. Cyprian In his Treatise of the lives of
Popes Engl. p. 32.
also Valera confesses of S. Grogorie, that he granted Pardons but sold them
not. And D. Humfrey In Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 5. p 5. and 627.
repeating sundry Catholic points of Faith taught and brought into England by
S. Gregory and S. Austin, infers from them in these words: From al which
what else is intended, but that Pardons, Monachisme, Papistrie, and (even) the
whole Chaos of Popish Superstition be builded up.

But to clear S. Gregory of al Innovation in this point of Doctrine: The
Centurists acknowledge that Cent. 5. c. 6. col 692.
S. Chrysostom mentions days of Indulgence and Pardon. And D. Field Of the
Church. l. 1. c. 17. p. 33.
confesses that, The Ancient Bishops were wont to cut off great parts of
enjoined Penance, which remission was called an Indulgence.

Now to conclude, Confession being made and Penance enjoined, the Priest (as
the Centurists confess for the practice of the Third Age) did afterward
absolve the Penitent (even) with the (now-like) used ceremony of imposing his
hand. So that the Primitive and our present Roman Church do confessedly agree
in the doctrine of Penance; First, As that Priests have truly Power to remit
Sins. Secondly, that Auricular Confession is necessary. Thirdly, that after
Confession Penance is to be imposed. Fourthly, Cent. 3 col. 127.
that the same is truly Satisfactorie. Fifthly, after Penance, Absolution is
given, with Imposition of hands. Sixthly, yea Pardons and Indulgences are
acknowledged to be granted and used in those purest times of the Church
Primitive.

Now the Fathers cited and reproved by Protestants for our foresaid doctrines,
are S. Gregory, Leo, Chrysostom, the Doctors in the Age of Constantin,
Ambrose, Augustine, Cyprian, Tertulian, the Carthage Council, the 1. Council of
Niece, and the Fathers in general.

The Protestants accusing them, are the Centurie-writers, Calvin, Chemnitius,
Melancthon, Hamelmanus, Osiander, Hieronimus Marius, Pantaleon, Valera,
Symonides, Bale, Humfrey, Field, Morton and Whitaker.

It is granted by Protestants, that the Catholic Doctrine of Purgatory, and
of Prayer and Sacrifice for the dead, was believed, taught, and practiced by
the Fathers of the Primitive Church. CHAPTER XI.
WHAT more generally disliked by Protestants then our Catholic doctrine of
Purgatory, and our charitable pracise of Praying and Sacrificing for the dead?
And yet what more generally confessed by Protestants to have been the belief
and custom of the Primitive Church, then Purgatory, Prayer, and Sacrifice for
the dead?

Concerning S. Gregory, D. Humfrey In Jesuit. part. 2. rat 5 p. 5. and 627.
acknowledges, that he taught us Englishmen by the preaching of S. Austin the
doctrine of Purgatory etc. the oblation of the healthful Sacrifice, and
Prayers for the dead. In Chro. l. 4. p. 567. 568.
Carrion confesses, that he approved the opinion of the oblation of Christ's
Body and Blood to be made for the dead.

John Bale In Act. Romans Pontif. p. 44. 45. 46. 47.
is of opinion, that he made his four books of Dialogues for the upholding of
Purgatory etc. and admitted (even) Masses for the dead. The Magdeburgians In
the Index of the 6. Centurie at the word Gregory.
charge him out of his own writings with the Doctrine of Purgatory etc. Cent.
6. col. 373.
and with oblation of Sacrifice for the dead. D. Fulk Ag. Rhem. Test. in 1 Cor.
3.
says: In the days of Gregory etc. the opinion of Purgatory had gotten some
ground in the Latin Church etc. yet in the place by (the Rhemistes) quoted, he
grants it, but for very small offenses. D. Sutcliffe avouches that, Gregory
Subversion. c. 4.
used Litanies, allowed Purgatory etc. And whereas D. Whitakers confidently
avouches, that, Contra Duraeum l. 7. p. 480.
He that first delivered Purgatory for a certain Doctrine, was Gregory the
Great: Yet M. Symonides Upon the Revel. p 83.
only charge him, not with beginning, but with increasing two pernicious
things in the Church, Invocation of the Dead, and Prayer for the dead* yea D.
Morton confesses that, S. Gregory Prot. Appeal l 1. Sec. 17. p. 19. ^0
frames thus his conclusions: Because such Souls (departed appearing after)
desire the help of the living, the Sacrifice of the Altar is profitahle for
them. Whereupon our Doctor concludes, saying: This, does give us cause to
observe in him a deep plunge into Superstition. And again: S. Augustine spoke
with a Peradventure, but S. Gregory kindled the fire with a Credo etc. And now
of late, the Romanists have blow^e the flame with an Anathema. So hotly do
Roman Catholics follow the Sent given by S Gregory and S. Augustine. But to
clear S. Gregory of al Innovation in this point; Ibid. p. 498.
I will ascend to his predecessors and Ancients. And to begin with S. Augustine,
whom though D. Morton pretends to speak hereof, only with a Paraduenture or
doubtfully, yet Bullinger, having perused diverse places of S. Augustins
writings concerning this point, avouches: De orig^^ Errori^ f. 223.
That, not in one, but in many places, Augustine makes mention of Sacrifice
for the dead etc. in Enchirid. c. 109. for it is not to be denied (says he)
but that the Souls of the dead are relieved by the piety of their living
friends, when the Sacrifice of the Mediator is offered for them etc. And in
his 32. sermon de Verbis Apostoli, This, says he, delivered from the Fathers,
the whole Church observes, that prayer be made for them, who dyed in the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, when in their place they are
remembered in the Sacrifice, and the Sacrifice also is offered for them. This
therefore (says Bullinger) I set down more at large, that thou may
understand this custom of Sacrificing for the dead to be ordained, not by the
Apostles, but by the holy Fathers.

D. Willet affirms: That diverse of the ancient Fathers, Tetrastylon part. 3.
p. 97.
did incline too much to maintain and commend prayer for the dead, with which
error (says he) S. Austin seems somewhat to be infected. Augustine (sayrh
Calvin Inst^t. l. 3. c. 5. 10
in his books of Confessions tells, that his mother Monica earnestly desired
that Memory of her might be made at the Altar in performing the mysteries. An
old woman's desire (says Calvin) which her Son squared not by the rule of
Scripture, but through affection of Nature would have it approved to others. D.
Fulk confesses that, In his Confut of Purgat. p. 1^0.
Austin de Ciuitate Dei. l. 21. c. 13. concludes very clearly, that some
suffer temporal pains after this life, this may not be denied: Yea he boldly
avouches, that Austin Ibid. p 313.
blindly defended prayer for the dead. D. Morton affirms, that Protestant
Authors Prot. Appeal. p. 495.
have observed S. Augustine to have been the first who opened the window unto
the doctrine of Purgatory, by whose own direction (says he) we have a good
warrant to dissent from him etc. So admitting S. Austin for Purgatory, but
most disgraciously insinuating, that therein he is contrary to himself; which
as most palpably untrue, I forbear to confute; and only proceed clearly to
show, that neither S. Austin was first, nor the sole man that opened the window
herein, as our Doctor with his other Brethren have blindly observed.

To which effect D. Fulk acknowledges that, S. Ambrose In his Confutation of
Purgat. p 78. 320. 326 202.
allowed prayer for the Dead, and that it was the common error of his time. As
also, Ibid. p 194. And see Cent. 5. c. 6. col. 675.
that Chrysostom and Hierome allowed prayer for the dead. And Chemnitius
confesses the same of Ambrose, Exam. part 3. p. 93. 94.
Prudentius and Hierome, and further reprehendeth S. Epiphanius, Ibid. p. 107.
as not daring to refute such opinions of the common people: as also S.
Augustine and S. Chrysostom for yielding over much herein to the custom of the
time, and the received opinions of the vulgar. De Ratione Refor. Eccl. Edic.
Gal.
I do not deny (says Calvin) these prayers (for the Dead) to have been
received by S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius and S. Austin and such others, because
they had them from their Predecessors etc. But these good men whom I have
named with over much credulity, without al discretion and Judgment followed
that which within short time had gotten authority. Osiander testifyeth, that
(23) Pelagius the Second decreed that Memory of the dead should be made in
every Mass, after the Elevation of the healthful Host. Which decree is
observed even unto this day. Melancthon charge the whole Council of Carthage
herewith, saying: In his Libelli aliquot etc. f. 19. and see Apol. Conf Aug c.
de vocabulis Missae f. 216
The fourth Carthage Council contains a Decree of Prayer and Sacrifice for
the dead, in these words etc.

D. Fulk acknowledges, that this forefather In his Answer to a Counterf. Cath.
p. 44.
Aerius taught, that prayer for the Dead was vprofitable, as witness (says he)
both Epiphanius and Austin; which they count for an error. Hereunto agrees
Hospinian, saying: Hist. Sacr part. 1. fol. 155.
It was the common opinion of the vulgar, that the Souls of the dead might
something be helped by the prayers, Alms, and Sacrifices which are done upon
earth, as is evidently understood by the disputation of Epiphanius with Aerius.
D. Fulk not only reprehendeth In his Confut. of Purgat p. 320. 294. 326. 349.
Ambrose, Chrysostom and Austin for allowing Prayer for the dead; but withal
he admits, that it Ibid. p. 320. 326. 34^. 78.
was the common error of their times, and that the error of Purgatory was
somewhat rifely budded in Austins time: Ibid. p. 161.
Yea answering to D. Allen, he grants, that Ibid. p. 78.
Austin speaks of the Amending fire in the place by M. Allen alleged: He
does so indeed (says D. Fulk) but Austin had no ground of that fire, but in
the common error of his time. So confessedly was the Amending fire of
Purgatory the common doctrine of S. Austins time.

A truth so certain, that Chemnitius for the self same doctrine reprehendeth
Exam. part. 3. p. 92.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Ibid. p. 93.
Ambrose, Hierom, Ibid. p. 94.
and Prudentius. Ibid.
And Fulk speaking of Constantin the Great, who lived somewhat before these
Fathers, affirms that, In his Confut of Purg. p. 313.
In the burial of Constantin there is mention of Prayer for his soul according
to the error of his time. In like sort the Centurists observe, that Cent. 4.
col. 454.
a great multitude of people powered out their prayers with tears for the Soul
of the Emperor. And for the same doctrine of Purgatory they accuse Cent. 4.
c. 4. p. 304.
Lactantius, Prudentius and S. Hierome. D. Beard speaking of Those fathers
Retractiue from Romish Religion p. 414.
which do patronize Purgatory, mentions from Bellarmine, Athanasius, Basil,
and Gregory Nazianzene.

Neither was this so general practice of the people or uniform consent in
doctrine of these ancient Fathers any Innovation, or first beginning error of
their times: For it is further confessed by D. Fulk, that the doctrine of
Purgatory, not began, but In his Retentiue etc. p. ^06.
prevailed (says he) within three hundred years after Christ. And M. Gifford
In his Demo^stratio^ that our Brownistes be full Donatistes p. 38.
grants that, In the (Churches) public worship, to pray for the Souls of
the dead, and to offer oblation for the dead, was general in the Church long
before the days of Austin, as appears (says he) in Cyprian and Tertulian,
which was before him, and nearer to the times of the Apostles. So likewise
Calvin Inst l 3 c. 5. sec. 10.
acknowledges that, above One thousand three hundred years since, it was
usual, that prayers should be made for the dead; whatsoever hereof is read in
the Ancient (Writers) was yielded to the public custom, and to the ignorance
of the people etc. I confess they were drawn headlong into Error: even as
inconsiderat Credulity does usually deprive the minds of men, of Judgment.
And relating the Custom of making Commemoration of the dead in the Supper, or
Sacrifice, that place of ease, light and peace might be given to them: he
further says, I do not deny this to have been a most ancient Custom, and
because great is the force of Custom, or rather Tyranny, therefore I confess
these prayers to have been approved by Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Augustine and
the like, because as by hands, they were delivered to them from their
Ancestors.

Beza speaking of the times of Cyprian, Austin and Chrysostom, confesses, that
as then, Praef. in nouum Test. ad Princ. Cond.
Prayers for the dead were begun to be used more freely. The Protestant In
Apoc. p. 206
Ioannes Winkelmannus avouches that, Origin decreed a Purgatory wherein after
this life some sins are purged. The Centurists Cent. 3. col 87.
report that, Thou may see some seeds of Purgatory spread abroad in some
places of Origin, as hom. 2. in psalm. 36. yea in the same place they allege
sundry of Origens sayings affirming Purgatory. And Cent. 3 col. 265.
in another place they acknowledge that, Origin in his books de Principijs,
decrees Purgatory to be the punishment of Sins. And for the same doctrine,
they reprehend Cent. 3. col 138. 139.
both Cyprian and Tertullian. Yea other Protestants affirm of S. Cyprian, S.
Augustine, and S. John Damascene, in that they defend Prayer for the dead, that,
Clypeus fidei. Dial. 11. p. 449.
they are mere fooleries which they have written of this matter: And that such
their doctrine is to be ascribed to ihe rash stupiditie wherewith their heads
were moved, seeing they were deuoyd of the Holie-Ghost.

Chemnitius grants that in the writings of Dionysius the Areopagite, who was
converted by the Apostles, mention is made of Prayer Exam. part. 3. p. 110.
for the dead in the Church. And the like is acknowledged of Dionysius by
Melancthon, In aliquot libel. etc. fol. 23.
and D. Fulk, Against Purgatory p. 353.
which D. Fulk in plainest words teaches that, Tertulian Against Purgat p.
3^2. and see p 303. 393.
Cyprian, Austin, Hierom, and a great many more do witness, that Sacrifice
for the dead is the Tradition of the Apostles. Whereunto Bucer accords, In
Enarrat. in Sacra, quatuor Euangel in Math. c. 12. p 311.
affirming that prayer and alms were made for the dead almost from the very
beginning of the Church. Lastly, Zuinglius being impugned for denying Prayer
for the dead, and pressed with the Authority of Fathers (especially of S.
Chrysostom and S. Augustine, who derive this Custom from the Apostles)
answers thus: Tom. 1. Epicheroe. de Can. Miss. f. 186. And see Tom. 2. in
Elench. contra Anabap. f. 10.
If it be so as Augustine and Chrysostom report, I think that the Apostles
suffered certain to pray for the dead, for no other cause then to condescend to
their infirmity. So insimulating the Apostles, wilfully to have permitted
others to err (according to the errors of Protestants) in praying for the
Dead, which they could not do without error in themselves.

Yea the Doctrine of Purgatory and Prayer for the^ dead, was believed and
practiced by the ancient true believing Jews: For whereas M. Morton speaking
of the Church before the coming of Christ, affirms, the doctrine then taught
by the Jews, to be now known (among other Reasons) Treat. of Israel and the
Church. p. 93. 94.
By the open Confession of the Jews in all Ages since the coming of Christ. For
(says he) it is plain that they hold even to this day those opinions which
they received from their Ancestors, and were commonly held of that Nation. Yea
say the Centurists: Cent. 8. col. 885.
The Jews are constant in their opinions. And Pet. Martyr writes that, Com.
plac. in Engl. part. 2. p. 599.
The Jews as yet continue, and kept in so great adversities, in so diverse, and
gri^uous Captiuities, and Dispersions, they hold still their Religion. Doubtless
no ancient Trojans, Lumbards, Hunnes, or Vandals have so held their own etc.
and could show their original and History set forth in most true writing: and
being every where dispersed as they were, could nevertheless keep their own
Ordinances etc.

Now concerning these Jews so constant in their Faith; and admitting the
books of Machabees but only for a true History: it is evident thereby, that
Judas Machabeus (a holy and just man) procured 2. Machab. 2.43.45.
Sacrifice for the dead, and that the Priests of Jerusalem (then true
believers) offered the same; wherein also our later Jews are so conformable,
that D. Whitaker confesses the same in these words: Cont. Dur. l. 1. p. 85.
I know that the Jews have (libros memoriales) books of Commemorations, which
they read in their Synagogues; and I am not ignorant that now they are
accustomed to use certain prayers for the Dead. Insomuch that, Buxdorsius also
reports their known and confessed doctrine of Purgatory Synagoga Iudaica.
p. 24. 505. 506. 508. 275.
D. Beard avouches that, Retractiue from the Romish Religion. p. 77.
The Romanists are like unto the Jews in their doctrine and practice of Prayer
for the dead; for they hold and teach that prayer and Sacrifice is to be
offered for the dead; grounding their opinion, partly upon the example of Judas
Machabeus, who as they affirm procured Sacrifice to be offered by the Priests
for the dead etc. and partly upon the Thalmudical Traditions of diverse of their
ancient Rabbis.

From the Premises then we may remember, that the ancient Fathers did
confessedly believe a place of Purgatory after this life. Secondly, wherein
Sins were punished and remitted. Thirdly, for which Remission they used to
Pray, give Alms, and offer the most precious Sacrifice of Christ's Body and
Blood.

Now the Fathers acknowledged and reprehended by Protestants for the foresaid
Points, are S. Gregory, Austin, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Prudentius,
Epiphaenius, Pelagius, the Fourth Carthage Council, Cyprian, Tertullian,
Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Dionysius the Areopagite, the Apostles, and the
ancient believing Jews.

The Protestant Writers observing and disliking in the said Fathers the foresaid
Points, are, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Zuinglius, the Centurie-writers, Carrion,
Chemnitius, Osiander, Melancthon, Hospinian, Winkelmannus, Buxdorsius, Bucer,
Symondes, Bale, Sutcliffe, Humfrey, Fulk, Whitaker, Gifford, Willet and Morton.

It is confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
believed and taught our Catholic Doctrine of Christ's Descending into Hell.
CHAPTER XII.
ACcording to the Article of our Creed: He descended into hell; Catholics
generally teach, that the Soul of Christ, presently after his death, descended
into Hell, or Lymbus Patrum, or Abraham's Bosom, there to deliver and redeem
the Captive Souls of the holy Patriarks, Prophets and other Just, who lived
before his time.

But Protestants being divided amongst themselves, Bu^er in c. 27. Mat. Beza in
c. 2. Act.
some of them teach that by the foresaid Article, is only understood, that
Christ descended to his Grave; Calu. Instit. l. 2. c. 16. 8 9. 10. 11. 12*
others that he suffered the pains of the Damned Souls.

Now do decide this Controversy by the belief and Doctrine of the Fathers of
the Primitive Church, and that by the confessed acknowledgement of our
Adversaries, who in a case so evident liberally confess the general stream of
ancient Doctors to be most adverse unto them in this very Article of our
Faith: whereas that most holy and ever renowned Cardinal Bellarmine, in proof
of this Article alleged Tom. 1. l 4. de Chri. Anima. c. 14
the plain testimonies of the Greek Fathers, as namely of Justin, Ireneus,
Clemens, Origin, Eusebius, Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen, Epiphanius, Chrysostom
etc. And of the Latin Fathers, Tertulian, Hypolitus, Cyprian, Hilarie,
Gaudentius, Prudentius, Ambrose, Hierome, Ruffinus, Austin, Leo, Fulgentius
etc, The Protestant Ad Bellarm Disput part. 1. p. 176.
Danaeus in answer to so many most famous Fathers testimonies, most barely
affirms that, As concerning them, they were not instructed out of Gods word,
neither do they confirm their opinion from it, but only from their own
conjectures etc. Thus supposing their Catholic opinion herein, and therefore
rejecting al their judgments, as confirming their Faith only by their own
conjectures in Danaeus his opinion; which as no less absurd in itself then
improbable to al Judicious, I omit as an answer purely Protestantical.

In like plain manner Conc. Dur. l 8. p. 567 And see p. 773.
D. Whitaker in answer to the like testimonies of the Fathers urged by our
Catholic Writer Duraeus, writes thus: That which thou could not do by
Scriptures, no doubt thou will perform by the testimonies of the Fathers: of
whom, that I may freely and briefly answer thee what I think, one little word of
Scripture has more weight with me, then a thousand Sayings of Fathers without
Scriptures. Therefore thou art not to expect that I severally wash away those
errors of the Fathers. So according to the custom of al Heretics for their
last refuge, appealing to only Scripture, and disclayming from the Doctrine of
the ancient Fathers.

M. Jacob In Bilsons full Rede^pt. p. 188* And see Jacob in Def. of the Treat.
of Christ's fuffringes. p 199. 200.
honestly acknowledges that, All the Fathers with one consent affirm, that
Christ delivered the Souls of the Patriarcks and Prophets out of hell at his
coming thither, and so spoiled Satan of those that were in his present
possession: with whom agrees, herein D. Bilson. Vbi sup. p. 189. And in his
Survey. p. 656.
And D. Barlow Def. of the Articles of Prot. Relig. p. 173.
testifyeth that, This passes most rife among the Fathers, who taking,
(Inferi,) for Abraham's bosom, expound it, that Christ went thither, ad
liberandum liberandos, to convey the Fathers deceased before his Resurrection
into the place where now they are.

A French Protestant Catholic Tradit. p. 112. 113.
Writer not only affirms this to be the doctrine of Chrysostom, a very true
(says he) Catholic teacher, but also of the now present Apostolic Churches
of the East, whereto says he, In likelihood the Christians of Afric do
consent. And whereas S. Ignatius Ep. ad Trallianos post med.
does clearly teach the same Doctrine, the same is acknowledged in him Def. of
his Article etc. fol. 22 Bislons Survey p 657. 658.
by D. Hill, and D. Bilson. yea the Poloman De Russorum etc. Religione. p. 122.
123.
Protestant Lascicius doubts not to affirm and derive the Doctrine thereof
not only from S. Ignatius S. John's Scholar, but also from S. Thadaeus one of
the twelve Apostles, Math. 10 3.
And withal answerably testifyeth herein the opinion and doctrine of the
Hebrews, Vbi sup. p. 123.
and of the remote Christians both in Syria and Aethiopia. And the like
acknowledgement of S. Thadaeus his opinion herein is made by Palma Christiana.
p. 74. And see Eus. Hist. l* 1. c vlt.
Frigiuillaeus Gruu^us, who speaking thereof affirms that, we have the
testimony of Eusebius Pamphylus, who in the History of Agbar, King of the
Edessens testifyeth Thadaeus the Apostle to have preached before Agbar and
others, amongst other things, the Descension of Christ to Hell etc. And then
further defending this History for Authentical, he concludes: No man of
mature judgment will impugn those things which Eusebius delivers of the
preaching of Thadaeus at Edessa, and the conversion of Agbar to Christ: Finally
this testimony of the holy Apostle Thadaeus, is further defended by D.
Bilson, and sundry times alleged and urged by D, Hill.

The ancient Jews did so certainly believe the Doctrine of Lymbus Patrum, and
the same is so clearly taught c. 24. 37.
in the book of Ecclesiasticus, that D. Whitaker for his best answer finally
betaketh himself to the rejecting Conc. Dur. l. 8. p. 567.
of the said book for not Canonical; But the falsehood hereof being formerly See
bef. l. 2 c. 5.
proved, Survey of Christ's sufferings p. 653. 654. 657. 660. 661. etc. Hill Def.
of this Art. Christ Desce^d. etc.
and that from the Confession of other Protestants, it suffices for this
present that the said book being but a true History, does yet fully manifest
the Doctrine herin of the Ancient Jews who lived before Christ. In which
regard also D. Beard Retract^ue from Romans Relig p. 78.
affirms Catholics, to Iudaize in their doctrine of Lymbus Patrum and
Purgatory. This Article then of our Creed, that Christ after his death truly
descended into Hell, we see was the confessed Doctrine of S. Austin, Leo,
Fulgentius, Chrysostom, Prudentius, Hierom, Ruffine, Ambrose, Hilarie,
Gaudentius, Epiphanius, Justin, Clemens, Hippolytus, Irenaeus, Ignatius,
Thadaeus the Apostle, and of all the Fathers, and the ancient Jews.

Now the Protestants producing and acknowledging the Fathers Doctrine herin to
be Roman Catholic, are Danaeus, Lascicius, Frigiuillaeus Gruuius, Whitaker,
Bilson, Hill, Jacob, Barlow, Beard, and others.

IT IS CONFESSED BY PROTESTANTS, THAT THE Fathers of the Primitive Church
believed and practiced our Catholic Doctrine of praying to Angels and Saints.
CHAP. XIII.
ALthough the glorious Angels and blessed Saints do not require, or need, in
regard of themselves, any human Apology for their deserved honor; they being
seated in the highest and strongest turrets of the kingdom of Heaven, wherein
new Triumphs they daily win against their Enemies, and being (as l. de
Mortalitate.
S. Cyprian says) now secure of their own immortality, are yet careful of
our securetie: Yet if we respect either the general Calumnies and contempts of
our modern Heretics against them, or our bounden duties by reason of so many
celestial Graces through their charitable suffrages bestowed upon us, it may
justly be thought expedient, or rather necessary in their due defense, and for
sa isfaction of the Adversary, briefly to set down the confessed Doctrine and
belief of the Primitive Church honoring and inuocating the said Angels and
Saints as Intercessours, agreably as the Roman Church still does; directly
contrary to our Modern Protestants refusing and impugning the same.

First then touching S. Gregory the Great, the Protestant Chronicler Carrion
affirms that Chron. l. 4. p. 567. 568.
Gregory orda^ned the public Rite of Invocation of Saints. M. Symonds only
avouches that Upon the Revelations. p. 83.84.85.86.
Gregory increased two pernicious things in the Church, Invocation of the
Dead, and Prayer for the dead, And that, he wrote to Leontia to make S. Peter
Protector of the Empire in earth, and Intercessour in Heaven, etc. He Sent
Austin into England to convert the English; they which were sent, spread forth
a Banner with a painted Crucifix, and so came in Procession to the king,
singing Litanies in a strange tongue: Now one chief part of the Litanie
contains Invocation of Saints.

Luke Osiander Cent. 6. p. 288.
reciting many Catholic points of Faith, taught and believed by S. Gregory,
numbreth amongst the rest that, He approved, cloaked, and defended the
Invocation of Saints and their worship. In the Index of the sixth Century, at
the word, Gregory.
The Centurie writers numbering up in like sort the pretended Popish Errors of
S. Gregory charge him with Invocation of Saints. With whom agrees In Iesuitis
part. 2. r at. 5. p. 5. and 627.
D. Humfrey, reprehending S. Gregory for public Invocation of Saints and
their worship. Cent. 6. c. 131. col. 17.
And the Centurists further confess, that Gregory the Great recites many
miracles etc. which plainly confirm Superstition, as confidence in Saints,
Invocation of the dead etc. We need not therefore, (says D. Morton) Prot.
Appeal. l. 1. sec. 24 p. 27.
be greatly moved with the contrary Doctrine of S. Gregory (allowing praying
to Saints) etc. And again: Nevertheless as we find in him very rarely any
prayer unto Saints etc So desiring to mince, but not daring to deny a truth so
manifest, and for such confessed by so many of his other Brethren, of S.
Gregory his defending Invocation of Saints.

But to ascend from S. Gregory to other more ancient Doctors, Exam. part. 3.
p. 211.
Chemnitius alleges S. Austin inuocating S. Cyprian, and concludes saying
thereof: These things (did) Augustine without scripture, yielding to the times
and custom. Prudentius I grant (says D. Whitaker) Answer to Campian Reas. 5.
p. 140. 141.
as a Poet somtims called upon the Martyrs, whose Acts he describes in verse;
And the superstitious Custom of praying to Saints, had now taken deep root in
the Church, which as a Tyrant haled sometimes the holy Fathers into the same
error. In his Reioynder to Bristow p 5.
D. Fulk spares not to speak thus plainly, I confess (says he) that Ambrose,
Austin, and Hierom held Invocation of Saints to be lawful: And that Against the
Rhem. Test. in 2. Pet. c. 1. sec. 3. fol. 443.
In Nazianzene, Basil, and Chryostome, is mention of Invocation of Saints; And
that, Theodoret also speaks of prayers unto Martyrs: As also that, Leo
ascribes much to the prayers of S. Peter for him: And in brief, that many of
the ancient Fathers held, that the Saints departed pray for us. Cent. 5. c. 6.
col. 675.
The Centurists charge S. Chrysostom's Lyturgie with Invocation of our B. Lady
by name.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 3. 200.
avouches, that About the year of our Lord three hundred and seauentie,
Inuo^a^ion of Saints began to be brought into the public assemblies of the
Church by Basile, Nyssen, and Nazianzene: Ibid. p. 211.
And he reprehendeth for the same Doctrine, Theodoret and Hierome. A French
Protestant answering to the testimony of S. Gregory Nazianzene, writes
Clypeus fidei Dial. 8. p. 258.
In that thou citest S. Gregory praying to S. Basil (dead) that he would pray
for him, I will let thee know, that Gregory knew not what he said, when he said
so. Belike this Protestant thought that greatest Divine S. Gregory Nazianzen
to have been overtaken with drink, when he prayed so, as we may justly suspect
this giddie French Protestant was when he writ thus.

But the Centurie-writers Cent. 4. col. 295. 296. 297.
allege sundry examples of prayer to Saints Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene,
Ambrose, Prudentius, Epiphanius, and Ephrem. Apocal. in c. 14 p. 382.
M. Brightman having named Athanasius, Basil, Chrysostom, Nazianzen, Ambrose,
Hierom, Austin etc. reproves them, as in words condemning Idolatry, but
indeed establishing it by Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Relics, and
such like wicked Superstitions etc. says he. And whereas D. Bishop alleges S.
Chrisostom affirming the Emperor Constantin to have prayed to Saints, p. 17.
M. Wotton in his book against D. Bishop only answers, by barely rejecting
the Saying for suspected and forged yet In his Answer to. D. Bishop. p. 174.
D. Abbot acknowledges the contrary, saying: We deny not Chrysostom to be
author of the words: And then inuenteth an answer no less false then
impertinent, to wit, Ibid.
that Chrisostom thereby means the Emperor Arcadius, who was Emperor above
sixty years after Constantin: but of Constantin it is (says he) that we
enquire; for what others did after the time of Constantin, Superstition more
and more increasing, is nothing concerning him. But yet to omit al other
answer, this may so much concern any indifferent man, that it may
sufficiently assure him, that Invocation of Saints was confessedly used in the
Church at least about Anno Domini 398. when Arcadius reigned.

Yea this Doctrine was so general, and so certainly believed in the Primitive
Church, that the holy Fathers are reproved by our young Protestant writers for
condemning the contrary Protestant Doctrine as Heretical in Vigilantius and
Aerius. D. Fulk says: In his answer to a counterf Cath. p. 46
Last of al Vigilantius shall be brought in, who wrote against the Invocation of
Saints etc. Him Hierom reprooueth: And In defen. tract. de Diverse. p. 349.
D. Sarauia and Beza Ibid. p. 346.
do both of them affirm, that Aerius was likewise charged and condemned by the
Fathers, for his then affirming, that the Saints departed are not to be prayed
unto.

But to arise yet somewhat higher, and a little to view the times near Christ and
his Apostles, Beza speaking of the times of Cyprian, Austin, and Chrysostom
acknowledges, that Prefat. nou. Test. ad Princip. Condens.
then prevailed Invocation of the Dead. The Centurie writers speaking of Cent.
3 col. 84.
S. Cyprian say thus: Verily Cyprian in the end of his first Epistle of his
first book does not obscurely think, that Martyrs and Saints departed do pray
for the living. Cent. 3 col. 83.
Yea they further charge Origin for praying: O holy Job pray for us wretches:
And for teaching hom. 1. in Ezech. that Angels are to be prayed unto. But to
avoid tediousnes in reciting the other particular Fathers of that Age, they in
gross confess, Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 83.
that, There are manifest steps of Invocation of Saints in the Doctors of
that ancient Age, which was the third Age or hundred years after Christ. And
whereas l. 5. c. 19.
S. Ireneus terms the B. Virgin Marie, Eues Aduocat, some Caluinists avouch
that these were the words Clype^^ fidei. Dial. 8. p. 277 Edi^ Gall.
rather of some Idolater, or if they were the words of Ireneus, Ireneus had not
the true understanding of the confession of the holy Faith of Christian
Religion. But if so ancient and holy Ireneus wanted true understanding of
Faith and Christian Religion, we may assure our selves that newborn
Protestants are wholly blind therein.

But without al restraint of Age or time, In his Examination etc c. 9. p 120.
D. Couel affirms, that Diverse both of the Greek and Latin Church were
spotted with errors about Free Will, Merits, Invocation of Saints etc. Yea D.
Whitguift discoursing of In h is Def. etc. against the Reply of Carthwright p.
472. 473.
Doctrine taught in any Age since the Apostles time, affirms without any
exception either of Age or Father, that (to use his own words) Ibid. p. 473.
almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greek Church and Latin also,
for the most part, were spotted with Doctrines of Free will, of Merit, of
Invocation of Saints, and such like.

Now the Doctrine and practice hereof in the ancient Jews is so clearly
recorded in the books of c. 5. 5. 12. 13. 15. 18.
Tobie and Macchabees 2 Ma. 15 12.13.14 and 3.33. and 4.34.
that no better answer thereto can Ad Rat. Camp. p. 15. 16.
D. Whitaker find, then barely to reject them as not Canonical. D. Beard
affirms that Catholics Retractiue from Romish Religion. p. 80.
join hands with the Jews in their Doctrines of Freewil, Invocation of Angels
and Saints, and Merit of good works: Al which the Modern Rabbis hold as
Articles of their Creed, deriuing them from their Predecessors the Pharisees
that went before them. And yet we never read, that the Pharisees were reproved
by Christ or any of his Apostles for the foresaid points, who yet noted their
smallest errors.

This then our Catholic Doctrine of praying to Angels and Saints, is thus by
the Confession of Protestants the ancient Catholic Doctrine and Practice of S.
Gregory, Austin, Leo, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Nyssen, Nazianzene,
Basil, Theodoret, Athanasius, Prudentius, Cyprian, Origin, and of almost al
(say they) the Greek and Latin Fathers.

Now the Protestants acknowledging and disliking this in the said Fathers, are
the Centurists, Osiander, Carrion Chemnitius, Beza, Sarauia, Symonds, Brightman,
Humfrey, Fulk, Abbot, Couel, Whitguift, Beard, and Morton.

IT IS CONFESSED BY PROTESTANTS, THAT THE Fathers of the Primitive Church
allowed the use of Christ's Image, and his Saints, placing them even in
churches, and Reuerencing them. CHAP. XIV.
THough Conc. Trident sess. 25.
Images may not be worshipped with Invocation or by placing any confidence in
them, as though they were endowed with any Divinity; yet that otherwise they
may be worshipped, as by kissing them, kneeling down, and praying before them,
placing them in Churches, translating and the like, the Catholic Church does
teach and practice. But Protestants denying al worship to Saints, do much more
deny al reverence or respect to their Images.

Wherefore to decide this Controversy by the Doctors of the Primitive Church,
I find the holy Fathers even often reproved by Protestants for their special
devotion and Reverence toward holy Images. So S. Gregory is reprehended by
M. Bale In Act. Romans Pont p. 44. 41 46 47.
for that he suffered the Image of the Blessed Virgin to be carried about etc.
And that he confirmed by Indulgences, Pilgrimages to Images, for the Devotion
of the People. Cent. 6. p. 289 290
Osiander affirms that Austin (sent by Gregory) thrust upon the English
Churches the Roman Rites and customs, to wit, Altars, Vestmentes, Images etc.
Upon the Revelations. p. 83.84.85 86.
M. Symondes confesses that, S. Gregory was angry for breaking of Images,
and called the^ Lay men's books etc. He did worse (says he) then the Heretics
called Collyridiani, that worshipped the Virgin Marie, Instit. l. 1. c. 11. 5.
carried the Image of the Virgin Marie in Procession etc. He sent Austin into
England to convert the English; they which were sent, spread forth a Banner
with a painted Crucifix, and so came in Procession to the king etc. D. Fulk
confesses that Against Rhem. Test. in Mat. 4.
Gregory allowed of Images: Ibid. In Hebr 11.
Allowed Images to be in Churches: Ibid. in Act. 17.
Allowed Images to be Laymens books, for which very point: Calvin affirms
that, S. Gregory was not taught in the School of the Holy Ghost. And
Osiander Cent. 6 p. 288.
affirming, that S. Gregory was fowly and Popishly deceived in many Articles,
besides sundry other particulars there by him mentioned, avouches, that he
approved, cloaked, and defended the Idolatrical worshipping of Images. For
which worshipping of Images, and defending the same, he is cited and reproved
by In his ^o^mon. plac. part. 2. p. 343.
Peter Martyr, Exam. part 4. p. 32.
Chemnitius, Cent. 6. p. 288.
Osiander, and John Bale. In his Pageant of Popes. fol 33.
And though D. Morton will not so ingenuously confess with his former Brethren,
that S. Gregory approved the worshipping of Images, yet himself Prot Appeal l
1 sect. 25. p. 28.
reports and cites S. Gregory reprehending Serenus Bishop of Marseils for
breaking down Pictures in Churches etc. And further thinks, that his not
suffering Images to be broken, when there was so public and general Idolatry
committed with them, seemed unto our Osiander, although not a direct, yet an
occasional approving of Idolatries, or rather a cloaking thereof, etc.

But to go to the more ancient Doctors, In his Pageant of Popes. p. 24. 27
And see Osiander cent. 5. p. ^3.
M. Bale confesses, that S. Leo allowed the worshipping of Images: Yea says M.
Symonds Upon the Revel. p. 57.
Leo decreed that reverence should be given to Images etc. And S. Chrysostom
Problem. page 27. Fulk against Heskins. p. 673.
is charged by M. Parkins and D. Fulk with worshipping of Christ's Image.

D. Fulk Against Heskins. etc. page 672. 47. 675.
acknowledges, that Paulinus caused Images to be painted on Church wales. And
of the use of Images confessedly in Churches in those ancient times, sundry
examples are given by Against Symbolizing. part 1. page 32.
M. Parker, the Centurie-writers, Cent. 4. col. 409.
and Chemnitius Exam. part. 4 pa. 26. 29. 30.
from the several testimonies of Sozomen, Athanasius, Prudentius and others. D.
Morton confesses that Prot. Appeal. page 586.
About the Four hundredth year Images crept out of private man houses, and went
into the public Churches, standing there etc.

Now whereas according to Protestants al Religious worship is to be exhibited
only to God, and none to any Creature, yet as Catholics now, so S. Austin
before, divided Religious worship into two kinds: the first, which is proper
only to God, he called Latria; the second, which is communicable to creatures,
Dulia. Hereof the Protestant Hospinian says: De Templis. page ^07.
Blessed Augustine first forged the Dinstinction of Dulia and Latria etc.
Amongst Religious worships in this sort he distinguished; that which was due
only to God, he called Latria, and that which was lawful to give to creatures,
he named Dulia: And presently afterward he cites the special places hereof
out of S. Austin, condemning withal this distinction, as being, says he, a
Defense of Superstition and Idolatry. Chemnitius Exam. part. 4. pa. 29.
confesses, that in the Tripartite History, and in Nicephorus, there are
certain places which seem to tend, as though in the time of Constantin, certain
Statues, or Images, began to be placed in Temples, but of this (says he) I will
not much contend.

But Lactantius, who was yet ancient, is reproved by the Centurie-writers, for
that, say they, he affirms many Superstitious things concerning the
efficacy of Christ's Image: Which Cent. 4. col. 408. and 409. and Cent. 4. c.
2. col. 33.
Centurists also, do make report of that strange Miracle at large recorded by
Libro de Passione Imaginis Christi. And although some doubt be made whether
this book be made by S. Athanasius, yet it is cited as a most ancient history
by the seventh Synod. Act. 4.
S. Athanasius, of a certain holy Image of Christ our Savior, left in a
house where a Christian had inhabited a little before, and at his remoual had
forgot the same; which the Jews finding, in derision of Christ Crucified, spit
upon it, buffeted it with their hands, nailed the hands and feet upon a Cross,
offered it vinegar mingled with gaul, crowned it with a crown of thorns,
strock the head thereof with a reed, and at the last pierced the right side
thereof with a lance, from whence forthwith issued out water and blood: Which
the Jews perceiving, caused a vessel to be set under, which presently was
filled: But they removing it into their Synagogue, intending thereby to offer
the greatest disgrace to Christ our Lord, assembled thither all the disease and
infirm which they could find, which annoynting therewith, there were cured the
Sick of the palsy, the blind, the lame, the deaf, the dumb, the leapers and
others: Which the Jews themselves seeing, believed in Christ our Lord, and
went unto the Catholic Church in that City; where prostrating themselves at
the feet of the Metropolitan Bishop, confessed their Sins, and related all the
History passed. Whereupon the Bishop caused the Christian who had inhabited the
house before, to be brought unto him, and enquiring of him how he came to the
Image, he answered, Nicodemus who came to Jesus by night, made it with his own
hands, and dying gave it to Gamaliel, who dying left it to James, and James to
Symeon, and Symeon to Zachaeus, and so by their Successors it continued in
Jerusalem until two years before the Subversion thereof by Titus and
Vespasian: When the Christians admonished by the holie-Ghost left the city,
and coming into Syria, they brought with them al things which belonged to the
worship of Religion: At which time the Image being brought amongst other things
which concerned the Church, remained until this day in Syria, which I receiving
from my Parents departing this life, have until this time possessed by right of
inheritance. The Bishop hearing this was very joyful, and instructing the
Jews in the Christian Doctrine, after three days fast, baptized them al; and
at their entreaty consecrated their Synagogue into a church in honor of the
Savior of the world. Afterward consulting what to do with the sacred
liquour of water and Blood in the vessel, resolved to send the same in bottles
of glass made of purpose to al churches through Asia, Africa, and Europe:
Exacting this of them, that every year upon the ninth of November the like
Solemnity should be used, as upon the days of Christmas and Easter. This
(says S. Athanasius) is the true and very credible History of the blood of
the side of our Savior, which issued out of his holy Image, which was
crucified in Syria in the city Berithus. Here will I leave our Protestants
condemning S. Athanasius of Credulity and Superstitious Papistrie.

Now to proceed, Functius confesses, that Lib. 7. commentariorum in praeced.
chron. fol. 6.
Anno 494. Xenaias was the first in the church that stirred up war against
Images. So quiet possession had they in the Church before that time. Exam.
part. 4 pa. 26.
Chemnitius says: In one and only Tertulian, I have observed the history of
the Shepherd calling and seeking his wandering sheep, to be painted and graven
upon holy Chalices. In like sort says D. Beard Retractiue from Romish
Religion. page 401.
Indeed we confess, that there was in these primitive times of the church an
historical use of Images, as may appear by that Statue of our Savior at
Cesarea, mentioned by Eusebius, and the pictures of Peter and Paul, in the same
Author: And of the good shepherd feeking the lost sheep painted upon the
Chalices in Tertulian.

Another Protestant discoursing of the Religion taught and professed publicly
by the Graecians and Abissines, reciting amongst the rest, their having In his
Catholic. Tradictions. page 212. 214.
Pictures in their Churches, and inclining and howing before the Images of
Saints, does from thence conclude in these words Ibid. pa. 216.
It seems that this is the greatest accusation which Protestants have against
the Churches of the East and Africa; nevertheless etc. the ancient Doctors
which destroyed the Pagans Idolatry, have approved it, their devotion did lead
them unto it etc.

So clearly therefore may we conclude, that our Catholic usage of Pictures, in
placing them in Churches, and reuerencing them, does most truly accord with the
like practice and Devotion of S. Gregory, Leo, Paulinus, Prudentius, Austin,
Chrysostom, Nicephorus, Sozomene, Athanasius, Tertulian, Lastantius. Witnesses
whereof are the Protestant writers, the Centurists, Osiander, Chemnitius, Peter
Martyr, Hospinian, Functius, Symonds, Bale, Fulk, Parker, Parkins, Beard, and
Morton.

IT IS ACKNOWLEDGED BY PROTESTANTS, that the Fathers of the Primitive Chuch did
specially honor and reverence the holy Relics of Martirs, and other Saints,
carrying them in Processions, and making Pilgrimages unto them: At which also
many Miracles were wrought. CHAP. XV.
AS it is to be supposed, that such Here^icks as deny the due worship and
Invocation of Saints, will much more deny al reverent respect or worship to be
given to the Relics of their dead Bodies; So we may as confidently expect that
al holy fathers, who so confessedly before, exhibited honor to the Blessed
Saints or Souls in Heaven, will likewise perform their answerable respect to
their sacred Bodies upon earth.

And to begin with S. Gregory: It is acknowledged by In Act. Romans Pontif. p.
44. etc.
M. John Bale, that Gregory the great, etc. commanded Masses to be celebrated
over the dead bodies of the Apostles: And Carrion Chron. l. 4. p. 567. 568.
avouches that, He dedicated Churches to the bones and Ashes of Saints. Cent.
6. Col. 381.
The Centurie-writers charge him with Translation of Relics: In Jesuit. part.
2. rat 5. p. 5. and 627.
And D. Humfrey reciting sundry particular points of Catholic Doctrine which
S. Gregory and S. Austine brought into England, amongst the rest does number,
Relics. D. Fulk avouches that Ag Rhe^. Test. in Apoc. 6.
Gregory living so near the Revelation of Antichrist, it is no marvel though
he be more superstitious in Relics. And Again Ib. in 1. Tim. 4.
Gregory indeed wills etc. Altars to be built, and Relics to be layd-vp;
Gregory indeed did send many Superstitious tokens etc. He sends a little Key
from the body of S. Peter for his blessing, in which is enclosed the iron of
his chains etc. Such was the practice and reverence given to the Relics of
Saints by S. Gregory.

But to proceed; S. Ambrose having made a godly speech about the pious
honoring of Martyrs Tombs, the Centurists thus censure thereof: Cent. 4. p.
301.
Let the godly Reader consider, how horrible these things are, uttered by
Ambrose: And whereas Contra vigilans.
S. Hierome avouches, that The Emperor Constantin translated the holy
Relics of Andrew, Luke, and Timothy to Constantinople, at which (says he)
the Devils roar; Bullinger disliking the same, affirms that, De origin^
Erroris. fol. 67. and fol. 58.
Hierom is over full in that he says, that Devils roar at the holy Relics
of Andrew: Which Saying is likewise acknowledged and reproved by Exam. part 4.
p. 8.
Chemnitius. But De origin^ Erronis. p. 67.
Bullinger further alleges and reprehendeth S. Hierom saying: Hierom says,
If it be not lawful to translate the Relics of Saints, and to lay them in
Golden coffers, Then was Arcadius with Constantine Sacrilegious, yea al Bishops
were to be censured, not only as Sacrilegious, but also as foolish, who carried
in a Vessel (or Reliquarie) of God and silk; a thing (says Bullinger) most
vile, and loose Ashes: Now to this opinon of S. Hierom, and to the practice of
Constantin, Arcadius, and the Bishops of those times, Bullinger only answers:
I will not obscure the renowned glory of those holy men of God (Constantino
diuo, Arcadio Sancto) Holy Constantin and Holy Arcadius etc. but I testify
for them that they have the love of God, not according to knowledge: so
acknowledging their Sanctity, and censuring their knowledge; which how evil it
becomes an ignorant Minister, I leave to the censure of an indifferent Reader.

This Devotion of Constantin to holy Relics, was so certain, that Exam.
part. 4. p. 8. and see Crispinus of the Estate of the church. p. 93
Chemnitius avouches, that Translation of Relics began under Constantin the
Great. And M. Brightman In Apoc. in c. 12. p. 325. And see Hospinia^ de
Templis. p. 109. 110. 111.
speaking of Constantins coming in, affirms, that then was the time of
seeking the Relics of Saints, and consecrating Churches to Martyrs etc. The
Centurie-writers likewise reprove him, for that, say they; Cent. 4. Col. 15.29.
with like Superstition Constantin is said to have translated to
Constantinople, certain Relics of the Cross found by Helen, that the Cross
might preserve the city. And as now in Catholic Countries it is usual in
their greatest feasts and Solemnities, to carry in their Processions the holy
Relics of Saints, so was the same likewise practiced in the Primitive
Church, as witness both S. Hierom and S. Austin, alleged and reproved by
Chemnitius in these words: Exam. part 4. p. 10.
From Translation of Relics, forth with was used the carrying of them, as is
to be seen in Hierome and Austin etc.

Neither is confessed testimonies of Pilgrimages to Relics and holy places
wanting. D. Beard freely gra^teth: Retractiue from Romish Religion. p. 207.
that vows and Pilgrimages unto places famous for the Relics of Martyrs, were
in old time profitable, whilst that the Memory of the Martyrs was yet fresh
and certain, and as long as God by undoubted Miracles did manifest that their
Souls did live, who were thought to be dead: So supposing vows and
Pilgrimages unto places famous for Relics, to have been usual and allowed in
old time, and that Miracles were wrought thereby. And the Cent. 4. col. 457.
see also Cripspinus of the Estate of the Church p. 111. and Hosp. dete^plis. p.
365.
Centurists record, Concerning Pilgrimages to holy places, that in this Age
Under Constantin, first began the places of the Holy Land etc. to be had in
esteem etc. Helen Mother of the Emperor (in Heretics opinion) a Superstitious
woman going thither to worship etc. And Chemnitius, Exam. part. 4 p. 10. And
Osiander cant. 4 p. 393. and cent. 4. col. 457.
acknowledges, that the Christians of those times made Pilgrimages to such
places, where they heard were Relics famous and renowned with Miracles. D.
Beard avouches that Retractiue from Romish Relig. p. 197. 198.
In former times etc. they placed the Relics of Saints under the Altar, as
Ambrose (whom he calls Ibi. p. 181.
This good father) witnesses of the Relics of Geruasius and Protasius, Christ
was upon the Altar who suffered for all, the Relics of them under the Altar,
who were redeemed with his Blood etc. Yea he further confesses that, The first
bringers-in of that custom etc. placed them under the Altar in a Religious
manner. And indeed the reverent respect hereto was such from the holy and
ancient Doctors, as that, they not only earnestly defended the same, but
withal censured and condemned the despisers thereof for Heretics. Epit. ce^t.
4 p. 506. and see the centuristes. cent. 4. col. 1250
Osiander hereupon reproves S. Hierom for that, says he, S. Hierom did
foolishly contend that the Relics of Saints were to be worshipped. And D. Fulk
says In his Answer to a counterf. cath. p. 46. and see cent 4. col. 1250.
Osiand. cent. 4. l. 4. p. 506. Parker against Symbolizing with Antichrist.
part 4. p. 74. 83. Crispinus of the Estate of the Church. p. 131.
Last of al, Vigilantius shall be brought-in, who wrote against Invocation of
Saints, Superstition of Relics, and other Ceremonies: Him Hierom reproves.

Lastly plentiful are the reports confessed from the Fathers of many miracles,
wrought at the Monuments and Relics of Saints. Exam. part. 4 p. 10.
Chemnitius confesses that, Mention is made in Augustine, that a blind woman
received sight at the Translation of the Relics of Stephen: And sometimes
certain Miracles were wrought at Relics ande. The Cent. 4. col. 457.
Centurists acknowledge that, If we believe Ambrose, the sick were cured by
touching with the hand, the garments of Saints, and the obsessed were
delivered etc. De Sacramentis. p. 738.
Zepperus reports that, At the memories of Martyrs certain Miracles were
wrought, which without doubt (says he) God himself wrought etc. And, I do not
think those Miracles vain (says Com. Duraeum l 10. p 866.
D. Whitaker) which are reported to be done at the Monuments of Martyrs. In his
Eusebius Captiuus. act. 2. diei. de Imaginibus. fol. 104.
Hieronimus Marius confesses, that Miracles were done by God at the Sepulchers
of Martyrs, and other Saints of Christ etc. That by these signs God himself
might testify of their Doctrine, Faith, and Sanctity. M. Fox Act. Mon p. 61.
And see Crispinus of the Estate of the Church p. 133.
reports (out of S. Chrisostom l. contra Gentiles, and Theodoret l. 3. c. 9.)
how that, after the bringing of the (dead) body of Babylas (Martyr) into the
Temple (of an Idol) the Idol ceased to give any more oracles, saying, that for
the body of Babylas, he could give no more answers.

But to conclude, the antiquity of this Reverence given to Relics is so
great, as that Exam. part. 4. p. 7.
Chemnitius confesses, that Hierom writes that the Heretics Caiani were
condemned by Tertullian, for that they would not honor the Relics of Martyrs.
From al which it appears, that most special Reverence was given to the holy
Relics of Saints by the Fathers of the Primitive Church of Christ, who
celebrated Masses over them, Dedicated Churches in their honor, Translated
them, carried them in Processions, made Pilgrimages unto them, and frequently
make mention of the many and strange Miracles wrought by them.

The Fathers cited and reproved by Protestants for the foresaid points, are S.
Gregory, Hierom, the Emperors Constantin and Arcadius, Augustine, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Theodoret and Tertullian: The Protestants their Accusers, are the
Centurists, Carrion, Bullinger, Chemnitius, Crispinus, Hospinian, Osiander,
Zepperus, Marius, Bale, Humfrey, Brightman, Parker, Fulk, Fox, Beard, and
Whitaker.

IT IS CONFESSED BY PROTESTANTS THAT THE HOLY Doctors of the Primitive
Church, not only used the sign of the Cross, but likewise worshipped the same,
attributing great efficacy, power, and virtue thereto. CHAP. XVI.
ALthough the CROSS OF CHRIST, by reason of that dignity which it obtained by
touching the Body and Blood of Christ, may truly be esteemed amongst ^he most
precious Relics; As also in that it represents the figure of our Lord
Crucified, it may rightly be numbered amongst the honest Images: Yet because
withal, it is indeed the high Altar of the chiefest Sacrifice, whereby the wrath
and Justice of God was satisfied, the ladder whereby Christ himself ascended
into heaven, the worthiest Instrument of man's Redemption, and Satan's foil; and
as now, is the fairest Mark whereat our Modern Heretics do leuel and direct
their poynsoned arrows of foulest Contumelies, Injuries, and Disgraces, I will
therefore severally treat thereof, and that from the confessed testimonies,
practice, and belief of the most holy learned, and ancient Fathers of the
Primitive Church.

Luke Cent. 6. p. 289. 290
Osiander discoursing of the several articles of the Catholic Roman Religion
taught by S. Gregory, and S. Austin, amongst the rest does number the
allowance, and use of holy Crosses, In Act. Romans Pontif p. 44.45.4^.
M. Bale acknowledges that he admitted worshipping or adoration of the Cross:
But M. Symondes charge him, Upon the Revel. p. 83.84 85 86.
that, He instituted the worship of the Cross barefoote on Good Friday. And
Peter Martyr In his common places in Englih part. 2. c. 5. sec. 14. p. 343.
yet further affirms that, Gregory of Rome the Patron (says he) of
Superstitions, says in his prayers, Grant unto us Lord that they which come to
the Adoring of thy Holy Cross, may be delivered from the bonds of their
sins. For which point of Adoration or worship of the Cross, Conwal King of
Scotland, who lived within the first six hundred years, is reproved by In the
later Edition p 107.
Hollinshead in his Cronicle of Scotland.

But to arise; M. Parkins In his Problem p. 83.
confesses that, About the four hundredth year after Christ, the Cross began
by little and little to be adored: For which time he there alleges the direct
testimonies of Prudentius, Hierom and Euagrius. And he also grants else
where, In volume 1. p. 681.
that sundry private men, and particular Churches, after Four hundred years,
began religiously, or ra her (says he) Superstitiously to adore the wood of
the Cross, and the pieces thereof etc. Calvin relating that S. Augustine (tract.
50 in Joan.) affirms, that the faithful have Christ by the sign of the
Cross, by the Sacrament of Baptism, and by the meat and drink of the Altar;
he presently affirms, that Augustine Inst. l. 4. c. 17. 28.
numbered that Superstitious Rite amongst the Symbols of the Presence of Christ.
d. Abbots In his Answer to D. Bishop. p. 168.
aknowledgeth and translateth those words of Eusebius (in his 3. book of the
life of Constantin) Atque interdum vultum salutari illa Passionis signauit
nota; in this sort, He signed his face with the sign of the Cross. In his
common places. part. 2 c. 5. sec. 20. p 349.
Peter Martyr writes, that Constantin made the sign of the Cross in gold, I
allow not etc. And whereas De vita Constant. l. 1. c. 22.
Eusebius relates, and that from the mouth of Constantin himself, who
confirmed the same with oath that, The Sign of the Cross appeared to him in
the afternoon in great light above the Sun, and a writing therein with those
words: In hoc vinces, In this (sign) thou shall overcome. The same History is
reported out of Eusebius Cent. 4 l. 1. c. 30.
by Osiander, In Apocal. c. 16. p 604.
M. Fox, In M. Trigs true Catholic p. 295
M. Gualter and M. Trigge, al Protestant Writers. And again Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Zozomene and Eusebius De vita Constant. l. 2. c. 7.
relating, that In what part of the Army the Standard of the Cross was seen,
there the Enemies fled, and the Conquerours pursued; which the Emperor
understanding, when he saw any part of his Army languishing, there he
commanded the Standard to be placed, as a certain help for the obtaining of
victory; and by the help whereof, the victory was forthwith obtained, by a
certain divine power, the strength of his Soldiers being much confirmed: All this is acknowledged by In Apoc. in c 12 p. 326.327.
M. Brightman De Templis p. 165.
and Hospinianus.

D. Fulk Against HesKins etc. p. 657.
affirms that, by Report of Paulinus, the Cross was by the Bishop of
Jerusalem brought forth at Easter (yearly) to be worshipped of the people: Yea
says Vol. 2. p. 596.
M. Parkins, The Bishop himself was the chief of the worshippers etc. This
Paulinus lived in the fourth Age, and was as Osiander confesses Cent. 5. l. 3.
c. 20 p. 386.
very familiar with Hierome, Ambrose and Augustine.

Danaeus In 1 partis altera part ad Bellarm. p. 1415.
avouches that Cyril, and sundry other Fathers were plainly Superstitious and
blinded with this enchantment of the Crosses Adoration: For which point of
Adoration M. Parker Against Symbolizing part. 1. p 14 and part. 2. c. 6. p. 61.
alleges the Saying of Photius, Sedulius, Chrisostom, Propertius, Paulinus,
Hierom and Euagrius, al whom he reprehendeth for the same.

The Cent. 4. col 302.
Centurists say of Ephrem, that he attributes over much to the sign of the
Cross: And D. Fulk Against HesKins etc. p. 657.
affirms that, Ruffinus and Cyril, had a Superstitious estimation of the
sign of the Cross. And the Cent. 4. col. 459.
Centurists charge them for that, At every foot they signed their forhead with
the sign of the Cross, which signing was so ordinary in those times, as that
Osiander Cent. 4. p. 326.
acknowledges, that Julian the Apostata being afrighted, out of his custom
which he had being a Christian, made the sign of the Cross upon his forhead,
whereat the Devils suddenly vanished away.

M. Burges In Couel his Answer to Burger. p. 130.
discoursing of the Fathers opinion of the Cross (with exception only to the
point of Adoration) affirms, that there is nothing ascribed to the Cross, in
or out of Baptism by the rankest Papists, but the Fathers are as deeply
engaged in the same: So as if we will use it as the Fathers did etc. we take the
Soul to be fenced by crossing of the body, and the Cross to have virtue of
consecrating the Sacrament, driving away Devils, witchcraft etc. Yea in proof
of this, he alleges in his Margent, diverse Fathers who lived in the fourth
Age.

The Puritans In their short Treatise of the sign of the Cross p. 21
confess that, The Fathers delivered to us the sign of the Cross, with an
opinion of virtue and efficacy, not only in the Act of blessing our selves,
and in the expelling of Devils, but even in the Consecration of the most
Blessed Sacraments: To which purpose they do there allege the special sayings
of S. Austin, S. Hierom, S. Cyprian, Lactantius, and Tertullian. And S. Austin
is also reprehended by Against Symbolizing part 1. p. 133. and 76.
M. Parker for his opinion of the Cross. Catholics obiecting, as D. Beard
relates them, that, the Retractiue from Romish Religion. p. 238.
Fathers held the Cross in great Reverence, and the Image of the Cross, and
worshipped them; he answers, True, they reverenced them, and held them in
great estimation* but yet there was no worship given unto them, until near
four hundred years after Christ. About that time began this superstition etc.

But the Fathers in this point were so resolute, as that they doubted not by
their writings to commend to all Posterity the many and strange Miracles
wrought by the Cross, and the sign thereof. In his Answer to M. Burges. p. 138.
D. Couel speaking of the ancient times, affirms that, No man can deny, but
that God after the death of his Son, manifested his power to the amazement of
the world in this conte^ptible sign, as being the instrument of many Miracles
In his Common places. part. 2. c. 5. p. 349.
Peter Martyr says, I deny not but certain Miracles have sometimes been wrought
by the sign of the Cross, as S. Austin reports l. 2. de ciuit. Dei. c. 28.
And M. Parker Against Symbolizing etc part 1. c. 3. p. 154.
reports certain Miracles done with the s^gne of the Cross. D. Beard
produces Catholics obiecting that, Retractiue from Romans Relig. p. 238. 239.
240.
Many and Strange Miracles have been wrought by the sign of the Cross,
therefore it is to be worshipped: To which he answers, The Argument is naught;
for if every worker of Miracles should be worshipped etc. So gra^ting the
Antecedent, that, many and strange Miracles have been wrought by the sign of
the Cross. To which he adds that, The Miracles that were done at, or before
this sign, were effected by the power of the Faith, and Invocation of Christ
Crucified, and not by the bare Sign of the Cross etc. And therefore the
(Fathers) signing of themselves with the Cross, was a secret kind of
Invocation of Christ crucified. Lastly, says he, we confess that there was a
holy and commendable use of the transeant sign of the Cross, in the
Primitive Church: to wit as a badge of Christian profession, to signify that
they were not ashamed of their Crucified God, which the heathen and wiked Jews
used to cast in their teeth: And so of the permanent Cross erected in public
places, to be as it were a Trophee and monument of the Exaltation of him that
dyed on the Cross. So confessedly did the Fathers of the Primitive Church
sign themselves with the sign of the Cross, and Erect Crosses in the honor
of Christ crucified; al which with new Protestants is pure Superstition, and
therefore as they never use the said sign themselves, so further do they pull
down and break such Crosses, as have been anciently Erected.

But yet much more ancyent was the use of the Cross, for the Cent. 3. col. 121.
Centurists confess, that Tertulian seems to tell, that Christians had the
Image of the Cross as well in the places of their public assemblies, as in
their private houses. And Medullae Theol. p. 229. sec. 7.
Schultetus alleges Tertulian, saying: At every going forward, coming in,
or going forth, we make the sign of the Cross upon the forehead. And to
include many in one, whereas it is In the Treatise of Catholic Traditions. p.
215.
confessed that the Graetians and Abyssines do bow their heads before the
Cross, a Protestant Writer says hereof, It seems that this is the greatest
accusation which Protestants have against the Churches of the East and Africa,
nevertheless etc. the ancient Doctors which destroyed the Pagans Idolatry,
have approved it, their Devotion did lead them to it etc.

The Primitive Church then, no less then our present Roman, had ever the
Cross, and the Sign thereof in special Estimation: Christians as then, not
only signing their foreheades therewith, but also Consecrating their Sacraments,
expelling devils, Witch crafts and the like: Yea as then the Cross it self was
specially worshipped, as also placed not only in private howses, but likewise in
their public assemblies. And many Miracles have confessedly been wrought both
by the Cross it self, and the sign thereof.

Now the Fathers disliked and acknowledged for the foresaid points, are S.
Gregory, Prudentius, Euagrius, Eusebius, Paulinus, Austin, Hierome, the
Emperor Constantine, Sozemene, Cyril, Photius, Sedulius, Chrisostom,
Propertius, Ephrem, Ruffinus, Cyprian, Lactantius, and Tertulian. The
Protestants producing and reproving them, are the Centurist, Peter Martyr,
Osiander, Calvin, Hospnian Danaeus, Schultetus, Bale, Symondes, Hollinsead,
Parkins, Abbots, Fox, Gualter, Trigge, Brightman, Parker, Bourges, Beard, Fulk
and Couel.

It is confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
allowed and practiced the vow of Chastity. And that they never allowed such as
were once of the Clergy, afterward to marry: or such as had been twice
married, to be admitted to Holy Orders without special Dispensation. CHAPTER
XVII.
THree special points concerning vows are taught and practiced by the
Catholic Church. First, in general Bellar. de Monachis. l. 1. c. 16.
that Vows of things not commanded, but of Counsel and perfection, are
lawful, godly, and commendable. Secondly, that Bellarm. de Clericis. l. 1. c.
19.
the vow of Chastity, is to be annexed to holy Orders, and so to be observed
by the Clergy. And that such as have been twice married should not be admitted
to holy Orders without special dispensation. Thirdly, that the vows of
Bellar. de Monach. l. 2 c. 20. etc.
Monks and other Religious concerning Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, and
their strick order of life are likewise lawful, holy and laudable.

Directly Luth. l. de Votis Monasticis. Calvin. Inst. l. 4 c. 13. etc. 12.
contrary to al which, is the Doctrine and practice of the Protestant Church,
which First teaches, that no vows are to be made to the honor of God, but
such as are of things already commanded. Secondly, that it is lawful for the
Clergy or Ministry even after Orders taken to marry wives. Thirdly, that the
Vows of al Religious Persons, with their manner of life, are impious, vain,
Superstitious, and not to be kept. Now how repugnant are our Modern Libertines
herein to the ancient Fathers, and wholly agreeable our present Roman, with the
Primitive Church, let these few lines following, serve for fullest proof.

Luke Cent. 6. p. 208.
Osiander numbering up many Catholic points of Faith wherewith he charge S.
Gregory the Great, to have been foully and Popishly deluded, amongst the rest
affirms, that he Sharply urged the single life of the Ministers of the
Church. D. Morton accordingly says hereof: Prot. Appeal. l. 1. sec. 52. p. 38.
The Apologists do truly object, that our Osiander noted S. Gregory to have
been a vehement vrger of Single life of the Clergy. And concerning such of the
Clergy as were married before their Orders taken, M. Symond^ Upon the Revel.
p. 83. 84 85. 86.
reproves him, for that, He decreed that the Clergy should not have knowledge
of their wives etc. Carrion Carrion in Chron. l. 4 p 567. 568.
reciting his several pretended Catholic errors, repeateth his error of
Vows and Single life.

But to leave S. Gregory, and to arise to S. Augustine and other ancient
Fathers, I know (says de Votis p. 524.
Peter Martyr) and declared no less to my Auditors in Oxford, that Epiphanius
with many others of the Fathers, erred in that they hold it a Sin to break
the Vow of virginity, and they do il to number it amongst the Apostolical
Traditions. Chemnitius Exam. part. 3. p. 41. 40. 42.
in general confesses saying: We are not ignorant that the Fathers allow the
vows of perpetual Chastity, and acknowledge them to be obligatorie. Insomuch
as he does specially recite and reject in this behalf, the several sayings of
S. Basil, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Epiphanius, S. Austin, and S.
Innocentius. And Iustus Molitor De Ecclesia Milit. p. 80.
reproves the whole Council of Chalcedon, which was most famous and ancient,
for that, It forbad to Monks and Nuns the use of Marriage. In like sort S.
Augustine, and all the Fathers assembled with him in the Carthage Council, are
rejected by Danaeus, Contrae Bellarm. 1. part. alterae part p. 10 11
for that, says he, they abused manifestly the Word of God, saying upon the
Apostles words: If any widows, how young soever etc. have vowed themselves to
God, left their Laical habit, and under the testimony of the Bishop and Church
appeared in Religious weed, if afterward they go to Secular marriage, they shall
according to the Apostle have damnation, because they dared make void the vow
of Chastity which they made to God. And Osiander Cent. 5. l. 1. c. 1. p. 20.
for the same respect confesses, and at large reprehendeth the foresaid Canon
of the Carthage Council.

Yea the Council of Nice, whereof D. Whitguift In his Def. p. 330
says: That notable and famous Council of Nyce, which is of al wise and
learned men reverenced, esteemed, and embraced next to the Scriptures
themselves; this so famous a Council, did (as M. Carthwright, In his 2. Reply
part. 1 p. 485. D. Bancroft in his Survey etc. p. 386. Centurists Cent. 4. c.
9. col. 656. D. Fulk against Rhem. Test in Math. 8. fol. 14.
and sundry other Protestant Writers acknowledge) affirm and teach, that unto
those that were chosen to the Ministry unmarried, it was not lawful to take
any wife afterward: only being married before entrance into the Ministry, it
was lawful for them to use the benefit of that (precedent) Marriage. And
Paphnutius, one of the Council shows concerning Priests unlawfulness to marry
after Priesthood undertaken, that not only this was before that Council, but
was also yet further, an ancient tradition of the Church, in which both himself
and the rest of the Council Thus far M. Carthwright. Luther Tom. ^. Germ
Ienae f 97. and de Council. part. 1. p. 92.
like wise much disgusted with the foresaid Council of Niece, rejects the same
saying: I do not acknowledge the holy Ghost in this Nicene Council, because it
forbids him who has gelded himself to be made Priest, and also commands
the Clergy to have none dwelling with them, but their Mother, Sister etc. Had
the Holy Ghost no other thing to do in Councels, but to bind his Ministers to
such imposed, dangerous, and not necessary Laws?

Frigiuillaeus Gaunius Palma Christiana. p 103.
reprehendeth Socrates and Sozomene, for their report of Paphnutius, saying:
Socrates added this report rashly of his own devising etc. with like falsehood
did he wrest the Saying of Paphnutius in the Nicene Council etc. And Sozomene
following after Socrates, follows his explication in maintenance of the
doctrine of Devils, condemned by Paul. 1. Tim. 4. And the Centurie-writers
Cent. 4. c. 9. col. 656.
and D. Fulk Ag. Rhem. Test. in Math. 8. sec. 3 fol. 14.
do both of them confess, that Paphnutius though he thought that Priesthood
did not dissolve Marriage contracted before Orders given, yet he affirmed to the
Nycene Council, that Those who were made Priests before they were married,
should not afterward marry, alleging for this, veterem Ecclesiae
consuetudinem, the ancient Tradition of the Church.

In like sort say our Puritans: A brief Discovery of untruths in D. Bancrofts
sermon. p. 21.
We must needs confess, that not only this Government of the Church, but also
many other points of greatest weight in Religion fell to decay long before the
council of Niece etc. besides many other Corruptions which were past over, yea
and established at that Council etc. Paphnutius alone was enforced to stand up
against the whole Synod in the cause of the Marriage of Mini^^ers, which
notwithstanding he etc. so defended, that he would not have him that were a
Minister being unmarried, ever after to be joined to a wife. Agreeable hereunto
says D. Morton. Prot. Appeal. p. 480.
The Council (of Niece) restrayneth them from marriage, who were unmarried when
they entered into Orders.

But to proceed, the Magdeburgians Cent 4. col. 704. And see further Crispinus
of the Estate of the Church. p. 107.
confessing that the second Synod of Arles, being celebrated in the time of the
Emperor Constantin, and (Pope) Syluester, they repeat and dislike the Second
Canon thereof, which was, That no married man ought to be admitted to
Priesthood, nisi fuerit promissa Conuersio, unless his Conversion, or leaving
of his wife, was (first) promised. Yea they further Cent. 4. col. 616. And see
col. 486. 303. 704. 2293.
confess that the ancient Council of Neocesarea decreed: That if a Priest
should marry, he should be deposed from his Orders. But this prohibition of
Priests Marriage was so general in the ancient Fathers, as that Hospinian Hist.
Sacr part 1 p. 132.
acknowledges the same in Siricius, Innocentius, Calixtus, the second Council
of Arles, the Council of Neocesarea. And M. Parkins Volum. 2. p. 658.
reproves for the same the Council of Ancyra, which was before the Nicene
Council, as also S. Hierom, Ibid. p. 661.
Siricius, Leo, Ambrose, Isidore, Arator etc. D. Field Of the Church l 3. p.
475.
rejects likewise herein the Council of Eliberis, which was holden Twenty
years before the Nicene Council. But Osiander Cent. 4. p. 46. in Can. 1. And
see p. 195. 167. 45. 122. 156 298. 365. 406.
reproves the same in the Council of Neocesaria, in the second Council of
Arles, in the Council of Eliberis, in the first Toletane Council, in the
Council of Agatha, in the Fifth Council of Carthage, in the First Arausican
Council, in the Councels called Turonense, and Venetica.

Beza In nou. Test. in Praef. ad Principem Condensem.
speaking of the times of Cyprian, Austin and Chrysostom, confesses that,
There was in use the Invocation of the dead, and the foolish opinion of single
life, which shameful errors (says he) Hierom plainly defends. Yea S. Hierom
preferring Single life before Marriage, is therefore ce^sured by Calvin Hermonia
in Math. 19.11
to have given a clear proof of a malignant and perverse disposition. Again,
In 1. Cor. 7.7.9.
whilst the chiefest Doctors are wholly busied in extolling Virginity,
forgetting man's frailty, they neglect this Admonition of Paul, yea of Christ
himself. But Hierom blinded I know not with what zeal, does not only slide
into such false opinions, but runs headlong.

But because D. Whitaker Cont. Duraeum. l. 7. p. 480. Mort Prot. App p 477
and D. Morton affirm, that Siricius (who lived about Anno 384) was the first
that annexed perpetual Chastity to the Ministers of the Word, I will therefore
search further into the times more ancient; And I find the Centurists Cent. 4
col. 467.
to acknowledge, that, it is evident by the Fourth book of Eusebius of the life
of Constantin, that there were before Co^stantins time (who lived above sixty
years before Siricius) virgins and women continent, and that professed
perpetual chastity: Where also (say they) Eusebius affirms, that the
Emperor Constantin did greatly approve that kind of discipline, Insomuch as he
often went unto them. And Socrates testifyeth l. 1. c. 17. that Helen mother of
Constantin, found at Jerusalem Virgins consecrated to God, whose profession
she liked so much, that she made her self servant unto them. Yea the
Centurists Cent. 3. c. 6. col. 140. etc. 7. col. 176.
further confess, that Cyprian in his first book and 9. and 11. Epistles,
declares that among Christians there were Virgins consecrated unto God, which
would and could keep chastity etc. And that, Tertulian in his book of the
clothing of Virgins expressly mentions the vow of Chastity. And that, It was
decreed by Cyprian and his fellow Bishops, l. 1. ep. 11. that Virgins vowing
chastity ought not to dwell with men.

And whereas Origin in Numer. hom. 23. says: It is certain that the continual
Sacrifice is hindered to them who serve the necessities of wedlock, whereupon it
seems to me, that he alone is to offer the continual Sacrifice who has vowed
himself to continual and perpetual Chastity: This Saying is confessed and
rejected, as being evidently against Priest, Marriage by Chemnitius: Exam. part.
3. p. 50. And see p. 58.
And so likewise in the same case is S. Cyprian Med. Theol. p. 357
by Schultetus.

But before them lived S. Clement, of whose time Peter Martyr De votis. p. 490
writes: I confess there were in the time of Clement Professions and vows of
Chastity etc. And M. Parkins In Probl. p. 191.
acknowledges that, In the foresaid Ages, promises of Continency were
accustomed to be made publicly in the Church: For in the year of Christ One
hundred seauentie, Clemens Alex. l. 3. Strom, says etc. In like sort
Hospinian, De origin Monachetus f. 104
I will grant that in the time of this Clement, that is, about the year of
Christ, One hundred seauentie five, there were Professions and vows of
Virginity or continency and single life.

But before Clement lived, S. Ignatius Scholar to S. John the Evangelist,
about the year One hundred and nine, of whose time the Centurists Cent. 2 c.
4. col. 64.
say: It appears by the Epistles of Ignatius, that even then men began
somewhat more earnestly to love and reverence the desire of Virginity, for in
the Epistle ad Antiochenses he says, Virgins videant cuise consecrauerint,
Let Virgins see (or remember) to whom they have consecrated themselves. And
whereas, in his Epistle ad Tarsenses, he advises thus, Honor yet those who are
Virgins (Sicut Sacras Christi) as the Sacred (or consecrated) to Christ, and
reverence the chaste widows, Sicut Sacrarium Dei, as the vestrie (or Temple) of
God: This his Saying is reproved Cent. 1. l. 3. c. 23. p. 131.
by Osianders, And the Centurists Cent 2 c. 10. col. 167.
charge him, that he speaks incommodiously of Virginity and that his
foresaid Sayings Cent. 2. p. 65.
were an occasion, and opened the way to those things, which afterward were
thereupon founded, concerning Cloisters, Vows etc. Shulterus Med. Theol. p. 450.
alleges, Ignatius writing ad Philippenses, I salute the College of Virgins;
whereupon he immediately infers: Were there then in that flower of the Church,
Virgins which professed perpetual Chastity and Continency? There were truly
etc. says he. D. Morton also acknowledges that, Prot. Appeal. l. 1. p. 88.
we find that the Age next abutting upon the Apostles time, did practice a
perpetual vow of virginity, which being guarded with a just moderation, may be
judged both commendable and convenient.

But to pass from the Scholars to the Masters themselves, to wit, the
blessed Apostles; Luther Tom 5. Wittemb. fol. 108.
infers this Doctrine from the example of S. Paul himself, saying: Dicendum
est etc. It is to be said, that either Paul's wife dyed, or that she was
dismissed from him by her own assent, that he might not carry her about with
him, and so in matrimony to have lived a single life, as he seems to show in
the 9. Chapter: howsoever whether his wife dyed, or he left her for the Ghospel
of his own accord, it is certain that then he lived as a widower, who before
was married.

Peter Martyr De Coel^bata and votis. p 54.
acknowledges, that S. Ambrose and Epiphanius derive professed chastity from
the Institution of S. Paul. And D. Fulk Against Rhem Test. in 1. Tim. 5. fol
381. Danaeus co^t. Bellarm. 1. partis ale^ra part. p. 1811 Mayor in ep. 1. ad
Tim. in c. 5 fol. 249.
Danaeus and Georgius Mayor do al of them grant, that by the first faith
(mentioned 1. Tim. 5 11.12) most of the ancient Fathers, do expound the vow or
promise of Continency.

Hamelmannus De Traditionious Ap st. o. 460 and see col. 254. And Bugchagius in
Ionam c. 3.
avouches that, after the death of John the Apostle who by the Fathers is much
commended and esteemed for his Virginity, presently began reuolting from the
Faith etc. forbidding of Marriages, and meats, vows, single life etc. D. Fulk
speaking of our B. Ladies vowing Chastity, opposes himself to S. Austin and
S. Gregory Nyssen therein saying: Ag. Rhem. Test. in Luc. 1. sec. 13
Though S. Austin gather she vowed Virginity, yet it follows not etc. And
although Gregory Nyssen be of Austins opinion etc. But D. Fulks Non sequitur,
will never counterpoyse the contrary Collection of so worthy Fathers.

But to speak of the ancientest Ages and Fathers in general, Peter Martyr De
Caelib and votis p. 477.
thinks that, forthwith after the Apostles times too much was attributed to
single life. And Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 13. sec. 17.
speaking hereof, says: This say they was observed from furthest memory, that
those who would dedicate themselves wholly to the Lord, should bind themselves
to the vow of contine^cie: I confess this custom was anciently received, but
I do not grant that Age to be free from al vice. In like sort answers M.
Wotton In his Def. of M. Perkins. p 491.
saying: But the Fathers are not for us, what then? Is nothing true that cannot
be confirmed by their testimonies etc. Indeed it is one of the blemishes of the
ancient Writers, that they were too highly conceited of single life etc.
Therefore it is not to be looked for, that Antiquity should afford us
(Protestants) any testimony herein against the practice and judgment of
those days.

And whereas Bellarmin to this purpose, produces many Sayings of the ancient
Fathers, Danaeus In 1. partis a t. part. p. 1034
his best answer thereto is, that those Fathers thought so, being blinded with
the cloud and enchantment of that error of the lawful Vow of perpetual
continency. So likewise M. Jewel In his Def of the Apol p 164.
speaking concerning the Fathers opinion against Marriage of Priests, says,
Here I grant Mr Harding is like to find some good advantage, as having
undoubtedly a great number of holy Fathers on his side. Add lastly that the
Fathers herein were so firm and constant, as that D. Fulk In his Answer to a
Counterf. Cath p. 45.
acknowledges that Iouinian was condemned by them, for that among other
things. He taught that such as could not contain, though they had vowed
virginity should nevertheless be married. So evident and confessed it is, that
the vows of Chastity and the single life of the Clergy was allowed and
practiced in the purest times of the Primitive Church.

Now whereas it is Law decreed and observed by the Roman Church, that Bigamus,
or he that has been twice married, is not to be admitted to holy Orders
without special dispensation therein: M. Bale In Act. Rom p. 44. 45 46. 47.
acknowledges, that, S Gregory the Great, prohibited that he that was
Bigamus, should be made Priest. And D Fulk In his Retentiue against Bristow
etc. p. 164.
grants that, He who had had two wives could not be a Priest in Hieroms time.
And the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 847 And see col. 303. 877. 1293. And see Cent
3. col. 85 86. and Carthwright in his 2. Reply. part. 1. p. 509.
speaking of that Fourth Age, affirm that it was decreed, that ordination to
Priesthood should not be bestowed of those who were Bigami But Beza De Polig p.
211.
reprehendeth herein ancient Origin saying: Origin were ancient then al
Councels, excepting that of the Apostles, writes ( in Luc. hom ^7) that not
only fornication, but also Marriage does hinder from Ecclesiastical dignities,
to wit, second Marriage etc. But here I affirm that Origin is to be altogether
rejected, as contradicting the doctrine of the Apostles. Yea he further In nou.
Test. in 1. Tim 5.9. p. 333.
says of Bigamie, In the case of widows If any shall oppose to me the
authority of certain Fathers, I appeal to the Word of God. For which his
appeal he is reproved by In his Survey p. 220.
D. Bancroft. And the Centurists Cent 3. col. 85. 86.
do allege both Tertullian and Origin, against Bigamie in the Clergy.

The Particulars then concerning Vows thus confessedly taught by the Fathers
of the Primitive Church are, First, that Vows of things not commanded, but
indifferent, as of perpetual Chastity, are lawful and commendable. Secondly,
that though for some time as then it was permitted, that such as were married
before their taking of holy Orders, should continue and live with their wives
in the state of wedlock: yet was the same afterward, even during the precinct
of those purest times prohibited and disallowed: But never in any time, or by
any Father was it allowed to the Clergy to contract Marriage after Orders
taken; a thing now so ordinary with our Protestant Ministers. Thirdly, it was
never suffered, that those who were Bigami or twice married, should afterward be
admitted to holy Orders without particular dispensation therein. Now the
Fathers produced and reproved by Protestants for these foresaid Catholic
Articles, are S. Gregory, Austin, Ambrose, Hierom, Leo, Innocentius,
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Siricius, Socrates, Sozomene, Eusebius, Basil, Cyprian,
Nyssen, Origin, Tertulian, Clement, Ignatius, S. Paul the Apostle, with the B.
Virgin Marie and S. Paul's widows. As likewise the Councels of Niece, of Arles,
of Neocesaraea, of Eliberis, of Toledo, of Carthage, and several others.

The Protestants accusing the foresaid Fathers are, Luther, the Centurists,
Carrion, Chemnitius, Molitor, Danaus, Osiander, Gaunius, Crispinus, Hospinian,
Beza, Schulterus, Peter Martyr, Mayor, Hamelmannus, Calvin, Symondes, Bale,
Humfrey, Carthwright, Fulk, Bancroft, Wotton, Parkins, Morton, Field, Whitaker,
and Jewel.

It is confessed by Protestants that the Fathers of the Primitive Church,
allowed and practiced the Religious State of Monastical life: And that many
Christians of those purest times both men and women, did strictly observe and
profess the same. CHAPTER XVIII.
BUT now to come to that which to our Protestants is most hateful and
displeasing, as being most repugnant to their new Euangelical liberty and
licentiousnes of life, to wit, the holy, austere, and Monastical life of
Religious men and women, practiced and approved by the primitive Church. And
first to begin with S. Gregory, D. Humfrey having recited many particulers of
our Catholic Faith, wherewith he charge him and S. Austin, at length
concludes thus: Jesuit. part. 2. rat 5. p 5. and 62^.
These has Augustine the great Monk taught by Gregory the Monk, brought to the
English: yea S. Gregory was so devoted to the State of Monachisme, as that M.
Bale thus accords of him: In Act R^m Pontif. p. 44
Gregory the Great, of all the Roman Patriarcks the most excellent in life and
learning etc. altered the houses of his Parents into Monasteries etc. built six
Monasteries, and Commanded (which Command is still in force and observed in
Catholic Countries) that women should not enter the Cloisters of Monks, nor
Monks the houses of Nuns. And according to Carrion In C^^. l. 4. p. 567. 568.
He much increased (says he ( the false Conceit of Monachisme.

D. Morton Prot. Appeal l 4. sec. 37. p 46.
avouches that, Monachisme is a State of life greatly commended by S.
Gregory, who had been himself a Monk. Yea he says further of ancient
Votaries, Ibid. l. 2. p. 89.
or Religious women, that, The Apostle required in his widows, the age of
threescore years, and often times would not admit Virgins under Twenty five
years old, nor veyled Nuns til forty; for which he cites the Third
Carthage Council holden about Anno 398. and the Councels Agathense and
Caesaraugustanum assembled in the Fifth Century: So supposing that the widows
spoken of by S. Paul, had vowed Chastity or single life, and that in the
Fourth and Fifth Centurie after Christ, there were in the Church vowed and
veyled Nuns.

But to arise yet higher, M. Carthwright In Whitguift. Def. p 344.
confesses, that Ruffine, Theodoret, Sozomene, Socrates etc. do mention Monks
almost in every page. And the Centurists Cent. 4. c. 10 col. 129^.
speaking of the Age wherein Constantin lived, acknowledge that there were Monks
throughout Syria, Palestina, Bithinia, and other places of Asia. Also
throughout Africa Cent. 4. col. 1036.
and Europe: Ibid. col. 1331.
Insomuch that they begin a special Cent. 4. col 1294.
Tract, the Title whereof is; Monks throughout Syria, Palestin, Birthinia, and
other parts of Asia under Constantin the Great. As also another Ibid. col.
1306.
Tract, the Title whereof is, The African Monks throughout Egypt under
Constantin the Great. Other Protestants acknowledge, that, In the brief
Discourse of the Churches Estate annexed to Crispinus of the Estate of the
Church. And see his fidelis Relig. p. 19. 136.
About the end of this period (which continued until Constantin) the love of
Solitude and Monkerie, the abstinence from Marriage, and from certain meats on
particular days, many Feasts and other seeds of Superstition after
succeeding, took a maruailous root: So the commencement of Prayer for the dead,
and Sacrifice of the Mass did discover themselves etc.

But the Centurists having alleged a long place of S. Basil in praise of
Monastical life, they add this Censure: Cent. 4. p. 300. 301.
Al which words (of S. Basil) are both besides and contrary to holy
Scripture. As also, S. Ambrose does pronounce too too insolently of the merits
of Virgins. And whereas Ephrem said, That al pious people shall come merrily in
the day of Judgment before the face of Christ: but especially Monks, and other
such as have lived in desert in chastity, labors, watchings, fastings and the
like; these words are so distastful to Protestants, that the Magdeburgians say
thereof: What can be spoken more monstrously against the merit of Christ? The
Centurists Cent. 4. c. 6. col 464. 466. 474.
likewise confess, that these Monks had Monasteries to dwell in: And they make
Cent. 4. col. 467. 479 1335. 5337.
a special Title: Of the Monasteries of Virgins: whereof also mention is made by
Cent. 4. p. 507. 503. 161.
Osiander.

In these Monasteries, one was appointed for Superior over the rest: So
Osiander Cent 4. p. 503. And see the Centurists Cent. 4. col. l 335.
acknowledges, that, Paula was Gouernesse, or Abbess of their Monasteries
which were of Virgins. And the Centurists give like instance of Publia, a most
noble woman, who was Mistress of the company of Virgins, who professed
chastity.

There were used at those times a special Consecration of Monasteries, and
Monks, and Nuns: Insomuch as the Centurie-writers Cent 4. col. 466.
have a particular Title, De consecratione Monachi, of Consecration of a Monk.
And else where Cent. 4 col. 865. 869 874.
in plain terms they mention Consecration of Virgins. And whereas the Council
of Chalcedon Can. Cent 4. col. 125.
24. says, we decree that such Monasteries as are once Consecrated with the
allowance of their Bishop, shall remain so perpetual etc. neither after shall be
used for secular houses: this Council is mentioned and commended by the
Centurists. Cent. 4 col. 855. 667. 515.
But Hamelmannus De Traditionibus Apost. 1. col. 707. 743.
and D. Regnolds In his conf. p 488.
do mention and reprove in S. Dionysius the Areopagite, Consecration of Monks.

These Monks and Nuns used a Religious habit, different from that of Secular
people: For the Magdeburgians Cent 4. col. 472.
do affirm, that in the Fourth Age, they used a certain Cover for the head,
which they call the Cowle; which is, used at this day. And, Cent. 4 col. 468.
and 867. 874. 870. And see Hosp^nian de Origin Monach. fol. 111.
It may be observed (say they) out of the same book what was the Custom of
Clothing Virgins, for first they were clothed in the Church before the Altar
upon Ester day, in presence of the solemn assembly, Candles being lighted
etc. But now to touch their professed Poverty and Austeritie of life, the
Centurists Cent. 4 col. 301.
speaking of the Monks which lived in the Fourth Age, plainly acknowledge that,
It is evident that those who were to profess Monastical life, did first
distribute their goods. Basil says, It behooves a Monk before al things to
embrace that kind of life, that he possess nothing. And as concerning their
diet, they likewise grant, Cent. 4. col. 474. and 471.
That some abstain from foul, using eggs and fish; others abstain from
fish, and eat cheese; others do not take cheese: and yet there are others who
abstain from bread: As also, Cent 4 col. 475.
that some live with bread, pulse, and herbs, which are boiled only with
Salt. In like sort they Cent. 4. col. 474.
acknowledge, that, Many sleep upon the ground, others go barefoot, and wear
Sackcloth secretly upon their bodies: Yea they mention Cent 4 col. 465.
their going barefoot out of Nazianzen. And M. Willet Synopsis Cont 6 q 6.
part. i. p. 258.
makes a special Tract against the austeritie of those ancient times, saying:
The solitary life of Eremites in flying the comfortable society of men, and
the rigorous manner in the unnatural chastising of their bodies, is contrary
to the rule of the Ghospel. And again: That cruel and inhumane kind of
chastising their bodies, by fasting and other discipline, is utterly unlawful.
And afterward he there reproves S Basil and S Gregory Nazianzene, for
plucking down themselves by immoderate fasting. Yea the Austeritie and
sanctity of the ancient Monks were such, that Luther says thereof: Upon the
Epistle to the Galat. Engl in c. 1 verse 30. fol. 220.
If the Papacy had the same holiness and austeritie of life, which it had in
the time of the ancient Fathers, Hierom, Ambrose, Austin and others etc. what
could we do now against the Papacy by our Doctrine (of only Faith? Calvin
Instit. l 4. c. 12. s^ct. 8.
much disliketh the ancient Fathers confessed austeritie, saying: In which
respect the immoderat austeritie of the Ancient (Fathers) can no ways be
excused, which both altogether dissented from the rules of our Lord, and also
is very dangerous. And again, Instit. l. 3 c 4. sec. 38
Little do those things move me which every where occur in the writings of the
old (Fathers) concerning Satisfaction, for I see some of them, yea I will speak
plainly, almost al whose books are extant, either herein to have been
deceived, or else to have spoken over sharply and roughly.

And to give example in some few; Osiander Cent. 4. p. 99.
speaking of S Anthony, who lived in Constantins time, much reprehendeth him
in these words: When in a certain Sermon (Anthony) had heard that saying of
Christ repeated, If thou will be perfect, go and sell al which thou have, and
give unto the poor, and follow me, This Saying he impertinently applied to
himself, selling those things which be had by inheritance etc. choosing a
Solitary life. And being about thirty five years old, he went into the desert
that there he might lead a more strict life. His meat was only bread and Salt,
his drink water, his time of dinner Sunsetting, whereas often he fasted two
days or more together, he watched whole nights in prayer etc. His Garment
inwardly was hairecloth etc. Therefore (says Osiander) the life of Antonie
wanted not much Superstition. And again, Ibid. p. 103.
that Antonie was the first beginner of Monastical life in in Aegipt, that he
punished his body over much, and such like, they are to be numbered amongst the
stubble, whereof Paul speaks. In like sort says D. Beard: Retrartiue from
Romans Relig. p. 375.
The first Hermit was one Antonie, who lived three hundred years after
Christ, who taught others that State of life.

And as concerning S. Anton.'s house or Celle, Osiander Cent. 4. p. 100.
likewise confesses, that it was Seated upon a high mountain etc. and that
the square thereof was no larger then a man might lay himself down to sleep.
And as for his bed, he used a matte spread upon the ground, and often the
ground itself.

Like instance may be given in S. Symeon, whose great austeritie reported by
Theodoret, the Protestant Iunius Animaduersiones ad Controuersiam 3. de Membris
Eccl. p. 611. 612. 613. 614.
reprehendeth, tearming him, Mela^cholie, ignorant and superstitious Symeon,
and condemning his miraculous fast of Forty days for counterfeit etc, his
daily continued prayer at the pillar for battalogie etc. his miracles for
magical, etc. And his Prophesying as done by human Judgment, or suggestion
from the Devil. What now could Lucian, or Porphyrie utter more profanely? And
yet the like is affirmed of this holy Symeon by Hospinian. De Monach. f. 24.
But now to come to the vowed Chastity of Monks and Nuns of those ancient
times: Whereas it is decreed in the Council of Chalcedon. Can. 15. that, If any
Virgin or Monk shall dedicate themselves to God, it is not lawful for them to
marry: This so famous a Council, is reprehended for this very Decree by D.
Whitaker, Cont. Camp rat. 4 p. 62. Osia^d. Cent. 5. l. 32 c. 13 p. 356. 359.
Iustus Molitor de Eccl. Milit. p. 80.
Osiander, and Iustus Molitor. The Centurie-writers Cent. 4. col 467. And see
col. 706. 483. 847. 301. And Cent. 3 col. 140.
acknowledge that, Ruffine l. 2. c. 9. declares, that Basil built Monasteries
in the Cities of Pontus, and ordained that Virgins should vow Chastity: And
concerning the virgins of Europe, they confess in the same place that, Ambrose
tells that the vow of Virginity was common with that sex.

Yea such was the Sanctity of the Religious of those times, that it is
confessed, that they shined with the gifts of miracles: The Centurists Cent 4
^ol 493. And see col. 1445. and 493.
say: There were amongst the Monks and Ermites in this (Fourth) Age, men who
were famous with the gift of Miracles, as Antonie and his Disciples,
Macharius, Isidorus, Heraclides, etc. And such was the holy conceit of the
ancient Fathers concerning the perfection of Monastical life, that they
doubted not to condemn Vigilantius and others of error for impugning the
same: For thus, by the confession of Crispinus, Of the Estate of the Church.
ep. 131. 132.
writes S. Hierom against, Vigilantius: In that thou affirm^st those to do
better, who use their goods, and by little and little distribute the fruits of
their possessions to the poor, then those who selling their possessions give
al at once; the answer shall be given, not from me, but from our Lord; If thou will be perfect, go and sell al things which thou have, and give to the poor,
and come follow me. He speaks to him who will be perfect etc. That degree
which thou praysest is the Second and Third, which also we allow, whilst we
know the first to be preferred before the second and Third. Neither are Monks
to be terrifyed by thee from their devotion, with they viperous tongue, and
cruel biting, of whom thou arguest and say. If al shall shut themselves up,
and be in the deserts, who shall frequent the Churches?

These premises supposed and observed, it is no marvel though M. Carthwright
In his 2. Reply. part. 1. p. 502.
affirm, that Monks are Antichristian, notwithstanding their anciencie: And
that, Ibid. p. 510.
Hieroms Monks, Hermites, and Anchorets were at that time very gross. As also
though Instit. l. 4. c. 13. sec. 16.
Calvin say, I do not dissemble, that in that ancient form (of Monachisme)
which Augustine commends, there is something which little pleases me. And yet
this notwithstanding Beza In his nou Test. in prefat. ad Principem Condensem.
speaking of the times of Cyprian, Augustine and Chrysostom, acknowledges that
the Christians as then, Admired the Monks of Aegipt and Syria etc. as if they
were Angels. And such was the Emperor Constantins opinion of S. Anthony his
sanctity, that Crispinus Of the Estate of the Church. p. 106. And see Cent. 4.
col. 470.
confesses, that Antonie being in Aegipt in the wilderness, Constantin wrote to
him, for to pray to God for him and his children. Add hereunto, that
Chemnitius reproves the Fathers for referring Monastical profession to
Apostolic Exam. part. 3. p. 54
Institution.

To touch now the Monastical life of the ancient believing Jews, De origin
Monaechatus f. 10.
Hospinian reports, that S. Hierom makes the sons of the Prophets, the
Monks of the Old Testament, for in his Epistle to Rusticus he says: The sons
of the Prophets, whom we read were Monks in the old Testament, built for
themselves Cottages near the River of Jordan, and leaving the Cities did feed
upon barlie bread and wild herbs. And in his Epistle to Paulinus speaking of
Monks, he says, our guides the sons of the Prophets who dw^lled in fields
and Deserts, and made themselves Tabernacles near the river Jordan. And again
Ibid. fol. 11.
S. Ambrose in his book of Virgins, writes that the Jews kept certain Virgins
in the Temple of Jerusalem etc. But Ambrose I think had this (says Hospinian)
from the 2. book of Machabees and 3 Chapter, where mention is made of virgins
shut up together, but these books of Machabees are not to be believed So not
being able otherwise to deny this ancient Monachisme in the Jews, but by
rejecting the books of Machabees for not Canonical.

In like sort concerning the Pharisees, whereof S. Paul affirms himself to
have been one, Act. Ap. 26. 5.
tearming it, The most sure sect of the (Jews) Religion, or as Protestants
translate the most strait sect etc. Phaerisaisme. p. 15.
These Pharisees (says M. Hal) were a Fraternity or College of
extraordinary Devotion, whose rule was Tradition, whose practice voluntary
Poverty, and who according to D. Beard believed Retractiue from Romish. Rel.
p. 80.
Freewil, Invocation of Angels, and Saints, and Merit of good works.

The Nazarites also (whereof though some were but temporary, yet others
according to M. Parkins were Upon the Hebr. c. 11. p 501. And iunius in
Animaduers. p 216.
perpetual) were so agreeable to our Monastical and Religious life, that
Bullinger writes thus of them. Dec. 3. sec. 6. p. 380.
Because they should more freely attend upon God, they did of their own accord
take upon them a more strict trade of life then the common people used: And so
were Ibid. p. 381.
consecrated to the Lord by a certain peculiar kind of living. To the same
effect writes D. Beard, Retractiue from Romans Relig. p, 70. 71.
As touching their Friars and Anchorets, how like are they to the Nazarites of
the Law? the Nazarites might not drink wine nor strong drink: no more may
diverse of the Religious Shauelings by the Rules of their Order. They were tied
by a vow which they might not break without sin; so are these at their first
entrance into their Cloisters and Cells etc. They might not meddle with worldly
affairs, during the time of their separation: no more, may some of these
Romish Votaries etc. And yet he confesses further of the Nazarites, that, They
were true worshipers of God, and their Order was Gods ordinance. Yea the
Scriptures themselves do Numb. c. 6.
relate their peculiar Consecration to God, their Vow, their Abstinence from
wine, and other such Circumstances belonging thereunto.

And as concerning certain of the Jews called the Essenes, Josephus writes
thus of them. Antiquit. Iud. l. 18. c. 2.
The righteousness of the Essenes is maruailous etc. They enjoy their riches in
common etc. And in this course above four thousand men do live, having neither
wives nor Servants etc. They De Bello Iud. l. 2. c. 7.
are Jews by nation, and do observe continency, avoid Marriage, are contemnens
of riches, and enjoy things in common, none being richer then other. And before
any be admitted amongst them, Trial is had of his continency, and his other
manners are for two years proved, and then he is taken into the Company M.
Hal acknowledges these Essenes, affirming that there were of them Pharis. p.
15. Parkins in Hebr. c. 11. p. 501.
both Collegiat and Eremitical. And De Oriegine Mon f. 29. and see p. 5. 6. 7.
8.
I deny not (says Hospinian) the Institute, or rather Superstitions of these
Essenes to have crept into the Church as a certain gangrene; of their single
life and Virginity no man may doubt. D. Beard testifyeth, that the Jews
Retract. from Romans Relig. p. 81. 82.
had those that professed a Monastical and Single life, which were called
Essaeans, from the Greek word (...), that is, Saints or holy men, as some
suppose etc. And those as Josephus and Philo testify, professed Continency
from Marriage, community in goods, and abstinence from meats etc. And do not
the Romanists imitate them in the same kind? etc. Let then the Jewish Essaeans,
and the Romish Monks walk together etc.

Philo also living in the Apostles times mentions those who then De vitae
Contempl.
forsaking their goods did dwell without the walls, loving solitarines etc. He
mentions likewise their Monasteries, where being solitary they studied the
mysteries of holy life, as also their Apud Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 16.
extraordinary fasting from meat. Al which is so certain that the
Centurists. Cent. 1. l 2. col. 18. Rayn. in hic Conf. p. 488.
and D. Raynolds do acknowledge the same, and can only euade the force thereof
by affirming, that it was Jewish, and the Professors thereof Jews, directly
contrary to S. Hierome De Script. Eccl. verbo Phile. Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 16.
and Euschius who think they were Christian Professors.

Lastly S. John Baptist did in many things Marc. 1.2.
prepare the way to our Christian Doctrine, so amongst others, by his kind of
Monastical Conversation: his abode to such purpose being in Math. 3.1. and
11.7. Marc. 1.4. Luc. 3.4.
the Desert, his Math. 3.4. Marc 1.6.
Raiment of Camels hair: his Mat. 3.4 Mar. 1.6.
Girdle of (a beasts) skin about his loins: And his abstinence
extraordinary from meats, other then Mat. 3.4
Locusts and wild honey. In respect whereof it is said of him that, Math. 11.18.
He came neither eating nor drinking: Yea it was prophesied of him by an Angel
that he should Luc. 1.15.
Neither drink wine, nor strong drink. Al which his austerities and stricter
Course of life, are thus specially described by the holy Evangelists to his
greatest Commendation. Yea in these regards the ancient Father tearming him
Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Marc. and hom de Io. Bapt. Hier. ad Eustoch de virg Seruanda.
Sozom. hist. l. 1. c. 12. Cass. col. 18. c. 5.
The Prince (or beginner) of Monastical life, they are therefore reproved by
Cent. 5. col. 711. Fulk ag. Def. of the cens. p. 82. Hospin de Origin Monach.
l. 2 f. 17. Osiand. cont. 3 p 84. Park. in Problem p. 225.
the Centurists, by D. Fulk, Hospinian, Osiander and M. Parkins.

Thus then we see, that the Religious of these days, have taken their
Institute and manner of life from their worthiest Predecessors of the
Primitive Church, First who no less then now, did confessedly build
Monasteries both for men and women. Secondly, which also they specially
consecrated or hallowed. Thirdly, the Monks and Nuns wearing a distinct habit
from Secular people. Fourthly, using extraordinary Austeritie in their
Apparel, Diet, Bed, and the like: Examples whereof are acknowledged in S.
Antonie and S. Symeon. Fifthly, they likewise vowed Chastity the violating
whereof was holden most sinful, and punishable. Sixthly, yea such was their
Sanctity, that the co^fessedly shined with the Gifts of Miracles. Seauenthly,
and so highly were they reverenced in these best times, that their Impugners
and despisers were condemned by the Fathers for wicked Heretics. Eighthly, add
hereunto, that sundry truly believing Jews both before and since Christ did
likewise practice a kind of Monastical life, and were therefore as it were the
Prototypon of our future Religious.

Now the Fathers cited and rejected by Protestants for the foresaid points,
are, S. Gregory, Augustine, Ambrose, Hierom, Ruffine, Theodoret, Sozomene,
Socrates, the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, Basil, Nazianzene, Antonie,
Symeon, Macarius, and the ancient believing Jews. The Protestants summoning
them are Luther, Calvin, the Centurists, Carrion, Osiander, Hamelmannus,
Hospinian, Iunius, Molitor, Crispinus, Beza, Chemnitius, Bale, Humfrey,
Carthwright, Raynolds, Willet, Hal, Parkins, Morton, Beard, and Whitaker.

It is acknowledged by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
allowed and practiced prescribed fasts, and Abstinence from certain meats,
upon days and times appointed: holding the same to be obligatorie under sin.
Condemning also our Puritan Sabbath fasts. CHAPTER XIX.
COncerning fasting: The Doctrine of the Catholic Church is contained in four
several points. First, that fasting Bellar. de bonis eperihus in Partical. l.
2. c 5 6. 7. and 23.
in general is commanded by God. Secondly, that fasting upon certain days, and
from certain meats, is not only lawful, but being appointed and commanded by
the Church is also obligatorie under sin. Thirdly, that no meats of their
own nature are unclean, or unlawful to be eaten. Fourthly, that in honor of
Christ our Saviors Resurrection, Sunday is not fasted.

The Protestant Church herein teaches. First, Calvin. Inst l. 4. c. 12 Chemn.
Exam. part. 4 p. 440.
that fasting is not commanded by God, but left free to the will and devotion
every man. Secondly, Calvin l 4 Instit. c. 12. Luth de Liberate Christiana
that the Church has no Authority to command certain days, or abstine^ce
from certain meats, nor Christians bound to obey her therein. Thirdly, Chemn.
Exam part. 4. p 400
Protestants falsely teach, that Catholics forbear certain meats as of
their own nature unclean or unlawful. Fourthly, the most refined Protestants
do keep their strictest Fastes upon the Sunday.

Now what the Primitive Church taught and practiced concerning fasting, I will
appeal to Protestants as witnesses impartial and free from al exception in
this case. First then, M. Bale Iu Act Rom Pontif. p. 44 etc.
confesses, that S. Gregory the Great consecrated the beginning of Lent-fast
with sprinkling of ashes etc. And forbad to those that fasted the use of flesh,
milk, cheese, butter and eggs. M. Symonides reports that, Upon the Revel. p.
85 86.
He wrote to Austin that the Clergy should in Quinquagesima abstain from
flesh, milk, and eggs etc. Whereas S. Ambrose Sermon. 25 34. 36.
teaches that, It is sin not to fast in Lent, he is reproved for the same by
M. Carth-wright In Whit. Def p. 100.
. And Melancthon In libelli aliquot etc. fol. 9.
affirms that, Ambrose says of the fast of Lent etc. This is of necessity.
This opinion (says Melancthon) is stubble added to the doctrine of Faith. He
likewise reprehe^deth In Ep. ad Romans c. 14. p. 389.
S. Austin for teaching abstinence from flesh and wine in Lent. For which very
point the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 1057.
reject Theophilus Alexandrinus. D. Morton speaking of the fast of Lent, says;
Prot. Appeal. l. 2 p 303.
This fast, we confess, was of great Antiquity, and etc. had in general use
and observation, which S. Ambrose teaches to have been ordained by the divine
Institution of Christ etc. And S. Augustine does sometime write of the forty
days fast, that it has a divine Authority etc.

M. Trigge not only allows himself prescribed and appointed days of fast,
but alleges for the same S. Cyril, In his true Cathol. p. 600.
as also S. Ibid. p. 304.
Ambrose Ibid. 601. 602.
for fasting in Lent, wednesdayes and fridayes; and withal says: I would to
God at this day al Christians would solemnly every week fast wednesday and
friday etc. let us observe the fast of Lent, and of wednesdayes and fridayes
etc. The Centurists confess that, Epiphanius affirms haer. 75. that the fast
of wednesdayes and fridayes until the Ninth hour was decreed in all Countries
of the world, Cent. 4 col. 440.
and that he refers the authority of that Decree unto the Apostles. They
likewise Cent. 4 col. 44.
admit, that Gregory Nyssen relates the fasting from flesh and wine in Lent.
And speaking of the Fourth Age Cent. 5. col. 44.
in general, they acknowledge, that Histories testify, that Christians of this
Age did observe fastes, and that more Religiously, or (say the Centurists) more
superstitiously then in former Ages.

But the Fathers in this point were so resolute, as that they doubted not to
condemn Aerius for his contrary Protestant Doctrine. D. Fulk In his Answer to
a counterf. Cath. p. 44. 45 and see Pantaleon in his Chron. p. 28.
says, I will not dissemble that which you think the greatest matter; Aerius
taught that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness both Epiphanius
and Austin, which they count for an error. Also he taught that fasting days
are not to be observed. D. Field Of the Church. l. 3. c. 22. p 138.
likewise writes: The eleventh is the heresy of Aerius etc. He disliked set
Fastes etc. He was justly condemned etc. Osiander Cent. 4. p. 434.
reciting the condemned errors of Aerius, amongst the rest numbered, appointed
Fastes not to be kept etc And that fasting is to be when a man will, according
to his liberty. And whereas S. Epiphanius her 75. affirms of Aerius, that he
says: Neither shall fasting be appointed, for these things be Iudaical and
under the Law of Bondage: If at al I will fast, I will choose any of myself, and
I will fast for liberty. All this is acknowledged by Pantaleon, In his Chronogr.
p. 28.
and is so agreeable with the now Doctrine of Protestants, that D. Whitaker
Contra Duraeum. l. 9. p. 830.
avouches, that Aerius taught nothing concerning fasting different from the
Catholic Faith: by which he means the Protestant Faith. Insomuch that Aerius
herein is defended by Danaeus De haresibus. c. 53. f. 175. 177.
and D. Fulk; Answ. to a countor. Cath. p. 45.
Though M Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 210. And the Author of Quaerim. Eccles.
p. 31. 94 103.
and other Protestant Writers do no less condemn him herein of error then
Catholics do.

In like sort whereas D. Fulk Against Rhem. Test. in Math. c. 15 fol. 28. And
Aretius loc. com. p. ^72.
and other Protestant Writers, do commonly object against Catholics, that
Montanus the Heretic, was the first that appointed laws of fasting. M. Hooker
Eccles. Pol l. 5. p. 209. 210.
himself answers with us, that the Montanists were reprehended only, for that
they brought in sundry unaccustomed days of fasting, continued their fastes a
great deal longer, and made them more rigorous etc. whereupon Tertulian
maintayning Montanisme, wrote a book in defense of the new fast. And the like
answer is given by another Protestant Quaerimonia Eccl. p. 110.
saying: Protestants say that Eusebius manifestly teaches, that Montanus made
the first laws of fasting: but they are greatly deceived in this as in other
things etc. Montanus brings in a new Custom of fasting, having abrogated the
Fastes of the Church etc. And of this new Custom in particular, Chemnitius
Exam. part 4. p. 143.
records that, The Montanists make three Lents in the year, as though three
Saviors suffered in the year; which is altogether impertinent to Catholics.

Again, whereas it is ordinarily urged against Catholics, that they absolutely
condemn certain meats, contrary to S. Paul 1. Tim. 4.3, M. Jacob Def. of
the Church and Ministry of England. p. 59.
a Puritan acknowledges that, The place of Paul is understood of Marcion and
Tatianus, who did absolutely condemn Marriage and certain meats: And so
(says he) are in no comparison with the Papists, if they erred in nothing else.

But to proceed yet to Fathers more ancient; The Centurists Cent. 3 col. 136.
write that, Origin hom. 10. in Leuiticum, mentions the 40. Days, or Lent,
consecrated to fasting, as also Wenesday and Friday, in which says he, were
solemn Fasts: D. Whitaker Cont. Duraeum. l. 7. p. 480. Mort. Prot. App. p. 506
and D Morton charge Pope Calixtus, who lived about Anno Domini 218. that, He
was the first that ordained Ieiunium quatuor Temporum, or Ember days. And
Hamelmannus De Trad. Apost. col. 254.
speaking of Hermes, of whom S. Paul makes mention Romans 16 14 affirms. that
in his book entitled Pastor, is recorded the then Fasting from certain
meats. Abraham Schultetus In Medulla Theol. Patrum. p. 440.
does not only affirm (to use his words) the superstition of Lent and Fasting
to have been allowed and commanded by Ignatius, Vbi supra and Whitguift in his
Def. p. 102. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l. 5. p. 209.
but does also, as does likewise D. Whitguift and M. Hooker, defend that very
Epistle of Ignatius, being ad Philippenses, in which this Doctrine is extant,
to be his true Epistle, and not counterfaite.

Chemnitius Exam. part. 1. p. 89.
confesses, that Ambrose, Maximus Tauroninsis, Theophilus, Hierom, and others,
do affirm the fast of Lent to be an Apostolical Tradition. And the like almost
in the same words is acknowledged by Schrederus, Opuscul. Theol p. 71.
saying, Ambrose, Theophilus, Hierom and others, do decree that Lent has
descended from Apostolical Tradition. Add lastly that, Calvin Insti. l. 4. c.
12. sec. 19.
speaking of fasting, confesses in general, that, he dares not wholly excuse
the Old Fathers, but that they sowed some seeds of Superstition. And that
Ibid. sec. 20.
every where the observation of superstitious Lent was in force. Hamelmannus
affirms that, De Traedit. col. 460.
After the death of John the Apostle, there began fallings away from the Faith,
Doctrines of Devils, under pretense of the Word of God, forbidding of Marriages
and meats, vows, single life etc. And the Centurists do confess and report
from Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. col. 581.
the testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, Egesippus, and Josephus, concerning
the abstinence of the blessed Apostle S. James, that Ibid. col. 582.
wine and sicer he did not drink, that he did not feed of any living creature
etc. that he wore not woollen garments, but was attired in Syndon, that he
prayed so continually upon his knees, that Camel-like they had lost their
feeling. So strict were the Fasts and other austerities of the ancientest
Fathers and Apostles.

But to touch briefly our Puritan or Sabbath Fastes, whereas M. Welsh, In his
Rep. against Brown. p. 196.
speaking of himself and his Brethren, says: We think it not Heresy to fast
on the Lords, more then other days; The Fourth Carthage Council Can. 64. is
reprehended by Osiander, Cent. 5. p. 13.
for decreeing that, He that advisedly (or of purpose) fasted upon the Sunday,
should not be esteemed a Catholic. And whereas Epiphanius haer. 75. reciting
and condemning the error of the Aerians herein, affi^meth that, They affect
rather to fast upon the Sunday, and to eat upon the Wenesday and Friday (in
which respect, our modern Protestants are their docible Scholars) M.
Midleton, alleges to the same purpose, not only the several testimonies of
Epiphanius, but also of Tertulian and Ignatius, freely confessing, that
Sundays fast was condemned in Eustathius, and the Aerians. In like sort S.
Austin ep. 86. ad Casulanum, affirming that To fast on Sunday is a great
offense, In h s Papistomastix. p. 35.
especially since the detestable Heresy of the Manichees etc. who appoint unto
their hearers this day as lawful to be fasted upon. This saying is alleged by
D. Whiteguift In his Def. p. 102.
and the Centurie-writers, Cent. 4. col. 445.
as also is S. Ambrose for the same purpose by M. Parker. Against Symbol part.
2. c. 5. sec. 16 p. 38.
And where Clement l. 5. Constit. Apost. c. vlt. and Ignatius ep. ad
Philippenses, do but both of them affirm that, He is guilty of sin, who
fasteth upon Sunday: The same is confessed by M. Carthwright: In Whit. Def. p.
99.
who also with M. Midleton, In his Papistomastix. p. 35.
and M. Parker Against Symbol. etc. part. 1. c. 4. p. 171.
confesses the same of Tertulian de Corona Militis c. 3. Yea M. Parker
recites the several sayings to this purpose of Tertulian, Ignatius and Austin
And M. Wilet Synopsis controuers. 9. q. 8 p. 384
says, we grant this opinion is very ancient, and that in Tertulians time,
it was received in many Churches.

Thus then our Roman Church does truly Symbolize with the Primitive. First, in
teaching that the fast of Lent is obligatorie and under sin. Secondly, as
also, that certain meats are to be abstained from upon certain days and
times. Thirdly, for the contrary Doctrine whereof, the Fathers censured Aerius
for an Heretic. Fourthly, and with him Eustachius, for their Sundays fast.
Fifthly, Catholics being confessedly cleared from the imputed Heresies of
Montanus, Marcion, and Tatianus.

Now the Fathers acknowledged and reproved by Protestants for our foresaid
Doctrine of fasting, are S. Gregory, Ambrose, Austin, Hierom, Theophilus,
Maximus Taurinensis, Cyril, Epiphanius, Nyssene, Origin, Calixtus, Tertulian,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Egesippus, Josephus, Ignatius, Hermes, and all the Fathers
of the Fourth Carthage Council. The Protestants citing them are, The
Centurists, Melancthon, Pantaleon, Danaeus, Aretius, Chemnitius, Hamelmannus,
Schultetus, Schrederus, Calvin, Osiander, Symondes, Bale, Trigge, Carthwright,
Fulk, Field, Hooker, Jacob, Welsh, Midleton, Parker, Willet, Morton, Whiteguift
and Whitaker.

It is admitted by Protestants that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
expressly taught our Catholic Doctrine concerning freewil. CHAPTER XX.
Whereas it is generally taught by Catholics See Bellarmine in his boo 1. s de
Gratia and libero Arbit.
that man, even after the fall of Adam, has freewil and liberty, not only in
actions natural, or civil, but likewise in moral and supernatural, Gods Grace
concurring. Directly to the contrary the learned Protestants Calvin. Inst.
l. 1. art. 16.. 8 and l. 2. c. 4.. 6. And see 3.. 7.
teach, that man in the state of Nature now corrupted is not endowed with
Freewil in any action natural, civil, moral, or supernatural.

The Primitive Church is so wholly Roman Catholic in this point of Faith
concerning Freewil, as that the same is most plentifully confessed by many
Protestants. Luke Osiander Cent. 6. p. 288.
speaking of S. Gregory affirms that, In many articles he was fowlly and
Popishly deceived: for he attributed overmuch to Freewil etc. And the
Centurie-writers, Cent 6. c. 10. col. 748.
repeating many pretended errors of his, amongst the rest do number Freewil.

But the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 291.
proceed further, for speaking of the Fourth Age, they confess, in general
that, Almost all the Fathers of this Age, speak confusedly of Freewil etc. And
contrary to the manifest testimonies of holy Scripture. And immediately after
they do there recite and reject the particular Sayings of Lactantius,
Athanasius, Basil, Nazianzene, Epiphanius, Hierom etc. saying: They were al
deceived, al in darkness, al washed about the doctrine of Man's Freewil, Beza In
his Nou. Test. in Praef. ad Principem Condensem.
discoursing of the times of Austin, Chrysostom and Cyprian, affirms that
then was in use the opinion of Freewil. Calvin affirms in general that, The
Inst. l. 2 c. 2.. 4.
Grecians above others, and amongst them Chrysostom, notably exceed measure in
extolling the faculty of man's will. And again Inst. l. 2. c. 1.. 10.
It is necessary, that be rejected, which is so often repeated by Chrysostom,
Quem trahit, volentem trahit, whom he draws, he draws willing.

Yea the famous Council of Niece was so clear for Freewil, that our Puritans
spare not to say: A brief Discovery of untruths in D. Ba^crofts sermon. p. 21.
We must needs confess, that not only this government of the Church, but also
many other points of greatest weight in Religion, fell to decay long before the
Council of Niece etc. Man's Freewil and ability to fulfill the Law of God etc.
was winked at or buried etc. at the time of the Council of Niece. So that if
this Argument (taken from the Council of Niece) be good etc. it is also
powreful to overthrow the main point of our Justification by Faith etc. The
Centurie-writers Cent 3. col. 247.
arise yet higher, affirming that S. Cyprian is every where a vehement
defender of Freewil. And again, Cent. 3. col. 77.
The same thinks Cyprian l. 3. ep. 3. Man (says he) left to his own
liberty, and placed in his own power, either desires death to himself, or
life. And they recite and reject su^drie other of his like sayings: which
sayings also are confessed and rejected by D. Humfrey. In his Jesuit part. 2.
p. 540.


It is likewise Cent. 3. col. 77.
confessed, that Origin hom. 9. in Numeros, thinks that our will can choose
good things, that it may be a vessel to honor; or evil and earthly things,
that it may be a vessel to reproach. Yea they further allege and reject many
other of his like Sayings. And else where Cent. 3. col. 2^8.
they reprove Origin herein, and all the Doctors of the then precedent Age. Yea
speaking of Tertulian, Origin, Cyprian, and Methodius, their modest Censure is
that, Cent. 3. c. 4. p. 77.
They do abuse the Scriptures intollerably for the maintenance thereof. And as
for Tertulian, they Cent. 3. col. 240.
acknowledge that, he In many and large Sentences attributes Frewil to man,
even after the corruption of Nature by Adams fall. And in Cent. 3. col. 77.
another place they reject Tertulians sundry testimonies of Frewil. But
Hamalmannus De Traditionibus l. 2. c. 7. col. 93.
confesses that, Tertulian and Ireneus with many followers defend Freewil
etc. Yea Schultetus Medulla Theol. Patrum. p. 369. 304. 466. 151. 105. 98. 48.
66. 73. 40. And see Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 58. 59. And Cent. 3. c. 4. col. 77. 78.
48.
for the self same Doctrine of Freewil reproves of error, Cyprian,
Theophilus, Tertulian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Justin, Ireneus,
Athenagoras, Tatianus etc. And the Centurie-writers Cent. 2. c. 10 col. 221.
And see col. 58. 43. And Humfrey in Jesuit. part. 2. p. 527. And Osiand. cent.
2. l. 4. p. 84.
confess that, Ireneus admitteh Freewil (even) in spiritual actions. And that,
Ireneus Cent. 2. c. 4. p. 53.
disputes not dissinctly, and wresteth the speeches of Christ, and of S. Paul
in favor of Freewil, saying, that there is Freewil also in faith and belief.
But these things (say he Centurists) are spaken grossly (by Ireneus) and are
repugnant to the Scriptures.

In like sort Osiander Cent. 2. p. 5. 6. And see the Centurists. Cent. 2. col.
207.
reproves Justin saying: Iustine extolled too much the liberty of man's Will in
observing the Commandments of God. And it is granted Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 59.
And see Calvin Inst. l. 2 c. 2. 4.
that Clemens every where defends Freewil, so that it may appear (say they)
that not only all the Doctors of that Age were in such darkness, but also that
the same after increased in the later Doctors. D. Abbots In defense of the
Reformed Catholic. part. 1. p. 114.
speaking of the book of Hermes, entitled Pastor, (and some others, forged
according to his opinion in the Apostles times) says: The poison which Satan
had conveyed into such counterfaite books, was received as wholesome food, and
sundry errors and superstitious fancies of vowed Virginity and Prayer for
the dead, of Freewil, of Invocation of Saints, of Antichrist, and the
Assumption of Marie, and such like by little and little got footing in the
Church. And here was indeed (says Abbot) the true beginning of many doctrines
of Popery etc. The Centurists Cent. 2. c. 4. 4 co^. 58.
speaking of the times next after the Apostles, do acknowledge, That almost no
point of Doctrine began so soon to be obscured, as this of Freewil. Yea it is
confessed, So say the Puritanes cyted in D. Bancrostes Sermon. p. 23.
that the Protestants know that ever since the Apostles time, in a manner it
flourished every where, until Martin Luther took the sword in hand against it.
A true so evident, that D. Humfrey Jesuit. part. 2. p. 530.
thinks, It may not be denied, but that Ireneus, Clemens, and others (quos
vocant Apostolicos) whom they call Apostolical (in respect of the time in which
they lived) have in their writings the opinions of Freewil etc. Yea says M.
Calvin, Instit. l. 2. c. 2. 9.
Al Ecclesiastical Writers, excepting Augustine, have written so ambiguously and
differently in this matter (of Freewil) that nothing certain can be gathered
from their wrytings: And they were over full in extolling Freewil. Lastly. D.
Whiteguift In his Defense against the Reply of Carthwright. p. 472. 473.
discoursing of Doctrine taught in any Age since the Apostles time, affirms
without any other exception, of Age or Father, that (to use his words) almost
Ibid. p. 473. And see the like in Whitak. de Eccl. Con. Bellar. Controu. 2. p.
299.
all the Bishops, and learned Writers of the Greek Church and Latin also for the
most part, were spotted with doctrines of Freewil, of Merit, of Invocation of
Saints and such like. And the same also almost in the same words is confessed
by D. Couel, saying: In his Exam. c. 9. p. 120.
Diverse both of the Greek and Latin Church, were spotted with errors about
Freewil, Merits, Invocation of Saints etc.

Yea the ancient Jews did so firmly believe our Doctrine of Freewil, that to
omit the c. 15. 12. 15. 16. 17.
cleerest words of Ecclesiasticus, which D. Whitakers had no other ways Resp
ad Camp. Rat. 1. p. 15.
to euade, but by denying the said book to be Canonical Scripture: D. Fulk
terms: Defense of the Eng. Transl. p. 320.
The Jewish Rabbis, Patrons of Freewil; which D. Morton Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p.
371.
iustifyeth, and further says: Ibid. p. 370.
What if it be confessed that some Rabbis maintained the liberty of man's Will,
as Rabbi Moses did? Yea M. Hal charge the Pharisees Pharisaisme. p. 50.
with Freewil and Merit, which is more then either Christ or his Apostles did,
who yet in other respects spared not to discover their true Errors.

Well then, our Catholic Doctrine of Freewil, is the Primitive Doctrine taught
by S. Gregory, Hierome, Epiphanius, Nazianzene, Basil, the Council of Nice,
Chrysostom, Athanasius, Lactantius, Cyprian, Origin, Tertulian, Theophilus,
Iustine, Athenagoras, Tatianus, Clemens Alexand. Ireneus, Hermes, and by all the
Fathers since the Apostles until Luthers time. Our strongest witnesses hereof,
are the Protestant Writers: The Centurists, Beza, Osiander, Hamelmannus,
Schultetus, Calum, Humfrey, Abbot, Hal, Morton, Whiteguift, Fulk and Whitaker.

It is granted by Protestants that the Fathers of the Primitive Church, taught
not only Faith, but likewise Good works truly to justify: And that the said
works are meritorious of Grace and Glory. CHAP. XXI.
COncerning Good-works: It is the general Se Bellarmin. De Iustificatione l. 1.
4. 5.
and received doctrine of the Roman Church, First, that the works of the just
are truly good, and not of their own nature sin. Secondly, that not only
Faith, but likewise good works do truly justify a man and obtain remission
of sins. Thirdly that the same good works do truly merit or deserve Grace in
this world, and glory in the next.

Directly Luther. in Assert. art. 31. 32. 36. Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. ^^. 4.
and c. 41.. 9. etc. 19.. 2. 4. 7. etc. 15. 2.
contrary to all the foresaid points concerning Goodworks, is the ordinary
doctrine of our new Protestants; First, affirming that the best works of the
just, are of their own natures deadly sin. S^condly, that only Faith does
justify. Thirdly, and lastly, that works do neither merit Grace nor glory.

To come now to the doctrine and Faith of the Primitive Church; The Cen^. 6. c.
10. col. 748.
Centurists making a Catalogue of S. Gregory's pretended errors, amongst the
rest number his Error of good works and Justification. And Cent. 6. p. 288.
Osiander much reproves him for that, he attributes over much to good works.
S. Augustine is rejected by In Confess. Wittemb.
Brentius, for that the taught, Affiance in man's merits toward remission of
Sins. The Harmony of Confess in English. sec. 16. p. 509.
Divines of Wittemberg affirm that, These reasons which Augustine brings for
his opinion of Purgatory, do seem to lean to this foundation: That we
obtain remission of our sins and life, not only for Christ his sake, through
Faith; but also for the merits of our works. And for the same doctrine of Merit
of works, he is further reprehended by Cent. 4. p. 520.
Osiander, the Cent. 5. col. 507. 1133.
Centurists, Instit. l. 3. c. 11. 15.
Calvin, l. 1. Ep. p. 290 and in Consil. Theol. p. 240. And see Colloq.
Altemberg. fol. 307. Field of the Church. l. 3. c. 42 p. 170.
Melancthon, and D. Field. So likewise the Cent. 5. col. 1178.
Centurie-writers speaking of S. Chrysostom affirm, that, Chrysostom handles
impurely the doctrine of Justification, and attributes merit to works. They
likewise say of Prosper, Cent. 5. c. 10. col. 1363.
that, he retained not a few freckles of his Age: Such an one is, that Faith
only does not justify. Luther In Gal. c. 4. And after the English Translation
fol. 220.
terms S. Hierom, Ambrose, Austin and others, Iustice-worke^s (or as the
English Translation thereof has, Merit-mongers) of the old Papacy. And because
he and his children confirm their doctrine of sole Faith by certain
sentences, especially taken out of S. Paul's Epistles to the Romans and
Galathians, which they wrest to another sense, then ever was given by the
ancient Fathers, hence he makes this complaint saying: In Colloq. Conuiual. c.
de Patribus Ecclesiae.
Neither are there any works extant of the Fathers upon the Epistle either to
the Romans or to the Galathians, in which any thing pure and sincere may be
found. But of S. Hierome in particular, because he contrarieth his Exposition
of the said Epistles, he avouches, that Tom. 5. in Ep. ad Gal. c. 3. f. 348.
and Tom 2. de seruo Arbitrio. f. 473. Et in Ep. ad Brentium quae praefixa est
Brentii Com. in Oseam. And see him in c. 5. ad Gal.
he was deceived by Origin, and that he understood nothing at al in S. Paul,
but depraved the Justice of only Faith: And that this one error of his was so
great, that it alone was sufficient to destroy the Ghospel, by which if it had
not been (says Luther) through the singular Grace of God, Hierome had merited
rather Hell then Heaven.

The Centurists having proved at large, that neither Lactantius, Chromatius,
Ephrem, Theophilus, S. Hierome, S. Gregory Nyssene, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S.
Hilarie, nor S. Ambrose ever acknowledged their manner of Justification by
Faith only, infer thereupon: Cent. 4. col. 292. 293.
Now let the Godly Reader imagine with himself, how far this Age touching this
Article went astray from the doctrine of the Apostles. And see the Fathers of
the Fourth Age, further disliked therein by Cent. 4. p. 102 506 520. 430. 70
Osiander and Exam. part. 4. p. 110.
Chemnitius.

But to arise to the Third Age, In Romans p. 391.
Melancthon affirms that, Origin, and many (others) following him, imagined
that men were just by reason of their works. The Cent. 3. col 265. 266
Centurists plainly confess, that, Origin made good works the cause of
Justification. Ibid. col 79.
And speaking of the Fathers of that Age, they acknowledge that, They
attributed to good works, Justice before God; as Origin l. 1. in Job. etc. And
that as then, for the most part this cheifest article of Justification seems
to have been obscured. In Apoc. p. 206.
Winkelmannus does clearly grant that, Origin ascribes to works, the cause of
Justification. Yea the Centurists C^nt. 3. col. 80
affirm that, Origin in many places ascribes to works, the preparation and
cause of Salvation, as trac. in Math. and hom. ^4. in Iosuam and 26. he
ascribes to our merits Gods dwelling in us, by his Grace. In which respect
also Beza accuses Origin In Act. c. 10 46.
of horrible blasphemy. The Centurists speaking of this Third Age, avouch
that, ^ent 3. c. 4. col. 53 79 80 8. and Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 292. Cent. 5. c.
4. col 504. etc. 10.
This Article (of Justification by only Faith) was almost altogether obscured,
and that the Doctors of that time declined more from the true doctrine of
Christ and of the Apostles, then of the Age before. Hence among others of this
and the succeeding Age that they pretend to have erred herin, they name S.
Clement, Tertulian, Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S.
Chrysostom, S. Cyril, Theophilus, Lactantius, Eusebius, Chromatius, Ephrem, S.
Gregory Nyssene, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Hilarie, S. Leo, Saluianus,
Esichius, Prosper, Maximus and Paulinus. In like sort they report of S. Cyprian
that, He attributes overmuch to good wooks. And Medulla Theol. p. 370.
Schultetus reprehendeth him, for that, In his Sermon de Lapsis, he ascribes
forgiveness of sins to Satisfactions. And the Cent. 3. col. 240.
Centurists confess the same in the self same words of Tertulian. But D.
Whitaker In Resp ad rat. Came. rat. 5. p. 78
with Chemnitius Exam. part. 4 p. 110.
and Melancthon In suis libelli aliquot. fol. 25.
do al of them avouch that, Not Cyprian only but almost all the most holy
Fathers of that time were in that error, as thinking so to pay the pain due
to sin, and to satisfy Gods Justice. Melancthon acknowledges that, In 1.
Cor. c. 3.
Presently from the beginning of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured the
doctrine concerning the Justice of Faith etc. So likewise in general it is
confessed by the Cent. 3. col. 80.
Centurists, that, The Doctors of this Age declined from the true doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles concerning works.

But to ascend yet higher: The Centurists speaking of the second Age after
Christ, affirm that, Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 60. 61.
The Doctrine of Justification was delivered more negligently and obscurely by
the Doctors of this Age. As also, This Article, the highest and chiefest of
al, by little and little through the craft of the Devil, began to be obscured.
And again say they, It appears out of the writings of Clemens Alexandrinus,
that in his Age, the Doctrine concerning the end of good works, began to be
obscured. Finally, The times ensuing declare sufficiently, that the doctrine of
Faith justifying without works, began forthwith to be more and more varied and
obscured.

Schultetus Medulla Theol. p. 48. 122. 151. And see Cent. 2. c. 4. and Cent. 3.
c. 4.
confesses the Doctrine of Merit of works, in Clemens Alexandrinus,
Theophilus, Cyprian, Justin Martyr etc. And D. Humfrey Jesuit. part. 2. p. 530.
his opinion is that, Cent. 3. col. 247.
It may not be denied, but that Ireneus, Clemens, and others called
Apostolical, have in their writings the opinions of Freewil, and Merit of
works. Schultetus Medul. Theol. p. 467.
also charge the book of Hermes entitled Pastor, with Merit and
justification of works. And In his Defend. of Parkins p. 339. 340.
M. Wotton not forbeareth to tax for this very point of Merit, Ignatius
cyting for the same his Epistle to the Romans, and only answering in this
unworthy namer: I say plainly this man's testimony is nothing worth, because
he was of little judgment in Divinity. But what may then be thought of M.
Woottons no divinity or of Woottons greatest impudency thus censuring that
ancientest Martyr of Christ, and scholar of S. John.

Yea this Doctrine of Merit was so universal as that D. Couel In his Exam. c.
9. p. 120.
writes that, Diverse both of the Greek and Latin Church, were spotted with
errors about Freewil, Merits etc. Luther after his Censure given against
diverse of the Fathers in particular, pronounces of them in general thus: In
Col. Conuiual. c. De Patribus Ecclesiae.
See ye what darkness there is in the Fathers writings concerning Faith; for
when that Article of the Justification of men is covered with darkness, it can
by no means be, that greater errors he avoided. Bullinger does In Apoc. Sermon.
87. fol. 270.
acknowledge that, The doctrine of Merits, satisfaction, and Justification of
works did incontinently after the Apostles time lay their first foundations
Calvin affirms in general that, Inst. l. 3. c. 25.. 2.
The ancient Writers of the Church using every where the word (Merit) gave
occasion of error to posterity thereby. Add lastly, that D. Whiteguift In his
Def. against the Reply of Carthw. p. 472. 473.
treating of Doctrine taught in any Age since the Apostles time, affirms
without al other exception either of Age or Father that, Almost all the Bishops
and learned Writers of the Greek Church, and Latin also, for the most part were
spotted with doctrines of Freewil of Merits etc. And the same is likewise
taught by De Eccl. cont. Bellar. p. 299.
D. Whitakers.

Now concerning the ancient Jews: The Books of c. 12 9. and 4.10.
Tobie and Ecclesiasticus c. 3. 33.
are so pregnant for the Merit of works, that sundry Protestants say thereof:
Minist. of Lincoln Dioces. in their Abridgment. p. 76.
The two places of Tobie and Ecclesiasticus tend dangerously to the Justifying
of the Merit of Almsdeeds. And others writing against the book of Homilies
say: ^ilenced Ministers in the 2. Part of Def. p. 164.
The book of Homilies whereto we are required to subscribe etc. expoundes
Tobie, saying, that Alms is profitable to purge the soul from the spots of
sin, alleging these words of Tobie 4.10. and 12.19. etc. and out of
Ecclesiasticus etc. Yea they further say, This Ib. p. 166.
place of Tobie were it Canonical etc. is very pregnant for the Merit of
works, and as strong for it, as the Scriptures are for the merit of Christ.

Buxdorfius also writes of the Rabbis that Synagog. Iudaica. p. 23.
They persuade themselves that they may satisfy for their sins by doing
penance upon their skins, and that they may easily merit eternal life by
keeping of the Commandments, and Good works. And the same also is acknowledged
in them by Pharisaisme p. 13. 50.
M. Hal. I may then conclude, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church are our
firmest Patrons for our Catholic Doctrine concerning Good-works, confessedly
teaching: First, that Good-works do truly justify: Secondly, Meriting Grace and
Remission of sins in this life, and eternal glory in the next: For which
very doctrine the Fathers acknowledged by Protestants, are S. Gregory,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Prosper, Ambrose, Hierom, Nyssene, Nazianzene, Hilarie,
Ephrem, Cyprian, Origin, Tertulian, Theophilus, Lactantius, Justin, Clemens
Alex. Ireneus, Hermes, Ignatius, and the ancient believing Jews.

The Protestant Writers producing and charging the foresaid Fathers are Luther,
the Centurists, Brentius, the Divines of Wittemberg, Osiander, Calvin,
Melancthon, Chemnitius, Winkilmamus, Schultetus, Bullinger, Buxdorfeus, Wotton,
Whitaker, Humfrey, Couel, and Whiteguift.

It is acknowledged by Protestants that the Ceremonies now used by the Roman
Church in the ministering of service or Sacrifice, as also of the Sacraments,
were formerlie used by the Bishops, Priests and Fathers of the Primitive
Church. CHAP. XXII.
Having thus passed through so many particular Controversies of greatest
weight, and finding in all of them a perfect agreement and sweetest harmony
between the ancient, most holy and Primitive Church, and the present Roman
Catholic Church, and this by no weaker proofs or evidences, then the free
grants, Confessions, and acknowledgments of our sworn and professed
Adversaries; I will now, for my Conclusion in this kind, only examen one point
further, which being not purely Doctrinal but most sensible and external, will
thereby not only prove most accommodate to the sense and capacity of the
meanest Reader, but withal will most evidently declare and make manifest, the
outward gracious and beautiful face of Christian Religion practiced by the
ancient, learned, and holy Bishops, Doctors and people of the Primitive
Church.

Nothing is better known either to those of greater years, who as yet may well
remember the Ecclesiastical rites and Customs of our own kingdom, or to
others more modern, who have travailed foreign Nations, then the external
Ceremonies used in Material Churches, in Celebration of Service, and
Administration of the most holy Sacraments: For who knows not that when
Catholic Churches are erected, they are specially consecrated, and dedicated
either to Christ, or some of his Saints? That in them are several Chancels,
and Vestries, as also Altars, Candles, Relics and Images? that there are
truly Priests who offer daily external Sacrifice at the Altar? Whose Vestments
and vessels are specially hallowed? who likewise observe Canonical hours,
saying some prayers in Secret, others with a loud voice? sometimes giving the
people their benediction, and burning Incense at the Altar? In the Church
likewise there is a Font, specially hallowed for the administration of
Baptism, which is holden necessary to Salvation, and the same is ministered
with the Sign of the Cross, with holy Oils, and sundry other Ceremonies
hereafter specifyed: And to omit sundry other; In the Church is blessed by the
Priest, Holiewater, Holie-bread, Candles, Ashes etc. I need not describe the
naked walls of Protestants Churches, or the bare black coats of their wedded
Ministers, both of them deuoyd of al grace, ornament, purity and state, duly
befitting places and persons Ecclesiastical: And therefore I hasten to the
confessed practice of the Primitive Church.

Wherein I first find, that when Material Churches were first built, they were
specially hallowed by the Bishop; so much as S. Gregory and S. Austin are
reproved by D. Humfrey In Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 5. p. 5. and 627.
for bringing into England, the new Consecration of Churches. And the Cent. 6.
col. 364. 365.
Centurie-writers do charge S. Gregory out of his own writings with
Consecration of Churches. D. Morton affirms that he used Prot. Appeal. l. 1.
p. 53.
Superstitious manner of Consecration of Churches. Yea the Cent. 4. col. 408.
further confess, that Athanasius in his Apology to Constantin plainly
shows that Christians did not assemble together in Churches not consecrated.
And that in the Fourth Age, the Fathers used Cent. 4. col. 497.
Sumptuous Churches consecrated, and Superstitious Insolency in celebrating of
Mass, appointed to be said in no places but such as were hallowed by a Bishop.
Cent. 4. col. 497.
Yea they reprove Constantin himself, for that (say they) concerning
Consecration of Churches new built, proud adorning of them, and other
Superstitious things the greatest part Constantine invented and spread abroad
in many Churches. And whereas Sozomene hist. l. 1. c. 8. reports that
Constantin, when he went to the wars, used to carry about with him a
Tabernacle made in form of a Church, to the end that a Consecrated house
should not be wanting either to himself living in the Deserts, or to his Army
etc. And that, Priests and Deacons did daily attend upon the Tabernacle; the
truth hereof is so certain, that it is confessed by Crispinus. Of the Estate of
the Church. p. 89.
But for further testimony of hallowing of Churches in those ancient times,
see D. Fulk Against Rhem. Test. in 1. Thim. 4. see 13. fol. 378.
the Centurie-writers Cent. 4. col. 408.
and Crispinus. Of the Estate of the Church. p. 93.


Secondly, these Consecrated Churches were dedicated in memory of Christ or
some of his Saints: In which respect, S. Gregory is charged by Chron. l. 4.
p. 567. 568.
Carrion to have Commanded Churches to be dedicated to the bones and Ashes of
Saints. M. Mason affirms that, Consecration of Engl. Bishops p. 57.
In Canterbury the Regal City, even when Austin arrived, there was a
Christian Church built in the time of the Romans, dedicated to the Memory of
S. Martin. And whereas Eusebius de vita Constantini l. 3. c. 47. relates, that,
Constantin erected Churches in the honor of Martyrs, And ( l. 4. c. 58. 59.)
dedicated a most sumptious Church in Memory of our Sauiour's Apostles; the
Cent. 4. col. 408.
Centurists speaking hereof, say: These Dedications seem to have sprung from
Iudaisme without any Commandment of God, Yea Cent. 4. col. 452.
they further confess, that, Constantin appointed a very Solemn Feast for
the Dedication of the Church. And Brightman Apoc. in c. 12. p. 325.
acknowledges that at Constantins coming in etc. Temples were Consecrated to
Martyrs. Yea says D. Beard: Retractiue from Romish Religion. p. 388 389.
The Annual Feasts of Dedication of Churches grew from a sinister imitation of
Constantin the Great, who because he kept a Solemn day at the Dedication of a
certain Church, which he had built, therefore it was received as a law etc. to
solemnize every year a Holiday upon the day of the Dedication of their Church.

Thirdly, in the Churches was built a place several, for the laying up of holy
things, called the Vestrie; whereof the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 835.
allege the Laodicen Council saying: It is not fit that Subdeacons have
liberty to go into the Vestrie, and touch our Lords vessels. Yea they Cent.
4. col. 409. And see Osiand. cent. 5. p. 391.
acknowledge the Vestrie to be mentioned by S. Ambrose l. 1. offic. c. 50.

Fourthly, as concerning Chancels, D. Raynolds In his Conference with M. Heart
p. 488.
confesses from S. Denis the Areopagite, that in his time there were Chancels
severed with Sanctification from the rest of the Church. And Hospinian De
Templis p. 85.
makeh mention of Chancels used in Constantins time. And the Centurists Cent.
4. col. 1165. Hospin. do Templis p. 85. 86. 87.
affirm that Lay-persons were prohibited to come into the Chancels. Osiander
Cent. 4. p. 390.
charge the Laodicen Council as Superstitious herein.

Fifthly, but nothing was more diligently regarded and observed in Churches then
sacred Altars: S. Gregory is charged by the Centurists Cent. 6. col. 369.
with Consecration of Altars. And Osiander Cent. 6. p 289. 290.
affirms that Augustine (sent by S. Gregorye) thrust upon the English Churches
the Roman Rites and Customs, to wit, Altars etc. Peter Martyr In his Common
places in English. part. 4. p. 225.
writes that, Petrus Alexandrinus attributes more to the outward Altar, then
to the lively temples of Christ. He further Ibid. p. 226.
confesses that, Optatus l. 6. against Parmenianus says, what is the Altar?
Even the Seat of the body and blood of Christ. Such sayings as these (says
Peter Martyr) edifyed not the people: And for the self same Saying, is Optatus
reproved by the Centurie-writers. Cent. 4. c. 6. col. 409.
Hospinian de Templis. p. 98. And see p. 101. 459. 460 100.
says, I dare not deny but that in the time of Constantin the great, Stately
Temples, Stately and beautiful Altars took their beginning, and the same were
fixed, and of stone. The Centurists Cent. 4. col. 409.
speaking of the same Age, affirm that, The Histories of this time testify
that there were Altars in the Churches etc. but this Custom came into the
Church of Christ from the Jewish custom. But Praetorius De Sacramentis. 287.
arises higher, auouching that Anno 262. Pope Sixtus the Second abrogated the
tables hitherto used, and erected Altars, which (says he) better represent
Iudaisme then Christianisme. M. Carthwright ^n his 2. Reply part. 1. p. 517.
And see Jacob in his Reasons taken out of Gods word etc. p. 58.
thinks that, Ignatius calls the Communion Table improperly an Altar. Yea
he ^n his 2. Reply part. last. p. 264
reproves the Fathers in general saying: The ancient Writers abuse herein, may
easily appear, in that, in this too great liberty of speech, they used to call
the holy supper of the Lord, a Sacrifice, and the Communion table, an Altar.
In like sort says Peter Martyr, In his Com. plac. part. 4. p. 225.
The Fathers should not with so much liberty have seemed here and there to
have abused the name (Altar.) So plain it is, that Altars consecrated were
used in those ancientest times of the Primitive Church.

Sixthly, upon these Altars were placed lights or Candles: M. Bale In Act. Romans
pontif. p. 44.
confesses that S. Gregory gave lights to Churches. And D. Morton says of
him: Prot. Appeal. l. 1. p. 57. Margin.
He indeed requires lights, but not that thereby he might burn day etc. Which
may seem to have been rather the institution of his Successor Sabinianus, for
etc. But our late Writer, D. Beard proves the same from Retractiue from Romans
Relig. p. 65.
the decree of (our) own Popes Gregory the First, and Sabinian his
Successor; the one of which appointed certain lands for the maintenance of
waxe-c^ndles and Lamps in Churches; and the other ordained, that burning
lamps should be always kept in their Churches. The Cent. 4. col. 487.
Centurists charge Constantin, that He ordained the burning of Candles in the
Churches in the daytime. And again say Cent. 4. col. 410.
they: Eusebius has reported that wax-Candles and Lamps were burned in the
daytime, in the places of the Assemblies by Constantin the great. In like sort
Crispinus Of the Estate of the Church. p. 93.
thinks that, In Constantines time many Ceremonies il-agreing with Gods Word
were brought in; as Candles lighted in the daytime. M. Beard affirms that,
In Retractiue from Romish Religion p. 66.
Hieroms Age this Superstition (of Candles lighted in the daytime) began to
grow upon the Church. Yea the Cent. 4. col. 454.
Centurists acknowledge that, Wax candles were accustomed to be carried at
Burials. And that, Priests did carry before the Corse, Lamps and wax-candles:
Cent. 4. col. 453.
And that, Funeral-rites and Ceremonies in this Age (of Constantin)
Superstition (say they) increasing, were heaped up, partly from Heathenisme,
partly from Iudaisme. Seauenthly, as for the use of Images in Churches, in the
time of the Primitive Church, the same is proved at large in the Chapter See
before l. 2. c. 14.
of Images.

Eighthly, D. Raynolds In his Conference with M. Har. p. 552.
confesses that, Altars and Sacrifice are linked by nature in Relation and
mutual dependence one of another; Whereupon it does evidently follow, that
Aultars being used in Churches in the ancientest times, true external Sacrifice
was likewise used, which Sacrifice to have been the Sacrifice of the Mass, I
have largely proved in the Sea before. l. 2. c. 9.
Chapter of Mass. Now because true and proper Sacrifice can not be offered at
the Altar but by a Priest, therefore in the Primitive Church there were true
Priests, whose Ordination was ever by a Bishop, and not by the Laity. The
Cent. 4. col. 435.
Centurists confess that, The Constitutions of the Laodicen Council forbad
Ordinations by the judgment of the multitude: And that, They were desired of
that Bishop who had authority to give Orders, as appears (say they) by the
Fourth Epistle of Basil to Gregory, and the Thirtith, to the Cesareans. And
elsewhere Cent. 4. col. 489.
they say expressly that, The ordination of Ministers was proper to the Bishop.
And as for the word, Priest (so hateful now to our Protestant Clergy) it was
so usual in the Primitive Church, as that In his Defense p. 411.
D. Whiteguift says: This name, Priest, is usually applied to the Minister of
the Ghospel in all Histories, Fathers, and Writers of Antiquity. The like is
acknowleged by L. 9. cont. Dur. p. 813.
D. Whitaker, who only answers, that the Fathers used the word, Sacerdos,
Priest, not properly, but by abuse of speech; an answer directly contrary to
the express words of S. Austin himself De Ciuit. Dei l. 20. c. 10. But D. Fulk
Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 14. see 4. f. 210. Willet. in his Synop. Controu.
13. p. 482.
and D. Willet do both of them reprove the Fathers, for their using the word,
Priest, properly.

Yea the Priests of the Primitive Church were (as ours still are) specially
anointed, in so much as S. Cyprian in his Sermon de Chrismate, mentioning the
same, is therefore reproved by Exam. part. 2. p. 247.
Chemnitius. They had also their Crowns shaven, for M. Brightman Apoc. in c.
9. p. 249.
confesses, that the Fathers used to entreat Priests, by their Tonsure or
shauing, as now (we may see) in the Epistles of Hierome and Augustine. And
Medulla Patrum. p. 484.
Schultetus affirms that, Dyonisius the Areopagite, in his book of
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, writes many things of Temples, Altars,
Sacred-places, the Quier, Consecration of Mo^ks, the Tonsure and shauing of
heads.

Ninthly, the Priests used also consecrated vestments, and vessels, for the
celebration of Mass, and other offices of the Church. The Cent. 4 col. 504.
Centurists affirm that, S. Athanasius mentions Ecclesiastical vestments,
and ornaments, and other things necessary for the Church. De Sacramentis p. 44.
Zepperus avouches that, The Ministers (or Priests) used in the celebration of
this Mystery (of the Eucharist) a peculiar kind of apparel, which they termed
holy; neither was it lawful for Priests to wear them, but in the celebration
of the Eucharist; yea they were not to be touched by any (persons) but such as
were sacred; which invention the first Decretal Epistle of Pope Stephen
refers to himself. Of the Cross part. 1. sec. 36. p. 52. And see Hut. 2 in
his 2. part. of the Answ. and p. 194. 195. 196. Whiteguift in his Def. p. 268.
270.
M. Parker grants in general, The Fathers will have the Garments to be
Religious, that are used in the Church; in proof whereof he cites in the
Margent, Origin and Hierome.

And to descend to particulars, whereas Theodoret l. 2. c. 27. reports that,
Constantin gave to the Bishop of Jerusalem a (Cope) or precious garment,
wrought with gold to administer Baptism, the same is confessed by In his
Persuasion to uniformity. c. 5. p. 19. whyteg. in his Def. p. 269.
M. Spark and D. Whiteguift; in so much as Ibid. p. 268.
M. Carthwright testifyeth: Theodoret makes mention of a golden Cope. The
Centurists Cent. 4. col. 876.
confess, that in the Fourth Age the Albe was used, and In his Persuasion to
uniform. c. 5. p. 19.
M. Spark alleges sundry ancient Fathers, al mentioning the Albe. D.
Raynolds In his Confer. c. 8. diuis. 4.
acknowledges, that in the Liturgies of S. Basil and S. Chrysostom, are
mentioned the Amice, the Girdle, the Chisible and the Fanel: The Centurists
Cen^. 4. col. 835.
likewise confess, that as then, was used the Stole: And D. Whiteguift In his
Def. p. 269. 270.
admits the Dalmatica to be used in S. Cyprians time, and alleges Peter
Martyr to be of the same mind; who In his Epistles annexed to his com. plac. in
Engl. p. 119. And Whiteg. in his Def. p. 264. 268.
likewise relates, that as then was used the Bishops Pontifical Plate, or
Miter: and Ibid. p. 269.
D. Whiteguift avouches the same to have been worn by S. Cyprian.

The Centurists Cent. 4. col. 835. And Osian. cent. 4. p. 391.
likewise report, that in the Fourth Age, were used by Priests in Churches,
Holy vessels, which Subdeacons (and Lay persons) might not touch, And Cent. 4.
col. 490.
they mention the then Careful committing of the holy Chalice, to the Priests
Custody. D. Sutilisse De M^ssa Papist. ca. l. 5. c. 7. f. 96.
says: We do not deny the Church, as Chrysostom says, hom. 4. in Math. and
de S. Babila, to have had holy vessels, and the same not to be touched by
laymen. Yea the Centurists Cent. 4. col. 504. And see col. 409. And Chem.
Exam. part. p. 26.
affirm, that Theodoret, l. 3. c. 12. shows, that the Church of Antioch, had
many precious vessels, which Constantin and Constantius gave to it. And they
mention Cent. 4. col. 873. 874.
likewise, the yet controuerted rites of Chalice, Paten, Cruet full of water,
Towel, Wax-candle for Church lights, book of Exorcismes etc.

Tenthly, the Priests, thus furnished with sacred vestments and vessels, not
only offered Sacrifice, but likewise observed Canonical Hours of prayer in the
Church: In so much as the Centurists, Cent. 4. col. 433. And see Bullingers
Decades. Decr. 5. p. 937.
charge the Fourth Age, with observation of Canonical Hours: And with Cent. 4.
col. 433.
Rising in the night to prayer: And with Cent. 4. col. 459.
using set form of Prayer: And Litanies Ib. col. 433. 414. 411.
As also, with Cent. 4. col. 1329. And Osiand. cent. 4. p. 454.
numbering prayers upon little stones (or beads) yea they Cent. 3. col. 134.
charge the Third Age, saying: Tertullian, in his book of Fasting, affirms
those Three Hours, to wit, the Third, the Sixth, and the Ninth to have been
more famous in divine prayers. And Cyprian in the Lords prayer, calls the
Prime, the Third, the Sixth, and Ninth, the Hours of praying anciently
observed. And they Cent. 3. col. 135.
further Confess, that as the^, Christians prayed with their face turned
toward the East; as Tertulian affirms in his Apology etc. And that in the
holy Sacrifice some prayers were said in Secret, others audibly. In so much as
Osiander recyteth, and dislyketh these words of the Laodicen Council: Let three
prayers be said; one in silence, the second, and third, vocally (or andibly)
and then let the kiss of Peace be given: And after the Priests have given the
Pax to the Bishop, then let it be given to the Laity, and so the Sacrifice
offered: But let it be allowed only to the Clergy, to come unto the Altar, and
there Communicate.

Eleuenthly, amongst other prayers used by the Priests in the Church, were
ordinary such, whereby Sundry Creatures were hallowed and consecrated, as
Water, Bread, Oil, Ashes, the Font for Baptism, and the like. S. Gregory is
reproved by the Centurists, and Osiander, for his using and Sprinkling of
Holie-water. D. Morton affirms that, Prot. Appeal. l 1. p. 56.
True it is, that Aqua lustralis (Holie-water) was used, but etc. as an
Invention of Pope Alexander; who lived Anno 109. after Christ etc. And it was
applied in the days of Gregory by Augustine, to the Consecration of Churches,
together with prayers for the casting out of the filth of Idols and Devils.
And of further use of Holie-water in the Primitive Church, see D. Fulk Fulk
against Rhe^. Test. in 1. Ti. 4. sec. 13. fol. 378. Parkins in Problem. p. 136.
and M. Parkins.

Holie-bread is affirmed so plainly by S. Austin (de pec. merit. and remiss. l.
2. c. 26.) that D. Fulk Against He^kins etc. p. 377.
does therefore term it: A Superstitious bread, given in S. Austins time, to
those that were Catechumens, instead of the Sacrament. And Of the Mass p. 51.
Philip Morney charge S. Basils Liturgy, with Holie-bread, distributed after
Service, to such as had not Communicated.

And as for Holy oil, or Chrisme, the Centurists Cent. 6. col 367.
charge S. Gregory, out of his own wrytings, with Consecration of Chrisme and
oil. Yea they Cent. 4. col. 865 503 1274 869.
confess, that in the Fourth Age, there was Consecration of Chrisme by a
Bishop only: And that, Cent. 4. col. 420.
Optatus shows that Chrisme was accustomed to be kept in a bottle. Yea they
Cent. 5. col. 1386.
relate of S. Martin that, A Maid dumb from her Mothers womb. being brought
unto him, pouring Holy oil into her, and praying, he made her speak well. But
Hamelmanus De Tradit. Apost. 707. 737. Parkar against Symbolizing etc part. 1.
sec. 11. p. 76.
and M. Parker do both of them confess, that S. Denis the Areopagite, makes
mention in his writings of Chrisme.

In like Sort is S. Gregory reproved by M. Bale, In Act. Romans Pont. p. 44. etc.
for Consecration of Ashes etc. And for Dedicating the beginning of Lentfast,
with sprinkling of Ashes.

12. But most observed, and sundry were the Ceremonies of Baptism. S.
Gregory is charged by the Centurists, Cent. 6. col. 367.
with Consecration of the Font of Baptism. And they charge the Fathers of the
Cent. 4. col. 415.
Fourth and Cent. 3. col. 82.
third Age, with consecration of the water of Baptism, with Abrenunciation,
Exorcisme, Anoyling, threefold Immersion: And they Cent. 3. col. 8^.
say expressly of S. Cyprian, that he, In his first book, and tweluth Epistle
affirms, that the water must be first purifyed and Sanctified by the Priest,
that it may by baptism, wash away the sins of the man that is baptized; for
which very saying, he is also reproved by M. Parker Against Symbolizing etc.
prat. 1 sec. 35. p. 112 113. Hamelman. de Tradit. Apost. l. 2. c. 7. col. 97.
and Hamelmannus.

In Baptism was likewise used the sign of the Cross: So the Centurists Cent.
3. col. 125. And M. Spark in his Persuasion to uniform. p. 23.
confess, that Origin in his 2. Hom. upon the 38. Ps. shows, that those who
were Baptized, were accustomed to be signed with the sign of the Cross: of
which Rite, Tertulian also makes mention, in his book De Resurrectione
Carnis: And Cyprian also, in his book of baptizing Heretics, mentions the
Imposition of hands, with prayer and Siging. And D. Beard confesses that,
Retractiue from Romish Relig. p. 391.
The Cross and anointing (in Baptism) are of great Antiquity. Such as were
Baptized were also anoyled with holy Chrisme. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sec. 43.
Calvin says: If any man will defend those Inventions with antiquity, I am
not ignorant, how ancient the use of Chrisme, and exufflation, is in baptism;
how little from the Apostles Age, the supper of the Lord was touched withrust
etc. Perkins In the 2. vol. of his works. p. 653.
confesses that, Cent. 4. p. 390.
This Unction pertained to Baptysme in the West, til above 300. years after
Christ. Cent. 6. col. 364. 365. Osiand. cent. 6. p. 289. 290.
And Zepperus Politia Eccl. l. 1. c. 12. p 123.
mentioning Holie-water, oil, salt, exorcisme, spitle etc. says: I confess,
these Superstitious Ceremonies are very ancient in the Church, and not many
Ages after the Apostles times; and in further Ibid. p. 124. 125
proof thereof, he alleges those most famous and ancient Fathers S. Austin,
S. Cyprian, and Tertullian.

And as concerning Exorcismes, Exufflations and other ancient rites of
Baptism, Compend. loc. 33. p. 264.
Gesnerus avouches that, Exorcisme in Baptism is much more ancient then
Papistrie; for Nazianzene, Cyril, Cyprian, Ambrose and Austin make mention
thereof in many places. The like acknowledgement whereof is also made by Common
places part. 4. c. 9. see 14. 15. p. 132. 133.
Peter Martyr. M. Parker affirms, from the many testimonies of Cyprian and
Tertulian, by him alleged in the Marge^t, saying: Against Symbolizing wi^^
Antichrist. part. 2. sec. 8* p. 128
I know right well, that within the 200. years after Christ, there were crept
into the Church many idle Ceremonies etc. There began in this mixed Age,
Exufflation of the Baptized: Consecration of the Font with Oil and Cross:
Oil in Baptism: The reserving of the Sacrament: Exorcisme: Offering, and
Prayer for the dead: Fasting on certain days with opinion of necessity and
Satisfaction, and the seed of Monkerie: See then (says M. Parker) among what
weeds the Cross grew up and in what a danged soil of many Superstitions etc.
Ib. part. 1. p. 152. And part. 2 p 131.
Yea he further alleges Nazianzene reporting, that, Julian agreably to our
present Protestants) laughed at the Sufflations of Baptism. But Beza In Epist.
Theol. ep. 8. p. 79.
says in general, I can not sufficiently admire all that decking, wherewith even
the most ancient (Fathers) thought they could adorn Baptism, and the Lords
Supper. And having recited sundry of the former Rites, used as himself
confesses, even by the most ancient, he yet terms them, Stage Plays,
follies; And further thus concludes: Verily those that make the Apostles
Authors of these follies, need no confutation, though they be never so ancient
Writers: So insinuating the former Ceremonies to be ascribed even to the
Apostles themselves by most ancient Writers.

But to conclude, so great was the respect, which ancient Fathers had to holy
Ceremonies, as that with the planting of true Faith and religion, special care
was had of Sacred Rites and Ceremonies, as an external ornament thereof. Jesuit.
part. 2 (...) 5. p. 5. and 627.
D. Humfrey demanding, what Gregory and Austin brought into the (English)
Church? answers, A burden of Ceremonies etc. They brought in the Archbishops
Palle for the Solemnities of Mass, Purgatory etc. The oblation of the
wholesome Host, and prayers for the dead etc. Relics etc. Transubstantiation
etc. new Consecrations of Temples etc. of al which, what else was sought, then
that Indulgences, Monachisme, Papistrie, and the whole Chaos of Popish
Superstition should be built? These things Augustine the great Monk, taught by
Gregory the Monk, brought unto the English. But yet more particularly says
Cent. 6. p. 289. 290.
Luke Osiander; Augustine thrust upon the English Churches, the Roman Rates and
Custome^ to wit, Altars, Vestments, Images, Masses, Chalices, Crosses,
Candlesticks, Censors, Ba^ners, Sacred vessels, Holy waters, and even the
books of Roman Ceremonies. Accordingly says Prot Appeal. l. 1. p 53 58.
D. Morton; In the Innouating, and multiplying of new Rites, Gregory himself
was not the lea^ Agent. As also, Be it known to al our Adversaries, that the
too many Ceremonies used by S. Gregory, can not excuse their now far more
multitudes, nor can some of his not good, justify their (...) worse Rites etc.
In Praef. noui Testam, ad Principem Condenser
Beza speaking of the times of Augustine, Chrysostom, and Cypria^ affirms
that, Cent. 4. col. 417. 418 419. and cent. 3. col. 114. 115 116. And see
Eobanus in his libel. Theolog. p. 230.
Some Bishops etc. applied themselves to the building of Stately Temples etc.
(...) the increasing of Ceremonies etc. And that others, would not only not
repress open Superstition arising, but also would mayntaine them. And a little
after he aoucheth directly that, At the same time etc. the multitude of
Ceremonies increased.

But I will end with M. Calfehil, who, as In his Reioynd to Martials Reply p.
131. 132
D. Fulk relates of him, avouches is general that, The Fathers declined al
from the Simplicity of the Ghospel in Ceremonies. And with In 1. Cor. c. 3.
Melancthon who auerreth, that presently from the beginning of the Church, the
ancient Fathers obscured the doctrine concerning the justice of Faith,
increased Ceremonies, and devised peculiar worships. So disliking to our
Protestants, was the Doctrine and Ceremonies used by the Fathers, even from the
beginning of the Church of Christ.

Here then we have, besides the former more substancial points of Faith and
Religion, even the very outward semblance and face of our present Roman
Church, confessedly most like or agreeing to the ancient Primitive, both of
them teaching and using. First Hallowing or Consecration of Churches. Secondly,
Dedication also of the^ to Christ or some of his Saints. Thirdly, Seuering
the^ also with vestries and Chancels. Fourthly, Placing in them Altars. Fyftly,
with wax-candles and lamps burning in the day time. Sixthly, which also were
used at Burials. Seauenthly, there were also in the Church, placed Images of
Christ and his Saints. Eighthly, At the Altars served Priests, who offered the
Sacrifice of the Mass, and who at their Consecration were specially anointed,
having afterward their Crowns shaven. Ninthly the vestments and vessels used
by the Priests in administration of the Sacrifice and Sacraments, were so
peculiarly reverenced, as that they were not to be touched by the Laity.
Tenthly, the Priests in time of Sacrifice said some prayers secretly, others
audibly. Eleuenthly they kept also the Canonical Hours of Prime, Third, Sixth
and Ninth. Tweluethly, with prayer also they hallowed water, bread, oil, ashes
and sundry other creatures. Thirteenthly, as also the Font, and water of
Baptism, using in Baptism the sign of the Cross, Anoyling, Exorcismes, and
sundry such like, used even at this day by the Roman Church; though greatly
impugned and contemned by the Protestant Congregation.

Now the Doctors alleged, and rejected by Protestants for the foresaid
points, are S. Gregory, Ambrose, Optatus, Petrus Alexand. Augustine, the
Fathers of the Laodices Council, Hierom, Theodoret, Naziazene, Cyril, Basil,
Chrysostom, Eusebius, Sixtus, Cyprian, Athanasius, Stephen, Tertulian, Origin,
and S. Denis, Scholar to S. Paul.

The Protestans producing and rejecting the foresaid Fathers, are the
Centurists Crispinus, Carrion, Osiander, Hospinian, Peter Martyr, Praetorius,
Chemnitius, Schultetus, Zepperus, Bullinger, Mornay, Hamelmanus, Calvin,
Gesnerus, Beza, Melancthon, Humfrey, Brightman, Fulk Raynolds, Bale,
Carthwright, Jacob, Hutton, Spark, Willet, Whiteguift, Whitaker, Beard, Parker,
Morton, Mason, Calfehil and Parkins.

THE THIRD BOOK, VVHERIN IS PROVED THAT THE CHVRCH OF PROTESTANTS was never
known or in Being before the days of Luther: And that the Articles of
Religion now taught by the Protestant Congregation, were Heresies condemned
by the Primitive Church of Christ.
IT IS CONFESSED BY PROTESTANTS, that from the days of the Apostles until the
time of Luther, themselves never had any known Church or Congregation, in
any part of the universal World. CHAPTER I.
SEEING contraries placed together do more clearly appear, having hither to
offered to the view of the indifferent Reader, the clearest continuance of our
Catholic Church, from the Apostles times to these our days: as also the
confessed agreement throughout particular Congrouersies between our present
Roman, and the ancient Primitive Church of Christians; I will now in further
manifestation of the truth, no less clearly discover the Protestant Churches
inuisibilite, or rather nullitie and not-being, during the foresaid time from
the Apostles to Luther.

The Proof whereof for these last thousand years, is so easy and obuious, as
that Reioynder to Bristovv p. 341.
D. Fulk plainly teaches, that the Revelation of Antichrist, with the
(Protestant) Churches flight into wilderness, was Anno 607. And Catalogue of
Doctors in the ep. to the Reader.
Simon de Voyon affirms, that Anno 605. when Pope Boniface was sealled in
the Papal throne, then falsehood got the victory, etc. then was that universal
Apostasy from the Faith foretold by Paul. Hist. Sacram. l. 2. p. 157.
Hospinian assures us, that in the Age of Gregory the Great, al kind of
superstition and Idolatry, as a sea ouerflovved, overwhelmed, and wholy
ouerdrovvned almost the whole Christian world; no man not only not resisting,
but al rather adding, and affording what strength they could. So clear it is,
that in the very time of S. Gregory, no one Protestant was known to the
Christian world, and much less was seen to resist, or hinder the swelling sea
of Roman Religion.

But to proceed, Expositio of the Creed. p. 307.
M. Parkins avouches, that during the space of 900. years the Popish Heresy
(for so do Heretics style it) has spread itself over the whole earth, and
the faithful servants of God were but as a handful of wheat in a mountain of
chafe, which can scarce be discerned Idib. p. 400.
And again, we say, that for the space of many hundred years, an universal
Apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the earth, and that our Prot. Church
was not then visible to the world, but lay hid under the chafe of Popery.
M. Bale affirms, that from the year 607. purity of Heavenly (or
Protestant) doctrine, Cent. 1. p. 69.
vanished in the Church. Cent. 1. p. 65.
And that, after Gregory the First, purity of doctrine perished. And that
from Phocas (the Emperor, who lived Anno 602.) til the renewing of the
Ghospel (by Luther) the doctrine of Christ, was for that space among Idiots,
and in lurking holes. In hypotes. pos. Theolog. l. 3. p. 110. 111.
Brumlerus acknowledges, that the Prot. Church begun to lie hid An. 800. an
universal Apostacy being made, Antichrist being placed in the Temple of God,
the Church fled into the desert, and there fed by God for a time, and times,
and half a time. And whereas the true Church cannot consist without true
Pastors, Tract. Theolog. p. 374.
and preaching; yet M. Calvin confesses, that so for some Ages the (Prot.)
Church was torn and pulled in sunder, that she had no true Pastors; and that
for some Ages the pure preaching of the word vanished away. Now if I should
demand of Calvin, or any his Followers, how the pretended Protestant people of
those Ages could possibly believe, and so be saved, if during those Ages, they
neither had preaching, nor Pastors to preach and minister Sacraments, I might
expect for my best answer the deepest silence.

But the more I wade herein, the less do I find any bottom of the Protestant
Churches latencie, or not-being: For examining the very time of Luthers first
beginning, I find it directly confessed by Apology of the Church of Engl.
part. 4. c. 4 And his defen. of the Apol. p. 426.
D. Ievvel, that the Protestant Truth was unknown at that time, and unheard
of, when Martin Luther, and Vlderick Suinglius first came unto the Knowledge
and preaching of the Ghospel. In August. Co^fess. explicat. c. 7. de Eccle. p.
137.
Miluius argues thus: If there had been right believers that went before
Luther in his office, etc. there had then been no need of a Lutheran
reformation.

De Eccl. p 145.
Morgensterne censureth it ridiculous, to think that in the time before Luther
any had the purity of doctrine; and that Luther should receive it from them,
and not they from Luther. Considering (says he) it is manifest to the whole
Christian world, that before Luthers time al Churches were overwhelmed with
more then Cimmerian darkness. Liber Apologet. p. 176.
Regius being urged to tell what Congregation or Protestant Clergy Luther found
in the world at his revolt, answers that before Luther there was a Clergy of
the true Religion, which agreed with Luther in all things. But being to answer
where this Congregation was then to be found, he has no other help but to
confess, that is was not known by the Papists; neither through the Tyra^nie
of the Pope could peradventure be visibly shown. A strange answer, that it
should be unknown to the Papists, and yet the persecution by the Pope should
make it unknown, as though Fairies invisible could be persecuted by Papists.
But he goes forward saying: Therefore when the Jesuits urge, that Luther
should show (verae Religionis asseclam Ecclesiam) his fellow-Church of the true
Religion, they will that Luther demonstrate contradiction in terms; and that
he prove that which is invisible to be visible. So clear a Contradiction to
the truth it is, to affirm the Protestant-visibilitie at Luthers first
beginning.

To the former demand, the like answer is given by In Apocal. c. 11. p. 283.
M. Brightman, Contra Bell. contr. 2. q. 5. p. 261.
saying: The Church before Luther, was in Gods hidden Vestrie; and by Upon the
Reuela. p, 199.
M. Dent affirming, that as then Christ had his little flock in the wilderness;
and by D. Tom. Vvittemb. in praefat. and see Tom. 2. Vvite^b fol. 63 and Tom.
3. fol. 555.
Whitaker teaching, that the Church then lay hid in the wilderness.

But none acknowledges this truth more plainly then Luther, himself saying: At
the first I was alone. And, I dare glory that Christ was made first known by
me; but with the denial hereof Suinglius does dishonor me. Yea Loc. com.
class. 5. c. 15. p. 50.
speaking of the Sacramentaries, he glories and says: without us, and before
us, they were nothing; truly they durst not mutter; now puffed up with our
victory, they bend their force against us. And in this regard, In praefat. in
corpus doctrinae Lypsiae 1561. and Epist. ad Argentine^ses.
Ep. ad Episcop. Hereford. praefix. Enarrat. Euceri in Euang. and see his
scripta Anglicana. p. 675
Bucer terms Luther, the first Apostle to us of the purer Ghospel. Yea
Epist. 141 p. 273.
Calvin speaking of the same times says: Seeing we are compelled to make a
departure from the whole world, it is absurd one to disagree with another. So
clearly was the Protestant Religion as then, dissenting from the Religion of
the whole world.

In like full manner says Epist. Jesuit. part. alt. p. 49.
Cannerus: The poison of the Arrians infected not some little part, but almost
the whole world etc. we are come unto those times, which even exceed the
confusion of the Arrian fury: Error has possessed not one little part or
other, but Apostasy has auerted the whole body from Christ. By which it
appears, that even at these first beginnings of Luther, not only one member
or parcel, but even the whole body of Christianity, was auerted from
Protestancie, the Church of Protestants as then not being being known to have
the least Being, in the smalest parcel or member of the same body.

The like obscurity, or nullitie of the Protestant Church, at Wicclifs first
revolt from the Catholic Faith, is confessed by Act. mon p. 85.
M. Fox in these words: Out of al doubt, all the world was in a desperate and
vile estate, and lamentable ignorance, and darkness of Gods truth had
ouershaddowed the whole earth, when John Wiccliffe stepped forth, as the
morning star in the midst of a cloud. And again Act. mon p 391.
In times of horrible darkness, when there seemed in a manner to be no one so
little spark of pure Protestant doctrine left or remaining, Wiccliffe by Gods
providence rose up, through whom the Lord would first awaken and raise up
again the world etc. Estate of the Church. p. 418.
Crispinus also avouches that Ihon Wiccliffe began as from a deep night, to
draw out the truth of the doctrine of the Son of God. And D. Vita Iuelli p 263
Humfrey affirms, that Ihon Wiccliffe in these last times was almost the
first Trumpeter of this Ghospel: In so much that Cent. 9. 10. 11. p. 439.
Osiander confesses, that he as then had not (so much as any) Companions of
that time brotherly to admonish him. So assured we may rest, that at Wiccliffs
time, the Protestant Church was ouershaddowed with horrible darkness, not so
much as one little spark of pure Protestancie, appearing in the world.

But yet neither was Wiccliffe himself Protestant; for besides his sundry
Catholic opinions before proved, it is testified of Wiccliffe to the
contrary, by Melancthon Ep. (...) Frider. mico^ inter ep. Suinglii p. 612.
saying: I have looked into Wiccliffe, who makes a great ado about this
Controversy (of the Eucharist) but I have found many other errors in him, by
which we may judge of his Spirit; surely he neither understood, nor held the
Justice of Faith; which only point is so necessary to the Salvation of
Protestants, that Luther says thereof: Praefat. Ep. ad Gal.
If article of Justification (by only Faith) be once lost, then is al true
Christian doctrine lost: And as many as hold not that doctrine, are Jews,
Turks, Papists, or Heretics. Again, by this only doctrine the Church is
built, and in this it consists. In c. 1. ad Gal.
If we neglect the article of Justification, we loose al together. For In c.
2. ad Gal.
it is the principal article of al Christian doctrine; al other articles are
comprehended in it. It is the foundation (says M. Act. mon p. 840
Fox) of al Christianity: and the Ibid. p. 770.
only origin of our Salvation. It is the Tovver Desp.
soul of the Church, says D. Chark. Now this soul, foundation, principal
Article of Protestancie, Wiccliffe did not believe. Yea such were the demerits
of Wiccliffe, that D. Antiqu. l 2. p. 268.
Caius obiecteth him to the Oxonians, as a disgrace to their University. And
Melancthon censureth him to have been Loc. com Tit de Pot. Eccl.
A mad man; and sundry his gross errors and Paradoxes condemned both by
Catholics and Protestants will discover hereafter; so little cause have the
Protestants to appeal to Wiccliffe for the continuance of their Church in his
time.

Now as concerning Waldo Estate of the Church. p. 338.
Crispinus confesses, Waldo his beginning, to have been in time of thick
darkness, and as a first and little beginning, of the instauration of Christian
Religion.

But whereas Father Campian, Rat. 3. affirms, that the Protestants cannot for
many Ages together, give example so much as of any one City, village, or
house, professing their doctrine; Resp. ad rat. Ca^piani rat. 3 p. 48.
D. Whittaker coming to answer thy very point, tells in general, that in the
worst times many Faithful were found, and that all Histories do witness this:
But being provoked to give particular instance out of any one History, either
of time, or person, he becomes mute; affirming in the same place directly to
the contrary that, In the times of the Apostles al Churches, al Cities, al
Towns, al Families embraced the same Religion which we (Protestants) profess:
Afterward by little and little, the purritie of doctrine began to be corrupted,
and much superstition more and more to be spread abroad; to which yet the most
holy Fathers resisted what they could, until that mystery of iniquity, which
took root even in the Apostles Age, went through all the parts of the Church,
and so at last possessed the whole Church. So true it is that for many Ages
together, instead of any Instance of the Protestant Churches being, Popish
pretended superstition possessed even the whole Church.

But some may say, the Protest. Churches inuisibilitie for these last 1000.
years, is a point undoubted, and for such by themselves formerly and fully
confessed: But it is the Primative Church of the first 600. years, wherein
they glory their Church was most splendent, known, and conspicuous.

Now of all the Ages of the Primitive Church, none is more famous or better
known, or wherein Christian Religion more clearly shined over the whole face
of the earth, then the Age of Constantin, whereof say the Cent. 4 Ep. dedic.
Reginae Elizabeth.
Centurists: The state of the Church at (Constantins) time illustrated the
whole world with her splendor. And D. Morton styleth Constantin himself: The
Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 328
great and first Christian Emperor, so greatly honored in the first and most
famous Synod of Nice. And yet in so great a Sunshine of Christ's true Church,
it was impossible as then, to see a Protestant Chapel; for M. In Apocalyp. in
his synopsis before the Book. A 1. 11
Brightman teaches, that the Protestant Church, from the times of Constantin,
for 1260. years, was hid etc. And Ib A. 2. 14. And see p. 383.
again, for 1000. years from Constantin, the was conversant with Christ in
most hidden dens: Yea, as Ibid. p. 326.
then there were no Protestant public assemblies, wherein the Divine
Institutions did wholly flourish: So Constantin, a son of the Church (says
he) did more hurt, then an Enemy: As Ibid. p. 577. and see p. 341.
also, the want of public Religion has been many Ages, to wit, from
Constantin the Great, to this day; al which time Antichrist reigned, whilst the
Woman (the Protestant Church) lived in the desert. To the same effect says M.
Napper: Upon the Reuelat. p. 161.
From the year of Christ 316. God has withdrawn his visible Church, from
outward assemblies, to the hearts of particular godly men etc. during the space
of 1260. years Gods true Ibid. p. 191.
Church most certainly abiding so long latent and Ibid. p. 161. 156. 237. 23.
188.
invisible; the Pope Ibid. p. 145.
and his Clergy, during all that time, possessing the outward visible Church of
Christians; And, Ibid. p. 239.
never suffering, for the space of a 1000. years after Syluester the First,
any to be seen vouchable or visible, of the true Church. Whereby it is
confessed as most certain, that at Constantins time, and ever since until
Luthers, there was never any public Church of Protestants, or their poorest
Congregation, seen or known in the world.

But to enquire yet further for a Protestant Church, in any Age between
Constantin and the Apostles: It is likewise acknowledged by M. Napper, Upon the
Reuelat. p. 191. and see cent. 2. c. 4. coll. 35.
that during even the second, and third Ages (next after Christ) the true
temple of God, and light of the Ghospel, was obscured by the Roman Antichrist
himself; whereto assent In Ba^crofts survey c. 27. p. 343.
both M. Cartwright and Beza. D. Fulke Answ. to a Counter. Cath. p. 35.
avouches, that the true Church (of Protestants) decayed immediately after the
Apostles times. And De amplitudine regni Dei. l. 1. p. 43.
Caelius Secundus Curio, further says: Are we ignorant in how great darkness,
blindenes, and ignorance, the world has continued, almost from the Apostles
Age, to these very times, in which above al expectation the Lord began to
manifest himself? In like sort it is affirmed by another Anti-Christus sieve
prognostica finis mundi. p. 13.
Protestant, that from the Apostles time til Luther, the Ghospel never had open
passage. Ep. de Abrogandi statutis Ecclesiasticis.
Sebastianus Francus auerreth that, Presently after the Apostles, al things
were turned vpside down etc. And that for certain through the work of
Antichrst, the external Protestant Church, together with the Faith and
Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles departure. And that, for
these 1400. years, the (Protestant) Church has been no where external and
visible. Lastly D. Downeham Antip l. 2. p. 25.
teaches that the general defectio^ of the visible Church (foretold 2.
Thessal. 2.) began to work in the Apostles times. Most certainly then we may
conclude, that the Church of Protestants was wanting and unknown, even in S.
Paul's time; and so continued in the darkest lakes of Auernus, until Luther sent
out by Pluto, enlighetned the world, by the comfortable beams of his libertine
Ghospel.

So clear and undoubted then it is, that this new Protestant Congregation was
never known to the world, before the days of Luther, that we produce only in
proof thereof for witnesses the Protestant writers, the Centurists, Hospinian,
Simon de Voyon, Bumlerus, Luther, Calvin, Beza, Miluius, Morgensterne, Rhegius,
Bucer, Camerus, Crispinus, Osiander, Curio, Sebastianus Francus, Humfrey, Fulk,
Parkins, Brightman, Dent, Fox, Napper, Cartwright, Downham, Whittaker, and
Jewel.

A FVRTHER CONVINCING PROOF OF THE Protestant Churches not being, during the
first 600. years, is taken from the Fathers Condemning in the ancient
Heretics the chiefest articles of the Protestant Religion, and our Protestants
Confessing the same. And First Concerning the Sacraments. CHAPTER II.
AS it is most certain, that the Protestant Church and Religion, was never
hard or known of, in any Age whatsoever precedent to ours: So it may not be
denied, but that in several Ages, there have some gone out of our Catholic
Church, who teaching or professing some one or other article contrary to the
same, were ever condemned by the Doctors and Pastors of the said Church for
Heretics, Cent. 5. col. 585.
and their opinions for Heretical; amongst which to treat only of such as are
now renewed, defended, and believed by the Protestant Church, I will begin
with the holy Sacraments.

And first concerning Baptism; whereas Calvin, Beza, Morton, and other
Protestants, do al of them teach, that children dying unbaptized may be saved:
This error was condemned in the Pelagians by S. Augustine, who reports that
amongst other their errors, they taught that children might have life Haer.
88. contra Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 7.
everlasting, although they were not Baptized; which opinion In rescr. ad
Meleuit. Council. and Leo ep. 86.
Innocentius terms in them to be very foolish: This error of Pelagians is
so certain, that it is confessed and reported by the Centurie-writers, and by
Loc. com. fol. 88.
Sarcerius. In like sort Synopsis 415. and upon the 122. Ps. Fulk against
Purgatory p. 35.
D. Willet, and D. Fulk denying remission of sins, and grace to be given by
Baptism, are condemned in the Manichees by the acknowledgement of Contra
Dureum l. 10. 883. and Sarcerius loc. com. Tom. 1. de Baptismo fol 232.
D. Whitaker, saying of him self, and some other Protestants: We believe and
teach, that Sins are forgiven, and grace conferred in Baptism; which the
Manichees were accustomed to deny.

The denial of Exorcisme and Exsufflation used in Baptism, was condemned in
Iulianus the Pelagian, whereof says De imperijs and concupis. li. 2. c. 29.
etc. 17. and cont. Julian Pela. l. 6. c. 2.
S. Augustine: Julian reproacheth the most ancient tradition of the Church,
whereby children are exorcised, and breathed upon. And Against Symbolizin. part.
1. sect. 13 p. 152. and part. 2. sect. 9. p. 131.
M. Parker alleges Nazianzen reporting, that Julian laughed at the sufflations
of Baptism.

To come to the Eucharist, Theodoret dial. 3.
S. Ignatius affirms of certain Heretics of his time: That they do not
admit Eucharists and oblations, because they do not confess, the Eucharist to
be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which flesh suffered for our sins.
These words are acknowledged and cited for the saying of S. Ignatius, by de
Tradit Apost. col. 746. Chem. Exam. part. 1. p. 94. Simon method. aliquot
locor. part. 3. fol. 172. Recitationes de Concilo Scripti libri Concord. p. 177.
Hamelmannus, Chemnitius, Simon Pauli, and other Protestants.

Communion under both kinds, was condemned in Nestorius; Vrbanus Rhegius says
hereof: Loc. com. fol. 56.
Nestorius communicated the Laity under both kinds, (but) the Council of
Ephesus withstood him.

The denial of the B. Sacraments Reservation (which Protestants now generally
deny) was condemned in the Anthropomorphites, of whom says S. Cyril: I hear
Ad Calosyrium.
they say that the mystical blessing, if any remnants thereof do remain, til
the next day following, is unprofitable to sanctification; but they are mad in
so saying; for Christ is not made an other; neither shall his body be changed,
but the virtue of blessing and lively grace, do always remain in it. This
censure of S. Cyril is confessed and disliked by Cont Gandiner Ecl. 838.
Peter Martyr, as also by Ag. Hoskins. p. 83. Oecolam. lib. 3. Epist. p. 689.
D. Fulk; and Oecolampadius, who answering hereunto said: Cyril wrote this
against the Anthropomorphites, who taught that the body of Christ was
corrupted, if the remnants of the Sacraments were corrupted. But this most
strongly confirms both Reservation, and Real presence; for how could the
Anthropomorphites think Christ's body to have been corrupted, the Sacrament
being corrupted, had they not thought, Christ's body to have been in the
Sacrament, and the same as then usually reserved?

The denial of Priests power to remit sin in the Sacrament of Penance, was
condemned in the Nouatians, against whom writes S. Ambrose l. 1. de Remit. c.
2. etc. 7.
thus: They say they give the reverence to God, to whom alone, they reserve the
power of forgiving sins: but none do greater injury unto him, then those who
will break his commandments; for seeing our Lord himself in his Ghospel has
said: Receive you the Holie-Ghost, whose sins you shall remit, they shall be
remitted etc. who does more honor him, he who obeys his commandments, or who
resists?

To omit the like censure given by Pacianus Ep. 1. ad Sympron.
against Sympronianus the Nouatian; Socrates relates the Heretic Acesius to
have said, that sinners Hist. Trip. l. 2. c. 13.
were to be invited to Penance, but the hope of Remission they were not to
have from Pirests, but from God alone, who has power to forgive sins; which
when he had spoken, the Emperor said, O Acesius, set a ladder, and if thou
can, ascend alone to Heaven. So strange and singular in those times, was this
opinion of the Nouatians; and yet this History is so true, that it is recorded
and confessed by Cent. 4. p. 119. Che^. Exam. part. 1. p. 188. and part. 2. p.
193. Cent. 4. col. 653.
Osiander, Chemnitius, and the Centurie-writers: And M. Dilingam Disp de natura
P^n. p. 12.
grants that, The Nouatians did reserve to God alone the power of forgiving
sins; do so Protestants? says he: And may not I rather say, and that most
truly, that Protestants do so: and therein are right Nouations? For what
Protestants in England dare publicly now avouch, that Ministers have power,
not only to declare, but truly to forgive sin, and that remission of sins
is not reserved to God alone?

In like sort, concerning Penance enjoined after Confession, Theodoret
reproves the Heretics Audiam, l. 4. her. Fab. de Audiant.
for that: They give remission to such as are confessed, without prescribing
time for Penance, as the Laws of the Church command. Concerning the
Sacrament of Confirmation or Chrisme, the Nouatians, as Theodoret testifies,
were farther condemned, for that They l. 3. her. fab. 2.
^aue not holy Chrisme, to those who were Baptized by them. And Eusebius
testifies, that Nouatius himself being Baptized, was not confirmed by a
Bishop, which he wanting, says Eusebius, how could he obtain the holy Ghost?
Optatus reproves l. 2. contra Donatistas.
the Donatists, for that they caused the reserved Eucharist, to be thrown to
dogs, which dogs, thereupon al raging, rent in pieces their Masters, as guilty
of the holy Body: They also threw out of the window a vial (or little bottle)
of Chrisme, to the intent to break it, Hist. li. 6. c. 35. and see M. Parker
against Symbolyzing p. 77. 96. 97.
the which being stayed by an Angels hand, God preserving it, light safe
amongst the stones.

For the denial of the external Sacrifice of the Mass, Ignatius before
censured certain Heretics, saying: They do not admit Eucharists and oblations,
because they do not confess the Eucharist, to be the flesh of our Savior
Jesus Christ etc. And S. Augustine Tom. 6. cont. Aduen legis and Prophet. c. 19.
condemns the Manichees, for denying external sacrifice; of whom he further
says: The Tom. 6. cont. faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 18.
Manichees being ignorant, what is to be condemned in the Sacrifices of the
Gentiles, and what to be understood in the Sacrifices of the Hebrews, and what
to be holden or observed in the Sacrifice of Christians, do Sacrifice their
own vanitye to the Devil.

Yea, the Armenians Conc. 6. Consta^tinop. can. 32.
were condemned, for not mingling water with wine in the Chalice in time of the
Sacrifice; against whom was urged the authority of S. James and S. Basil: And
S. Cyprian (28) affirms, against the Heretics Aquarij, that in the chalice
of our Lord, water alone cannot be offered, neither wine alone etc.

And as concerning Altars, upon which this sacrifice was offered, Optatus L. 6.
cont. Donatist.
says unto the Donatists: What is so Sacrilegious, as to break, scrape, and
remove the Altars of God, in which sometimes yourselues have offered? For what
is the Altar, but the seat of the Body and Blood of Christ? These al your
fury has scraped, or broken, or removed etc. What has Christ offended you,
whose Body and Blood there resided at certain times? l. 2. Ep. 3
What have your selves offended, that you should break those Altars etc. So
clearly, was our Protestants fury and malice in ruining Altars, long before
condemned, in the Heretical Donatists.

And thus we see our modern Protestants, agreeing first with the Pelagians, in
denying the necessity of Baptism, and grace, and remission of sins to be
given thereby; as also the Ceremonies of Exorcisme and Exsufflation, to be
therefore in them, and the Manichees, condemned for Heretics by S. Augustine.
Secondly, their denying of the Real Presence in the Eucharist, was condemned in
most ancient Heretics by S. Ignatius. Thirdly, their denying of Communion
under one kind, was condemned in the Nestorians by the Council of Ephesus.
Fourthly, Their denial the B. Sacraments Reservation, was condemned in the
Anthropomorphites by S. Ciril. Fifthly, the denial of Priests power to remit
sin, was condemned in the Nouatians by S. Ambrose. Sixthly, in whom also was
condemned the denial of Confirmation and Chrisme, by Theodoret and others.
Seauenthly, the denial of External Sacrifice, was condemned in the Manichees by
S. Augustine, and in others by S. Ignatius. Eighthly, the not mingling of water
with wine in the Chalice, was condemned in the Armenians by the 6. Council of
Constantinople, and in the Aquarij by S. Cyprian. Ninthly, and the breaking and
casting down of Altars, was condemned in the Donatists by Optatus. And so I
leave it to the judgment of any indifferent man, whether it stands with
more discretion and security, concerning the former points of Faith and
Religion, to join in profession and belief, with S. Ignatius, S. Cyprian, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Cyril, Theodoret, Optatus, and the present Catholic
Roman Church, or with the most infamous and condemned Heretics, the Pelagians,
the Manichees, the Donatists, the Nestorians, the Nouatians, the
Antropomorphites, the Aquarij, the Armenians, and the present Protestant Church.

THAT THE FATHERS CONDEMNED in ancient Heretics the opinions of Protestants
concerning the Scriptures, and the Church Militant, and Triumphant. CHAPTER.
III.
TO examine now such doctrines, as concern the sacred Scripures, and the
Church both Militant, and Triumphant: It has been observed in all Heretics, to
pretend only Scripture in defense of their errors, thereby to euade the
manifest and most conuincing arguments from Councels, Fathers, and Histories.
So S. Hilarie Orat. 2. cont. Constantium.
wishes us to remember, (that there) is no Heretic, (which) does not faigne,
that the blasphemies which he teaches, are according to the Scripture. And S.
Austin L. 1. de Trinit. c. 3.
affirms, that al Heretics endeavor to defend their false and deceiptful
opinions, out of the Scriptures: Yea he reproves L. 1. con. Maxim.
Maximinus the Arian, for saying (as Protestants now do) If thou shall bring
any thing from the sacred Scripture, which is common to al, it is needful we
hear you: But these words which are out of the scripture, in no case are to
be received of us. In like sort, says S. Vincent: L. 1. co^t. haeret.
If one shall ask any Heretic etc. from whence do you prove, from whence do
you teach, that I ought to forsake the universal and ancient Faith of the
Catholic Church? Presently he (answers) for it is written; and forth with he
prepares a thousand testimonies, a thousand examples, a thousand authorities,
from the Law, from the Apostles, from the Prophets etc. Agreeably hereunto the
Arrians denied, the Son of God to be consubstantial to his Father, because
the word Consubstantial is no where in the Scriptures, as S. Athanasius, S.
Austin, and S. Hierome testify in sundry places writing against them.

The Macedonians Basil. de Spiritu Sancto c. 25. and l. 1. contr. Eunomium.
and Eunomians denied, the Holie-Ghost to be equal with the Father and the
Son, because in their opinion, it is no where expressly set down in the
Scriptures. The Cyril. Socrates and others writing of the Nestorians.
Nestorians denied, the B. Virgin Marie to be the Mother of God, because these
words are not expressly in Scripture: And the self same pretense of only
Scripture, is still used now by Protestants, as I have proved at large els-where.

The continuance and visibilitie of the Church of Christ, was denied by the
Donatists, of whom S. Austin affirms, that they used to collect certain
places of Scripture, and to wrest them against the church of God, that so it
might be thought, to have failed and perished out of the whole world. And as
Protestants say now, of the Church before Luthers time, de vnita. Eccl. c. 2.
so said the Donatists before: August. in Ps. 101. Conc. 2.
The Church has revolted and perished out of al Countries: But this (says S.
Austin) say they, who are not in it; Or impudent speech! The claim of
Ecclesiastical Primacie was condemded in the Emperor Constantius, to whom
Osius Athan. Epist. ad Solit. vit. agentes. Ambr. Ep. 32. 33. Sozom. l. 6. c.
7. Conc. 3. Carthag. can. 9. Aug. Ep 48. 50. 162. 165.
said: I. beseech thee cease, and remember thou art mortal; be fearful of the
day of Judgment; keep thyself pure against that day; do not intermedle in
Ecclesiastical affairs, neither command us in this kind, but rather learn
those things from us. God has committed the Empire to thee; and to us, those
things which belong to the Churches. Take heed least drawing unto thee such
things as concern the Church, thou be guilty of great crimes. And again; for
who, seeing him in decreeing to make himself the Prince of Bishops, and to be
cheef Judge in Ecclesiastical Judgment, will not justly say, that he is that
abomination of Desolation which was foretold by Daniel? Hereof also the Cent. 4
col. 549. Polanus in Symphonia p. 836. 837. 8^8. 839. 841. 842. 843. 844. 849.
Cartwright in whiteg. def. p. 700. Osiand. cent. 4. p. 477.
Centurists: Emperors also sometimes vnfittingly assumed to themselves the
Judgment of matters of Faith, which thing Athanasius reprehendeth in
Constantius, and Ambrose in Valentinian etc.

The denial of Invocation of Saints, was condemned in Vigilantius the Heretic,
of whom Answer to a Count. Cath. p. 46. Par. against Symb. part. 1. p. 74. 83.
Cent. 4. col. 1250. Crisp. his Estate of the Church p. 131. Osian. cent. 4. p.
506.
D. Fulk says: Last of al Vigilantius shall be brought in, who wrote against
Invocation of Saints, Superstition of Relics, and other Ceremonies; him
Hierome reproves. And the same is confessed of Vigilantius, by M. Parker, the
Centurists, Crispinus, and Osiander. In like sort D. Sarauia, and Beza do both
of them affirm, that Aerius was likewise condemned by the Fathers, for his
then teaching, that the Saints departed are not to be prayed unto. The which
also is acknowledged by Loc. com. p. 514
Bucanus, against Aerius.

The denial and contemning of Saints Relics, is condemned in Eunomius, and
Vigilantius; whereof says De Ecl. dog. c. 73 see Chemnit. Exam. part. 4. p. 7.
S. Austin: We believe that the bodies of Saints, and especially the Relics
of Blessed Martyrs, are most entirely to be honored if any man contradict
this, he is supposed not to be a Christian; a but an Eunomian, and Vigilantian.
So likewise the Arrians and Vigilantius, denying the Devils to be tormented by
the Relics of Martyrs, are condemned therefore, the first by S. Ambrose Ser.
93. De Invent. corpo. S. Geruasij and Protasij.
the second by Contr. Vigil. c. 4.
S. Hierome.

The denial of the Images of Christ, and his Saints, was condemned in Xenaias,
of whom says Hist. Eccl. lib. 16. c. 27.
Nicephorus: That Xenaias first (o audacious soul, and impudent mouth) vomited
forth that speech: That the Images of Christ, and those who have pleased him,
are not to be worshipped. According to which the Protestant Comment. in proc.
Chronol. l. 7. at Antichr. 494. see Cedemus in Compend. hist.
Functius confesses that, Defen. Tract. de diuersi. p. 349. 346.
Xenaias first raised wars in the Church against Images.

The denial of the sign of the Cross, was condemned in some ancient
Magicians, of whom thus writes Hist. li. 3. c. 3.
Theodoret; The Devils appearing in their accustomed shape, fear compelled
Julian (the Emperor) to sign his forehead with the sign of the Cross;
whereupon the Devils, beholding the figure of our Lords victory, and
remembering their own ruin, forthwith vanished away etc. Julian affirmed, that
he greatly admired the virtue of the Cross, and that the Devils fled away,
because they could not endure the sign thereof; to whom the Magician said; Do
not so think; for they do not fear for that reason which you allege, but
detesting your fact, they withdrew themselves from our sight. Whereupon (says
Theodoret) so wretched Julian was deceived by him etc. And yet the Protestant
Cent. 4. p. 326.
Osiander is not ashamed, to justify this foresaid speech of the Magician,
affirming of this example, that the Devils by dissembling their flying away,
would confirm the superstition of the people, as though (says he) Devils were
driven away, by the sign of the Cross. And whereas many miracles have been
wrought in the Church, by the sign of the Cross, by the Relics of Saints,
and sundry other such holy helps; the Arrians used, to attribute the same to
witchraft, and deceits of the Devil; hereof says Sermon. 93. de Sa^ctis Geruasio
and Protasio.
S. Ambrose: The Devils say to Martyrs, you are come to destroy us; the Arrians
say, these are not true torments of Devils, but only feigned and affected
scoffs. For the same cause Cont. Vigil. c. 4.
S. Hierome reproves Vigilantius, saying: According to the custom of the
Gentiles, and of wicked Porphorie, and Eunomius, thou faignest these to be the
sleights of the Devils, and that the Devils do not truly cry, but only
counterfaite their torments etc. And De persecut. Vandal. l. 2.
Victor reporting, how the Catholic Bishop Eugenius, having restored sight to
one Felix that was blind, signing his eyes with the Standard of the Cross, a
thing (says he) manifest to all the Congregation, he farther reports, that
the Arrian Bishops said, that Eugenius did this by witchcraft. And the self
same answer, is given to S. Martius Miracles, by the Centurie writers, and to
the Miracles of holy Symeon, by Animaduers. p. 612. 613. 614. Hosp. de monach.
fol. 24.
Funius, and Hospinian, and to the Miracles of B. Aman, by In Ep. Part alt.
Part. Cont. Bellar. 1066
Daneus.

The denial of Purgatory, of prayers, and Sacrifice for the dead, was
condemned in Aerius, by S. Austin, Haer. 53. Epiph. haer. 75.
and S. Epiphanius, whereof says D. Fulk: Answ. to a counterfeit Cath. p. 44.
45.
I will not dissemble that, which you think the greatest matter; Aerius taught
that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness both Epiphanius, and
Austin, which they count for an error. Cent. 5. col. 1393.
Cent. 4. p. 434.
Osiander reciting the condemned errors of Aerius, amongst the rest numbreth
this, That we ought not to pray, or offer Sacrifice for the dead. And D. Field
says: The eleventh, is the Heresy of Aerius, he condemned the custom of the
Church, in naming the dead at the Altar, and offering of the Sacrifice of the
Eucharist etc. He was justly condemned. And the same error in Aerius, is
expressly confessed by Chrono. p. 28. Bull. de enigm. erroris fol. 222. Hosp.
hist. Sacr. par. 1. p. 155. Abb. in Defense of the refor. Cath. part. 3. in his
aduertisment therio ann^xed p. 106.
Pantaleon, by Bullinger, by Hospinian, and D. Abbot.

From the premises then we may observe, First, that our modern Protestants
appealing to only Scripture, are condemned in the Arrians, by S. Austin; and in
other Heretics, by S. Hylarie, and other Fathers; and in the Macedonians and
Eunomians, by S. Basil; and in the Nestorians, by S. Cyril. Secondly, their
denying the visibilitie of Christ's Church, was condemned in the Donatists, by
S. Austin. Thirdly their, giving Ecclesiastical Primacie to temporal Princes,
was condemned in Constantius by S. Athanasius; and in Valentinian, by S.
Ambrose. Fourthly, their denying of Invocation of Saints, was condemned in
Vigilantius by S. Hierome. Fifthly, the dishonouring of Saints Relics, was
condemned in Eunomius and Vigilantius, by S. Austin, and S. Hierome; and in the
Arrians by S. Ambrose. Sixthly, the denying of holy Images, was condemned in
Xenaias, Of the Church. li. 3. p. 138.
by Nicephorus. Seauenthly, the denying of the sign of the Cross, and the
virtue thereof, was condemned in Magicians, by Theodoret. Eighthly, denying of
Miracles, and imputing them to witchcraft and the deceipts of the Devil, was
condemned in the Arrians, by S. Ambrose, and in Vigilantius by S. Hierome.
Ninthly, the denial of Purgatory, and Prayer for the dead, was condemned in
Aerius, by S. Austin and S. Epiphanius. Now let the Judicious Reader make
choice, whether in the foresaid points of doctrine, he will join in union of
Faith, with S. Athanasius, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Austin, S. Hilarie, S.
Basil, S. Cyril, Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomene, Vincent, and the present Roman
Church; or with the condemned Heretics, Arrians, Macedonians, Eunomians,
Nestorians, Donatists, Vigilantians, Aerians, Image-breakers, Magicians, and
the present Protestant Church.

THAT THE FATHERS CONDEMNED in ancient Heretics the opinions of Protestants,
concerning Monachisme, the marriage of Priests, and prescribed Fasts. CHAPTFR
IIII.
TO make the like trial of such articles, as concern the state of perfection,
as Euangelical Counsels, Vows, Mortification, and the like: And first
concerning Monks and Montastical life, In Ps. 132.
S. Austin reproves the Cercumcellians, for that they accustomed to say, what
means the name of Monks? And again, what then say they, who insulte against
us, for the name of Monks etc. who say unto us, show where the name of Monks is
written (in the Scriptures?) And writing Cont. liter. Petil l. 3. c. 40.
against Petilianus, he affirms, That he proceeded with cursed mouth in
dispraise of Monks, and Monasteries. In like sort, Cont. Vigil. prope fin.
S. Hierome answers Vigilantius, saying: Whereas thou affirmest those to be
better, who use their goods, and by little and little divide the fruits of their
possessions to the poor, then those who selling their possessions, give al at
once, thou shall be answered, not from me, but from our Lord: If thou will be
perfect, go and sell al which thou have, and give to the poor, and come follow
me. He speaks to him, who will be perfect etc. That degree which thou praysest
is the second and third, which we also allow, whilst yet we know to prefer
the first, before the second and third. Neither are Monks to be terrified from
their study (or labor) by thy viperous tongue, and cruel biting, against whom
thou arguest and say: If al shall shut up themselves, and be in the deserts,
who shall frequent the Churches? This reproof of Vigilantius by S. Hierome, is
so certain, that it is further plainly confessed by Of the Estate of the
Church p. 131. 132.
Crispinus.

Concerning Virginitye, the equalling of marriage therewith, was condemned in
Iouinian, by L. 1. co^^. Iouin. c. 2.
S. Hierome saying; Iouinian taught that Marriage and Virginity were of equal
merit. A point so certain that M. Wotton, in defense of Iouinian boldly Def.
of Parkins p. 500.
avouches, that herein the Christian Fathers dealt unchristianly with Iouinian;
Retractiue from Romish Religion p. 312.
again; Iouinian worthily denied, al difference of merit betwixt a married and
single life, which no enemy of Iouinian can disprove. And the same is
confessed in Iouinian, Chron. p. 32. and cent 5. col. 5^8.
by Pantaleon, and the Centurists. And yet D. Beard acknowledges, that S.
Austin does prefer Virginity (before Marriage) as a greater good. But Luther
Tom. 5 Wittemb. in 1. Cor. c. 7. fol. 107.
much exceeds Iouinian herein saying: I do conclude that matrimony is as
gold, and the spiritual state (of single life) is as dung: In which absurdity
and impuritie he is also defended by Cont. Camp. Rat. 8. p. 151.
D. Whitaker.

The single life of Priests was impugned by Vigilantius, whom therefore Cont.
Vigil. c. 1.
S. Hierome reproves in these words: What do the Churches of the East, of
Egypt, and the Sea Apostolic, who take Clergymen either such as are
Virgins, or continent, or if they have wives, yet cease to be as husband.

Agreably hereunto D. Fulk Answ to a Count Cath. p. 45. and see Hier. l. 1.
cont. Iouinis: c. 14 and 19. and Apol. ad Pamachius c. 8. Epiph. her. 59.
confesses that, Iouinian also was condemned for that he taught, that such as
could not contain, though they had vowed Virginity, should nevertheless be
married. And D. Morton confesses, that Appeal. p. 604.
Vigilantius and Iouinian are condemned by S. Hierome, for impugning the
unmarried life of Priests,

The impugning of prescribed Fasts, was condemned in Aerius, of whom confesses
D. Fulk, that he taught that fasting-dayes are not to be observed. D. Field
(17) says: He disliked set Fasts etc. He was justly condemned. Osiander cent.
4. p. 434.
reports him to say that, set Fasts are not to be observed etc. According to
liberty, a man is to fast, when he will. This error was reproved in Aerius, by
S. Austin, her. 53. Epiphan. her. 75.
and S. Epiphanius. And S. Austin her. 82.
reports Iouinian to say: Fasts, answer. to a Count. Cath. p. 44. 45.
or abstinence from certain meats, do nothing profit. Yea he de Eccl. dog. c.
68.
avouches further, that to beeleeue, that such as abstain from wine and
flesh, have no greater merit, is not the part of a Christian, but of a
Iouinian; which Censure of S. Austin, is confessed in him by Chemnitius. of the
Church. l. 3. p. 138.
Exam. part. 4. p. 142.


And whereas Protestants keep their strictest Fasts upon Sundays, S.
Epiphanius her. 75.
witnesses, that the Aerians desired rather to fast upon Sunday, and to eat
upon Wednesday, and Friday: And S. Austin Ep. 86.
affirms, that to fast on the Lords day, is a great offense, especially since
the detestable Heresy of the Manichees etc. who appoint unto their hearers,
this day, as lawful to be fasted upon. This saying of S. Austin, is alleged by
D. Whitguift, Defen. p. 502. and cent. 4. col. 445. 401.
and the Centurists, and the like of S. Ambrose, by Against Symbo. part. 2. p.
38.
M. Parker.

From these few premises, I may infer, first, that the Protestants impugning
Monks and Monastical life, are condemned in the Heretics Circumcellians,
Petilianus, and Vigilantius, by S. Austin, and S. Hierome. Secondly, their
impugning of voluntary poverty, is condemned in Vigilantius, by S. Hierome.
Thirdly, their equalling of marriage with Virginity, was condemned in
Iouinian, by the same S. Hierome. Fourthly, their impugning the unmarried life
of Priests, was condemned in Vigilantius also by S. Hierome. Fifthly, their
denial of set Fasts, and abstinence from certain meats, is condemned in
Aerius, by S Austin, and S. Epiphanius, and in Iouinian, by S. Austin. Lastly,
our Protestants Sunday-fast, was condemned in the Manichees, by S. Austin; and
in the Arians, by S. Epiphanius; So perfect harmonye we ever find, between the
ancient Heretics, Vigilantius, Petilianus, Iouinian, Aerius, and the
Manichees, and our Modern Protestants: And between the ancient Doctors, S.
Austin, S. Hierome, S. Epiphanius, and the present Roman Church.

THAT THE FATHERS CONDEMNED in ancient Heretics the opinions of Protestants,
concerning Free Will, Faith, Good works, the Commandments, sin, and the
knowledge and Death of Christ. CHAPTER V.
BUT now to come to the chiefest articles of man's Freewil, Faith, good works,
and the possibility of the Commandments, sin, and the like: The denial of
Freewil, was condemned in the Manichees by S. Hierome, in Proe^. lib. cont.
Pelagianos fin.
saying, it is proper to the Manichees to condemn man's nature, and to take
away Freewil, and the assistance of God; of whom also says S. Austine: de fide
cont. Manich. c. 9.
The Manichees bark against these with wonted blindenes, and when they are
convinced, that Nature is not an evil thing, and that it is in the power of man
to do well or evil, they say, that the soul has not Freewil, and they see not
their blindness. Hereupon it is, that Hemingius de universally gratia p. 109.
charge his other Protestant Brethren denying Freewil, with the doctrine of
the Manichees and the Stoics. And whereas some answer hereunto, that the
Manichees condemned Nature, which Protestants do not, we reply again that we
do not charge them therewith, but only with the denial of Freewil and Gods
grace, for the denial whereof the Manichees were condemned; and though it were
upon other grounds then Protestants do, yet that excuses not, since the very
denial of Freewil was condemned in them by the Fathers. As likewise the denial
of any article of Faith (upon what reason or ground soever it be) is
notwithstanding to be condemned for error. The pretended sufficiency of only
Faith, was condemned in Eunomius by S. Austin, her. 54.
who reports Eunomius to have taught, That the committing of any sins
whatsoever, and continuance in them, would nothing hurt a man, if he was
partaker of that Faith which was taught by him. Agreably to whom says D.
Whitaker; de Eccl. p. 301.
we affirm that if one have an act of Faith, sins do not hurt him; this
Luther affirmed, and this we al say. The denial in general of the diversity of
merits, was condemned in Iouinian by S. Austin, de Tem. ser. 191.
saying: We condemn the error of Iouinian, who said there Was no difference
of merits in the world to come. And S. Ambrose, Conc. Telense and Rescript.
Ambrosij and aliorum ad Siricium Papa^ ibid.
and others term it, A rude houling etc. to confound al things promiscuously
etc. and to take away the degrees of different merits.

The denial of the possibility of keeping the Commandments, was condemned in
certain Heretics by S. Hierome In expl. symb. ad Damas.
saying: We accurse the blasphemy of them, who say, that any thing impossible
is commanded by God to man. And the same words uses S. Austin, De tem. ser.
191.
in so much that the Protestant Hoffman rather accurseth S. Hierome, saying:
Comment. de penit. l. 1. fol. 55.
Hierome writes, let him be accursed who has said, God to have commanded
impossible things; but why is not Hieromerather accursed, who so audaciously
thinks against God? And in the like sort, is this saying of S. Hierome
alleged and rejected by Luther, and by the Centurists, as also by Calvin
saying: Inst. l. 2. c. 7. 5.
The opinion of the impossibility of keeping the Commandments, is commonly
thought to be most absurd, so that Hierome doubted not to denounce Anathema to
it; what seemed to Hierome, I nothing care. Tom. 2. Wittemb. f. 216 Cent. 4.
col. 1248.


The denial of Inherent Justice, was condemned in Julian the Pelagian by S.
Austin Cont. Iul. Pelag. l. 6. c. 11.
saying: Thou do not depart from thy opinion, wherein thou affirmest the
grace of God to consist in the only remission of sin. And the same error is
condemned Epist. 1. c. 10. Conc. Mileu. c. 3. and August. l. 1. Retract. c. 13.
and ep. 106.
by Celestinus and the Mileuitan Council.

The affirming of God to be the Author of sin, was condemned in Simon Magus,
whereof says Vincentius: Lib. cont. haer. post. med.
Who before Simon Magus etc. durst affirm, God the Creator to be the Author
of our wicked deeds? etc. And who before Nouatianus (taught) that God would
rather the death of him that dies, then that he should return and live?
Hereof also says S. Austin: It is a hateful and abominable opinion, to
believe, that God is the author of any evil will, or action. And yet this so
abominable opinion is believed by Luther In assert. art. 36.
asking: How man can prepare himself to good, seeing it is not (so much) as in
his own power, to make his ways evil; for God works the wicked work in the
wicked. As also by Calvin In l. 3. c. 23. sect. 6.
teaching that, God does ordain by his Counsel and decree, that among men some
be borne destined to certain damnation from their mothers womb; who by their
destruction may glorify God. And Suinglius Tom. de Prouid. Dei fol. 365.
expressly affirms that, Ad art. sibi falso impet art. 10.
David's adultery pertayned to God as Author. Melanchton In Romans 8.
avouches, that the Adultery of David, was the proper work of God; as was
the Conversion of Paul. Iacobus Andreas Epit. Colloq. montisb. p. 47.
auerreth, that according to Beza, God is the Author of sin. And yet al
these plain testimonies notwithstanding, Cont. Camp. rat. 8. p. 115.
D. Whitaker blusheth not to say: If Calvin, Pet. Martyr, Melancthon, Luther,
or any of ours affirm, God to be the Author of sin, I will not deny, but
that we are al guilty of horrible blasphemy and wickedness.

And as Protestants thus join with Simon Magus in making God the Author of
sin; so likewise do they with Apollinaris and Eutyches affirm, the very
Godhead of Christ to have suffered and died. D. Barnes Vit. Romans Pontific. p.
46. 103 Resp. ad act. col. montisbel. part. 1. p 82
reports one of the condemned Heresies of Apollinaris to have been; that
Christ being dead for three days, the Divinity dyed withal. And In
Co^fessione maiore de canae Dom^ni.
Beza confesses, that Eutyches affirmed, the Godhead of Christ to have
suffered. Agreably to these, In Cre^anor. Dial. de corrup. muribus etc. f. 5.
D. Luther says: When I think that only the humane Nature suffered for me,
Christ is of vile and small price, yea himself has also need of a Savior. Yea
he reproves the Zuinglians, for that, says he, most obstinately they urge
against me, that the Divinity of Christ could not suffer. And the same
blasphemy or rather Atheism, is taught by Musculus, Islebius, Cont. Busaeum.
p. 24 126.
Gerlabius, Iacobus R^sp. ad act. Col. Montisb. p. 82. 92.
Andreas, and the other Lutherans. And yet D. Abbot Def. ad Park. 3. p. 240.
is not abashed to give D. Bishop the lie, for his obiecting that, Luther
affirmed the Godhead itself to suffer.

In like sort, Ireneus l. 1. c. 17.
condemning the Gnostics for teaching Christ to have been ignorant, and to
have learned his A. B. C. under a Master; and S. Gregory l. 3. Indict. 3. Ep
42.
confuting the same error in the Agnoites: The same error is yet taught by
Resp. ad act. Col. Montisb. part. 1 147. 148. 134. Buc. and Calvin. in Math 24.
will Synop. p. 599. 600. Sunt. Reuiew of D. Kellisons survey p. 55.
Beza, Bucer, Calvin, D. Willet, D. Sutclif and other Protestant writers. I
might produce sundry other ancient condemned Heresies, now renewed and
defended by our new Protestant Church; but it may suffice to the eternal
infamy thereof, First, that denying Frewil, it is condemned in the Manichees,
by S. Hierome, and S. Austin. Secondly affirming only Faith to be sufficient to
salvation, it is condemned in Eunomius Defense of Parkins. part. 3. in the
aduertisment annexed p. 60.
by S. Austin. Thirdly, that denying of the diversity of Merits, it is
condemned in Iouinian, by S. Austin and S. Ambrose. Fourthly Impugning the
possibility of keeping the commandments, it is condemned in certain old
Heretics, by S. Hierome and S. Austin. Fifthly, denying Inherent Justice, it is
condemned in the Pelagians, by S. Austin. Sixthly, Affirming God to be the
Author of sin, it is condemned in Simon Magus by Vincentius, and by S.
Austin. Seauenthly, teaching the Godhead of Christ to have suffered and dyed, it
is condemned in Apollinaris, and Eutyches. Lastly, teaching Christ to have been
ignorant, it is condemned in the Gnostics by S. Ireneus; and in the Agnoites
by S. Gregory; So that we still find a sympathy and union in sundry of the
chiefest points of Religion, between the ancient Heretics, Manicheus,
Eunomius, Iouinian, Pelagius, Simon Magus, Apollinaris, Eutyches, the
Gnostics, and Agnoites, and nouel Protestants of the on side; and the ancient
most holy Fathers, S. Hierome, Gregory, Vincent, Austin and Ambrose, and the
Roman Church, of the other side.

Yea so grateful scholars are our Protestants to their old Masters, and so
otherwise naked of better answer, that they doubt not to reprove the ancient
Doctors and Fathers of the Primitive Church, and to commend and defend the
condemned Heretics of the same time; so professing to disclaim from the Faith
and Religion taught by the old Fathers, and to adhere and embrace the gross
and wicked errors broached by Heretics. D. Abbot Defense of Parkins. part. 3.
in the aduertisment annexed p. 60.
professes, That though Hierome and Austin have for some points taxed
Iouinian, and Vigilantius, (as Heretics) and Epiphanius, in an other point
Aerius; yet is that no sufficient motive for us (says he) to forsake those
opinions of Iouinian, Aerius and Vigilantius. In like sort says (112) D.
Willet; Some of these as they are imputed to Protestants, we deny to be
Heresies at al, as that of Vigilantius, that Relickes are not to be adored; of
Iouinians, that neither fasting nor Virginity is meritorious; of Aerius, that
prayer is not to be made for the dead etc. Tetrastylon. p. 97.
And if Aerius held no worse opinions, we see no cause why they should condemn
him for an Heretic etc. Antilog. p. 23.
(11) But neither was Vigilantius an Heretic, nor his opinions Heresies. Loc.
com. loc. 42. p. 513.
Bucanus demands, whether the Fathers deservedly numbered amongst Heretics
the opinion of Aerius, who said there was no difference between a Bishop and a
Priest? Ib. p. 99.
Whereto himself answers, no truly, no more then these which were his
opinions: First, that we ought not to pray and Sacrifice for the dead.
Secondly, that Saints departed are not to be prayed unto. Thirdly, that
certain days of Fasts are not to he appointed: Of which last says Cont. Dur.
l. 9. p. 830.
D. Whitaker, Aerius taught nothing concerning fasting different from the
Catholic Faith; whereby he means the Protestant. Faith Yea Aerius and his
errors, are further defended against the Fathers by D. Fulk, Answ. to a Count.
Cath. p. 45 Dan. de haeres. f. 175. 177. Osiand. cent. 4. p. 434. Park. against
Sym. part. 1. p. 60 cent. 4 Col. 401.
by Daneus, Osiander, M. Parker, and the Centurie-Wr ters. And Iouinian is
defended against S. Hierome, and S. Austin, by the Cent. 4. Col. 381. Dan.
Part. alt. p. 938. Lut. Thom. 2. f. 282.
Centurists, by Daneus, and Luther; as also Vigilantius, against S. Hierome, by
the Magdeburgians, and by D. Morton Prot. Appeal. p. 583.
saying; Concerning that, Vigilantius intended only the honor of God by
expelling Idolatry, then may we wish that S. Hierome had been a Vigilantius,
in the case of Relics of Saints. Yea (says D. Fulk Against Rhem. Test. in
apoc. 6.
Hierome in this case, is a partial witness, inueighing against Vigilantius,
which was as good a Catholic, as he etc. who did justly mislike the
superstious estimation of Relics, and write a book against it; which Hierome
does not confute with arguments so much, as with railing etc. S. Hierome
defending against Vigilantius, the Christian custom of burning Candles at the
Monuments of Saints, is therefore censured by the French Protestant for (6) an
Idolater, and defender of Idolatry; who also further adds, that Vigilantius
laughing at that custom, did prove himself more Christian, and more faithful
to God, then Hierome etc. Yea if I knew Hierome to have dyed in that error, I
would never call him Saint, but as damned as the Devil. In like forte, S.
Hierome writing against Vigilantius for prayer to Saints, the same Protestant
says: Ibi. p. 239.
I think Hierom when he writ these words against Vigilantius, Cent. 4. col.
601.
was driven into rage, and deprived of sense and understanding. So grievously
displeasing was S. Hierome, to both old and newborn Heretics.

The Armenians not mingling water with wine in the Chalice are defended by D.
Fulk, Def. of the English Transl. c. 17. p. 458.
saying: The Armenians are commendable in this point, that they would never
yeald to custom. Lastly the Magician himself is defended against Theodoret by
Osiander, Cent. 4. p. 326.
for denying the sign of the Cross, Clypeus fid. Dial. 8. p. 223.
and the virtue and power thereof against Devils. So clear it is, even by the
full confessions of our Protestants them selves, that the doctrines condemned in
the old Heretics, by the Doctors and Fathers of the primitive church, are now
renewed, defended, and believed by Protestants themselves.

PROTESTANTS VSVAL RECRIMINATION of obiecting old Heresies to the Catholic
Roman church, is clearly examined, discovered, and confuted by their own
acknowledgements. CHAPTER. VI.
PRotestants being unable to clear themselves of so foul a stayne, as
teaching and believing so many absurd and condemned Heresies, do subtly
endeauer to diuerte or extenuate their so great reproach, by falsely intruding
upon the Roman Church, the like defense of sundry condemned errors. But for
our easy disburdning thereof: It is to be observed, that Heresy is not an open
Enemy to truth and religion; but a subtle Deprauer thereof, by subtracting
from it, or adding thereto: So as Truth and Error having but one object, are
divided though ever really, yet oftentimes but, as it were, by a seeming
slender nicetie, or difference of words. In which respect he that will object
pertinently in this kind, must object not any resemblance or likelihood, but
an Identitie of opinion; for otherwise, as D. Couel Def. of Hooker. p. 49.
teaches not unaptly to this purpose: The neernes oftentimes to evil, is
warrant enough for suspicion to accuse of evil; and because al errors are not
equally distant from truth, some men (as now in this case we Catholics) are in
their true assertions, by weak Judgments (of such like as the vulgar
Protestants) supposed, not to differ at al from errors. And hence I take it to
be, that D. Morton as but dares to begin his objection in this kind against
us, with a neerenes Prot. Appeal. p. 675.
unto Heresy. As also says he unto Catholics: Let Ib. 675. 676.
them tell us, whether they have not (we say not an absolute, but yet) a greater
affinity with those foresaid Heresies, then have the Protestants etc. Where,
for M. Doctors better satisfaction, I will tell him, that sundry of his other
Brethren, nothing inferior to himself, have plainly acknowledged in the
precedent Chapter, an absolute Identitie in steed of Affinity with former
Heretics; thereupon not sparing bitterly to reprove the learned, and most
ancient Fathers, for their so censuring and condemning our Protestants true
Progenitors, the ancient Heretics. And that al pretended affinity, between
our Catholic Religion, and old condemned Heresies, is nothing else, but the
ignorant or malicious traducement of Protestant Writers, this present Chapter
shall fully demonstrate.

First then D. Fulk Answ. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 22.
obiecteth unto us: To make the Images of Christ, and of the Apostles, and to
cense them: you learned of the Heretics called Gnostici, and Carpocratites.
Epiph. L. 1. Tom. 2. Secondly, of the Valentinians, you learned to have in
price, the sign of the Cross. Thirdly, of the Heracleonites, you learned to
anoint men at point of death; and to cast water upon dead men with Invocation.
Epiphan. Her. 36. Fourthly, of the Cainans you learned to call upon Angels.
Epiph. Haer. 38. Fifthly, of the Marcionists you learned to give women leave to
Baptize: Epiph. Haer. 42. Sixthly, of the Collindians you learned to make Images
of the Virgin Marye, and to worship them and her with offering of Candels, as
they did of Cakes. Epiph. Haer. 79. Seauenthly, of the Messalanians, you
learned to let your locks grow long: Epiph. Haer. 80. Eighthly, of the
Pharisees you received your superstitious Massing-garments, which you call
Amictus, D^lmatica, and Pallia etc. Thus far D. Fulk.

First in general I answer hereto, that all this is most impertinently urged,
seeing there is not any of the foresaid Examples, which being truly delivered,
is not at this day condemned by the Roman Church, as being not slenderly, or
obscurely, but most strongly and manifestly different from our Catholic
doctrine, either by certain excess, or defect thereto. But to descend to
particulars: To the first against Images I answer with S. Epiphanius, that
those Heretics were reproved, for that together Epiph. her. 27. Iren. l. 1.
c. 24.
with the Images of Philosophers, Pithagoras, Plato, Aristotle, and others,
they did set up the Images of Jesus, and did then adore them, and celebrate the
mysteries of the Pagans; al which the Catholic Church does censure for damnable
idolatry.

To the second, against the sign of the Cross, the Valentinians are
reprehended by S. Ireneus, Iren. l. 1. c. 1. Epiph. her. 31.
and S. Epiphanius, for inuenting 30. Gods, which they called Aones, and in
them two Christ's, one of which they named Crux; but against the sign of the
Cross, they do not so much as insinuate any one word.

As to the third, against Extreme Unction, prayer for the dead, and sprinkling
the^ with Holie-water, S. Epiphanius Her. 36. Iren. l. 1. c. 18.
answers: That the Heracleonites thinking to redeem those, who were seduced
by them, at the end of their life, some of them powered upon the head of the
Party departed, oil mingled with water; others an ointment which is called
the Juice of Balm, and water; yet both using this common Invocation etc.
Nessia, Vphareg, Namepsaeman, Chaldaeam, Mosomedea, Acplirane, Pseuua, Jesus
Nazaria: And this they do that those, who have these inuocations at the end of
their life, with water, and oil, or an ointment mingled, may be
incomprehensible and enuisible to supernal Principalities and Powers. Thus far
S. Epiphanius, and the same is taught by S. Ireneus. Al which is most
impertinent and dissonant to our known doctrines of Extreme Unction, Prayer
for the dead, and Holie-water.

To the Fourth, against Invocation of Angels; S. Epiphanius Haebr. 3.
cited, plainly testifyeth, that the Cainans worshipped Cain and Judas, glorying
that they were allied to them: As also to the Sodomites, Esau, and Core;
affirming that others could not be saved, except they went through al sins,
referring their particular abominations, either to Angels, or to such as
falsely by them were called Angels, attributing to every one of them, some
heinous sin, applying their action to the name of the Angel, whom they will.
And when they do these things, they say: O Angel, I use thy work; o Power, I
do thy action. Al which is condemned by Catholics, as most ridiculous and
impious.

To the Fifth, against Baptism by women in case of necessity; S. Epiphanius
Haer. 42
testifyeth, that Marcion held, that a man might be thrice Baptized; and that
he made women no less then men, the public and ordinary Ministers of
Baptism. Now that women may Baptize in case of necessity, it is defended by
Hook. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. sec. 61. 62. Schluselburg. Theol. Call. f. 68. Lambert.
Act. mon. p. 541. Woodman. Ib. p. 1590. Sarcerius loc. com. f. 229. sec.
Whiteg. Def. p. 518. 522. 523. 518.
sundry Protestants. And more then this, the Roman Church does not teach
herein.

To the Sixth, against the Images, and worship of our B. Lady, S. Epiphanius
Haer. 79.
writes, that certain women decking a square table, and spreading a linen
cloth over it, upon a solemn day of the year, did set on bread, and offer it,
in the name of Marye; so taking upon them, to be her Priests, and to offer
Sacrifice to her: Which S. Epiphanius condemns, in that, says he, from the
beginning of the world, never waman Sacrificed to God, no not Eve; as also in
that God only, is to be honored with Sacrifice. Al which is also rejected by
the Roman Church, which only allows Sacrifice to God.

To the Seventh, against long hair, I do not understand why it is urged more
against us, then against themselves: But as for the Messalians, Haer. 80.
S. Epiphanius records that they suffered their heads to grow at length like
women; which I have neither seen, nor heard to be practiced in any Catholic
Country.

To the Eighth, against Church-garments; S. Epiphanius Haer. 15.16.
writes that the Scribes and Pharisees wore in their common daily garments,
Cassacks with dilated Philacteries, and enlarged fringes; which use also our
Savior Mat. 23.5.
describes in them, as noting thereby their hypocrisy. But what makes this
against Church apparel, which Protestant Ministers, and Bishops themselves use,
and which D. Whiteguift Def. p. 264.
defends, deriuing the use thereof from the Apostles times?

But D. Fulk Against Purgatory p. 419.
yet farther urges against Catholics that, They take prescript times of
fasting, and unmeasurable extolling of single life in the Ministers of the
Church from the Manichees, Tatianists, and Montanists. Secondly, Prayer for the
dead, of the Montanists. Thirdly Purgatorie-fire, of the Origenists. Fourthly,
Of Answ. to a Count. Cath. p. 21. 22.
the Essenes, the superstition of Relics; for they used to take the spittle,
and other filth from the bodies of Marthis, and Marthana, which were of the
seed of Elxai, that is, great Saints with them, and used them to cure diseases.
Fifthly, of the said Elxai, to command the people to pray in a strange tongue.

But all this is as idle and impertinent as the former. And so to the first
against prescribed times of fast, D. Fulk shall receive his answer from his
own Brethren, Eccl. Pol. l 5. p. 209. 210.
M. Hooker answers, that the Montanists were reprehended only, for that they
brought in sundry unaccustomed days of fasting; continued their fasting a
great deal longer, and made them more rigorous etc. Whereupon Tertullian
maintayning Montanisme, wrote a book in defense of the new Fast. Exam. part. 4
p. 143.
Chemnitius confesses more particularly, that the Montanists make three Lents
in the year, as though three Saviors had suffered in the year. And he further
charge them for ieiunia propria; for Fasts peculiar to themselves. In like
sort, an other Querimonia Eccl. p. 110.
Protestant roriter answers saying: They say that Eusebius plainly teaches
that Montanus made the first laws of fasting; but they are gratly deceived in
this, as in other things etc, Montanus abrogating the Fasts of the Church,
brought in a new custom of fasting. Herein also D. Morton is our kind
Advocate. Prot. Appeal. p. 309.
We object not (says he) unto our Adversaries the grossenes of the Montanists,
who held three lents; wherein they imposed only an abstinence from dry me^ts;
upon an opinion etc. that those things had an evil beginning: Now if D. Fulk be
comprehended in D. Mortons (We) then did he undeservedly object against
Catholics, the error of the Montanists. So wholly impertinent is the objection
from Montanus.

And as to the abstinence from flesh, and marriage; the Manichees and
Tatianists condemned flesh and marriage, as pertaining to the il God: according
to the Heresy of the Valentinian before them. To this end says Ad Quod
vult-Deu. haer. 25. 40. 53.
S. Austin of the Tatianists or Encratites: They condemn marriages, and
esteem of them al alike as of fornication, and other pollutions; neither admit
they to their number, any that use marriage. They eat^^ flesh, but account al
flesh as abominable. A thing so evident, that the Puritan M. Jacob Def. of the
Churches Ministry of Eng. p. 59.
answerably acknowledges in our behalf, that Marcion the Heretic, and
Tatamus, did absolutely condemn marriage, and certain meats, and so are in
no comparison with the Papists, if they erred in nothing else. In like sort
says D. Morton; our Adversaries Prot. Appeal. p. 600.
feared the eating of certain meats, as the Heretical Tatianists and
Manichees anciently had done; but with a difference; for the foresaid Heretics
taught, that men might not eat certain sorts of meats, because they thought
they were not made of the good God, but of the Evil; for the which cause they
were condemned in Councels. But abstinence from certain meats is appointed in
our Church (say the Rhemists) for chastising the body with Penance; Heerby
acording unto us, that it is not always Quid, but Quo; that is, not the same
Action, but the diverse principles and intentions of the Action, do distinguish
truth from Heresy. So confessed a difference there is, even in D. Mortons
Judgment, between our Catholic truth, and the Heresy of the Tatianists, and
Manichees concerning abstinence from certain meats.

To come then to the second, against Prayer for the dead; D. Fulk barely
affirms; that it is taken from Montanus, not being able to allege any one
testimony, of any one Father, witnessing the same, or charging Montanus with
error in that respect. Yea his own conscience did tell him the contrary, when
he confessed that he uttered this but of Against Purgat. p. 417.
thought, and Ib. p. 263.
conjecture, and as a thing that may well be so: Whereas I have proved (25)
at large, that Prayer for the dead, was taught by S. Cyprian, and other
Fathers living with, and before Montanus.

To the third against Purgatory fire; Origens error was, that Hel-fire was
not everlasting, but temporal; which (as S. Austin Ad. quod vult. haer. 43.
relates) should in time purge not only them, that had ended their lives in
most horrible sins; but also the Devils themselves: Which opinion makes so
little, or rather truly nothing against Purgatory, that S. Austin, and S.
Epiphanus, who confute the errors of Origin, do yet See before. l. 2. c. 11.
confessedly believe and defend the Catholic doctrine of Purgatory, and
Prayer for the dead.

To the fourth against worshipping of Relics of Saints; haer. 19.
S. Epiphanius reports, that the Essenes were a sect of Jews, and that
Marthis being the kinswoman of Elxat, and Marthana his sister, they were in the
country of the Essenes adored for Gods, for that they were of Elxais stock;
The spitle of which woman, and the filthes of their bodies, the Heretics of
that country did take to them, thereby to cure diseases, but yet without any
effect at al. Now, as this folly of the Essenes makes nothing at al, against
the Act. 19.12.
napkins, or handkerchefs, which being brought from Paul's body to the sick,
the diseases departed from them, and the wicked spirits went out; so neither
does it make any thing against the Religious estimation of Saints Relics,
and the Miraculous cures, which God has showed by them; according to the
undoubted and confessed report, and See before. l. 2. c. 15.
testimony of the ancient Doctors.

To the fifth against the vulgar peoples praying in Latin, or other unknown
tongue; S. Epiphanius relates, amongst the other errors of Elxai, haer. 19.
that he prescribed this prayer: Abir, anid moib nochile daasin any daasin
nochile moib anid abar selan: which prayer being interpreted as S. Epiphanius
affirms, it was nothing but vain words. But what makes this against godly
prayers allowed and prescribed by the Pastors of Christ's Church? So that D.
Fulks pretended errors against the Catholic Church are nothing else, being
duly examined, but malicious, forged, and idle inventions of his own brain.

Other Protestants Whitaker contra Duraeum. l. 7. fol. 480.
object, that we take from the Manichees, Communion under one kind. But this
also is most untrue, for Exam. part. 2. p. 145. Zepperus de Sacrament. p. 41.
Chemnitius himself truly explaineth this, and says: The Manichees, because
they detested wine, as an abominable thing, and imagined the body of Christ,
as only fantastical, not to have had true blood, they endeavored to bring in
the receiving only of one kind; for which errors they were condemned, by S.
Leo, and Gelasius; and are still by all Catholic Doctors. And we are further
cleared herein at large by Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 139 140.
D. Morton in these words: Knowing that the Manichees did heretically celebrate
the Eucharist only in one kind, the bread, but the wine they did not allow,
because they imagined wine to have been created by an evil spirit, and were
therefore anciently condemned for Heretics; would now the Apologists hold it
conscionable in Protestants, to accuse the Romanists of that Heresy of the
Manichees, because they distribute not the Eucharist in both the elements bread
and wine? Nay would they not rather reject this accusation, as altogether
injurious saying: It was not the Manichees abstinence from the wine, but the
reason of that forbearance, which was judged heretical? So kind is M. Morton
here to Catholics; and so scrupulous in conscience, least they should be
injured, with this so unworthy imputation. But where was his conscience, or
ordinary senses, when directly contrary to the premises, in the same book
of the Appeal, himself produces D. Whitaker, and joins with him, charging us
Catholics with the said imputed Heresy of the Manichees? saying: But Ib. p.
505.
M. Whitaker in the same place, did further more note the administration of the
Eucharist but in one kind, now used in the Romish Church to have had the
original from the Manichees, etc. Where now then was his want? Shall it not be
rather imputed to the Apologists, who have not answered unto those points,
which they have so willingly concealed, then unto our Doctors, who has
objected so many etc? Thus confessing D. Whitaker to have objected to
Catholics the foresaid Heresy of the Manichees; and himself reproving our
Apologists, for not answering him therein, and as not able (says he) willingly
concealing the same. But where was conscience now when D. Morton writ this?
Sure I am not in himself, howsoever in D. Whitakers; for himself confessed
before, that it was not conscionable in Protestants, to accuse the Romanists,
of that Heresy of the Manichees, which yet himself does, citing, and
justifying D. Whitakers therein.

I might produce such like impertinent matter pretended by Protestants: but
because it is rather urged by them, to delude the ignorant and unlearned, then
upon any conscience or confidence of truth, I will therefore conclude, with the
more sincere proceeding of their own Brother in this kind M. Parker, and that
in his own words: Against Symbol. part. 1. p. 149.
we lay (says he) to the Papists charge a Communion with Carpocrates, in
worshipping Images; with the Heracleonites in annoynting the dead with oil,
with the Tatiam in abstaining from marriage, with the Peputiani in suffering
women to be Priests; with the Manichees in abstaining from meats; with the
Angelici in worshipping Angels; with the Apostolici and Hieraclites in their
Monks, Nuns, and Friars with the like (being the examples objected by D.
Fulk, D. Willet D. Morton, and others) when yet our hearts (says M. Parker) do
know they can shift with distinctions, to make appear, for manner and meaning,
a certain distance between these Heretics, and themselves. Now if the hearts
and Consciences of Protestants do know, that both for manner and meaning,
Catholics can make appear, a certain distance or difference between the
objected Heretics and themselves; what impenitent hearts and obdurate
Consciences bear they, still thus endeavoring by studied sleights and
forgeries, ever to obscure and disgrace, the known and most renowned truth of
Catholic Faith and Religion? Wherefore I may truly say to them, as S. Stephen
said to the Jews: Act. 7.51.
You stif-necked and vncircumsised hearts and ears, you always resist the
Holy Ghost: As your fathers (the old Heretics) your selves also.

A FVRTHER TRIAL IS MADE, Whether Catholics or Protestants be true Heretics;
and this by sundry known badges or marks of Heresy. CHAPTER VII.
D. Morton is of opinion, that Appeal p. 577.
Heresy is the Helen of Greece, engendring dissension for some carnal
respects; the Devils Concubine, conceiving deformed shapes of error; an Adder
writhing itself into perplexed senses and contradictions; and an Ape, imitating
only the terms of truth: Both Protestants and Romanists (says he) would be
loath to be patterned by these Hieroglyphics; We are now to try them both by
their own certain scantlings. After I had much wondered to see the man thus
madly to describe his own shame; I was further hence encouraged to give him an
other most certain scantling, of his own Infancy and misery in this behalf.
It has ever been holden, an infallible Badge of an Heretic, being originally
or formally a member of Christ's true Church, to go out or depart from thence
to new Sects or Congregrations by their damnable Apostasy, of whom thus
reports S. Paul: Act. 20.39.30.
I know that after my departure, there will ravening wolves enter in amongst
you, not sparing the flock: And out of your owneselues shall arise men speaking
perverse things, to draw away Disciples after themselves. In prevention
whereof, his best advise is, that Hebr. 10.23.25.
we hold the Confession of our hope vndeclining etc. not forsaking our
assembly, as some are accustomed. S. John speaking of Heretics, the
forerunners of Antichrist; for our better notice, he brandeth them with this
mark: 1. Io. 2.19.
They went out from us. S. Jude verse. 18.19.
affirms, that in the last time shall come mockers, according to their own
desires, walking in impieties; and then he names them, saying; These are they
which segregate themselves. Yea the Apostles and Priests of Jerusalem, being
assembled together in Council, to Act. 15.5.
repress the Heresy of the Pharisees and others, teaching Circumcision, and
commanding the Law of Moses to be kept; they expressly say of these Heretics,
Act. 15.24.
Because we have heard, that certain going forth from us, have troubled you,
with words subuerting your soul etc. Yea Christ himself foretelling the
coming of Heretics, forewarneth us against them, saying; Math 24 26.
If they shall say unto you, Behold (Christ) is in the desert (of our invisible
Church) go ye not out: to wit, from your former known Church. Gal. 5.19.20.
Tit. 3.10. 2. Cor. 11.19.
So that the sacred Scriptures have left us for the special Mark and Character
of Heresy; The going-out, or Apostaring from the known visible Church of
Christ. In so much as the word, Heresy, (in Scripture so odious) being in
Greek, HERESIS does truly signify singular Election and separation, as both
Peter Com. Places. Par. 2. p. 330. Muscu. loc. com. p. 552.
Martyr and Musculus confess.

Most answerably hereunto says S. Austine: Tract. 3. in Ep. Joan.
Al Heretics, al Schismatics have gone out from us, that is they go out of
the Church. And giving the reason why the Prophets spoke more plainly of the
Church then of Christ, he says: In Psalm. 30. conc. 2. and Tom. 8. in ps. 106.
I think therefore it was because they foresaw in spirit, that men would make
factions against the Church, and not contend so much concerning Christ, being
to raise up great strifes about the Church: Therefore that was more plainly
foretold and prophesied, about which there was to be greater dissensions, that
so it might serve to them for judgment (or condemnation) who have seen her,
and fled out from her. Optatus advises that, L. 1.
It is to be observed who remainenth in the Root with the whole world, who
goes forth. And Aduers^ haer. c. 34.
Vincentius demands: Who ever hegun Heresies, but he who first severed
himself from the union of the universality and Antiquity of the Catholic
Church? which to be so, examples make known more clear then the Sun.

But this point is so clear, that the truth thereof is accordingly acknowledged
and approved by Protestant Doctors. So D. Field makes this peculiar Of the
Church l. 1. c. 13. p. 25. 26 Alison in his confut. of Brownisme. p. 1.
unto Schismatics and Heretics: To depart, and go out from the Church of God.
In Osiander Cent. 1. p. 78.
it is said: Observe, Heretics go out of the Church. M. Clapham speaking of
our Saviors former words, Remedy against Schism p. 23
affirms: That thereby our Savior forbiddes going out unto such desert and
corner Ghospels. And will Chronological discourse. c. 7. And upon the song of
songs fol 3. And see Zanchius in miscelanea. p. 55. 56. 57.
we not reverence before Gods judgment, and take heed of Going out, as our
Savior premonished? Pantaleon says: Ep. nuncu pat. Christi Chronogr.
we have assigned the third place to Heretics, who have Gone out of the elect
people of God, but were not of them. So that Scriptures Fathers and Protestants
do al of them agree: That the Going out or departing from the Church, is the
Badge of Heresy; and Persons so Going out, are thereby marked Heretics.
Examples heerof we have in all former Heretics; in Arius, Macedonius,
Nestorius, Pelagius, Eutyches, Donatus, waldo, Wicclif, Husse etc. who al of
them, being at first Roman Catholics, through Innovation of opinions,
afterward severed themselves from their mother Church, going out from her to
new Congregations.

But now to apply this to Catholics and Protestants and breefly to examine
whether company has gone or departed out of a former known Church, the true
Church of Christ; and first to give M. D. Morton, a short scantling concerning
himself and his Brethren; his own neighbor M. Mason, answering certain
demands of Catholics in this kind says: Consecrat of English Bishopes p. 41.
When it pleased him, which causes the light to spring out of darkness, we did
spring from yourselues, being still content to be yours, so you would be
Christ's. In like sort says Apol. p. 288.
D. Jewel: We have indeed gone from the Pope, we have shaken of the yoke of
the Bishop of Rome. It is true (says Act. mon. p. 3.
M. Fox) we are removed from the Church of Rome. And D. Rainolds In his
Conclusions annexed to his Conference.
makes this one of his Conclusions: That the reformed Churches in England,
Scotland, France, Germany, and other kingdoms, and Commonwealths have
severed themselves, lawfully (says he) from the Church of Rome. And as for
Luther himself, he was at first so Roman Catholic, as that (says, he In Ep ad
Gal. fol. 38. and see 37. 188.
I did so highly esteem the Popes authority, that to dissent from him, even
in the least point, I thought it a sin, worthy of everlasting death, and
would my self in the defense of the Popes Authority, have ministered fire and
sword. Calvin speaking of Protestants in general expressly says: In Ep. 141. p.
273.
we were enforced to make a departure from the whole world; yea we Instit. l.
4. c. 6. 1.
have departed, says he, from her, to wit, the Roman Church. And so
accordingly it is so evident, that Waldo, Wicliffe, Husse, Luther, Calvin,
Zuinglius etc. were first borne, baptized, and brought up in the Catholic
Church, from whence afterward through Novelty and Liberty they went out, and
became Apostates, as that to endeavor any special proof thereof, might justly
be censured of no less idle vanity, then to seem to deny it, of greatest
ignorance or impudency. And so leaving our Protestants thus confessedly Going
out of our former Catholic Roman Church, and thereby branding themselves with
the infamous Mark of Heretics: I will examine what Protestants think of the
Roman Church in this behalf. And indeed this crime of Going out, is in it self
so foul a blemish, as that some Protestants much desire to stayne our Roman
purity therewith. So D. Fulk would have the world to think, That Retentiue p.
85.
the Popish Church, is but an Heretical Assembly, departed from the universal
Church, long since Augustins departure out of this life. With whom agrees his
Brother blindbyard D. Sutclif, affirming, That Survey of Poper p. 315.
the Papists are a sect going out of Christ's Church, and rising long after
Christ's time. But these great Doctors speak much, but prove nothing; for it
behooved them, to assign a former Church, from whence the Papists thus
revolted, as also the persons, who; the time, when; with other Circumstances;
of al which they rest silent.

Wherefore to clear our Roman Church of this so foul Imputation, and that to
the perfect sight of the blearedst eye; And first to omit al former
testimonies, plentifully exhibited in proof of her confessed, known, and
vn-interrupted Conrinuance from the Apostles times to these of ours; as also to
forbear, that ancient Doctors and Writers in all Ages do specially mention and
register up, al notorious departures made by any Heretics from the true
Church, not insinuating the least concerning our Roman:

Our Innocence herein is so notoriously apparent, as that sundry Protestants
being provoked in this kind to give the least Instance of any such departure
in our Roman Church, are ever enforced in their answer thereunto, only to fly to
our pretended departure from the sacred Scriptures; so passing over al
precedent Ages, without any color of Examples to be urged against us. So M.
Knewstubs Answer to certain assertions etc. p. 35.
answers: you require to know, if our doctrine were the same, which they in
the Primitive Church professed, who they were that did at that time note our
Going out etc. This question is altogether unnecessary; for when an offender
is taken with the manner, it is needless to stand upon Examination of them,
who were at the deed doing: We have taken you with the manner; that is to say,
with Doctrine diverse from the Apostles; and therefore neither Law nor
conscience can force us to examine, who were witnesses of your first departing.
With whom agrees M. Powel, only answering, that the Roman Church, is
Consideration of the Papists supplication p. 36.
fallen from the doctrine comprehended in the writings of the Apostles. But to
omit, that this answer is a base and shameless begging of the thing it self in
question, to wit, that we are departed from the Scriptures, which, as most
untrue, we ever do deny: It is further most impertinent to the point now urged,
which is, whether the Roman Church, has gone out from any other known
Church; yea it most strongly argues the contrary, seeing they much desiring to
exemplify against us herein, for want of al Instance during these 1600. years,
constrained to iumpe them over, and only to insist in the writings of the
Apostles; then which what more strongly can be urged in our behalf?

And yet in like sort for want of better answer, D. Sutclif Answer to the mass.
Priests supplicat. c. 7.
says: Neither is it material that the Roman Church never went out of any
known Christian Society: So insinuating her never Going out, with is the only
thing I here desire to prove. But if this be not material with D. Sutclif, yet
is it most material and conuincing with all men of judgment; for if the Roman
Church or any other Church, having once been confessed members of the true
ancient visible Church of Christ, did never depart, or Go out of the said true
Church; then are they still yet within it, and members of it; Now that the Romam
Church was not only a true Church in the Apostles times, but also unto the time
of S. Austin and further, it is abundantly already confessed; and therefore
seeing she has confessedly never departed out; the sequel is evident, that
still she continues the true Church; then which, what can be urged more
material either in our defense, or more disgraceful against al Protestants?

But the truth hereof is so palpable, as that the learned Protestants, in
color and excuse of their Church not departing out of the known visible
Church, do chiefly urge and pretend their own communion with the Roman Church
in all Ages whatsoever. So M. Bunnie very wisely teaches that, Treat. to
pacific. see 18. p. 108.
Of departing from the Church there ought to be no question at al amongst us
etc. we Ib. p. 113.
are no several Church from them, nor they from us, and therefore there is no
departing at al out of the Church, for any to depart from them to us, nor from
us to them: All the difference between us, is concerning the truer members,
whether we, or they may be found more worthy of that account: As for the
other, we allow no such question. In so much that he affirms; that Ib. p. 109.
it was il done of them, who first urged such a separation, confessing further,
our advantage Sec. 15. p. 92.
given thereby; for that ^b. p. 96.
(says he) it is great probability with them, that so we make ourselves
answerable for to find out a distinct and several Church from them, which
continued from the Apostles Age to this present; else, that needs we must
acknowledge, that our Church is sprung up of late, or since theirs. So
earnestly does he labor his Churches not Departing from the Roman Church; and
thereby supposes the Roman Churches never departing from any other, for if
the Roman Church had ever departed her self, then were it no proof, but rather
a conviction of the Protestant Churches most certain departure.

But instead of al such pretended departure, D. Field acknowledges further,
That Of the Church. p. 88.
the Roman Church held still Communion with those other (Churches) which never
fell into error, and so were both of one Communion: Which evidently proves she
never went out of the true Church, but still preserved Communion and Society
with her.

So evident it is, that our Roman Church is freed from that infamous Mark of
Heresy of Going out of the Church; which yet Protestants have so clearly done,
going out of our Roman Church, and that our honor, and their infamy therein,
is proclaimed to the world, by men condemned thereby, even by Luther, Calvin,
Osiander, Pantaleon, Clapham, Alison, Mason, Fox, Rainolds, Jewel, Fulk,
Sutclif, Knewstubs, Powel, Bunnie and Field.

But to give M. D. Morton yet another scantling, whether Catholics or
Protestants be truly Heretics: It is a supposed principle taught by S.
Hierome: Ad Ctesiphont and Vincent Lyri. cont. haereses c. 4.
That to reduce an Heresy to it beginning, is a confuting of it. Thus S.
Ireneus refuted the Valentinians, and Marcionists, saying. L. 3. c. 4.
Before Valentine, there were not any which are from Valentine; neither before
Marcion, were they which are from Marcion. And D. Whitaker avouches, That
Cont. Duraeum l. 7. p. 479.
no man denies, but that it much avails to the confuting of Heresies to have
known their beginning. In like sort D. Fotherbie, in behalf of the Cross,
argues thus: If Answ. to object against the Cross in Bap. p. 26.
it be but an humane invention, let us know, I pray you, the first Inuentour of
it, and when it was first decreed, and how it came so soon to be so generally
observed; which if you cannot show us, I think we may with greater probability
esteem it to be an Apostoltcal Tradition. D. Sarauia says upon an other
occasion: In def. Tract. de diverse minist. Grad. c. 23. p. 361.
I answer it is not enough to say so, but it must be showed out of Histories,
which were those schisms, and where, and when they sprung up; and how from
thence so general a custom came. Agreably writes M. Bell Regiment of the
Church p. 26. 27.
If any man deny this old custom, let that man show, when it came in. And D.
Jewel urges D. Harding, concerning an error of former times alleged by him.
Reply p. 112.
If there had been any show of truth in it, M. Harding would have laid out all the Circumstances, when this strange error first began, where, and how long it
continued, who wrote against it etc? Verily this great silence declares some
want. D. Bilson says: Survey of Christ's suff^ings, p. 660.
The report of Eusebius proves this clause, of Christ's descending to Hades, to
have been anciently and openly professed in the primitive Church; otherwise the
Religious of those Ages, that lived with, and after Eusebius, if he had
broached any new point of Faith, as in duty they were bound, so no doubt they
would have refuted and resisted them. D. Whiteguift, defending Cathedral
Churches against M. Cartwright, demands accordingly of him: Denfen. p. 747.
From what Pope they came, or in what time they were first invented? Yea he
further teaches: Ibid. p. 351.
That as for so much as the original and beginning of these names, Metropolitan,
Archibishop etc. such is their antiquity, cannot be found, so far as I have
read, it is to be supposed, they have their original from the Apostles
themselves; for as I remember S. Austin has this Rule in his 118 Epistle. And,
Ibid. p 352.
It is of credit with the writers of our time, namely, with M. Zuinglius, M.
Calvin, and M. Gualter, and surely I think no learned man does dissent from
them. Lastly says D. Morton Prot. Appeal. p. 465.
We willingly join issue, and if we cannot prove, that the Roman Church has
in many weighty points of Religion degenerated from herself, then shall we no
more decline from her, as from a malignant stepdame, but devoutly yield unto
her al due acknowledgement, as unto a Mother Church.

And now to join issue herein with M. Doctor, and so to square hereby the
truth of Roman, or Protestant Religion: Our Catholic Faith is so confessedly
free, from any known beginning since the Apostles, and so wholly agreeable with
S. Austins foresaid Rule, as that Ib.
Thereby (in M. Cartwrights opinion) a window is open to bring in all Popery;
yea Ibid. p. 103.
I appeal to the judgment of al men, if this be not to bring in Popery
again, to allow of S. Austins saying. So evident it is, that Popery is
without any known beginning, and consequently no Heresy.

In like sort M. Powel being provoked, that if Consideration of the Pap sts
Supplic. p. 43.
our Doctrine be error, then to tell us when it came in, who was the Author of
it etc. answers thereto directly in our behalf saying: We cannot tell by whom,
or at what time the Enemy did sow it etc. Neither indeed do we know, who was
the Author of every one of your blasphemous epinions. And so D. Whitaker
confesses: Resp. ad Camp. Rat. 7. p. 101.
That the time of the Roman Churches change cannot easily be told: Yea well
foreknowing the impossibility of any such time to be assigned, he only
euadeth by affirming, That Protestants Lib. 3. Cont. Dur. p. 277.
are not bound to answer, in what Age Superstition crept into the Church. And;
It is not needful for Protestants to search out in Histories the beginning of
this change. With whom agrees Buchanus, saying: loc. com. p. 466.
It belongs not to us to assign what time the Church begun to fade away.
But if this be not needful for D. Whitaker or other Protestants to find out;
why did D. Whitaker before teach, that no man denies but that it much
avails, for the confuting of Heresis, to have known their beginning: So
forcible is the truth of the Roman Churches never changing in Faith and
Religion.

D. Field being urged to give Instance of any Contradiction made against the
Roman Church, upon the example but of any one first known change in Doctrine;
in steed of answer, acknowledges, that Of the Church l. 3. ^. 13. p. 89.
the aberration in the Church of Rome in matters of Doctrine, was in such
things, and so carried in the beginings, that the Authors of these new and
false opinions, were not disclaimed and noted as damnable Heretics: Yea the
Authors of these errors, and they that were free from them, were,
notwithstanding these differences, both of our Communion; and therefore the
Circumstances (of the first Author, and his Contradiction etc.) cannot be
showed. Here though it pleased M. Doctor to term our Catholic points of
Doctrine errors, yet is he further pleased in our behalf plainly to
acknowledge, that no first Author or beginning can be showed of these pretended
errors, which is the point we desire. D. Fulk likewise being urged to give
any example of the time when, or by whom, our Roman Faith was contradicted, or
charged with Innouarion, only says: Rtioinder to Bristow p. 265.
I answer, my text says, it was a Mystery not revealed, and therefore could
not be openly preached against. But though the Iniquity or Apostasy foretold
by 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
S. Paul, whereof D. Fulk speaks, be a Mystery in the prediction; yet this
nothing lets, but that it may be conspicuous and most markable in he event;
as the accomplishment of al predictions are. Yea this truth, of no known
beginning or change in our Roman Faith, is so certain, as that sundry
Protestants earnestly labor to find out several pretenses or excuses, why
any such change or Innovation was never noted, or observed; so supposing and
granting their ignorance of al such imaginary change; and only seeking to
euade by mere fallacies, and impertinent examples.

Thus D. Fulk examining, why our Religion entered the Primitive Church without
Contradiction, resolves, Answ. to a Conterfaite Cath. p. 43.
that it entered by small degrees at the first, and was therefore less espied by
the true Pastors, who were earnestly occupied against greater Heresies, as the
Valentinians, Marcionists, and Manichees: And therefore Against Purgatory p.
256.
either had no leisure to epsy, or else made less account to reform the same.
But this is most idle; for the Fathers were most watchful and ready to
suppress al errors, even of much lesser importance in themselves, then are,
or were our Catholic Doctrines of Mass, Real Presence, Adoration of the
Sacrament, Confession, Justification by work etc. t^ough we should for the
time, suppose them to be errors. Examples hereof might be given, about the
keeping of Easter Day Ignat. Ep. ad Philip. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 22. 23.
in the time of Victor, and before; about prescript days of Epiph. haer. 75.
fasting; about mingling of water 56)
with wine in the Chalice; about the very ceremonies 57)
of Exorcisme and Exufflation in Baptism, and sundry such like, which I
purposely pretermit; D. Couel himself granting, that Examination etc. p. 64. 65.
great and violent dissentions have risen in the Church for Ceremonies; and
that Councels have condemned (some) as Heretics, only for being opposite in
this kind.

But D. Fulk urges further that some of our opinions, as namely Prayer for the
dead, Answer to a Count. Cath. p. 39.
deceived simple men the sooner, because it had a pretense of charity, and
show Against Purgat. p. 386.
of piety confirmed by custom, whereby it was at length allowed of by Austin,
and others, who never weighed the matter by Scripture. But what errors had
more pretense of piety or charity, then Origens; for the Salvation of Devils;
Tertullians for chastity, S. Cyprians against Baptism by Heretics, Montanus
for austere Fastings, and Papias for Christ's raigninge upon earth a thousand
years aster the Resurrection? and yet al these, Montanus only excepted, being
principal men, and of special deseruings in the Church of Christ, were
grievously contradicted and reproved by the Catholic Doctors of theirs and
succeding times for these very errors.

But M. Woton persisteth, saying, to Catholics: Trial of the Roman Clergy p.
378.
It is ridiculous for you to challenge us to show, when the Faith received by
the Church of Rome from the Apostles, began to fail in it; it was done, as our
Savior speaks in the like case, while men slept: And the same sleepie
argument is urged by D. White Way to the true Church p. 371.
But this is clearly to contradict God himself, who said, Isa. 62.6.
upon thy walls o Jerusalem, have I set watch men; all the day and all the
inght for ever, they shall not hold their peace. Now, if they were al asleep
when so many and so great pretended errors of Catholic Doctrines, as are
supposed to have begun, and that in several times and Ages, how could they be
more silent, or how could they be said to watch, either day or inght? How could
that saying of S. Austin be true: Ep. 119. c. 19.
The Church of God beset with chafe and cockle, although she tolerate many
things (which she is not able to redress) yet such things as be against
Faith, or good life, she neither allows, nor passes over in silence? Or how
is that verified of D. Fulk, Answ. to a Count. Cath. p. 11. and 92.
that the true Church has always resisted al false opinion, with open
reprehension? Or how is that true which White himself avouches saying: Way to
the true Church Ep. Ded. sec. 8.
The primitive Church, and all the Doctors thereof would never yield, I will not
say in an opinion, but not so much as in a form of speech, or in the change of
a letter sounding against the orthodoxal Faith etc. Yea Ib. sec. 6.
the vigilancie, zeal, and courrage of the Primitive Bishops was admirable
etc. There could no Heresy harbor under them, but they drove it out. So clear
it is, that the true Churches Pastors, are never so sleepie, as to suffer any
errors to be published or practiced without their resistance.

But D. White, M. Woton and other Protestants, observing that this pretense of
sleeping, would nothing avail them, do therefore acknowledge, that such was
the nicenes of our imagined Inventions, that they could not be seen or
discerned; so faith M. Wooton, Trial of the Roman clergy. p. 383.
You press us, that if there had been any alteration of Religion, it would
have been recorded; but how should it have been recorded, when it was not seen?
The alteration grew so nicely, that few, or none could discern it. D. White
exemplifyeth this, saying: Way to the true Churhc p. 370.
The Romish Faith came into the true Church, as sickness does in to the body,
and ruin to a house which appears not by and by at the first, but then when
it is ripened. D. Whitaker instanceth in the hairs of a Cont. Camp. Rat. 7. p.
101. 102.
man's head, which wax not white suddenly; and in slifters entering into a
building, at first not to be perceived. But to omit that, as Peter Martyr
confesses Epist. anex. to his com. plac. in Engl. p. 131.
unless a man do diligently examine similitudes, he shall easily be deceived by
them: This argument being taken from excrements, diseases, and ruins, is no
less unworthy, infirm, and ruinous itself; for first in none of these is the
change made, instantly and at the first, but by degrees and in success of
time; whereas in Doctrine every opinion is at the first, either true or false.
Secondly, the first whitnes of hairs, or the first decay in health, or
building, cannot at the first he discerned, though they were most precisely
regarded, which is evidently otherwise in change of Doctrine, and practice
thereof. Thirdly, none are specially appointed, neither is there any such
urging necessity to mark the first change of the hairs, and the like;
whereas it is the special charge, and command, not of few, but of all the
Churches Pastors, not only to observe, but also publicly to withstand the
other, with the uttermost of their power and learning.

But admitting for the time, that the foresaid similitudes were pertinent, and
that we were not to urge Protestants to show the first beginning of our so great
a change, as is by them imagined; Yet we are in all reason to expect, that as,
though the first white hair, or slifter, or degree of disease, be not
discerned, yet the further degrees and increase of them being most markable and
to be seen, that therefore they are to discover, and describe to us, some
sensible proceedings, and increase of this our supposed change. And if they will
say, it was not made al at once, but by little, and little, sometimes in on point
of Faith, sometimes in an other, then still must we urge them to show those
several little changes, as what points of doctrine were so by degrees changed?
Who were the Authors of the change? What Popes begun or first allowed them? by
what Doctors; and Pastors were they first contradicted? Or else, they in all
these being most silent, we may most strongly conclude, that our Roman Church,
being thus free from al known change or Innovation, since the Apostles times,
that therefore she is not any Heretical sect, Going out or departing from a
former Church, nor her doctrine Heretical, no one Article thereof being liable
to that foulest stayne of Innovation.

Whereas to the contrary, the very first beginings, changes, and Apostasies,
made by Waldo, Wicclif, Husse, Luther, Suinglius, Calvin, or any other
pretended Protestant, in any Age whatsoever, were ever so observed,
contradicted, and condemned by the watchful Pastors of the Roman Church, as
that every particular, both of Person, time, place, and opinion, are every
where to be seen in sundry Writers, both Catholic and Protestant.

But to reach M. D. Morton yet an other scantling of an Heretic, we must
observe, that this name Christian, given at first to al believers, was
especially taken to distinguish them from the Jews and Gentiles, which believed
not at al in Christ. But when Heretics began to arise from among the
Christians, who professed still Christ's name, and sundry Articles of Faith, the
name Christian was too general to sever Heretics from true believers. And
therefore the Apostles imposed the name Catholic upon al such as in all points
were obedient to the Churches Doctrine. Hereof says expressly M. Wotton Trial
of the Romish clergy p. 285. 286.
The reason of the name, Catholic, was at first, that there might be a title,
to distinguish sound Christians, and true churches, from Heretics.

And of the contrary in all Ages it was ever usual that every Sect or
Company, embracing new Doctrine, though but in some one or other point
contrary to the Catholic faith, received thereupon the like answerable
alteration of name; sometimes from the Doctrines so newly embraced, sometimes,
and that more usually, from the first Author and Inuentour himself. And it was
thought meet, says M. Woton Ib. p. 286.
That Heretics should be called by some special name, either of their Author,
or of some points of error which they held. In like sort D. Field doubts not
to say: Of the Church l. 2. c. 9. p. 57.
Surely it is not to be denied, but the naming after the names of men, was in
the time of the Primitive Church, peculiar and proper to Heretics and
Schismatics only. Neither Apology etc. p. 30. 31.
do I see (says M. Parker) any sufficient reason, why those among us, whom
singularity in affection, and novelty in faction have denomitated Puritans,
should not be distinguished by that name etc. for in truth such new names have
in all former Ages for distinction sake been attributed unto al such, who
defended new opinions, either devised by themselves, or others, contrary to
the received doctrine of the whole Church.

Thus from the erroneous Doctrines, which they broached and defended, were
named the Heretical Monothelites, Aquarians, Agnoites, Theopaschites,
Catabaptists etc. And according to Hospinian Concord d^scord. f. 131.
the Enthusiastes, Anabaptists, Antimonians, and Sacramentaries; And from that
Authors themselves were named the Nicolaites, the Manichees, the Arians, the
Pelagians, the Donatists, the Nestorians, the Eutichians, the Waldenses, the
Wiccliuists, the Hussites, the Lutherans, the Caluinists, the Suinglians.

To examine now both Catholics and Protestants about this point: The name,
Catholic, we have seen was imposed to distinguish sound Christians, and true
Churches, from Heretics; and was for the same cause inserted into the Creed by
the Apostles themselves; and so accordingly, it has been used, and understood
by all Fathers Cyril Catech. 18. Aug. Cont. Ep. fundam. c. 4. and de vera Rel.
c. 7. Patianur Ep. ad Sympron.
and Writers in former Ages.

And as for the name Papist, as it was never heard of, before this Age of ours,
for 1500. years together after Christ; so was it only coined by our new
Protestants, and that not upon any necessity, for the professors of our
Religion were in being and known by the name of Catholics, in all the foresaid
Ages, before the name of Papists was ever heard of. Besides neither does it
point to any one or other special Pope, or new supposed Doctrine in
particular, but most strongly for our Justification in this behalf, to al Popes
and doctrines alike in general. Whereas it is most evident, and for such
acknowledged, that sundry Popes have been truly Religious, and Catholic, and
their Doctrines answerable.

And whereas D. Fulk urges against Answ. to a Count. Cath. p. 65.
us the names of Benedictines, Franciscans etc. as also of Scotists and
Thomists: he shall receive his answer only from his own Brother D. Field saying
Of the Church l. 2. c. 9 p. ^8.
We must observe, that they which profess the Faith of Christ, have been
sometimes in these later Ages of the Church called affter the special name of
such men, as the Authors, Beginners, and Diuisers of such courses of
Monastical profession, as they made choice to follow, as Benedictines, and such
like. So plainly acknowledging these names, not to import any change or newnes
of Faith, but only these several Rules and orders of Monasticel and Religious
life. And so likewise he further affirms, the differences between Scotists
and Thomists, to have been in the Controversies of Religion, not yet determined
by consent of the universal Church.

So that no name was ever appropriated to Catholics, with truly imported any
Innovation in matter of Faith. And therefore if D. Field in excuse of the name
of Lutherans might say: Of the Church. p. 59.
neither was it possible that so so great an alteration etc. should be
effected, and not carry some remembrance of them by whom it was procured: At
what great and most apparent want are now our Protestants, who charge the Roman
Church with the greatest alteration before Luthers time the ever was, either
for longest continuance of time; as being confessedly for 1260. years
together; or for multitude of Countries, reigning universally; or for number
and weight of chiefest Articles of Faith; and yet for el this cannot al of them
find, so much as any step or sign thereof by any then new devised or imposed
name, either from Doctrine, Person, or Pope.

Whereas to the contrary it is more then evident, that the several names of
Protestants, Puritans, Lutherans, Zuinglians, Sacramentaries, and Caluinists,
are al of them imposed either through Innovation of Doctrine, or from the first
Author of the said sect. So the very name of, Protestants, was at first given
to certain of the Lutherans, who opposing themselves against the decrees of
the Empire made in behalf of Catholic Religion, and protesting they would
stand in defense of their own, were for such their protesting, named
Protestanto: A truth so certain that it is accordingly acknowledged and
recorded by sundry Protestants Sley. hist. l. 6. f. 81. 82. Osiand. cent. 6. p.
131. Schlus selb. Theol. call. l. 2 f. 155 Fulk Answ to a Count. Cath p. 65.
themselves. Yea the name, Protestan^ (wherewith our new Ghospellers is are best
pleased) is so certainly new, and since the revolt of Luther, as that I dare
challenge the oldest or learned Protestant living, to give the least instance
or example of any such name in any Age precedent up to the Apostles. So
lately were they christened, by the name of Protestants.

And as for Puritans, M. Parker told us before, that they were so denominated
through singularity in affection, and novelty in faction. The newnes whereof
is such, as that it was but heard of after Protestancie itself, from whence
they went out and departed; and now are become a Sect so different and adverse
from the former, as that to be understood, a distinction of names is
necessarily required. Now that Lutherans sprung from Luther, Zuinglians or
Sacramentaires from Zuinglius, and Caluinists from Calvin, it is too clear to
require any proof. Only we cannot but observe that the foresaid several names,
are not imposed by Catholics for reproach and disgrace upon Protestants: but
are used and required by themselves, for necessary distinction and knowledge
of their several, and most dissenting Sects. So says D. Whitaker Answ. to
Rainolds Pref. p. 44.
For distinction sake we are enforced to use the name of Protestants. Conradus
Schlusselburg says Catal. Heret. l. 13. and vet. p. 866.
When the Divines of our side do call their adversaries, Zuinglians, Caluinians,
and Sacramentaries, they do it not for reproach or detraction, as neither of
the contrary when they name themselves and the Defenders of their opinions
Lutherans. But as Grauerus further gives the reason saying: Absurda Absurdor.
Praefat. f. 3.
This only is therefore done, that we (Lutherans) may be distinguished from
Caluinists, and Papists, from whom either by the common name, either of
Christians, or true believers, or Catholics, we cannot be distinguished. So by
this means we distinguish ourselves from Caluinists. In like sort says
Hospinian. Hist. Sacram. part. alt. in Prol. and Lauather Hist. Sacr. Praefat.
I do abhor those Schismatical names of Lutherans, Zuinglians, and
Caluinists, yet in this History I use those names (docendi gratia) to be
understood.

Rungius speaking of the name of Lutherans says: Disp. 17. Ex Ep. ad Corinth.
Disp. 2. par. 3. sect. 4. And Piscat. his Analysis Logica Ep. Pauli p. 143.
These names are used for distinction sake, that etc. they may he known from
other men of different Religions, Papists, Caluinists, Anabaptists, and the
like. Zanchius complains that ^n Epist. l. 1. p. 32. and l. 2. p. 539.
in the reformed Churches some are not ashamed to say, we are Lutheranes, but
others are called Caluinistes, or Zuinglians; hence (says he) the Churches are
divided among themselves. An other Protestant confesses, that Cathol.
Traditions Praef. f. B. 3.
the Reformed have no Primate in common, neither any general Synodes etc.
Thence have entered amongst them etc. the names of Hussites, Lutherans,
Caluinists, Puritans. Of which last D. Downham says: Denfen. l 3. c. 1. p. 8.
I did term them Presbyterians, not knowing how to speak of them as
dissenting from us (Protestants) more charitably. So confessed it is, that
these several names of Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinists, Puritans,
Protestants, are al of them imposed by themselves, and that upon urgent
necessity, that so their difference in Faith, Profession, and Religion might
be known and discerned by their several names expressing the same; then which
what can be alleged more conuincing, either to prove their dissentions amongst
themselves, or the point now insisted upon, their palpable Innovation and
change in faith, and the very pointing and naming of the very first Authors,
and Broachers thereof, and consequently their Sect to be Heretical, seeing the
reducing of an Heresy to it beginning, is confessedly a confuting of it.

But now some Protestants hereby perceauing our Roman Church to be thus free
from al noted change or Innovation, as also their own errors to be easily
traced to their first beginings and first Authors; for their preventing hereby
that so odious name of Heretics* they endeavor to prove eu^n against their
other Brethren, that a Sect or Heretical profession may be published or
followed, without note of any known beginning, either of the doctrine, or the
Author. So D. Fulk obiecteth that, Against Purgat. p. 388.
There was an Heresy of them, that were called Acephalt, because there was noe
Head known of them. But D. Fulk bewrays here most grossly his ignorance; for
these Heretics, were so named of Seuerus Conc. Nycen. 2. p. 62. Tom. 3 Niceph.
l. 16 c. 27. and l. 28 c. 45.
Acephalus Bishop of Antioche, who was their Head; and they were but a part of
the Eutychians, whose Head was Eutyches. In so much as the Protestant Pappus
says most directly contrary to D. Fulk: Epist. Hist. Eccl. p. 494. And see
Omerod in his picture of a Puritant p. 12.
The Ac^phali were so named, not because the first Author of their Error was
unknown, but because etc. But besides, though their first Author could not be
named, yet is this no proof that their first beginning is not known, which
beginning being othe^wise proved, the naming of the first Author needs not,
the Author being only sought for, thereby to know the beginning.

In like sort, where D. Fulk alleges there also, the example of the
Chiliasts, the Ophites, the Caineans, the Scethites, the Adamites, the
Melchisedacheans, the Apostolicks, the Emerobaptists etc. whose first Authors
cannot be named; this in like respect is most impertinent, as well, in that
these and many other Heresies received their name, not from their first
Author, but from the error it self; as also for that the point here chiefly
insisted upon, is not so much of the first Author being known, as of the
first beginning being known, and thereupon contradicted: Which beginning and
contradiction being discovered, the naming of the first Author is not
necessary, we only seeking the Author, as is said before, thereby to know the
beginning; now that al these, had a known secondarie beginning after the Apostles
times, and ware thereupon contradicted, appears by S. Epiphanius and S.
Austin in their several Books of Heresies, and the same is confessed by the
Cent. 2. and 3. c. 5. Pap. Epist. Hist. Eccl. p. 324. 325. 326. 327. 328. 340.
Centurie-writers and their Brother Pappus.

The like objection is made by D. Field, producing sundry Of the Church l. 3.
c. 14. p. 89.
Examples, whose first Author (says he) cannot be named; But besides that,
diverse of them (such is his want) are not matters of Faith, or such as by the
Church are not hitherto determined; yet in that himself alleges Contradiction
to have been made against al such as were material, himself therein affoardeth
most full answer to his own objection.

Wherefore seeing many Articles of our Catholic Faith, in the opinion of
Protestants, are most grievous errors, and yet they not able to show when any
one of them first came in with Contradiction, but in all want thereof, are
enforced to betake themselves to the obscure Examples of other opinions never
taught, but impugned by the Roman Church, neither ever generally diuulged, but
abortiue and perished in their first Birth, most of them also arising in the
Churches beginning, when by reason of the general persecutions then raging, and
the want of printing, few monuments of those times are now remaining; and yet
all this notwithstanding, their beginning with Contradiction, is now to us known
and testified. Whereupon I may conclude, that it is more then probable, that if
so many of our foresaid Catholic Doctrines, having been so generally
dispersed, had ever so begun with Innovation contradicted, the same would then
have been in some one point or other, in some one country or other, by some
one man or other, known, discerned, and recorded. So clear it is, that the
Roman Church, thus confessedly never going out of any other known Church; not
any change or beginning of any point of her Faith ever observed or
contradicted, that therefore according to the former scantlings, given and
squared even by Protestants themselves, she cannot be a Church nouel and
Heretical. And so of the contrary, the Protestants Sect most apparently and
confessedly going out of our Roman Church, as also the first Authors,
beginning, and progress thereof, being at al times known, contradicted, and
condemned; the sequel is evident, that Protestancie according to all the former
scantlings, is a Sect Heretical. And so according to D. Mortons former
description: She is the Helene of Greece, engendring dissension for carnal
respects, the Devils Concubine, conceiving deformed shapes of error; an Adder
writhing itself into perplexed senses and Contradictions; and an Ape, imitating
only the terms of truth. May not Protestants now be much ashamed and
confounded to be patterned by those so odious Hieroglyphics?

A BRIEF SVRVEY OF D. WHITES CATAlogue; wherein Contrary to the Confessed truth
in the precedent Chapter, of no known beginning or change of our Roman Faith
in any Age; He undertakes (according to his Title thereof) to show, That the
present Religion of the Roman Church was observed and resisted in all Ages, as
it came in, and increased: naming withal the Persons that made the Resistance:
And the points wherein: And the time when; from fifty years to fifty,
throughout al Ages since Christ. CHAPTER VIII.
HERE I must confess M. Doctor gives us a goodly Brauado, and if his deeds
do answer what his words engage him, the foil shall be mine, and the field his;
but if he only bark, and does not bite, and lurk away when he should enter
the list, then shall ignorance, falsehood, temeritie, shame, and confusion be al
of them, his.

For trial then of his strength and art in this combat undertaken, I do intend
him a double assault; first by discovering in general his weak performance;
and then by answering in particular his shaddowed blows. First then, where he
undertakes, in the very Title of his Challenge, to show: that the present
Religion of the Roman Church was observed and resisted in all Ages since Christ,
as it came in, and increased, and that for more precisenes, by Semicenturies,
or every fifty years, at the first iumpe, he ouerleapeth the first 600.
years after Christ, confessing that Ib. p. 385.
in the first 600. years there was no substantial or fundamental Innovation,
received into the Church; whereupon he begins his Catalogue thus: After 600.
years were expired, that the several points of the true Faith began, one after
another, to be more grossly corrupted, and changed by the Church of Rome. In
the first fifty I name etc. Now how was it possible for this great Champion,
by one only blow, to give a greater advantage to us, or more dangerous wound to
himself, then at the very first footing or encounter, to yield so much homage
and honor to the Roman Church, as that for the first 600. years entire, she
remained constant and immovable in her Faith, received from Christ and his
Apostles? And that more especially, and altogether unanswerably, seeing the
very particulars of our Roman Faith, wherein D. White chiefly insisteth for his
pretended Innovation and change, as our Doctrines of Images, of Primacie, of
the unmarried life of Priests, of Real presence, of merits etc. are al of them
See before. l. 2.
acknowledged by the most of the learned Protestants to have been the very
Doctrines, belief, and practice of the Primitive Church; not some few only,
but al or most of the ancient Fathers being therefore reproved in general as
agreeing with us Catholics in the points forenamed? The second thing I intend
to observe, is, the strange indiscretion, or palpable ignorance, discovered in
M. White, by his thus appealing to these last 1000. years, for proof of
change and novelty in our Roman Faith; for what period of time is more
generally confessed by all other Protestants to have been wholly Papistical, then
these last 1000. years? See before. l. c. 2.
Do not D. Fulk, M. Parkins, M. Powel, and many others, al of them confess,
that for these 1000. years (to speak in their Dialect) the Popish Heresy
has spread itself over the whole earth; the Protestant Church during that time
being not visible to the world, but lying hid under the chafe of Popery? Yea
do not our Protestants further confess to the contrary saying: See before. l.
1. c. 5.
Between the year of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian and Papistical
Reign began, reigning universally and without any debatable contradiction
1260. etc. never suffering for the space of 1000. years after Syluester the
First, any to be seen vouchable or visible of the true Church? And it is so
clear, that during the foresaid time our Roman Church was not resisted, or
charged with any Innovation, by any imagined Protestant, that directly
likewise to the very contrary, it is acknowledged, that the feigned
Protestants of those times, did in all external show and profession, conform
See hereafter. l. 4. c. 6.
themselves to the Roman Church; whereof to omit others, D. White says
himself: Way to the true Church p. 371.
Protestants did not always abandon the Communion of the Roman Church etc. the
Tyranny of Rome suppressed them so, that they could not manifest abroad to the
world their dislike etc. but by force and violence were constrained to devour
their own sorrow in the society of their adversaries. So sociable and good
fellows were those Platonical Protestants, who instead of resisting the Roman
Church for any conceited Innovation, according likewise to Osiander, Cent. 8.
Ep. Ded. p. 3
with a common Custom, as with a violent stream, were carried away to do the
same things with the Papists: Which things he numbreth to be their Cent. 16 p.
1073. and cent. 8. Ep. ded. p. 2.
Communion in the Ministry of the Ghospel or preaching, in the Bible, in
Baptism, in the Lords supper, in taking of Orders etc. such (says he) as
those times did affoard. Then which, what can be said more forcible to free our
Roman Church, from al change or contradiction, during the foresaid times?

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that whereas D. White undertakes to show, that
the present Religion of the Roman Church was observed and resisted in all Ages,
as it came in, and increased; naming etc. to that end, the time when it so came
in and increased; he fails so foully in his performance thereof, that among so
many examples by him produced, he does not, nor could give Instance of the
first noted beginning of any one, or of the first contradictio^ made thereunto
In clerest conviction whereof, I will evidently show here after, that every
particular point of Doctrine by him instanced for our pretended first change
and Protestant resisting, was formerly in much more ancient Ages taught and
believed in the Roman Church; and so consequently, that D. White does not
perform his promise made, of naming The time, when our present Religion of the
Roman Church, was observed and resisted in all Ages, as it came in and increased.

Now to pass from the Time, to the Persons, which D. White names to have made
the Resistance, himself divides them into three parts or ranks, saying: Way to
the true Church p. 393.
one part of them is the Greek Church; an other part is some ancient Divines of
their own Church; a third part is such as the Roman Church persecuted. The
first (says he) are sound and lawful witnesses, being the true Church of God
to this day, though polluted with some errors. The second, though Papists in
many points, yet show against al exception those points, wherein they were no
Papists, to have been no part of the Catholic Faith, so called in their time;
for then they would not have resisted them, but embrace them as they do all the
rest. The third part I grant the Church of Rome then persecuted, and now
calls Heretics (to wit, us Protestants) but that is the question etc.

But now to examine the force of the argument, thus taken from this triple
testimony produced by our Doctor: First I do constantly auerre that no one
part of the three, no nor any one man of that one part can be assigned which
was not originally at his first birth and breeding, a Roman Catholic, and not
Protestant: And therefore though Going out of the Roman Church, he afterward
contradicted the same in some one respect or other, yet this nothing proves
that the Roman Church did change her Faith but only that the said man so Going
out from her, did change his Faith which she had formerly taught him, and he
believed. Secondly I do as resolutely avouch, that not any one man of al those
which D. White produces, as obseruers and impugners of the pretended change of
Roman Church, was not only at the first, but never after through his whole life
truly P^otestant, dissenting much more in Doctrine and profession of life from
modern Protestants, then from Roman Catholics. And therefore if their
testimony be good against us in regard of some one or other opinion, wherein
they have Apostated from us, agreing yet in the rest; how much more forcible
will it be against Protestants, from whom they wholly disclaim in most, and most
important Articles of Faith?

For example, the first part of D. Whites Spies, which observed and resisted
our conceited change, is the Greek Church, which, says he, are sound and
lawful witnesses, being the true Church of God to this day etc. Now concerning
these so sound witnesses, first it is certain, that as there have been several
Nicephonus, Zonoras, Glicas, Humbertus and Crispinus. Of the Estate of the
Church p. 364. 253. Osia^d. cent. 9. 10. 11. etc p. 144. 156. 261 262. Spark
ag. Albine^ p. 158 Keckerman System. Theol. p. 68. 69.
defections of the Greek Church from the Roman in these later times, yet have
the Grecians at many several times reformed and submitted themselves to the
Roman Church, though at the last falling again, they were thereupon oppressed
with barbarous Turckisme. Secondly, their few errors, wherein they dissent
from us, are most notorious, both for their first beginning, and the
contradiction made unto them: So their denial of subjection to the Roman
Church, was begun by Ihon of Constantinople, but therein he was contradicted by
S. Gregory, l. 4. Ep. 34. 36. l. 7. Ep. 36.64.
and by Ep. vniuersis Episcopis.
Pelagius: Their denial of prayer for the dead was begun by Aerius, but it was
contradicted in him by S. Epiphanius haer 75.
a Grecian, as also by S. Austin haer. 53
a Latin Doctor, and yet in both these doctrines they conformed themselves to
Rome; as witness M. Spark, Ag. Albines p. 1^8 Osiand. cent. 1^. p. 477. Crisp.
of the Estate of the Chur. p. 451.
Osiander, and Crispinus. In like sort their defense of marriage of Priests was
contradicted in them by S. Epiphanius haer. 59
and particularly in Theodorus by S. Chrysostom Ep 6. ad Theodor. mon.
also a Grecian. Their denial of the Holie-Ghost proceeding from the Father and
the Son, was begun, and co^tracted about Anno 764 as testifies Keckermanus
System. Theol p. 68.
Their denial of unleavened bread in Celebration of the Eucharist, was begun
about Anno 1053. as appears by Leo Ep. ad Michael Episc. Constantinop. c. 5.
the Ninth, Osiander, Cent. 11. p. 156.
and the Centurists Cent. 11. c. 8.
Other few and lesser errors they had, which according to Crisp^nus vbi supra.
p. 253.
did Anno Domini 870. consist but only in the Primacie, and diversity of
Ce^emonies.

But now as the Grocians did differ in the former points from Catholics,
wherein yet was their inconstancy most notorious, as also their first beginning
and contradiction, even by the learned Grecians, ever markable; so did they
incomparably much more differ from Protestants, as I have formerly l. 1. c. 6.
proved more at large; agreing with us, as Sir Edwin Sands Relation of
Religion in the last lease but fi^e.
confesses, In opinion of Transubstantiation, and generally in the Sacrifice
and whole body of the Mass, in praying to Saints, in auricular confession, in
offering Sacrifice and prayer for the dead, Purgatory, and worshipping of
Pictures etc. To which other Protestant Writers before added all the seven
Sacraments, Relics, Freewil, Monachisme, Vows of Chastity; Fast of Lent and
other set fasting-dayes, that Priests may not marry after O^de^s taken, and
others. Yea at this day, they so much detest Protestant Religion, as that
therein they utterly refused (66) al Commerce and Communion, which with great
solicitation and submission was offered them by Protestants. And now hence to
return to D. White, whose first part of sound and lawful witnesses against the
Roman Church, was the Greek Church, the same being (says he) the Church of God
to this day. For first, how can those be said to be sound and lawful witnesses
for those very points wherein they dissent from us? Wherein may they be more
justly disclaimed from, or suspected of partiality, then when they speak in
their own Cause, and in behalf of their own opinions? Of what Credit and
authority with Protestants is the opinion and Doctrine of a Catholic? Or will
they possibly esteem him a sound and lawful witness against themselves? If not,
how can the Greek Church be produced as a sound and lawful witness against the
Roman, for those very doct^ines wherein she has departed from her, and for
which she was contradicted by the chiefest Doctors and Pastors both of the
Greek and Roman Church, and in which also as seeing her error, she has often
recanted and submitted her self?

See hereof l. 4. c. 6.
And again, with what Judgment does D. White appeal to the Greek Church, as
sound and lawful witnesses in defense of his own, and against the Roman; which
detesteth and refuses al spiritual Communion with the Protestant sect, as
being nouel and contrary to the ancient Fathers, and which agrees wholly with
our Catholic Church, their former few errors only excepted?

And lastly how could the Doctor afford the Greek Church, so high a Title of
being the true Church of God to this day, seeing that it accords much more
with the Roman, then the Protestant Church, and yet dissenteth from both? But
all this was to point out his sound and lawful witnesses against us, whereas
indeed in the most and weightiest Controversies, they may be truly termed his
sound and lawful Adversaries. And thus much of the first part of D. Whites
sound witnesses, summoned by him for the making of his Catalogue of his
Protestant Doctors, observing and resisting the present Roman Religion, as it
came in, and increased in all Ages.

To come now to the second part of witnesses; who though Papists (says he) in
many points, yet show against al exception those po^nts wherein they were no
Papists, to have been no Part of the Catholic Faith, so called in their time;
for then they would not have resisted them, but embrace them as they do all the
rest. Here our Doctor deals plainly with us, confessing that these his
witnesses are Papists in many points; but he might if it had pleased him, have
coupled the Grecians with them, who are confessedly no less Papists in most
points then these. But it seems he was willing to raise up the number, which
yet being examined, will end in A. O.

For first, if these be lawful witnesses for the Protestant Church, because in
some points they dissented from the Roman, then much more may they be sound
witnesses against Protestants themselves, seeing from them they dissent and
continue adverse in most, and most weighty points whatsoever. And whereas M.
White urges, that Against al exception these points, wherein they were no
Papists, were no part of the Catholic Faith; because then they would not have
resist^d them, but embrace them as they do all the rest; this is so subject to
al exception and answer, that every child may except against it; for whether
is it more likely that but some one or other man, thus resisting the Roman
Church, did innouate himself, and change, and depart from his former Faith; or
that the whole Church did alter or change from the said man and his singular
Faith? For example, if I should argue thus in behalf of Puritans, that though
they be Protestants in many points, yet they show against al exception those
points, wherein they are no Protestants, to have been no part of the Protestant
Faith, for then they would not have resisted them, but embrace them as they do
all the rest; this kind of arguing as it would be grateful to them, so would it
prove most disgraceful and distastful to Protestants; for hence would it follow
that in those very points wherein Puritans are divided from Protestants, the
Protestant Church should be changed, and the Puritans should be the men who
should observe and resist the same; for according to our Doctors wise
reasoning* if the Puritan points had been part of the Protestant Faith, then
would they not have resisted the Protestant Articles, but embrace them as they
do all the rest. The which also may be urged in behalf of Bro^nists,
Anabaptists, and al other Sectaries whatsoever; for according to M. White, if
the Protestant Church were not changed, the Purit^ns, Brownists, Anabaptists
etc. would not have resisted it in some points, but embrace them also, as they
do in all the rest; then which nothing can be uttered more absurd in it self, or
more aduantagious to al Heretics ever arising.

And so I pass to the last and worst part of D. Whites witnesses produced
against us, and in behalf of himself; that is, to those whom (says he) the
Church of Rome then persecuted, and now calls Heretics, that is,
Protestants; which in his Catalogue he names to be Berengarius, Bertram,
Ahnaricus, the Waldenses, Wicclinists, Lollards and Hussites; al which he
coupleth together like Sampsons foxes, to make them good witnesses against the
Roman Church. But first in what Court or Tribunal will any man's naked
testimony be auailable against his Adversary, and especially of a convicted
offender against his Judge, when he speaks only for his own private* Who may
not disclaim and reject as suspected, any man's bare word in his own cause?
This is the case of our last witnesses, who going out and departing from our
Roman Church, as al other Heretics have ever done, were always noted,
contradicted, and condemned for the same: What then can the force of their
testimony be against us, but as of a Felon or Traitor against his lawful
Judge or Prince, having denounced sentence of death against him.

Besides, I will make it manifest that these who are produced as Protestants
resisting the Roman Church in all Ages, were not Protestants, but clearly
dissenting from them in many fundamental points. And lastly I would gladly
know how possibly D. White could have so good Intelligence of Protestants
resisting in all those several Ages our Roman Church, when as I have largely
convinced l. 3. c. 1.
before, by the full testimonies of many and the most learned Protestants
that ever were, that during all the foresaid Ages by him instanced, there was
never any one Protestant known, and visibile to the world before the days of
Luther?

Wherefore after good examining, I doubt not but my Doctors Protestants
resisting in all Ages our Roman Church, will finally resolve into his own idle
fancies; which if they were as forcible to prove, as his fond imagination is
fertile to frame them, the ruin of Catholics were inevitable, and their very
memory hateful.

But to leave now a while these so sound and lawful witnesses, and to come to
the points wherein they made resistance, I will only observe that sundry of the
points instanced by D. White, are either matters of indifferency, or not of
Faith, never yet determined by the Church of God; or else of fact, and not of
right, or lastly only of life and conversation; al which is most impertinent in
proof of any change in Faith and Religion; which is the only point here to be
proved by our Doctor.

Wherefore now to graple nearer with our Catalogue-Maker, and to examine the
points instanced in every Semicenturie for the Roman Churches change: After
600. years were expired (says he) the several points of true Faith began one
after another to be more grossly corrupted, and changed by the Church of Rome.
In the first fifty, I name Serenus Bishop of Marseils in France, who brake the
Images that began to be set up in his Diocese. But at the very first M.
Doctor iuggleth with us; for whereas this matter concerning Serenus, was
written first by S. Gregory the great, l. 7. Ep. 111.
he does not any thing insinuate that Images began then to be set up in the
Churches of Marseils in France, but only observes, that Serenus perceauing
some Christians lately converted to adore the Images in the Church as though
they were Gods, through Zeal did break them, and cast them down; for which
very fact was he yet severely reproved by S. Gregory himself, writing thus
unto him: Pictures are used in Churches that those who are unlearned, at least
should read by seeing in the walls those things which they could not read in
books. Thy Brotherhood therefore ought to have preserved the Pictures, and to
have hindered the people from their adoration, that so the ignorant might have
from whence to gather knowled e of the History, and the people not sin in
adoration of the Picture: Further also affirming, that not without cause l. 9.
Ep. 9.
Antiquity admitted Histories, to be painted in the venerahle places, or
Churches of Saints. So clear it is, that the placing of Images in Churches did
not as then first begin. A truth further so evident, that sundry Protestant
Writers Before l. 2. c. 14.
have largely heretofore acknowledged the use and placing of Images in
Churches, during the purest times of the Primitive Church; alleging to that
end several examples from Sozomene, Athanasius, Prudentius, Nicephorus,
Tertullian and others, who al of them lived some Ages before Serenus was borne.

But to proceed: In the same 50. years, says he, Gregory the Bishop of Rome
resisted the Supremacy; for which he l. 4. Ep. 32. 34. 38. 39.
cites certain Epistles of S. Gregory, al written against John Bishop of
Constantinople, who as then assumed to himself the name of Universal Bishop;
which as he deservedly reproved in him, so was he so far from denying his
own Primacie, as that M. Bale reports to the contrary, Image of both Chur.
f. 11.
that John of Constantinople contended with Gregory of Rome for the
Supremacy, in which contention Gregory laid for himself, S. Peter's keys,
with many other sore arguments and reasons. The which also is granted by many
other See before l. 2. c. 4.
Protestants, amongst whom one reports, that whereas Cath. Traditions q. 2.
p. 17.
the Emperor Maurice, would have taken away the Primacie from Gregory, and
given it to John Bishop of Constantinople etc. Gregory did oppose himself
against him. And the Centurists add further that Cent. 6. col. 425.
Gregory gloried, that the Emperor and Eusebius his fellow Bishop (of
Constantinople) did both of them acknowledge, that the Church of Constantinople
was subject io the Apostolic Sea of Rome.

Neither was this Primacie first begun by S. Gregory; See before l. 2. c. 4.
for his Predecessors, Pelagius, Celestine, Leo, Gelasius, Sixtus, Siricius,
Innocentius, Sozimus, Damasus, Julius, Steven, Dionisius, Victor etc. yea S.
Peter himself, are al of them reproved by Protestant Writers, for the foresaid
Primacie. So confessed it is, that the Primacie of the Roman Church, did not
first begin in the time of S. Gregory.

Now whereas D. White further added, that the whole Greek Church complained
when Phocas had first conferred it on Boniface; that their complaint (supposing
it for true) is nothing material; for they being as then divided in this point
from the Roman Church, assuming to themselves the said Primacie, their
testimony in their own Cause is of no account. But neither is it true, that
Phocas did first confer it on Boniface; for though he did by his Edict
declare, that the Roman Church was the Head of al Churches, as testify S. Bid
and others, l. de Sex Aetatibus in Phoca. Ado in Chron. Paulus Diacon. l. 18.
de Rebus Roman.
yet is there no intimation that he first bestowed it: yea further they
affirm, that the reason of the said Edict was the pride of the Bishops of
Constantinople, who injuriously styling themselves universal Bishops, and
contemning the Excommunications denounced against them by S. Gregory, and
Pelagius, the Emperor therefore thought it necessary to interpose his own
authority, which the Grecians much more feared. And he is so free from
innouating in this Cause, that besides the late premises of the ancientest
Popes ever claiming the same, Iustinianus Ep. ad Ioann. 2.
the elder, ancient to Phocas by 70. years, affirms, the Roman Church to be
Head of al Churches: And Valentinian, who preceded Phocas 140. years,
avouches, that the Roman Bishop has ever had the Principality of Preisthood
above al others. Yea in fullest satisfaction hereof, it is plainly confessed by
Protestants themselves, that Constantin our first Christian Emperor, elder to
Phocas almost 300. years, Before l. 2. c. 4.
attributed Primacie to the Roman (Bishop) before al. So free was Phocas from
first conferring Primacie to the Roman Church, and so clearly she rests
acquitted of these pretended Changes and Innouations in the first 50. years.
After 650. 650.
to 700. I name (says D. White) the Sixth general Council, decreing the
marriage of Priests, against the Church of Rome, laboring to restrain it; for
which he cites Can. 13. But the truth is, there are not any such Canons in
the Council cited; for the true Sixth General Council put forth no Canons, as it
is evident by the Seventh Act. 4. and 5.
Synod. Wherefore after the Sixth Synod, certain Bishops assembled at
Constantinople, who in the Emperor Iustini^n the Second his Palace called
Trullum, published those Canons, under the name of the sixth Synod, which were
never approved by any Roman Bishop, but to the contrary, then contradicted by
Pope Sergius. Beda l. de Sex Aetatibus in Iustiniano. Caulus Diacon. l. 8. c.
9. de Rebus Romans
But though these Canons were authentical, yet little would they avail our
marrying Ministers, not one of them allowing any Clergie-man to marry after
Orders taken, and only permitting such to keep their wives, as had them before
they were of the Clergy; and neither Can. 6. 12. and 48.
this do they allow to Bishops, but only to others of inferior Orders.

Yea the Roman Church is so free from making any change in this respect at the
time prescribed, that sundry Before l. 2. c. 17.
Protestants for the self same prohibition of marriage to the Clergy, do
reprove many more ancient and confirmed Councels, as the 2. Council of Arles
holden in the time of Constantin, the Council of Neocesaraea, of Eliberis, the
first of Nice, and sundry others. As also for the same cause they reprehended
the ancient Popes, Leo, Innocentius, Calixtus, Siricius etc. and the learned
Doctors of those times, as S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, Origin, with many others,
so that at the time of the 6. Council of Constantinople, no changee at al was
made by the Roman Church, concerning the Single life of the Clergy.

But D. White further urges, that the said ^. Council forbids to make the
Holie-Ghost in likeness of a Dove. But neither is this true; for though it did
prefer other Pictures before the Picture of Christ in the figure of a Lamb,
and the Picture of Holie-Ghost in form of a Dove, yet does it not condemn
these. Act. 5.
And in the 7. Synod (44) the Image of the Holie-Ghost in form of Dove, is
expressly approved. Yea therein was also read the Epistle of Adrian to Tharasius,
in which it is said, that in the 6. Synod was commended the Image of Christ in
form of a Lamb. And that the Roman Church long before those times allowed
Images, it is evident enough by that which is before said concerning Serenus.

But our Doctor yet urges, that at this time there was a Council holden in
Portugal, where the Cup is appointed to be ministered to the people against the
practice of some, that used to dip the bread, and so to give it, which was one
beginning of the half Communion. But this Council, being the third Council of
Can. 1.
Brach, did justly forbid that dipping, in that it was neither so instituted by
Christ, nor could be confirmed by any testimony or example from Scripture,
yet does it not command both kinds to be given; And though it had, yet were the
obiecting thereof impertinent, seeing as then it was free and lawful to use both
kinds. Now, that Communion under one kind, was sometimes used in much more
ancient Ages, it might easily be proved by Sozomene, Hist. l. 8. c. 5. Niceph.
hist. l. 13. c. 7. Hieron. Apol. pro l. in Iouin. Cypr. Sermon. de lapsis.
Tertul. l. 2. ad vxor. Clem. Al. l. 1. strom. 700.
Nicephorus, S. Hierome, S. Cyprian, Tertullian and others. So that D. Whites
Examples for the Roman Churches change in this 50. years, are altogether
frivolous.

After 700. to 750. I name (says M. White) the General Council of
Constantinople under Leo Isaurus against Images. This Council was never
confirmed but rejected; for none of the Patriarchs were present, S. German only
excepted, who would not consent thereunto, and thereupon was deprived of his
Sea of Constantinople; Wherefore this only proves that some of the Grecians
changed their Faith concerning Images, for which they were contradicted, not
only by the Latin Church, but by sundry also of the greatest Doctors of the
Greek Church.

In this Age also he names Clemens, Scotus, and Adelbartus; who (says he)
preached against the Supremacy, Traditions, Images, and in the defense of
Priests marriage, also against Purgatory, Masses for the dead etc. And all this
he proves only by one of his lawful witnesses, his Protestant Brother
Illiricus, which being wholly destitute of al other Authority, I may lawfully
forebeare it al further answer.

After 750. 750.
to 800. I name (says he) the Council of Constantinople under Constant.
Copronymus, and of Franckford under Charles the Great, against Images, and the
book yet extant that he caused to be made against the 2. Nicene Council; with
another set forth by Ludonicus his Son to the same effect. A great tooth still
has our Minister against Images, but it never biteth; for t^is Council of
Constantinople was likewise never confirmed, but expressly condemned in the
Seventh Synod: Act. 6. and Paul. Diac. l. 21. 22 de Rib. Romans Zonoras in
Annalibus.
And being assembled only of Grecians, who in the doctrine of Images, were
many of them divided from the Roman Church, the testimony thereof is of no
force, as I have showed before. But besides, it is not worthy of observation,
that as neither of these Councels of Constantinople so often urged by our
Doctor were ever confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, without whose allowance,
according to the first Council Socrat. l. 2. c. 13.
of Nice, it was not lawful to assemble General Councels; so neither did any
of the Patriarchs themselves ever assent unto them, as is manifest by Zonoras,
Cedrenus, Paulus Diaconus, and other Writers hereof. Yea further al Authors
who write of General Councels, as Psellus, Photins, Zonoras, Nicephorus,
Cedrenus, Nycetas, Paulus Diaconus, Rhegino, Ado, Sigebert, Abbas Vspergensis
and others, do either not number these two of Constantinople amongst the
Councels of the Church, or else do expressly reprove them; and the 2. Council
of Nice, which was truly General and plenarie, did directly abrogate and
condemn them.

Add hereunto in favor of our Doctor, who is so far in love with these
Councels, that in that under Constantin is decreed, Can. 15.
those to be accursed, who do not invoke the B. Virgin Marie: As also, Can.
17.
those who do not worship and Invoke the rest of the Saints: And Can. 18.
those who do not believe, that God will give eternal life for merits of works,
according to the just weight of his Judgment; al which Catholic Canons are
Cent. 8. c. 9. col. 639
recited by the Centurists. Now if M. White will urge this Council against
Images, in which respect it was impugned and contradicted by several means, why
may not I much more urge it for these other points, wherein it was never
reproved by any Council or other Writers?

Now as concerning the Council of Franckford, urged here and by sundry other
Protestants against Images: First the Cen. 8. c. 9. col. 639.
Magdeburgians themselves acknowledge, that Pope Adrian then Bishop of Rome,
never consented unto it, but both himself and his Legates resisted it. Now
never Galasius Temo de vin^ulo Anathematis.
was there any one Council holden lawful, whereunto the Roman Bishop resisted:
In so much that this Council of Franckford itself decreed, In lib. Catolino.
That the last Judgment of Controversies belonged to the Roman Bishop; and
with this very argument chiefly it endeavored to confute the seventh Synod,
imagining this to have been assembled without the authority of the Bishop of
Rome. So that this Council of Franckford, by the testimony of the Centurists,
destroys it self.

Secondly, the Centurists in the same place teach, that the 2. Nicene Synod was
confirmed by Pope Adrian; but the Council of Franckford rejects only such
Synods as are assembled without the Popes Authority; wherefore according to
the Magdeburgians not the Council of Nice, wherein Images were approved, but
some other was reproved by the Council of Franckford. Thirdly, The Centurists
further confess, that the Council of Franckford did not decree, that Images
should be taken out of the Churches, but remaining in the Churches, that they
should not be adored. Wherefore then do Protestants pull down Images, and break
them? Wherefore do not themselves observe the Decree of the Council? Yea this
very Council thundreth Anathema l. Carol. Hincmarus and Magdeburg.
to al such as deface, break, and pull down Images; how then will our Protestants
escape this bolt?

Fourthly, the Council of Franckford did indeed impugn l. Carol. and Hincmarus.
two Councels, one of Constantinople, which decreed against Images, and the
other of Nice which was for Images. But the impugning of this latter was only
through error and materially, even as the Council of Ariminum condemned the
word Homousios; for the Author of the Books under the name of Charles, had
obtruded unto the same Council of Franckford two untruths; In praef. lib. Carol.
First, that the Council of Nice had decreed, that Images should be worshipped
with the honor of Latria, or that which is due only to God: l. Carol.
The second, that this decree was made by the Grecians without the consent of
the Bishop of Rome. Now these two lies supposed for truths, it is no wonder,
though the Council of Franckford resisted the Council of Nice. And that these
were mere Impostures falsely imposed upon the Council of Nice, it is evident,
as well in that the Legates of the Roman Bishop subscribed to every Act, as also
in that the Epistles of Pope Adrian himself for Images, Act. 2.
were read in the Council it self. And so likewise that the said Council did
not decree Images, to be worshipped with Latria, is further manifest, in that
Basil of Ancyra, who was formerly an Heretic, being now converted and
professing the Catholic Faith, the Act. 1.
whole Council hearing him and approving him, affirmed that he did worship
Images, but not with Latria, seeing that was due only to God: And the like Act
3.4.7.
was professed by Constantin Bishop of Constance, and other Bishops in the
Seventh Synod.

Neither let it seem improbable, that such untruths could be forged against a
general Council so lately before celebrated: Whereas most Protestants dare now
affirm, that Catholics adore Images as Gods, whereas almost thousands of
Catholic Writers and the General Council of Trent celebrated in the Confins of
Germany, do declaime the contrary; what wonder then if the like be forged of
a Greek Synod, which few could read and understand, and which was celebrated in
the Oriental parts, being far distant?

Lastly it is to be remembered, that though this Council of Franckford did err,
yet was it not in matter of Faith, but only in fact, condemning upon false
information the Council of Nice; neither was it ever confirmed, but expressly
rejected by the Bishop of Rome; and therefore the error thereof does nothing
prejudice the infallible authority of lawful approved General Councels. So
many ways does it appear, that this thredworne Argument from the Council of
Franckford against Images, is altogether impertinent.

And now to come to the bastard Book fathered upon Charles the Great: First,
the Book of Adrian the First to Charles is extant, whereby it appears that
the said Book was written by some Heretic, and sent from Charles to Adrian,
that he might answer it. Secondly, the Roman Zonaras Cedrenus and Paulus Diac.
in vita Leonis Isauri.
Bishops, Gregory the Third, Adrian the First, and Leo the Third
Excommunicated the Grecian Emperors, and transferred the Empire from them, to
the French; chiefly for that they patronised the Heresy against Images,
whereas the French persisted ever constant in the ancient Catholic Faith;
wherefore it is most improbable, that Charles should write in defense of the
Grecian error against the Pope of Rome. Thirdly L. 1. de cultu Imaginum.
Jonas Aurelianensis (who lived in the Reign of Ludouicus son to Charles)
testifyeth that Claudius Taurinensis, a special Patron of the Heresy, durst
never open his mouth therein, during the life of Charles. Fourthly, Pope Paulus
Aemil. l. 2. Franc. And see cent. 8. c. 9. col. 570.
Stephen holding a Council at Rome against the said Error, Charles himself
sent 12. of the chiefest Bishops of his Kingdom to assist him therein: And D.
Cowper Chron. 174.
reports that certain Bishops were sent by Adrian to Charles, who held a
Council in France against the condemnation of Images. Fifthly, this most famous
Emperor Charles, was so wholly Roman Catholic, as that Ep. ded. Hist. Sacra.
Hospinian records of him, Epist. Hist. Eccl. Cent. 8. p. 101. Crisp. of the
Estate of the Church. p. 221. 216. Bull. in 2 Thessalonians. c. 2. p 533. Cowp. Chron.
f. 173. 195. Foxin Apoc. p. 436.
that he not only commanded by public Edicts that the very Ceremonies, Rites,
and Latin Mass of the Roman Church, as also the Decrees, Laws and Ordinances
of the Roman Bishop, should be observed through his whole Empire, but himself
by imprisonments and diverse kinds of punishments compelled Churches to the
same. The like whereof, is confessed of him by Osiander, Crispinus, Bullinger,
D. Cowper and M. Fox. So unlike was he to write against the Roman Church
concerning Images.

Sixthly, Calvin himself insinuates this Book to be forged about Charlemaines
time saying: Just. l. 1. c. 11. sec 14.
There is extant a refuting Book, under the name of Charles the Great, which
by the words thereof we may gather to have been made at the same time.
Seauently, whereas Charles was known to be very skilful both in Greek and
Latin, learned, and ingenious, in this book there are many absurdities
committed; as where it affirms, Constantinople to be a City most known in
Bythinia, whereas indeed it is in Thracia: as also that at Constantinople there
was a Council celebrated in defense of the worshipping of Images, whereas the
said Council was celebrated at Nice: And that the Nicene Council termed the
Eucharist the Image of Christ's body, whereas directly and purposely they
refute and condemn the said speech.

Eighthly, supposing for the time, against all the premises, that it had been
Charles his Book, yet nothing would it avail, but much prejudice Protestants;
for therein is expressly taught, that the last sentence in Controversies of
Faith belongs to the Roman Bishop: And that he has his Primacie not from
Councels, but from God himself. It prescribes also Exorcismes to be used in
Baptism, Churches to be dedicated with special Rites: That we are to pray for
the dead, and Invoke Saints, and their Relics to be worshipped: That
Chrisme and Holie-water are to be used: That in the Eucharist there is the true
Body of Christ, and the same to be worshipped, yea to be offered as a true and
proper Sacrifice: Al which do mainely impugn Protestant Religion: And
therefore if they will have us to believe this Book, teaching that the Council
of Nice erred concerning Images; let them believe it teaching the other
Catholic points next recited.

Lastly, if it could be proved that Charles himself had made this Book, and
that he had been a perfect Protestant in all points; yet how would it hence
follow, that the Roman Church had changed her Faith in the time of Charles? Or
what would the testimony of a Layman avail them, seeing according to Orat. 2.
de Imag.
Damascen, Christ committed not his Church to Kings and Emperors, but to
Bishops and Pastors? But we have seen sufficiently before, that Charles was a
Prince wholly devoted to the Roman Church, and a special Patron of Images, and
consequently the Book written against them, and imposed upon him, is merely
forged and of no authority.

And so likewise is no less forged that other, under the name of Jews his
Son, which for such is condemned by the Catholic Church: Neither Index lib.
prohibit.
does our Doctor affoard us the least color of proof, for the legitimation of
either of these Books, but only says, that they are extant, as though it were
rare among Heretics to find many spurious and adulterine Books. And so I
conclude, that seeing our Ministers proofs for the Roman Churches change in
these 50. years, are al of them in several respects, either most impertinent,
or most false, that therefore the Roman Church during the same time did not
change.

After 800 800.
to 850. I name (says our Cataloguer) Ioannes Scotus, etc. who resisting the
Real presence etc. was therefore murdered: The same time Berthram also writ
against it etc. Claudius Bishop of Towers resisted Images, worship of Saints,
and Pilgrimage; Lotharius the Emperor reduced the Pope to the obedience of the
Empire etc. These are the examples of the Roman Change in this time: But let us
examine them.

As concerning Scotus, that he resisted the Real presence, M. White proves it
only by the testimony of Daneus, who being a formal Protestant of these times,
his testimony is insufficient, as bearing witness in his own Cause, and
therefore al further answer were needles. But yet I do acknowledge, that about
the same time there was one Scotus (not the subtle Doctor who lived some Ages
after) but an other who writ something doubtfully in this point, but his Book
was condemned in the Council at Vercella, as testifyeth Lantfrancus: lib. de
verit. Corp. Et sang. Domini in Eucharistia.
And he is observed to be the first in the Latin Church, who writ suspiciously
against the Real Presence. And as for Bertram, though the Book extant under
his name does use some doubteful, and obscure words, as Figure, Spiritual, and
Mystery, yet at other times does it speak as plainly: Affirming the Presence
of Christ's Body, under the veyle or couerture of Bread. Yea the Centurists
confess that Bertram Cent. 9. c. 4. Col. 212.
(in the said Book) has the seeds of Transubstantiation. Secondly, this said
Book being set forth lately by Oecolampadius may justly be suspected; and
rather, in that Pantaleon p. 65.
in his Chronograph, mentioning Bertram and his other writings, forbeareth yet
to mention this Book, or to charge him with this pretended opinion. Thirdly,
Illiricus making a Catalogue of Protestant witnesses (to whom our Minister, for
this of his, is no little beholding) does yet forebeare altogether to name him
therein, but it seems our Minister meant to make al good flesh, that he cast
into the pot. Fourthly, Bertram was a Monk, and so continued until his dying
day, not teaching any one point of Protestancie in his life, as may appear by
verbo Bertramus. Sander. de visibil. Monarchia. haer. 133.
Tritemius and others that writ of him. Fifthly, supposing for the time that
Scotus and Bertram did both of them believe and write directly contrary to the
Real Presence, yet what does this prove, that the Roman Church as then did
change her Faith, or make any Innovation concerning this point? But rather
that these two dissenting then in this from the whole Christian world, did
change, and begin themselves this their so singular and presently condemned
opinion. Sixthly, the Roman Church is so free in this Age from changing her
Faith concerning the Real Presence, that the very Doctrine thereof is formerly
l. 2. c. 8.
acknowledged by sundry Protestants, to have been taught by S. Gregory, S.
Ambrose, S. Hilarie, S. Cyril, S. Cyprian, and sundry others most ancient and
approved Fathers.

And as for Claudius Taurinensis in this Age resisting images, it is granted;
as also that he Jonas Aureol. de Cultu Imag. Praefat. ad Carolum.
endeauored to revive the Arian Heresy long before dead, Cent. 9. c. 10. Col.
498.
and forgotten; but he was presently noted and condemned of singularity and
Error. Neither did Claudius resist any pretended beginning, or change in the
Roman Church; but only cast out of the Churches of his Diocese Images and
Crosses, which peradventure were there erected long before Claudius was borne:
But I need not insist any longer herein, this point being fully cleared in the
example of Serenus.

Now as for Lotharius the Emperor reducing Pope Sergius to the obedience of
the Empire: First, this concerns only government and Policy, not Faith and
Religion, which M. White undertook to show, as it came in every Age. Secondly,
Lotharius was so Roman Catholic, as that according to the Centurists Cent. 9.
c. 10. Col. 498.
themselves, Pope Sergius himself crowned him, and created his Son Lewis King
of the Longobards: And the Sons of Lewis being at discord about the Kingdom,
he pacifyed by his Legates, and allowed the partition of the Kingdom. Now what
signs were these that the Pope was subject; or reduced to the obedience of the
Empire, but rather to the contrarie^ and that the more, Lib. Pon^^si^alis in
vita Sergij 2. N^uclerus in Chron. Generat 39
in that Lewis being sent by his father Lotharius with diverse Archbishops and
Bishops to Pope Sergius at Rome, to move him that he would permit the Roman
Nobility to swear fidelity to him; as he had permitted them to do it to his
father Lotharius; The Magdeburgians report his answer to be this: Cent 9. c.
^9. Col. 498.
If you desire that this oath be made to Lotharius the Emperor, I am content
and permit it: but that it be done to Lewis his Son, neither I, nor the
Nobility do consent. So little obedience does he acknowledge to the Emperor,
and so false it is, that the Pope was reduced to the obedience of the Empire,
or that he was confuted by the Bishops sent with Lewis.

After 850. 850.
to 900. I name Volutianus a Bishop, that wrote to Nicolas the First, in the
defense of Priests marriage, Michael the Emperor, and Photius the Patriarch of
Constantinople resisting the Popes Supremacy, as also did the Bishop of
Rauenna. But first D. White barely affirms this of Volutianus not citing any
Author, or yealding the least proof thereof; and therefore it may be suspected
to be only his own invention: And the rather in that no mention at al is made
of any such man, either in the Acts of Nicolas the First, or in the Records of
those times. But it may be that our Minister mistaketh Volutianus for Vlricus,
who has been often objected by Protestants to have written to Pope Nicolas, in
defense of Priests marriage; whereas it is certain, Onuphrius l. de Rom
Pontif. Anastas. Bibl. de vitis Romans Pontif. Pantaleon in Chronol. p. 70.
that Pope Nicolas the First was made Pope Anno 858. and dyed Anno 867. And
vlrick was not made Bishop vrsper. Chron. Chitraeus in Chro. Pant. Chron. p. 75.
of Augusta til after the death of Pope Nicolas, to wit Anno 924. and
continuing Bishop 50. years dyed Beut. l. faster. p. 209. Pant. Chron. p. 75.
Osiander Cent. 9. 10. and p. 99. 100.
Anno 973. By which account this Epistle was written either before that Vlrick
was borne, or else after that Pope Nicolas was dead. So clear it is, that this
Epistle printed lately at Basil, is only forged under the name of Vlrick. And
though it were not Apocryphal, yet would it much more press Protestans then
Catholics; for therein is taught, that the Roman Bishop is Head of al; and that
from al, obedience is due unto him: As also that he is to compel Priests and
Monks not to marry, and if they do marry after the vow of Continency, that
they are to be separated.

And as for Michael the Emperor, and Photius the Patriarch of Constantinople
resisting the Popes Supremacy; the truth of that History is briefly this,
related more at large by Nycetas and others both Greek and Latin Writers.
Ignatius Joan. Curopalates Nycaetas, Nicolaus in diverse Epistles Anastasius.
Patriarch of Constantinople having Excommunicated Bardas (one of the principal
men under Michael the Emperor) for dismissing his own lawful wife, and taking
his own kinswoman in her steed; Bardas thereupon being much incensed,
endeauored by all means to cast him out of the Sea of Constantinople; to which
purpose he suggested unto the Emperor, many things most false against
Ignatius, whereupon the Emperor caused him to be bannished into the Island
Terebinthus, and through the solicitation of Bardas, appointed that Photius,
as then a Courtier and Secular man, should be ordained and placed in his Sea; a
man altogether unlearned, who for his better Confirmation entreated the
Emperor, that he would send an Ambassador to Pope Nicolas, desiring that some
Legates might be sent from him, for the correcting and redressing of some faults
in the Church, and in particular he pretended the Heresy of Iconoclasts, or
breakers of Images; signifying further himself by his false letters to the said
Pope, that Ignatius by reason of his old age and infirmities, had of his own
free accord resigned up his Sea, and betaken himself to a Monastery in a
certain Island, where he continued much honored and respected both by the
Emperor, and the whole City. The Embassedours sent by the Emperor, were
certain Bishops and a Layman named Arsa, who carried many and very rich
Tokens to the Pope; of whom being received, he returned with the two Bishops
Rodoaldus and Zacharias for his Legates, with particular charge to examine
matters, but to define nothing before his notice; and withal not to communicate
with Photius as a Bishop, but only as a Secular man, being ordained contrary
to the Canons, and having unjustly deposed Ignatius: which when Photius
perceuied, he hindered the said Legates for conferring with any, but only their
own followers, and withal assembled a Synod, wherein through the power of the
Emperor, he further confirmed the Deposition of Ignatius, and his own
Creation, threatening also the Popes Legates, that unless they also would
subscribe to the said Council, the Emperor would bannish them into remote
Countries, where for very hunger they should be enforced to eat lice; Through
which terrors, and also through bribes from Photius, the Legates, contrary to
the Popes command, subscribed to the condemnation of Ignatius and establishment
of Photius: Which when Pope Nicolas truly understood, assembling a Council in
Rome, he excommunicated Photius and his own Legates, and deposed them al,
restoring Ignatius to his Sea: Which Basil the Emperor, succeding Michael,
according to the Popes determination, fully executed.

Now what does any of this make against the Popes Supremacy, but rather
confirm the same, seeing that both Michael and Photius sent Embassedours to the
Pope, entreating that he would send Legates from himself, for the redressing of
abuses at Constantinople? And when themselves were found chiefly faulty, the
Emperor was severely reprehended by the Pope, and Photius excommunicated and
deposed. Add hereunto that the Greek Writers themselves do generally testifye,
that both Michael and Photius were men extremely addicted to many and most
enormous vices, and therefore their resisting the Pope, is of no greater
Authority, then of an offender or Rebel, resisting his lawful Judge or Prince.

So likewise concerning the Bishop of Rauenna's resisting the Pope, Anastasius,
cited by M. White in proof thereof, reports, In Nicolao. 1.
that sundry Persons going to Pope Nicolas, with many complaints of greiuous
wrongs and dommages done unto them by the said Bishop, the Pope thereupon, did
by his Legates and letters admonish him to surcease the same, and to make
satisfaction. Which the Bishop neglecting, and adding still more to his former
impieties; he further commanded him to repair to Rome there in the Synod to
answer in his own behalf, which he likewise refusing and contemning to do, he
was thereupon Excommunicated by the same Council: Yea the Pope himself, upon
the earnest entreaty of the people of Rauenna, went to the same City, where
presently he restored many things taken wrongfully by the Bishop, who having
Intelligence before hand of the Popes coming, was fled to Papia, there to
desire Ludonicus the Emperors help and backing against the Pope: But as the
people there in the streets did eschew his company, hearing that he was
Excommunicated by Pope Nicolas, so the Emperors answer was only this by his
Messenger: Let him go, and laying pride aside, let him humble himself to the
Pope, to whom both we and all the Church are subject: Which when the Bishop
heard, despayring of al other means, he went to Rome, where submitting himself
to the Pope, and promising reformation, and performance of sundry matters
enjoined him, and commanded by the same Pope, he was thereupon absolved from
his Excommunication, and suspension from saying Mass.

This being the truth of the Story concerning the Bishop of Rauenna his
resisting the Pope; I refer it to the Judgment of any impartial Reader,
whether this does not strongly confirm the Primacie of the Bishop of Rome.

But to proceed after 900. 900.
to 950. 950.
and so forward, D. White urges sundry abuses noted as then in the Church of
Rome; But those by him specifyed, concerning only matter of life and manners,
are altogether improper and insufficient to prove any change in Faith and
Doctrine; which was the only point pertinent to be proved: Yea Baronius, by
him, alleged speaks only of such abuses as were brought into the Church by
Anti-Popes and Intruders, not by true Popes.

And whereas further it is objected, that certain of the English Clergy,
maintained the Sacrament to be only a figure of the Body and blood of Christ,
against the Real Presence then increasing: Besides that the confirmation hereof
depends upon the testimony of the old Fabler Fox, I have showed heretofore,
in the Examples of Scotus and Bertram, that our Catholic Doctrine of Real
Presence, was confessedly believed and taught in the purest times of the
Primitive Church.

After 950. 950.
to 1000. we have (faith D. White) Otho the Great, that deposed John the Pope,
and assumed into his hands the nominating and making of Popes hereafter etc.
But this only proves what was done, not with what right it was done; for
though through the solicitation of a false Synod, Otho assented to the
deposition of John, by reason of many crimes objected against him: Yet the
proceeding therein was in sundry respects not Iuridical, but directly contrary
to the much more ancient practice and decrees of the Church, as Baronius
proves at large Anno 963. Neither is it true, that Otho assumed into his hands
the nominating and making of Popes hereafter; for no sooner was John deposed,
but immediately in the hearing of the Emperor, the Bishops assembled i^ the
same Synod, said: We choose Leo our Pastor, that he may be the chief and
universal Pope of the Roman Church; to which though the Emperor afterward
assented, yet did he neither first nominate or elect him.

In this Semi-centurie M. White further urges, that Aelfricus Archbishop of
Canterbury, preached and published his Homilies against the Real Presence
coming in. But first Aelfricus the Archbishop of Canterbury, was so Roman
Catholic, that D. Godwin testifies, Catal. of Bishops. p. 23.
that he was brought up in Glassenburie. And M. Bale assures us, that he was
Scholar to S. Ethwald and Abbot of Abingdon; and for his crafty Cent. 2. c.
41.
(says he) in promoting Papistrie, made Archbishop of Canterbury. Secondly,
the Protestants which In the Preface before it.
published that Sermon, confess that the Author thereof was no Archbishop of
Canterbury. And it is more likely to be true which M. Fox Act. mon. p. 1148
and 1040.
says, that it was Aelfrick surnamed Bara, an Heretic, who, as S. Dunstan
appearing to one in a vision said (as reports Osberne) attempted to
disinherit his Church, but I have stopped him, (says S. Dunstan) and he could
not prevail. Thirdly, that Sermon diligently read, makes as much for
Transubstantiation as against it. Lastly though we should suppose for the
present, that Aelfricus did preach or publish such Homilies, yet was that
doctrine so far from coming in as then, as that the best and ancientest
Fathers of the Primitive Church, are formerly confessed and reproved for the
same doctrine by sundry Protestant Writers.

In like sort though Arnulphus, a man vicious, inueighed against the Pope,
urging, that if he be void of charity, puffed up only with knowledge, he is
Antichrist etc. but if he want both charity, and knowledge, then is he an
Idol: Yet does he not any where absolutely affirm the Pope to be Antichrist,
and especially that Antichrist which the Scriptures foretell shall come a little
before the end of the world, and so he only terms him Antichrist in that
sense of S. John, 1. Io. 2.18.
Now there are become many Antichrists.

After a 1000. 1000.
to a 1050. years, I name (says he) Rodulphus Ardeus preaching against Merits
etc. Glaber Rodulphus against the Popes Primacie, and Leuthericus denying the
Real Presence. But for brevity admitting all this for true, yet does it not
hence follow, that the Roman Church made any change or Innovation in the
foresaid points, seeing the same were al of them taught and believed generally
by the Church in times much Before. l. 2. c. 21. 4. 8.
more ancient and approved.

After a 1050. 1050.
to 1100. I name (says he) Nycetas an Abbot and the Bishops of Italy, France
and Germany, resisting Hildebrand, and deposing him, when he would restrain
the Clergy from Marriage; Henrye the Third etc. withstanding the Popes
Supremacy etc. and judging him to be deposed. Sigebert etc. noting the Popes
Excommunicating Princes, and absoluing their subiets from their obedience,
tearming it a novelty and Heresy: Berengarius resisted the real Presence etc.
But as for Nycetas, as I do confess, that he writ many things against the
Roman Church, and in particular in behalf of Priests marriage, so yet did he
afterward so Baron Anno 1054 nun. 19.
much repent himself thereof, as that in presence of the Emperor Constantinus
Monomachus and the Popes Legates, he recalled and accursed al his said writings;
as also al such he accursed as denied the Roman Church, to be chief of al
Churches, or presumed to impugn in any thing the Orthodoxal Faith thereof:
whereupon immediately the Emperor caused the said Books to be burned in the
sight of al. So that the argument here drawn from Nycetas is most fully
answered by Nycetas himself.

And as for sundry Bishops, and Henry the Third, the Emperor, withstanding
Pope Hildebrand, and judging him to be deposed, it is altogether immaterial;
for the said Bishops adhering schismatically to the Emperor, for the which
Baro: Anno 1076. number. 15.
themselves were Excommunicated, and the Emperor also for his many enormous
vices, it is no marvel, though such men would endeavor their best for his
deposing: And yet the Emperor Ib. Anno 10^7 number. 10. and 18.
after submitted himself, going to the Pope barefooted, and after four days
fasting, was admitted to his speech, and upon certain Conditions was absolved
by the Pope from his Excommunication: Yea it is observed from the Writers of
those times, that the Bishops and other Principal men who withstood the Pope,
during the said Schism, were most or al of them severely punnished by God in
this world: amongst whom William Bishop of Virick being the Ringleader, and
one who, as Lambertus records, usually upon Festiual days at Masse-time
publicly inueighed against the Pope; this man being suddenly taken with a
grievous infirmity, with miserable houling before all that were present cried
out, that by the just Iud ement of God, he had lost both this present and
eternal life; in that with all his power he had concurred with the King, in all
things which he wickedly intended, and for desire of his favor had wittingly
and willingly uttered greiuous Contumelies against the Roman Bishop, a man most
holy and of Apostolical virtues: which when he had said, (as the report is) he
d^ed without Receiving or any Satisfaction. Thus far Lambertus: But In
Chronico Citicensi.
Langius adds further that, In the very place wherein he detracted from the
Roman Bishop, he fell sick, where he continued until the miserable end of his
life; and his disease still increasing, one of the Kings servants, asking him
that he might return to the King with his Command: I send (answered he) to the
King this Command: That he, and I, and all that favor his Iniquity are damned
for ever; yea when he was admonished by some of his Clergy, that he would not
say so, he replied, what should I say, but that which I visibly see to be true?
for behold the Devils do compass my bed about, that when I die they may
presently catch me. Wherefore I desire you, and al faithful people, not to
trouble themselves with praying for me after my death. Now by this we must
briefly note, what wretched and most damnable witnesses our Minister still
produces against the Roman Church, and in defense of his own.

As for Sigebert he was known to be one of the followers and flatterers of
Henry the fourth the Emperor, and therefore his testimony in this case is of
no force. But besides, his affirming the Popes Excommunicating of Princes etc.
to be a novelty and Heresy, is most absurd and untrue; as might be proved at
large by the much more ancient Examples of Pope Leo the Third, translating the
Empire from the Grecians to the Germans; and of Pope Zachary deposing King
Childericus, and creating Pepinus; of S. Gregory the Second, excommunicating
the Emperor Leo; of S. Ambrose Excommunicating the Emperor Theodosius; and
sundry such like.

Lastly, concerning Berengarius as he resisted for a time the Real Presence, so
did he publicly Fox Act Mon. p. 146.
recant the same. Yea his Error was so great, and his Condemnation so just,
that the Centurists thus write thereof: Cent. 11. c. 10. p. 527.
Leo the Ninth, deserved in this one thing, no small praise above his
predecessors, that presently at the beginning he condemned the Heresy of
Berengarius, together with the Author in a Synod at Rome. But I have
sufficiently before cleared our Roman Church of al pretended change in this
behalf. After 1100. 1100.
to 1150. I name (says M. White) Henry the Fifth the Emperor, who against
Paschalis then Pope, maintained his right of making Bishops, and other
privileges etc. Chron. Casmense l. 4.
But who doubts that any Prince may not defend his right? Yet that which was
done in the case proposed, was done by fraud and violence, by the Emperor
against the Pope, who for the quiet of the Church, yielded in some respects
concerning the same Privileges, much blood having been shead of either side,
and great wars l^kely to ensue. And yet the said Emperor upon the same
agreement swore unto the Pope, that he would restore such Lands and possessions
of the Roman Church as he had taken away, or which the Pope ought to have, and
that he would obey the Pope, the honor of his Kingdom and Empire ever
preserved. After which, the Pope saying Mass, when himself and those of the
Clergy assisting at the Altar had Communicated, the Emperor also Received at
the hands of the Pope. Now by this it sufficiently appears, that this Example
of the Emperor, does nothing prove any Innovation in the Roman Church, but
rather to the contrary, does plainly show his union and Communion therewith in
matters of faith and Religion.

In like sort where he obiecteth, that S. Bernard freely noted diverse
Corruptions then coming in; it is so improbable, yea so grossly untrue, as
that to the contrary L. 2. Cont. Dur. p 154. Fulk against. Rhem. Test. f. 133.
D. Whitaker, and D. Fulk, both of them confess, that he taught the Popes
Supremacy, and D. Whitaker Ad Rat. Camp. rat. 7. p. 105.
aknowledgeth, that he was of our Church. In specul. Eccl. p. 23.
Gomarus calls him our S. Bernard. The Centurists affirm, that he was ^ent
12. c. 10. col. 1637.
a most earnest Defender of the Sea of Antichrist. Bell Challenge etc. p. 148.
terms him, Bernard, the Popes dear Monk and reverend Abbot. Yea the
Centurists further report, That he said Cent. 12. col. 1939.
to the Duke of Aquitaine, whatsoever is out of the Roman Church, by the
Judgment of God is certainly to perish, even as those things which were out of
the Ark, were drowned in the diluge: As also he that persecuteth the Pope of
Rome, persecuteth the Son of God. Now by this, al of it confessed by sundry
and much more learned Protestants then M. White, it more then clearly
appears, that S. Bernard was no fit witness to be produced against the Roman
Church, nor that he himself, did differ in any one point of Faith from her,
much less did note any pretended corruption of Faith coming in: And as for
the feast of the Conception, or the Doctrine concerning the Virgin Mary's
freedom from original sin, it is not yet to this day defined by the Church
as a matter of Faith.

But where he further urges that S. Berna^d was against Merits, Iustificat^on
by works, Freewil, keeping the Law, Seven Sacraments and vncertantie of our
Salvation, and the Popes greatness in Temporalities, it is al of it most untrue,
as himself might have plainly showed, if he had been pleased to have set down
the answers out of Cardinal Bellarmine, as he was to have his objections.

In like sort, that which he obiecteth concerning Arnulph, pertains only to
matter of life and manners, not to Faith or doctrine, and therefore it makes
nothing to prove any Innovation or change in our present Roman Religion; As
also, though as then one preached in Antwerp, against the Real Presence; yet I
have before freed our Church from al Innovation therein, in far more ancient
times.

And as for Honorius his noting the bringing in of Wafers into the Sacrament in
this Age, it is so untrue that M. Cartwright See before l. 2. c. 8.
confesses that it was brought in by Pope Alexander, who lived Anno 111. which
is some thousand years before the time now objected.

After 1150. to 1200. I name (says M. White) the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa
forbidding Appeals to Rome, and the coming of Legates from Rome into Germany
etc. But though the Emperor did this, being as then at discord with the Pope,
yet his fact was so faulty, as that he was thereupon, and for other injuries,
Excommunicated: From which Baron. Anno 1160. number. 31. 32. and Anno 1168. number.
60.
after, upon his submission Baron. Anno 1177. number. 22.
and promise of obedience, he was absolved, and permitted to come to the Pope,
whose feet the Emperor kissed, and bowing his head received reverently his
benediction: And that the Roman Church as then, made no Innovation concerning
Appeals, or sending of Legates, it is most clear by general practice and
allowance thereof in the purest times of the Primitive Church, proved at large
Before l. 2. c. 4.
heretofore.

And as for Lincolniensis noting as then the Novelty and Heresy of Friars, M.
White only barely says it without al further proof: yea though as then the
Institution of Friars had been but new, yet neither was it in any thing
Heretical, nor proved any Innovation in the Church, in Faith and doctrine.

But to come to the Waldenses, who, according to D. White, were dispersed over
all this part of the world, and in most substantial points resisted the Papacy
etc. as it is not denied, but that in some points they revolted from the Roman
Faith, so have I showed Before l. 1. c. 3.
before, that in sundry other weighty Articles of Religion, they agreed with
Catholics against Protestants. And it is very easy further to prove, that
indeed they believed sundry gross errors, though M. White would make the
world to think, That the said errors were falsely imposed upon them. Ibid. p.
729. 747. 760.
For Illiricus himself Catal. Test. verit. p 731. 745. 730. 732.
testifyeth that they taught, That Laymen and women might Consecrate (the
Sacrament) and preach: That Clergy men should have no possessions or
proprieties: That Ibid. p. 731. 743.
married Persons mortally sinned, who accompanied together without hope of
Issue: That neither Priest Ibid. p. 760. 740. and Osiand. Cent. 9. 10. 11. p.
440.
nor Civil Magistrate being guilty of mortal sin, did enjoy their dignity,
or were to be obeyed. And to omit many Ibid. p. 734.
others; they went to the Catholic Churches dissembling, and offered,
confessed, and communicated dissemblingly. And now must M. White either charge
his own Brother Illiricus, to have falsely imposed these errors upon them, or
else must he confess that these so dissembling and ignorant witnesses, are
altogether insufficient to prove any change in the Roman Church, out of which
themselves went out.

After 1200. 1200.
to 1250. I name (says M. White) Almaricus a Doctor of Paris, that was bu^ned
for withstanding Altars, Images etc. It is not denied but that Almaricus was an
Heretic, falling from the Roman Church: But yet I hope D. White will be ashamed
to claim him for a Protestant; for he was condemned first by the University
of Paris, after by Innocentius and a Synod at Rome, for these propositions
following: Cesarius Dial. l. 5,
That there is no Resurrection of bod^es. Secondly, that there is no Paradise
norhel Thirdly, that the body of Christ is no more in the Sacrament, after the
words of Consecration, then in a stone or horse. Fourthly, that God spoke as
much in Ovid, as in Austin, and other such to the number of 20. for which he
was burned openly in Paris with certain other blasphemous Heretics against
the Persons of the B. Trinity; says Lib. 6. Hist. Franc. and see Gers. Tract.
3. in Math. Aemilius li. 6. Hist. Gal. Genebrad in Chro. Anno 1208.
Gagninus. Besides I have Before lib. 2. c. 14. 22.
proved before, that the foresaid Catholic points, urged to be denied by
Almaricus, were yet al of them taught and believed by the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, so that no Innovation therein could be observed or reproved
by Almaricus. In like sort though Robert Bishop of Lincoln withstood the
Popes proceedings in England; yet this nothing proves any change or first
coming in, of any point of Faith in the Roman Church observed or resisted by
the said Robert. Besides D. Godwine reports that a Cardinal said to the Pope
concerning him: He Catalo. of Bishop of England. p. 240.
is for Religion a Catholic as well as we: And so dying, he gave al his books
(an excellent Library) unto the Friar Minors at Oxford. So charitable was he
to Friars, and consequently so Roman Catholic even at his very death. And
where he affirms that Ioakim Abbas said, that Antichrist was borne at Rome,
and should sit in the Apostolic sea; It is so untrue, that, in his Epistle
prefiged to his Exposition upon the Apocalypse, he submits his writings to
the Censure of the Sea Apostolic, affirming further that he firmly believes,
that the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against the Roman Church, and that her
Faith shall not perish before the end of the world. Yea in his Exposition upon
the 6. Chapter and 11. verse, he calls such the Sons of Babylon, who
impugn the Church of Peter. And upon the 7. Chapter and 2. verse, by the Angel
ascending from the East, having the sign of the living God, he understands
the Bishop of Rome, who with his fellow-Bishops, with the sign of the Cross
will arm the Elect in that last tribulation which Antichrist shall raise: So
little cause there is to urge this Abbot against the Pope. And indeed all that
truly can be urged against him, is that being an old man, and half out of his
wits, he was censured by the Pope for certain fond Prophecies, and some
errors also about the B. Trinity, as appears by the Decree extant in the
Canon Law against him, and by other Authors that have written of him.

And as for Fidericus the Second Emperor resisting the Popes Supremacy, it
proves no more, but that even the most vicious Emperors were most adverse to
the Pope: For he being a Prince of most scandalous and wicked life, was after
due admonitions excommunicated, as also deposed by Pope Innocent the Fourth in
a general Council holden at Lions; so that his resisting in this regard the
Supremacy, is only a guilty and convicted Persons resisting of al such lawful
Authority, whereby he is censured and punished. Concerning Arnoldus
Villanouanus speaking against Friars, the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Papal
Decrees: This M. White only proves by the testimonies of the Magdeburgians,
and Osiander; which being Protestants, are no competent witnesses against
Catholics; But besides, I have proved l. 2. c. 9. 4.
before, that the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the Popes Authority were
believed, and practiced in much more ancient times; As also that the
Institution of Friars, proves no Innovation in Faith and Religion. Euerardus
broaching those foul and false reproaches against Pope Gregory the Seventh,
called Hildebrand, proves nothing but his own disobedience and impatience,
having been by the same Greg. 7. Ep. 18.
Pope for his own demerits, justly suspended from his Episcopal function.

After 1250. 1250.
to 1300. I name Gulielmus de S. Amore withstanding Friars and their abuses;
but how impertinent this is, I have showed sufficiently before. The Preachers
also (says he) in Sweden, that publicly taught the Pope and his Bishops to be
Heretics: But M. White receiving this Relation from Illiricus, no further
answer will be requisite. Dantes also (says he) writ, that the Empire descended
not from the Pope: But Dantes being only a Poet, intermedling in other matters
committed See Bellar. in Append. ad lib. de Sum. Pont c. 14.
many gross errors; for which his books are condemned, and prohibited by
the Church, yea he lived in faction against some Ibid. c. 12.
Popes, and therefore his writing against them is of no force.

As for Gulielmus Altisiodorensis, M. White producing nothing in particular out
of him against the Roman Church, but only affirming, that in his Sums are
found many things confuted that then were coming in, no further particular
answer can be expected; and though he refer himself for particulars to this
his own Book, yet citing no page or place thereof, I hold it unworthy of so
paineful search; it being also well known that Altisiodorensis only differed
from other Schoolmen, in matters disputable and not defined.

After 1300. 1300.
to 1350. I name (says he) Marcilius Patauinus, that wrote against the Popes
Supremacy. But he being a known condemned Heretic, a flatterer of the
Schismatical Emperor, and his Books condemned by the Church; as also the
Popes Primacie being formerly acknowledged in the Primitive Church, his
testimony is sundry ways insufficient. And the like is to be answered to
Ocham, Trithe^nius and Genebrard l. 4. Chron.
who was purposely hired by the Emperor to write against the Pope; who was
also Excommunicated and his Books prohibited; and Gregorius Ariminensis his
differences, were only in School points not determined by the Church.

And as for the University of Paris condemning the Popes Pardons, it is most
untrue; and therefere M. White did well to father it only upon his Brother
Illiricus, whom he knew to be expert in the art of forging.

After 1350. 1350.
to 1400. I name (says he) Alu^rus Pelagius, who wrote a Book of the L
mentation of the Church, wherein he reproves diverse abuses of his times. But
who denies but that in the Militant Church consisting of good and evil, there
are many abuses in life and conversation? But as for abuse or Innovation in
matter of Doctrine and Faith. Aluarus makes no mention at al in his said
Book. And as for Montziger disputing against ^ransubstantiation, and Adoration
of the Sacrament, and Cesenas calling the Pope Antichrist, besides that the
truth hereof depends only of the testimony of Fox, and Ill^ricus, both of
them Protestants, I have sufficiently before cleared both these points from al
Innovation in Ages much more ancient.

Now as for John Wiceliffe, as I have showed l. 1. c. 3.
before, that in sundry points of Faith he agreed with Catholics, which
Protestants now impugn; so it is evident that he taught sundry gross
errors, which both Catholics and Protestants do detest, as that, If a Fox
Act. M^n. p. 96.
Bishop or Priest be in deadly sin, he does not Order, consecrate, or
Baptize: that, Al Osiand cent. 9. 10. 11. p. 459.
oaths are unlawful: That Osiand cent. 15. p. 457.
al things come to pass by absolute necessity: That there Ib. p. 454.
is no Civil Migistrate whilst he is in mortal sin, and sundry others; in
regard of which, Protestants Pant. Chronol. p. 119. Mathias Hoe. in his Tract,
duo. Tract. 1. p. 27.
themselves rank him in the Catalogue of Heretics. So that small Credit or
succor will M. White purchase for producing Wiccliffe, as one of his witnesses
against the Roman Church.

After 1400. 1400.
to 1450. I name (says he) the Lollardes in England etc. that were persecuted
at that time: And that very justly, M. White; for besides, that they held the
former Heresies of the Wiccliuists, they further Trithem. in Chr. Anno. 1315.
impugned the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Eucharist; they held that Lucifer
with the rest of his Angels, were injuriously thrust out of Heaven by Michael
and his Angels, and consequently to be restored again at the day of Judgment;
and that Michael and his Angels are for the said injury to be damned from the
day of Judgment for ever: That our B. Lady could not bear Christ, and
remain a Virgin: That any thing done under the earth in Caves and Cellars, is
not punnishable, with other such like: Which if M. White did know in them, and
remember, greatly might he be ashamed, to number them amongst his sound and
lawful witnesses for the Protestant Church.

Now as for Plowmans tale, reporting that Chaucer expressly writ, the Pope and
his Clergy to be Antichrist; as unworthy of other answer, I leave it for a
Tale fit for Plowmen to tell in a winters night, having also spoken of this
point before.

Neither does Nilus his writing against Purgatory, and the Popes Supremacy,
any thing advantage the Protestant Church, or impugn the Roman; for both
these Doctrines I have formerly proved to have been the general belief of the
Primitive Church. Besides Nilus was one of the Greek Church, which sometimes in
the foresaid points was divided from the Roman; yea he was condemned for an
Heretic, and thereupon enrolled by Illiricus Catalog. Test. verit. Tom. 2. p.
876.
amongst the witnesses of the Truth of Protestancie. Concerning John Husse, and
Hierome of Prage, D. White confessing, that their Doctrine was the same with
that of the waldenses, the former answer to them, may serve also for this.
Besides I have l. 1. c. 3.
convinced heertofore, that Husse wholly agreed with Catholics in sundry
Articles, earnestly now impugned by Protestants.

As for Sauanarola, his writings are condemned by the Church of Christ: Neither
did he impugn any one point of our Catholic Faith, which I have not formerly
showed to have been taught by the ancient Fathers. And therefore his resisting
the Roman Church, does nothing prove any change or Innovation made by her. And
the self same answer is to be given to Wesselus Groningensis, whose Books are
prohibited; As also to Ioannes de Vessalia, who defended the Heresy of the
Grecians, concerning the proceeding of the Holie-Ghost: who yet in the end,
recanted al his opinions held against the Church of Rome.

And where M. White further affirms, that in England also and Bohemia, lived
those which followed the Doctrine of Wiccliffe and Husse continuing the same
til Luther: Supposing this for true (the contrary whereof I have proved l. 1.
c. 3.
already at large) yet does it prove no more then the Examples of Wiccliffe and
Husse themselves, which lately we have seen to prove nothing at al in behalf of
Protestants.

And when 1500. 1500.
years were expired, arose (says M. White) Luther, Suinglius, Tindal, and
diverse others, whom God raised up to call his people out of Babylon etc. These I
must confess were faithful witnesses for M. Whites Church, and great Resisters
of the Roman: But I cannot confess that God, but the Devil only raised them
up; for so Luther confesses Tom 7. Wittem l. de Missa f. 443.
that Satan dissuaded him from the Mass: And Tom. 2 l. de subsid. Euchar. f.
249.
Suinglius acknowledges that he was instructed in the night, by an Admonisher,
whether white or black he remembers not: And the same might be showed of
sundry others first broachers of Protestancie. But as now I will purposely for
bear, having waded over long in this so unsavory a Pudle of D. Whites
Catalogue: In which, as he has not proved by any one Instance, any known
beginning or change in our present Roman Faith since the Apostles times, so I
cannot but observe, that amongst all the witnesses by him produced against the
Roman Church, not one can be picked out, which was not a man vicious and of a
scandalous life, or else infected with Schism and Heresy, for which he was
ever noted, reproved, and condemned, even by the Doctors and Writers of the
same time wherein he lived. And so I still conclude, that our Roman Church,
having never Gone out of any other Church, nor ever been noted of Innovation
and change in Faith, that therefore she is not any Nouel or Heretical Sect,
but the One, True, Catholic, and Apostolic Church of Christ.

THE FOVRTH BOOK, WHEREIN IS PROVED BY THE CONFESSION OF PROTESTANTS, that,
according to the Sacred Scriptures, the Roman Church is the true Church of
Christ: And so to have ever continued from his time, until the Date hereof: And
of the contrary, the Protestants Church to be only a Sect Heretical, and never
to have been before the days of Luther.
PROTESTANTS FLYING TO THE sacred Scriptures in proof and defense of their
Church and Religion, it is showed, the said flight, not only in itself to be
dishonorable, but also to be the ordinary flight of al modern Heretics.
CHAPTER I.
HAVING labored thus far with all diligence, to search for the finding out of
Christ's true Church, and her necessary continuance and visibilitie through-out
al Ages; and ever finding the present Roman Church and Religion, to have been
at al times the only known, public, and professed Church of Christians in all
Countries whatsoever: The Protestant Congregation in the mean time being
indeed not in Being, and by their own former acknowledgments not known,
visible, or heard-of in the Christian world; I begun further to think with
myself, what strange evasion, color, or pretense our Protestants could invent
for their further maintaining of their new-sprong Faith. And reading casually
in l. 7. p. 478.
D. Whitakers book against the Jesuit Duraeus, I found him expressly to hold and
teach, that it is sufficient for us Protestants, by comparing the Popish
doctrine and Scriptures together, to know their difference and disagreing; we
leave it free for Historiographers (says he) to write what they list. And
agreably hereto, I since found In Bancroftes Survey. p. 219.
Beza to say: If any shall oppose against my exposition the authority of
certain of the ancient Fathers, I do appeal to the word of God. So that the
Protestants last refuge and appeal, is, to the only written word of God,
distrusting and renouncing al proof or testimony either from ancient Councels,
Fathers, or Histories; for they willingly Midleton in his Papisto-Mastix p. 193.
confess, that perusing Councels, Fathers, and Stories from the Apostles
forward, they find the Print of the Popes feet.

Now for the clearer discovery of the gross absurdity, and greatest
insufficiency of this desperate answer, I will make proof of two several
truths: First, that the said answer has ever been, and is still, the ordinary
answer of al Heretics, thereby intending to escape, not only the foulest
stayne of Nouellisme or Innovation, but withal to prevent al strongest
arguments drawn from general Councels though never so lawful, from ancient
Doctors though never so learned, and from Ecclesiastical Histories though
never so true. The second truth is, that their so appealing to the Sacred
Scriptures, is the thrusting their own throats againsts the sharpest points
of their Enemies swords. For by them I will evidently prove the Roman Church and
Religion to be the only true Church and Religion of Christ and his Apostles: As
also the Congregation of Protestants and their profession, to be most adverse
and disagreing with the Scriptures themselves, and so in itself to be nouel,
heretical, and damnable.

And to omit the ordinary custom of elder Heretics in appealing from al
other proofs to only Scripture, observed and reproved in them, by the
ancientest and learned lib. De Prescript. c. 15. Hieron. ep. ad Paulin. and
tom. 3 cont. Lucifer. Augu. cont. Faust. Manic. l. 32 c. 19 and l. 1. de
Trinit. c. 3. and ep. 222. Hilar. l ad Constable. Vincent. Lyrin. l. aduers.
haeres. c. 35. Ambr. in c. vlt. ad Tit. Orig. hom. 7. in Ezech.
Doctors and Fathers of the Primitive Church, namely Tertulian, Hierome,
Augustine, Hilarie, Vincentius Lyrinensis, and others: And only to observe, how
the refinedst Sectaries of these our days, with the same pretense of
Scripture, do daily revolt and rebel from their other Brethren. And first
concerning the Puritans against the Protestants, D. white gift alleging and
urging in behalf of Metropolitanes, the authority of the Nicene Council, In
his 2. Reply. part. 1. p. 484.
M. Cartwright replyeth: Touching the perfect unity of Substance of our
Savior Christ with God the Father, it giving Sentence upon the infallible Word
of God, is worthily to be reverenced: But if the Doctors will have their
soundnes in that point to authorize the rest etc. it is that which we can by no
means assent unto. And that it may appear, how justly we call this Canon of
the Council (touching Metropolitanes) unto the touchstone of the word of God;
Let it be considered etc. yea the same In Whiteg. Def. p. 111.
M. Cartwright allows the judgment of his learned father Calvin, but with
this restraynt: So far (says he) as we can esteem, that that, which M. Calvin
says, does agree with the Canonical Scriptures. This practice is so ordinary
with the Puritans, that D. Bancroft in his Survey of pretended Discipline,
spends wholly his 27. Chapter in observing and reproving the same.

In like sort the In their Apology. p. 103. 4. 98. 99. 100. And see M.
Aynsworth in his Counterpoyson. p. 15. 154.
Brownists of Amsterdam, answering to D. Bilsons allegations from the Fathers,
resolutely affirm and say: Let M. Bilson with these Doctors know, that unless
they can approve by the word of God their Prelacie, etc. All the color they
bring out of former times and writers, is of no moment in this case.

And as for the Anabaptists, Eccl. Pol. pref. p. 38.
M. Hooker reports of them, that the Book of God, they for the most part so
admired, that other disputation against their opinions, then only by allegation
of Scripture, they would not hear; for which very point and error, they are
reproved by Tract. Theol p. 171 in Psycophannichiae. p. 451. And in his
Instruction aduersus Anabap p. 478.
M. Calvin in these words: Because silly Christians, who have some zeal
toward God, can be seduced by no show or appearance more fair, then when the
word of God is pretended and alleged, the Anabaptists, against whom we now
write, have it always in their mouths, and they always solemnly recite it
etc. And again, The Devil himself armed himself with the word of God, and
girded himself with that sword to invade and assault Christ. And we find true
by experience, that he does daily use these guiles or arts, by organs or
instruments, to deprave the truth, and so to lead miserable Souls to
destruction. So ordinary it is with the Anabaptists and the Devil himself, in
defense of their errors, ever to appeal to the only written word.

The same answer is likewise given by the Protestant Arians of these times;
insomuch as Lib de Christi Naturae. p. 222.
Socinus in defense of his error against the Divinity of Christ, answers
his Protestant Adversary Volanus in these words: We propound to us in this
question none for Master or Interpreter, but only the Holie-Ghost etc. we do
not think, that we are to stand to the judgment of any men, though never so
learned; of any Councels, though in show never so holy, and lawfully
assembled; of any visible Church, though never so perfect and universal.
Simlerus De aeterno De^ filio. l. 1. c. 2.
writes of the Arians: They provoke us to Scriptures, and because they know al
Antiquity to be against them, they reject al without exception. And In ep.
Theol. ep. 15. p. 119. 120.
Beza says to the Arian Statorius (who was sometime Bezas Scholar, and dear
to him) Ought thou not to remember from whom, to whom thou have revolted?
But thou say: I do not depend of men, but of the word of God. Very well: But
does the word of God teach thee etc. that he can be a Savior etc, who is not
God? So that our modern Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists and Arians, do al of
them in defense of their several errors, being urged by other Protestants with
the authority of the Church, Fathers, and Councels, ever appeal unto the only
written word.

But who would not think, but that our ordinary Protestants, thus reproving
in their reuolting Brethren, their contempt of the Church, Fathers, and
Councels, and their running to only Scripture, would not be found faulty
herein themselves? And yet when their learned Bishops and Doctors are urged
upon several occasions by our Catholic writers, with the authority of Church,
Fathers, and Councels, none more ready then themselves to refuse, disgrace,
and reject the same, and that ever with pretense and appeal to only Scripture.

A truth so evident, that their foresaid rebellious Brethren do plainly
acknowledge, that this their course of appealing to only Scripture, was taught
and defended by themselves; for thus say the Simlerus De filio Dei. in
Bullingers pref. there fol. 4. And in Simlerus his other Priface. fol. 1.
Antitrinitarians to the Tigurine Protestans: You have taught us, that nothing
is to be received besides the Scriptures; therefore we demand, where it is
written in the Scriptures? etc. Except you show this, according to your Rule,
we reject and condemn those things: therefore we have learned of you to
contemn the Fathers. And Socinus Lib. de Christi Not. p. 21.
the Arian answering his Protestant Adversary Volanus, demands: To what
purpose should I answer that which thou borrowest from the Papists etc.
especially where thou opposest to us the perpetual Consent of the Church? Very
excellently doubtless in this behalf has Hosius (the Papist) discoursed against
you, wounding you with your own sword. And therefore you are no less deceived
in urging against us the Churches perpetual Consent, then are the Papists in
their urging thereof, both against you and us. And again Ibid. p. 222.
Even Volanus himself, disputing against the Jesuits, is enforced to reject the
Examples, Sayings and Deeds of Athanasius, Hierom, Austin, Theodoret, and other
Fathers, whose authority he now opposes against us as sacred. Thus much have
I thought good to remember, that Volanus may receive answer from himself, when
he so often inforceth against us the authority of learned men, and consent of
the Church. In like sort said In Bancrofts Survey p. 219.
Beza before: If any shall oppose against my Exposition the authority of
certain of the ancient Fathers, I do appeal to the word of God. With whom
agreed Cont. Duraum. l. 7. p. 478.
D. Whitaker teaching, that It is sufficient for (Protestants) by comparing the
Popish Doctrine and Scriptures together, to know their difference; we leave it
free for Historiographers to write what they list. And yet the same Ibid. p.
472.
D. Whitaker in the self same book affords this credit and authority to
Histories, that (says he) Whatsoever the old Prophets have foretold of the
propagation, largenes, and glory of the Church, that to be performed, History
most clearly testifies: So that there is no Controversy, but that
Ecclesiastical History does give testimony to the predictions of the
Prophets. Yea this foul flight from Histories, Fathers, and Councels, thus
practiced by all sorts of Protestants, is an Argument most conuincing, that the
said Histories, Fathers, and Councels make directly against them; insomuch as
one The Author of A brief answer to certain objections against the Descension
of Christ into Hell. p. 1.
of our English Protestant Writers, being ashamed of this course, reproves
herein his other Protestant Brother, saying: Where you say, we must build our
Faith on the Word of Faith, tying us to Scripture only, you give just occasion
to think, that you neither have the ancient Fathers of Christ's Church, nor
their Sons succeeding them, agreing with you in this point, which implies a
defense of some strange Paradox.

By all which, we may see this miserable shift of al kind of Heretics, in
refusing al proofs but only Scripture, to be no less in itself then a
strongest argument, that al Heretics are deuoyd of al other proofs.

THAT EVEN THE SACRED SCRIPTVRES themselves do most plentifully testify our
Roman Church to be the Church of Christ: And the Congregation or Church of
Protestants, to be no true Church, but a Sect Heretical, and most contrary to
the said Scriptures: And that, first by the Churches necessary continuance and
universality. CHAPTER II.
AS it has been ever most frequent, so to me still it is most strange, why al
Heretics both ancient and modern, for their last Refuge, do ever betake
themselves to the sacred Scriptures: Seeing, as nothing is of greater power and
authority in itself to judge and condemn, so nothing more strongly confuteth
Heresies, then the foresaid Scriptures, if either they be taken in their literal
sense, or according to the exposition of the Primitive Church.

The Sacred Scriptures do plainly teach, that the true Church of Christ is ever
to continue, even from Christ's time until the end of the world, and that not in
one particular Nation or Country, but that most universally, and with
plentiful increase. In which respect the Church of Christ is foretold to be
Dan. 21.44.
A Kingdom that shall never be destroyed (but) shall stand for ever: Esaias. 60.15.
As an eternal glory and joy from generation to generation Act. 5.52.
That so, being of God it shall not to be dissolved. Yea further it is said of
the Church, that Es. 6.20.
A little one shall become as a thousand, and a small one as a strong Nation: that
Es. 2.2.
Al Nations shall flow to it; which place is expounded by Protestants In the
Marginal Notes of the English Bib. of An. 1370 in Es. 2 2.
of the Church of Christ to be enlarged. Ps. 2.8. This is understood of
Christ's Church by the Marg. Notes of the Engl. Bib. of 3576.
And the Prophet David foretells, that It shall have the end of the earth for
it possession Ps 72 8.
from Sea to Sea. And Christ himself says of his Church; Math. 13 51. Mat
4.3^. And see the Marg. notes of Dan. 2.45.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Mustard Seed, the least of al seeds; but
when it is grown, it is the greatest amongst herbs, and is made a tree, so
as the fowls of the air may come and dwell under the shadow thereof. And
concerning In the Engl. Bib. the Contents of the 60. chapter of Esaias.
the Gentiles coming to the Church in abundance, it is said Es. 60.5
Thou shall see and shine, thy heart shall be astonyed and enlarged, because the
multitude of the Sea shall be converted to thee. Es. 60.9
The Isles shall wait for thee Esa. 60.11. And see Psalm. 102.15.22. and Esaias.
62.2.
Their Kings shall minister to thee, and thy Gates shall be continually open,
neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring to thee the riches
of the Gentiles. And in the person of the Church it is said Esaias. 49 20.
The place is straight for me, give room that I may inhabit. And again to the
Church Esa. 54.2.3. And see there the Contents of the Engl. Bib.
Enlarge the place of thy Tents, spread out the Curtains of thy habitation;
for thou shall increase on the right hand, and on the left: thy seed shall
possess the Gentiles, and inhabit the desolate Cities.

From these and sundry other such places, Protestants themselves collect and
infer most truly, that the Church of Christ is to continue for ever. Against
Raynolds in his Answ. to the Pref. p. 33.
D. Whitaker says; We believe to the comfort of our souls, that Christ's
Church has continued, and never shall fail so long as the world endures. And,
We account it a profane Heresy to teach, that Christ's Catholic Church has
perished from the earth at any time; for this assertion shakes the foundation
of al faith. The Divines of Wittemberg do firmly believe, the Church to have
continued upon earth without interruption, and with perpetual Succession from
the Ascension (of Christ) to these times; Ibid. p. 1065.
as also that, The true Church is to continue upon earth against all the furies
of Satan, even until the coming of Christ at the last Judgment. Insomuch as
Trast. Theol. etc. in Refut. Errorum Ser. p. 762.
Calvin upon this known principle of the Churches Continuance thus urges
Seruetus: I have not touched that continual banishment from the earth which he
faigneth of the Church, in which he plainly argues God of lying etc. He
faigneth the Church for 1260. years to have been banished from the world, so
that Heaven should be her place of exile etc. Again, God otherwise should have
lied, who promised a certain people always to himself, as long as the Sun and
Moon shall shine in Heaven: we know what the Prophets have in sundry places
testified of the eternal kingdom of Christ. Do they place the seat thereof in
the Heavens? yea they foretell, that our Lord will show a far-of her Scepter from
Sion, wherewith She may rule from the East to the west, and her inheritance may
be the whole world.

The Protestant Harm. of Confess. p. 321.
Confession of Belgia teaecheth, that there is one Catholic or universal
Church etc. which as it has been from the beginning of the world, so it shall
continue unto the end thereof: The which appears by this, that Christ is our
eternal King, who can never be without subjects. And, to conclude, this holy
Church is not situated or limited in any set or certain place; nor yet bound
and tied to any certain and peculiar persons; but spread over the face of the
whole earth etc. The Protestant Ibid. p. 306. 307.
Confession of Heluetia in the same behalf argues thus: In Osia^d. cont. 16.
p. 1064.
Forasmuch as God from the beginning, would have men to be saved, and to come
to the knowledge of truth, therefore it is necessary, that always from the
beginning, at this day, and to the end of the world, there should be a Church
etc. As also, Seeing that there is always but one God, and one Mediator etc it
follows necessarily, that there is but one Church, which we therefore call
Catholic, because it is universal, spread abroad through al parts and quarters
of the world, and reaches unto al times, and is not limited within the
compass either of time or place. But none is more full heerin then The way to
the true Church. p. 85. 86.
D. white, saying: we confess the Church never cease to be, but continues
always without interruption to the worlds end: And that so universally, that
In his Defense. p. 465.
D. Whiteguift avouches that, The Church of Christ is dispersed through the
whole world, and can not now be shut up in one Kingdom, for that he terms an
impossibility. In his Defense. p. 465.
D. Whitaker confesses of the fore-alleaged Scriptures, that, The promises of
God concerning the largenes and beauty of his Church, have been accomplished.

And in this regard, of the Churches ever continuance and universality, thus
plainly taught by the Scriptures, and believed by Protestants, the holy
Apostles in their Creed gave unto the Church the Surname of Catholic, that is
universal; for so says Sovereign Remedy against S^hisme. p. 23.
M. Clapham: the Church was to enlarge her Tents, and stretch her Cords
universally through the earth, Answ. to Raynolds in the Pref. p. 37.
for which cause it is called Catholic.

But now to examine, whether the Roman or Protestant Church, is this Apostolic
Church, thus plainly taught by the sacred Scriptures, and the acknowledgments
of Protestants, ever to continue even from Christ's time, to the end of the
world, and that not in one or other particular Nation, but even universally
over the whole world:

First concerning the Protestant Church, it has so little performed the
fore-sayd predictions of the Sacred Scriptures, for the Churches ever
Continuance and Universality, as that to the contrary R^sp. ad Camp. rat. 3.
p. 48.
D. Whitaker confesses, that The Mystery of iniquity, which took root in
the Apostles times, went through all the parts of the Church, and at length
possessed the whole Church. Now if the whole Church of Protestants and all the
parts thereof were thus possessed with the mystery of iniquity, what true
Church was then left in being or continuing in the world?

Agreably hereto teaches In epist. Jesuit. part. alt. p. 49.
Cannerus: we are come to these times which even exceed the confusion of the
Arian fury; error has possessed not one or other little part, but Apostasy
has auerted the whole body from true Christ: So that in these times the
Protestant Church consisted without a body. In like sort writes Upon the
Creed. p. 400.
M. Parkins: we say that before the days of Luther for the space of many
hundred years, an universal Apostacy ouerspred the whole face of the earth.
Which necessarily infers the Protestant Churches not being, during the
foresaid Apostacy.

But D. Willet observing the certain discontinuance, or not-being of his
Church for many former Ages, is not ashamed for his best help, contrary to the
foresaid Scriptures, and his other Brethren, boldly to impugn and deny the
ever certain Continuance of Christ's Church upon earth; for Synopsis. p. 54.
thus he says: A visible Church we desire to be a congregation of men, among
whom the Word is truly preached, and the Sacraments administered: Such a Church
has not always been, neither can we be assured that it shall be always found
upon the earth etc. concluding of the time of Antichrist, that then, shall the
visible Church fail upon earth. With whom agrees Answ. to a Counterf. Cath.
p. 79.
D. Fulk affirming, that the visible Church may become an Adulteress, and be
divorced from Christ: And which Answer to a Popish Pamphlet. p. 100
M. Woodcock acknowledges, that Protestants have often wanted in their
assemblies worshipping of God in the Word, Sacraments, and Prayer. Now from
these premises does unavoidably follow the real impugning of the certain
continuance of Christ's Church upon earth; for if according to D. Willet here,
the Churches visibilitie does consist in administration of Word and Sacraments,
of which himself says Synops. p. 71.
These marks can not be absent from the Church; and it is no longer a true
Church then it has those marks; for as he further Ib. p. 69
avouches, the only absence of them do make a Nullitie of the Church: Then, if
the visible Church may fail upon earth, who then so dull, as discerns not,
that, by necessary sequel hereof, the true Church may also fail upon earth?
Against M. Raynolds in his Answ. to the Pref. p. 33.
Directly contrary to which D. Whitaker said before, We believe that Christ's
Church shall never fail, and we account it a profane Heresy to teach that
Christ's Catholic Church has perished from the earth at any time; for this
Assertion shakes the foundation of al faith. Into such miserable streights and
manifest co^tradictions are the learned Protestants driven, through want of
their Churches continuance and universality.

Yea upon the self same ground of the Protestant Churches not fulfilling the
predictions of the Churches continuance, In his Preface of the great Latin
Bible dedicated to K. Edward the Sixth.
Castalio bursteth out into these words: Verily we must confess, either that
those things shall be performed hereafter, or have been already, or that God is
to be accused of lying. If any man answer, that they have been performed, I will
demand of him, when? If he say in the Apostles time, I will demand, how it
chances, that neither then the knowledge of God was altogether perfect, and
often in so ^bort space vanished away, which was promised to be eternal, and
more abundant then the floods of the Sea? And again, The more I do peruse the
Scriptures, the less do I find the same performed, howsoever you understand
the said Prophecies.

But Apcalypsis insignium aliquot Haer^siarcharum. fol. 4. nu. 8.
David George a Protestant at Basile proceeded much further upon the self same
cause, as is recorded by one of his brethren, who introduces him disputing
thus: If the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had been most true, and most
powerful to Salvation, the Church, by their Doctrine they had framed and
confirmed, should not have been torn asunder; for against the Church the Gates
of Hell (Christ himself witnessing) can not prevail; But now it is evident,
that the building of Christ and his Apostles is utterly overthrown by
Antichrist, as is abundantly seen in the Papacye. From whence he necessarily
concludes the Doctrine of the Apostles to have been torn and discontinued
etc. To the same effect it is reported in his History Historia Georgij Dauidis.
published by the Divines of Basile, that he thus disputed: If the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles had been true and perfect, the Church which they
planted etc. should have continued etc. But now it is manifest that Antichrist
has subverted the Doctrine of the Apostles and the Church by them begun, as is
evident in the Papacy; therefore the Doctrine of the Apostles was false and
imperfect. Not much less dangerously writes In praef suorum Dialogorum.
Bernardine Ockin: When I did consider how Christ by his power, wisdom, and
goodness, had founded and established his Church, washed it with his blood, and
enriched it with his Spirit; And again discerned how the same was utterly
ouer-throwne; I could not but wonder, and being desirous to know the cause, I
found there had been Popes. So plain it is, that the Church of Protestants,
which themselves suppose to be the Church of Christ, directly contrary to the
foresaid Scriptures, has not continued, but has been utterly overthrown. A
truth so certain and plain, that therefore Christ, his Apostles, and Doctrine,
are al of them accused of lying, through want of accomplishment of the foresaid
Prophecies in the Protestant Churches continuance and universality.

And here, I can not but admire the folly and impudency of D. White, The way
to the Church. p. 85.
who directly contrary to his other brethrens co^fessions and to al Histories,
writes thus audaciously; We confess the Church never cease to be, but
continues always without Interruption to the worlds end; and against al
Papists we make it good, that this very Faith we now profess, has
successively continued in all Ages since Christ, and was never interrupted so
much as one year, month, or day; and to confess the contrary were
sufficient to prove us no part of the Church of God etc. And yet the Contrary
is plainly confessed by D. Whitaker before, affirming the mystery of Iniquity
to have possessed the whole Church; by Cannerus, confessing Apostacy to have
auerted the whole body (of the Church) from Christ; by M. Pa^kins, confessing,
for many hundred years an universal Apostacy; by D. Willet, defending, that
the Church, in which the Word is truly preached, and Sacraments administered,
has not always been; by Castalio, confessing, that the Prophecies of the
Churches Continuance he cannot find performed in the Protestant Church; by
David George confessing that the Protestant Church has been utterly
overthrown, and not continued; and by Bernardine Ockin, teaching the very
same. So clear it is, that the Church of Protestants is not the Church of
Christ, which, according to the Shriptures, is ever to continue, even from
Christ's time unto the end of the world.

But now to examine, whether in our Roman Catholic Church the foresaid
Scriptures are truly verifyed by her perpetual Continuance even from Christ's
time to these our days, I hold it superfluous, seeing I have proved the same at
large heretofore through every Centurie or Age, and that by no weaker proofs
then the plainest acknowledgements of many and the learned Protestants; as
namely See before l. 1. c. 2.
for these last 1000. years, by M. Parkins, Powel, Wotton, Tindal, Johnson,
Dove, Beacon, Fulk, Downham, Whitakers, Luther, Calvin, the Centurists,
Osiander, Hospinian, Danaeus, and sundry others: And for the like Continuance
of our Roman Church for the first 600. years See before l. 1. c. 5.
by Zanchius, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Danaeus, Francus, Rhegius, Broccard,
Brightman, Napper, Fulk, Powel, Leigh, Morton, Midleton, Parkins, Bunnie, Jewel
and many others.

Now whereas the Apostles in their Creed do give to the Church the Surname of
Catholic, and that for this very reason, according to The Harmony of
Confess. p. 307. Clapham in his Sovereign Remedy. p. 23.
Protestants themselves, because it is universal, spread abroad through al
parts and quarters of the world, and reaches unto al times etc. This name,
Catholic, is so peculiar and appropriat to the Roman Church, and her
Professors, as that it is applied only unto them by their greatest Enemies.
Act. Mon. p. 613.
M. F^x terms our adversaries Protestants, and us Catholics. l. 7. fol. 96.
and l. 10. fol 127.
Sleydan records that Luther and others differed only in opinion touching the
Lords Supper, which the Catholics rejoiced at, and the rest much lamented. And
the same name is applied to us by M. Re^so^s taken out of Gods word. p. 5. 23.
24. 73. 74. Willet in his Obedience etc. p. 29. Humfrey vita Iuelli. p. 202.
Jacob, D. Willet, D. Humfrey and others.

Yea the said name is so dissorting from the Prot. Church, and so agreeable to
the Roman, that therefore it is hateful and disliked by Protestans: Insomuch as
Luther translating the Apostles Creed into Dutch, thrust out the word,
Catholic, and in steed thereof put-in Christian. And of the like course
observed by Lutherans Against Rhem. Test. in Act. 11. f^l 377.
D. Fulk himself acknowledges and says: It is not to be allowed. Yea in the
Synod holden at Altemberg between the Divines of the Palsgraue of Rhene, and
the Duke of Wittemberg, when the one Party objected a saying of Luther, the
other Party upon perusal of the places finding therein the word, Catholic,
thereupon rejected the whole for counterfayte, saying thereof Colloq. Altemberg.
fol 154
these words (vz. Catholickly understood) do not taste of the phrase of Luther:
And again, It is not the phrase of Luther, that any thing ought to be
understood Catholickly.

But not only Lutherans but likewise Caluinists are much out of love and liking
with the word, Catholic, as may be seen in Beza, Pref. non Test. Jacob in his
Reasons etc. p. 5. 7. 24. 23
M. Jacob, and others: And yet all this notwithstanding, Trial of the Romish
Clergy. p. 285. 286.
M. Wotton confesses that, Ibid. fol. 355.
The Reason of the name, Catholic, was at first, that there might be a Title
to distinguish sound Christians, and true Churches, from Haereticks.

Out of the Premises then we may necessarily infer, that the sacred
Scriptures assuring us, that the true Catholic Church of Christ must ever
continue, even from Christ's time until the end of the world; and the same truth
being likewise acknowledged by the learned Protestants: As also, that the Roman
Church has accordingly so continued, known and universal in all precedent
Ages, the Protestant Congregation being confessedly unknown in any Age
precedent to this of ours; that therefore our Roman Church is the only true
Church of Christ, so formerly described by the foresaid Scriptures; the
Protestant Church remaining only a Sect Heretical, nothing performing the
foresaid Oracles.

The second Proof from sacred Scriptures, in Confirmation of the Roman Church,
and Confutation of the Protestant, is taken from the Euer-visibilitie of
Christ's Church. CHAPTER III.
THE Churches continuance is by nothing more plainly taught in the sacred
Scriptures, then Euer-visibilitie, which is evermore to accompany the true
Church of Christ: In which respect it is resembled by the Prophet C. 2. 2.
Micheas 4. 1.
Esaias, to a Mountain prepared in the top of mountains, and exalted above
(other) hills: that is, as In the Marginal Notes of the Engl. Bib. of An. 1576
in Esaias. 2. 2.
Protestants expound the same, in an evident place to be seen and discerned. It
is likewise compared to the Sun, whereof it is said: her Esa. 60.20.
Sun shall not be set, nor her Moon hid. And concerning her public and
known Professors, God himself promises saying: Es. 61.9.
I will make an everlasting Covenant with them etc. All that see them, shall know
them, that they are the seed which the Lord has blessed.

In like sort Math. 5.5.
Christ himself speaking of his Church, compares it to a City placed upon a
hill, that can not be hid. And prescribing a Sovereign remedy against
dissentions daily arising between Brother and Brother, he directs the Party
grieved, that he should Math. 18.15 16.17
tell the Church, which he can not accomplish, unless she may be to him daily
known and discerned. And so this remedy being by our Savior appointed in
help of a daily continuing disease, argues that as the disease is continual,
so likewise that the remedy thereof so appointed by him, should be in like
manner continual. The prescript therefore of this continual remedy being, to
tell the Church, which we can not perform, unless the Church be to us in her
Pastors visible and known, proves evidently, that the Church must
accordingly continue visible and known.

Yea our Savior himself does specially forwarne us against al pretended
invisible Congregations, saying: Math. 24.26.
If therefore they shall say unto you, behold he is in the d^sert, go you not
forth; behold he is in secret places, believe it not. Whereupon M. Clapham
Remedy against Schism. p. 23.
teaches that, our Savior forbids going out unto such desert and
corner-Ghospels. Math. 24.23.24.

Now as these most infallible Oracles of sacred Writ, do thus plainly teach us
the Churches Euer-visibilitie, so is the same truth answerably understood,
believed, and defended by the learned Protestants that ever were; and that
from the Scriptures themselves. To this end M. Clapham Remedy against Schism.
p. 17.
writes: Contrary to al Scriptures they do affirm, that there has been no
visibilitie of the Church for former hundreds of years; which position is
against Ps. 72.3.17. Esaias. 59.21. yea having alleged many proofs from the
Scriptures and otherwise, he concludes thus: Not only al Ancients ever hold
the Churches Euer-visibilitie, but also al learned men of our Age. Loc. com c.
de Eccl. p. 354. 360.
Mela^cthon directs, that, whenever we think of the Church, let us behold
the Company of such men as are gathered together, which ^s the visible
Church: Neither let us dream that the Elect of God are to be found in any
^ther place, then in this visible Society; for neither will God be called-vpon
or acknowedged, otherwise then he has revealed himself; neither has he
revealed himself else where, save only in the visible Church, in which only the
voice of the Ghospel sounds. Neither let us imagine of any other invisible
Church, but let us know, that the voice of he Ghospel must sound openly amongst
men, according as it is written psalm. 18. Their ^ound is gone forth into all the
earth etc. And then alleging su^drie other places ^f Scripture, he adds:
which places and other the like speak not of Plato's Idea, but ^f a visible
Church. Again, Pref. in Corpus Christ. Doct.
It is of necessity that we confess a visible Church, whereof the Son of
God says, Math. 18. Tell the Church; and whereof Paul says, ^. Cor. 4. we are
made a spectacle to the whole world, to Angels and to men. What Spectacle I
beseech you is that which is not seen? And whereunto tends this Monuous
speech, which denies the visible Church? It abolisheth al testimonies of
Anti^itie; it takes away al Judgments; it causes an endless Confusion; and
induces Commonwealth of unruly Ruffians, wherein no one cares for another.
Al which to ^e most true, the Protestants of these days do ouer-strongly
confirm.

Agreably hereunto says Jesuit. part. 2. cat. 3. p. 240.
D. Humfrey: I have declared that we do not ^lace the Church in the air, but
upon the earth; we confess the Church to be a City ^laced upon a hill, which
can not be hid. Math. 5. To be a high Mountain of the house of God, higher
then other hills, to which al Nations shall flow. Esaias. 2. etc. And again, Ibid.
p. 241.
It is visible for the exercises of piety, which are seen of al in the Church;
for whilst Ministers teach, others learn; they minister Sacraments, these
Communicate etc. Who sees not these things, is blinder then a mole etc. And
lastly Ibid. p. 281.
he concludes of the Church Militant, which is the only point in question,
that It is a most clear Conclusion, that the Church must be visible. Compend.
loc. 24. p. 201.
Gesnerus avouches that, The external and visible Company of those who are
called, Baptized, and profess the name of Christ, whereof Christ speaks
Math. 1.14. was never hid. And a little before he affirms that, It can not be
hid and be obscure. Sermon. 4. fol. 90.
M. Web likewise in his Sermons upon the 2. Psalm infers the like from
Math. 1.4.

Cra^merus Scholae Propheticae. p. 381.
teaches that, The State of the Church is painted out by similitude of a
Mountain, whereby the Church is signified, which never was nor can be hid; but
as a high Mountain easily yields itself to be seen of al, as Christ (Math.
5.14.) says of a City, which placed upon a Mountain can not be hid. These
and sundry other Protestants do not only defend the Churches Euer-visibilitie;
but they defend the same, even from the Scriptures themselves; condemning the
contrary opinion of the Churches Inuisibilitie, as contrary to Scriptures and
al ancient and modern Writers.

From this so certain and confessed a truth, of the Churches Euer-visibilitie,
sundry Protestants of special note do further infer, and teach the absolute
necessity of the Churches Euer-visibilitie to the remission of Sins, and the
Salvation of man; plainly condemning to eternal damnation, al such as live and
dye out of the visible Church of Christ. To this end Instit. l. 4. c. 1. Sac. 4.
Calvin writes: Because I intend to dispute of the visible Church, let us
learn, though with this one testimony of our Mothers praise, how profitable,
yea how necessary is the knowledge of her unto us, seeing there is no other
entrance into life, except she conceive us in her womb, except she bring us
forth, except etc. to conclude, she defend us under her custody and
government, until we dying etc. Add hereunto, that out of her bosom no
remission of sins is to be hoped for. M. Parkins Vol. 1. p. 308.
teaches that, The Arc, out of which al perished, figured the Church, out of
which al are condemned etc. out of the Militant Church there are no means of
Salvation, no preaching of the Word, no Invocation of Gods name, no Sacraments,
and therefore no Salvation: For this cause every man must be admonished
evermore to join himself to some particular Church etc. D. Humfrey Jesuit.
part. 2. p. 242.
confesses that, Secret aboades are not the Christian Convocation etc. because
this Communion of Saints is an open testification of Christianity; which open
testification is necessary to Salvation. De Ecclesia Milit. p. 36. 38.
Molitox testifyeth that, The invisible Church of the Elect is latent in the
visible Church, and out of it can not be found, as it is truly said, out of the
Church (to wit, the visible Church) there is no Salvation etc.

Keckermanus System. Theolog. p. 408.
urges that, The Church of the new Testament, by reason of her Marks and
external form, must always be sensible and visible, that so other Nations,
who are yet out of the Church, may know to what Church they ought to adhere
etc. Meth. Theolog. p. 552.
Hiperius thus justly demands: Verily except these Signs were, and that the
true Church could be apprehended by Senses, how could a man know to what
Company he should adhere for the obtaining of Salvation? Of the Church l. 1.
c. 1. p. 3.
Philip Mornay avouches that, Into the visible Church al must retire
themselves in this world, that will be gathered in the invisible Church in the
world to come. All this supposes the necessary visibilitie of the Church in all
Ages, seeing in all Ages, God has provided sufficient means for man's
Salvation. Yea it further conuinceth, that supposing the Church could be
invisible at any time, that as then all the Professors and members thereof
dying should incur damnation, seeing according to the truth and the judgment
of so many Protestants, out of the visible Church there is no Salvation.

To apply then this so certain and necessary Doctrine to the Roman and
Protestant Church, I have formerly proved the Inuisibilitie of the Protestant
Church in all Ages before Luther: As namely even at Luthers first appearing, See
before l. 3. c. 1.
by the testimonies of Luther himself, of Morge^sterne, Rhegius, Miluius,
Bucer, Calvin, Camierus, Dent, Brightman, Whitaker and Jewel; as also in all
Ages for these last 1000. years, by the Sea above l. 3. c. 1
confessions of D. Fulk, Parkins, Bale, Bramlerus, Simon de Voyon, Powel and
others: And that it was no less invisible during the time of the Primitive
Church, See before l. 3. c. 1.
it is formerly acknowledged by M. Brightman, Nappeir, Carthwright, Beza, Fulk,
Cario, Francus and others.

Now to the contrary, the cleerest visibilitie of our Roman Church during al
Ages since Christ, is most plentifully testified, and first for these last
1000. years See before l. 1. c. 2.
by Powel, Simon de Voyon, Parkins, Fulk, Danaus, Whitaker, Dowaham, Wotton,
Hospinian, and many others: And for the first 600. years See before l. 1. c.
5.
by Broccard, Brightman, Leigh, Napper, Winckelmanus, Danaus, Fulk, Raynolds,
Calvin, Zanchius, Whitaker, Ridley, Jewel, Bunnie, Morton, Parker, Francus,
Field, and several others. So that my Conclusion may truly be, that seeing
according to plain Scriptures, and the answerable acknowledgeme^ts of
Protestant Writers, the Church of Christ must ever continue visible in all Ages
and times, which the Roman Church has ever, and the Protestant never
performed, that therefore not the Protestant, but the Catholic Roman Church,
is the only true Church of Christ described in the Scriptures.

The third Proof from sacred Scriptures, in Confirmation of the Roman Church
and Confutation of the Protestant, is taken from the Churches Pastors which
must ever continue with lawful Calling and Succession, and with Administration
of Word and Sacraments. CHAPTER IIII.
THE sacred Scriptures do plentifully further show the necessary Being,
Continuance, Calling, and Succession of Ecclesiastical Pastors; In which
respect God himself thus promises to his Church: Esaias. 59.2^.
My Spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth for ever. As also Ps. 45.16.
In steed of fathers, children shall be borne to thee; thou shall make them
Princes through all the earth. Esa. 62.6.
And, upon thy walls, Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, all the day and all the night, for ever they shall not hold their peace. S. Paul Ephesians. 4.11.12.
assures us that, our Savior has placed Pastors (to continue in his Church)
to the Consummation of Saints, til we al meet in unity of Faith, that is for
ever, according to the exposition hereof by D. Fulk, Against Rhem. Test. fol.
335. Calvin Inst. c. de fide. sec. 37. 38. p. 233. 234. Melan. loc. com. c. de
Ecclesiae.
Calvin and Melancthon.

Hence it is, that Calu. vbi sup. Whitak. de Ecclesia. p. 281. 285.
Calvin and D. Whitaker do affirm that, The Church can never want Pastors and
Doctors. And which is more, D. Fulk is of opinion that, Christ will suffer no
particular Church to continue without a servant to ouersee it. Ib p. 536.
And that Pastors and Doctors must be in the Church til the end of the world,
even Ib. p 569
from Christ's time til Luthers Age. M. Spark Answ. to Albines p. 11.
affirms that, The Church of Christ has always had, and shall have to the
end successively in all Ages, in one place or other, such as have showed the
truth fully unto others, Against Hoskins etc. p 359.
as have shined as Lights in their days set upon a Candlestick. And D. Field
Of the Church. c 6. p. 51
avouches that, Lawful and holy Ministry is an inseparable and perpetual
note of a true Church, and that no Church can be without it.

Secondly the holy S^riptures teach, that these Pastors which must ever
continue, must not undertake the charge by usurpation without sending, but by
lawful Calling. According to that of S. Paul Heb. 5.4
No man takes to himself the honor (of Priesthood) but he that is called of
G^d as Aaron was, to wit visibly and by peculiar Consecration. And again, To
10.14
How shall they preach, except they be sen^? Christ himself avouches that, Ioh
10.1
who so en^r^th not by the door into the sheepfold, but climeth another way,
is a thief. And God Almighty says by the Prophet Hieremie: c. 23.21
I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran. c 14.14 1^ and 27. 15
The Prophets prophecy lies in my name; I have not sent them. c. 29.31.
Semetas has prophesied to you, and I sent him not. Insomuch 2. Paralip. c.
26.16.18.19.
as Vzias presuming to vsurp the Priests office, was therefore reprehended and
stricken with Leprosy, whereof other like examples are not wanting in the 2.
Reg. 6.6.7. and 1. Paralip. 13.9.10.
Scriptures.

Now agreably to these Scriptures Protestants teach, that this personal
Succession of Pastors is to be continued in the Church no otherwise then by
lawful sending or calling by man's Ministry. Luther Upon the Epistle to the
Galath. fol. 10.
teaches that, God calls us at this day to the Ministry of his Word, not
immediately himself, but by man. As also, Tom. 5. Wittemb. in c. 1. Gal. fol.
376.
God calls us at this day to the Ministry of the Word by Mediate vocation,
which is done by means, that is, by man etc. that vocation has continued even
til these times, and shall continue til the end of the world. Piscator Vol. 1.
These. Theol. p. 405.
avouches that, God after the Apostles times has called, and as yet does call,
and to the end of the world is to call Pastors, Doctors, and Priests by the
Church. D. Bilson Perpetual Government etc. c. 9. p. 111.
affirms that, The Moderation of the keys, and Imposition of hands were at
first settled in the Apostles; and that, They can have no part of Apostolic
commission, that have no show of Apostolic succession. And therefore that,
Pastors do receive by Succession the power and charge of the Word and
Sacraments from, and in the first Apostles. Whereto assenteth also M. Bernard
saying: Plain Evidences etc. p. 184. 185.
In the Scripture of the new Testament there is none allowed to ordain a
Minister, but a Minister etc. In the new Testament, all the Apostles time, the
Ministry was by Succession, Ministers, as it were, begetting Ministers, by
Ordination, and by laying on of hands; let (but) one Instance be given to the
contrary. After their time, like Succession has been kept from time to time,
Bishop after Bishop, and Ministers ordained by them etc. The Scriptures
promising the same to the worlds end etc. Thus by plain Historical narration
both of God and Man, we see a Succession of the Ministry, from one Minister
to another. M. Cartwright 2. Reply part. 2. p. 128.
avouches that, It is forbidden that any should take honor to himself, but
he which is called of God, as was Aaron. What greater appearance of necessity
of Sacrificing could be, then when Saul took upon him to Sacrifice? 2. Sam.
13.11. etc. Likewise what greater appearance of necessity, then when Vzias
stayed the Arc ready to have fallen? 2. Sam. 6.6.7* yet these necessities
notwithstanding, for so much as they took upon them that, whereto they were
not called, they received the reward of their boldness. And again, 2. Reply
part 2. p. 141.
A Pastor can no more preach now in a particular congregation without a
sending, then an Apostle could then in all the world etc. affirming yet further
that, one not sent, may not preach, although he speak the words of Scripture;
yea Upon the Epistle to the Galath. Eng. in c. 1. f. 10.
It is not enough (says Luther) for a man to have the Word, and purity of
Doctrine, but also he must be assured of his Calling; and he that enters
without this, certainly enters to no other end but to kill. M. Mason
Consecration of Engl. Bishops. p. 9.
not only affirms it to be impossible to be a lawful Minister without a
lawful calling; but withal confirms the same from several texts of Scripture,
and from the testimony of Beza, saying: This is an order appointed in the
Church by the Son of God, and observed inuiolably by all true Prophets and
Apostles; That no man may teach in the Church, unless he be called. So that
according to holy Scriptures, and Protestants themselves, the true Church must
ever have Pastors endued with lawful callin^ and ordinary Succession.

Thirdly the same Scriptures do teach, that the said Pastors must not be
silent, but must preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments. The Prophet
Esaias Esa. 62.6.
fortelleth of the Churches Watchmen, that they shall not hold their peace. And
S. Paul Romans 10.14.15.
sets down the necessity of Preaching in these words: How shall they
believe him whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? But how shall they preach, unless they be sent? Romans 10.17.18.
Faith then is by hearing, and hearing is by the word of Christ. And certes
into all the earth, has the sound of them gone forth, and unto the ends of the
whole world the words of them. And as concerning the administration of
Sacraments, it is so to continue until the end of the world, that expressly it
is said of the Eucharist; 1. Cor. 11.26.
As often as you shall eat this Bread, and drink the Chalice, you shall show the
death of our Lord, until he come, to wit, at the day of Judgment.

Answerably to these Scriptures, Protestants teach concerning Preachers, that,
Fulk in his Answ. to Counterf. Cath. p. 100.
The truth can not be continued in the world but by their Ministry, and that
therefore, Propositions disputed in Genesis p. 845.
The Ministry is an essential Mark of the true Church. M. Deering Upon the
Epist. to the Heb. c. 3. lect. 15. 16.
teaches that, Salvation springs in preaching of the Ghospel, and is shut up
again with ceasing of it And that, Take away preaching, you take away Faith;
for which he cites many Scriptures. D. Fulk Answ. to a Counter. Cath. p. 11.
and 92.
affirms, that the Churches Pastors shall always resist al false opinions
with open reprehension. And M. Deering Upon the Hebr. in c. 2 lect. 10.
is of opinion that, The Religion being of God, no fear of man shall keep them
back; because, that were to k^ep the honor of God for corners and solitary
places. For* as the Romans 10.10.
Apostle prescribes, with the heart we believe unto Justice: but with the mouth
Confession is made to Salvation. Sermons upon the Canticles Englished. p 79. 80.
Beza confesses, that there must be Pastors and Doctors to the end of the
world, for the administration of the Word and Sacraments. And, See the Survay
of the Holy pretended etc p. 440. 441.
The Ministry of the Word and Sacraments are in absolute degree of Necessity
to Salvation. D. Whitaker Cont. Duraeum. l 3 p. 260.
assures us that, they are Essential Notes of the Church. Ibid. p. 249.
which being present, they do constitute a Church, and being absent do subvert
it. And D. Willet Synopsis p. 71.
avouches that, These Marks can not be absent from the Church, and it is no
longer a true Church then it has these Marks; for Ib. p. 69
as he further says: The only absence of them do make a nullitie of the
Church. Lobechius Disput. Theo p. 213.
speaking of these Marks, and of the Church, affirms that, They are coupled
together with so straight and indiss^luble a knot, that in the assemblies of
those who are called, the one can not be without the other, and the one denied,
the other of necessity is to be denied. Hiperius Meth. Th p. ^48. 557.
teaches that, These Notes are needful to distinguish the true Church from the
false, that men careful of their Salvation may know where the true Church is,
and to which Company chiefly they ought to adioyne themselves.

By the premises now it is evident, as well by the sacred Scriptures, as by the
manifest Confessions of Protestant Writers, that the Church of Christ must ever
have in her, Ecclesiastical Pastors and Preachers, which must be lawfully
sent, and ordinarily called by the Church, and which must preach the true Word
and Faith, and administer the holy Sacraments.

The only point therefore resting to be examined, is, whether the Roman or
Protestant Church has ever had in all Ages the foresaid Pastors lawfully
called, and succeeding one another, truly preaching the holy Word, and
administering the Sacraments.

And first concerning the Protestant Church: Al personal Succession of Pastors
has been so interrupted, or rather altogether want^ng, that in steed of any
Successi^n of Pastors to be named, it is at large confessed before, Before l.
3. c. 1.
that their Church has been wholly Invisible and unknown for many hundred of
years together. Yea Calvin In Lascicius de Russor etc. R^lig. p. ^3 And see
Calvin Inst. l 4. c 3. sec. 4. Danaeus Isagog part. 4. p. 36.
plainly confesses that, Through the Tyranny of the P^pe, the true Succession
of ordination was broken off in the Protestant Church. And again, Tract. Th.
p. 374.
The Church of God for some Ages was so torn, and pulled a-sunder, that she
was destitute of true (Protestant) Pastors. Ep. Theol. ep. 5.
Beza acknowledges, that among them, ordinary vocation was no where extant.
And Disputationes Theol. p. 719
Sadel relates that sundry Protestants, who acknowledge the doctrine which
their Church does embrace, to be true, and grounded upon the express word of
God, do yet affirm the Ministers with them to be destitute of lawful calling,
as not having a continued visible Succession from the Apostles times, which
they do attribute only to the Papists. In like sort says Bullinger: Upon the
Apocalypse. ser. 145 fol. 137. S^e Libauius in his Gretzerus triumph. p. 102.
and knewstubs in Confut. of the principal points of Popery p. 38
Albeit we can not at this day refer our calling to the Pope and Bishops,
which brag of lawful Succession: yet for so much as we can prove, that our
Doctrine is Christ's Doctrine, and therefore that our Ministry is lawful, we
care not a whit etc. So confessedly is the Protestant Church destitute of
lawful Calling.

And to touch breefly the Calling and Succession of our English Ministry,
whereas D. Barlow in his Sermon before the King at Hampton Court, publicly
taught that, The Apostles reserved Ordination to themselves, and conveyed it to
Bishops etc. Neither would the Church of Christ succeeding admit any other but
Bishops to that business, as not iustifyable for the Presbiters, either by
reason, example, or Scripture etc. Not one Example (says he) is to be showed
through the whole Story Ecclesiastical, that any besides a Bishop did it; if
some one of the inferior rank presumed to do it, his act was reuersed for
unlawful. It is so certain that our Catholic Bishops after the death of Queen
Marie, were so far from Consecrating those other, which were for such named by
Q. Elizabe^h at her entry to the Crown, and from whom sithence all the
Protestant Clergy of England deriueth itself, that the p 177.
Protestant Writer of The Assertion for true Christian Church-Policie,
avouches that, It cannot be proved that any Lord Spiritual was (so much as)
present in Parliament, or gave any assent to the Enacting of Statutes made Anno
primo Elizabethae. Yea in supply thereof, there was a Statute made An. 8. Eliz.
c. 1 the Title thereof being, An Act declaring the manner of making and
Consecrating Archbishops of this Realm, to be good. And toward the end of
that Statute, it is enacted that, Al Acts done by any Person about any
Consecration etc. by virtue of the Queens Majesty's Letters Patents shall be
good etc. And that al Persons that have been, or shall be Consecrated
Archbishops etc. shall be Archbishops etc. But the then Parliament, or her late
Highness Letters Patents could not enable the first Protestant Bishops to be
true Bishops, because that function is not Civil, but Spiritual, and ex iure
diuino. Yea M. Mason himself acknowledges, and that from M. Fox, that amongst
Consecration of the Bishops in England. p. 264 And see Fox Act. Mon. Vol. 2. p.
1295.
The Articles sent by Queen Marie to Bishop Bonner, one was this: Item,
Touching such persons, as were heretofore promoted to any Orders after the new
sort and fashion of Orders: Considering they were not ordered in very deed,
the Bishop of the Diocese, finding otherwise sufficiency and ability in
these men, may supply that thing which wanted in them before, and then
according to his discretion, admit them to Minister. Here, though M. Mason
would gladly enforce a different Gloss, yet the words are most plain, that
Queen Marie and the Church in her time censured such as were promoted to any
Orders after the new sort and fashion of Protestant Orders in K Edwards time,
were not ordered in very deed. So that still it deserves further search,
whence our present English Clergy, as also other foreign Ministers, have
obtained true power and authority to preach and administer Sacraments.

And as for Forainers, as the Ministers in Germany, Denmark, Holland and the
rest, they are so clearly and confessedly destitute of al true Ordination,
that M. Mason acknowledges that, Consec. of Engl. Bish. Ep. Dedic.
whereas other Reformed Churches were constrained by necessity to admit
extraordinary Fathers, that is, to receive ordination from Presbiters (or
Ministers) rather then to suffer the fabric of the Lord Jesus to be dissolved:
The Church of England had always Bishops to confer Sacred Orders according
to the ordinary and most warrantable Custom of the Church of Christ: So that,
no Protestant Ministers in the world, have any ordinary Calling or Ordination
by Bishops, but only the Ministers of England, who yet beg and derive all that
which they have, from their imagined Antichrist himself, as now shall be showed.

Some Protestants therefore teach, that they have their Calling and Ordination
from the Church of Rome; so D. Bridges Defense of the Government. p. 1276.
speaking of our Catholic Bishops, and their Calling, urges thus in our
behalf; If our (Protestant) Brethren will make them but mere Laymen, then are
neither they, nor we, any Ministers at al, but mere Laymen also; for who
ordained us Ministers, but such Ministers as were either themselves of their
Ministry, or at least were made Ministers of those Ministers? Except they will
say, the people can make Ministers etc. yea some Sile^ced Ministers
supplication of Anno 1609. p. 9. 10. 17.
Puritans do reprove their Protestant Brethren, for deriuing their Ministry
from the Church of Rome. But Cont. Dur. l. 9. p. 820.
D. Whitaker exemplifyeth the same, saying: Luther was a Priest, and Doctor
according to your Rite or ordination etc. And it is manifest, that so also was
Zuinglius, Bucer, Oecolampadius, and innumerable others etc. M. Parkins Vol. 1.
p. 737.
speaking of the Calling of the first Preachers of the (Protestant) Ghospel,
argues thus: If they had no Calling, neither have we that are their followers:
But, They had their Callings etc. from the Romish Church itself; for they were
either Priests or Schoole-Doctours, as in England Wiccliffe, in Germany
Luther, in Bohemia John Husse and Hierom of Prage, at Basil Oecolampadius, in
Italy Peter Martyr, and others. And therefore these with many others were
ordained either in Popish Churches, or in Schools etc. And again, We say, the
first restorers of the Ghospel in our times, had their first Callings of them,
to wit, the Papists.

M. Mason discoursing at large of this very point of Ordination, and in
particular of the Ordination of our English Protestant Clergy, confesses
first, that the Roman Church has ever had true power of Ordination:
Consecration of the Bishops of England. Ep. Dedic.
Such was the goodness of God (says he) that even in the darkness of Popery, as
Baptism, so the Ministerial function etc. was wonderfully preserved; for the
Church of Rome by Gods special providence, in her ordination of Priests,
retained such Euangelical words, as in their true and native sense, include a
Ghostly Ministerial power to forgive sins etc. Thus the Church of Rome gave
power to her Priests to teach the truth etc. which Ibid. p. 262.
Power (says he) is a Rose, which is found in the Romish wilderness, but the
plants thereof were derived from the garden of God: It is a River which runs
in Aegipt, but the fountain and Spring of it, is in Paradise: It is a Beam
which is seen in Babylon, but the original of it is from the Sphere of the
Heaven. Wherefore when your Priests return to us, our Church paring away their
Pollutions, suffers them to exercise their Ministerial function, according to
the true meaning of Christ's word. And again, Ibid. p. 262.
we being content with their calling, and commission of their function already
committed unto them, do not reiterate their ordination and Imposition of hands.
And as Catholic Pri^sts Apostated only through vice, are here allowed for
sufficient Ministers without al new ordination from any Protestant
Superinte^dent, so does M. Mason most seriously labor throughout his whole
Book, to prove the ordination of the Protestant English Clergy, to have been
certainly derived from our Catholic Roman Church. To which end acknowledging
that Ibid. p. 64. 65. 66.
The whole Clergy of England at this day, deriueth their Consecration from
Cranmer, he painfully labors to prove, that Cranmer was appointed by Pope
Clement to be Archbishop of Canterbury, and that he was Consecrated by three
Catholic Bishops; which Consecration was performed with wonted Ceremonies,
according to the usual form of (the Roman) Church; which (says he) continued
all the days of King Henry the Eighth, even when the Pope was banished, yea he
expressly concludes his book thus: p. 267.
Thus it appears, that although we received our Orders from such as were
Popish Priests, yet our Calling is lawful. So clear it is, that M. Mason would
be glad to wring his Ministers Ordering from our Roman Church. And the like is
acknowledged and taught by Cath. Trad. p. 183. Buca. loc. com. p. 509. Bernard
in his Diswasion from Brownisme. p. 144. White in his way to the Church p. 404.
Fotherby his Answer annexed to his 4. Sermons. p. 81. Sutcliffe against D.
Kellison p. 5. Sarauia of diverse Degrees of Ministers. p. 9.
sundry other Protestants. But here I can not but observe by the way how
strange it is, that Protestants should thus much delight and please themselves
in their Ordination from Cranmer, a man so vicious, inconstant, and treacherous
both to God and man. Does not D Godwin relate that, In Cranmsr. p. 123.
Being yet very young he ^aryed, and so lost his fellowship in Jesus College
in Cambridge? Does not Fox report, that being Archbishop, in his return from
Rome he brought with him a Dutch woman, Act. Mon. p 1037
to whom (says Fox) it is supposed he was married? yet certain it is, that no
show thereof was made in K. Henry's time, when he carried her up and down in a
trunck, marying her afterward in K. Edwards time. He was also most treacherous
to his Prince; for albeit he had been so greatly exalted by K. Henry, and by
him appointed one of the Executours of his Will, yet presently after his death
he assented to the breaking thereof. And after K. Edwards death, endeavored al
he could to the advancing of Q. Jane, and utter excluding from the Crown of K.
Henry's lawful daughter Queen Marie: To whose dis-inheriting he first
subscribed, as also to that rebellious letter, which he and his accomplices sent
to Queen Marie, and which to his everlasting infamy and confusion, Act. Mon.
p. 1299
Fox himself has recorded. And although from his cradle he was a Roman
Catholic until his being Archbishop, which honor he received from the Pope,
taking the usual oath of fidelity unto him: Yet in the next year after, K.
Henry by Parliament procuring himself to be termed Head of the Church, he also
forsook the Pope, and forswore himself in that point, agreing yet, as also the
King, in all other with him, and both by words and deeds persecuting
Protestants, as is evident in the death of Lambert and others, written by M.
Fox. Yea in K. Edwards time (as Stow Chron. p. 594.
reports) The French King being deceased etc. also the Church of S. Paul in
London being hanged with black, and a sumptuous Hearse set up in the Quire, a
Dirge was there song, and on the next morrow, the Archbishop of Canterbury
(Cranmer) assisted of 8. Bishops, al in rich Miters and other their
Pontificals, did sing a Mass of Requiem etc. yet after this, he fell to
Lutheranisme, publishing a Catechism, wherein with Luther he taught the Real
Presence; which not long after impugning, he turned with the Duke of Somerset
to Zuinglianisme, setting forth another Catechism against the Real Presence.
And yet after all this under Act. Mon p. 1710
Q. Marie, he recanted for hope of life, al his Protestantisme, and both by
tongue and pen professed the Roman Catholic Faith: But perceiving that he must
dye, and choosing rather to dye in the opinion of vulgar Protestants a Martyr,
then in the true judgment both of Protestants and Catholics as a Malefactor
and Traitor, he finally dyed in Zuinglianisme, being both condemned for Heresy
against God, and for Rebellion against his Prince, as M. Fox Act. Mon p. School
confesses. So infamous was the life and death of the first Protestant Bishop
that ever England had, and from whom al our English Ecclesiastical fry do
derive their Ordination, and other good conditions not unlike unto his.

But to return from whence we have digressed, all this begging, by M. Mason and
the rest forenamed, of Protestant Orders from the Church of Rome, is directly
contradicted and loathed by others of their Brethren, as thinking the Bishop of
Rome to be Antichrist himself, and the Roman Church to be the whore of Babylon.
M. Powel De Antich. p. 6. and 310.
terms our Catholic Orders, the Mark of the Beast. D. Downham Of
Antichrist. l. 2. p. 108.
spares not to say: I say their Priesthood is Antichristian. The Divines of
Geneua Propositions Disputed etc. p. 245.
affirm, that There is in Babylon (thereby meaning the Roman Church) no holy
Order or Ministry indeed no lawful Calling, but a mere usurpation. M. Penrie
writing against the Protestant Calling disputes thus: From whence have they
their calling? had they it not from those which sit in the Chair of
Antichrist? Upon the 122. Ps. fol. D. 8.
yea how many are in all Christendom? etc. but their ordination have come from
Popish Prelacie within three or four generations at the most etc. Can an
unlawful calling bring forth a lawful, though it descend from one to another a
hundred or thousand times? Therefore unless they can approve the lawfulnes of
their calling under some other title then that which they now have by the
Clergy, it will fall out there shall hardly be found a Minister duly called in all
the world etc. In like sort D. Fulk Answ. to a Counterf. Cath. p. 50.
answers to us Catholics: you are highly deceived, if you think we esteem
your offices of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons any better then Laymen, and you
presume to much to think that we receive your ordering to be lawful. And
again, Retentiue. p. 67.
with all our heart we defy, abhor, detest and spit at your stinking, greasy,
Antichristian Orders etc. In like modest sort says Beza: Apud Sarauiam. in
Defens. Tract. etc. p. 56.
Popish Orders are nothing else, then the impurest buying and selling of the
Roman Stews. And Consideration of the Papists Reasons. p. 71.
M. Gabriel Powel avouches that, The Popish ordination is nothing else, but
mere profanation etc. there is no true Ecclesiastical Vocation in the Papacy.
We judge no otherwise (says D. Whitaker) Cont. Dur p 635.
of your Priests, then of Christ's Adversaries, and enemies of his Priesthood:
Ibid. p. 662.
You have neither lawful Bishops, nor Priests, nor Deacons. And according to D.
Sutcliffe, Answ. to Ey^^pt. p. 82
The Pope (himself) is neither true Bishop nor Priest, for he was ordained
Priest but to offer Sacrifice and to say Mass for the quick and the Dead. But
this Ordination (says he) does not make a Priest, nor had true Priests and
Elders ever any such Ordination. Therefore, Ib p. 87 And see his Cha^leng. p.
35:
The Romish Church is not the true Church, having no Bishops nor Priests at al,
but only in name

Now if the Protestant Clergy will not derive their Vocation and Ordination
from the Church of Rome, as the former Protestants do refuse, and in reason
they cannot, supposing their absurd Doctrine of the Pope being Antichrist; for
what more ridiculous then that Christ's Ministers should receive their spiritual
power and Commission from Antichrist? Then still we are to demand, from whence
the Protestant Clergy has their Calling and Commission, seeing according to
the former Scriptures, the true Churches Past ours must be lawfully called,
sent, and ordained?

In these so extreme straytes some Protestants acknowledge and defend their
Ordination and calling to be from the Laity itself, as from the temporal
Magistrate, and their hearers and followers. His two Letters con^erning the
Earl of Lauale Eng. fol. c. 3.
D. Tilanus teaches that, Farel had his sending of the people sf Geneua, who
had right had authority (says he) to institute and depose Ministers, And, The
reformed Churches and their calling partly from God, and partly from the
people, as by lawful instruments. M Dilingam p. 78.
writing against M. Hill, says: our Preachers were called by Christian
Magistrates, whose allowance they had, which to be warrantable you can not
deny. D. Sutcliffe Against D. Kellison. p. 5.
is not abashed to teach, that in case of necessity, such as Protestants had
at Luthers first revolt, The multitude of Christians without Ministers, have
power to appoint Ministers among themselves. And M. Symondes Upon the Revel. p.
123.
avouches, A Calling to preach by the Civil Magistrate, A holy and sufficient
calling (says he) in the time of these confusions.

Now according to this strange Doctrine has been the answerable practice of
Protestants; for M. Mornay Treatise of the Church. p. 371.
says: Some of our men in such a corrupt State of the Church, as we have seen
in our time etc. did at first preach without this former calling, and afterward
were chosen and called to the holy Ministry by the Churches which they had
taught: A practice preposterous and directly contrary to the order set down
by S. Paul Romans 10.14.
saying: How shall they invoke in whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe whom they have not heard? How shall they hear without a Preacher? And
how shall they preach except they be sent? So evidently is sending or calling,
and Ordination precedent in order to preaching. Yea agreably hereunto writes
M. Mason: Consec. of Engl. Bishops. p. 3.
It is clear that the Presb^terie here mentioned, ordained Timothy by
Imposition of hands, which no Laymen may do. But besides, how absurd is it to
affirm, that mere Lay and temporal men, as Shoomakers, Taylours, B^acksmithes,
and the like, can bestow upon others that most Spiritual and highest power and
Jurisdiction of preaching true Faith, and administering the most holy and
celestial Sacraments, whereof they are wholly deuoyd and destitute themselves?

The indignity, disgrace, and absurdity then of this base begging of Calling
from the Laity, being discerned by other Protestants, as much ashamed thereof,
they wholly disclayme from it as also in all other ordinary and Mediate Calling
and Succession, betaking themselves for their last refuge to extraordinary and
immediate Vocation from God. So D. Fulk Against Staples. etc. p. 2.
confesses that, The Protestant^, that first preached in these last days, had
extraordinary calling. And, Retentiue etc. p. 300.
In the State of the Church so miserably deceived as in Luthers time, God
sends extraordinarily, immediately from himself, as Elias and Elizeus, and the
Prophets were sent etc. So Christ sent his Apostles and Evangelists, and so was
Luther, and such as he, sent to repair the ruins of the Church etc. Agreably
hereunto are those words of M. Cartwright: In Whiteg. Def. p. 217.
When the Churches have been by Antichrist even razed from the foundation, God
has stirred Evangelists even immediately by his Spirit, without any calling of
men, to restore his Church again; as Wiccliffe, Husse, Luther, Zuinglius. In
like words says M. Parkins: In his works printed. 1605. fol. 916.
The calling of Wiccliffe, Husse, Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr etc. was
extraordinary. Ramus Commentaries of France English. p 74.
reports the French Protestants to say: We believe it is unlawful for any,
of his own authority to take upon him government of the Church, without
lawful Election, if so it may be had: We add this (if) because some-time (as in
our time also) when the Church has been persecuted, many have been
constrained without ordinary calling, by motion of the Spirit etc. Calvin In
Lascicius de Russor. etc. Relig. p. 23. Calu. Inst. l. 4. c. 3. sec. 4.
also writes: Because the true Succession of Ordination has been broken off
by the Tyranny of the Pope, a new help is now needful etc. and (therefore)
this office was altogether extraordinary, which the Lord has enjoined unto
us. And Beza In Sarauia his Def. tract. etc. p. 56. 60. 74.
in the Conference at Poysie, being demanded of the Calling of himself, and his
other then Associats, affirmed the same to be Extraordinary. Ep. Theol. ep* 5.
p. 49.
And in his Epistle to Alemannus he further urges: Verily thou can not
pretend ordinary Vocation; for who chose thee? therefore let us see of
Extraordinary: But to this, then only do we give place, when there is none, or
almost no ordinary vocation, as has happened in our times in the Papacy,
when ordinary Vocation, which was no where, neither ought nor could be
expected. So that in the opinion of Beza, Calvin, Fulk, Parkins and sundry
other Protestants, all the calling which the first Protestant Preachers had, was
only extraordinary and immediate from God.

But now to discover the great insufficiency, and manifest falsehood of this
their last Evasion, and thereby plainly to discover al our Protestant Clergy,
even to this day, to be destitute of al lawful Calling and Mission, and so to
prove al our Ministers to be usurpers, intruders, and mere Laymen; First,
according also to Beza his former Doctrine, it is certain, that extraordinary
Vocation takes not place, but when ordinary is wanting; which is also taught
by M. Parkins Vol. 1. p. 738.
using the same words: Extraordinary calling never has place, but when
ordinary calling fails. Wherefore our Protestants pretending for themselves
extraordinary calling, do thereby disclayme, and debar themselves of al
ordinary, which is directly against the former Scriptures, and sundry of
their learned Brethren before cited, amongst whom Luther said: God calls us
at this day to the Ministry of his Word, not immediately by himself, but by
man.

Secondly, extraordinary Calling is always accompanied and confirmed by
extraordinary signs and wonders. So says Loc. com. class. 4. c. 20 p. 58
Luther (whom our Protestants most pretend to have been extraordinarily called)
Try this whether they can prove their Vocation; for never has God sent any,
but either called by man, or declared by signs, no not his own Son. Tom. 5.
Ien. Germ. fol. 491.
And again: From whence come thou? Who sent thee? Where are the Seals,
that thou art sent from men? Where are the Miracles which testify thee to be
sent from God? Tom 3 Ien. Germ. f. 455. 456.
In like sort he admonished the Senate of Milhouse against Munster the
Anabaptist, saying: If he say, he was sent from God and his Spirit, as the
Apostles were, let him prove this by working of Signs and Miracles, or else do
not suffer him to preach; for wheresoever God does change the ordinary way,
there always he works Miracles. In like manner are the Anabaptists urged by
Bullinger; Cont. Anabap. l. 3. c. 7.
If you say, you have a peculiar Vocation like unto the Apostles, prove it by
signs and Miracles etc. but this you will never do, therefore your calling is
of no worth, yea it is pernicious to the Church of Christ. D. Sarauia Def.
Tract. cont. Bezam p. 38 And see his Diverse Degrees of Ministers. p. 7. And
Fenner in his sacra Theol p. 119
also teaches that, That vocation which is immediately from God, is never read
to be made without some external and visible sign and vision. Disp. th. 23 p.
207
Sigwartus avouches that, This vocation has alw^yes certain and
extraordinary gifts attending it, which are as it were the Seals of Doctrine
etc. of which sort were Miracles etc. Part. Theol. l. 1. p. 308
Polanus auerreth that, of Ministers extraordinarily called, there were also
extraordinary gifts, to wit, of Prophecy, of working Miracles etc. Loc. com
p. 394.
Musculus assures us that, The calling which is immediately from God, is not
now in use, as it was in times past; it had its signs whereby it might be
known, whereof Mark the Evangelist makes mention in his last Chapter, saying:
They preached etc. with Signs following. And M. Clapham Soueraign Remedy etc.
p 25.
upon the same ground reprehendeth Brown, for that he did take upon him
extraordinary calling and wonted Miracles. M. Parkins Vol 3 part. 2. p. 395.
and 441. And Luther in D^uteron in t. 13, fol 102 Aretius loc. com loc. 63. p.
198. Melancthon in Christ doct p. 884. Clapham in Chro. c. 7. f. L. 2. Mayor in
ep. 1. ad Tim. in c. 3. fol. 177.
confesses that, We may justly require more and more wonderful Signs of an
extraordinary calling before we believe it etc. The Church in these days has
much more cause to doubt, and to require many and extraordinary signs, before
it acknowledge any such extraordinary calling etc. So that our Protestant
Clergy challenging unto themselves extraordinary Calling, thereby do oblige
themselves to prove the same by extraordinary Signs and Miracles.

But to the contrary it is most certain that not any Minister, no nor other
Protestant in the world, ever wrought any Miracle: And so also is it confessed
by Sir Edward Hobbie, saying: Letter to Higgons. p. 102 And Tinleyes 2. Sermon. p
66. Wotton in his Trial of the Romish Clerg. p. 355
We are not ashamed to confess, that we have no other Miracles, then those
which were wrought by Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles. But Sir Edward may
then be much ashamed of his painted Ministers, who only pretend for themselves
extraordinary Calling, which, as before, must ever have Miracles annexed.
Agreably hereunto writes M. Mason, saying: Consecrat of Engl: Bish. p 11.
We teach the same doctrine for substance, which Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles both taught and confirmed by Miracles. And in this sense all the Miracles of Moses, and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, are ours etc.
But if the question be concerning our Persons, then we confess that we can
work no Miracles, we take no such matter upon us; neither is it necessary,
because both our Calling and Doctrine are ordinary. So flatly does he
disclayme from al Protestants Miracles, or extraordinary Calling. In like sort
acknowledged D. Sutcliffe: Examination of Kellisons Survey. p. 8.
Neither do we (Ministers) practice Miracles, nor do we teach that the doctrine
of truth is to be confirmed with Miracles. D. Fulk Ag Rhem. Te. in Apoc. c. 13.
fol. 478.
confesses that, It is known that Calvin and the rest, whom the Papists call
Arch-hereticks, do work no Miracles.

And as concerning Luther himself, whom al pretend to be most extraordinarily
called, Admonitio de libro Concordiae p. 202. 203.
the Protestants of the Count Palatine do expressly say of him: We have not
heard any miracle which he has done. Yea himself Tom. 4. in Esaias. c 35. fol.
157.
endeavoring to answer this strongest argument made against him, is enforced
to confess and say: They laugh at us, and object, that not so much as a lame
horse has been cured by Lutherans, and that we are altogether destitute of
the gift of Miracles; But it is written; The impious sees not the glory of
God (and now reports he his Miracles) for as now the blind do see, when they
are reduced to the knowledge of Christ etc. the deaf hear the Ghospel, the
lame who sat in Superstition, and the Idolatrous, go well and walk with
pleasant Faith etc. whom do not these Miracles move? etc. for they are no
less, then to raise the dead, or to give sight: So that the greatest Miracle
that Luther wrought was to make (for example) Catharine Bore to see the
liberty and pleasure of his new Ghospel, she being before blinded with the
austeritie and Mortification of a Religious Nun; and to make her hear his
lascivious and scurril discourses, being before deaf to al speeches, but such
as tended to Charity and devotion; and lastly to make her walk with pleasant
faith from her Monastery to the Tavern, being before mured within the walls
of her Nunnerie: which are Miracles ordinarily wrought by any Heretic
whosoever. Besides these blind, deaf, lame, whom Luther did so miraculously
cure by reducing them to the knowledge of Christ, were those, who were indeed
already Christians, whom he seduced by his greatest liberty offered, from their
ancient Faith: for as for his Conversion of one Heathen, Pagan, or Idolater
from Infidelity to the Christian Faith, no Instance can be given, as shall be
showed at large in the Chapter subsequent.

Besides, it is the certain and true Doctrine even of sundry Protestants
that, as Vol. 1. Thesien Theol. loc. 23 p. 364. Bale Examen Recitationum. p.
386. Lubbertus de Principijs Christ. Dogm p. 562. Pol. Part. Theol. l. 1. p.
308. Beamlerus Hypost. Theol l. 3. fol. 109.
Piscator says, whom God calls by himself immediately, those he is accustomed
to furnish with singular gifts, that it may appear they are sent from God:
And these only have testimony that they can not err in Doctrine. Now it is
evident, and for such at large acknowledged by Protestants, that Luther
believed and taught sundry See this at large in the Prot. Apology. Tract* 2.
c. 2* Sec. 10. Subd. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7. 8.
gross and most dangerous errors and Heresies, as that the Apocalypse, the
Epistles to the Hebrews and of S. James are not Canonical: That, Faith unless
it be without even the least good words, does not justify, nay is no Faith: and
that nothing sins but unbelief: and that, Good works are hurtful to
Salvation: That, The Husband, if the wife will not, may take the maid, and may
have ten or more wives at once: That the Lay People may preach, Baptize,
Consecrate and minister the B. Sacrament; that the Divinity of Christ did
suffer etc. with sundry such like, over tedious to recite.

But here by the way, I cannot omit the strange Encomium given of Luther by D.
Morton in these words: Protest. Appeal p. 615.
This is our Adversaries guise, whenever they light upon any tooth of this
dead Lion, they tread upon it with contempt; Never considering, that as out of
the Judge. 14*14.
Strong came sweetness, so in those Sentences of Luther, which they most
traduce, there is commonly enclosed the most Sacred truth full of as divine
comfort as man's heart can ruminate upon. But if the former and innumerable such
like Sentences of the Protestants Lion, Luther, be so comfortable to D. Morton,
sure I am, that they are odious, and loathsome to chaste and Christian ears,
and for such are taxed by sundry See Ezecanomius de corruptis moribus.
Wygandus de bonis and malis Germ. Hospin. ^o^c. discord. 99. Couel D^f. of
Hook. p. 101. Saying. Tom. 2. in Resp. ad Conf. Luth. f. 458. and sundry
lothers.
of his own brood, even Protestant Writers, who rested much scandalized
thereby: And therefore M. Morton patronizing so unpardonable errors, may give
over just suspicion of his own guilt in the like.

But to return, from the Premises therefore it evidently follows, our
Protestant Clergy to be wholly destitute of al lawful Calling, seeing it is
already proved, even by their own confessions, that their Succession has been
interrupted, and that they have not ordinary Calling, and therefore do fly to
extraordinary, which also they are deuoyd of, through their confessed want of
Miracles and truth of Doctrine, or freedom from error, which does ever
certainly accompany the same.

Now the sacred Scriptures concerning the Churches Pastors Calling, preaching,
and administration of Sacraments, not being fulfilled, and performed in the
Protestant Church: It only remains to be examined, whether the same are
verifyed and accomplished in the Catholic Roman Church. And first, the same is
confirmed by ad such Arguments as Before 4. 1. c. 23. 4.
heretofore we have used in prooff of the Roman Churches Euer-visibilitie,
which does ever suppose the like continuance of Ecclesiastical Pastors, with
administration of Word and Sacraments.

Secondly, the same is evidently supposed and confessed by all such Protestants
as See Before l. 3. c. 4.
formerly acknowledged and derived their Succession and Ordination from the
Church of Rome; for if the Roman Pastors succession and Ordination were not
good or interrupted, then were it fruitles and absurd, for the Protestants
Clergy to derive their own succession and Ordination from them.

Thirdly, the Centurie writers of Magdeburg in the tenth Chapter of every
several Centurie, do make special mention of the Bishops and Doctors of the
Roman Church, who lived ahd flourished in every Age.

Fourthly De rebus grauiss contr. Disp. p. 719.
M. Sadel plainly confesses sundry Protestants not only to affirm the
Ministers with them to be destitute of lawful Calling, seeing they have not a
perpetual and visible Succession from the Apostles to these times; but also
they attribute this only to the Papists, whom therefore in this question they
prefer before us. In like direct sort D. Fulk Answ to a Count. Cath p. 27.
And in his Reioynder to Bristow. p. 343.
acknowledges unto us, saying: You can name the notable persons in all Ages in
their government and Ministry, and especially the Succession of the Popes you
can rehearse in order upon your fingars. M. Mason grants that, Cons. of the
Engl. Bish. p. 52.
The Church of Rome etc. was planted by two so great Apostles Peter and Paul.
And that Ibid. p. 41.
The Priesthood which the Apostles conferred etc. being conveyed to Posterity
successively by Ordination, is found at this day in some sort in the Church of
Rome, in regard whereof you may be said to succeed the Apostles etc. So certain
it is, that the Bishops of the Roman Church, have ever successively continued
in all Ages, even from Christ's time to this, and that true Ordination has been
ever in the said Church since the Apostles: The poor Protestant Family being
merely Laical, as being confessedly destitute of al Calling either ordinary or
extraordinary.

The fourth Proof from sacred Scriptures, in Confirmation of the Roman Church,
and Confutation of the Protestant, is taken from the Conversion of Heathen
Kings and Nations to the Faith of Chtist. CHAPTER IIII.
IT is most clearly taught us by the sacred Scriptures, that the Church of
Christ shall convert many Heathen Kings and Countries to the Faith of Christ.
The Prophet Esaias Esa. 60.16.
speaking of the Church of Christians says: Thou shall suck the milk of the
Gentiles, and the breasts of Kings. And, Esa. 60.11.
Their Kings shall minister to thee, and thy gates shall be continually open,
neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring to thee the riches
of the Gentiles. And that their Kings may be brought etc. Esa. 49.23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Mothers: upon which place in
the Annotations of the English Bible of Anno 1576. it is said, The meaning is,
that Kings shall be converted to the Ghospel, and bestow their power and
authority for preservation of the Church.

Yea God almighty has further promised that, Esa. 2 2
Al nations shall flow unto it. And that, Psalm. 2.8
He will give the Heathen for thy inheritance, and the end of the earth for thy
possession. Yea it was said to Apoc. 10.11.
S. John (and in him to other Pastors) Thou must prophecy again unto Nations,
peoples, tongues, and many kings. Es. 62 2.
As also, The Gentiles shall see thy Justice, and al Kings thy glory, and thou
shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of our Lord shall name. Ps.
102.15.
Then the Heathen shall fear the name of our Lord, and all the Kings of the
earth his glory. These and sundry other such places are so co^uincing for the
Conversion of the Heathen Kings and Nations by the Church of Christ, that
Protestants themselves do endeavor to confirm the same truth from the sacred
Scriptures.

Luther Tom. 4. Wittemb. in Es. 60. fol. 234.
writing upon the Prophet Esaias, chap. 60. affirms that, Kings shall obey and
believe the Ghospel etc. the Church is in perpetual use of converting others to
the Faith etc. for this is signified by her gates being continually open. And
Oecolampadius In Hier. c. 33.
writes upon Hieremie, that God speaks here of the eternity of Christ's
Kingdom etc. he shall have Kings and Priests, and that for ever, and not a few,
but as the stars of heaven etc. for their multitude. Tabulae Analyticae. in Es.
c. 60. p. 126.
Szegedine affirms that the Prophet Esaias fortelleth, that Gentiles and Kings
shall embrace with great desire the religion of Gods people, which ought to be
referred to the Kingdom of Christ, where he foretells the coming of the
Gentiles, and that in such number, as that it should make the beholders amazed.
In like sort teaches Meth. D^script. p. 583. 584.
Snecanus, saying: Hitherto appertain Ps. 72.9. and Esaias. 49.2.23. and 60.4.
In these places the Prophets describe the Kingdom of Christ under the new
Testament, and the office of the Gentiles, and especially of Kings flowing to
the Church etc. that they may be Nurces to the Church of Christ etc. unless
therefore our Adversaries will accuse God and the Holie-Ghost of lying etc. It
is necessary that they grant to the Church of the New Testament her Nurces,
pious Kings and Queens, who shall bow themselves to Christ etc. And these
predictions of the Prophets of Kings to be in the Church of Christ may suffice.

This then supposed as a most certain truth, that the Church of Christ was to
convert Heathen Nations and Princes from their Infidelity and Idolatry, to
the true Faith of Christ; That then which rests to be examined, is, whether
the said Conuersions have been performed by the Roman or Protestant Church. But
first it is to be granted, that during all the time after Christ until
Constantin's Conversion, the true Church remained so under persecution, as that
the foresaid glory and amplitude foretold of her, concerning her great
increase of believers, and of Kings and Queens to serve her, was not as then
fulfilled: In which respect, D. Barlow Def. of the Articles of Prot. Relig p.
34.
avouches that, In the primitive Nonage of the Church* is promise of Kings
allegiance thereunto, was not fully accomplished, because in those days, that
Prophecy of our Savior was rather verifyed: you shall be brought before Kings
for my names sake, by them to be persecuted even unto death etc. In like sort
says Against Stapl^t. Mart. p. 51.
D. Fulk: Let him, I say, point out with his finger, what Kings in every Age
for the space of the first 300. years did walk in the brightness of the Church
arising.

To examine then the subsequent time from Constantine to Luther, and to begin
with the Protestant Church: It is so far from accomplishing the foresaid
Prophecies, that to the contrary, it is at large acknowledged before See
before l. 3. c. 1.
to have been Invisible itself, even from Constantins time to Luthers; And so
accordingly D. Barlow Def. of the Art. p. 34.
being urged to answer this very point concerning the Protestant Churches
bringing forth Kings, which should be, as Esaias prophesied, foster-fathers, and
Queens to be noursing-mothers to the Church, confesses, as before, that in the
Primitive nonage of the Church this was not accomplished: And speaking of the
times succeeding, Ib. p. 35
he affirms that, The promise by Esaias prophesied was accomplished, and the
number so increased, though still inuisibly, that as her Love said in the
Canticles: there are threescore Queens etc. But I will not urge how absurd it
is to affirm, that many Kings, Queens, and Kingdoms themselves should be
converted, and yet all this to be invisible.

It is likewise not unworthy of observation, that whereas Martin Bucer De Regno
Dei. l. 1. c. 1. 3.
makes a special Tract of the sundry Prophecies by himself alleged in this
behalf, he does not yet in accomplishment of them, give instance, though so
provoked thereto by the argument of his said Treatise, so much as but in any
one heathen King or Kingdom, converted accordingly by Protestants, to the
Faith of Christ. Yea to the contrary, sundry Protestants are enforced,
through their manifest want of fulfilling the foresaid Prophecies in any Age
before Luthers, to refer, or rather defer the Conversion of Heathen Kings
and Countries unto the now later times, wherein their supposed Antichrist is
publicly withstood. So M. Symondes Upon the Revel. p. 123.
terms these later times, The days of the seventh Angel, that conuerteth
Kings to the Ghospel. And M. Willet Synop. Ep. Dedic.
affirms that, The Prophecy of Esaias is fulfilled in these our days, who
says concerning the Church: Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy
Nursing Mothers, Esa. 49.23. etc. for now who sees not, that many Christian
Princes in the world are become the children of the Church? etc. And the same
is taught by In his Apoca in c. 20 p. 656.
M. Brightman, Plain Evidences etc. p. 72. 73. 81.
and M. Bernards.

Yea in this respect Protestants disclayming from al former Conuersions of
England, Germany, Heluetia, France and Poland, doubt not therefore to make
Tindal, Epistle to England written from Brasile. p. 71.
Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin and John a Lasco the first Conuerters or Apostles of
those several Nations. So M. Stalbridge avouches that, God raised up W^lliam
Tindal, the first true Apostle of Christ after John Wiccliffe. M. Wetenhal
Discourse of Abuses p. 134.
terms Tindal our English Evangelist. And M. Fox Act Mon p 883.
styleth him, M. William Tindal the true Apostle of our later days. And yet
this so great an Apostle was burned for Heresy in the time of K. Henry the
Eighth. In like sort says Zanchius to John a Lasco: In his Epistles l. 2. p
232.
God has hitherto preserved thee, that as Luther was the Apostle to his
Germany, Zuinglius to his Heluetia, Calvin to his France, so thou may be an
Apostle to thy Polonie. Therefore the Lord strengthen thee etc. until thou
shall consummate thy Apostleship etc.

But all this is most insufficient, and impertinent; for first, even since
Luthers time, not so much as any one King or Kingdom of the Gentiles, is yet
hitherto converted from Paganism by Luther, or any other Protestant ever
extant in the world; as shall be proved next hereafter in this Chapter.
Secondly, it is incredible to think, that the wisdom and goodness of Christ
would suspend the foresaid promises of his Churches happy and plentiful
Conversion of Kings and Countries to serve her, during both the beginning and
midle-time of the same, and would but fulfill the same in her most decaying,
declining, and decrepite Age. Lastly, this Evasion is plainly rejected and
contradicted by all such Protestants, as freely confess and teach the foresaid
Prophecies and promises of the Church her converting of Kings and Nations, to
have been fully accomplished in former Ages. Amongst whom Cont. Duraeum l. 7.
p. 472.
D. Whitaker says: Whatsoever the ancient Prophets foretold of the
propagation, amplitude, and glory of the Church, that History most plainly
testifyeth to have been performed.

But now to examine only the time since Luther, of the Protestant Churches
converting of any one Heathen King or Kingdom to the Faith of Christ, I will
first say unto our Protestants, as D. Whiteguift Def. etc. p. 33.
says unto the Puritans and Anabaptists: Tell me, I pray you, in what Church
has any of them settled themselves in, but in such wherein the Ghospel has
been well planted before? What Country was ever originally converted from
Paganism by the Protestant Church, or rather only seduced and withdrawn from
the ancient Catholic Faith by secondarie Innovation? As in like resemblance,
after Math. 13.25.
The good seed was sown in the field, the Enemy came and sowed tares among
the wheat. In which respect Tertulian l. de Prescrip. c. 42.
says excellent well of al Nouelists that, Their Endeavor is not to convert
the Heathen, but to overthrow ours (who are converted) They glory more to cast
those down who stand, then to lift up those who lie.

Wherefore Protestants are so far from converting any one Heathen Country to
Christian belief, that their divided Church, never yet, before or since Luthers
time, so much as but passed the Seas, with taking hold in any one Country of
Asia, Africa, or America, the three greatest known parts of the world: No
Protestant as yet, ever being able to give the least instance of their Church
in any one of al these three parts. Yea it remains as now (though being in
its greatest height of increase) so narrowly shut up or confined within our
Northern parts of the world, being but an only corner of Europe (the fourth,
and incomparably the least part of all the rest) that even in the far greater
part of this one least part, is not so much as any appearing profession,
either of Lutherans or Caluinists, known to be remaining, or in being.

Yea it is most worthy of al diligent observation, that whereas certain
Protestants have endeavored the Conversion of some Heathen Nations, the event
was ever such, through their own demerits, either of mutual dissentions
amongst themselves in matters of Faith and Religion, or of foul enormous and
most scandalous life and conversation, that their trauail and labor was ever
spent without fruit and commodity, and their return accompanied with shame and
disgrace. In this time is right famous the endeavor made of late times by
Calvin, and the Church of Geneua, in their sending Richerus the Caluinist (whom
In Icon.
Beza terms a man of tried godliness and learning) into Gallia Antartica, to
convert the Heathens there: In Calu. Epist. ep. 237.
But how void of al success it was, and that to their lasting discredit, is
plainly related and confessed by their own Brethren; for first Richerus (32)
himself writes thus unto Calvin concerning the people of that Country: They
are ignorant whether there be a God, so far are they from keeping his Law, or
admiring his power and goodness, whereby we are deuoyd of al hope of gayning
them to Christ etc. But much more fully is this reported by Villegaignon, who
being then chief Captain of the French Navy, and one so fervent and forward
in planting Protestancie in those Countries, that the next day after his
arriual, he not only (as Ibid. p. 438.
Richerus mentions) commanded the Word of God to be publicly preached, and
the week following the holy Supper of the Lord to be ministered, which himself
with some of his family religiously received etc. but withal gave certain
young men to the people of that Nation to be instructed in their Language; that
so they might afterward preach unto them. This so zealous a Ghospeller Epist.
before his book, entitled, Les Propositions Conte^tienses etc. written after
his Return from Gallia Antarctica.
relates the bad success and cause thereof in these words; Christian Reader,
M. John Calvin understanding that I was gone to Brasile, with intent to plant
the Faith there, moved with the old acquaintance had between us, sent unto me
as well in his own, as in the name of the whole City of Geneva, certain
Ministers of his Religion, the best learned that could be found, with certain
crafts-men in their company, well furnished with all such books as Calvin had
written, or any other which might serve for their people. As they passed by
Paris, certain other (Protestants) joined with them, and among the rest a
revolted Iacobin named John Comtate, a man of prompt and subtle wit. These men
coming to Brasile, adorned themselves with a fair Title, calling themselves:
The Reformed Church. By reason whereof they were of me received with all possible
courtesy, hoping they would have been profitable to me in my enterprise. But
when they began to execute their fu^ction, I then found they had usurped a
wrong Title etc. They agreed not among themselves, nor continued long in their
own doctrine, but as they learned every day, so they still added something
thereto. The Iacobin would follow a doctrine by himself, undertaking to defend
and publish the Confession of Augusta; and without dissimulation to impugn the
Doctrine of Calvin, whereby the contention among them grew so great, that no
other remedy could be had, but by sending away one of the Ministers of Geneua.
But Villegaignon himself discerning through their mutual disagreements, and
inordinate accomplished See Launay, En la Replique Chrestienne. l 2. c. 16. f
251. And Villegaigno^ aduers. Art. Richeri l. 1. c. 90.
lusts not to be named, the whole action of converting that Country to be
frustrated, received thereupon sufficient motive to abandon their Religion.

To the same effect it is reported by D. Philip Nicolai, Co^me^t. de Regno
Christi l. 1. p. 395.
that the French men, having for their Captain Nicolas Villegaignon, being
happily arrived in Brasile, through fatal misfortune and dissension, lost
their Regiment and Castle built therein, being cast out by the Spaniards: As in
like sort afterward, when with a new Army they came to Florida, John
Ribautius being their Captain etc. The English also, Forbisher being Captain,
opened the Northern side of the new world, but they returned home etc. And of
the bad success of this Sir Martin Forbisher and other English in the
Conversion of the remote Northern Nations, M. Hacklute Voy^ges and Discoueries
etc. p. 680.
writes thus: The events do show, that either Gods cause has not been chiefly
preferred by them, or else God has not permitted so abundant grace, as the
light of his Word and knowledge of him to be yet revealed to those Infidels
before the appointed time.

And whereas some Protestants in Germany did insinuate with the Church of
Greece, writing to the Patriarch in this humble manner with title of Direction:
Acta Theol. Witemb. and Patria^ hae Con^tantin. etc. p. 2.
To the most Holy and Ecumenical Patriarch, the Lord Hieremie Archbishop of
Constantinople of New Rome, a pious Lord: And renewing again Ibid. p. 144.
the same Direction, in steed of Pious Lord, they add, our most Reverend Lord:
Ib. p. 4
Concluding with, farewell most Holy Lord etc. and vouchsafing us pardon, and
receiving us favorably into thy Fatherly care etc. with much more insinuating
submission and desire of Communion with him: All this yet notwithstanding, after
much conference, writing, and labor in vanie spent, the Patriarch rejected
them as most unworthy Ibid. p. 350.
saying: We were determined to be altogether silent to those your (demands)
neither to give you any answer, who so plainly alter according to your will
both the Scriptures, and interpretations of holy Doctors, seeing we have Paul
thus exhorting us: Eschiew an Heretical man, after one or two admonitions etc.
we are fully assured by your writings, that you can never agree with us, or
rather with the truth etc And therefore, Ibid. p. 370.
we desire you hereafter not to be troublesome unto us etc. for the Divines,
which were the Lights of the Church, you diversely handle; in words you honor
them, and extol them, but in deeds you reject them etc. wherefore forasmuch as
concerns you, you have freed us from cares. So little success had our Germane
Protestants, and so disgraciously were they repulsed even by the Schismatical
Grecians. But such is the known want of al success in this behalf in the
Protestant Church, that, Beza In Sarauia his Def. Tract. De diuersis grad.
Minist. p. 309.
specially disclaymeth from laboring the conversion of remote Nations, leaving
that (expressly) to the Jesuits.

Wherefore having thus fully discovered the manifest and confessed want in the
Protestant Church, in fulfilling the foresaid predictions from the Scriptures,
of the true Church of Christ, her converting of Heathen Kings and Countries to
the true Faith: It rests now to prove, that the foresaid Prophecies have been
fully performed in the Catholic Roman Church, and consequently that the said
Church is the Church of Christ described in the Scriptures.

And to begin with the Conversion of the most famous Emperor or King that ever
was, Constantin the Great, who lived about Anno Domini 311. First, it is
confessed by our Protestant Adversaries, that Constantin was the first King
that ever professed the Christian Faith; so M. Bunny Survey of the Popes
Supremacy. p. 121.
terms him, Constantin the first Emperor that publicly allowed of
Christian Profession. And M Brightman Apoc. p. 323.
avouches that Constantin was (he) who first of the Roman Emperors undertook
the open Patronage of the truth; and that, a Male-child was not borne before
Constantin. Bibliander fidelis Relatio. p 22
teaches that, Constantin first of the Roman Emperors embraced Christian
Religion with true Faith. And the like is taught by Simlerus De filio Dei in
Pref.
and others.

Secondly it is most agreably reported by all Historiographers, that this our
first Christian Emperor was Baptized by Pope Siluester then Bishop of Rome.

And thirdly, it is before See before l. 1. c. 5.
proved at large, that the Religion delivered to Constantin by Pope Siluester,
and which they both believed, and publicly professed, was the present Roman
Religion, now taught by Pope Vrbane the Eighth. So clear it is, that the Roman
Church fulfilled the former predictions of the Scriptures in the Conversion of
K. Constantin.

As for the other Christian Emperors succeeding Constantin, as Consta^tius,
Constans, Constantin, Julian, Iouinian, Valentinian, Gratian, Valentinian the
Second, Theodosius etc. they were so certainly converted, or rather borne and
brought up in the Roman Church, that they are greatly disliked and condemned by
Brightmans Apoc. p 344* 477. Fulkes Reioynder etc. p. 2.
Protestant Writers, as special Patrons and maintainers of the pretended
Antichrist, the Pope of Rome.

But to descend to the manifold Conuersions of Kings and Countries made by the
Roman Church in these last 1000. years: It is confessed and reported by the
Centurie-writers, that our Catholic Roman Church converted Germany, Cent. 8
col. 20.
the Vandals, Cent. 9. col. 15.
the Bulgarians, Cent. 9. col. 18.
Sclauonians, Polonians, the D^nes and M^rau^ans, and Cent 10 col 18. 19.
sundry Kings and Kingdoms, and a great Cent. 11 col 27.
part of Hungary, as also the Noruegians. Cent 12
Osiander likewise mentions our converting of the Danes, Ep. hist. p. 16. 94.
M^rauians, Ibid. p. 16.
Polonians, p. 36.
Sclauonians, p. 36. 16.
the Bulgares, p. 36.
the Hunnes, p. 37.
the Normans, p. 72.
the Bohemians, p. 77.
the Suecians, p. 21. 9
the Noruegians, p 86.
Liuonians and Saxons, the Vagarians, p. 104.
the Rugij p. 99.
and Thuscans, them of p. 111.
Scandia and Matorica, p. 341.
of Tunes in Africa, p. 377.
and of sundry other Nations. p. 342.
M. Brightman Apoc. p 100.
likewise reports that, famous Conuersions are read of at this time of the
Polonians, Saxons, Danes, Suecians, Noruegians etc. And though those
Conuersions were done by the pains of Superstitious men (the Papists) yet was
it the Seal of God, and profitable to his elect. Now al these Countries being
summed up together, may well be thought to make a full accomplishme^t of the
foresaid prophecies in their said Conuersions by our Roman Church from
Heathnish Infidelity to the Faith of Christ.

But I will yet further descend to particulars, and first begin with Germany,
wherein Protestancie with Luther first appeared: It was so certainly converted
at first from Infidelity to Christian Religion by the Romans Church, that the
Centurie-writers, Cent. 8. Ep. Dedic.
writing thereof, do affirm, that Antichrist has his notable Posts or Runners
etc. Such a Post was that Boniface, called the Apostle of the Germans, who
with greatest study, art, and power applied himself to this only, that he
might reduce al Germany to the Power of the Pope of Rome; but although he is
reported to have abolished in some places Heathnish Idolatry, yet he sowed not
Christian Religion pure and incorrupt, for he overthrew and cast down that
hinge of al piety of free Justification by only Faith in Christ etc. wherefore
he often mentions the blemishes of Antichrist, that is, the corruptions of
the articles of Faith etc. with such insolency was that false Apostle puffed
up. So clear it is that Germany was converted by S. Boniface from Idolatry to
the Roman Faith: Yea Protestant Religion was so unknown to the Christian
Germans before the Apostacy of Luther, that Luther In Deut^ron. in pref. fol 3.
himself says: I am of opinion that the (Protestant) Ghospel was never
revealed to Germany before this Age. As also, Enar rations seu Postillae.
fol. 271.
I am ignorant, whether Germany ever heard the Word of God; indeed we have
heard the Word of the Pope, which no man can deny. So plainly in Germany had
our Roman Faith her being and precedence before al Protestancie.

But now to come to the late Conversion of the remotest Indians, it was so
certainly performed by Friars, Jesuits, and other known Members of the Roman
Church, that D Philip Nicolai writing a special book of this very argument,
and therein professing to set down the accomplishment of the sacred Prophecies
in this behalf, is enforced, in proof of the same, wholly to insist upon such
Conuersions from Paganism, as have been performed by our Catholic Church:
Amongst which speaking of the Indians, he justly Co^me^t. de Regno Christi. l.
1. p. 315.
confesses, that, Spain has showed itself careful and painful, that the
remotest Nations, the people of the East, West, and South, should be Baptized,
and the name of Christ made known to those Barbarians: According to the
diversity of Countries (to which the Portugesses and the Castilians do sail)
they diuulge in diverse languages the ten Commandments, the Lords Prayer, the
Creed of the Apostles, in Mauritania, in the Atlantic coast, in Guinea, in the
Kingdoms of the Nigrites, Armutium, Goa, Narsinga, Aurea, Chersonesus, China,
Taprobona, the Islands of Molocca, America, Mexico, Peru, Brasile etc. whereby
those Countries abiuring Paganism, and rejecting the Superstitions of Mahomet,
are converted to Christ; wherefore now Christ is preached to Kingdoms far
distant from our world, and heretofore unknown, so that there are gained to
the Kingdom of Christ a great part of Africa, to wit, Manicongru^, Guinea,
many Kingdoms of the Nigrites, almost reaching to the mountains of Luna, as
also Zofala, Deanamataxa, Quiola and Meluida, then in the remote Orient, the
Persian Gulf, and many Kingdoms of the Indians, Cheul, Dabal, Bauda. And
what should I recite more? The religion of Christ is dispersed even to the
Kings of Narsinga, Honorus, Batecalla, Otisa, Delus, Cananorus, Colochus,
Cochinus, and the S^cylane Islands, and beyond Ganges, through the Kingdoms of
Bengalla, Pegna, Scanus, to the great City of Malaccha, and the Island
Sumatris, then to the less and greater Iana, and the Islands Iaponia, Bauda,
Molucca, Borneum, also through China, Lequios, America, new Spain, Florida,
the Kingdom of Peru, Brasile, Cambals, and the Islands adjoining etc.

Yea so grounded and hopeful of continuance are the Conuersions of these so
many forenamed Countries, as that in sundry of them, not only Churches, but
also Monasteries, Colleges, and other Religious houses are richly built and
founded: Insomuch that the foresaid Protestant Doctor Ibid. l. 1. p. 52.
Philip Nicolai confesses most truly, that the Spaniards have founded many
C^lledges in sundry places, the greatest whereof the Jesuits possess in the
City of God, a City abounding with men of sundry Countries: In which
College it is reported above 600. children of most different Nations, to be
diligently instructed in piety and learning, as the Brachmans, Persians,
Arabians, Aethiopians, Cafies, Canarians, those of Guzarotes, Decamios,
Malauares, Beagolones, Canareos, Pegnos, Patanas, Chingales, Iauenses, Malaios,
Marancabas, Macazaios, Maluchos, Siomos, Mauros, Simos, and sundry others of
that kind. But besides this College of Goa, many others are also numbered, as
the College Cochinense, Bozainense, Salsetanum, Malacakense, and Bungense of
the Iaeponies. Besides these there are thirteen Residences of the Jesuits,
Cherana, of S. Thomas Damanensis, Tannensis, Bandoronensis, Calanae,
Traxancort, C^morinensis, Manarinensis, Sinensis, Aethiopiae, Ambrinensis, and
of the Holy Trinitye: to which may be added those of Iaponia, as Meacensis,
Emurensis, and certain others.

Much more might I recite, of the several Conuersions made by our Roman Church
in the East Maff. Hist. Indic. l. 16. Hackluite Principal Nauigatio^s in the 2.
part of the vol. p. 88.
and West Acost. de Naturae noui Orbis.
Indies, as also in Africa; Hartwels Report of the Kingdom of Congo. And his
Epistie there to the Reader.
but I will forbear, it being also (besides the Premises) most fully confessed
by the Protestants Lythus, Respon. altera ad alterum Gretseri Apologiam. p. 331.
that the only Jesuits within the space of a few years etc. not content with
the Coasts of Europe, have filled Asia, Africa, and America with their Idols,
that is, with the Catholic Roman Faith and Religion.

Only I will now further add to the greatest honor and confirmation of our
Catholic Church, that the foresaid Conuersions of so many Heathen Countries,
so happily wrought by her, have been often accompanied with undoubted and
confessed Miracles; For so our foresaid D. Phtlip Nicolai Co^me^t. de Regno
Christ. p. 91.
acknowledges and writes that, The Jesuits and Popish Priests by publishing
the Articles of Christian Faith, of the ten Commandments, and of the Lords
Prayer, as also by diuulging the texts of the Sundays Ghospels and Epistles,
and by Administration of Baptism, like unto the Bileamites, do build the
Church of Christ, and in the name of God amongst the Indians and Americans do
happily expel the Idols and Devils of the Gentiles, and do work great wonders.
And in the same place he likewise affirms that, Though the Jesuits and
Papists be Idolaters, yet through the name of Christ they can prophecy, cast
out Devils, and work great Miracles amongst the Indians and Americans.

And whereas it is most credibly testified, Rerum in Orient Gestarum
Cemmentarius. fol. 8. 9.
that the Jesuit S. Franciscus Xauerius going to the East Indies for the
Conversion of those Pagans to the Catholic Faith, in testimony and proof of
the same Faith by him then preached, cured miraculously the dumb, the lame,
the deaf, and with his word healed the sick, and raised sundry dead persons
to life: And after his death, the grave being opened, to the end his naked
bones might be carried from thence to God, Ibid. fol. 14.
they found his Body not only unconsumed, but also yielding forth fragrant
smells; from whence they carried it to God, and placed it there in the Church of
S. Paul, where yet to this day (says the Author) it remains free from
corruption. This History for matter of fact is so certain, that D. Whitaker
De Eccl. p. 353.
in his answer thereto does not rest in denial of the thing, but only says:
Let not Bellarmine think, that I do altogether contemn these Miracles. I
answer it may be, that in the Popish Kingdom (or Church) there have been such
Miracles and now are: Ibid. p. 354.
And, The Devil might preserve the Body of Xauerius for a time uncorrupted,
and smelling sweetly. So not denying these Miracles wrought by a Jesuit in the
Conversion of the Heathen to the Roman Faith, but most blasphemously and
damnably referring the same to the Devils work: whereas as yet to the contrary
M. Hachluite, a Protestant Preacher, doubted not to affoard most commendable
mention of that Principal Nauigatio^s the 2. part of the 2. vol. p. 88.
Holy man (Xauerius) his particular virtues, and wonderful works in that
Region.

As concerning Africa; It is likewise acknowledged and reported by M. Hartwel,
Report of the Kingdom of Congo etc. l. 2. c. 2. 3.
that in the Kingdom of Congo, a region thereof, was converted to the Christian
Faith, and that by great and undoubted Miracles showed in the presence of a
whole Army. Now the Persons by whom the said Conversion and Miracles were
wrought, were so certainly Catholic Roman Priests, that the same M. Hartwel
Ibid. Ep. to the Reader.
confesses, that this Conversion of Congo was accomplished (by Massing
Priests) and after the Romish manner: And that action (says he) which tends
to the glory of God, shall it be concealed and not committed to Memory,
because it was performed by Popish Priests and Popish means? God forbid. p.
410.
yea M. Pory in his Geographical History of Afric, acknowledges and
mentions the said Miracles; Ibid. p. 413.
And much commends M. Hartwel for publishing his foresaid Treatise.

I do forbear here to speak of the Conuersions of our own Country by
Eleutherius, or Gregory, both Popes of Rome, sending holy and learned men
from them for the effecting thereof, the same being largely recorded by several
English Writers both Catholic and Protestant, and having myself before spoken
sufficiently of the latter, as well concerning the Persons of them that converted
us, as also of the Faith and Religion to which we were by them converted: Only
I will add that S. Austin sent hither by S. Gregory did confessedly work many
and undoubted Miracles for the Conversion of our Country; for so S. Bid and
our Protestant Chroniclers witness that, S. Austin Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 2.
Hollinsh. Chron. vol. 1. l. 5. c. 21. p. 102.
to prove his opinion good, wrought a Miracle in restoring sight to one that
was blind, whereat the Britta^s, being then present, were so moved, that They
confessed they perceived, it was the true way of Justice which Austin preached.
whereof also says D. Godwine, Catal. of Bishops. p. 5.
Austin wrought a M racle by healing a blind man for Confirmation of his
Doctrine, as you may read in Bid his Hist. l. 2. c. 2. Yea it is likewise
recorded, Bed. hist. l. 1. c. 26 Hollinsh. vbi sup. p. 100. Fox Act. Mon. p 117.
that S. Austin persuaded K. Ethelbert to his Religion by diverse Miracles
showed: which were as then also so publicly known, that it was, Bed. hist. l.
2. c. 3. Stowes Annal. p. 66.
written in the Epitaph upon his Tomb, that he was strengthened by God with the
working of Miracles: And S Gregory himself not only takes Bed. hist. l. 2. c.
1.
notice thereof, but also by his Hollin. vbi sup. p. 192. 102.
Letters dated Anno 602. did specially write to S. Austin touching the Miracles
showed by him, aduising him not to glory therein; but rather to consider, that
God gave him the gift, for the good of those to whom he was sent: And withal,
(as D. Godwine Catal. of Bishops. p 4.
testifyeth) exhorted him to diligence in his calling, and to take heed, least
the Miracles which God wrought by him for the Conversion of this people, should
make him proud. Ibid. p. 414.
yea I doubt not (says D. Godwine) but God affoarded many Miracles to the
first Infancy of our Church. In like sort S. Bid, Hist l. 2. c. 12. Fox Act
Mon. p. 121. 122. Holl. Chron. vol 1 p. 108 109
M. Fox, and M. Hollinshead do al of them mention the Miraculous Conversion of
Edwin K. of the Northumbers, which happened some 26. years after Augustin's
foresaid coming into England; M. Fox not doubting to place the same in his
Alph. Table of his Acts and Mon. at the word, Miracles.
Catalogue of true Miracles. So clear, and for such confessed, it is, that S.
Austin the Monk converted England to our Roman Faith by many Miracles.

These so many Conuersions of Heathen Countries, and so confirmed by undoubted
Miracles, being confessedly performed only by the Roman Church, and none at al
by the Protestant: It will not suffice to answer (as some Phil. Nicolaus De
Regno Christi. p. 53. 91.
Protest. do) that, The Jesuits in the first Conversion of the Indians and
Oriental Ilanders, showed themselves to be Lutherans: for who knows not that
al Jesuits without exception have ever holden Lutherans to be Heretics most
damnable, and so their Faith and Religion to be altogether vnauaylable to the
Conversion of the Heathen, or working of Miracles? Or who is ignorant, that
Numbers of Jesuits have freely shead their blood for not communicating in
matters of Religion with Lutherans and Caluinists? And therefore in steed of
further answer, I hold it only worthy of contempt, laughter, and scorn.

A Discovery or brief Examination of sundry sleights and Euasions used by
Protestant Writers in Excuse of the manifest confessed want of their Churches
fulfilling the foresaid Scriptures concerning the continuance, universality,
and visibilitie of Christ's true Church. CHAPTER VI.
Having thus far labored in full discovery of the perfect agreement of our
Roman Church with the sacred Scriptures, and of the opposite co^trarietie of
our Protestant Congregation with the same; I will now only examine the
extremest and most desperate shifts and euasions, which the learned
Protestants are enforced to make, in color and pretense of their Churches not
fulfilling, or agreeing with the foresaid Scriptures.

As first, whereas the former Scriptures did manifestly teach, that the Church
of the new Testament must ever continue even from Christ's time until the end of
the world, Protestants being urged by us to show the like continuance of their
Church, Sadel. de Rebus grauiss. Contr. p. 783 Fulk in A^oc. c. 12. f. 69.
they answer, that in all Ages it did continue with Pastors and Doctors in it,
for the administration of the Word and Sacraments, but yet (through
Persecution) unknown and invisible to the world; even as those 3. Reg. 19.18.
7000. faithful, though unknown to Elias, when he thought 3. Reg. 19.10.
himself alone, were yet nevertheless at the same time reserved and remaining.

But the falsehood and insufficiency of this answer, is sundry ways appare^t.
For first, it is directly against the sacred Scriptures See before l. 4. c. 3
plentifully produced before in proof of the Churches Euer-visibilitie.
Secondly, it is contradicted by most of the learned Protestants, who formerly
from the said Scriptures do prove and maintain the Euer-visibilitie of Christ's
Church. See before l. 4. c. 3.
Thirdly, the arguments drawn from the Jewish Synagogue are impertinent to
those many greater predictions and promises made to the Church of Christ,
whose Heb. 8.6
Testament is established in better promises, and therefore though the Church
had been invisible in Elias his time, yet this infers not the like of the
Church of Christ at these times. Fourthly, Neither does this example of Elias
extend to the universal Church before Christ, but only, admitting the most, to
the particular Nation of the Jews, besides whom were extant many other
faithful, as appears by the sundry examples of Melchisedech, Job etc. And
afterward of Cornelius See Act. 10.1. and 8.27.11.18. and 13.14 42.43. and
14.1. and 18.4 8.9.
the Eunuch etc. yet the Protestant Syntagma ex veteri Test. col. 1232 1233.
Wigandus shows by very many examples of Scripture, that the Jewish
Synagogue before Christ's time, was dispersed in sundry other Nations, besides
that of the Jews: Now amongst these the Church might in Elias time be visible,
though it had been then invisible among the Jews. Fifthly, though those 7000.
of that one special time were unknown as then to Elias, yet this proves not
(which is the point only pertinent to be proved) that therefore they should be
as then unknown also to al others of the same time: And much less therefore
can this particular example prove, that all the Faithful, not of one special
time only, but also of so many several hundred years, (as are here See before
l. 3. c. 1.
before confessed for the Prot. Churches inuisibilitie should al of them,
during al those Ages, continue so generally late^t and unknown (not to one
Elias only,) but to the whole world, as that there should remain no memory or
notice of the needful preaching and administration of Sacraments, to have been
performed so much, as by one of them, in any one Nation of the earth for any
one moment of al those times. Sixthly, this objection of Elias makes fully for
us, and against our Adversaries; for it is evident, that Elias flying 3. Reg.
19 2.3.8.9.
theface of Iesabel wife to Achab, who sought his life, lay thereupon secret in
a Cave upon Mount Horeb, at the time of his complaining that he was left alone;
the which co^playnt he made in regard only of that Country of Israel, which
was the kingdom of Achab (wherein he then a stranger lay secret) as appears
most plainly as well in that God himself accordingly answered his said complaint
with like respect to that only Country, saying: I have left to me in Israel
7000. etc. Of one hundred whereof Elias himself had then special 3. Reg. 18.13.
notice given him before by Obedias, to whom therefore the Church was the^,
even in that very Country, known and visible; which only point quite
dissolueth all the supposed force of this so often re-enforced objection.
Besides in those very times, the Church flourished in the next adjoining
Kingdom of Judah, and was there as then to Elias both known and visible, under
two good Kings, Asa and Iosaphat who reigned even in the time 3. Reg. 22.41.
of Achab: At what time the number of the Faithful was there so exceeding
great, that the Souldiars only were numbered to 2. Par. 14.8 9. and
17.14.15.16.17.18 19
many hundred thousands: And thus is this very objection answered by M. Henoch
Sovereign Remedy etc. p. 17. 18.
Clapham saying, our ignorant Reformists say, the Church was invisible in the
time of Elias, but, The Holy Ghost records Elias to have spoken this against
Israel, not against Judah; for as he knew that good Iosaphat at that time
reigned in Judah, so he well knew, that there was not only the Church visible,
but also mightily reformed. yea In Corpore Doctrinae. p. 530. 532 And in
Morgensterne Tract. de Eccl. p. 4.
Melancthon expounds those very words objected, I have left to me 7000 etc.
of the visible Church. And whereas Def. of the Answ. p. 645.
Whitguift writes that, Sometimes the Church of God is where there is no good
Pastor, as in the time of Elias, Last part of the 2. Reply. p. 63.
M. Carthwright answers, This is untrue; for there were an hundred Prophets
then kept of one man alone. 1. Reg. 18.13. So many ways is it evident that
the Church in the time of Elias his complaint, was visible not only in Judah,
but also in Israel.

Now whereas our Adversaries do make for the reason of their Churches
inuisibilitie, Persecution: This poor evasion implies in terms; for what
makes the Church more known and famous then Persecution? Or who can be
persecuted but men known and seen to others? Does not M. Jewel Reply. p. 506.
And Def. of the Apolog. p. 33. 34.
hereupon affirm that, The Church is placed upon a mount, her persecutions can
not be hid? Does not M. Carthwright In Whytguift. Def p 174. And see D.
Babington upon Exodus. p 10.
confess, that the Church under Persecution, is visible and sensible; for else
(says he) how could it be persecuted? As also, what a Conclusion is this: the
Churches were few in number, because they were under the Cross? etc. To let
pass both Scriptures and Stories Ecclesiastical, have you forgotten what is
said in the first of Exodus, that the more the children of Israel were
persecuted, the more they increased? But in clear demonstration hereof, is it
not further evident, that though the Primitive Church, during the first 300.
years after Christ, endured Fox Act. Mon. p. 34. etc. The Centuristes Cent. 1.
col 24, etc. and Cent 2. col. 10. etc. and Cent. 3. col. 10. etc.
incomparably the most universal and violent persecutions that ever were, yet,
the same notwithstanding, even Protestant writers Cent. 1. 2. 3. throughout
Pantaleon. in Chronogr. Functius in Chr. Osiand. cent 1. 2 3. Dresserus in
Millen. 5. p. 11. 12. Fulk de Successione Eccl. p. 246.
do at this day take certain and particular notice of the Catholic Bishops
and Pastors by name in every one of those Ages, of their administration of
the Word and Sacraments, and their open impugning of Heresies?

But besides all this, al sides must acknowledge of the Church under
Persecution, that either she does make Profession of her Faith, as also openly
refrain the external communion of al Idolatry, false doctrine and Sacraments;
or else that she does not profess and refrain as before said: If the latter,
then (as is heretofore proved) she is not the true Church; for as D. Field Of
the Church. l. 3. p. 19.
further says: Seeing the Church is the multitude of them that shall be saved,
and no man can be saved unless he make Confession unto Salvation (for faith hid
in the heart and concealed, does not suffice:) it cannot be, but they that are
of the true Church, must by the Profession of the truth make themselves known
in such sort, that by their profession and practice they may be discerned from
other men: If then the first, then is she thereby made most known and visible;
for besides her foresaid Profession consisting in administration of the Word
and Sacraments, and impugning of errors, which being done, though never so
privately, is impossible to be in so many several Countries kept secret for
any smaller time, much less for so many Ages together: whereof D. Humfrey
Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 3 p 241.
says most truly: Whilst Ministers teach, others learn; they administer
Sacraments, these communicate, al call upon God, and profess their Faith: Who
sees not these things, is blinder then a Mole; I say besides this, her only
open refrayning or Recusancie (whereto she is even by the judgment of
Protestants Willet Synop. p. 612 613 614 Act. Mon. p. 1283. 1150. 1151.
Melancth. in Consil. Theol. p. 628 Pet. Mart. ib. p. 634. 635. Bu^er. 16. p.
632. 633 634. Calvin ib p. 635. And Calvin Tract. Th. p 584. The Deuines of
Germany in Sleydans Comment. Engl. f. 87.
no less in duty bound) lies evermore most open and easy to be discerned;
yea by how much the persecution is more grievous, so much the less can this
Recusancie be kept secret or vnespyed, as appears most plainly in the example
only of our own times and Nations; for if during but these last 20. years, we
of this one Nation in comparison but few, could not so escape the search of
Protestant Magistrates, but that by our only Recusancie we were daily discerned,
presented, indicted, co^uicted, sundry ways persecuted, and some Martyred:
Could then a Protestants pretended to be dispersed throughout so many Nations
of the world, escape for so many hundred years together, that Inquisition of
the Roman Church, which Protestants affirm to have been universal, and far
more grievous?

Wherefore to end this inexplicable and contradictorie point, of the Protestant
Churches Being or continuance, but yet unknown and invisible for many hundred
years together, and that through the greatest persecutions thereof by the Pope
of Rome; I will only demand with D. Field, Of the Church. l. 1. p. 19.
How (possibly) there should be a Church in the world (the perpetuity whereof,
al most constantly defend) and none found (seen or known) to profess the
Saving truth of God? Or as M. Jewel (26) says of Heresy, so, in his words,
will I say of his Church, It must needs be a very strange Church, that had
neither beginning, nor ending, nor defender, nor reprouer, nor mouth to utter
it, nor ear to hear it, nor pen to write it, nor time to last in, nor place
to rest in; of which strange kind of Church, was our pretended Protestant
Church for many hundred years together, no known beginning being assigned
of her Inuisibilitie, no man defending or reproving her, during the said
latencie, no Pastor of hers preaching, or sheep hearing her doctrine, no pen
writing her Momuments, or her pretended pressures and sufferings, no one hour
known wherein she had being, or corner, or cottage in the world, wherein she
r^sided.

Wherefore the absurdity and insufficiency of this former answer being in so
many respects so easily discovered, other Protestants disclayming from this,
do avouch, that their Church according to the Scriptures has ever continued,
and that visible and known in all former Ages; but now sithence, through the
late violence of the Pope and his Clergy, al testimony, Monument, and Record
thereof is utterly suppressed and made away.

But the idle vanity of this naked conceit is many ways appearing; for
first, this is but a mere Imagination, destitute of al testimony or proof in
confirmation thereof. Secondly, al proof and experience is directly to the
contrary, seeing the very books of Husse and Wiccliffe are yet extant to our
adversaries, as also the Epistle of Vlrick in defense of Priests marriage, and
the pretended books of Charlemaine against Images, and Bertram concerning the
Eucharist, and the like: And yet in none of these is the least mention afforded
of any Protestant Congregation though never so slender, to have been formerly
residing in any cave or corner of the earth, though never so straight; And yet
these are the ancientest Records wherein they can insist, either in defense of
themselves, or impugning of us.

Thirdly, our General and Prouincial Councels holden in most several Nations,
did ever recite and condemn al new arising Sects and Heresies contrary to the
Roman Faith, and yet in none of these is there the least mention or Record to
be found of the Church of Protestants.

Fourthly, our Catholic Writers, in every Age, have plentifully recited, and
at large confuted al appearing doctrines contrary to the Roman Church, and yet
as for any Protestant Religion known before Luther, they are wholly sile^t.

Fifthly, from hence do sundry Protestant Writers take notice, and in their
own writings The Cent. Pant. in Chron. Osia^d. Epit. Eccl. Hist. Illiricus
Catalogus Testam. etc. Whitak. cont. Dur. p. 276. 469.
make mention of the daily opinions, not passed over in silence, or wholly
suppressed from the view of Posterity, but directly to the contrary most
expressly mentioned, recorded, and condemned in every Age, by the Church of
Rome: Of which opinions, certain also (which makes this point most evident)
were oftentimes even some one or other special Doctrine, now sithence taught by
Protestants, and heretofore severally professed by some one or other particular
condemned person of those times. And yet was never Protestant hitherto ever
able to nominate or assign a Protestant Church before the days of Luther,
truly agreing in matters of Faith and Religion with our now reformed Church of
England.

Sixthly, this confessed general suppression of the Protestant Church, and al
her Records for so many hundred years, does evidently convince the said
Church, not to be the Church of Christ, but some Heretical Conuenticle; for the
Scriptures testify of the true Church, that her Esa. 60.20.
Sun should not be set, nor her Moon hid; that she Dan. 2 44.
should not be given over to another people, but should stand for ever, as an
Esa. 60.15.16.
eternal glory and joy, from generation to generation.

Lastly, every vprising Sect, though never so gross, may as easily, and with
as much probability, pretend for itself, the continuance and visibilitie of
their Church for all former Ages, only adding (with our Protestants) the
Imagiginarie suppression and ruin of al testimonies, proofs, and Records of
the same, through the power and malice of the Church of Rome, then which
nothing more dangerous to affirm, or more absurd to maintain.

The falsehood of the two former Answers being thus easily displayed, and seen
to be most palpable and sensible, even to the meanest judgments, a third
remains, in matter and substance of no greater force then the former, but
through affected obscurity of words, more difficult and perplexed to an
ignorant Hearer: As namely, that during al those confessed many Ages, wherein
no knowledge is had of the Protestant Church, her Pastors, or administration
of Word, or any one Sacrament, Whitak. de Ecelesia p. 165. Perkins in his
Reformed Cathol. p. 328. 329. Osia^d. Cent. 16. part alt. p. 1072. Calu. l.
epist. ep 104. p. 222. Rhegius lib. Apolog. p. 95. Beza in ep. Theol. ep. 1. p.
15.
The (Protestant) Church was in the Papacy, and the Papacy was in the Church,
and yet the Papacy was not the Church. An answer not much unlike to that
Censure given upon D. Playford his strange dividing the Text of his Sermon, to
wit, that it was as A Pie, A Pudding: A Pudding and a Pie: A Pie pudding: And a
Pudding Pie: Being indeed no other but a mere Tergiuersation, and idle
Battologie of distracted, perplexed, and obstinate men, not willing to yield or
acknowledge the truth, and yet not able a deny the certainty thereof: Much
agreeable to that instabilitie and doubtfulnes, which Instit. c. de fide. p 148.
And his like perplexed Sayings, see Inst. l. 4. c. 2. sec. 11. 12.
Calvin in the same matter expresses in other words, professing: Neither
simply to grant, nor plainly to deny our Catholic Church, to be the Church of
God. And yet such Confidence is placed in this extremest Refuge, that in M.
Parkins Reform Cath. p 329. Whitak. de Eccl. p. 165. Beza in Ep. Theol. ep. 1.
p. 15. Calu. lib. Epist. ep. 104 p. 222.
his opinion, it will serve to stop the mouths of Papists, who demand of us,
where our Church was fourscore years before Luther. For, says he, hereby They
are answered, that our Church has been since the days of the Apostles, and
that in the very midst of the Papacy. But to omit, that hereby is plainly
granted and supposed, that Papacy, or the Roman Religion has ever been since
the days of the Apostles, I will now lay open this last receptacle wherinto our
Enemies do so confidently retire.

And first, when they say their Church was in the Papacy since the Apostles
days; they either mean, that their Church continued in Popish Countries
amongst the Papists without al external Communion with them in Church or
Sacraments, even as Catholics do at this day in England, Scotland, Holland,
Turkey etc. Or else, that their Church was in the Papacy, because she did
Communicate with the Papists Church in all external offices, Service, and
Sacraments thereof, not being in any external respect to be discerned from the
Papists, only reserving in their inmost thoughts and secret Consciences, the
Faith of Protestants.

If they intend the first, then had it been more congruously said, that their
Church was without the Papacy, or near to the Papacy, or among the Papists,
or in Popish Countries, but at no hand in the Papacy, that implying the very
Faith and Religion of the Papists, no more then a Catholic can endure to hear
that the Roman Church or Religion, is in the Protestancie, Puritanisme,
Turcisme or the like. Besides if the Protestant Church had been thus still in
Popish Countries with external Recusancie of al Popish Service and Sacraments,
then we urge again, as before, for some one testimony, proof, or but shadow
thereof from any one Writer, Record, or Monument of al those former Ages; but
herein they are most silent through their known confessed want of al such
helps. And therefore they betake themselves to the second meaning of their
Church being in the Papacy, that is, not being only in Popish Countries, but
in all external Communion and Profession either of Service, Sacraments, or other
matters of Faith and Religion, being and showing itself only Papistical.
Agreably hereunto M. Parkins expounded himself saying: Reform. Cath. p 328.
The true Church has been in the Roman Church, as Corn in the heap of
Chafe: And not severed each from other in outward profession, Ib. p. 329.
but mixed together for external society, like Chafe and corn in one heap:
In which sense Osiander (so great an Enemy of our Catholic Church, that by no
means Epit. Hist. Eccl. Ep. Dedic. and Cent. 6. p. 290. and Cent. 7. 331
he will acknowledge it for a true Church) yet affirms, that, Ep. Dedic. Cent.
8. p. 2.
In those darkened times, the true Church was under the Papacy: And that so,
that though Cent. 16. part. alt. p. 1076.
some godly men (inwardly) disliked the Popish errors, and Idolatrous
Sacrifices, yet they durst not always openly profess the same: Ibid. 1072.
Neither durst they freely profess their own opinions, except they would be
burned, or at least banished: Yea these so godly men, says he, Cent. 8. Ep.
Ded p 3.
though they gave not their mind to these Popish Idolatries, yet they did not
altogether neglect the external rites, and with a common custom, as with a
violent Stream, they were carried away to do the same things with the Papists:
Many, through fear of the Popish Tyranny, not daring to profess that they
disliked the Popish worships, whose infirmity God tolerated and pardoned. And
so, says he, they communicated with the Popish Church, in Cent. 16 p. 1073.
and Cent 8. Ep Ded p 2.
Ministry of the Ghospel (or the Word) in the Bible, in Baptism, in the
Lords supper, in taking Orders etc. such (says he) as those times did affoard
etc. And so thereby were most evidently no other then plain Papists in all
external Profession. And according to this, D. White also confesses, that
these godly men did not Way to the Church. p. 371.
always abandon the Communion of the Roman Church etc. the Tyranny of Rome
suppressed them so, that they could not manifest abroad to the world their
dislike etc. but by force and violence were constrained to devour their own
Sorrow in the society of their Adversaries. This external society of
Protestants with Papists in matters of Religion is further granted by the
Protestant Molitor, Disquisitiones de Eccl. etc. p. 114.
who writing hereof says: We affirm the Church in former Ages to have layne
hid in the midst of the Papistrie, as in Caves, neither durst it, through the
abominable Tyranny of the Son of Perdition, come forth to light: Even as yet
to this day many faithful are in the midst of the Romish Babylon, who lie hid
there as in a Prison, and for fear of danger dare not publicly profess the
name of Christianity. So that the very true and last resolved sense of the
Protestant Churches being in the Papacy ever since the days of the Apostles,
imports no more, but that in the secretest corners of their hearts, they
believed Protestancie, and in all external Communion, society, and conversation
they lived and dyed Roman Papists.

But if men had long studied for an answer most foolish and wicked, what more
apt then this? For first, no instance or proof do they or can they produce,
whereby to prove these external Papists, to have been indeed internal
Protestants, this being only a fiction or Imagination of their own, deuoyd of
al testimony, Record, or probability whatsoever. Secondly, supposing it to be
true, does it import, or conclude any less, but that the said Imagined Church
of Protestants in this sort being in the Papacy, was a most dissembling and
adulterous Church, publicly denying in word and deed that very Faith and
Religion, which inwardly it believed only to be true, and committing and
practicing both in life and death many foul supposed Superstitions and
Idolatries with the Popish Church, which they firmly believed to be most
wicked and damnable? And is it possible that an hypocritical Church is the
Church of Christ? Or that Godly men would for fear of any persecution, not
only deny Christ before men, but withal commit Adultery with the pretended
whore of Babylon, in partaking with her in all her superstitions, Idolatries,
and abominations? what more forcible can be desired, or urged against the said
imagined Church, that she was not the Church of Christ, then her own
confession of gross and palpable dissimulation in the weightiest matters of
Faith and Religion? Does not Christ himself avouch and say, Math. 10.33.
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my father in
heaven? And his Apostle teaches Romans 10.10.
that, with the heart a man believes unto Justice, and with the mouth
confesses to Salvation: And how possibly could the Math. 16.18.
Gates of Hell more strongly prevail against the Church of Christ, then by
making her to commit Idolatry and Superstition, and that for many hundred
years together? Whereas in steed of these, Psalm. 86.3.
glorious things are foretold of the Church of Christ, as that, Esa. 60.11.
her Gates should be continually open, her Esa. 62.6.
Pastors never silent, her Dan. 2.44.
Kingdom not given over to another people, but should stand for ever, as Esa.
60.15.16.
an eternal glory and joy from generation to generation. So that the censure
which by this last answer is imposed upon the Protestant Church, and that by
her own Children, is, that in steed of Christ's Church, she is a dissembling
Church, a Church denying Christ and his Religion, a Church for temporal
respects committing many Idolatries, and Superstitions, and so by most true
consequence no Church at al.

THE FIFTH BOOK, WHEREIN IS SHEVVED, THAT PROTESTANTS IN THE Decision of
Controversies betvveen them and Catholics, do absolutely disclaim from
Antiquity, rejecting the Ancient Fathers and Councels for Papistical, and the
Sacred Scriptures for erroneous.
THAT PROTESTANTS DISCLAIM from al Antiquity since the Apostles; and further
reject and condemn as Papistical the Ancient Fathers and General Councels.
CHAPTER I.
SO foul is the stayne of Novelty in any profession of Religion, as that
some Protestants have adventured to charge our Roman Church with the deformity
and crime thereof; Mr. Hal thereupon auouching, that Peace of Rome p. 24.
Popery is but a new fashion; and D. Way to the true Church. p. 341. 342.
White undertaking to prove it contrary to the primitive Church. But as
nothing can be more grateful to a Christian Reader, then a clear and sincere
trial of this point, to wit, whether the ancient Fathers of the primitive
Church were the true Progenitors and Fathers of Catholics or Protestants; so
among many means and arguments, al of them able most clearly to determine the
same, I will only make choice for this time of the free grants,
acknowledgements, and confessions of Protestants themselves: And this chiefly
concerning their own bastardie, degenerating, and disclaiming from those so
ancient, so noble, so worthy Peers of those purest times.

And first concerning the Argument drawn from Antiquity in general, it is
acknowledged to be a Popish Argument, and for such to be avoided and taken
heed of: so do some careful Ministers prescribe to the King's Majesty
himself, saying: Let Survey of the Book of common prayer. p. 18.
not your Majesty be now deceived by the Popish Argument of supposed
Antiquity, as Iosue was with the old and mouldie bread of the Gibeonites etc.
And now follows the reason of this so necessary prevention, And the rather,
O Christian King, take heed, because Antichrist began to work even in the
Apostles days: Yea, says D. Willet, Papistrie Synop. Controu. 2. q. p. 56.
etc. began to work in S. Paul's days. So that Papistrie being as old as S.
Peter and S. Paul, it behooves Protestants in all good policy to reject and
utterly abandon Antiquity as a Popish argument, and as the old and mouldie
bread which the poor Papists feed on. The like provident and most necessary
prevention for Protestants used the Maddeburgians Pref. ep. Dedicat. ad Elizab.
Angliae. Reg. in Cen. 4.
before to Q. Elizabeth, to whom pretending to bring Antiquity for her
Majesty to look upon, yet at the first premonish, that few Doctors in
ancient times did write Luculenter et cum iudicio, perspicuously and witb
judgment: And withal complain, that very many are as it were so bewitched
with the holy title of Antiquity, that without al attention and true
judgment they do give willingly consent to never so foul errors, if they be
set down by Antiquity; so fearful are these deepest Diverse and Searchers into
Antiquity to be tried thereby.

Just cause had then D. Humfrey to reprove Mr. Jewel for his so bold appealing
to the first 600. years, saying: Jewel De vita Iewelli. p. 212. And see the
like in Fulks Retentiue. p. 55.
provoked to all that Antiquity, but he was over liberal, and yielded more then
reason, and was over injurious to himself etc. and in a manner spoiled himself
and his (Protestant Church) etc. It is sufficient for a Christian to say, So
says the Lord etc. What have we to do with Fathers, with flesh or blood? or
what belongs it to us (Protestants) what the false Synodes of Bishops shall
ordain? Here our Doctor wisely controuleth Mr. Jewel for his so rash
appealing to the primitive Church, as seeing plainly that his new Protestant
family would be utterly spoiled and undone thereby. And the like dislike
shows Iacobus Acontius against some Protestants alleging the Fathers in
their own behalf saying: Stratag. li. 6. p. 296.
Some are come to that, that they will fill al their writings with the authority
of Fathers, which I would to God they had performed with as prosperous
success, as they hopefully attempted it etc. I do verily think that this
custom is most dangerous, and altogether to be eschewed. So that in this
Doctors judgment, it is no wisdom but imminent danger for Protestants to
meddle with the Fathers.

Now if any desire to know the true cause of this danger hanging over
Protestants by appealing thus to Fathers, it is confessed to be no other, but
because the said Fathers were Papists. We are sure (says Mr. Papisto-mastix.
p. 193.
Midleton) that the mystery of iniquity did work in Paul's time; and fell not
a-sleep so soon as Paul was dead, waking again 600. years after, when this
mystery was disclosed etc. and therefore no marvel, though perusing Councels,
Fathers, and Stories from the Apostles forward, we find the print of the Popes
feet. O how firm and during are the Pope's steps, or our Roman faith, which at
this day are presented unto us by Councels, Fathers, and stories from the
Apostles times; al of them recording to us their Posterity the Popish Faith to
be the Faith of their times! What reason then have Protestants to appeal to
such ancient Papists?

In like for argues Mr. Carth wright saying: That Reply part. 1. p. 18.
the argument of the authority of men which have interpreted the Scriptures,
is the best reason in Controversies of Divinity, was never heard of but by
Papists, whose strongest towers are in the testimonies of the Doctors etc.
There is nothing more Papistical then this Assertion. So that if Protestants
commit themselves to the trial by Fathers, they yield themselves prisoners to
the strongest Towers and Castles of the Papists their Enemies, wherein what can
they expect but ruin and confusion?

D. Whitaker affirms Cont. Dur. li. 6. p. 423.
The Popish Religion to be a patched couerlet of the Fathers errors sowed
together. Well then if our Religion was believed by the Fathers, and from them
delivered to us, I am persuaded that D. Whitaker admitting this, would place
little hope in appealing to Fathers for Confutation of Popish Religion. And
though he falsely terms our Religion the Fathers errors, yet thereby he
plainly grants the Fathers to have believed and taught the same Religion
which we now profess, and Protestants impugn.

Now the ancient Fathers being thus acknowledged for Papists, I do not wonder
that Protestants contemn their authority, and seek their disgrace with all
contumelies possible. Why may not D. Luther affirm To. 2. Wittemb. l. de Seruo
Arb. p. 434. And the same book printed in 8. p. 72. 73. 276. 337.
The Fathers of so many Ages to have been plainly blind, and most ignorant in
the Scriptures; to have erred al their life time; and that unless they were
amended before their deaths (whereof never Protestant had yet the least
intelligence) they were neither Saints nor pertaining to the Church, but no
doubt (according to Luther) damned Papists? Why might not he further avouch:
That In Colloq. mensalibus c. de Patrib. Ecclesiae.
in the writings of Hierome there is not a word of true faith in Christ and
sound Religion? Tertullian is very superfluous. I have houlden Origin long
since accursed. Of Chrysostom I make no account. Basil is of no worth, he is
wholly a Monk, I weigh him not a hair. Cyprian is a weak Divine etc. See how
our old Papists are betrampled by a young Protestant?

And yet no less resolute against them is In Ionam.
Pomerane: Our Fathers whether Saints or no I care not (o zeal and reverence
Protestantical!) they were blinded with the Spirit of Montanus by humane
traditions, and the doctrines of Devils etc. they teach not purely of
Justification etc. neither are they careful to teach JESUS CHRIST according to
his Ghospel. Still are the Fathers rejected as men blinded with Papistical
opinions. The Centurists endeavoring to discredit the whole multitude of
Doctors and Fathers in every Age begin even with the first Age next after the
Apostles, saying, Cent. 2 c. 4. p. 55.
Albeit this Age was nearest to the Apostles, yet the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles began to be not a little darkened therein, and many monstrous and
incommodious opinions (to Protestants) are every where found to be spread by
the Doctors thereof. Perhaps some cause thereof may be, for that the gift of
the Holy Ghost in these Doctors did begin to decay for the ingratitude of the
world toward the (Protestant) Truth. Now as for the Doctors of al Ages
succeeding, they make a Principle, that The Cent 3. c. 4. p. 17.
further we go of from the Apostles Age, the more stubble shall we find to have
been added to the purity of Christian doctrine: So that al Doctors and
Fathers since the very first Age of the Apostles are discarded by the
Centurists for stubble and Papistical.

But Luther will not rest, until he has brought these stubble-Doctours to Hell
for teaching Papistrie: In Deuteronomy. c. 13. p. 102.
Satan (says he) has hitherto deluded us by signs and lying wonders etc.
whilst contrary to the Ghospel, we have admired Pilgrimages, Apparitions of
Spirits, and cures at certain Sepuchers, in so much that Saints also erred
herin, as Augustine, Bernard, Hierome and many others etc. certainly damned (as
Wicclif said) unless they repented. So that if Papists be damned for believing
the Catholic faith, they have for their Companions Hierome, Augustine, Bernard,
and many others most renowned Doctors of Christ's Church, and Saints. From this
true conceit of the ancient Fathers being Roman Catholics, Protestants
further disclayme from their Interpretations and expositions of Scripture,
refusing to stand to their judgments for the true understanding thereof. Thus
then they write: The Sacred Scripture (says Polanus) Symphonia c. 1. These. 6.
p. 56.
is not to be interpreted by Fathers; neither is the Interpretation of
Scripture to be judged by Fathers; the Fathers are not the rule of expounding
the sacred Scripture etc. what is here said of every Father alone, is to be
understood of all the Fathers joined together, as also of Councels, That is,
though al Fathers and Councels conspire together in their Expositions of
Scripture, agreably to the Doctrine and belief of the Catholic Roman Church,
yet Protestants will not subscribe or admit the same, but will valiantly
maintain al such expositions, though most contrary thereto, as are last coined
at Geneua or Wittemberg, or newliest extracted by some Brother more
illuminated. In like and most provident manner argue our English Puritans
against Doctor Downham obiecting against them, That none of the Fathers did
ever understand the Text (then in question) as Puritans do. The Puritans in
their answ. to D. Downham.
Does not Mr. Doctor know (say they) that to argue negatiuely concerning the
sense of Scriptures from the authority of Fathers, is the practice of Papists
only, and taxed by learned writers against them? etc. If that manner of
disputing be good, we shall often loose more truth in taking their
Interpretations etc. Carthwright terms the seeking into the holy Fathers
writings a In Bancrofts survey of Pretend. Discipl. p. 331. 337 and see chap.
4. p. 64.
Raking of ditches, and the bringing in of their authorities the moving and
summoning of Hell. Parker assures us that, Pref. to his Answer Limbomastix and
see Jacob's Treatise p. 1. 3 54. 81. 68. Bilson's sermons Ps. 323. Answ. to
Brough^on's Letter p. 17.
If you allege the ancient Fathers against them, they will tell you roundly,
that their opinions are nothing else but the corrupt fancies of vain
Imaginations of men, toyish fables, fond, absurd, without sense and reason. And
some stick not to call the Fathers of the Latin Church the plague of Divinity.
Hence it is, that the French Protestants have enacted it for a Disciplina
Magistrorum Galliae art. 4.
law, that no place be given to the writings of the old Doctors, for the
judgment ad determination of Doctrine. So clearly is Protestancie at an end,
if the Fathers Interpretation of Scriptures may stand for good.

But yet further they doubt not to affirm the argument or consequence urged
from the Puricans Answ. to D. Downham's ser. p. 92.
received opinion in the Church of God, even from the Apostles time unto our
Age, to be liable to just exception. So that though the Fathers of al Ages up
to the Apostles themselves do al of them jointly agree with our Roman faith in
their Expositions and delivery of the sense of Scripture, yet may one
illuminated Protestant except, contemn, and reject them al, as not having the
Spirit nor interpreting according to the Analogy of the Protestant faith. But
O most miserable and lamentable times! O insolency most impious and
incredible! What? the received opinion in the Church of God even from the
Apostles time unto our Age, to be liable to just exception? The Fathers of al
Ages during 1600. years of al Countries, though most distant in place, and
different in language, and other conditions of nature and government, al of them
to conspire in one opinion of truth and doctrine, and yet al of them so fowly
and so grossly to err, as that a newfound Protestant is able to discover it?
This, this may a Protestant often declaime, but no man of judgment can
possibly believe him.

Yea, our Protestants are so far out of love and liking with the Fathers, as
they painfully labor to make the world to think, that their Commentaries,
books, and belief were directly contrary to the Sacred Scriptures, and
therefore to these they will ever appeal from the writings of men. Captain
Luther L. contra Henricum 8. Regem Angliae.
says: Against the sayings of Fathers, Men, Angels, and Devils, I place not
ancient consent, nor the multitude of men, but the Ghospel being the Word of
One Eternal Majesty, which themselves are enforced to allow: Here I stand,
here I sit, here I abide, here I glory, here I triumph, here I insult over
Papists, Thomists, Henricians, and all the Gates of Hell, much more over the
sayings of men, though never so holy and deceauable custom. The word of God is
above al; Divine Majesty makes with me; so that I care not if a thousand
Augustins, a thousand Tertullians, a thousand Henry's or (Papistical) Churches
should stand against me. God can not err and deceive; Austin, and Cyprian, as
also all the Elect may, and have erred. My Doctrines shall stand, the Pope shall
fall. Here we have a man of lively Faith; but yet hear him further: In
Comment. in ep. ad Gal.
No other doctrine is to be delivered or heard in the Church, then the pure
word of God, that is, the Sacred Scripture; Let other Doctors and Auditors be
accursed with their learning; but here wants Charity.

Neither is Luther in this alone, for Zuinglius likewise declaymeth: In
Explanat. Artic. 64.
Presently thou beginnest to cry, Fathers, Fathers, the Fathers have so
delivered: But I do not ask of thee, Fathers or Mothers, but I require the word
of God. In like sort Peter Martyr: De Votis. p. 462.
As concerning the Fathers judgment, because our Adversaries (the Papists) are
accustomed in this and other Controversies always to provoke to them, I
(therefore) declare, that to me it seems not the part of a Christian to
provoke to the judgments of men, from the Scriptures of God. Yea (says he)
Ibid. p. 476.
As long as we rest in Councels or Fathers we shall always be conversant in the
same errors. And the like is taught by Summerus saying: Contr. Carolum. l. 1.
c. 1.
Antiquity, by which they affirm we are condemned, is of no force; for if
they speak of a right believing Antiquity, by which we understand Christ and
his Apostles, the matter itself cries, that it is for us; but if they will
understand the same of the authority of the Fathers, we do not take it il,
that the word of God is condemned by them.

Agreably heerunto writes D. Whitaker: Contra Sander. p. 92.
If you argue from the testimonies of men, be they never so learned and
ancient, we yield no more to their words in cause of Religion, then we perceive
to be agreeable to Scripture: Neither think your self to have proved any thing,
though you bring against us the whole swarm of Fathers, except that which they
say, be justified not by the voice of men, but by God himself. And again:
Answ. to. Camp. Reas. 2. p. 70. And see the like in Abbots in his Answ. to His.
Reas. 10 p. 371.
We are not the Servants of the Fathers, but the Sons; when they prescribe us
any thing out of the Law and Divine authority, we obey them as our parents;
if they enjoin any thing against the voice of the heavenly truth, we have
learned not to hearken to them, but to God. You (Papists) as vassals and base
servants receive whatsoever the Fathers say, without judgment or reason, being
affrayd (as I think) either of the whip, or the halter, if every thing they
speak be not Ghospel with you. Again: Against Sanders de Antichristo p. 21.
We repose no such confidence in the Fathers writings, that we take any certain
proof of our (Protestant) Religion from them, because we place al our Faith and
Religion, not in humane but in Divine authority. If therefore thou bring us,
what some one Father has thought, or what the Fathers universally altogether
have delivered, the same except it be approved by testimonies of Scriptures, it
avails nothing, it gains nothing, it conuinceth nothing; for the Fathers
are such witnesses, as they also have need of the Scriptures to be their
witnesses. If deceived by error they give forth their testimony disagreeging
from Scriptures, albeit they may be pardoned erring for want of wisdom, we can
not be pardoned (being green-witted Protestants) if, because they erred we also
will err with them. Thus does this Protestant Doctor defend his rejecting the
ancient Fathers as writing contrary to the Scriptures, and upbraid us
Catholics for our due estimation of the same: and so do Protestants still
labor in derogation of the Fathers, to oppose the Sacred Scriptures, and holy
Fathers as contrary one to another. But al in vain; for who ever more duly
reverenced, or more carefully preserved those heavenly writings, then the
ancient Bishops and Doctors of the Primitive Church? Who more truly translated
them to their greatest pains, and for the good of al succeeding Ages, then
those learned Fathers? Who in searching the deepest difficulties so frequent
in them did more submit and captiuate their judgments then these holy Fathers?
Who ever more pressed Heretics with the weight of God's word then those
zealous Fathers? Who ever writ more large or more learned Commentaries and
explanations thereof, then the aged Fathers? And is it then possible, that the
said Fathers should so directly contradict the Sacred Scriptures, as our
Protestants pretend? But this so desperate and so unworthy dealing against the
Fathers, does clearly convince, that Fathers were no Protestants, but merely
Papists, wherein we may glory, as reuerencing their sanctity, admiring their
learning, and honoring their Antiquity.

Neither is it true, as Protestants use to suggest, that Catholics distrusting
their cause, if it be committed to trial by Scripture, do therefore fly from it
to Fathers and Doctors; for, as for all such points as are contained in
Scripture, to Scripture we appeal; it is that we urge; her literal sense and
words has made us Papists. We therefore only recurre to Fathers, either for
the better finding-out and understanding the true meaning of sundry difficult
passages and texts of Scripture, or for the true discerning of several
Ecclesiastical Traditions and doctrines taught and practiced by the Church, and
yet no where mentioned in the Written Word. And as this is not most impiously to
oppose Fathers to Scriptures, or to fly from Scriptures to Fathers: So is it in
these respects the most assured means to give us satisfaction. For as none
ever left more lively Monuments of rarest wit and profundest knowledge, or
more shining testimonies of greatest purity and sanctity in life, or more
astonishing wonders and miracles in confirmation of their Faith and doctrine,
then these ancient Fathers; so were there none ever furnished with so good
means eithers of knowing the Apostles, or the Apostles preaching, as the
Apostles first heirs, and next successors, the sweetest fruits of their
labors, our holy Fathers.

But to prosecute yet further this so lunatic proceeding of Protestants
against these grauest Sages of Christ's Catholic Church, what more indigne or
injurious can be uttered, then that these so great Doctors, al of them united
members of one Catholic Church, should be at deadly wars and dissension
amongst themselves in important articles of Faith and Religion? Yea that one
and the same Doctor should contradict himself, and that in matters fundamental
and of greatest consequence? And yet Calvin blusheth not to say: In Inst. in
Praef. ad Reg. Galliae. p. 7.
Those holy men were ignorant of many things; they often fight amongst
themselves, and sometimes with themselves. Beza likewise speaking of the
ancient Fathers in Theodosius his time says: In Inst. in Praef. ad Reg.
Galliae. p. 7.
I confess as then there were most learned Bishops; In nou. Test. Praef. ad
Princip. Condens. p. 4.
but this also I affirm etc. that scarce any of them can be named, who
dissenteth not both from himself and others in many things, and those of
greatest moment. A thing incredible in such learned Bishops, if Calvin and Beza
were not the Broachers, who seldom tell truth. Ep. ad Romans c. 14. p. 419.
Melancthon also thus writes of the Fathers: Seeing they sometimes speak
contrary things, they must pardon us, if we reprehend certain things in them.
And Devotis p. 463.
Though the Fathers were wise, and learned, and saw many things (says Peter
Martyr) yet they were men, and could err: And that chiefly is to be observed,
that the Fathers do not always agree amongst themselves, and sometimes one
dissenteth from himself. Those Fathers (says Retractiue from Romish Religion
p. 223. 224.
D. Beard) that lived in the next two hundred years (after the first) speak of
this matter (of Invocation of Saints) very variously and doubtfully, as if it
were a Doctrine which they knew not what to say to, and were not fully resolved
in. Thirdly, of those Fathers which he alleges, though in some places they
seem to allow that custom which was then brought into the Church, yet in
other places they disallow the same, yea and they are disapproued also of
others that lived in the same Age. Thus true Athanasius conde^neth Invocation
of Saints etc. and false Athanasius allows it etc. Basil approves it, but
Nazianzene doubts of it; and Epiphanius etc. utterly condemns it.
Chrysostom in some places seems to allow of it, in others he speaks
against it, and so does Augustine and the rest.

The like contradition D. Whitaker instanceth in S. Basil saying. De Sacra
Scrip. p. 670.
Basil fights with himself. And De Princip. Christ. Dog. l. 2. c. 10. p. 675.
I oppose (says Lubbertus) Basil against Basil. And Ib. p. 678.
Damascene is contrary to himself. Yea Ib. p. 676.
I oppose Chrysostom against Chrysostom; of whom also (says Whitaker) De
Sacra Scrip. p. 678.
he is at variance with himself. And, Ibid. p. 676.
Let us not attend what Cyprian said, but let us examine him by his own law.
Yea of S. Augustine Whitaker blusheth not to say: Ibid. p. 690.
Although in this he may be thought to favor Traditions, yet in other places
he defends earnestly the perfection of the Scriptures. Of whom also says D.
Beard. Retractiue from Romish Religione. 413.
Augustine, whom they challenge for the greatest Patron of this fire, yet
defines nothing determinately of it, but speaks doubtingly and
problematically; and if he affirm it in some one place, he leaves it in
suspense in others, and utterly denies it in a third. D. Morton acknowledges,
that Protestants Prot. Appeal. l. 2. p. 201. 202.
have particularly and by name observed, that Justinius, Ireneus, Clemens,
Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and others; albeit many times they pleaded for
the free will of the corrupt nature of man, yet were they sometime reduced unto
the more Orthodoxal hold, writing thereof more commodiously; belike as denying
Free Will. But this being only a Protestant or lying observation, I must
infer, that as this so base proceeding against the Fathers, does evidently
demonstrate and discover the unableness of Protestants, in alleging the
Fathers further against us, then they are pretended to be against themselves,
which al of judgment will confess to be nothing; So does it alfo no less
clearly convince, that Protestants in their own consciences do find and know
the Fathers directly to condemn their opinions, and to patronize Papistrie;
for otherwise they would never endeavor so fowly to blemish them by urging
contradiction with themselves, which the- meanest Writer though in triuial
matters does ever scorn, as too clear an argument of gross oblivion, or worse
inconstancy.

Now from this conceit of the Fathers ignorance and contradiction to
themselves, Protestants doubt not to prefer their own modern writers for
judgment, knowledge, and learning before the greatest and ancientest Doctors
of the Primitive Church. So Luther in his Protestant humility thus speaks of
himself: Lib. ad Ducem Georgium. And see Colloq. lat. c. de Consolatione.
Since the Apostles times, no Doctor or writer has so excellently and clearly
confirmed, instructed, and comforted the consciences of the secular States, as
I have done by the singular grace of God. This certainly I know, that neither
Austin, not Ambrose, who are yet in this matter the best, are equal to me
heerin: Tom. 7. Sermon. de Euersione Jerusalem f. 271.
The Ghospel is so copiously preached by us, that truly in the Apostles time it
was not so clear. And seeing Tom 2. lib. Cont. Reg. Angliae f. 344.
God's word is above al, the Divine Majesty makes for me; So that I pass not
if 100. Austins 1000. Cyprians, 1000. King Harrie's Churches stood against me.
Wherefore Lib. de Seruo Arb. And see Cnoglerus his Symbolatria. p. 152.
Cast you off what armor the ancient Orthodoxal Fathers shall afford, or the
schools of Divines, the authority of Councels and Bishops, the consent of so
many Ages and of al Christian People, we receive nothing but Scriptures; but
yet so, that the infallible authority of interpreting is only in us; what we
expound that the Holy Ghost thinks, what others though great, though many
bring, it comes from the spirit of Satan, and a mind distracted. Yea the
Pope L. aduersus Papatum Romae a Satana fundatum f. 1.
knows (says Luther) that by the singular gift and bounty of God, I am
more learned in the Scriptures then himself and al his Asses.

But if Luther himself does so fully mouth his own praises and deserts, we
may presume his disciples and followers are not sparing in the like. And so
indeed writes Alberus Contra Carolostadianos. l. 7.
I doubt not, but that if Austin were now living, he would not be ashamed to
profess himself Martin Luther's Scholar. But Musculus lasheth far further;
for Praef. in Libellum Ger. de Diaboli. Tyramide.
since the Apostles times (says he) there lived not in the world a greater
then Luther. And it may be said, that God powered al his gifts upon this only
man: and that there is as great difference betwixt the ancient Doctors and
Luther, as betwixt the light of the Sun, and of the Moon. Neither is it to
be doubted, but that the ancient Fathers, even those that are chief and best
among them, as Hilarie and Austin, if they had lived and taught in the same
time with Luther, would without blushing have carried the lantern before him
as his Scholars or Ministers. And another professes that: In Hos. in. Hist.
Sacra. part. alt. f. 346.
He prefers one leaf in Luther before the writings of al Fathers. So that if
we believe either Luther or his Scholars, not only Austin, and Hilarie, and
Ambrose, but even all the Fathers since the Apostles times, must give place to
Luther, in regard of his profoundest knowledge and learning.

But not only Luther himself thus far excels the ancient Fathers, but in his
opinion, the only In Col. mensa. c. de Patribus Eccl.
Apology of Philip Melancthon does far excel all the Doctors of the Church,
and exceed even Austin himself. Beza in like sort affirms Praef. in nouum
Testament. dicat. Principi Condiensi.
Calvin to have far exceeded all the ancient and later writers, in interpreting
of the Scriptures with variety of words and allegation of reasons. Yea, says
he: Epist. Theol. ep. 1 p. 5.
I have been accustomed to say, and not without cause (as I take it) that
whilst I compare those very times next the Apostles with our times, they had
then more conscience and less knowledge: And on the other side we have now
more knowledge and less conscience: This is my opinion etc. Agreably hereunto
says D. Whiteguift in his Defense etc. p. 472.
Brief Comparison between the Protestants Bishops of our time, and the Bishops
of Primitive Church: The doctrine taught and professed by our Bishops at this
day, is much more perfect and sound, then it commonly was in any Age after the
Apostles times Ibid. p. 473.
Surely you are not able to reckon in any Age since the Apostles time any
company of Bishops, that taught and held so perfect and sound doctrine in all
points, as ^he Bishops of England do at this time. Yea in the truth of doctrine
our Bishops be not only comparable with the old Bishops, but in many degrees to
be preferred before them. In like sort says Zanchius De Sacra Scriptura p. 411.
Christ has now given to us more excellent Interpreters, then ever heretofore
stnce the Apostles. Yea, says M. Jacob, Defense of Treatise of Christ's
sufferings p. 146. And see the Answ. to Downham's sermon p. 20.
this is the profit that comes by ordinary flanting with the Fathers etc. if
in this case we were to look after any man, surely we have more cause to
regard our late faithful teachers, rather then those of old, who being equal
with the best of them in any of the excellent graces of God's Spirit etc. By
which we may see the small account made by Protestants of ancient Doctors, not
blushing thus to equal, yea much to prefer their own latest Writers before
all the Fathers since the Apostles times.

But what should I urge thus much their dislike, disclaiming, and disgracing of
ancient Fathers, when they spare not to reject and contemn the authority of
al Councels, though never so general, never so ancient? And first does not
Luther affirm in general: In Asser. Articulorum per Leonem X. damnat. Art. 29.
That the way is made to us (Protestants) of weakening the authority of
Councels, and of freely contradicting their decrees, and of judging their Acts,
and of confessing confidently whatsoever seems true (to Protestants) whether
it be approved or reproved by any Council? Does not Beza affirm that, Praef.
in nouum Testam. ad Princ. C ndiens.
even in the best times, the ambition, ignorance, and lewdnes of Bishops was
such, that the very blind may easily perceive, how that Satan was president
in their assemblies or Councels? Does not D. Humfrey disclaim from the
Councels celebrated in the first 600. years, saying: De vita Iuelli p. 212.
What concerns it us, what the false Synods of Bishops (as then) shall
ordain? And does not M. Carthwright reject as erroneous even the first Nycene
Council, saying: 2. Reply part. 1. p. 509.
We have good cause to hold for suspect, whatsoever either in government or
doctrine those times left unto us, not confirmed by substantial proofs out of
the Word etc. This appears in the first Council of Nyce, where the most
errors decreed upon etc. besides the ungodly custom, which may appear to
have occupied almost all the Churches, touching the forbidding of the second
Marriage of Ministers before that Council? And again: Ibid. p. 484.
In the same Council appears, that to those chosen to the Ministry
unmarried, it was not lawful to take any wife afterward etc. Paphnutius
shows, that not only this was before that Council, but was an ancient
Tradition in the Church, in which both himself and the whole Council rested
etc. If the ancient Tradition of the Church (says Cartwright) cannot authorize
this, neither can ancient custom authorize the other, to wit, of
Metropolitans. Luther styles the Canons of the said Council of Nyce Luther l.
de Co^cilijs part. 1. p. 92.
hay, straw, wood, stubble; and demands, whether the the Holie-Ghost has
nothing else to do in Councels (but) to bind and burden his Ministers with
impossible, dangerous, and unnecessary laws: So absurd was the Council of
Nyce in Luther's judgment; affirming further, That more light is brought to a
Christian by that Catechism which children do learn, then by all the Councels.
Calvin calls the Fathers of the said Council of Nyce, Lib. de vera Eccl.
reformat. opuscul. p. 486. And Inst. l. 4. c. 9. 3. 10.
Phanaticos, that is, men Phanatical, or deluded by the Devil; and withal
gives leave to every private man to examine the decrees of Councels, by the
Scriptures, saying: Inst. l. 4. c. 9.. 8. 9 11.
Let no names or authorities of Councels, Pastors, Bishops, hinder us, but
that we may examine al Spirits of al men by the rule of the Word of God. And
again: Ib. 3. 14.
I deny that Interpretation of Scripture to be always true and certain, which
is received by the consent of a Council. But I cannot here but observe the
strange giddines of this primest protestant Calvin, who directly contrary to
his former Assertions, writes thus: Inst. l. 4. c. 9.. 8.
Those ancient Synods, as Nyce, Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, of
Chalcedon, and the like, which were assembled for the confuting of errors, we
do willingly embrace and reverence as Sacred, for as much as concerns
doctrines of Faith; For they contain nothing but the pure and native
Interpretation of Scripture, which the holy Fathers with spiritual wisdom
applied to the vanquishing of the Enemies of Religion which then appeared. But
to leave him thus fighting with himself, and to come to the Ministers of the
Church of Scotland, In the end of the Harmony of Coafes. p. 19. And see the
said Harmony sect. 1. p. 14.
Without just examination we do not receive (say they) whatsoever is obtruded
unto men, under the name of a General Council; for plain it is, that as the
men assembled were men, so have some of them manifestly erred, and that in
matters of great weight and importance. So far then as the Council proves the
determination and commandment, that it gives by the plain word of God, so
soon do we reverence and embrace the same. Hereunto also do accord our English
Protestants teaching, that Articles of faith agreed upon in the Conuocations of
A. 1562. and 1604. art. 21.
General Councels etc. may err, and sometimes have erred even in things
pertaining unto God: Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
salvation, have neither strength nor authority, unless it may be declared, that
they be taken out of holy Scriptures. So unwilling, or rather truly fearful
are Protestants to appeal unto General Councels for the decision of
Controversies.

But D. Luther proceeds further, seriously expecting, and exacting, that al
Councels shall be subject to his Censure and determination. Tom. 2. wittenberg.
f. 375.
The Rectours of Churches (says he) and the Pastors of Christ's sheep have
indeed power to teach; but the sheep ought to judge, whether they propose the
voice of Christ or of strangers etc. Wherefore let the Pope, Bishops, Councels
etc. decree, appoint, and ordain what they will, we will not hinder them, but we
who are the sheep of Christ, and hear his voice, will have it in our power to
judge whether they propose things true, and agreeable to the voice of our
Pastor, or no; and they are to yeald, subscribe, and obey our Censure and
Sentence. Now if Councels be subject to the Censure of Luther, or any other
such rotten sheep, then less is the authority of Councels then of Luther
himself, then the which nothing can be spoken more absurd or ridiculous.

In like sort says Peter Martyr in general: De votis p. 476.
As long as we rest in Councels and Fathers, we shall be ever conversant in the
same errors. Yea (says M. Carthwright) In whiteg. Tract. 2. p. 95.
If this be a sufficient proof to say: such a Council decreed, such a Doctor
said so; there is almost nothing so true, but I can impugn; nothing so false,
but I can make true; And well assured I am, that by their means the principal
grounds of our (Protestant) Faith may beshabken. But to conclude, De Council.
contr. Bellar. 9. 6. Fulk. Answ. to a Counterf. Cath p. 89. 90. Will. Syno. 92.
D Whitaker, D. Fulk, D. Willet, and most other Protestants teaching, that
General Councels may err in Faith and manners, it is no wonder, though they
reject their authority: but yet it evidently conuinceth, that in matters of
Faith and Religion Protestants dare not rely and submit themselves to the
decrees and definitions, either of ancient or modern General Councels.

So that though Ministers in their Pulpits (where none will gainsay them) do
flourish and flaunt forth the ancient Fathers praises, approve their authority,
applaud them as Protestants, and appeal to those primitive Doctors, as
Masters and Patrons of their errors, yet when they are pressed by Catholics
with cleerest evidence of their particular writings, sayings, and practice, and
with the answerable acknowledgements of the learned Protestants, then their
tone is changed, bitterly exclaming, that The argument drawn from Antiquity,
is a Popish argument: that To appeal to the Primitive Church, is to injury
the Protestant Congregation: That for Protestants to fill their books with the
authorities of Fathers, is dangerous and to be eschued: That in all Councels,
Fathers, and Stories since the Apostles, the print of the Popes feet is to be
found: That the Papists strongest towers are in the testimonies of the
Doctors: That the Fathers were blind and ignorant in the Scriptures: That they
were certainly damned for their Papistical opinions, unless they repented: That
their interpretations of Scripture were aduantagious to Papists, and
prejudicial to Protestants: That their books and Commentaries were contrary to
Scripture: Yea that the Fathers did contradict one another, and often one and
the same himself: That Luther and sundry other Protestants are much to be
preferred for learning before S. Austin, S. Ambrose, and all the other Fathers:
That the Doctrine now taught by the Bishops of England is much more sound then
ever was taught by any Bishops since the Apostles, and therefore that our
Bishops are in many degrees to be preferred before them; that even in the best
times Satan was president in Councels: And lastly that al decrees of Popes,
Bishops, and Councels are to yield, and obey the Censure of Luther. Dot not all this most strongly confirm, that in the very hearts and consciences of
Protestants themselves, the ancient Fathers were Roman Catholics, and most
adverse to Protestants? and that therefore and only therefore they are thus
rejected, contemned, disgraced, and wronged by them? even by Luther, Calvin,
Beza, Acontius, Pomeran, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Sommerus, Melancthon,
Lubbertus, Polanus, Alberus, Musculus, Hospinian, Zanchius, Humfrey, Willet,
Midleton, Carthwright, Whiteguift, Jacob, Fulk, Beard, Morton, and Whitaker?

THAT THE PROTESTANTS CHVRCH disclaimeth from the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, it is further proved by the Protestants condemning all the ancient
Fathers in general, for believing, teaching, and practicing the several
particular actions of our Catholic Roman Faith and Religion. CHAPTER II.
HAVING in the former Chapter so plentifully displayed our Protestants free
confessions for the ancient Fathers Papistrie, least some should yet object,
that not al, but only some few of the Fathers were reprouable therein, or that
not in all but only in some few points, and those of lesser moment they were so
faulty: I will now make manifest through all the principal points of our
Catholic Religion at this day controuerted with Protestants, that either all the Fathers indefinitly, or sundry of them at once are acknowledged and
reproved by our Protestant Adversaries, as agreing with us Catholics in the
foresaid Articles.

And first concerning the holy Sacraments and Sacrifice. 1. as touching the
efficacy or Grace truly given by Sacraments, Zuinglius says: Tom. 2. de Bap.
f. 70
Here most of the Doctors by the name of water understanding that material and
external water of Baptism, have attributed more thereunto then was meet.
Whereupon it came to pass, tbat after they ascribed the cleansing of the Soul
to the element of water. Luther says in general: Tom. 2. Witten. f. 229.
I hold the Fathers pardonable, who through temptation or necessity stiffly
denied sin to remain after Baptism. Musculus reproves the Fathers in
general, for that, Loc. com. p. 299.
They attribute greater efficacy to our Sacraments then to the Sacraments of
the old Testament, affirming ours to be more effectual signs of Grace; not
only signifying the same as the others did, but also conferring and giving
Grace and Salvation. And Vrbanus Rhegius confesses that, In part. 1. operum.
in Catechismo minore f. 105.
the Scripture and authority of the ancient Church constrain him to believe,
that little children dying unbaptized are damned. In which respect Inst. l. 4.
c. 15.. 20.
Calvin acknowledges that, Many Ages since, almost from the very beginning
of the Church, it was usual, that in danger of death Lay people might Baptize,
if the Minister were not present. So clear it is, that the ancient Fathers did
generally teach, that the Sacraments of Christ did truly give grace, as
Catholics believe, and not only signify the same, as Protestants pretend.

Secondly, as concerning the Sacrament of Penance or Confession; the
Centurists, Centur. 3. c. 6. col. 127.
speaking of the general use thereof in the ancient times of Tertullian and
Cyprian report that, They gave absolution from sins thus: If any did
penance, they first confessed their sin; for so Tertullian greatly urges
Confession in his book of Penance: And that private Confession was usual, in
which they confessed their sins and wicked thoughts, it appears by some
places of Cyprian etc. And that Satisfaction (or Penance) according to the
quantity of the fault was accustomed to be enjoined, it appareth in his fifth
sermon de Lapsis. So usual was Auricular Confession and Penance in those
ancient times; which Penance also was sometimes by Pardons or Indulgences in
part remitted. For thus writes D. Field: Of the Church l. 1. c. 17. p. 33.
The ancient Bishops were wont to cut off great parts of enjoined Penance,
which remission was called an Indulgence. And whereas D. Field would euade this
our so strong argument for Pardons and Indulgences, by affirming that the
enjoined Penance thus remitted was not then imposed as in satisfaction of
God's Justice, it is so evidently against the Fathers doctrine and practice,
that D. Whitaker himself confuteth it in these words: Cont. ca^p. rat. 5. p. 78.
The Fathers thought by their external discipline to pay the pains due for
sin, and to satisfy God's Justice. And that not Cyprian only, but almost all the holy Fathers of that time were in that error, and depraved the Doctrine of
Penance. Ib. p. 78.
Yea (says Melancthon) Libelli aliquot etc. fol. 11.
all the Council of Nyce overcome with the consent of Multitude and of the time,
approved the Canons of Penance. So that our Catholic Doctrine of Confession,
Penance, and Pardons, is the general confessed Doctrine of the ancient Fathers.

Thirdly, as concerning the Real Presence in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, I
have showed lib. 2. c. 8
before, that S. Gregory, Eusebius Emissenus, S. Ambrose, S. Cyril, S Hilarie,
S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, Tertullian, Origin, and S. Ignatius are al of them
acknowledged and reproved by Protestants for our Catholic doctrine of Real
Presence and Transubstantiation. Yea some Protestants confess that, Adamus
Francisci in Margar. Theol. p. 256.
Transubstantiation entered early into the Church; And that they Antony de Adamo
in his Anotomy of the Mass p. 236.
have not yet hitherto been able to know, when this opinion of the Real and
Bodily being of Christ in the Sacrament did begin. But Bucer speaking of the
Fathers in general professes in this point, Scripta Eruditorum aliquot virorum
de Cena Domini p. 37.
to avoid their sayings, as being (says he) serviceable to Antichrist, and
overmuch varying from the scriptures. Whereby it is evident, that the ancient
Fathers were wholly agreeable to our Roman Church in this weightiest Article of
Real Presence.

4. Concerning Holy- Orders D. Field avouches, Of the Church l. 5. p. 121.
And se the like Cent. 3. c. 7. Col. 149. 150
That there is no question, but that the Minor Orders of Subdeacons, Acolyths,
Exorcists, Lectors, and Ostiaries, are very ancient. In proof whereof he
alleges S. Cyprian and many other Fathers.

5. As touching Extreme Unction, D. Whitaker answering to the sundry ancient
Fathers objected testimonies in behalf thereof confesses, saying: Contra Dureum
l. 8. p. 650.
I confess the superstitious use of this unction to have continued longer in
the Church then was meet.

6. Our sacrifice of the Mass was so generally believed and offered by the
Fathers, that Calvin himself affirms, that In Heb. c. 7. p. 924. And devera
Eccl. Refor. extant. in Tract. Thel. p. 389.
The ancient Fathers forged a sacrifice in the Lord's supper without his
commandment, and so adulterated the supper with adding of sacrifice.
Chrastouius witnesses that, De Opifi^io Missae l. 1. p. 28 58. 102. 171.
The Fathers thought the Eucharist to be a Sacrifice according to the Order of
Melchisedech. And Against Hoskins etc p. 99. 100.
I confess (says D. Fulk) that diverse of the old Fathers were of opinion,
that the bread and wine which Melchisedech brought forth, was sacrificed by
him, and that it was a figure of the Sacrament, which they improperly call a
Sacrifice. Yea (says Chrastouius: De Opificio Miss l. 1. p. 167.
The sayings of the Fathers do not only import impetration (or prayer) but a
certain intrinsecal force of appeasing (God's Justice) For which very point of
the Mass being a Propitiatory sacrifice, he produces the sayings of Origin,
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Austin, Gregory and others; al which were no
less Massing Priests then the Roman Priests of these times.

7. That the ancient Fathers thought, that S. Peter was the Head of the Church,
and the Bishop of Rome his successor therein, D. Field testifyeth saying:
Confut. of the Papists quarrels p. 4.
Many of the ancient Fathers etc. were deceived to think something more of
Peter's prerogative, and the Bishop of Rome's dignity, then by the word of God
was given to either of them. And Philippus Nicolai undertaking to speak De
Regno Christi. p. 221.
of the beginning and increase of the Pope's dignity, avouches, that the
desire of Primacie was the common infirmity of the Apostles, and of the first
Bishops of Rome.

8. That the Pope is not Antichrist, D. Whitaker confesses, that Lib. de
Antichr. p. 21.
the Fathers for the most part thought, that Antichrist should be but one man;
but in that as in many other things they erred, says he. And M. Cartwright
affirms, that diverse 2. Reply part. 1. p. 508.
of the ancient and chiefest of them imagined fondly of Antichrist, as of one
singular person. And as for the time of Antichrist's continuance, M. Fox
acknowledges, that In Apoc. c. 12. p. 345.
almost all the holy and learned Interpreters do by a time, times, and half a
time, understand only three years and a half.

9. Unwritten Traditions are so plainly taught and defended by the Fathers, as
that Chemnitius reproves for the same Exam. part. 1. p. 87. 89. 90.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Hierome, Maximus,
Theophilus, Basil etc. D. Fulk confesses the same Against Purg. p. 362 303.
397. Against Marcial. p. 170. 178. Against Brist. mot. p. 35. 36.
of Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine, Hierome etc. And D. Whitaker
reprehendeth for the same De Sac. Scrip^. p. 678. 681. 683. 685. 690. 695. 696.
670. 668.
Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Innocentius, Leo,
Basil, Eusebius etc.

10. Purgatory, Prayer, and Sacrifice for the Dead were so ordinarily and
generally taught by the Fathers, as that D. Gifford confesses, Demo^st. that
Brownists be Donatists. p. 38.
that in the Churches Worship to pray for the souls of the dead, and to offer
oblation for the dead, was general in the Church long before the days of
Austin, as appears in Cyprian and Tertullian. D. Fulk acknowledges, that Ag.
Purgat. p. 362.
Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Hierome and a great many more do witness, that
Sacrifice for the Dead is the Tradition of the Apostles. And he further
affirms, that Ib. p. 161
the error of Purgatory was somewhat rifely budded in Austin's time; And,
that it was the common error of his time.

11. Lymbus Patrum or Christ's descending into Hell, was so generally believed
by the Fathers, that M. Jacob witnesses, that In Bilson's full Redempt. p. 188.
All the Fathers with one consent affirm, that Christ delivered the souls of
the Patriarcks and Prophets out of Hell at his coming thither, and so spoiled
Satan of those that were in his present possession.

12. Invocation of Saints was so universally believed in the Primitive Church,
that D. Whiteguift and D. Couel do both of them confess, that Def. ag. Cartwr.
Reply p. 473. Couel in his Exem. c. 9. p. 120.
almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greek Church and Latin also
for the most port were spotted with the doctrines etc. of Invocation of Saints
and such like. And D. Brightman reproves for the same doctrine In Apocal. c.
14. p. 382.
S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregoire Nazianzen, S. Ambrose, S.
Hierome, S. Austin etc. And Exam. par. 3. p. 211.
Chemnitius alleges S. Augustine inuocating S. Cyprian, wherein (says he) he
yealded to the times and custom. D. Beard speaking of the Fathers opinion
heerin says: Retract. from Romish Relig. p. 224.
First, the Fathers, if they did allow of this Invocation, yet it was in their
private Devotions, not (says he, though untruly) in the public Liturgy of
the Church etc. until Gregory the First's time etc. Secondly, the Fathers,
though they may seem to have prayed sometimes unto the Saints out of the heat
of their devotion, yet it was but now and then, and as it were by the way etc.
Thirdly, the Fathers albeit they directed their prayers sometimes to the
Saints, yet they reposed most confidence in their prayers to God. So
confessedly did the Fathers themselves pray unto Saints.

13. For worshipping of Saints Relics; S. Basil, S. Athanasius, S.
Chrysostom, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Austin etc. are
al of them reproved In Apoc. p. 382.
by D. Brightman. The Centurists charge the Fathers of the fourth Age with
Cent. 4. c. 6. col. 456.
public Translation of Saints Relics. And Chemnitius charge the Fathers
indefinitly not only Exam. par. 4. p. 10.
with Translation and Circumgestation of Saints Relics, alleging in proof
thereof the testimonies of S. Austin, S. Hierom, and Lucillus; but yet further
also with Pilgrimage to the Relics of Saints.

14. Images were then so generally used, as that sundry examples of their
very placing in churches are given by Against symbol. par. 1. p. 32. Cent. 4.
col. 409. Exam. part. 4. p. 26. 29. 30.
M. Parker, the Centurists, and Chemnitius, out of the writings of Sozomen,
Athanasius, Prudentius, and others. And Functius plainly confesses L. 7.
Comment. in Chronol. f. 6. at An. 464.
that An. 494. Xenaias was the first in the Church, that stirred up war
against Images; so general and peaceable was the use of Images for the first
464. years after the Apostles.

15. Concerning the Cross, M. Burges acknowledges, that In Couels Answer to
Burges. p. 130. 136.
there is nothing ascribed to the Cross in or out of Baptism by the ranckest
Papists, but the Fathers are as deeply engaged in the same; so as if we will use
it as the Fathers did etc. we take the soul to be fenced by Crossing of the
body, and the Cross to have virtue of Consecrating the Sacrament, driving
away Devils, witchcraft etc. In proof whereof he there alleges sundry ancient
Fathers. Yea the worshipping of the Cross was so universal, as that M. Parkins
reports, that Vol. 2. p. 596.
Paulinus Epist. 11. says: The Bishop of Jerusalem yearly at Easter set forth
the Cross for the people to worship, himself being the chief of the
worshippers; so general and received was the practice heerof in the time of
Paulinus, who, as Osiander relates, was Cent. 5. p. 387.
familiar with Hierom, Austin, and Ambrose.

16. Concerning the Vow of Chastity, Chemnitius confesses, that Exam. part.
3. p. 41.
we are not ignorant, that the Fathers allowed the Vows of perpetual
Chastity, and that they thought them to be obligatorie. I know (says Peter
Martyr) that De Votis p. 524.
Epiphanius with many other Fathers erred, in that they affirm it to be sin
to break this Vow, when need shall require: and that he refers the same
naughtily to Apostolical Traditions. Yea (says M. Wotton) it is one of the
blemishes Defense of Parkins. p. 491.
of the ancient Writers.

17. The Chastity or single life of Priests was so generally prescribed and
practiced by the ancient Fathers, who were Priests also themselves, that M.
Jewel speaking of this point Def. of the Apol. p. 195.
says: Here I grant, that M. Harding is like to find some good advantage, as
having undoubtedly a great number of holy Fathers on his side. Bucer likewise
acknowledges, that Gratul. ad Eccles. Angliae. p. 35.
in the time of S. Hierome the Churches of Egypt, of the East, and of the Sea
Apostolic, were not accustomed to receive for Priests, but such as either were
not married or abstained from their wives.

18. Monastical life was so general with the Fathers, that M. Cartwright
confesses, that In Whiteg. Def. p. 344.
Ruffin, Theodoret, Sozomen, Socrates, do mention Monks almost in every page.
And the Centurists do begin a whole special Tract, the title whereof is: Cent.
4. c. 10. col. 294.
Of the Monks through Syria, Palestina, Bythinia, and the other places of Asia
under Constantin the Great; as also the title of another Tract is: Cent. 4. c
10. col. 1306.
The African Monks through Egypt under Constantin the Great. And the title of
another Tract is: Ib. col. 1331.
The Monks through Europe. So that in those purest and ancientest times
Religious or Monastical life was generally practiced over the whole face of the
Christian world, even through Asia, Africa, and Europe.

19. Prescribed times for fasting are so ancient and general, that Chemnitius
confesses, that Exam. par. 1. p. 89.
Ambrose, Maximus Taurinensis, Theophilus, Hierome and others do affirm the
Fast of lent to be an Apostolical Tradition. And Calvin professes that Instit.
l. 4. c. 1 2.. 19.
heerin he dares not excuse the old Fathers, but that they sowed some seeds of
superstition; And that Ib.. 20.
every where the observation of superstitious Lent was in force.

20. Concerning Free Will, some Protestants say: A Discover. of untruths
contained in D. Bancrofts sermon. p. 23. 59)
We know, that ever since the Apostles times in a manner it flourished every
where, til Martin Luther took the sword in hand against it. The Centurists
speaking of the times next after the Apostles, say: (59) In like sort Clemens
affirms every where Free Will, that it may appear not only all the Doctors
of that Age to have been in such darkness, but that it likewise increased in
their successors.

21. Merit of works was so generally believed by the ancient Fathers, that D.
Whitaker charge with error therein Resp. ad Camp. p. 78.
not only Cyprian, but almost (to use his own words) all the most holy Fathers
of that time. And Jesuit. par. 2 p. 531.
It may not be denied (says D. Humfrey) but that Ireneus, Clemens, and others
called Apostolical have nothing Apostolically inserted into their writings the
opinions of Free Will and Merit of works.

22. And as for the use of Ceremonies in the Church, M. Calfhil affirms, that
In Fulks Reioynder to Martials Reply p. 131. 132.
the Fathers declined al from the simplicity of the Ghospel in Ceremonies.
Melancthon also affirms, that In 1. Cor. c. 3.
Presently from the beginning of the Church the ancient Fathers obscured the
doctrine concerning the justice of Faith, increased Ceremonies, and devised
peculiar Worships.

23. But to include many in one, D. Whiteguift a prime Metrapolitan amongst
Protestants discoursing Defense etc. p. 472. 473.
of Doctrine taught in any Age since the Apostles time, affirms without any
exception either of Age or Father, that almost all the Bishops and learned
Writers of the Greek Church and Latin also for the most part were spotted with
doctrines of Free Will, of Merit, of Invocation of Saints, and such like etc.
Meaning thereby such other like points of our Catholic Religion; which his
Assertion has since been renewed by D. Couel, who speaking of the ancient
Fathers uses these like words, as: Exam. against the Plea of the Innoc. p. 120.
Diverse both of the Greek and Latin Church were spotted with the errors about
Free Will, Merit, Inuocotion of Saints. Many things (expressing their
Papistrie) might be alleged in this kind, if it were any virtue to rip up
their faults, whom we ought to honor. And whereas Bellarmin alleges De Not.
Ecclesiae l. 4. c. 9.
the particular sayings of Calvin and the Centurie-writers, as charging the
ancient Fathers with our doctrine of Free Will, Lymbus Patrum, Denial of our
Concupiscence without consent to be sin, Satisfaction, Prayer for the Dead,
Merit, Penance, the Fast of Lent, the unmarried life of Priests, Baptism of
Lay-persons in case of necessity, the manner of Sacrificing etc. D. Whitaker
answering thereto iustifyeth the same, saying: De Eccles. cont. Bellarm. Contr.
2 q. 5. p. 299.
Bellarmin alleges certain testimonies from Calvin and the Centurie-writers,
as noting certain errors of the ancient Fathers, which were common to them
with the Papists, as namely Free Will, Merit, Lymbus, Invocation of Saints, the
unmarried life of Priests, Satisfaction, and certain other such like etc.
before mentioned by Bellarmine, I answer thereto, that it is true which Calvin
and the Centurie-writers have written, that in many things the ancient Church
erred, as in Lymbus, Free Will, Merit of works, and in all the residue of those
other before recited.

24. In like sort M. Brightman having named S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S.
Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, etc. affirms of them al, that
In Apoc. in c. 14. p. 382.
in words they condemned Idolatry, but in deed they established it, by
Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Relics, and such other wicked (Popish)
superstitions.

25. Beza speaking of the times of S. Cyprian, S. Austin, and S. Chrysostom,
avouches that: Praef. in Nou. Test. ad Princip. Cond.
Then Satan laid the first foundations in Greece of Invocation of the Dead,
whereto some of the chiefest Bishops were so far from resisting etc. others
etc. did not only not repress open superstitions arising, but did also nourish
them etc. Hence those opinions of Free Will, of Faith, of free Justification
(was as then) almost oppressed with the Comments of the Grecian Bishops etc. At
the same time the Invocation of the Dead prevailed, and the foolish opinion of
single life, which shameful errors Hierom openly defends; the multitude also
of Ceremonies then increased etc. And al for the most admired the Monks in
Egypt and Syria etc. no otherwise then if they had been Angels. Prayers also
for the Dead began then more freely to be used; and the Platonical question
risen concerning Purgatory etc. So ancient and general amongst all the holy
Fathers were all the foresaid Articles of our present Roman Faith.

26. So that our Catholic Roman Faith concerning the Sacraments conferring
grace, of Confession, of Pardons, of Transubstantiation, of Holie-Orders, of
Extreme Unction, of the Mass, of S. Peter's and the Pope's Primacie, of the
Pope not being Antichrist, of Traditions, of Purgatory and Prayer for the
Dead, of Limbus Patrum, of Invocation of Saints, Reuerencing of Relics,
Images, and the Cross, Vows of Chastity, single life of Priests, Monastical
life, prescribed Fasts, Free Will, Merit of Works, and the Ceremonies of the
Church, was the general received Faith of al ancient Fathers and other
Christians. Witnesses whereof in our behalf are Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, the
Centurists, Rhegius, Melancthon, Adamus Francisci, Antonie de Adamo, Bucer,
Crastouius, Philippus Nicolai, Chemnitius, Functius, Osiander, Peter Martyr,
Beza, Brightman, Field, Humfrey, Fulk, Cartwright, Whiteguift, Couel, Fox,
Gifford, Jacob, Parker, Parkins, Wotton, Beard, Calfhil, whitaker and Jewel.

THAT PROTESTANTS DO NOT ONLY disclaim from all the ancient Fathers as Papists,
but do further reject the authority of the sacred Scriptures and of the
Apostles themselves, as being erroneous; and that therefore they do not found
their Faith or Religion upon Sacred Scriptures, or Christ his Apostles. CHAPTER
III.
I have labored often and long for the finding out of some ground work,
Argument, or Principle, whereupon the Protestant Church should be builded and
sustained. And still observing al proofs whatsoever, drawn either from
Histories, Fathers, Councels, Church or Antiquity, to be al of them contemned
and despised by them as merely Papistical, I retired and tied my thoughts at
last to that surest Ancker of God's heavenly Word, proposed unto us in the
sacred writings of his Prophets, and Apostles; nothing doubting, but that the
credit and authority thereof would in the judgment and very belief of al
Protestants be ever admitted, acknowledged, and reverenced, as Divine,
infallible, and inspired from God the Holie-Ghost himself. And yet frustrate in
this my last expectation, I find the very writings of the Prophets and
Apostles to be censured and rejected, and the Prophets and Apostles themselves
to be scorned, disgraced, and disallowed by the learned Protestant Writers.

And to begin first with the scriptures of the old Testament (omitting also
Tobie, Judith etc. and the rest, which Protestants generally reject for
Apocryphal) whereas Moses was confessedly the first that writ any part of
sacred Scripture, yea that writ the Law of God, or Ten Commandments in Tables
of stone, he and the said Commandments are al of them rejected by our new
Protestants. Tom. 3. Germ f. 40. 41. And in Col^oq. Mensal. G^rm. fol. 152. 153.
We will neither hear nor see Moses (says D. Luther) for he was given only to
the Jews; neither does he belong any thing to us. Let him be to the Jews as
the Law of the Saxons, and let him not disquiet or trouble us Gentiles. As
France regards not the Law of the Saxons, so the Law of Moses does not bind
us. If any propose unto thee Moses with his Laws, and would compel thee to
keep them, then shall thou say: Go to the Jews with thy Moses; I am no Jew;
thou shall not enwrap me with Moses. And again: In Colloq. Mensal. c. de Leg.
and Euang.
I will not receive Moses with his Law; for he is the enemy of Christ. If he
shall come with me to examination, I will reject him in the name of God, and will
say: Let Christ stand here. F^l. 118.
Moses is the master of al hangmen, no man matcheth him in terrifying,
streightning, tyranizing, threatening, and thundering; he cruelly assaulteth the
consciences; he terrifyeth, tormenteth, and teareth the heart. Ad Ps. 46.
Away therefore with Moses to obstinate and cruel men, and proud Saints, whom
he may terrifye and humble. Tom. 3. Witemb. in Ps. 45. f. 423. And see 422. And
in Colloq. Men's Ger. f. 152. 153.
Moses indeed had lips, but (profunda) great ones, unpleasant, stopped,
angry; in which there is not a word of grace, but of anger, death, and sin:
Gather all the wisdoms of Moses, and of the Heathen Philosophers, and you
shall find them to be in God's sight either Idolatry or hypocritical wisdom,
or if it be Politic, yet the wisdom of wrath etc. For Moses has his lips
full of gal and anger etc. Away therefore with Moses etc.

Moses being thus discarded, Away likewise (say Protestants) with the Law and
Commandments. Tom. 3. Germ. fol. 121.
The Law (says Luther) is a true Labyrinth, which only casts consciences
into error. The justice of the Law is the monster Minotaurus, that is, a mere
fable, not leading to salvation, but to the waters of Acheron. In Colloq.
Mensal. Germ. f. 152. 153.
To the Jews belongs the Law of Moses; it does not bind us, etc. I will not
have Moses with his Law; for he is the enemy of Christ our Lord; yea Tom. 3.
Wittemb. f. 6. 7.
the Decalogue itself testifyeth, that Moses does not oblige the Gentiles. And
his own Brethren allege him saying: Admonitio Christiana. p. 211 And see
Hospin. concord. discord f. 225.
As France respects not the Law of the Saxons, so let not Moses be thrust
upon us; we in the New Testament will neither see nor hear Moses.

And as for the Ten Co^mandments themselves, Luther expressly teaches, that
Sermon. de Mose.
the Ten Commandments pertain not to Christians. In Conuiual. Colloq cited by
Aurifab. cap. de lege.
And therefore (says he) Let the Ten Commandments be altogether rejected, and
al Heresies will presently cease; For the Ten Commandments are as it were the
fountain, from whence al Heresies spring. According to which, Islebius,
Luther's own scholar, Cent. 6. p. 311. 312. 310.
taught (as Osiander relates) that the Decalogue was not to be taught in the
Church etc. He dispersed in public writings his Antinomian error; and drew
into error some learned (Protestants) He seems to have taken occasion of
this error from the writings of Luther not rightly understood. And Act.
Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 94
being great in the Court, he preached earnestly for the Antinomian liberty.
These Antinomians Sleidan. Hist. l. 12. f. 262.
receiving their first beginning from Islebius Luther's scholar publicly
taught, as other Protestants confess Confess. Mansfelden Ministror. tit. de
Antinomis. f. 89. 90.
that the Law of God is not worthy to be called the Word of God. If thou be
a where, a whore-mungar, if an adulterer or otherwise a sinner, believe, and
thou walk in the way of salvation. When thou art drowned in sin even to
the bottom, if thou beleeuest, thou art in the midst of happiness. All that busy
themselves about Moses, that is, the Ten Commandments, belong to the Devil, to
the gallows, with Moses.

In like sort Illiricus, the chief of the Centurie-writers, and whom M. Bell
terms Regim. of the Chur. p. 28.
a very famous Writer and most worthy defender of the Christian truth; this so
famous defender of Protestancie is accused of these Antinomian errors by his
own Brethren saying: Act. Colloq. Aldeburg. p. 94.
After the death of Luther, when Flaccus Illiricus and many other factious
Companions of his had begun again those Antinomian filthinesses etc. And with
no little applause of the multitude etc. had dispersed them abroad etc. Yea D.
Hutter public Professor at Wittenberg adds yet further saying; Concord
explicat. Art. 5. c. 1. p. 478. And see Art. 6. p. 535. 536. etc.
But neither did that error rest in a narrow compass, but presently getting
strength crept abroad etc. In so much that Melancthon in the last Edition of
his Common Places has plainly renewed the same error etc. And An. 59. the
later Antinomians, who named themselves the Schole-men of Wittemberg, publikly
and before the whole Church undertook the Defense of that error. Yea that
Antinomian fury increased so much, that also An. 70. in this our Wittemberg
some Divines for the obtaining of the highest degree in Divinity etc.
propounded publicly that error, and endeavored to defend it, as it appears
by the 38 and 39. Theses of that Disputation. Some Protestants also teach, that
Act. Mon. p. 1335. And see the Parable of the wicked Mammon, whereof Tindal is
said to be Author p. 573. 486.
the Commandments were given us, not to do them, but to know our damnation, and
to call for mercy to God. And D. Whitaker says accordingly: Cont. Camp. par.
8. p. 153.
Christ proposes to us another more easy condition; Believe, and thou shall
be saved. By this new league, the old one is taken away; that whosoever
believes the Ghospel, is freed from the condition of the Law. For those, who
believe, are not under the Law, but under Grace; what need I say more?
Christians are freed from the curse of the Law, not from the obedience. But if
Christians be delivered from the condition and curse of the Law, how can they
be bound to the obedience of it? Or what can the breach thereof be prejudicial
unto them? So that if Catholics do at any time urge against Protestants the
authority of Moses or of his Law, or the Ten Commandments, sundry of the
chiefest Protestants have already answered: I will not hear Moses; he is
Christ's enemy; he is the master of hangmen. Away with Moses (therefore) to
the gallows. His Law is a fable, leading to Acheron, or the pit of Hell. The
Ten Commondments do not pertain to Christians; they are the fountain of al
Heresies; and are not to be taught in Churches. The Law of God is not worthy
to be called the Word of God. Yea if thou be an adulterer, or drowned in the
depth of sin, do but believe, and thou art in the midst of felicity. And so
al Arguments drawn from Moses or his writings, are of no force or esteem in
the judgment of Protestants.

But to proceed to other Scriptures, Luther further affirms, that In Ser.
Conuin. tit. de Patriar. and Prophet.
he does not believe al things to be so done, as they are related in the book
of Job. And again: Tit. de libr. Vet. and Nou. Testa.
the book of Job is as it were the argument of a fable, to propose the example
of Patience. And when Luther had read over the book of Ecclesiastes, his grave
censure was: Pet. Robenstock lib. 2. Colloq. Lat. Lu^her. c. de Vet. Test.
This Book is not perfect; many things are taken away; it wants boots and
spurs, that is, it has no perfect sentence; It rides upon a long reed, as
I, when I was a Monk, was wont to do in the Monastery.

And as for the Canticles (which our English Protestants term the Ballet of
Ballets of Solomon) Bible of An. 1595.
Luther was of opinion, that they imported no further, but only a familiar In
Exordio fuarum Annot. in Cant.
conference between Solomon and the Commonwealth of the Jews inuiting Solomon
to reign over her. But Castalio proceeds further, judging this Book to be
only In his La^. Transl of the Bib. Praef. in Cant. the first Edit. And see
Beza in Praef. ante Comment. Calu. in Iosue.
a loue-communication between Solomon and his Mistress Sulamitha; for which he
cites those words: Return, Sulamitha, return, and let us look upon thee;
adding also in the Margent: Sulamitha the Mistress and spouse of Solomon. And
Beza testifyeth of Castalio, that In Vita Caluini. And see Whitaker. poorest
evasion hereof, cont. Dur. l. 1. p. 121.
he commanded the Canticles of Solomon to be thrust out of the Canon as an
impure and obscene Song, reuiling with bitter reproaches such Ministers, as
resisted him therein. Yea this so impious rejecting this parcel of Canonical
Scripture was so gross in Castalio a Caluinist, that now since in the later
Editions of his Bible at Basil, the Protestant publishers thereof have for very
shame altered it.

But now to pass from the Old Testament to the New, and to omit, that Calvin
Instit. l. 2. c. 16.. 18.
rests doubtful, whether the Creed, commonly called the Apostles Creed, was
made and published by the Apostles or no, and consequently whether it be of
infallible authority and belief; He further charge S. Mathew's Ghospel with
error, saying: In Matthew. 27. verse. 9.
Surely the name of Hieremie to be erroneously put for Zachary, the thing
itself shows, because no such thing is read in Hieremie; but that other
place, unless it be dexterously applied, may seem to be drawn into a
contrary sense etc. And whereas Math. 20.16. Christ says: Many are called,
but few are chosen; Calvin rejects it, saying: Harm. in Math. 20.16.
Minime quadrat, quae a quibusdam inseritur, sententia: Multi vocati, pauci
electi; That sentence (Many are called, few are chosen ( which by some is
inserted, does not agree. Which words: does not agree, he expounds in French,
is nothing to the purpose.

M. Jewel likewise affirms Def. of the Apol. p. 361.
that S. Mark alleges Abiathar for Abimelech; and S. Matthew, Hieremias for
Zacharius. Bible of An. 1592.
Our English Church Math. 6. receaues as Canonical scripture these words: for
thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, which they add at the end of
our Lord's Prayer. And yet Bullenger heerin reproves them saying: Decad. 5.
sermon. 5.
Their rashness was to be reproved, who durst presume, to piece on their own,
to the Lord's Prayer. Clebitius a Caluinist impugneth S. Luke's report in the
History of our Sauiour's Passion, saying: Victoria Veritatis and Ruina
Papatus. Saxon. arg. 5.
Mark and Matthew deliver the contrary; therefore to Matthew and Mark being two
witnesses, more (credit) is to be given then to one Luke, who was not present
at the last super, as Matthew was.

Beza Beza in his Trans. And the Engl. Bib. of An. 1595.
and our English Protestants seem to confess, that S. Luke (c. 3.36) in his
Ghospel erred in making Arphaxad the father of Cainan, and Cainan of Sale;
whereas in the Book of Genesis, Arphaxad is said to have been the Father of
Sale; for if S. Luke did not err, why do they (notwithstanding that al Copies,
both Latin and Greek, in this agree) thrust out of the Text these words: who
was of Cainan; and so make S. Luke to say, that Arphaxad was the father of
Sale? And whereas Christ said, Luke 6.40. The disciple is not above his master,
Calvin affirms Harm. in Luc. 6.40.
that Luke in the 6. Chapter relates this sentence without connection, uttered
amongst other speeches as it were of the sudden.

Concerning some part of S. John's Ghospel, Beza says: Ad c. 8. Joan.
As concerning myself, I do not dissemble, that to me it seems justly to be
suspected that which the Ancients with such consent have either rejected or
been ignorant of. Besides, in that he tells Jesus to have been left alone in
the Temple with the woman, I know not, how probable it is. And that he writes
Jesus to have written with his fingar upon the earth, it seems to me a new
and unusual thing; neither can I imagine, how it may be fitly declared. Beza
further See the New. Test. Trans. by Beza of An. 1556. and 1565. And in English
of An. 1580.
in one Edition of his New Testament in the end of the eigth Chapter of S.
John's Ghospel, puts in these words: Jesus passing through the midst of them
etc. which in another Edition with great vehemency he rejects. Wherefore
although Beza in his Edition of the year 1556. leave the said words out; yet
in Beza's Englished Testament of An. 1580. they are admitted; such freedom by
the Spirit has this Caluinist in admitting and expunging of Scripture.

But Luther is so slenderly affected to the three Ghospels of S. Matthew, S.
Mark, and S. Luke, because they write much of the good works done, by Christ
our Savior, as that he spares not to write: In 2. Praef. Nou. Test. primae
Editionis.
Because Ihon writes very few works of Christ, but many things of his
preaching; of the contrary, the other three (Evangelists) set down many
things of his works, but few of his words, the Ghospel of Ihon is the only
delicate, true, and chiefest Ghospel, and far to be preferred before the other
three, and more loudly to be preached. So near were those three Ghospels to be
banished by Luther for recording good works, though done by Christ himself.

But not to rest only in the Ghospel, Luther in plain terms accuses S.
Stephen of error, In cap. 46. Genes.
in following the 70. Interpreters, who (as he says) erred concerning the
number of those that went down into Egypt.

To come now to S. Paul and his Epistles, Zuinglius says: Tom. 2. Elench. f.
10.
This is your ignorance, that you think the Commentaries of the Evangelists,
and the Epistles of the Apostles, to have been then in Authority, when Paul
did write those things; as though Paul then did attribute so much to his
Epistles, that whatsoever was contained in them, was sacred etc. Which thing
(says Zuinglius) were to impute immoderate arrogancy to the Apostle. In like
sort says D. Fotherbie: In his 4 sermons ser. 2. p. 50.
The Apostle twice in one Chapter professed, that this he speaks, and not the
Lord; he is very well content, that where he lackes the warrant of the express
Word of God, that part of his writings should be esteemed but as the word of
man: So supposing some parcels of S. Paul's Epistles not to be sacred and
divine. The Centurists likewise fear not to say: Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. col.
580.
Paul does turn to James the Apostle, and a Synod of all the Presbyters being
called together, he is persuaded by James and the rest, that for the offended
Jews, he should purify himself in the temple, whereunto Paul yields; which
certainly was no small sliding in so great a Doctor. In Act. 21.
Mr. Gualter also reproves S. Paul for shauing his head. Luther tells us
that In Isay. c. 64.
S. Paul 1. Cor. 2.9. does finely writh or wrest a certain sentence of the
Prophet Isay. But Peter Martyr avouches that In 1. Cor. 2. f. 46.
he mistook the Hebrew word.

And as for S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, Luther thought that In 1. Nou.
Test. Ger. Editione.
This Epistle was not written by Paul or any of the Apostles, but composed by
a certain learned man out of many Fathers: And though it lay not the
foundation of true faith, yet it fitly builds up gold, silver, and precious
stones. Therefore it ought not to trouble us, that wood, hay, straw are mingled
therewith. This was so certainly the judgment of Luther herin, that
Oecolampadius observing the same, says: In Ep. ad Heb. in Praef. f. 4.
Luther in his Preface says thus: This Epistle seems to me to be patched
together of many, and not to handle the same thing in order. He adds also,
that it lays not down the foundation of faith etc.

The Magdeburgians also do follow their Master Luther heerin, writing: Cent.
1. l. 2. c. 4.
It is easy to observe that the Epistle to the Hebrews does not bear Paul's
phrase etc. It was not hard to judge, those things which in the 7. and 10.
chapter are plainly to that end produced, that such, who are once converted to
Christ, if they fall again, cannot be recovered by serious repentance, not to
be the Doctrine of Paul, nor of the other Apostles, nor of Christ: Through
those and such like reasons, prudent Antiquity seems deservedly to have
doubted of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

In Heb. c. 10 p. 963.
Calvin likewise says: The Grecians have delivered that which the Apostle here
mentions, which partly agrees with the mind of the Prophet, and partly
impugneth the same: So making the Prophet and Apostle to vary amongst
themselves. But indeed at some time of the Moon S. Paul is in so slender
esteem with Protestants, that one of them confidently avouches In D.
Bancrofts Survey p. 373.
that if Paul should come to Geneua, and preach the same hour that Calvin did,
I would leave (says he) Paul and hear Calvin. And, Ibid. p. 372.
another in Basile did attribute no less to Farellus then to Paul. Yea some of
Luthers scholars: (35) not the meanest among their Doctors, said Lauaterus
Hist. sacram. p. 18. see Schlusselb. Theol. Call. l. 2. f. 146.
they had rather doubt of S. Paul's doctrine the^ of Luther, or the Confession
of Augusta. And yet the doctrine of Luther is often so absurd, so impure, and
scandalous, as that some Protestants themselves, as much ashamed thereof, have
rejected the same: And the Confession of Augusta has been often impugned by
sundry Caluinists.

But preaduenture S. Peter is in better credit then S. Paul: And yet I find him
rebuked by Protestants for his claim of Primacie. Catalog. Testium veritatis
to. 1. p. 27.
It cannot be denied (say they) but that sometimes Peter labored with Ambition
and desire of greatness etc. Wherefore this so perverse Ambition of Peter, and
ignorance, and negligence of Divine matters etc. But Luther says further: In
Epist. ad Gal. c. 1.
Be it that the Church, Austin, and other Doctors, also Peter, Apollo, yea and
an Angel from Heaven teach otherwise, yet is my doctrine such as sets forth
God's only glory etc. Peter the chief of the Apostles did live and teach
besides the Word of God. And again: Tom. 5. Vvittemb. f. 290.
Whether S. Cyprian, Ambrose, Austin, or S. Peter, S. Paul, yea an Angel from
Heaven teach otherwise, yet I know this certainly, that I do not persuade
humane but Divine things. Calvin likewise affirms, that Peter's pretended
erring was, In omnes Pauli. Epist. in Gal. c. 2. p. 510. 511.
(37) To the Schism of the Church, the endangering of Christian liberty, and
the overthrow of the Grace of God. (38) D. Fulk charge S. Peter with error
of ignorance, and against the truth of the Gospel. And that this pretended
erring of S. Peter, Against Rhem. Test. in Gal. 2. f. 322.
was even after the descending of the Holie-Ghost upon him, D. Goad avouches
saying: Tower. Disp. 2. Confer. Arg. 6.
P^ter did err in faith, and that after the sending down of the Holie-Ghost
upon him. Brentius likewise affirms that, In Apol. Conf. c. de Co^cilijs p.
900.
S. Peter chief of the Apostles, and also Barnabas, after the Holie-Ghost
received, together with the Church of Jerusalem erred. In like sort says D.
Whitaker: De Eccl. cont. Bellar. Controu. 2. q. 4. p. 223.
But peradventure they will say, Christ had not yet ascended, and the
Holie-Ghost was not yet given to the Apostles; whereto he immediately thus
replyeth; what? did they not err afterward? Yea it is evident that after
Christ's Ascension, and the descension of the Holie-Ghost upon the Apostles,
the whole Church, not only the common sort of Christians, but also even the
Apostles themselves erred, concerning the calling of the Gentiles etc. Yea Peter
also erred concerning the abrogation of the Ceremonial Law etc. And this was a
matter of faith, and in this Peter erred; He furthermore also erred in manners
etc. And these were great errors; and yet we see these to have been in the
Apostles even after the Holie-Ghost descending upon them. So that S. Peter is
of as small authority with Protestants, as S. Paul before was.

To come now to S. James, Andreas Friuius a Caluinist, (whom Com. Plac. in
Engl. part. 4. p. 77.
Peter Martyr terms an excellent learned man) affirms that, Ib. 2. de
Eccl. c. 2. p. 411.
Christ at his last supper joined wine with bread; if therefore the Church
separate these, she is not to be heard; The Church of Jerusalem did separate
these, S. James (as some dare affirm) gave only one kind to the people of
Jerusalem; what then? The Word of God is plain and manifest, Eat and drink:
This is to be heard of us, and preferred before al James and words of the
Church. And, De Captiuit. Bab. c. de Extr. vnct. tom. 2. wittemb. f 86.
further say (says Luther) that if in any place it be erred, in this place
especially (concerning Extreame-Vnction) it is erred etc. But though this were
the Epistle of James, I would answer, that it is not lawful for an Apostle by
his authority to institute a Sacrament; this appertains to Christ alone. As
though S. James would institute or publish a Sacrament without warrant from
Christ. And the Centurists before affirmed, that S. Paul was drawn into error
by S. James and the rest of the Apostles.

Now as concerning S. James his Epistle, Luther avouches that, Praef. in
Epist. Iacobi in Edit Ien.
The Epistle of James is contentious, swelling, dry, strawie, and unworthy an
Apostolical spirit. As also, Adc. 22. Genesis
Abraham was just by Faith, before he was known to be so by God. Therefore
James concludes il etc. It does not follow as James doateth etc. Let our
Adversaries therefore be packing with their James, whom they object so often
unto us. Again, In Coll. Mensal. lat. tom. 2. de lib. nou. Test.
Many have much labored in the Epistle of James, that they might accord it
with Paul, as Philip tried in his Apology, but without success; for they are
contrary, Faith justifies, Faith justifies not. Agreably hereunto also says
Musculus: Loc. com. c de Iustific.
The Papists object the Epistle of James: But he whosoever he was, the Brother
of Christ, and a Pillar amongst the Apostles, and a great Apostle above
measure, yet he alone cannot prejudice the truth of Faith. And after the
disagreement between S. Paul, and S. James (according to his imagination)
showed at large, he thus schooleth and corrects S. James: He alleges the
example of Abraham nothing to the purpose, where he says, will thou know, o
vain man, that Faith without works is dead? etc. He confounds the word,
Faith. How much better had it been for him, diligently and plainly to have
distinguished the true and properly Christian Faith, which the Apostle ever
preached, from that which is common both to Jews and Christians: Turks and
Devils, then to confound them both, and set down his sentence so different
from the Apostolical doctrine, whereby as concluding he says: you see that a
man is justified by works and not by Faith alone; whereas the Apostle out of the
same place disputes thus etc. where having made S. Paul to speak as he
thinks best, he infers: Thus says the Apostle, of whose Doctrine we doubt
not; Compare me now with this argument of the Apostle, the Conclusion of this
James, A man therefore is justified by works, and not by Faith only; and see
how much it differs; whereas he should more rightly have concluded thus etc.
So peremptory is Musculus the Sacramentarie against S. James the Apostle. In
like sort writes Illiricus: In Pref. in Iac. Epi.
Luther in his Preface upon James's Epistle, gives great reasons why this
Epistle ought in no case to be accounted for a writing of Apostolical
authority: In Enchyr. p. 63, And see Exam. part. 1. p. 55.
unto which reasons I think every godly man ought to yield.

But to annexe hereunto the Epistles of S. Peter, S. Ihon, and S. Jude,
Chemnitius (Luther's chief Scholar) affirms that, Upon the Apoc. Engl. c. 1.
ser. 1. f. 2.
The second Epistle of Peter, the second and third of Ihon, the Epistle to the
Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse of
Ihon, are Apocryphal: As, Exam. p. 1. p. 56.
not having sufficient testimony of their authority, and that therefore, Ib.
p. 57.
Nothing in Controversy may be proved out of these books. Agreably whereunto
says also Adamus Francisci: Margarita Theol. p. 448.
The Apocryphal Books of the new Testament are, The Epistle to the Hebrews,
The Epistle of James, the second and third of Ihon, the second of Peter, the
Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse.

Concerning which last of the Apocalypse of S. Ihon, Bullinger expressly
avouches, In Apo. c. 19. sermon. 84. f. 260. 259.
That S. Ihon was entangled with error. And Luther thinks this Book, Pref.
in Apo. prioris Edit.
Neither to be Apostolical nor Prophetical etc. nor that it was made by the
Holy Ghost etc. Therein neither Christ is taught nor acknowledged, says he. An
error so manifest in Luther, that Bullinger testifyeth the same saying: Upon
the Apoc. Engl. c. 1. ser. 1. f. 2.
D. Martin Luther has as it were sticked his Book by a sharp Prefac set before
his first Edition of the new Testament in Dutch, for which his judgment good
and learned men were offended with him. In Apol. Confess. Wittemb. c. de sacra
Scriptura.
Being to speak (says Brentius) of the authority of sacred Scripture, we will
first run over the Apocryphal Books, which are in the Vulgar Edition of the
Bible, and which the Papists obtrude upon us for truly Canonical: Amongst which
he then numbreth, the Epistle to the Hebrews, of James, of Jude, the second of
Peter, and the Apocalypse etc. and then adioyneth saying: Some of these are
termed dreams, some fables. Of so small account with Protestants is this so
Divine and mystical Book of the Apocalypse, written by S. Ihon the Evangelist.

Lastly Zuinglius being impugned for denying prayer for the dead, and pressed
with the authority of Fathers, especially of S. Chrysostom and S. Augustine,
who derive this custom from the Apostles, answers thus: Tom. 1. Epi^h^rae.
de Can. Mis. f. 186. And see Tom 2. in Elench. contra Anabap. f. 10.
If it be so as Augustine and Chrysostom report, I think that the Apostles
suffered certain to pray for the dead, for no other cause then to condescend to
their infirmity: So insimulating the Apostles wilfully to have permitted
others to err (according to the errors of Protestants) in praying for the
dead, which they could not do without error in themselves.

Add only hereunto, that seeing according to Brentius and other Lutherans, as
also according to our English Protestants, those Books of Scripture are only to
be acknowledged Canonical, Brent. in Conf^ss. Wittemb. c. de sacra script.
Conuocat. Land. Anno 1562. and 1604. ar. 6. Whitack against Camp. Reas. 1. p.
28.
of whose authority there was never any doubt made in the Church; then by the
said Rule, our English Protestants Church does reject as Apocryphal, the
Epistle of S. Paul to the Hebrews, the Epistle of S. James, and S. Jude, the
second of S. Peter, and the second and third of S. Ihon, to eather with the
Apocalypse, sithence al these have been doubted of formerly in the Church, as is
confessed by sundry Towers Disput. with F. Campian. in the 4. Days conference.
English Protestants; amongst whom M. Rogers having said, Upon the 6. Art.
Propos. 4. p. 26.
In the name of the holy Scripture, we do understand those Canonical Books of
the Old and New Testament, of whose authority was never doubt in the Church,
himself yet further confesses, that Ib. p. 31.
Some of the ancient Fathers and Doctors accepted not all the Books, contained
within the volume of the New Testament for Canonical. So giddie and inconstant
are our Ministers in impugning the truth.

Now if some deny (the plainest premises, notwithstanding) D. Whitaker, and
W^itak. Answ. to Camp. Reas. 1. Rogers upon the 6. Artic. p 30.
M. Rogers; that Luther and the Lutherans did reject the foresaid Books of the
new Testament, besides their own cleerest words particularly before cited out
of their own writings, Whitaker himself says: Vvhitack. de sacra S^ript.
Controu 1. q. 1. c. 6.
If Luther, or some that have followed Luther; have taught, or written
otherwise, let them answer for themselves; this is nothing to us, who in this
matter neither follow Luther, nor defend him, but are led by a better reason.
Rogers also alleges Vbi supra p. 32.
two principal Lutherans, Wygandus and Heshusius, accusing them both of error,
the one for refusing the first and second Epistles of S. John, with the Epistle
of S. Jude; the other for rejecting the Apocalypse. And Calvin acknowledges
that, In Argum. Epist. Iacobi.
In his time there were some (Protestants) that judged the Epistle of S. James
not Canonical. Oecolampadius testifyeth the same touching the Apocalypse, and
affirms himself to lib. 2. ad cap. 12. Daniel.
wonder, that some with rash judgment rejected S. John in this Book as a
dreamer, a mad man, and a writer unprofitable to the Church. So clear it is
against Whitakers and Rogers, even by the testimonies of themselves and their
other Brethren, that Luther and his brood, rejected the foresaid Scriptures as
not Canonical.

But now to recapitulate, or briefly to reuiew this so strange proceeding of
our new Ghospellers, with the sacred Scriptures: If Christians be to reject
Moses and his writings, as the Books of Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus etc. yea the
very Ten Commandments, which comprehend not only the Ceremonial, but also the
Moral Law, as also the Book of Job, with Ecclesiastes, and Canticles of
Solomon, and Tobie, Judith, Hester, Sapientia, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, some
chapters of Daniel, the first and second of Machabees, how slender then is the
remnant of the old Testament left behind? And if all the four Ghospels be
censured (as before) for erroneous, and the Epistles to the Hebrews, of James,
Peter, John, Jude, and the Apocalypse be al of them rejected as Apocryphal; how
diminutiue a volume will our new Testament remain?

Besides, if not only all the foresaid Books be erroneous, but the Apostles
withal, and the Evangelists themselves, even after their receiving of the
Holie-Ghost did write, teach, and defend several errors; how can any
Christian build an infaillible saving Faith upon the Ghospels, or other
Apostolical writings? How then can they be acerteyned of any one true sentence
of God's Word, if the writers and deliuerers thereof were not infallibly guided
by the Holie-Ghost into al truth, and so freed from al error, ignorance,
misprision, or falsehood?

And if some peradventure except, that these so Atheistical and Sacrilegious
reproaches imposed upon the sacred Scriptures, and the Blessed Evangelists and
Apostles, be not the ordinary opinions or practice of Protestants, but
peradventure only of some few, either ignorant, or not endowed with the spirit;
the falsehood and vanity of this evasion, is most apparent; for who of foreign
Protestants were ever reputed more learned, or more enlightened with the spirit,
then Luther, Calvin, Beza, Chemnitius, Islebius, Illiricus, with the other
Centurie-writers, Castalio, Zuinglius, Musculus, Brentius, Andreas Friccius,
Adamus Francisci, Bullinger, and sundry such others, al of them highly
esteemed of by their other Protestant Brethren? Or who at home more honored
then Tyndal, Jewel, Goad, Fotherbie, Fulk, Whitaker etc. and yet al of those,
being indeed the primest men that ever they had, do jointly conspire in this
greatest impiety of censuring, controuling, correcting, or rejecting some one
part or other of the forenamed Canonical Scriptures, or else of condemning the
Evangelists and Apostles of several errors, infirmities, and sliding in
matters of faith and Religion. Which foul proceeding of so many and so
learned Protestants, does evidently (according to D. Fulk's Rule) convince them
to be perfect Heretics: For Confut. of Purgatory p. 214.
whosoever (says he) denies the authority of the Holy Scriptures, thereby
bewrays himself to be an Heretic.

Laus Deo and B. V. Mariae.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE BOOKS AND CHAPTERS:
THE FIRST BOOK, WHEREIN IS PROVED BY THE Confession of Protestants, that the
Catholic Roman Church has continued Ever most Known and Universal, even from
Christ's very Time, until the Date hereof.
THE antiquity of the true Church; and the force of the Argument drawn from
the Authority thereof: As also of these great necessity of finding-out this
true Church. chap. 1. fol. 1. That the present Roman Church, and Religion, for
the last thousand years after Christ, have still continued most Known, and
Universal, throughout the Christian world. chap. 2. fol. 4. A further
confirmation of the universal continuance of our Roman Church and Religion, for
these last thousand years, is taken from the Confessed belief and profession
of such Persons, as living within the foresaid time, were most Famous and
Notorious, in one respect or other. chap. 3. fol. 8. That the faith of S.
Gregory and S. Augustine, and whereto England was by them converted, was our
Roman Catholic, and not Protestant. chap. 4. fol. 10. That the present Roman
Church and Religion, continued and flourished during the whole time of the
Primitive Church, containing the first six hundred years after Christ. chap.
5. fol. 20. A further proof of the present Roman Religions Continuance from the
Apostles time to these days, is taken from the Christian belief of the
Indians, Armenians, Grecians and Brittans, al of them Converted in the days of
the Apostles. chap. 6. fol. 27.
THE SECOND BOOK Wherein is proved through all the chief Articles of Religion,
and that by the Confessions of Protestants, that the same Faith which is now
taught by the Roman Church, was anciently taught by the Primitive Church of
Christ.
THat General Councels do truly represent the Church of Christ: And of the
Credit and Authority given by Protestants to the said Councels. chap. 1. fol.
1. That the argument drawn from the Authority of the Primitive Church of
Christ, and of her Doctors and Pastors, is an Argument of force; And for such
approved by sundry learned Protestants. chap. 2. fol. 3. That the Fathers and
Doctors of the Primitive Church, believed and taught, that S. Peter, was
ordained by Christ, the Head of the Apostles, and of the whole Church, and that
the Church was founded upon S. Peter, it is Confessed by Protestants
themselves. chap. 3. fol. 8. It is Confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers
of the Primitive Church believed and taught, the Bishop of Rome to succeed S.
Peter in the Primacie of the whole Church. chap. 4. fol. 11. It is confessed by
Protestants, that the Primitive Church of Christ believed the Books of Tobie,
Judith, Ester, Sapientia, Ecclesiasticus, and two first of Machabees, to be
truly Canonical Scripture. chap. 5. fol. 25. It is acknowledged by Protestants,
that the Fathers of the Primitive Church believed and taught our now Catholic
Doctrine concerning Traditions. chap. 6. fol. 30. It is Confessed by
Protestants, that according to the Fathers of the Primitive Church, the
Sacraments do truly confer Grace and Remission of sins: And that they are
in number seven. chap. 7. fol. 32. It is Confessed by Protestants, that the
Fathers of the Primitive Church believed and taught the Real Presence of
Christ's true Body and Blood in the Eucharist: As also our further Catholic
Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Adoration, Reservation, and the like. chap. 8.
fol. 35. Protestants confess, that the Primitive Church of Christ believed,
taught, and practiced the Sacrifice of the Mass, as also that it is a
Sacrifice, according to the order of Melchisedech; and truly Propitiatory for
the living and the dead. chap. 9. fol. 41. It is acknowledged by Protestants,
that the Fathers of the Primitive Church taught and believed the Power of
Priests to Remission of Sins; The necessity of Auricular Confession, The
Imposition of Penance, and satisfaction to God thereby: As also our Roman
Doctrine of Pardons or Indulgences. chap. 10. fol. 46. It is granted by
Protestants, that the Catholic Doctrine of Purgatory, and of Prayer and
Sacrifice for the dead, was believed, taught, and practiced by the Fathers of
the Primitive Church chap. 11. fol. 50. It is confessed by Protestants, that
the. Fathers of the Primitive Church believed and taught our Catholic Doctrine
of Christ's Descending into Hell. chap. 12. fol. 55. It is confessed by
Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church believed and practiced
our Catholic Doctrine of praying to Angels and Saints. chap. 13. fol. 57. It
is confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church allowed
the use of Christ's Image, and his Saints, placing them even in churches, and
Reuerencing them. chap. 14. fol. 60. It is acknowledged by Protestants, that
the Fathers of the Primitive Church did specially honor and reverence the
holy Relics of Martyrs, and other Saints; carrying them in Processions, and
making Pilgrimages unto them; at which also many Miracles were wrought. chap.
15. fol. 63. It is confessed by Protestants, that the holy Doctors of the
Primitive Church, not only used the sign of the Cross, but likewise worshipped
the same, attributing great efficacy, power, and virtue thereunto. chap. 16. f.
65. It is confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
allowed, and practiced the vow of Chastity; and that they never allowed such
as were of the Clergy afterward to marry; or such as had been twice married
to be admitted to holy Orders without special dispensation. chap. 17. fol. 69.
It is confessed by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Promitiue Church
allowed, and practiced the Religious State of Monastical life: and that many
Christians of those purest times, both men and women, did strictly observe and
profess the same. chap. 18. f. 74. It is acknowledged by Protestants, that the
Fathers of the Primitive Church allowed, and practiced prescribed fasts, and
abstinence from certain meats, upon days, and times appointed, holding the
same obligatorie under sin; condemning also our Puritan Sabboath Fasts. chap.
19. fol. 80. It is admitted by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive
Church expressly taught our Catholic Doctrine concerning Free will. chap. 20.
fol. 84 It is granted by Protestants, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church
taught, not only Faith, but likewise Good works truly to iustifye: and that the
said works are meritorious of Grace and Glory. chap. 21. fol. 86. It is
acknowledged by Protestants, that the Ceremonies now used in the Roman Church
in the ministering of service, or Sacrifice, as also of the Sacraments, were
formerly used by the Bishops, Priests, and Fathers of the Primitive Church.
chap. 22. fol. 89
THE THIRD BOOK, WHEREIN is proved that the Church of Protestants was never
known or in Being before the d yes of Luther: And that the Articles of
Religion now taught by the Protestant Congregation, were Heresies condemned by
the Primitive Church of Christ.
IT is confessed by Protestants, that from the days of the Apostles until the
time of Luther, themselves never had any known Church or Congregation, in any
part of the universal World. chap. 1. fol. 1. A Further conuincing proof of the
Protestant Churches not being, during the first 600. years, is taken from the
Fathers: Condemning in the ancient Heretics, the chiefest articles of the
Protestant Religion, and our Protestants Confessing the same. And First
Concerning the Sacraments. chap. 2. fol. 6. That the Fathers condemned in
ancient Heretics, the opinions of Protestants concerning the Scriptures, and
the Church Militant, and Triumphant. chap. 3. fol. 9. That the Fathers
condemned in ancient Heretics the opinions of Protestants, concerning
Monachisme, the marriage of Priests, and prescribed Fasts. chap. 4. fol. 12.
That the Fathers condemned in ancient Heretics the opinions of Protestants,
concerning Free Will, Faith, Good works, the Commandments, sin, and the
knowledge and Death of Christ. chap. 5. fol. 14. Protestants Usual
recrimination of obiecting old Heresies to the Catholic Roman Church, is
clearly examined, discovered, and confuted by their own acknowledgements.
chap. 6. fol. 17. A Further trial is Made, Whether Catholics or Protestants be
true Heretics; and this by sundry known badges or marks of Heresy. chap.
7. fol. 23. A brief Survey of D. Whites Catalogue, wherein contrary to the
Confessed truth in the precedent Chapter, of no known beginning or change of
our Roman Faith in any Age, he undertakes (according to his Title thereof) to
show, That the present Religion of the Roman Church was observed and resisted
in all Ages, as it came in, and increased: naming withal the Persons that made
the Resistance: And the points wherein: And the time when; from fifty years to
fifty, through-out al Ages since Christ. chap. 8. fol. 35.
THE FOVRTH BOOK, WHEREIN is proved by the Confession of Protestants, that,
according to the Sacred Scriptures, the Roman Church is the true Church of
Christ: And so to have ever continued from his time, until the Date hereof: And
of the contrary, the Protestants Church to be only a Sect Heretical, and never
to have been before the days of Luther.
PRotestants flying to the sacred Scriptures in proof and defense of their
Church and Religion, it is showed, the said flight, not only in itself to be
dishonorable, but also to be the ordinary flight of al modern Heretics.
chap. 1. fol. 1. That even the Sacred Scriptures themselves do most plentifully
testify our Roman Church to be the Church of of Christ: and the Congregation
or Church of Protestants, to be no true Church, but a Sect Heretical, and most
contrary to the said Scriptures: And that, first by the Churches necessary
continuance and universality. chap. 2. fol. 5. The second Proof from sacred
Scriptures, in confirmation of the Roman Church, and Confutation of the
Protestant, is taken from the Ever visibilitie of Christ's Church. chap. 3.
fol. 10. The third Proof from Sacred Scriptures, in Confirmation of the Roman
Church, and Confutation of the Protestant, is taken from the Churches Pastors
which must ever continue with lawful Calling and Succession, and with
Administration of Word and Sacraments. chap. 4. fol. 13. The fourth Proof from
sacred Scriptures. in confirmation of the Roman Church, and Confutation of the
Protestant, is taken from the Conversion of Heathen Kings and Nations to the
Faith of Christ. chap. 5. fol. 24. A Discovery or brief Examination of sundry
sleights and Euasions used by Protestant Writers in Excuse of the manifest
confessed want of their Churches fulfilling the foresaid Scripiures concerning
the continuance, universality, and visibilitie of Christ's true Church. chap.
6. fol. 33.
THE FIFTH BOOK, WHEREIN is showed, that Protestants in the Decision of
Controversies between them and Catholics, do absolutely disclaim from
Antiquity, rejecting the Ancient Fathers and Councels for Papistical, and the
Sacred Scriptures for erroneous.
THat Protestants Disclaim from al Antiquity since the Apostles; and further
reject and condemn as Papistical the Ancient Fathers and General Councels.
chap. 1. fol. 1. That the Protestant Church disclaimeth from the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, it is further proved by the Protestants condemning all the
ancient Fathers in general, for believing, teaching, and practicing the several
particular actions of our Catholic Roman Faith and Religion. chap. 2. fol. 12.
That Protestants do not only disclaim from all the ancient Fathers as Papists,
but do further reject the authority of the sacred Scriptures and of the
Apostles themselves, as being erroneous; and that therefore they do not found
their Faith or Religion upon Sacred Scriptures, or Christ his Apostles. chap.
3. fol. 18.
A TABLE SHOWING THE particular matters handled in this Book.
A.
AELfricus no Protestant. l. 3. c. 8. page 51. Albigenses taught sundry
errors. lib. 1. c. 3. page 12. Almaricus his errors. l. 3. c. 8. p. 55.
Antiquity commended. Praef. to the Reader; and lib. 5. c. 1. page 1. 2.
Antiquity rejected by Protestants as a Popish Argument. l. 1. c. 5. page 26.
Anthony the Monk commended. l. 2. c. 18. Apostles according to Protestants
erred in Faith even after the coming of the Holie-Ghost. l. 5. c. 3. p. 23.
25. Apocalypse rejected by Protestants. lib. 5, c. 3. p. 24. Armenia converted
by the Apostles. lib. 1. c. 6. p. 29. Armenians retain still sundry points of
Catholic Religion. l. 1. c. 6. p. 29. Aultars used in Churches in time of the
Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. p. 85. Aultars disliked by Heretics. l. 3. c.
2. p. 8. S. Austin the Monk commended by Protestants. l. 1. c. 4. p. 16. 17. S.
Austin converted England to the now Roman Faith. l. ^. c. 4. p. 16.
B.
Baptism conferreth Grace and Remission of sins. l. 2. c. 7. p. 33. Baptism
necessary for the salvation of infants. Ib. Baptism ministered by lay persons
in case of necessity, lawful. l. 5. c. 2. p. 12. In Baptism sundry
Ceremonies used by the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. Barnabas the Apostle
according to Protestants erred in Faith. l. 5. c. 3. p. 23. Beads or little
stones used to pray with, in time of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. S. Bid
confessedly a Roman Catholic, and a holy man. l. 1. c. 3. p. 14. Berengarius
his error and Recantation. l. 1. c. 3. p. 14. S. Bernard a Roman Catholic. l.
1. c. 3. p. 15. and l. 3. c. 8. p. 53. Bertram no Protestant. l. 3. c. 8. p.
46. Bigamus, not admitted to Holy Orders in time of the Primitive Church. l.
2. c. 17. p. 73.
C.
CAlling necessary for Preaching and Administration of Sacraments. l. 4. c. 4.
p. 13. 14. Protestant Ministers are distitute of al lawful Calling. l. 4. c. 4.
p. 15. 16. 17. and seq. c. The Calling of the English Ministry. l. 4. c. 4.
p. 16. Some Protestants derive their Calling from Catholics. Ib. p. 17. Others
deny it. Ib. p. 19. Calling by the Laytie allowed by Protestants. Ib. p. 20.
Protestants being confessedly destitute of al ordinary Calling, do fly unto
extraordinary. Ib. p. 20. Extraordinary Calling is ever confirmed by
Miracles. Ib. p. 21. Extraordinary Calling is freed from error. Ib. p. 23.
Catholic Priests have lawful Calling. l. 4. c. 4. p. 17. 18. 24. Candles
lighted in Churches in the day, in time of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22.
p. 86. Canticles rejected by Protestants as Apocryphal. l. 5. c. 3. p. 20.
Castalio his Apostacy. l. 4. c. 2. p. 7. The name Catholic, why imposed at
first. l. 3. c. 7. p. 30. 31. and l. 4. c. 2. p. 9. Applied only to the Roman
Church. Ib. p. 9. Disliked by Protestants. Ib. p. 9. Ceremonies approved by the
Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. p. 89. Charles the Emperor a
Roman Catholic. l. 1. c. 3. p. 14. The Book written under Charles his name
against Images, is counterfeit. l. 3. c. 8. p. 45. Chrisme used and approved in
the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. p. 88. Christ to have been ignorant,
condemned in ancient Heretics and Protestants. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15. Christ as
God to have suffered and dyed, condemned in Protestants. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15
Church to be known is most necessary. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3. Out of the true
Church there is no salvation. Ib. and l. 4. c. 3. p. 11. Church of Christ is
most ancient. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3. Church of Christ cannot fail. l. 4. c. 2. p. 3
Church of Christ cannot err. l. 1. c. 1. p. 2 Church of Christ is ever
visible. l. 3. c. 3. p. 9. and l. 4. c. 3. p. 10. 11. 12. Church of Christ
conuerteth Heathen kings and Nations. l. 4. c. 5. p. 24. 25. and seq. Church of
Christ discerns true Scriptures from Apocryphal. l. 1. c. 1. p. 3 Churches
were hallowed in time of the Primitive Church. lib. 2. c. 22. p. 90. Churches
were dedicated to Christ and his Saints. Ibid. p. 91. Churches had Vestries.
Ibid. Churches and Chancels. Ibid. Commandments to be impossible, condemned in
ancient Heretics and Protestants. l. 3. c. 5. p. 14. Ten Commandments rejected
by Protestants. l. 5. c. 3. p. 19. Communion under one kind. l. 3. c. 2. and p.
6. 7. c. ^. p. 21. Confession of the Adversary a strong Argument. Praef. to
the Reader. Confession of sins to the Priest, used in the Primitive Church.
l. 2. c. 10. p. 47. and l. 5. c. 2. p. 12. Confession being made, Penance was
imposed. l. 2. c. 10. p. 48. And Absolution given with imposition of hands.
Ibid. p. 49. Confirmation used in the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 7. p. 33. 34.
Consecration of water, Bread, Ashes, and used in the Primitive Church. l. 2. c.
22. page 88. Cranmer his life and death. l. 4 c. 4. p. 18. Creed of the
Apostles doubted of by Protestants. l. 5. c. ^. p. 20. Cross worshipped by the
Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 5. c. 2. p. 15. and l. 2. c. 16. per totum.
The sign of the Cross then used. Ibid. Cross used in Consecration of
Sacraments. Ibidem. Miracles wrought by the Cross, and the sign thereof.
Ibidem. Cross impugned by ancient Heretics, and Protestants. l. 3. c. 3. p.
10. 11. Councels represent the Church. l. 2. c. 1. page 1. Councels best means
to decide Controversies. Ib. p. 2. Councels cannot err in matters of Faith.
Ibidem. Some Protestants pretend to submit themselves to general Councels.
Ibidem. Councels rejected by Protestants. lib. 5. c. 1. p. 9. Council of
Francford. l. 3. c. 8. p. 44.
D.
DAntes the Poet. lib. 3. c. 8. p. 56. David George his falling from
Protestancie to Apostacy. l. 4. c. 2. p. 8.
E.
ECclesiastes rejected by Protestants for Apocryphal. l. 5. c. 3. p. 20.
Emperors reigning, during the time of the Primitive Church rejected by
Protestants for Papists. l. 1. c. 5. p. 20. Eucharist to be the Sacrament of
Christ's true Body and Blood, was believed by the Fathers of the Primitive
Church, even by the confession of Protestants. l. 2. c. 8. per totum and l. 5.
c. 2. p. 13. Eucharist carefully kept from falling. l. 2. c. 8. p. 37.
Eucharist adored in the Primitive Church. Ibidem. Eucharist accustomed to be
elevated in Masse-time. Ibid. p. 38. Eucharist received fasting. Ibid.
Eucharist received chaste. Ibid. Eucharist reserved. Ibid. and l. 3. c. 2. p. 7.
Eucharist used in around figure, in time of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 8.
p. 39. Eucharist foretold by the ancient Jews. Ibidem. Eucharist impugned by
Heretics. lib. 3. c. 2. p. 6. 7. and l. 3. c. 8. p. 51. Extreme Unction
believed and used by the Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 7. p. 34.
F.
FAith alone to iustifye, condemned in ancient Heretics. l. 3. c. 5. p. 14.
Fast of Lent confessedly approved and observed in the Primitive Church. l. 2.
c. 19. Fasts prescribed in the Primitive Church. Ibidem. Aerius denying
prescribed Fasts, condemned by the Fathers of the Primitive Church. Ib. and l.
3. c. 4. p. 13. Yet defended by Protestants against the Fathers. Ibid. c. 5. p.
16. Fasts condemned in Montanus, confessedly different from our Catholic
Fasts. Ib. p. 19. 20. Fasts not to be kept upon the Sunday. l. 2. l. 3. c. 4.
p. 13. Fathers confessed by Protestants to have been Papists. l. 5. c. 1. p. 2.
Fathers reviled by Protestants. Ibid. p. 3. Fathers disclaimed by Protestants
in their Exposition of Scriptures. Ibid. p. 4. Fathers opposed by Protestants
to Scripture. Ibid. p. 5. Fathers by Protestants made contradictorie to
themselves and other Fathers. Ibid. p. 6. 7. Protestants by Protestants
preferred before Fathers. Ib. p. 8. Fathers challenged by Protestants for
theirs. l. 2. c. 2. p. 6. Fathers authority approved by Protestants. l. 2. c.
1. p. 1. c. 2. p. 6. Fathers by Protestants preferred before Protestants. Ibid.
p. 7. Force of the Argument drawn from Man's authority. Ibid. p. 7. 8.
Frederick the Emperor, no Protestant. l. 3. c. 8. p. 54. Free Will taught by
the Primitive Church l. 2. c. 20. Free Will taught by the ancient believing
Jews. Ibid. Free Will denied by the Manichees. l. 3. c. 5. p. 14.
G.
GRecia converted by the Apostles. l. 1. c. 6. p. 27. Grecians in these times,
Catholics, not Protestants. l. 1. c. 6. p. 29. and l. 3. c. 8. p. 37. Gregory
the Great commended by Protestants. l. 1. c. 4. p. 16. Gregory a Roman
Catholic. l. 1. c. 4. p. 17. Guilelmus de Sancto-Amore no Protestant. l. 5. c.
8. p. 36.
H.
HEresies described. l. 3. c. 7. p. 23. Heretics named by their first Author
or Doctrine. l. 3. c. 7. p. 31. Ancient Her^ticks defended by Protestants
against the Fathers. l. 3. c. 5. p. 16. Ancient Heresies confessedly differ
from Catholic doctrine. l. 3. c. 6. p. 17. 18. Heretics go out of the
Church. l. 3. c. 7. p. 23. 24. Henricus 5. Imperator, no Protestant. l. 3. c.
8. p. 53. Henricus 8. king of England, no Protestant. l. 1. c. 3. p. 10.
Hildebrand defended against Protestants. l. 3. c. 8. p. 52. Hours Canonical
used in the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. p. 89. Husse, no Protestant. l. 1.
c. 3. p. 10.
I.
S. James the Apostle charged with error by Protestants. l. 5. c. 3. p. 23. S.
James his Epistles rejected by Protestants for Apocryphal. Ib. p. 23. 24.
Images worshipped by the Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 14 Images as
then placed in Churches. Ib. By Images Miracles wrought. Ibid. Images impugned
by Heretics, and these therefore condemned by Fathers. l. 3. c. 3. p. 10. etc.
8. p. 40. 43. 47. India converted by the Apostles. l. 1. c. 6. page 28. Indians
in these days Catholics, not Protestants. l. 1. c. 6 p. 28. Innovation or
first Beginning noted, a Badge of Heresy. l. 3. c. 7. p. 27. Job his Book
rejected by Luther for Apocryphal. l. 5. c. 3. p. 20. S. John's Ghospel charged
by Protestants with error. Ib. p. 21. S. John's Epistles rejected by
Protestants, as Apocryphal. Ibid. p. 24. S. John's Apocalypse rejected by
Protestants, as Apocryphal. Ib. p. 24. S. Iude's Epistle rejected by
Protestants as Apocryphal. Ibid. p. 24. Justice inherent denied and condemned
in ancient Heretics. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15.
L.
LAtria and Dulia confessedly taught by S. Austin. l. 2. c. 14. Lollards their
errors. l 3. c. 8. p. 57. Lotharius the Emperor objected against the Pope's
Primacie, and answered. l. 3. c. 8. p. 46. 47. At Luther's first revolt the
whole Christian world was Roman Catholic. l. 1. c. 3. p. 8. Luther taught
many errors. l. 4. c. 4. p. 23. Luther confessedly wrought no miracles. Ibid.
p. 22. S. Luke's Ghospel charged by Protestants with error. l. 5. c. 3. p. 21.
Lymbus Patrum confessedly taught by the ancient Fathers. l. 2. c. 12. p. 55.
and 56. Lytanies used by the ancient Fathers. l. 2. cap. 22.
M.
MAchabees, Tobie etc. approved for Canonical by the Primitive Church. l. 2. c.
5. Objections against them answered. l. 2. c. 5. p. 25. Marsilius Patauinus a
condemned Heretic. l. 3. c. 8. p. 56. Malachias a Roman Catholic. l. 1. c. 3.
p. 13. Mass generally used these last 1000. years. l. 1. c. 2. p. 6. Mass
confestedly taught and used by the ancient Fathers. l. 2. c. 9. p. 41. and seq.
Mass believed to be Propitiatory by the ancient Fathers. Ibid p. 44. Mass
celebrated for the dead. l. 2. c. 11. p. 50. and seq. Mass a Sacrifice
according to Melchisedech. p. In Mass water mingled with wine. l. 3. c. 2. p.
8. Heretics impugning the Mass condemned. Ibidem S. Mathew's Ghospel charged
by Protestants with ersour. l. 5. c. 3. p. 21. S. Mark's Ghospel charged by
Protestants with error. Ibid. Michael the Emperor objected against the Popes
Primacie; and answered. l. 3. c. 8. p. 48. 49. Miracles attributed by Heretics
to wichcraft. l. 3. c. 3. p. 10. 11. Miracles confessedly never wrought by any
Protestant. l. 4. c. 4. p. 22. 23. Miracles wrought by many Catholics l. 4.
c. 5. p. 32. Monachisme approved and used by the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 18.
p. 74. and seq. Monks had special Consecration. Ib. p. 75. Monks habit Ib. p.
76. Austeritie. Ibidem. Monks vowed Chastity. Ibidem. Monks wrought miracles.
Ibidem. Monks defended by the ancient Fathers against. Vigilantius. l. 3. c. 4.
p. 12. Monastical life in some sort professed by the believing Jews. l. 2. c.
18.
N.
NIlus a condemned Heretic. l. 3. c. 8. p. 58. Novelty rejected. Praef. to
the Reader. Nycetas objected against the Pope's Primacie; and answered. l. 3.
c. 8. p. 51.
O.
OCcham no Protestant. l. 3. c. 8. p. 57. Orders. l. 2. c. 7. p. Otho objected
against the Pope's Primacie; and answered. l. 3. c. 8. p. 50.
P.
PArdons and Indulgences taught by the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 10. p. 48. S.
Peter ordained by Christ Head of the Apostles for unity. l. 2. c. 3. p. 8. and
seq. Upon S. Peter Christ built his Church. Ib. S. Peter's seas of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch preferred before others. Ib. S. Peter charged by
Protestants with error. l. 5. c. 3. p. 23. Phocas co^ferred not Primacie to
Boniface. l. 3. c. 8. p. 41. Photius objected against the Pop's Primacie and
answered. l. 3. c. 8. p. 48. Pope of Rome S. Peter's successor. l. 2. c. 3. p.
9. 10. etc. 4. p. 11. Pope's Primacie was Christ his ordinance. l. 2. c. 4. p.
12. Pope's Primacie confessedly allowed and practiced universally these last
1000. years. l. 1. c. 2. p. 6. Pope not Antichrist. l. 2. c. 4. p. 24. and l.
5. c. 2. p. 14. Al Popes for these last 1000. years censured by Protestants to
have been Antichrists. l. 1. c. 2. p. 6. Pope's Primacie defended by S.
Gregory. l. 2. c. 3. p. 9. 10. etc. 4. p. 12. and l. 3. c. 8. p. 41. by
Pelagius. Ib. p. 14. by Celestine. Ib. by Leo Ib. p. 15. by Gelasius Ibid. p.
16 by Sixtus. Ib. by Innocentius Ib. by Siricius Ib. by Zosimus Ibid. by
Councels Ib. by Constantine Ib. p. 17. by Damasus and others of the fourth Age.
Ib. by the Fathers of the third Age. Ib. p. 19. by the Fathers of the second
Age. Ibid. p. 20. by S. Peter and the Fathers of the first Age. Ib. p. 21. and
21. by the Jews. Ib. p. 23. Primacie Ecclesiastical denied to Emperors by the
Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 4. p. 23. and l. 3. c. 3. p. 9. 10.
Priests ordained by Bishops. l. 2. c. 22. Priests are to live chaste. l. 2. c.
17. p. 69. Heretics impugning the same, condemned. l. 2. c. 17. l. 3. c. 8. p.
42. 48. Priests anointed at their Consecration. l. 2. c. 22. Priests have power
from God to remit sin. l. 2. c. 10. p. 46. Priests crowns shaven in the
Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 22. The Primitive Church her authority. l. 2. c. 2.
p. 3. and seq. To the Primitive Church some Protestants pretend to appeal. l.
2. c. 2. p. 3. 4. Other Protestants dislike the foresaid Appeal. l. 5. c. 1.
p. 2. Protestant Church invisible at S. Gregorie's time. l. 3. c. 1. p. 1.
Invisible al these last 1000. years. Ib. p. 1. at Luther's time. Ib. p. 2. at
Wicklifes time. Ib. p. 3. at at Waldo's time. Ib. p. 4. at Constantine's time
and since, Ib. p. 4. 5. In the Apostles time and after to Constantine. Ib. p.
5. Protestants went out of the Catholic Church. l. 3. c. 7. p. 24. Protestants
never wrought miracles. l. 4. c. 4. p. 22. 23. Protestants confessed external
dissimulation in matters of Religion. l. 4. c. 6. p. 38. Protestant Writers
preferred by Protesstants before S. Peter and S. Paul. l. 5. c. 3. p. 22. 23.
The name Protestant, from whence first. l. 3. c. 7. p. 32. The name Puritan,
from whence first. Ib. 32. Protestants are enforced to use diverse names for
distinction of their Religion and opinions. Ibid. p. 33. The name Papist,
whence. Ibid. p. 31. Purgatory, Prayer, and Sacrifice for the dead,
confessedly taught by the Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 11. p. 50.
and seq. and l 5. c. 2. p. 14. Purgatory believed by the ancient believing
Jews. l. 2. c. 11. p. 53. Purgatory denied by Aerius; and he condemned for
the same by the Fathers. l. 2. c. 11. p. 52. and l. 3. c. 3. p. 11.
R.
Relics confessedly reverenced by the Fathers of the Primitive Church. l. 2.
c. 15. and l. 5. c. 2. p. 15. By Relics, miracles wrought. l. 2. c. 15. To
Relics, Pilgrimages made in the Primitive Church. Ibidem. Relics translated.
Ibidem. Relics impugned by Vigilantius, and he condemned for the same by the
Fathers. l. 3. c. 3. p. 10. Roman Church continued confessedly a pure Church
for the first 600. years. l. 1. c. 5. p. 21. 22. and l. 2. c. 2. Roman Church
continued universally these last 1000. years. l. 1. c. 2. p. 4. Roman Church
continued universally since Constantine. l. 1. c. 5. p. 26. Roman Church
continued the first 300. years after Christ. l. 1. c. 5. p. 22. Roman-Church
has no known beginning since the Apostles. l. 1. c. 5. p. 26. Roman Church
her beginning is ascribed to the Apostles times. Ib. p. 20.
S.
SAcraments to confer grace, is the confessed doctrine of the Primitive
Church. l 2. c. 7. p. 32. Seven Sacraments taught by the Primitive Church. l.
2. c. 7. p. 32. Saints to be prayed unto, is the confessed doctrine of the
ancient Fathers. l. 2. c. 13. p. 57. Saints to be prayed unto, was taught by
the ancient Jews. l. 2. c. 13. p. 59. Vigilantius and Aerius denying the same
were condemned by the Fathers. l 2 c. 13 p. 58. and l. 3. c. 3. p. 10. Scotus
objected against the Real presence; and answered. l. 3. c. 8. p. 46 47.
Scriptures appealed unto by all Heretics. l. 3. c. 3. p. 9. and l. 4. c. 1. p.
2. Scripture has seeming repugnances. l. 2. c. 5. p. Scriptures discerned for
Canonical by the Church l. 1. c. 1. p. 2. Simeon the Monk commended. l. 2. c.
18. p. Sin attributed to God, as the Author, condemned. l. 3. c. 5. p. 15.
Sigebert. l. 3 c. 8. p. 52.
T.
TRaditions confessedly taught by the Primitive Church. l. 2. c. 6. p. 30.
Traditions taught by the ancient believing Jews Ibid. p. 31.
Transubstantiation confessedly taught by the Fathers of the Priuitiue Church.
l. 2. c. 8. p. 34.
V.
VEstments and Vessels consecrated to Church uses. l. 2. c. 22. Vow of
Chastity approved and practiced by the Primitive Chuch. l. 2 c. 17. p. 69.
Iouinian condemned for denial thereof. l. 3. c. 4. p. 13.
W.
WAldo, no Protestant. l. 1. c. 3. p. 12. Wales converted to Christianity in
the Apostles times. l. 1. c. 6. p. 18. The VVelch-men or ancient Brittans were
Roman Catholics. l. 1. c. 6. p. 28. They changed not their Faith before S.
Austin's coming. l. 1. c. 6. p. 30. VViccliff, no Protestant. l. 1. c. 3. p.
11. 12. Works to iustifye and merit, confessedly taught by the Primitive
Church. l. 2. c. 21. p. 86. Heretics denying the same, condemned. l. 3. c. 5.
p. 14.
FINIS.
FAVLTS ESCAPED.
Epist. Ded. Parag. Now supposing, for plainly, read painfully. Lib. 1. c. 1.
page 2. lin 26. for Ccclestical, read Ecclesiastical, p. 3. for ea, read and.
cap. 2. p. 4. lin. antepen. for Confirmation, read Confutation.

Lib 2. c. 1. p 2. lin. vlt. for Church, read Churches. c. 4 p. 17. lin.
anteantep for which, read with. p. 18. lin. 18. for Athasius, read Athanasius.
p 19. lin. 40. for 20 read second hundred. cap. 5. p. 26. lin. 42. for
Churches, read Councels. p. 29. lin. 33. for only not, read not only, cap. 8.
p. 37. lin. 10. for purposely to, read purposely prof^sse^h to. p. 38. lin. 13.
for or, read of. cap. 10 p. 48. for command, read commend.

Lib. 3. c. 1. p. 4. lin. 21. for thy, read this. cap. 4 p. 13. lin. 34. for
Arians, read Aerians. cap. 6. p. 2. lin. 14. for roriter, read writer. cap. 7.
p. 23. lin. ante p add (9) p. 26. lin. 6. for with, read which. p. 31. lin.
24. for that, read the. p. 32. lin. 14. for the, read that. cap. 8. p. 37. lin.
36. for. Turctisme, read Turcisme. p. 48. lin. 1. for contracted, read
contradicted. lin. 17. for (66) read (26) p. 43. lin. 29. for no^ worthy, read
not unworthy.

Lib. 4. c. 2. p. 5. lin. 25. v. David, add (7) lin. 27. v. Church, add (8)
p. 6. lin. 2. v. Wittenberg, add (17) p. 7. lin. 36. v. Whitaker, add (34)
p 8. lin. 1. for often, read after. lin. pen for Scriptures, read Scriptures
cap 4. p. 13. lin pen. and p. 14. lin. 27. for Vzias, read Ozias lin. 9. p. 20.
lin. 9. for had, read and p. 24. lin. 3 for ad, read al lin. 35. for Chapter 4.
read Chapters Lib. 5. c. 1. page 3. lin. 1. sor, read sort. c. 1. page 4. lin.
3. ad, read and. page 10. lin. penult. beshabken, read beshaken. lib. 5.


