THE IESVITES GOSPEL BY W. Crashawe, B. of Divinity and Preacher at the Temple.

LONDON, Printed by E, A. for Leonard Becket, and are to be sold at his Shop
in the TEMPLE nere the Church. 1610.

THE POINTS OF NEW DIVINITY CONTAINED IN this Gospel.
1 THat the Milk of Marye may come into comparison with the blood of Christ.
2 That the Christian man's faith may lawfully take hold of both as well as one.
3 That the best compounde for a sick soul, is to mix together her milk and
Christ's blood: 4 That the sins and spiritual deseases of the soul are cured
as well by her milk as his blood. 5 That Christ is still a little child in
his Mothers arms, and so may be prayed unto. 6 That her milk and the merit
and virtue of it, is more precious and excellent then Christ's blood.
JN THE APPENDIX.
1 THat no man, but a woman did help God in the work of our redemption. 2
That God has made Marye partaker and fellow with him of his divine Majesty
and power. 3 That God has divided his Kingdom with Marye, keeping Justice to
himself, and yelding Mercy to Her. 4 That a man may appeal from God to Her. 5
That a man shall oftentimes be sooner heard at Gods hands in the mediation of
Marie, then of Jesus Christ.
THE OCCASION OF THIS IESVITICALL BLASPHEMYE.
IVSTVS LIPSIVS, a man of learning enough but too much levitye, having run
over all religions; and at last set up his rest in Poperye: fell in his
declining and doting days to open Idolatrye: And as he never troubled himself
much with Christ in his life (whose very name a man shall seldom find in his
books) so at his end, wanting matter (it seems) to magnifye Christ, he writes
2. books in praise and honor of 2. Idols: namely 2. old rotten, or 2. new
forged pictures of a Woman with a Child in her arms. Which must needs be taken
for pictures of our Lady: Wherein the profane wretch blusheth not to write,
that at these 2. Images, there are more and greater miracles wrought, then the
scriptures speak of to be done by Christ himself. A learned lowe-Countrye
Divine wondering that such Owls durst fly abroad at Noone light, and such
tromperye be set to sale in these days of knowledge, Wrote a short reproof of
the impietyes, uttered in the first of these books, which is:

De Virgin Hallensi. Wherein, because the Jesuits were also touched, as being
the Fathers of such fooleryes, and the makers of those bolts which such fools
as Lipsius do shoot: Thereupon a Jesuit of Antwerpe calling himself Clarus
Bonarscius, (but his true name being, Carolus Scribanius) taking upon him in a
Jesuitical pride the general quarrel of the whole order of Jesuits,
undertakes to defend their Innocence, and their Honor (forsooth) against all
the world: and to that end writes a book, and calls it

The great Theater of the Jesuits Honor.

Amphitheatrum Honoris.

In quo Caluinistarum in Societatem criminationes iugulatae.

Wherein, after many blasphemies against Christ: calumnies and sclanders
against Princes: all kind of lies against our Ministers, and Professors: he
comes at last to defend their friend Lipsius, and his legend of our Lady of
Hall: And after he has abused him that wrote against it, with all despightfull
terms, and rayld most artificially, wherein he excels all other Jesuits, (
Parsons excepted) as far as they, all other Papists: He makes a transition from
railing on men to playing with God: and from disgracing Princes to dallying
with Jesus Christ: and not only defends the legend of Hall, Written by
Lypsius, but further to show his own devotion, he makes a Poem, not to the
honor of God, or of Christ the Mediator, But to our Lady of Hall and the
Child Jesus. Wherein, whether the verse be better or the matter worse is hard
to tell: But whether his devotion therein is greater to a Creature, or his
blasphemy against the blood of the Mediator, let the Christian Reader Judge,
by the Poem it self, which hereafter follows.

EX CLARIBONARSCII AMPHYTHEATRO HONORIS. Lib. 3 Cap. 8 page 356. editionis 2.
1606. AD DIVAM HALLENSEM, ET PVERVM IESVM.
HAEREO lac inter meditans, interque cruorem*
Inter delicias vberis, and lateris.
2
Et dico, (si forte oculos super Vbera tendo)
Diua Parens Mamma gaudiaposco tuae.
Sed dico (si deinde oculos in vulnera verto)
O Jesus, lateris gaudia malo tui.
3
Rem scio. Prensabo, si fas erit, Vbera dextrae
Laeua prensabo vulnera, si dabitur.
4
Lac Matris miscere volo cum sanguine nati:
Non possem Antidoto nobiliore frui.
5
Vulnera restituent turpem vlceribus mendicum:
Testa cui saniem radere sola potest.
Vbera reficient Ismaelem sitientem
Quem Sara non patitur: quem neque nutrit Agar:
Illa mihi ad pestem procul and procul expungendam:
Ista mihi ad longas eualitura febres.
6
Ira vomit flammas, fumatque libidinis Aetna?
Suffocare queo sanguine, lacte queo.
Liuor inexpleta rubigine saeuit in artus?
Detergere queo lacte, cruore queo.
Vanus honos me perpetua prurigine tentat?
Exaturare queo sanguine, lacte queo.
7
Ergo Parens and Nate, meis aduertite votis:
Lac peto, depereo sanguinem: vtrumque volo.
8
Paruule maternis medius qui ludis in vlnis
Qui tua iam comples vbera, iam vacuas:
Quid me respectas obliqua tuentibus hirquis?
Roboris in Coelum nil habet Inuidia.
Saepe quidem dixti, noxis offensus iniquis,
Tune meas mammas, Improbe, tune meas?
Nolo tuas o nolo tuas Puer auree mammas:
Non sum tam duri, tam grauis oris homo:
Sed tantum lateris pluat vnica and vnica stilla:
Et saltem a dextrae vulnere gutta pluat.
Si nihile dextra vis impluere, implue laeua:
Si nihil e laeua, de pede sanguis eat.
Si tibi non placeo vulnus mihi vulnera danto:
Mercedem danto vulnera, si placeo.
9
Saepe mihi Babylon patera propinat, and auro,
Ingeminatque meis auribus, euge, bibe.
Non faciam, vel si Coelum miscebitur Orco,
Non faciam, meretrix impia, non faciam.
10
O fitio tamen, o vocem sit is inter cludit!
N^te, cruore sitim comprime, Lacte Parens.
Dic matri, meus hic frater sitit, optima Matter,
Vis de font tuo promere, deque meo?
Dic Nato, tuus hic frater, mi mellee fili
Captiuus monstrat vincula, lytron habes.
11
Ergo redemptorem monstra te iure vocari
Nobilior reliquis si tibi sanguis inest.
Tuque Parens monstra matrem te iure vocari,
Vbera si reliquis diuitiora geris:
12
O quando lactabor ab vbere, vulnere pascar!
Delicijsque fruar, Mamma, latusque tuis!
Parce Deus, magno si te clamore fatigem:
Non potis Imperio, non potis art regi.
Exagitante siti, Patientia perdit habenas.
Clamores si vis tollere, toll sitim.
Pluris ego clauis: saturasti sanguine clauos:
Lanceaque erubuit sanguine tincta tuo.
Pluris ego pannis: madu^runt vndique panni
Nati a vulneribus, Matris ab vberibus.
TO OUR LADY OF HALL, AND TO THE CHILD JESUS.
MY thoughts are at a stand, of Milk and Blood
(Delights of Breast and side) which yields most good
2
And say when on the tears mine eyes I cast:
O Lady, of thy breast I beg a taste.
But if mine eyes upon the wounds do glide,
then (Jesus) I had rather suck thy side.
3
Long have I mused, now know I where to rest
for with my right hand I will graspe the breast,
(If so I may praesume) as for the wounds:
With left i will catch them: thus my zeal abounds. A mixture of Christ's blood
and a creatures milk to make up the confection which must heal our souls.

4
And of the milk, and blood in mixture, make
the soueraignst cordial sinful soul can take.
5
These wounds corrupted ulcers mundifies
which none can cure unless he canterize.
Those breasts the faynting Ismael well would cherish
whom Sara scorned and Agar would not nourish:
The first from me expells all pestilence:
the second drives all lingering feauers hence.
6
Does Ire belch fire, or lust like Aetna smoketh?
either the blood or milk this feruor choketh. How the blood an^ the milk ^
made equ^

Does enuyes rust enroule me round about?
this milk, or that same blood soones scoures it out.
Or do vain glorious tumor stuff me still
Here blood and milk enough my thirst to fill.
7
Mother and Son give ear to what I crave:
I beg this mi^ke, that blood, and both would have.
8
Youngling, that in thy mothers arms art playing
sucking her breast sometimes, and sometime staying:
Why do thou veiwe me with that look of scorn?
it is forcelesse envy that against thee is borne.
Often have thou said (being angry at my sin)
dare thou desire the teates my food lies in? Here the milk is ^uanced
^boue the blood.

I will not, oh I dare not, golden child
My mind from fear is not so far exilde:
But one, even one poor drop I do implore
from thy right hand, or side: I ask no more.
If neither; from thy left hand let one fall:
Nay from thy foot, rather then none at all.
If I displease thee let thy wounds me wound:
But pay my wage if I in grace befound.
9
Ofte-times does Babylon in gold me send
strong wine, and whispers to me, drink my friend.
No, no, though heaven and hell should make confusion
I Will none false strumpet, hence with thime illusion.
10
But ah, I thrist: ah drought my breath does smother!
Quench me with blood sweet Son, with milk good Mother.
Say to thy Mother, see my brothers thirst,
Mother, your milk will ease him at the first.
Say to thy Son, Behold thy brothers bands,
sweet Son, thou have his ransom in thy hands.
11
Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed:
thou Son, if that thy blood excel the rest.
And show thy self justly so styled indeed,
thou Mother, if thy breasts the rest exceed.
12
Ah when shall I with these be satisfide?
When shall I swim in joys of breast and side?
Pardon (o God) mine eager earnestnes:
if I thy laws, and reasons bounds transgress.
Where thirst ore swayes, patience is thrust away:
stay but my thirst and then my cries will stay.
I am better then thy nails: yet did a stream
of thy dear blood wash both the Lance and them
More worthy I then clouts: yet them a flood
moystned of Mothers milk, and of Sons blood.
THE APPROBATION OF THIS AVTHOR.
CLARVS Bonarscius, otherwise called Carolus Scribanius is a Jesuit now living
at Antwerpe, and of much account amongst them; he wrote this book and spewd
this blasphemy out of his unclean heart some 4. or 5. years ago. And whereas
both the Author and his book deserved the fire or halter, It was so far from
being misliked in the Romish Synagogue, or any way censured, that since then
the book has been reprinted and the Author and his book stand enrolled,
aproued and commended (in their great volumes set out for that purpose) for
good and Catholic.

Clari Bornascij Amphitheatrum Honoris Iesuitici, in quo Caluinistarum in
societatem Jesus criminationes iugulatae: Palaeopoli hoc est Antuerpia.
prostant Palaeopoli 1605. and postea 1606. Haec Posseuinus Iesuita in Appararu
sacro Tom. 1. lit. C. page 357. editionis vltimae. And it is to be noted that
these volumes of Posseuine contain only an inrollment and approbation of no
writers at all, save such as are approved Romish Catholics: and are set out
with great and public allowance of the Romish state, as may be seen at the
beginning of the first Tome.

Besides, let all men know the book stands yet uncensured, and the man lives
still unpunished, nay unreproved, or rather commended and rewarded for it:
therefore this cannot be called an obscure or private fact, but may properly be
held the fact of the Romish Church or State.

A DISCOVRSE OF THE LADIES OF HALL AND SICHEM, IN WAY OF PREface: showing
particularly the occasion of this new Gospel.
THe blessed Mother of our Lord, as the Church in all ages has done, so does
ours, willingly honor, as the most blessed of all Saints, yet as a creature,
and as one saved by her son, that Savior in whom her spirit rejoiced: Luke 2
we know and acknowledge that not she but the holy ghost has said that all
generations shall call her Luke
blessed: Yet we must confess, we are of that fathers religion, who said,
August lib. de virginit

^elicior partus spiritualis quam carnalis beatior enim Maria fuit concipiend.
Christum fide qua^ carne materna enim propinquitas nihil ei profuisset nisi
felicius chritum cord qua^ carne gestasset


her spiritual bearing of Christ was happier then her carnal, and her self
more blessed by conceiving Christ in her heart then in her womb, and by
believing in him then by bearing him, for her bearing him in her body would not
have saved her soul, if she had not more happily borne him in her heart. And
in another place, Idem inde felix quia verbum dei cu stodivit non quia in illa
verbum caro factum est. Papists themselves cannot deny but our men do (out of
this case) speak and write most reverently of the blessed virgin as namly,
Luther Oecolampadius Brentius spangenbergius vrb Rheg^s Bucer Bullinger.

All this is confessed by Coccius the great Papist, in his thesaure cathelico.

To. 1. Li. 3. 21. 5. p. 300.


she was happy and blessed, not because in her the word was made flesh, but
because she heard the word of God and kept it.

This her blessedness, far be it from us to impeach: and who would not yield
her all blessedness and honor that a creature may have, of whom God vouchsafed
to take the flesh of man? And if any of our Religion has given any words of
her, that may give the least blemish to her blessed state, it was not done in
any the least contempt of her, but in the zeal they bare to the honor of
their Savior, whom they held dishonored by the unequal co^paring of her with
him: for what will not a Christian man's zeal cause him to do, when he sees
his God dishonored? who would have thought that Moses would have cast so
carelessly out of his hands, so precious a jewel as were the two Tables written
with the finger of God? and yet when he heard the name of the Lord blasphemed,
he forgot himself and them, and as though he remembered none but God, he threw
them away and brake them in pieces.

if Moses his zeal makes his hastines excusable then no reason to condemn
them whose zeal gave passage to their passions, and caused them for the honor
of the Creator to forget the privilege of a Creature: and I dare say there
never was learned man of our profession that presumed to touch the very skirt
of the garment of her glory, unless they saw her set in comparison with God or
Jesus Christ, which seeing the Romish Church dare offer to do, thereby
ecclipsing the glory of Gods mercy and the worthynesse of Christ's satisfaction,
Bonauenture himself said, that we must take heed least we so far advance the
glory of the mother that we diminish the glory of the son.
we hold it our duties to be zealous for the glory of our God, and to preserve
as far as in us lies the prorogatiues of our Savior, if it be said that
they match her not with God or Christ. I answer they do, and that in such a
measure, as we dare pronounce her or any Angel accursed that should either
arrogate or accept of that which the Romish religion ascribes unto her. Too
good evidence hereof has been seen in all ages for these 200. years last
past, wherein they have fallen from honoring her as a Saint, to magnify her as
a Mediator; to pray to her as to a God, to trust in her as in a Savior: Many
perticulars have been specified by many of our writers which by the
adversaries could never be denied (they are so evident) and yet were they
neither recanted nor removed, Reinoldus de Idolatria. Catalogus testium
veritaetis. Perkins, of the Idolatrye of the last times.
but contrariwise they have proceeded from evil to worse, till their blasphemy
have even peirced the heavens and touched the Crown of the Almighty, and
confronted the wounds, merrits and blood of our Savior. Particular instances
hereof are many, which may be collected out of the Authors of late years,
part whereof shall if God permit be perticularized in this Treatise.

But above all there is one, which as it is the latest, so is it the fowlest,
and wherein Popish blasphemye is at the height, as now it gives hope to all
Christian men that their prayers are heard, her end is at hand, Revel.
and that her iniquity is come up before God. And there remains nothing but
the revenging hand of God to be stretched out upon her. We have it not from
the report of merchants, from the letters of the posts, nor from the
Intelligence of Ambassadors, for then our adversaries might suspect it, Nor
from the report or writings of our own men, for then let the world not believe
us: but we have it from the fountain it self even from the Record wherein it
is written, with the Authors hand: and surely if the evidence were not beyond
exception, our selves would not believe it of them, though they be our enemies.
Thus stands the case.

Amongst the late devices that Romish pollicye has forged to uphold their
hierarchye, a principal is, their art of Miracles, which they pretend to have
so ordinarye, In 80. the Pope lost all England Scotland, Ireland, Denmark,
Sweden and a great part of Germany, France, Switzerland, Peland, and Hungary.
that in many Churches they have more miracles then sermons: but alas daily
experience shows that they be lyinge Wonders and no true miracles. Now
because such tricks are most effectual to delude the common people, and that
they find themselves and their cause to have lost much of late in many parts
of Christendom, therefore to recover themselves and to gain credit to their
forlorn cause, they have most busily applied this point of late, and have by
the craft of Machiauelian Jesuits (as Watson their brother Priest often styles
them) so far prevailed, In their quodlibets often.
that there scarce passes a month wherein some new Image of our Lady is not
found, or some strange miracle and wonders heard of.

Two years ago they caused a storye to be written and published wherein they
blush not to make their people believe, that more miracles, See the book
called Iusti^^iptii diua. virgo Hallensis.
and greater then Christ did, have been and are daily done at Hall (a town in
the borders of Brabant and Henault) by the virgin Mary at a picture of hers in
a Chapel there: and this is set out by no vulgar or triuiall fellow, but by
that famous Apostat Lipsius, that the tale may carry the more credit: and the
miracles are not of ordinary but of the highest nature: for healing of
fre^sie^, fevers, co^uulsions, is nothing, nay: ^airus daughter.
sight is given to the blind, and whereas Christ raised but 3 from the dead
(that we know of) our Lady of Hall (says Lipsius) gave life to 7 at least that
were dead: Lo here how far short Christ himself is of his mother: Omnia
quafecit Christus fecit Franc^scus plura quam fecit Christus fecit Franciscus.
lib. conformit^tum beati Francisci.
and now we marvel no more if they have written that St. Francis did all that
Christ did and more then Christ did, seeing the picture of his mother, can do
more then he did.

I say the picture of his mother, because Georgius fabricius, the Popes ce^sor
of books, in his allowance of this legend of Lipsius says, that God gives and
communicates down power to work miracles not only to the virgin Mary and
the Saints, but even to their Images or pictures: behold good reader a worthy
piece of new refined popery, Gods divine power is communicated to the very
pictures of creatures: strange doctri^e of ^opery.
And if a y man object that miracles are not in these days to be expected,
Lipsius has a learned and catholic answer, that now indeed in respect of
Christ, or to auerre his doctrine, or to maintain his honor, they need not,
but the case is otherwise (says he) with Saints, for many do refuse to
worship them, and grudge at the honor that in the Romish Church is given them,
By popish doctrine Christ does more to establishe the worshipping ot Saints
then his own.
and therefore to defend them in this point, and to establish that worship
which they do unto them, God suffers so many miracles to be done even by
their Images: which answer being well considered of, what a kind of doctrine
it contains, I leave to the learned and judicious Reader:

I only say, that if this be true, then how sorteth it with the very body and
current of his story, by which no man can deny, but it is apparent that most of
the miracles which he specifieth, were done almost 200. years ago, namely
betwixt the years 1400. and 1500. long before Luther began to preach, and as
they say before our Religion was in the world, and consequently before the
worshipping of Saints was withstood, therefore it follows; that miracles were
ordinary at Saints Images, even then when worshipping of Saints was not denied:
Lipsius might have done well to have reconciled so evident a contradiction.

But what assurance have we for the truth of these miracles? or how know we
that this is an approved picture of our Lady? Lipsius answers that there was
one Sophia daughter to the Landgraue of Hesse, by his Lady Saint Elizabeth: (a
Saint of Pope Gregory the 9. making within four years after her death.)

This Sophia (says he) as it is thought, had certain Images of our Lady,
given her by her mother Elizabeth (was it then but thought so, and must we now
believe it?) one of these she gave to the Nuns of the Nunry at Vilvord, and
that was called our Lady of comfort: 2 more she gave to Madam Machtild, or Maud
her husbands sister, who bestowed them thus: one she gave to Grauesand, another
to Harlem (two towns in Holland) the third, (which it seems stole all the
virtue from both the other) to Hall, a town in Henalt, (and this is that we
now speak of:) and to ad more credit to the story, he tells us that this Lady
Maude was Mother to that Lady Mawde who bare at one birthe 364. children,
which were all borne alive, An old storye but greatly suspected by Erasmus and
other learned men, to be fabulous.
and baptized by a Bishop: So (says Lipsius) this is that image, which now we
worship at Hall: and thus strong a foundation has the story: and now may not
all Caluinists be ashamed to doubt of this storye or to suspect these grounds?

Now therefore surely we must needs believe (else we are unbelieving heretics)
that one was before this Image dispossessed of a devil without any other
means, for so he says, and that ten at least were delivered from present
death by but calling or thinking upon our Lady at Hall, and that seven were
raised from death to life being but laid before the image; and all these within
the space of xx. years, and in one country (so ordinarye a matter is it in
Poperye to raise the dead.) Nay we must believe (or else we are infidels) that
when a faulkener should have been hanged for loosing his Lords faulkon, and
had the rope about his neck, An excellen^ and new foun^ way for faul^ners to
^e their lost ^^kes, never ^ore heard prove this ^sius and ^u wilt have any
Faulkers turn pa^ts.
and did but call to mind the Lady of Hall, forthwith the Hawke came flynge
home again, and light upon the faulkeners shoulder, and so saved his life:
for this is not Lipsius ashamed to report. Which if it be true, then we shall
less wonder hereafter at that in the legende, where it is reported how a
Parrat having got abroad out of her cage and sporting her self in the air,
was by and by espied by a hawke, who being ready to seize upon her, Instantly
the Parrat seeing herself in danger to be surprised, cried out S. Thomas a
Becket save me: and presently the hawke fell down dead and the Parrat was
delivered.

^ee the book ^alled, Liber ^onformitatum ^. Francise^. ^f any impres^ion.
As also those miracles of S. Francis so far beyond Christ's or his Apostles,
that he tamed wild beasts, that he preached unto a Wolf, and converted him
from his cruelty, and calling him by the name of his brother Wolf, made the
town of Engubium and him friends, who of long time had been at contention,
and for the assurance of the peace, he made his brother Wolf to give him his
faith in the Market place, before the Magistrates, and afterward the Wolf went
up and down the city, and took his meat from door to door: Lo here you
heretics, here is a Miracle worth something: and if they will not believe me,
look in the holy book of Conformities, See the conformitye of the old
impression and his life in English.
and there you shall find all this and much more: as namely, how the birds
would come flyng, and the beasts flocking about him to hear him preach, and
how the Nightingales and other birds would come and help him to say Mass, and
sing his office, and would answer him verse for verse. Come out ye heretics
(Caluinists and Lutherans) Saint. Francis and his followers challenge you all
to bring out one miracle like these, Sedulius a Popish writer has this la^^
year defended all these.
to approve your religion surely they may, and for ought I see Christ and his
Apostles also, for they never wrought such a miracle to confirm the Gospel. Is
it not then apparent that saint Francis has done more then Christ did?

Oh my dear countrymen (you that name your selves the catholics of England)
if you would but open your eyes and consider of this, I durst make your selves
judges, what divinity this is: if you suspect me, believe me not, look into
the books themselves, and believe your own eyes: if you say unto me that some
such impieties and follies might creep into the old books, 100. or 200.
years ago when the times were not so warye nor suspicious; but the Church
has since reformed such abuses, I answer, I allege most of this out of the
Book of co^formityes, lately corrected and printed in Italye within these 20
years: but if you look into the old one, printed 100 years ago, (wherewith
your forefathers were abused) you shall there find such matter, a for
reverence of the Reader I shame, and for the honor of God I fear to write.

And as for these miracles at our Ladies picture at Hall they were never offered
to the worlds view nor ever came to light till within these 3 years that
Lipsius (a man who durst do any thing but honor Christ) presumed to publish
them, and with foul impiety to write that in these days Christ and his
doctrine, service and religion needs no miracles but the Saints and their
service and worship do stand in need thereof: and as in the infancy of the
Church Christ had his, so in the perfect state of it, Saints and their Images
must have their miracles: See the conformity of the ^olde impressio^ or his
life in English.
but observe withal that (if they say true) more strange and as I may so say,
more Miraculous Miracles are done for the honor of Saints, and approving the
worshipping of them and their Images, then were for the establishing of the
Gospel, the abrogating of the ceremonial law, and for proving Christ to be
the son of God.

Lipsius died a relapsed papist at L^ucin ano.
If Lipsius were living I would not spare to tell him: that this his doctrine
smells strongly of that whereof he has been, (it seems not without cause)
suspected, which because he is dead I will forbear to name.

But some of our English Papists (which are not learned) may doubt whether
there be such a book or no, or if it be not devised by us, and fathered on
them, (for so do their Priests often suggest unto them of such books as they
fear the people will mislike) but if any of their misleaders do so misinforme
them, let them know the book has been twice printed at Antwerpe, and once at
Paris, with allowance of authority in both places, not only of the Censors of
Books, and the Archbishop of the place, but the matter and miracles in the book
are confirmed with the bulls of 2. Popes, These bulls of 2. Popes are in the
end of the book.
one of Pope Nicholas, in the year 1451. the other of Pope Clement the 8.
within these 8. years: and if any should be so unreasonable as to think that
we have forged all this, Posseuine the Jesuit may give him full satisfaction:
who in his Apparatus sacer has published to the world that Lipsius in the
year and at the place aforenamed, Iustus Lipsius vir vere Catholicus inter
complures eruditissimos libros, anno. 604 edidit librum hac praenotatione Iusti
Lipsii diua virgo ^allensis eiusque beneficia and miracula bona fide atque
ordine descripta. Antuerpia apud moretum. Posse. Appa. sa To. 2. in litera I.
page 318
did put out such a work, and gives him spetiall commendation for his labors,
in that and the like for the Catholic cause.

But has not Lipsius recanted, or the Romish Church reformed this since then?
Alas, Lipsius was so far from that, that the year after, very near unto his
death, as though he intended nothing but to heap up wrath against the day of
wrath, he added drunkenness to thirst, as the Prophet says, for heaping sin
upon sin, in stead of reuoking and recanting his former collusio^, he published
another pamphlet, a more ridiculous Legend, and fraught with more
improbabillities and impossibilities then the former. It bears this title:
Iustus Lipsius his history of our Lady of Sichem, or of our Ladies picture, of
the craggy-rocke or sharp hill, Iusti lipsii diua virgo Aspricollis.
and of her new miracles and benefits: at Antwerpe. 1605.

At this Image says he, are wroght miracles of al sorts Apoplexis, Epilepsies,
goutes and all kind of diseases are healed, lame are restored to limbs, blind
to sight, deaf to their hearing: and all these by heaps, not sildome or
extraordinarily, but yearly monthly, daily: almost 60. are registered by
Lipsius besides many more omitted, and all to be done in 2. or 3. years,
insomuch as if his report be true, God makes miracles far more ordinary for
the honor of Saints and their Images, then he did for confirming the doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles: But what credit has the story of our Lady of
Sichem? even as good as has our Lady of Hall, else let the reader judge.

The tale of the Image of the eragg ye hill.
Near to the little poor (but old) town of Sichem says Lipsius, there is a
mount, barren, rough, and craggy, on one side whereof there is a little
hillocke: on it grows an Oak, and in it or fastened to it, is a lit-Image of
our Lady, which has done great miracles in time past, and was therefore
worshipped of the people there: but how is that proved? thus: above 100 years
ago, a Shepherd found that Image, and put it in his bosom, thinking to carry
it home to worship it, but as he was in these thoughts, he was suddenly
stricken and astonished in his senses, and benu^med in his whole body, insomuch
as he could not stir one foot but stood still like a dead tronk, not knowing
what to think of it, nor how to help himself: his M. wanting both his shepherd
and his sheep, sought them, and found him so standing, who told him the whole
matter: his M. taking the Image, went with great devotion and set it up in the
Oak again, and forthwith the shepherd had his limbs restored, and went and
worshipped it, and so by their reports, all the country heard of it, who came by
heaps and were healed of al diseases, but agues especially, and so it continued
(says he) til within these 20. years, about which time the blessed Image was
stolen or lost no man can tell how. (But is it not strange that if it could do
these miracles, they would let it be lost so carelessly?) well, lost it was: But
what tho? people went as fast then as before, and still as great cures were
there done as when the Image was there: and in want of the Image the people
worshipped the Oak, and why might they not said Lipsius? the holy Image had
hallowed the tree, so that it might lawfully be worshipped: (heholde popish
devotion!) yet says he we worshipped not the tree, but in it the Image, and in
it our Lady, and in her God. Mark good Reader, God gets his worship at last,
though it be at the fourth hand: they tender it to the tree, the tree yeeldes it
to the Image, the Image conueies it to our Lady, and she presents it to God: so
then by popish doctrine and devotion God is served and honored after his
creatures, and so at last gets his own, If they say that the worship is
intended to God, and is not ended but in him: I answer, but were it not better
that the worship were offered immediately from the heart and hands of the
worshipper to God himself, and to pass through no hands, but of his son the
mediator? but this is heresy, let it pass, or else it must pass the fire.

To return to the story: our Lady of Sichem is lost, but what then, must the
poor town loose her traffic and living? (nay rather we will make another, for
that is no hard nor unusual thing in that religion:) and so says he 7. years
after: an honest and devout Alderman of Sichem (perceiving well how his and his
neighbors gains came in, and how the poor town lived) like a good
townesman, made another Image, put it in a box of wood, and fastened the box
to the Oak, that so their Lady might not be lost so carelessly as before.

This new Image thus made, did as many miracles as the other, and why should it
not, for was it not as good as the other? Always remembered that I mean not in
any of these speeches the blessed virgin whom as I hold a blessed Saint in
heaven, so I present her with all the honor that may be given to a creature:
But I mean Lipsius his lady of Sichem, or our lady of Hall.
nay it may be it was more curiously carved and better wrought. Thus it
continued certhine years till at last the Parish Priest perceiving they began
to be well customed, bestowed some cost on their Lady which got them so much,
and built her a little chapel of boords, and there placed her. But still
their custom growing greater, they showed them selves thankful to their
patroness, and as she filled their purses, they sought her honor, and built her
a fair chapel of stone, some 2. years ago, and in that rests the Image,
working miracles every day. But what became of the holy Oak? it was so cut
away by pieces by devout persons, and carried away, that it was in danger of
falling, and a counsel was called in the town what were to be done with it
(as in so great a matter it is requisite) and there, after serious
consideration, it was gravely concluded, that it should be cut up by the
roots, and with much solemnity brought into the town of Sichem, where when it
came, forthwith happy was he that could get a piece of the holy wood, whereof
(says Lipsius, and blusheth not to write it) diverse made them little Images,
and with much piety do worship them: others that were sick of grievous
diseases, shaued it into their drink and drunk it, and so were healed. See
what an excellent religion this is: one Image has begot many, and the first
Image being but fastened to the tree, so sanctified the whole Oak, that every
Image made of the whole tree, should be as good as it self, and every crumme
of the wood should work miracles, as fast as the Image did.

Lo here the history of our Lady of Sichem, or of the sharp hill: and this
lege^d is not Lipsius ashamed to thrust upon the world, for a true and
undoubted story: such are the times we be fallen into, that to set fast the
crown upon the Popes head, truth must stand aside and lies must past for
current without control: and such a cause is Popery as cannot continue in
credit before the people, but by forging a continued succession of lying
wonders, for now we are made believe, that the Virgin Mary has 2. Images
within few miles together which have done more miracles in a few years
bypast, then God himself did in the old, or Christ and his Apostles in the
new testament: Such Idols of indignation does the Romish harlot advance against
the sovereign majesty of God, to provoke him withal: for what is it but an
Idol of indignation, that not a creature only, but the very Image of a
creature should be made pertaker of the divine power and majesty of God?

The time was when Isaiah the Prophet durst say of God, I am the Lord, this is
my name, Esaias 42.28
and my glory I will not give unto another, nor my praise to graven Images: but
how soever that might be tolerable doctrine in those days had he lived in
these, he must have been taught that a part of the glory and praise of God, may
daily be given to graven Images, and yet the glory of God not at all thereby
impeached, but rather augmented: Lo what Idols of indignation and
abominations lie hid under this mystery of iniquity.

Ezech.
And yet good Reader (as God says unto the prophet) turn thee a little and
thou shall see greater abominations then these.

It is yet scarce 3 years ago since the tale of our Lady of Hall, was forged
by some Jesuit, and published by Lipsius, when withal, a fair picture graven
in brass was prefixed upon the first page before the book of our Lady holding
her Son in her arms.

And behold, the Jesuits as though the Mother were a woman and the Son but
an Infant: or as though they had gained mercy by Christ already, and would now
see what they could get by the Mother, began to call in question his merits and
mediation, and the dignity of his wounds and sufferings, and at last pronounce
that his wounds and her paps, his blood and her milk, are either all one, or
else that the milk is better.

And yet before we enter into the particular, let the reader observe, that
though the Image be both of our Lady (as they call her) and of her son Jesus
our Lord, yet notwithstanding the miracles are all ascribed to her and her
picture, and none to Jesus Christ: for the coloring of which impiety, what
they can say I see not, unless they dare affirm that the son will do no
miracles in the presence of his mother, to which end, it may well be noted,
that generally in all places where the mother and the son, the virgin Mary,
and our Lord Jesus be pictured together in their Churches, she is always set
forth as a woman and a mother, and he as a child and infant, either in her
arms or in her hand, that so the common people might have occasion to imagine,
that look what power of ouerruling and commanding the Mother has over her
little child, the same has she over her son Jesus: and that seeing the
son is but an infant in his mothers arms, therefore they might not wonder
why her picture does all the miracles, and his none; for its likely, Christ did
no miracles whilst he was a child: into these superstitious and even
blasphemous conceits do they endeavor to drive their people, not caring what
they derogate from Christ, so they give it to their Saints: Is it not admirable
that still they will make him an infant, still in his mothers arms, still
under her power, and still all miracles must be wrought by her, and at her
picture, as though either he could not, or in his mothers presence would not,
or (at the least) as though she had many enemies, and therefore needed
miracles, and Christ none? But alas who sees not that the Athisme and
profaneness of the world causes even the name and religion of Christ to be
blasphemed, that if miracles might lawfully be expected, we should think them
as needful as ever since the first planting of the Gospel: it is therefore a
strange piece of Popish doctrine, that there is more cause that the virgin Mary
and her picture should have miracles for them, then Christ and his religion.

But yet this, and all other their suspicious and impious speeches and
practices against the honor of Christ and his religion, are in my judgment
inferior, and may all stoop to this new impiety of the Jesuits, whereby the
Mother is compared to the Son, not as being a child, or a man, but as the
Savior and mediator: and the pappes of a Woman equalled with the wounds of our
Lord, and her milk with his blood.

If this were written by Protestants, some might say we might report partially,
or if it were a matter of old, the age might yield suspicion that it were made
worse in the carriage: But when it is a matter of yesterday and comes from
themselves, partiallity it self cannot cavil against it.

And the particular is this Clarus Bonarscius a Jesuit or the Jesuits Patron,
published this present year to the world a volume large enough, in defense of
the whole order of Jesuits, the book bears this title.

CLARI BONARSCII, AMPHITHEATRVM HONORIS.

In quo CALVINISTARVM IN SOCIETATEM IESV, criminationes iugulatae.

Editio altera, libro quarto auctior. PALAEOPOLI ADVATICORVM, Apud ALEXANDRVM
VERHEIDON. 1606.

This volume he erected, as a theater, yea an Amphitheater of Honor, in
defense of the Jesuits, wherein after he had assa^ed with much sleight of wit,
and in a strange style, to wipe away many foul blots, with which that
Atheistical brood has stained the holy name of Jesus, and adorned it self
(for generally that which dishonors God adornes them) and after he had ranged
over all the reformed Churches, and raked up all rotten slanders, and revived
the callumniations that were answered, dead and buried, 40. 50. and 60. years
ago, and rayled upon the living and dead Calvin, Beza, Pareus Stenius,
Tossanus, Faius, and many other holy and learned men, with that bitterness and
virulency as never was before him: yea, moreover after that he had laid high
and horrible imputations upon this whole state, and (like a true Jesuits Impe)
slaundered the whole government, with foul injustice, and monstrous cruelty
in many perticulars, see for these perticulars of our Queen and state. lib.
and had in Jesuitical pride, dared to defile the name and honor of renowned
Queen Elizabeth, (whose memory for ever will be blessed) with words unworthy
the mouth of a man (if he were not a Jesuit:) at last from the defense of
Jesuits, he falls in to defend Lipsius, (a good friend of theirs) and his two
stories of our Lady of Hall, and our Lady of the craggy Rock, and not only
labors to make good all his fancies and fables, but further (to show that a
Jesuit has one trick of impiety beyond all, and is anointed by the devil
with the oil of mischief above al his fellows) adds a number of verses
directed to that picture, which he calls our Lady of Hall, fraught with so
fearful blasphemies against the blood and merits of the Mediator, as no
Christian ears to this day did ever hear, and doubtless no Christian heart can
patiently endure: and certainly if the blessed Virgin Mary, to whose picture
he has consecrated them, may be his Judge, without doubt both he and his
blasphemy will be condemned to hell: Luke.
and she whose soul rejoiced in God her Son and Savior, her soul I say
will rejoice in the just damnation of him who shall match the milk of her a
creature, with the blood of him her Savior: But shall we hear them? no will
some say, let blasphemy rather be buried in the depth of oblivion, darken not
the Sun, defile not the heavens, poison not the air burden not the earth
with it, amaze not the minds, and terrify not the consciences of weak
Christians: and assuredly could I bury it so that it might never live, and
quench it so as it might never flame again, and if my Book were the only
Copy in the world, I would rather choose to cover this shame of the shameless
whore of Babylon, then by discovering it to cause good men's ears to tingle,
and their hearts to tremble: But seeing the strumpet has the whores forehead,
and glories in her own shame, and founded out this blasphemy (as with a
trumpet) in the ears of all Christendom by publishing it in a book which he
calls the great theater of the Jesuits Honor, even bringing so fearful
blasphemy upon the stage, and dare diuulge it in a second impression, least the
world should want it;

Let us therefore crave leave of our Lord Jesus, to discover her shame wherein
she glories, and that we may without impeachment of his honor, repeat so
foul blasphemy, that so the world may both perceive what a religion popery is,
and that we for our parts have no fellowship with such abominable works of
darkness.

The title he gives them is this: Ad Diuam Hallensem, and Puerum Iesum.

THAT IS, To our Lady of Hall, and The Child Jesus.

See first the impiety lurking in this title. She is a Queen or Lady, Jesus a
Child or infant: compare this with holy scriptures, they indeed speak both
of him and her, but of him as God and a Savior, of her as a creature; the
mother only of his humanity (although the mother of him that was God) and
exercising power only over his humanity, and that only during his infancy and
priuatenes, but not after he took upon him the Prophetical office of the
mediator, John. 2.4.
for then he said (in a certain case) woman what have I to do with thee? and
again, being told she was without to speak with him, he answered that he
had more Mothers, tho not in the same, ^ath. 12. V^t.
yet in a better sense: for whosoever did the will of his father, the same
says he is my mother: thus the scripture proceeds to describe him in his
prophetical, and afterward in his priestly office, and leaves him not till at
last he be ascended into heaven, and have taken possession of his kingdom, and
then the scripture leaves him in his glory.

Is all this true? and yet must he now after 1606. years be an infant in his
mothers arms? and for her the holy scriptures speak no more of her, but as of
a creature, a woman, a believing Jew, a holy saint, saved by faith in her
savior Jesus Christ, and so leaves her, with little mention (after Christ was
baptized, and entered his prophetical office) her body to go the way of all
flesh, and her soul to enter into that great glory which Christ had purchased
for her, and all that spiritual kindred of his, whom with his own mouth he
had pronounced more blessed for hearing his word and keeping it, Luke 12
then they could have been by being the mother of his flesh:

And yet now after 1600. years, she must still be a commanding mother, and
must show her authority over him, Monstra te esse Matrem sumat per te preces.

so are the missals, Breuiaries and offices that are reformed.


and he must receive our prayers by her means, and still she must bear him in
her arms, or lead him in her hand, and her picture must work all the
miracles, but his none: and she must be saluted as a Lady, a Queen, a
Goddess, and he as a child: If this be not so, let this Title judge: Ad Diuam
Hallensem, and puerum Iesum. But let us leave the Title, and not stand long at
the gates, but enter this City of confusion.

And now all good Christians hearken with grief of heart to that which I
rather wish you might never have heard; but if your ears tingle, your hair
stand up, and your hearts tremble at the blasphemy following, blame the heart
that indighted it, the hand that wrote it, the Religion that allows it, and
not the pen that discouers it.

Thus then begins the Jesuits Gospel.

Haereo lac inter meditans interque cruore^ inter delicias Vberis et Lateris.
That is: My thoughts are at a stand of Milk and Blood:
delights of breast and side, which yields most good.


HEarken thou blessed Apostle Paul, (if thou in heaven can hear the
blasphemy on earth, 11. Cor. 2.2.
) thou that did preach and write, that thou desiredst to know nothing but
Jesus Christ and him crucified: thou that did teach the Churches only to
know and believe in Christ for salvation: and almost 20 times in thy Epistles
have magnified his Blood, without once mencioning the virgin Mary or her Milk.

Hear and be astonished at this, that some who profess to be thy Disciples or
thy fellows rather, cannot tell whether to choose that blood of the mediator,
or the milk of a woman: At least harken thou blessed spirit of truth, thou
that can and wilt hear, thou that did inspire those holy truths into that
holy Apostle: behold a religion risen up in the world, that dare compare the
blood of that God who was by thee conceived, with the milk of that woman, who
was the mother of his humanity and was saved from hell and damnation by that
blood, and that dare allow her professors to make doubt whether to esteem the
greater delight of their souls her milk or his blood: and we for reproving
this, must be accounted heretics: hear from heaven we beseech thee and Judge
betwixt us.

The blasphemer proceeds.

Et dico si forte oculos ad Vbera tendo
Diua Parens. Ma^mae gaudia posco tuae
Sed dico sideinde oculos ad Vulnera verto
O Jesus Lateris gaudia malo tuae.
That is: And say aloud when I the Teates do see,
O Goddess mother, lend thy Breasts to me!
But thus I beg, when on the wounds I think
O Jesus give me from thy side to drink,


What before he delivered more darkely, now he makes plainer: if any doubt
what milk what blood he meant, he answers our Ladies Milk, and Jesus
Christ his blood: but what, does popery make question whether of these two is
better? is this their holy Catholic Roman faith? If not, let their words be
Judge, I stand musing says he and cannot tell whether to take, milk or blood:
If I look at her paps, then I long for milk, If to his sides, then I would
have blood.

Mark how indifferent a papist is, whether he receive the one or the other: is
not this evil enough? a man would think so, yet hearken what follows, and
we shall hear worse: but let us do it with fear and reverence of that
glorious name, and precious blood which are blasphemed.

Rem scio, prensabo si fas erit vbera dextra
Laeua prensabo vulnera si dabitur.
in English thus, Long have I mused, now know I where to rest,
for with my right hand I will graspe the breast:
(If so I may presume) as for the wounds,
with left I Will catch them, thus my zeal abounds.


Hitherto he doubted, now he is resolved: but such a doubt, and such a
resolution, Christian ears never heard of: he doubted whether were better, the
blood of God, or the Milk of a creature (the devil himself never doubted
hereof) but now what is his resolution, does it make amend^? yes doubtless as
the Pope uses to make Christ amends, when he has dishonored him: I was at a
stand (says he) whether to take, and now I resolve I will have both: both are
so good I will refuse neither, her milk his blood both so precious, both so
powerful, both so virtuous, as I will have both. Both are good, and so good as
hardly can I find difference, but if there be any, it is that the milk is
more excellent, and therefore with my right hand, I will make it sure mine, if
I may be so bold as to touch it, or if it be lawful for a sinners soul to
taste so glorious, so invaluable and divine a liquor as is the Milk of the
Mother: and as for the child it is well for him if he may follow his Mother,
and have the next place to her: therefore if he please to give me leave I will
lay hold with my left hand on his wounds.

O glorious God, the eternal son of the eternal Father, thou blessed Jesus
Christ the stay and comfort of all Christian souls, hear in heaven thine holy
habitation this heinous blasphemy, and judge thy own cause: And if it fall out
that any contagion of sin catch hold on me the writer or any the readers
hereof, by not trembling or not sufficiently detesting such fearful impiety as
this that is past or that that is to come: vouchsafe in mercy to forgive it,
and to wash it away with that most precious blood of thine, whereto all the
creatures in the world are not worthy to be compared:

And though this that is past, be abominable, yet with reverence to thy holy
name and precious blood, give us leave to discover the height of their
iniquity, which still goes forward in more horrible and fearful manner: for
thus singes the Jesuit.

Lac Matris miscere volo cum sanguine nati
Non possum Antidoti nobiliore frui
that is, And of her Milk mixed with his blood I Will make,
The soueraignst Cordial sinful soul can take.


So now Christ Jesus shall have satisfaction, if there were a fault before, for
if he complain that the mother of his flesh, a woman and a creature, have the
righthand when himself and his merits must take the left or none, here they
will make him amends, for that he may have no cause to complain, for want of
place or precedence, her milk and his blood will he mingle both together, and
so make a sovereign compound cordial for his soul. But what? a mixture of
milk and blood, of the blood of God with the milk of a creature? and is now
the blood of the Lamb of God but one of the simples in that cordial Antidote,
that must both restore and preserve the life of man's soul? ye heavens be
astonished at this, so may we well say, for so said the Prophet at a matter of
far less wonder, hearken O Christendom, and al ye people, nations, and
languages to whom the blessed name of Jesus Christ has sounded: that poor
paschall Lamb of the Jews that was but a shadow of our Savior, the sign
and sacrament, and in some sort the means and instrument of the Israelites
temporal preservation, might not, nay needed not to have any thing mingled
with the blood thereof, Exodus. 12.5. etc.
but the blood alone being sprinkled on their doors delivered them from the
stroke of the destroying Angel: this was their passover, and says the Apostle,
Christ our passover is sacrificed for us: 1. Cor. 5.7.
shall this then be true, of their passover, a lamb taken out of the fold and
flock, and only dedicated by Gods institution, and shall not the blood of our
passover the Lamb of God, God and man Jesus Christ (whose Godhead is
consubstantiall and coequall with the father, and his humanity personally and
indiuisibly united to the deity) being sprinkled on our hearts and souls,
suffice to preserve them from the infernal stroke of hell and damnation,
unless it be mingled with the milk of a creature? pardon this blasphemy O
blessed Jesus Christ, if it be not a blasphemy against the holy Ghost, and a
despighting of the spirit of grace: pardon it in as many of them as do not
sin vnpardonably, for thy mercies sake. Amen.

But say (I pray thee) tell us in good earnest, (If so we may presume to call a
Jesuits proctor to his answer) is there not a more sovereign Antidote for a
sinful soul, then a mixture and co^pound of Mary's milk and Christ his blood?
then tell us who can make this mixture? who has the skill sufficient for this
confection? who gives the true dosse? who apointes the quantities, Mithridats
and triacles for the body are not compositions for every conceit, nor matters
for every hand to make, but rather beseeming the skilfullest, and require the
ouerviewing eye of the whole College of Physicians, shall then the heavenly
Antidote of the soul be compounded without a heavenly Physician? say then
(Man) if thou dare stand to thy deeds, who was the Physician that prescribed
and gave thee this receipt, was it God the father, the fountain of holiness
and happiness? himself says no, for thus proclaimed he twice from heaven of
Jesus Christ, This is my well-beloved son in whom I am well pleased: In none
as in him, Math. 3. At his baptism: etc. Math. 17 At his transfiguration.
nay in none, no not in his mother, but in, for, and by him. Thus the father of
heaven has testified that the blood of his son is one sufficient and
sovereign simple, for a heavenly Methridate. Now show thou, (and take the Pope
to help thee) where ever he testified so much of her milk: but if no such
thing, nay nothing at all, then he was not the Physician that prescribed this
mixture.

Who then, was it Christ himself the son of God and the son of this woman?
No, for of himself he says, My flesh is (spiritual) meat indeed, John. 6.
and my blood is (heavenly) drink indeed: but of her he says that every true
believing Christian, Matb. 12.4.6.
is his mother (as well as she) in the best sense, and much more then she, had
she been no more but the mother of his flesh: surely then if this be a
lawful mixture, which this papist makes, the son was much to blame to say so
much of his own blood, that it is drink indeed, and that it gives the
drinkers eternal life, etc. and not one word of his mothers milk: Not a word
said I? I recall that, for when once a certain woman hearing him preach, not
for any thing she saw in her, but for the powerful and gracious words, that
came from him, would have had her womb blessed that bare him, Luke. 11.27.28.
and her paps that gave him suck: (the worst whereof is better then her milk)
he instantly answered her, that much more blessed was every man that heard Gods
word and kept it. If no extraordinary blessedness belong to the womb that bare
him (in that respect only, because it bare him carnally) If none to the womb
nor paps, which shall endure for ever, then how much less to the milk that fed
him, which is vanished and shall be no more: If Christ would not match her
womb or paps with a man that feared God, what will he say to them that make
her milk a match for his own blood, the milk being a matter far inferior,
either to womb or paps. Thus they may see that Christ is not a fit Physician
to make this mixture.

What then, was the holy Ghost the Physician that framed this receipt?

No, for he by his divine power, conceived Christ in that holy and miraculous
manner, that Christ was fully without original sin, and therefore his blood
might well be a pure and perfect simple to make the Aqua Caelestis that must
quicken dead souls: let them approve as much of her if they can, they speak
and write that she was conceived without sin original, and have a holy day
for it, but they can not prove it: it is an Article of our faith, and grounded
on plain words of Scipture, Learned Papists hold that the Popes Bulls and the
decree of the counsel of Basil do not conclude it as an article of faith.
that Christ was conceived without sin: and though the whore of Babylon,
affirm as much of her, yet was she yet never so impudent, as to conclude it an
article of the faith. Thus God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, do
all disclaim the composition of this Antidote, as neither prescribed nor
allowed by them.

Who then may be imagined to be this Physician, was it Moses? no, Exodus. 12.
for he allowed nothing to be mingled with the blood of the pascall Lamb: was
it Esaias? no, for he avouches that with his stripes, Esaias. 53
are we healed, and his stripes were not without blood.

Was it Zacharia? Zacha. 9.11.
no for he teaches that the Church is saved by the blood of her covenant,
which is grounded only on the Messiah.

If any other Prophet, let them show him: was it John Baptist: no for he
testified that not the mother of his Lord, but his Lord Jesus Christ was that
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. John* 1.29.


Was it St. Paul? no for he teaches the Romans, that we are justified freely
by his blood: (behold ye Romanists, To. 3.24.25.
there is no milk) and the Ephesians that we have redemption through his blood:
yet there is no milk, Ephesians. 2, 13. Coloss. 1.14.
and the Collossians, that he set us at peace through the blood of his cross
not the milk of her paps: Hebrews 9.12
and the Hebrews that not with any milk, but with his own blood he obtained
eternal redemption for us: to conclude, 13. times at least in his Epistles
does he mention the blood of Christ, to the same purpose, and with the same
honor as before, and not once did he so much as name our Ladies milk: surely
either this was an intolerable omission in Saint Paul, not once to name it,
else, presumptuous impiety in the Papists to match it with blood of the son
of God.

Then who is it, was it St. Peter whom you brag to be the founder, nay the
foundation of your Church and head of your herarchie? No, that blessed Apostle
renounceth it, for he proclaymeth to all the world, 1 Pet. 1.2.
that we are elect through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
1.81.
here is no milk: and as we are elect and sanctified, so redeemed also not
with things corruptible (therefore not with milk) but with the precious blood
of Jesus Christ. Behold ye Jesuits and be ashamed, Peter is all in Blood,
blood, he knows no milk.

There remains but one (for St: James and St. Jude if they name not Christ's
blood, I am much more sure they name no milk: was it St. John the beloved
disciple, to whom Christ committed her, (as his mother, but not his Savior)
no verily, for he is plain, that not the milk of the virgin Mary, 1 John. 1.7.
but the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all our sins: and
that there are three which bear witness on earth, 1 John 5.8.
the spirit, and water, and blood: behold three witnesses on earth of our
sanctification and redemption, and of them blood is one, but milk is none, yea
water is and yet milk is not: surely if the fathers of the society or the
inquisition might be Judges, St. John were sure to be censured to remember
water, and forget milk. But see how St. John and the Jesuits differ, they dare
match and mix her milk with his blood, he will neither mix nor match it so
much as with the water, showing that the very water issuing out of his precious
side, was more of worth and value, then all her milk, even that which fed the
flesh of Christ when he was an infant: Nay, the Apostle has not yet done,
Revel. 1.5.
but tells us that Christ loved us and washed us (not in his mothers milk, but)
in his blood: and that the Robes of the Saints are made white (even white, and
yet not in white milk, but) in the red Blood of the Lamb: Revel. 7.14*
See here, if ever milk had been apt it had been here, if ever it had been
seasonable to have named it, here had been the place: for what should make
white, milk or blood? and yet the whiteness that must clothe the Saints; must
be dyed not in the milk of our Lady, but in the blood of Jesus Christ, if his
beloved and blessed Apostle John, nay if his own holy word may be believed. If
none of all these, was it then her self that prescribed this potion and made
this mixture? no assuredly: They say we hishonor and disgrace her, yet I dare
venture even my soul upon it, that her heart never consented to such a thought,
as to match and mix her milk with his blood: Luke. 1.28.
for seeing the Angel says she was beloved of God, I am sure that no creature
can be beloved of God, that durst offer to match the best thing in him (if it
were his very hearts blood) with the blood of his Son; no his soul would hate
him, his wrath break out upon him and his vengeance pursue him to destruction.
Far therefore was she from so vile a thought: Luke. 1.47.
nay her soul rejoiced in him her Savior, so far was she from making her
self in any part a savior of her self: yea rather, if a Saint in heaven does
hear a blasphemy on earth, then doutlesse that blessed soul of hers, that
magnified her son and rejoiced in him as her Savior, will never cease to cry
and call upon him, to revenge so high impiety: which is so much more heinous,
in as much as they make the mother the dishonorer of the son. And if her
prayers be as powerful with him as their doctrine teaches, assuredly she will
not cease to provoke his justice against them, till she have laid their
tottering kingdom flat on the earth, for erecting up her as an Idol against
her son, and for mixing her milk with his precious blood.

Thus then, if neither God the Father, nor Christ Jesus, nor the Holy Ghost,
nor Moses, nor the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor the blessed Virgin her
self, did any of them prescribe this potion, nor make this mixture: It
follows, that either the Devil was the deviser of it, or else that they
framed it out of their own brains and therefore are to be judged
Mountebankes, and spiritual deceivers, who make show to the world, they have
a confection of miraculous virtue, when indeed it is a perfect poison to all
that take it: for if S. Paul say true, ^ Galath. 5.2.
that if we join circumcision to Christ, Christ shall profit us nothing: then
without all controversy, if we mix the milk of a creature with the blood of
the mediator, that blood of his has lost the virtue, and shall ptofit us
nothing: And thus the Church of Rome has spunne a fair thread, she will
needs have both the son and the mother to be hers, in such a manner, as she
has lost them both, and made them both her enemies, the mother to be her
bitter accuser, and the son to be her angry Judge. But thus has God in
Justice blinded her, that whereas for these 2: or 300. years past, she came to
this height of blasphemous devotion, as to trust more the piety of the Mother,
then the merrits of the son, and often to appeal from him to her.

This is ord^nary in many otheir books especially Bernardine de Bu^ to his
mariale^ and reuelationes Brigere, and others.
Now at last by this dealing they have taken the direct course to turn her
against them also, and to make her curse and abhor them and their superstition,
who dare make her name and her milk to be the dishonourers of her son, her
Savior, and his precious blood.

Thus we have heard and seen the strangest piece of physic, and most
unequal mixture that yet was ever heard of, The blood of God, and milk of a
woman are mixed to make a cordial potion, But now what will this potion do,
what is the operation of it, hearken to the Mountebankes proclamation, and he
will tell you. Thus he cries, Vulnera restituent turpe^ vlceribus mendicum,
Testa cui saniem reddere sola potest:
Vbera reficient Ismaelem sitientem
Quem Sara non patitur, quem neque nutrit Agar
illa mihi ad Pestem procul and procul expu^ge^da^
Ista mihi ad lo^gas eualitura febres.


That is, These wounds the sores do cleanse and cure full well,
Which none can dress but scrape the^ with a shell
These breasts the fainting Ismael well would cherish
Who^ Sara would not, and Hagar could not norish
The first from me expels all pestilence,
The second drives all lingering fevers hence.


Now he tells us what his physic will do, and that perticularly in both his
simples, the blood and the milk: and as for the one of them that is the blood
and wounds of the mediator, if he had ascribed much more unto them, he might
have past with praise (for us) for he cannot sufficiently extol the merit and
virtue of them, but as for the other, that is the milk of a woman, (tho it be
the blessed virgin) or a confection of both, there he shows himself both
impious in making such a mixture, as also a vain deceiuer, proclayming great
and sovereign power in that which is nothing worth; for I say again, if it be
true that to him that joins circumsision to Christ, Christ is no Savior:
then we dare boldly say to him that joins a creatures milk in equallity with
Christ's blood, Galath. 5.
that blood of Christ is of no virtue: for circumsision is of the fathers, nay
it was Gods own ordination. Genes. 17,
But her milk is merely apart (and no essential part) of her body, which is
a creature, and as for the mixture of it with his blood, it is an impious
device of profane pollititians, not derogating from the dignity, but eue^
quite abollishing the glory of the mediator: then if his passion may not be
joined with circumsision, may his blood be mixed with her milk? But what is it
that he proclaymeth vulnera restituent, etc. Christ's wounds will restore and
heal the spiritual sores of a sinful Lazar, we believe it will, they will do
so and much more; yet not for his sake that says so, for we know that devils
themselves for a vantage would bear witness to Christ. But for his sake that
said, Math. 8.29.
He was wounded for our transgressions, He was broken for our iniquities, Esaias.
53.
the chastisement of our peace was upon Him, and with His Stripes are we
healed: and for his own sake especially, who said it and did it, I lay down
my life for my Sheep. Thus he has said well and truly of the wounds; John. 10.
but the wounds of Christ will not serve his turn: He therefore adds.

Vbera reficient etc. The Pappes will quench and refresh thirsty souls. And
will they so? who taught you that Divinity? will a creatures paps quench and
satisfy that soul that hungreth and thirsts after righteousness? Say ye
children of iniquity, have you not read Esaias the Prophet, who tells us He was
despised, He was afflicted, Esaias 53.
He was broken, He was plagued, and all for us: His stripes healed us, and not
a word of her nor her Milk, but al of him, his stripes and his wounds: what
will ye say, wanted he knowledge of her worthiness? or devotion to her
deserts? Can ye say the first without blasphemye to God, or the second without
injury to the Prophet? could it be he knew not her who knew her son, Indeed
the Papists have taught so in former times so says their maraile
could he foresee him and not her? or could any such mystery be kept from him
who spoke and wrote, as he was inspired by Gods spirit? and to conclude, was it
not he that says, Behold a virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son,
even Emanuell Jesus Christ? so that it is plain as the Prophet knew a Messiah
should come and should save his people by dying for them; so also he foresaw
and knew he should be borne of a virgin: If the^ the prophet had knowledge of
her, dare ye say he wanted due devotion? and yet one of these you must say, and
for want of one of these you must condemn him, who names none but Christ, or
else your selves, who dare mix her milk with his blood.

But is this all? No, Illa mihi ad pestem --
Ista mihi ad febres --


One can heal spirtuall pestilence, the other spiritual fevers; see what
difference there is by their religion, betwixt her milk and his blood: are not
these men great and devout honorers of Christ, and his suffering that can find
other helps to heal their souls besides his blood? But if it be thus that
both can heal so well, how comes it to pass they have so many sick souls in
popery, even sick of all spiritual diseases, espetially seeing by their own
doctrine and daily practice, it is apparent they can neither want the one nor
the other of these 2. simples: for first they say they make Christ's blood every
day, then they have blood at hand continually: If they say that the laytye may
not have that, but only their Priests (who indeed drink it up all) yet then
they may take their Ladies milk whereof (if themselves say true) they have so
much in several places, as some that lived 100. years ago do write, Erasmus
and others have spoken more plainly and fully then I d^
that in those days, it was more then a woman upon one child can give out,
though the child sucked none at all: If that that is kept, and showed, and
worshipped in so many Cities of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, be not her
milk, then where is the truth and honesty of that religion, so to deceive the
world? if it be then, why are their souls so full of spiritual diseases? why
are they not healed seeing this Jesuit teaches that it will heal as well as
Christ's blood? as well as Christ's blood will some say, why do you them that
wrong* they are never so wicked to speak such blasphemy. No? then judge by that
which follows.

Ira vomit fla^mas, fumatque libidinis Aetna?
Suffocare queo Sanguine, Lacte queo,
Liuor inexpleta rubigine saeuit in artus?
Detergere queo Lacte cruore queo.
Vanus honos me perpetua prurigene te^tat?
Exaturare queo Sanguine, lacte queo.
That is: Let Ire belch fire and lust like Etna flame,
Choose either milk or blood, both quench the same
Let Enuies rust canker my heart about,
This milk that blood, either will fetch it out.
Or do vainglorious passions stuff me still,
Either with milk or Blood the same I Will kill.


Here judge and spare not (without all partiallity,) whether that I said be
not true, that her milk will heal as well as Christ's blood, and this they
affirm, not in general terms but in plain perticulers: if says he Anger
swell, if Lust inflame me, blood will quench them and so will milk: are there
two stronger passions, two more conquering corruptions, two more raging and
reigning sins then Anger and lust? yet even these two are quenched and
conquered by her milk as well as Christ's blood: hearken ye Children of the
Romish Sinagogue, hearken I say what instruction your father gives you, hear I
pray (but learn it not) a creatures milk will cleanse your souls from sin,
as well as your saviors blood: O spirit of error and blasphemy, whither will thou go? O Romish impiety, when will thou make an end? will thou not cease
till thou have pulled down the fire of Gods fury, from heaven upon thee? O
Babylon we would have healed thee but thou will not be healed, for who can
heal him that will needs kill himself? so who can heal thee, Ierem. 51.9.
whose blasphemy has wounded and yet benu^med thy heart, gone over thy head,
and is ascended up to heaven, and in the presence of God cries vengeance upon
thee; and as for you seduced souls (my dear cou^trymen) you who are deceived
with shows of holiness and devotion, behold here a piece of popish
holiness, and of the doctrine of their devotion, that the sins of the soul
are cleansed and taken away as well by a creatures milk as by Christ his blood!
is this the catholic doctrine they brag so much of? is this the catholic
Church that teaches such divinity? is this the chair of S. Peter, and the
seat that cannot err? If it be so, then what did thou mean thou St. John
Evangelist, to teach that it was Jesus Christ that faithful witness, Revel.
1.5.
that first begotten from the dead, and that Prince of the Kings of the earth
(even he, and not any creature) who has loved us and washed us from our sins
in his blood: sure either must thou recant this doctrine, else they that boast
themselves to be successors of thy brother Peter may be ashamed of theirs, who
tell us that our sins are washed away in her milk as well as by his blood: and
you that are the dutiful and devoted children of that Romish sear, be Judges
even your selves in this case, what can be said heereunto: how can it stand
with scripture, or with the tenor of true catholic faith? or how can it any
way be defended that a creatures milk can quench the fire of sin in the
soul as well as Christ his blood?

Can ye say that here is only ascribed to her and her milk, a derived virtue
from another, and that the original and fundamental power, is only and wholly
in Christ and his blood? if it were so it were less evil (though Christ Jesus
may not, nor will not bestow the prerogatives of his Mediatorship on any
creature) but look and wade over the words again and again, expound them with
any favor that the words may bear, and you shall not see the least
difference.

Suffocare queo Sanguine Lacte queo.
Detergere queo Lacte Cruore queo.
If Lust burn, Anger boil, Envy fret, Vaineglory swell I can help it with
blood, so can I with milk: I can help it with milk, so can I with blood:
there can be no greater equality made betwixt any two things in the world,
then here they make betwixt this Blood and Milk.

Can it be said that the Author is a Poet, and said thus but to make up the
Verse, which otherwise would not have fallen so fitly? surely no, for a young
versifier can soon show how the verses might have run as well as they do, if he
had not purposely labored to sort his verse to his matter, and not the matter
to the verse:

For thus he might have said, Detergere queo sanguine Christ tuo. with very
little alteration.

And so of the rest: but he as truly endeavored to magnify the milk as the
blood, and therefore without any necessity of the verse, gives the same power,
place, and pre-eminence, in every respect to the milk as to the blood: but had
he been as sound and sincere a Christian as he is a good Poet, he might in as
good verses have given all the honor to Christ as he deserves. Therefore (my
dear countrymen) be no longer seduced by a Religion so fraught with Atheism,
blasphemy and impyety: do but look into the Scriptures, Counsels, or Fathers:
yea ask the honestest and learned of your own religion, (or any except
Jesuits or such other like them, who frame a religion to their own purposes.)

If this be tolerable Diuinitye, that the Milk of the Virgin does cleanse
man's soul from sin as well as Christ his blood.

If it be not divinity but blasphemy, no Christian doctrine but impiety, and
yet suffered, yea approved in the Roman Church, both by doctrine and practice;
then return to that truth and holy religion, which out of Gods word, and
according to the purest antiquity is established amongst us: and with heart and
voice join with us to embrace and say Amen, to that holy doctrine of blessed
St. John, who says, it is Jesus Christ that loved us, and washed us from our
sins by his blood, to him be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

This was his religion, this is ours; oh that it were yours also! he sucked
this divinity out of that blessed breast of Gods son, whereon he leaned: and
if he had sucked thence this divinity of the Jesuits, that the virgin Mary
washed us from our sins by her milk, surely he would never have concealed it
from us, nor have deprived her of the honor, nor us of the comfort that
thereby might accrewe both to her and us: for he was her son by her own
adoption, yea her son by the gift and nomination of her son and savior,
yea her son in love, duty, and all respectiuenesse could he then, or would he
in any sort obscure her due glory? would he give too much to her son, and too
little to her? would he give all that to her son, which in part was hers?
can this, may this, or dare this be immagined by any Jesuit? If not, then how
dare they extend their devotion beyond his, and ascribe that to her which he
never did, yea that to her, which he appropriates to Jesus Christ?

If they think that Peter had more devotion then John, 1. Pet, 2.24.
hearken then what he says: Jesus Christ his own self bare our sins in his
body on the tree: let the words be pondered, Jesus Christ says he bare our
sins: true (say they) but so did the virgin Mary also, No (says Peter) he
himself, his own self bare them, yea in his body, he bare them in his body:
(say they) that is true, but he bears them in his mystical body, in his
members, much more therefore in his mother, which is more then many members of
his body; nay says St: Peter, he bare our sins his own self in his body:
but what body? even that body that was on the tree: therefore if St: Peter
preach true divinity, then is this doctrine of your Teachers heinous blasphemy.

All that may be imagined for their defense at the best is this, that all this
is but poetical, and hyperbolicall, or proceeds from the passion and height
of devotion: but that in truth and earnest he ascribes all to Christ, and to
his blood, makes his prayer to him, and puts the confidence of his heart in him
alone: but least any man should have the least suspicion of him this way, or
think so good a thought of him, he deals yet more plainly and to prevent all
such thoughts and objections, he makes his prayer both to the mother and the
son, without any difference in the world, to the one for her milk, to the
other for his blood: for thus he says.

Ergo par ens et nate meis ad vertite votis,
Lac peto depereo sanguinem vtru^que volo
That is: Mother and Son give ear to what I crave,
I beg this milk, that blood, and both would have.


Here is plain dealing, it is not the Son and his blood that will serve his
turn, he must also have the mother and her milk, is not this good catholic
doctrine and devotion? but further is it not strange to see how he marshalls
them in the order of his judgment and affection? he prays to the mother and
the son; but first to the mother, he will have both milk and blood, but
first milk: thus Mary has the precedence of Christ, and her milk of his
blood: But you will say it is not that he so esteems them in his judgment,
but only for the necessity of the verse: the answer is that a grammar
scholar, can soon show how the verse is as good, and give Christ his
precedence, as it is doing him this wrong: Ergo Nate parensque meis aduertite
votis,

But he still keeping Christ in wardship and under age, held it not fit that he
should have the place before his mother only, and therefore without all
necessity even wittingly and wilfully, he puts Christ in the second place. But
now let us hasten to an end of this (if it be not endless and bottomless)
impiety.

Upon these fearful premises thus he proceeds, Paruule maternis medius qui
ludis in vlnis
et tua iam comples vbera, iam vacuas:
Quid me respectas obliqua tue^tibus hirquis
Roboris in Coelum nil habet inuidia.
Saepe quidem dixti, noxis offensus iniquis,
Tune meas ma^mas, Improbe, tune meas?
Nolo tuas o nolo tuas puer auree ma^mas:
Non sum tam duri, ta^ grauis oris homo:
sed ta^tu^ lateris pluat vnica and vnica stilla:
Et saltem a dextrae vulnere gutta pluat.
Si nihil e dextra visimpluere, implue laeua:
Si nihil e laeua, de pede sanguis eat.
Si tibi non placeo vulnus mihi vulnera da^to
Mercedem danto vulnera, si placeo.


In English thus, Youngling that in thy mothers arms art playing,
Sucking her breast sometimes and sometimes staying,
Why do thou view me with that look of scorn
Its forceles envy that against thee is borne.
Often have thou said, being angry at my sin,
Dare thou desire the teats my food lies in?
I will not, oh I dare not (noble child)
Duty from me is not so far exilde:
But one, even one poor drop I do implore,
from thy right hand or side I ask no more.
If neither: from thy left hand let one fall,
nay from thy foot rather then none at all.
do thou dislike me? let thy wounds me wound,
But pay my due, if I in grace be found.


Now from blasphemy he proceeds to plain Atheism, not fearing to expose the
greatest mysteries of Christian faith, and even our blessed Savior himself, to
the ridiculous and scornful contempt of profane men: Speaking unto Christ,
God coaequall with the father, and whose very humanity reigns now in glory at
Gods right hand, as to a seely infant in his mothers arms: and to him whose
very humanity is fed with the glorious presence and contemplation of the
deity, as to a poor child sucking his mothers breasts: such conceits are
common, and such words and writings rife with them, of our blessed Savior, who
never speak of the Virgin Mary, but with the title of Queen of heaven, Lady
of Angels, the gate of Paradise, the fountain of mercy, or some such other
titles, fitting none but him that is God, or at the least she is always a
commanding Mother, and he an infant governed and an obedient child: But let
us consider his words a little better. Paruule etc. youngling (says he) thou
pretty babe, that playest in thy mothers arms, and sometimes suckes her
breasts till they be empty, and again stayest till they be full. etc. Is this
good and sound Divinity, that Christ our Redeemer is now this present year, at
Halla in Brabant, an Infant playing in his Mothers arms, and sucking her
breasts?

If it be so, then sure St. Paul was much to blame to teach us, that even the
man Jesus Christ, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sits for
ever (not in his mothers arms, but) at his Fathers right hand: and what doing?
not playing in her arms, nor sucking her breasts, but there he ever lives to
make intercession for us. Intercession! to whom? not to her in whose arms
they will make him play, but to him, at whose right hand he sits for
evermore.

And much more to blame St Peter, who (not foreseeing, it seems what doctrine
his pretended successor would teach after him) teaches us that Jesus Christ is
at Gods right hand, gone into heaven, to whom Angels, powers and might are
subject. Are Angels, powers and might subject to him? and must he be subject to
a mortal and humane creature? Nay, is he now an Infant, playing in his mothers
arms, and hanging on her breasts? is not this good Catholic Ro^ish doctrine?
and is not this good pure Romish devotion, to pray to him who is God of glory,
and whose manhood is now at Gods right hand, Angels and powers subject to him,
in such words as these: Thou pretty Child that playest in thy mothers arms,
and hangest at her breasts? Is this a salvation fit for the Son of God, who is
the Son consecrated for ever? the heir of all things, the brightness of Gods
glory, and the engraven form of his person? or is this a Christian like
description of him, who having by himself purged our sins, fitteth at the
right hand of the majesty in the highest places? But this is natural to
Popish religion, to disgrace the mediator they care not how, so that they may
advance some creatures, and magnify their own devises: but though they never
so much abuse most of Gods ordinances, and nullify the very Offices of the
Mediator, Yet me thinks they should be a little fearful how they touch the
person it self of the mediator and son of God, and should shrink and shame
to expose the person of Jesus Christ, to the base conceit of the ungodly: for
what can the carnal man, much more the Atheist, the Turk, and the Jew
imagine of Christ, when he that is his pretended Vicar suffers his followers to
speak and write of him, and pray to him, as a playing child, and sucking
infant, and to describe him in his behauiours as a very child, greeuing and
crying that any should touch his mothers paps but only himself? alas what
will this religion of Rome do at last? the word of God and Sacraments and other
his holy ordinances they have profaned, the officer of the Mediator have they
nullified, and yet not content: here they labor to make rediculous to all
irreligious men, the very person of Jesus Christ himself: could this be done
by any but them that are the Children of that mother of fornication, that sits
upon the beast full of names of blasphemy? arise O Lord, maintain thine own
cause, deliver thy holy name from that pollution, and thy religion from that
contempt which they bring upon it. To conclude: it may not be amiss here to
observe the opposition betwixt God in his holy scripture, and the Pope in this
his religion.

1. Cor. 5.16.
The Scrpture says, Christ Jesus is no more to be known after the flesh.
Popeay says, Christ is yet to be known and worshipped as a child. Heb. 1.3.
The Scripture says, Christ bears up all things by his mighty word. Popery
says, christ is now borne in his mothers arms. Heb. 9.
The Scripture says, Christ sits for ever at the right hand of God. Popery
says, Christ is playing in his mothers arms. Psalm. 110.
The Scripture says, Christ tarieth at his Fathers right hand, till his
enemies be made his footstool. Popery soith, He is in heaven, till it please
the Pope to allow a picture at Hal or Sichem. 1. Tim. 3.16.
The Scripture says, Without Controuersye great is the mystery of godliness
that Jesus Christ is received up into glory. Popery says, Without
controversy, that it is no such mystery, for Christ is still in his mothers
arms. Luke. 24.
The Scripture says, Christ must suffer and so enter into his glory. Popery
says, Christ after all his sufferings, must again be subject to the
infirmyties of an infant.

Out of all this follows a conclusion of good use: It has been often
objected to the Romish Church, that they have not true Christ left amongst
the^, but an Idol of their own rearing, erected in their own carnal
fancies: now that this is no slander, no cavil, no hybolicall nor figurative
speech, nor an accusation forced upon them against their wills, is apparent by
their own doctrine and practice in this place: for the Christ of God and of
his Church, is God equal to the father, and can do all things himself: the
Christ of the Romish church is a child inferior to his mother and may deny
her nothing. The true Christ, being man grew in stature and wisdom, and being
grown a man, so lived and dyed, rose again and was glorified, and never
decreased: but theirs is now become a child again and a playing infant: the
true Christ sits at the right hand of God his father, theirs is borne in the
arms of Mary his mother.

Hence the conclusion is evident, that therefore the Romish Christ is not the
true christ of God and of the true christian church. This conclusion I
demonstrate thus: the title of these verses is this, To our Lady of Hall, and
the Child Jesus: this child they speak of is either Jesus Christ indeed or
it is not: if not, then they proclaim them selves liars and impostors: if it
be, then my conclusion stands good: for this Jesus, in all the forenamed
respects, and many more, differs from the true Jesus and savior of Christian
men: let them take whether they will, the better is to bad. But now let us see
what is that he says to this child Jesus.

Quid me respectas etc. Why (says he) do thou frown on me (thou pretty
child) art thou angry with me for desiring thy milk? do thou chide me that
I dare presume to ask the milk of thy mothers teates? this is all the cause
he lays of Christ his anger, what should a man say to this? what would a Jew
say, what will an Atheist think of it? surely they will deride and laugh at
that religion that allows it, if our Christ be such a one as is angry at such
a cause: But say I pray thee thou Romish Jesuit, (thou want neither wit nor
learning to give answer) speak thou in jest or earnest? If in Jest, then,
know thou with whom thou iestest? considerest thou that it is Jesus of
Nazareth, the great one of God, he of whose kingdom there shall be no end, he
that is the brightness of Gods glory and the engraven form of his person, he at
whose remembrance the devils tremble, and to whom all knees bow in heaven,
earth, and hell' and dare thou exercise thy wit, and whet thy style, and
practice thy poetical vain upon him? and unto him that now having conquered
sin, death, and hell? sits now at the right hand of Majesty, in the
highest places? dare thou present such a petition as this? O pretty child
do not envy me that I should touch thy mothers paps, with which I perceive
thou will suffer none to play but thy self: oh be not angry that I long for
that which is thine, namely, for the milk of thy mothers teats? did thou
ever find in scriptures or sound antiquity, that any holy man did ever
conceive of him, or speak to him on this fashion? no for its rather asporting
speech fit to be spoken to a playing child, then a salutation fit to be
tendered to the son of God and Savior of the world:

But if thou say thou speakst in earnest according to the truth of religion,
and soundness of divinity, then tell me I pray thee in earnest, is this any
part of christian faith, or is it catholic divinity, that Christ Jesus is
offended with that man that shall desire to touch the Virgin Mary's papps, or
to taste of her milk (not in this regard that its a thing not possible, and
therefore indeed not to be wished by a Christian, but) because they be
peculiarly and propperly his paps and his milk, still as they were when he was
an infant? If this be Romish divinity, alas for the sheep that are fed in such
pastures, and filld with such doctrine: for this is fundame^tally both false
and impious, false, for if it be true that the holy scriptures teach, 1. Cor. 5.
that Jesus Christ is now no more to be known nor conceived of according to
the flesh, that is as a mere and mortal man, but as a glorified man, a
spiritual conqueror of his enemies, and a spiritual head of his Church. If
this I say be true, that he is no longer to be known as a man, as he was upon
earth, then it is false that he is still to be conceived of and spoken unto as
a playing child: Besides it is impious and irreligious, and a step to Atheism
to imagine that Christ our God and Savior, is offended for such an imaginary
toy as this is, to touch his mothers paps, or to desire her milk: and what
enemies of our religion would not loudly laugh at this our Christ whom we so
magnify, that we make him the rest of our souls, to be such a one as he is
here described? namely one that chides him that dare touch his mothers paps,
for so says the verse: Tune meas Mammas improbe tune meas?

That is: Dare thou desire the teates, my food lies in? Alas how shall the
mouths of Turks and Jews be stopped from blaspheming, and saying: Is this
your Christ? is this the glory of christianity? is this he whom you make a
God? are these the sins he is offended withal? Surely no ways can such and
fowler blasphemies be prevented, but that the Christian world publicly
renounce, condemn, and curse, this damned doctrine, as being the private and
impious blasphemye of the Machiuillian Jesuits, but not the Catholic doctrine
of christianity: For we cannot deny but there is a generation of vipers, bred
of the corruption and putrefaction of an old and sinful world; calling
themselves Jesuits, or Priests of the society of Jesus: who as they come
nearest to God in their mouths; so are they in their hearts (if their courses
can discover them) the furthest from him. With these fellows it may be it is a
doctrine or a piece of devotion, that it is a great sin for a man to desire from
Jesus some of his mothers milk: but if they be asked who made this a sin, they
must answer, themselves: if what law? even their own fancies: But as for the
catholic and christian Church, she does renounce it.

But to proceed, is it not strange that a witty and learned Jesuit, should
frame such a speech as this unto Jesus Christ, for thus to begin, Oh blessed
Child why art thou angry at me, and offended with me? often have thou said to me
being angry at my sins, etc. would put a man in hope that some great matter
followed: for upon so good a beginning, would not a man presume that some good
confession of sins should follow? as this, I must confess o Lord I have
sinned in ignorance, in self-love, in security, in hardness of heart, in
incontinency, in malice, in hatred, in covetousness, in omission of my duties,
in commission of evil etc. for these O Lord, and for any of these, thou
might say unto me, thou miserable wretch, how dare thou thus pollute my
name, and as far as in thee lies, crucify me again, by these thy sins? how
dare thou dust and ashes, thus vilify my eternal law, the curse whereof
thou have hereby incurred? how dare thou bear my name, or look me in the
face, whom thou have thus provoked? oh that our ears might have heard a
Jesuit saying thus, and surely in reason a man would have expected some such
conclusion from such a beginning. But why should we look for either reason or
religion from a Jesuit? See Watson the Priest hi^ judgment the Jesuit ^^ten
in his quidlibets.

Costerus in ^chiridio: cap calibatu sa^d:

^cerdos si forcatur aut d^^i co^ucubinam ^eat tamet si ^us sacriligse
ob^tringet raeuius tamen ^ccat si malit ^enirum con^ hat.

^his is also by ^efended both ^retser the Ie^it in his hi^oria ord. Ies. ^d by
Igna^us armandus ^e Jesuit, in ^s Epistles to ^hamier: vid. ^. Iesuiticas. ^r
the points ^ swearing and ^oly days, see ^ollet in his ^structiosa^r dotum:
and ^zorius in his ^stitutiones orales Sixtus five made that a ^int at King
^helops request ^r recompense expressly) of ^is invasion ^f England. ^^88.


(if that be true which their brother Watson the Priest has written of them.)
To have supposed Christ to be angry with him for breaking the morrall law had
been good divinity, and no poetical immagination, but these holy fathers have
no such faults: nay see how innocent Lambs the Jesuits be, that when christ is
most angry with a Jesuit, and rebukes him for sin, he has none to lay to his
charge, nor find any whereof he is guilty, but a little holy presumption, or
rather height of ardent devotion, that he dare touch the papps, and beg the
milk of the virgin Mary: o fearful presumption, o carnal self-love, o
hellish pride, and well beseeming the Jesuitical brood! is not this the
generation that praises it self, and (as Solomon says) is good in his own
eyes? But say in earnest, is this all the fault that thou think christ can
find with thee? then belike there is either no breaches at all of the morrall
law, amongst Jesuits, or else the breaches of Gods law, are less sins
amongst them, then are the breaches of their own devises, and well may it be
so: for he was a Jesuit who taught that a Priest sins less if he keep a
whore, or lie with another man's wife, then if he marry a wife of his own, I
say he was a Jesuit that wrote it, and he was a Jesuit that defended it.

Again, they teach that its a less sin to swear in common talk by the
holy name of God, then it is to eat an egg in lent: for the latter say they is
a mortal sin, the first is but a venial. Again, that he sins no more that
works upon the holy Saboth day then he that works upon the feast day of St.
Didace the Spaniard whom Sixtus made a Saint, not yet 20. years ago: they
whose doctrines these and such others be, no marvel tho they hold that the
breach of a duty of their own devising, is a greater sin then the breach of
the moral law: for so must he hold that wrote this, or else that christ can
find no greater fault in him, but that he durst beg his mothers milk: or else
that Christ would pass by all other faults in comparison of that, let him choose
which of the three does please him best, for one he must needs take, or else
confess that all this while he is but in jest.

I would leave this point, but that my love to you (my dear countrymen, the
papists of England) provoke me to one word more, to you and for your sakes.

Consider I pray you what these men are, who be the Fathers and founders, at
least the guiders and governors of your faith: A generation that knows no
evil by it self, but this that I dare stand to is no evil at all, but of
their own making, a generation against whom Christ has nothing but this
ridiculous allegation which you have heard of: which if it be true, as they are
a society of all the world to be honored, so being false, they are a brood
of hypocrites, of all the world to be detested: Then see how, you are daily
bewitched by their inchauntments, and carried up and down as they please to
lead you: but consider I pray you what will not those men say of themselves to
you in private, which speak thus insolently of themselves in public? what
marvelous, miraculous, and incredible things will not these fellows buz into
the ears of their nouices (whom they endeavor to bind prentises to their
Beelzebub?) who dare offer to publish to the eyes and censure of all the world,
that Christ lays nothing to their charge unless it be an extremity of
devotion, to his blessed mother: O beloved countrymen, be not seduced by such
impostors! let not such vipers eat out your hearts; but discover the hypocrites
and send them home unmasked to hell where they were hatched, for they that dare
thus dally with our Savior, no marvel tho they be so bold with your souls
and your consciences, your children, and your estates and all that belongs you.

Now to go forward, he has told us the great quarrel that Christ has to
him, and the hideous fault for which he chides him, that he offers to touch his
mothers teates, and will needs have some of her milk: but now let us see what
he answers and how he defends himself.

Nolo tuas o nolo tuas puer auree ma^mas.
I will not, oh I dare not, golden child:
Duty from me is not so far exilde:
But one, even one poor drop I do implore,
From thy right hand or side, I ask no more.
To a strange accusation here is a more strange answer: for now the tide of
his blasphemy is almost at the highest: the quarrel he supposed Christ to have
against him, was that he durst presume to touch his mothers paps, or desire to
taste of her milk: a fearful sin doutlesse, yet neither forbidden in the
Law nor the Gospel, but a sin of the Popes making. But what is his answer
hereunto? he plainly pleads not guilty, alleging for himself, that he is
not so bold, so rude, so presumptuous, as to dare to entertain any such
thought, or attempt any such thing, as to touch her sacred paps, or to drink
of that glorious milk: no his ambition reaches not so high, he only prays
to have part of his wounds and blood, that he desires as being a thing of an
inferior nature and not comparable to the other.

O miserable times of ours, that we should live to see that any man's heart
should conceive, any man's tongue utter, especially any man's pen should publish
such horrible blasphemy against the blood and person of our Savior! what, must
the Virgin Mary be first compared, afterward equalled, and is not that enough
unless now she be preferred before, and advanced above Christ? is his blood
inferior to her milk? and is it less presumption to be bold with Christ then
her? whither will Romish religion go at the last, that already comes to this?

But to come to a more particular consideration of the words: the answer that
here the Jesuits makes, contains apparently both absurdity and impiety, and
both in the highest degree: The absurdity appears in the evident
contradiction of himself; for now, as tho he had either forgotten or cared not
what he said before, He denies that which before he spoke almost in every verse:
dare you not now touch her paps, nor taste her milk? then who was it that
before said, I am doutfull whether to take paps or side, milk or blood: If I
look at the paps, I long for milk: if at the wounds, I would have blood:
seeing therefore both are so good, I will have both: I will catch the milk
with my right hand, the blood with my left. Did thou this even now, and now
say thou dare not touch it? Nay, was it not thou that said I will mingle
the milk of the mother with the blood of the Son, and so make a sovereign
co^pound to heal my soul, and now dare thou not touch the milk nor paps?
was it not thy mouth that said, if Anger, Lust, or any sin vex my soul,
blood will help it, and so will milk: therefore mother and Son hear my
request, I must have milk, I will have blood, I will have both? and do thou
now say, oh I will have blood indeed, but I dare not desire milk? was it then
devotion to take it, and taste it, and drink it, and mingle it with Christ's
blood, and apply it to the soul, and is it now presumption to desire it? can
one mouth send out such gross contradictions? but let it pass, for no
absurdity nor contradiction can be so vile as should ever have moved me to have
set pen to paper at this time, (for they are sufficiently discovered already in
these and other points,) but when dishonor and blasphemy is offered to the
blood and person of Jesus Christ, how can a christian hold his peace? for if
that be true which the learned father says, Hieronim.
that in accusation of heresy he would have no man patient, whereas heresy is
but the shame and hurt of the man that holds it? then sure in the case of
blasphemy and impiety, touching the very crown, and striking at the head of
Jesus Christ our lord and redeemer, who can be patient, who can but speak?
neither think that herein I challenge ought to my self above my brethren,
but know contrariwise, that though I only write, who first, or with the first
that discovered it, yet speak I, and write I in the person of many millions
more, who all with one heart and voice detest this Romish impiety.

The impiety that bewrayes it self in this answer is such as goes beyond all
we yet heard, and wherein it seems the blasphemer thought to exceed himself.
That we may the better discover it mark the curre^t of his speech: O Christ
(says he) often have thou being provoked with my sin, rebuked me and said:
dare thou sinful wretch presume to touch my teates or meddle with the milk
that feeds me? he answers, oh no blessed child I dare not, nor I will not
so far presume, I never was so rude, nor so uncivil, as to imagine that I
might touch those precious papps, or taste the blessed milk of thy mother: I
only beg a little of thine own blood, from thy side, thy hand or foot: that
shall content me: what is this we hear? you are content to have Christ's blood,
but as for the virgin Mary's milk thou dare not desire it: what, is her milk
more precious, more dainty, more sacred then the blood of the mediator? Ye
heavens be astonished at this, and all ye creatures of God (in your kinds)
renounce and detest this heinous blasphemy. And you (my poor countrymen) that
are the devoted children of that church, behold here a piece of popish
divinity and devotion, a creatures milk is of more esteem then Christ his
blood: a christian by the power of his ordinary saving faith, may be partaker
of the benefits of Christ's blood, but not of the blessed milk of our Lady. The
blood he may boldly challenge, the milk he scarce may name: in the blood he
may diue and wash his soul, the milk he may not presume to touch: oh new
divinity, for merly it seemed strange that her milk was but compared to his
blood, but when after it was made equal to it, and mingled with it, and held
as fit to heal the soul as it that seemed incredible, till we saw it: then
what is this that now we hear, that her milk is not only comparable nay
equal but even more precious, more sacred, more excellent then the blood of
Jesus Christ: oh miserable religion of popery, whether will thou draw thy
deceived children in the end? what will become of thee and thy followers? If
the devils confessed that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ of God, that is the
only Savior of the world, and the only a^nointed of God, to be the mediator,
and yet for all this are diuelt still and no better: then what are they and
what a religion is that, which makes his blood not so good, so virtuous, so
sovereign, so precious as her milk, and so by consequent will neither let him
be the only nor the principal Savior. Now the same glorious God and Savior
Jesus Christ, whose merrits are debaced, whose person dishonored, and whose
blood little better then trodden under foot, either convert in mercy, or in
justice confound all that shall consent, defend or give countenance to so
fearful a blasphemy: and the same God give you grace poor seduced Englishmen
to relinquish that religion, which is the mother of such monsters as upon this
theater of the Jesuits, are presented unto you: and espetially to detest that
Iesuititical sect, whose honor it is to dishonor Jesus Christ, and who bring
upon the great theater of their honor, the blood of Jesus, so dishonored, as
it yet never was by any sect or profession, Turk or Jew, Atheist, or
heretic, devil or man, since the world began.

But let us see what remains.

Sepae mihi Babylon patera propinat et auro
Ingeminatque meis auribus, euge, bibe,
non faciam, vel si Coelum misce bitur Orco
Non faciam, meretrix impia, non faciam
O sitio tamen, o vocem sitis intercludit:
Nate cruore sitem co^prime, lacte pare^s
Often times does Babylon in gold me proffer,
Delicious drink, and wooes me to her offer:
No, no, though heaven and hell should meet, I Will none
I Will none, ungracious strumpet hence be gone:
But ah I thirst, a drought my breast does smother
Quench me with blood sweet son, with milk good mother.
After the discourse imagined (as we heard before) to be betwixt Christ and
him, containing Christ's accusation and his defense touching the high
presumption of being as bold with his mothers milk as his blood: now
suddenly he turns himself from Christ to Babylon and supposes that Babylon
that spiritual strumpet allures him to her unlawful lusts and vilde
idolatries, and that her temptations have been both frequent and forcible. And
surely herein we easily believe him: for what is spiritual Babylon but the
Kingdom of sin and Satan, of impiety, Idolatry, blasphemy, superstition,
prophanes: and where is that as in Popery, and where to be found so fully as in
the bowels of the Popish state, whom they well know all the world either
clearly condemns, or at least justly suspects to be that spiritual Babylon
so fearfully accursed and condemned in the Revelation. For what City is so
notoriously known to stand upon the notable and famous hills as Rome is? what
City in all the world did reign over all the Kings of the earth, then when
St. John wrote, but only Rome? and the text says (as plainly as can be) that
the woman, the great whore, great Babylon the mother of fornications, is that
great City that reigns over the kings of the earth: and lastly there is no
place, person, state, nor power, in the world, in whom the number of 666 so
fully concurreth, in so many languages, in so many respects, so directly; and
with so little strayning as in the Popes.

I will specify but few for many, the Pope or none but the Pope chalendgeth
to be the Prince of all the clergy in the world, and therefore in these latter
years has called himself universal Bishop, and pastor of Pastors: Now it
falls out that this his pride does proclaim his shame to all the world, for
the number of the beast is in this name, without adding, altering, or any
strayning, as he shall find that will reckon.

DVX. CLerI

500. 5. 10. 100. 50. 1. Total: 669.

Again, the Pope glories in this title and honor, that he is Gods general
Vicar on earth: this is the foundation of all his pretended power and
usurpation: this he and his imps fight for as for their lives.

This his seduced creatures, English Priests and Jesuits, do in England dye
for (excepting some that dyed for horrible treasons) and no marvel, for they
know they loose all if they loose this, and yet the Pope cannot hold it, but
withal he must have the number of the beast engraven in his forehead, so as he
that runs may read it: for put down this title in the latin tongue, (which
is the tongue by him advanced above Greek or Hebrew, wherein he writes his
Letters, gives his laws and his Bulls, and works all his feats) and it
contains the number of the beast, and neither more nor less.

GENERALIS VICARIVS DEI. 50.1. 5.1.100. 1.5. 500. 1. IN TERRIS. 1. 1.

50. 1. 5. 1. 100. 1. 5. 500. 1. 1. 1. total 666.

Thus its clear, that as the Pope will needs be Gods general Vicar on earth,
so he cannot have it, but he must bear the mark and number of the beast. If
any man say he calls not himself Gods Vicar, but Christ's Vicar, I answer
Christ is both God and man, and he holds himself Christ's Vicar, even as
Christ is God, and full little would he thank him that holds him Christ's
Vicar, only as he is a man: But I answer further, that who ever reads his own
decrees and public constitutions, shall easily see that he calls himself
ordinarily the Vicar of God, and suffers others so to style him: and that the
world may see they have not reformed it, Tuccii Tuccii patritii lucensis and
protonet Apostol: comment in cant. lug. 606. 4. In titulo libr^.
the Pope that now is, Paul the 5. has suffered one of his own creatures in a
book dedicated to him, to call him the Vicar of God. Thus he will needs be
Gods vicar, but his pride is well paid for, for as he will be Gods Vicar
against Gods will, so God makes him bear the devils mark, in the number of
the beast against his own will.

If therefore it be so likely that Rome is Babylon, and her doctrines and
deceits, superstitions, and Idolatryes, the fornications of that whore of
Babylon, then we easily believe this to be true, that often times did Babylon
allure him with her entisements, and woo him to her spiritual fornications:
so has she done many more, and preuailes with too many.

But what, with him? No, he will have none: it is well said. Oh that you would do
as well, that is the worst we wish you Jesuits, though you wish us nothing but
fire and gunpowder: oh that you would turn into your selves and see your error
in believing her, and in being deceived with her enchantments, and dronk with
her fornications that you would no longer be the sons of her that is the
mother of abominations least you be also children of abomination: oh that you
would forsake her and discover her skirts, and tear her in pieces as she has
deserved, and then return to be the children of the Church, and servants of
the living God! this is that we wish you from the Lord, whom we also pray that
thou whosoever thou art, that wrote this and all other of thy faction in the
world, may have grace to perform that which here thou promisest.

No no, though heaven and hell should meet I Will none,
I Will none ungracious strumpet, get thee gone.
Well then, if he will have none of Babilons dainties what will he have? for he
says he thirsts, and must have his thirst quenched, but how?

Quench me with blood sweet son, with milk good mother But alas these are
children of Babylon, they will not be healed: for lo he sings his old song
again, he must have blood, he must have milk: lo here the hunger and thirst
of a papist, it is for milk as well as blood: our Savior proclaymeth to the
world, Math 5.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, I would here ask
a reasonable papist, a brief question, whether this righteousness can be
attained by any means, but by the blood of the Mediator: If he think it may,
let him that says so, take time to consider of it, and he will answer
otherwise: But if not (as if they be Christians they must needs answer) then
what a kind of thirst is that, that thirsts for the milk of a creature, as
well as for the blood of the Mediator: But whilst they take time to answer this
question, let us go forward, and trace this Jesuit to his unhappy iourneyes
end.

dic matri meus his frater sitit optima matter
Vi de font tuo promere, deque meo?
Dicnato, meus his frater mi mellee fili,
Captiuus monstra vincula, litron habes
Ergo redemptorem mo^stra te iure vocari
nobilior reliquis si tibi sanguis in est.
Tuq parens monstra matre^ te iure vocari
Vbera si reliquis diuitiora geris.
That is, Say to thy mother see my brothers thirst,
Mother, your milk will ease him at the first:
Say to thy son, behold thy brothers bands,
Sweet son thou haste his ransom in thy hands
Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed,
Thou son if that thy blood excel the rest:
And show thy self justly so stilde indeed,
Thou mother if thy breasts the rest exceed.


Now if you please to observe a little, you shall see a new piece of popish
devotion: his ground already laid is, that he must have milk from the mother:
blood of the son.

But how will he come by them? he has found a ready way, he will make the
son mediator to his mother, and the mother to her son: Christian Religion
has ever taught, that the son is our Mediator to the father: and Popish
religion has long taught that the Mother is a Mediator to her son: But now
they begin to teach, that the son is also a mediator to his mother: what will
it come to in the end? And here observe, that as ever heretofore when there
was any honor in precedence, the mother had the first place: so now when it is
a burden and a duty, the son must have it, but not till then, for so he now
says.

Say to thy mother see thy brothers thirst,
Mother your milk will ease him at the first.
First indeed he intreates the son and then the mother: but what entreats he
him? to be a means: to whom? to his mother: for what? for her milk: so that
upon the matter, her milk is it that is first in his thoughts, its that he
longs for principally, and Christ Jesus shall be preferred to go a message to
his mother, and to entreat for him, that he may have it: as tho he had said, o
Jesus my soul so thirsts for milk, that I cannot be without it: now because
thou have rebuked me for my presumption, in offering to take it as boldly as
thy blood: I have therefore no other way but to entreat thee to be a means to
thy mother, that so by thy mediation and her mercy I may obtain it, therefore
I beseech thee Jesus say to thy mother etc.

Is not Christ honored and well advanced by Popery that makes him mediator to a
woman for her milk, and for the benefits and merrits of it, and that for such
a one as will not be content with the benefits and merits of his own blood
shedding: But behold good reader seriously what divinity here is! A Christian
man in his devotion may (says this Jesuit) desire Jesus Christ to go entreat
his mother for him, and to complain that his poor brothers soul thirsts,
desiring her to quench and comfort him with her milk: what is this we hear?
Is Christ a mediator to a creature? and for something in that creature to
quench the spiritual thirst of the soul? If this be true, then what meant
Christ to say Come unto me all that be weary, Math. 11.
and I will ease you: for if he send them that be thirsty and weary to his
mother to be eased, surely in that word, Christ either spoke too much of
himself, or too little of his Mother.

If Christ held that they might come only to himself, then it appears the
Jesuits religion and his be contrary: If he knew that they might come to her,
as well as him, or to her by him, then what meant he to say Come unto me, and
not rather Come unto her or unto me: what can they, what dare they say? was he
undutiful to his mother? or envied he her dignity? or forgot he her when he
thus spoke? or was he swayed with too much self-love? if none of these without
blasphemy may be imagined, then what may be said, that there were any such
thing due to her, and he knew it not? If this also be impossible, then there
remains but one that he named himself, but excluded not his mother, he bids
come to him, and forbids not to come to her: I answer, first here he bids us
come to himself, let them show where he bids us go to her, if he no where bid
it, it is as good as forbidden: again, he that in one case of truth said, I
and my father are one, would not have spared in this case if it had been true,
to have said I and my mother are one, and he who out of his holy humility, and
knowing the difference of the fathers deity and his own humanity, freely
confessed my father is greater then I, John. 14.
would never have scorned (if it had been true) to have acknowledged, my mother
is as great as I: whereas contrariwise, leaving out her and all creatures in
the world, he says directly, Come unto me: And whereas he came to fulfill all
righteousness: and the fifth commandment we know commands as well reverence to
Parents, as obedience: therefore doubtless he who went hence says the text
and was obedient to them, would also most readily have yielded her this
reverence if it had been due unto her, or if it might lawfully have been given
her: But he knowing the contrary, does in this case pass by her, and commands
Come unto me: If yet they will reply and say he says indeed come to him, but
meaning to send us from himself to her for ease and comfort, who is the Mother
of mercy and of grace: I answer, so indeed is she called in their service
book, Maria matter gratiae ^^ter mi^rec^^^e: t^ nos ab host ^rot^ge, et hora
mortes ^us^^^^. Officium beat^ ^^triae.
but Gods book takes that name to himself only, and gives it to no creature,
therefore let them answer it that give it to her: Again, the ground of this
replication is false, for as he says Come to me, and names no other, so
neither sends he us to her for ease, but says plainly and directly, and I
will ease you. Further, they not only make Christ a mediator to his mother,
and that for spiritual ease and comfort, but they do it in such a fashion, as
they make Christ one that either is not able or not willing to help us
himself: for if he were, then why do they say that he complains to his
mother, that we thirst, and for the ease of our souls, do yield her milk? If
here they were asked this question, I wonder how they would answer it? if
Christ be not willing or not able to ease the thirsty soul, then how is he a
perfect Savior? If he be, then how is it likely that he would send him that
humbles his soul to him for help, to another to be eased, seeing he asks
of him, who said, come unto me all that are weary, does he ask that that
Christ has to give, and is it likely he will deny it? does he ask that that
Christ has not to give, and is it probable that his mother has it? then they
may as well say that she has more grace and mercy, or more power and ability
then Christ himself has: let the^ answer these questions, how they will, here
will be found strange divinity, which we see is curra^t in the Romish Church.

But whilst they prepare their answer, let it please the reader to observe how
contrary the Romish doctrine is to the doctrine of Christ and of the holy
scripture.

John 14 28.
Christ says of himself as man. My father is greater then I

Rom sh doctrine makes him say My Mother is in some respects greater then I.

John. 10.30
Christ says of himself as God I and my Father are one.

Romish doctrine makes him say I and my mother are one.

Math. 11.2
Christ says Come to me all that are weary, I will ease you.

Romish doctrine makes him say Come to me and I will send you to my mother for
ease:

1. Tim. 2.5
The scripture says Christ is the mediator betwixt God and man.

Romish doctrine says Christ is the mediator betwixt man and Mary.

John. 14.6.
The scripture says No man comes to the father but by me.

They make him say: No man comes to my Mother but by me:

John. 15.16
The scripture says Whatsoever you ask my father in my name he will give it
you.

They make him say. Whatsoever you ask my Mother in my name she will give it
you.



These and such like oppositions are common betwixt Christ's Gospel and Romish
divinity, may not this give strong suspicion that their religion is
Antichristian, which in the foundations of it are so repugnant to Christ's, as
these and others which stand confirmed with more authority then yet these do?
well, thus Christ is made a mediator to his mother, now the Jesuit proceeds,
and to make him amends he makes the mother a mediator to him, Say to thy Son
behold my brothers bands.
Sweet Son thou have his ransom in thy hands.


That Christ Jesus has the ransom of sinful souls in his hands is good
divinity, and we heartily embrace it, wishing it were as heartily and truly
(without Equivocation) intended, by this papist: if he and all other papists
do so hold it, we heartily rejoice, but then we desire them to answer to a
few questions.

Who pays this ransom? is it not Christ? who accepts it? is it not God the
father? is it not mercy, grace and love, that either the one will accept it, or
the other pay it? can any pay it but the one? can any take it but the other?
are not the^ they the fou^tains and fathers of mercy, which have done so? if
all these be true, then what a religion have they, who in their liturgies and
daily prayers, call a creature the mother of mercy, and mother of grace, oftener
then either God the father, or Christ the redeemer, or both put together* we
desire some conscionable papist to answer us seriously: was the virgin Mary a
Creator or a creature? if a creature, was she any more then an excellent
creature, set apart for the most excellent use in the world? and was it not in
Gods election to have chosen any other woman, at his own good pleasure to have
been the mother of Christ? and was it not his own free mercy, that he regarded
the low estate of her his handmaid? if this be so, then did she anything in our
salvation, which any woman had not done, if God had taken her to be his mother:
was there any thing in her to move God to choose her, which was not Gods own
gift in her and to her? she may be then a vessel of grace but she can be no
way a fountain of grace: for what had she but she received it: but if (as they
say) she be the fountain of mercy and mother of grace, then she gives but
receives not, as the fountain receives from no other, but has of it self,
and sends out to others: and the mother takes not of her children, but lays
up for them. Now if it be as their liturgy says, it is that she is the mother
of mercy and grace, etc. as above: of grace and mercy, then sure she has the
ransom in her hands: but if it be in Christ's hands, as here they say it is,
then how is she the mother of mercy? hardly would these be reconciled, but that
they have equivocations, reseruations, or destinctions, that will make any
thing seem good enough to serve their turns.

Thus then they have not only made Mary Mediator to Christ, which is common in
their religion, but (which was scarce ever heard of before) they make Christ
their mediator to her, her to him for his blood, but first him to her for her
milk: now to leave this point, observe (in one word) how in these two messages
of mediation, here is no difference, but she that is a creature and saved by
her son, is made to speak to him in the same terms as he to her, and with
no other words or signs of reverence: and he her son and savior, yea God
himself made to speak to her with the same reverence as she does to him: as
though there were no difference betwixt him and her, and as though he being God
and her savior, was as much beholding to her for her milk, as she being a
creature is to him for his blood: Lo what popish devotion is here? now if
they be ashamed of this, then why are they not ashamed of the other? But they
are far from that, for where are the intreatings, the cries, the humble
requests and submissiue beseechings to him for his blood? here be none such:
but contrariwise as though there were no difference in the world, betwixt
either the persons entreating, which are Christ and Mary, or the things desired
which be his blood and her milk, he says to Christ.

Say to thy mother see my brothers thirst,
Mother your milk will help him at the first.
And to her he says, Say to thy son behold thy brothers bands,
Sweet son thou have his ransom in thy hands:


Thus Popery makes of Christ and Mary, one no greater a person then the other,
and of his blood and her milk one, no greater a matter then the other: Christ
with no more reverence to be implored then Mary, his blood with no more
vehemence to be desired, with no more difficulty to be obtained then her milk:
If this doctrine may be defended under pretense of devotion, then will not
there want a color for any blasphemy: But the Jesuit goes forward and says
to Christ.

Ergo redemptorem monstra* etc. Show thy redeeming power to souls oppressed,
Thou son of that thy blood excells the rest.
And show thy self justly so stilde indeed,
Thou mother, if thy breasts the rest exceed.
It may be doubted in whose name he speaks these words, whether in his own,
to both Christ and his mother, or in Christ's name to his mother, and in hers to
him: if in the first, they contain blasphemy, if in the second, absurdity: for
if he suppose the virgin Mary says thus to Christ, Show thy redeeming power to
souls oppressed,
Thou son if that thy blood excel the rest.


It is foully absurd to imagine that she being so dignified as she is (yea
rather as they hold Horatius. T^ sellinus Jesus in histor. lautanae in praf^
almost deified) should make an if, or a question whether Christ's blood excel
the rest or no: and much more absurd is it to make Christ seem to be ignorant
of his mothers power and state how great it is: be it more or less. But if so
be he speak these words himself to the^ both, then behold the heinous injury
done to the precious blood of the mediator. Concerning which this wicked papist
makes as much and equal doubt, whether it excel the blood of other creatures,
as he does: whether the milk of the Vrgin Mary excel the milk of all other
women: let all christian men shrink and tremble at so great a blasphemy, for all the learned Papists in the world may be challe^dged to prove (if they can)
out of Gods word and the grounds of Religion, that she was any more then
another holy woman, (saving this prerogative, that she was his mother acording
to the flesh) or any more then a Saint of God sanctified by the spirit, and
saved by the blood of Jesus christ, whose mother she was in regard of his
flesh: or that her milk had any virtue in the world, but to nourish his body
as does the milk of other women, their children: for was not he a man like
unto us in all things (sin excepted) and if Christ take it no prejudice to
himself, to be like unto men, shall it be a wrong to her to be like to other
women? Nay we dare go further and ask them, if God have vouchsafed once in
the whole new testament, so much as to name the milk of the virgin Mary?
whereas altogether and almost in every chapter, he extolleth the blood of
Christ, and is ever magnifying the virtue, merrits, and efficacy of the same:
if this be so, then what shall we say to that religion and to those men, who
make it as questionable, whether Christ Jesus his blood excel the blood of
other men, as whether the virgin Mary's milk exceed the milk of other women?
is this Romish religion? is this popish divinity? then see what follows. But
it cannot be proved either to reason or to faith that her milk excels other
women's, in any spiritual or corporal virtue or operation: therefore it is not
to be proved that Christ's blood is more precious then other men's: see here my
dear countrymen, how you are misled, see what doctrine you are fed withal by
your teachers! open your eyes and be no longer deceived; offer not this injury
to him that gave his life for you, to make this unequal comparison: If they
will not teach you holy and found divinity, then leave them, and learn from us,
or rather with us from the holy scriptures, that his blood is the price of our
redemption: but as for her milk we know no such thing, since she lived on the
earth: acknowledge with us that it is a fundamental ground of Christian faith
that his blood is more worth then ten worlds: but that her milk is now of any
vallue, can neither be persuaded to reason nor believed by faith: and yet dar^
this malignant sinagogue make that as likely as probable, as certain as the
other: If enemies of Religion take hold here, and say, that therefore the
grounds of our Christianity are uncertain, and so blaspheme the blessed blood
of our Savior, we can say no more but our Church is innocent, our hearts are
free, our hands are clear of it: woe be to them by whom the offense comes.
But now let us see how the Jesuit concludes, and whether his end be any better
then his beginning.

O quando lactabor ab vbere, vulnere pascar!
delitiisque fruar, ma^ma, latusque tuis!
Parce Deus, magno si te clamore fatigem:
non potis imperio, non poti art regi,
Exagitante siti, Patientia perdit habenas
clamores si vis tollere, toll sitim.
Pluris ego clauis: saturasti sanguine clauos
lanceaque erubu^t sanguine tincta tuo.
pluris ego pannis: madueru^t vndique panni
nati a vulneribus, Matris ab vberibus.
In English thus: Ah when shall I with these be satisfied,
when shall I swim in joys of breast and side:
Pardon O God mine eager earnestness,
if I thy laws and reasons bounds transgress,
Where thirst ore-swaies, Patience is thrust away:
stay but my thirst and then my cries will stay,
Better am I then nails, yet did a stream
of thy dear blood wash both the Lance and them:
More worthy I then clouts, yet them a floude
moystned of Mothers milk and of Sons blood.


Now comes to his conclusion, but alas his iniquity is as much at the last as
at the first: for still he persists in his impiety, without repentance, without
remorce, without sorrow or sense of the evil he has done, for still he sings
his old song: O when shall I suck the milk of these breasts, when shall I
drink the blood of these wounds.

His soul thirsts, but for what? for milk and for blood: but first for
milk and then for blood: If this be tolerable divinity, nay if this be holy
devotion, then what did our blessed Savior mean to cry out to all weary and
thirsty souls, If any man thirst let him come unto me and drink: I wish the
Jesuits would tell us what they think, whether he did well or no, to leave out
the Virgin Mary: for if this divinity of theirs be good, then he ought to have
said, If any man thirst let him come to my mother or to me to drink: and
surely if her milk be thus equal in value, price and merit to his blood,
then we do no longer marvel that they teach how the Virgin Mary did rise from
the dead, and was assumed into heaven corporally that as Christ rose and
ascended to apply and make good the merit of his death, so did she also to make
effectual the merit of her milk. But then good Paul how far art thou to
blame, that esteemd all things in the world, doug, and dross, and only that
thou may know the virtue of his resurrection! for then it seems, thou will
give little or nothing to know the virtue of her assumption. Nay it may be thou
art half an heretic, and beleeuest not any such assumption: but if thou
could be taken within the reach of the holy inquisitio^, thou should pay
well for such thy heretical incredulity. If now thou were alive thy better and
more holy brethren the Jesuits, could reprove thee for many indiscreet
passages, and teach thee better divinity then thou seem to know, for whereas
thou durst say, thou esteemdst to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, they can tell thee thou art far short in thy duty, and but cold in
zeal in respect of them, for they stand in doubt whether to esteem more the
blood of his wounds, or the milk of her paps: and whereas thou will give all
to know the virtue of his resurrection, they can but wonder at thy ignorance,
who carest not to know the virtue of her resurrection and ascension also, Be
thou content to know the one, they for their parts will know both: and if thou
be so precise for thy Master, that thou can not be content to say, that he
purges our sins, but must exclude al other, and say, that he by himself
purges our sins: know thou that they dare be so bold as to put out that word
by himself out of the text: and when they read thy Epistles they are half
ashamed to see what a bloody man thou art, for thou art all in blood, blood,
insomuch as twenty times at least thou art still upon blood as though there were
no salvation but by blood, and as though blessed Mary's milk had no merit at
all. It seems that as thou were a persecutor, and delighted in blood before thy
conversion, so thou bears still a bloody mind: but now behold these meek, and
mild and merciful men (the Jesuits,) a generation that loves no cruelty, nor
seeks to shed no blood (as most nations of the world can well bear witness
Witness in England the Powder treason: In France the last Kings death: the
present wars in Sweden and broils in Poland, etc.
) these sweet and gracious fathers being possessed with a better spirit, are
weary of blood and do rather choose and desire milk to quench the spiriuall
thirst of their souls.

If they would utter what their profane hearts think, or discover openly what
they mutter amongst themselves, we should hear them publish even such divinity
as this is: a taste whereof besides the present poems, you shall read anon.

But now for his conclusion, this blaspheming Jesuit dare proceed and turn his
speech to God, and not fearing the commandment that forbids him to take Gods
name in vain, under pain of standing guilty, at the bar of Gods justice, he
dare offer to abuse the name of God, with such a prayer as this.

O Lord thou must pardon me though I cry aloud, for it is not blood will serve
my soul, I long for milk, and am so a thirst, that I may not keep silence:
and why Lord should thou so long keep me a Petitioner in this case? I am
better then the nails, yet they had blood enough: I am not so vilde as
cloutes, yet they wanted neither milk nor blood.

Wat kind of men are these Jesuits, or what a God is their God, to whom they
dare present such a prayer as this? surely they think as basely of him as they
do highly of themselves, or else they never durst thus insult over him, and
thus abuse him, as after he has told him plainly that his blood is drink
indeed, and commanded them that are athirst, to come and drink of that well
of water of life, to come and tell him to his face that their souls thirst for
milk, and they must have it? belike these crawling frogs think that they have
such a God as they may leap and play upon at their pleasure: But O thou that
dwell in heaven laugh the^ to scorn, have them and their wickedness in
derision: and either work them to repentance and visible conversion, or bring
them to vengeance and just confusion.

The Jesuit concludes with a comparison of himself to the nails and lance
that pierced Christ's blessed body, and the clothes that touched him in his
infancy and death: and indeed the first comparison is not much unequal, for
the Jesuits are most like to nails and lances in Christ's body; for seeing the
holy Ghost tells us that wicked men by their sins did and do pierce Christ:
then the Jesuits who by their Atheismes, cruelties, periuries, equivocations,
treasons, have been sharper nails and lances in Christ's body, and greater
dishonourers of his religion, then any other sort of men, (if the voice of all
Christendom, and the testimony of their own brethren be true) then the
Jesuits I say are not unfitly resembled to nails and lances: and indeed they
that are thorns in the eyes, and pricks in the side of all princes and states
where they come: less marvel though they be like the nails and spear in
Christ's body! therefore let the Jesuit please himself in this comparison, as
long as he will, we envy it not.

But for the second, that he is better then the clothes that were about those
two blessed bodies, I say but this: that either the Jesuits are far more holy
then the Prophet Esaias, or else he far more humble in his own eyes then they:
for he professes in his own and the churches name, that they were no better
the^ the filthiest cloute that ever was, even a menstruous cloth. But says the
Jesuit, I am better then the best cloth that ever was, for though we hold that
God has given lasting virtue to his word and sacraments, but none that we know
to rags, or clouts: yet we acknowledge that as far as clothes may one excel
another, those that touched the bodies of our Lord and his mother, are the most
precious, and if we could be sure we had them, we would esteem them above
cloth of gold: we therefore wonder how a man coming before the Lord his God,
dare in his prayer make himself better then those clothes, especially hearing
the Prophet cry before him, O Lord al our righteousness is like a menstruouse
clout. If our best be so filthy, what is our nature, what is our sin? if he
answer that this is but a cavil, for he means that being a man he is therefore
capable of grace and salvation, which the clothes are not, I think so also:
But then why does he envy that milk and blood should touch them? If he mean
the material and real milk and blood that were in the bodies of Christ and
his mother, then he is more then mad, to envy the nails, the lance, the
cloutes, for they did touch them, and yet he cannot, and if he complain that
he may not, we ask him why then did not the Apostles take more careful order
to gather up and preserve that milk and blood, or if they did not, at least
why did they not complain of the want of them, as he does here? surely either
they had too little devotion, or the Jesuits too much superstition.

But if he mean the virtue, merit and efficacy of the blood and milk, then
let him answer us two short questions: First, what spiritual virtue and power
had that milk, what did it work in our salvation, (more then the milk of
another woman could) what did it merit for us? what the blood did we know and
most willingly acknowledge: but what the milk did or can do, if the Jesuits
can tell and teach us, we will not refuse to learn: But supposing that it had
much virtue as the blood (as the Jesuit affirms, but far be it from us once
so to think) then secondly we ask him does he think the nails, lance, and
cloutes were partakers of the virtue and merit of that blood, if he do, let
him show where he received such divinity: if not, then to what end complains
he to God in such a fashion.

Lord I am better then the nails and cloutes, and yet they had blood and milk
enough, but I dye for thirst.

If this be not to take Gods name in vain, and that in a high measure, we
appeal to all Christian men of reasonable judgment.

And thus at last are we come to an end of this Jesuitical Gospel, the
impiety whereof I now remit to the censure of the Christian world:

And for my conclusion, least any should say that this is but one private
Jesuits deed, and therefore may not prejudice the whole society of Jesuits, and
much less the religion of Popery.

To these I answer, the book is allowed and has been twice printed, and
stands approved by Posseuine, amongst good and catholic authors. 2. Show what
Jesuit or other popish doctor has reproved, or what Inquisitor or other popish
magistrate has censured this wickedness. 3. Which is worst of all, It is no
more in effect then others of them have taught or approved, though not in so
open and apparent a fashion: But let any Christian man judge what divinity is
laid down in these points that follow.

1. The Papists have a book called the Mariale, It has been objected unto
them that in that book it is thus said: Solomon says, the name of the Lord is
a strong tower, This has been long ago laid to their charge in Catalogo,
testium veritati^ edit toais 1^08
Prou 18.10. But Solomon knew little of the Virgin Mary let us therefore say,
the name of our lady is a strong tower, let the sinner fly unto her, and he
shall be saved: and again: thou art a sinner, fly then to the name of Mary,
that alone shall serve to heal thee: and again,

The Lord was with Mary, and Mary with the Lord in the same labor and same
work of our redemption for the Mother of mercy helped the father of mercy, in
the work of our salvation: and thereupon was it spoken of the first woman, It
is not good for man to be alone, let us make him a helper: But why then says
God, Esaias 63 I have trodden the wine press alone, and of all people, there was
no man with me: the book answers, It is true Lord that thou say, there
was no man with thee: but there was a woman with thee, which bore all the
wounds in her heart, that thou did bear in thy body.

Lo here a piece of rare divinity! Solomon is blamed for ignorance, that he
knew but little of the Virgin, and in a sort is rebuked for saying the name of
our Lord, and not rather the name of our Lady is a strong tower: and though no
man did, yet a woman (namely Mary) did help Christ to tread the winepresse of
Gods wrath, and was fellow worker with God, in the work of our redemption.

This book stands vnconfuted, uncondemned, unreproved, by the Jesuits or the
Romish Church, till this day, for ought that I can yet find, yet has it been
many years laid to their charge.

2. Again, the Papists have a book, they call our Ladies psalter, Vide
Psalte^ium beat Virgin^s Mariae: ^mpressum cum Psalterio Cutercienfi, Par.
^^rca an. 1520 Extat etiam idem Psalteriu^, ^d verbum. apud Chemnitium, in
Examine council Trident: in part ^. page 149. editi onts franco furt. 1596.
printed at Paris in the year 1520. or thereabouts, wherein every one of the
150. psalms are in whole or in part turned from Dominus to Domina, that is
from God or Christ, to our Lady, as In the first psalm.

Blessed is the man that loves thy name O Virgin Mary, etc.

In the 19 Psalm.

The heavens declare thy glory O Virgin Mary etc.

In the 29 Psalm,

Bring unto our Lady O you mighty, bring unto our Lady worship and honor etc.

In the 51. Psalm,

Have mercy upon me O Lady, thou that art called the Mother of mercy, and
according to the bowels of thy mercyes, cleanse me from all my sins, pour
out thy grace upon me, and take not thy wonted mercy from me, etc.

In the 57 psalm.

Have mercy upon me O Lady, have mercy upon me, for my heart is ready to search
out thy will, and in the shadow of thy wings will I rest etc.

In the 68. psalm.

Let our Lady arise and her enemies shall be scattered, etc.

In the 72 Psalm.

Lord give thy judgment to the King, and thy mercy to our Lady his mother.

In the 94 Psalm.

God is the God of revenge, but thou O Lady the mother of mercy, do bow him
to take pity etc.

In the 96 Psalm.

O sing unto our Lady a new song for she has done maruailous things, etc.

In the 110 Psalm.

The Lord said unto our Lady, Sit thou mother at my right hand etc.

Thus I might go over all the Psalms, but as he began he ends in the last
words of the last Psalm.

Let every thing that has breath praise our Lady.

Now this book stands not only uncontrolled, Gregor. de Va^ in vol, de reb^
fidei controuersis, sect. 5. lib. ^ Idolotria cap. 10. Bernardinus de Bustis,
in Marials part 3. ser. 3.
but rather even defended by the Jesuits, and those of the principal.

3 Again, a famous Friar and well approved amongst them, preached this doctrine
in the pulpit (amongst many other, little better.)

A man may appeal from God himself to the Virgin Mary, If any Man feel
himself agrieued at the justice of God, seeing God has divided his kingdom
with her, for whereas God has Justice and mercy, he has reserved Justice to
himself, to be exercised in this world as it pleases him: but Mercy he has
committed to his mother: If therefore any man find himself agrieued in the
Court of Gods Justice, let him appeal to the Court of mercy, of his mother.

This divinity was so well relisht in the Romish Church, that after he had
preached it, he published it under the Popes own Patronage: and the book was
again printed within these three years: but what say the Jesuits to it, they
testify that this book is a learned and godly book, full of goodness and
piety.

Fourthly, Horatius Tursellinus himself, a Jesuit of good esteem amongst
them, Horatius Turellinus: in Hi^toria virg. lau^tanae in prefat
writes thus,

Almighty God has made the Virgin his mother, as far as he may lawfully,
partaker of his divine power and Majesty.

Now surely if God have made her fellow with him of his divine majesty, less
marvel if Christ have made her fellow in the work of redemption. Posseuinus in
^it H.
And this book written by a Jesuit, has public allowance, and is dedicated
to Cardinal Aldobrandino.

Fifthly, a great Spanish Doctor, and professor of divinity of his order, writes
thus.

John. Chri^ostomus a visi^atione, de vertis domine to 2 ^ib. 2 cap. 2.
We have often seen and heard of very many, who in their extreme dangers have
called upon Mary, and presently were delivered: for often times safety is sooner
obtained by calling upon the name of Mary, then by calling upon the name of
Jesus Christ the son of God.

Posse^inus ^^ apparatu ^icro lit. l
And this book is both dedicated to Pope Clement the 8. and receives public
allowa^ce by the Jesuits: his name is Chrysostom, as tho he were a golden
mouthed speaker: but if this be his doctrine, that her mediation is as
powerful, or rather more then is her sons, it is pity but he should be
called and accounted a leaden mouthed wretch:

By all these and many more that (as the learned know) might easily be
produced, it may appear that this blaspheming Jesuit Bonarscius, in this his
detestable comparison, of her milk with Christ's blood, says no more in effect
then others both of his religion and particular sect, and therefore it may be
justly concluded, this is the doctrine and divinity not of him alone, but of
the Jesuits, and of the popish Church it self, as long as it stands approved
or uncondemned by them: Now then if this be the divinity of the Romish Church.

1. That a Creatures milk may be mingled with Christ's blood in the matter and
merit of our salvation.

2. That it helps and heales spiritual sores of the soul as well as the
blood.

3. That though no man did, yet a woman did help God in the work of our
salvation.

4. That the Psalms may be turned from Lord to Lady.

5. That a man may appeal from God to the Virgin Mary.

6. That God has divided his kingdom with her, keeping Justice to himself,
and surrendering Mercy to her.

7. That God has made her pertaker with himself of his divine power and
Majesty.

8. That a man's prayers are often heard, rather by and through her, then Christ
Jesus.

If these I say be the doctrines of the present Church of Rome, then let the
Christian world be pleased to observe,

1. How far the present Romish Church, is degenerate from the ancient.

2. How great cause we and al Churches of God have to separate from such a
sinagogue.

3. How justly they may be pronounced Antichristian, who thus hainously
disparage the person and office of the Mediator.

4. How untrue it is that by many is suggested that the present religion of
Rome is much reformed and refined at this day: for it is most certain, in the
former times these would have been condemned as blasphemies even in the Romish
Church it self.

And lastly you of this most Honorable and reverend assembly of the church and
Commonwealth of England may here see what cause there is to pronounce the true
Papists Heretics, considering the present Church holds not only these but
many other fundamental errors, both for matter of faith, and of government,
which are perticularized in my Epistle.

And considering that all means have been used, to reclaim and reform her,
but all is in vain, (for she is that Babylon that will not be healed:
wherefore it is our duty to forsake her and leave her to the just hand of God.

Thus shall we follow the counsel of the Prophet in the like case, who says:
we would have healed Babylon but she would not be healed: let us forsake her
and go every man to his own Country, for her Judgment is come up to heaven
and lifted up to the clouds.


