CONSCIENCE WITH THE POWER AND CASES THEREOF. Divided into V. Books.

WRITTEN BY THE GODLY AND Learned, WILLIAM A^, Doctor, and Professor of
Divinity, in the famous University of (...) in Friesland.

TRANSLATED OVT OF LATIN into English, for more public benefit.

Io^* 34. 29. When he gives quietness* who can make trouble? when he hides
(...)* who can behold him? Acts 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to
have always a Conscience void of offense toward God* and toward men.

Jmprinted, Anno MDCXXXIX.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MIGHTY LORDS, THE STAES of Zeland.
I Purpose not (Honorable LORDS) to insinuate my self, or my endeavors into
your Favor, by fine words, and feined commendations of your Virtues. For I do
not think it will be acceptable unto wise me^, who both suspect that Art, and
account it base; Though of my self I am not apt to flatter, yet the very name
of Conscience that is set before this Treatise, charge me to avoid it. Many
indifferent good Books are in the very beginning disgraced by it. I will only
show the true cause, by which I was persuaded (though my name perhaps be more
obscure, then to be known unto you) to set down your Name in the forefront of
this Treatise.

It is reported over all places near hand, that the Doctrine according to
Godliness, is both more Practically Preached by the Pastors, and more put in
practice by the Hearers in your Churches, then yet has been marked in many
others, though they hold the same Doctrine.

That worthy Servant of the Lord, Master WILLIAM TEELING, who was by this
means in great admiration, and famous throughout all the Low Country
Churches, (to say nothing of others, that both have, and do take the same
course) took such painful pains this way, both publicly and privately, by
word and writing, that it may be truly said, The zeal of Gods house has
eaten him up: whereby also (Envy the follower of such a Virtue, being now
overcome) he has obtained that Crown, which God has prepared for those that
have instructed many unto righteousness.

Because I hope this Treatise will more excite to this kind of study, it being
also desired by many, who were not to be neglected. Its fittest it should be
sent, where it may find those running this race, who will be easily put on,
and where others also may take example of that course that is taught here.

This being the true cause of the Dedication, gives me cause to hope, that this
intention and service will not be unacceptable unto you. This only remains
(Noble Lords) The good and great God in Christ, vouchsafe to bless you more
and more, and your Churches, with a true faith, a good Conscience, and perfect
Happiness.

Your Honors most addicted W. Ames.

TO THE READER.
I Gladly call to mind the time, when being young, I heard, worthy Master
PERKINS, so Preach in a great Assembly of Students, that he instructed them
soundly in the Truth, stirred them up effectually to seek after Godliness,
made them fit for the kingdom of God; and by his own example showed them,
what things they should chiefly intend, that they might promote true Religion,
in the power of it, unto Gods glory, and others salvation:

And amongst other things which he Preached profitably, he began at length to
Teach, How with the tongue of the Learned one might speak a word in due season
to him that is weary, out of Esai. 50. 4. by untying and explaining diligently,
CASES OF CONSCIENCE (as they are called.) And the LORD found him so doing like
a faithful Servant. Yet left he many behind him affected with that study; who
by their godly Sermons (through Gods assistance) made it to run, increase,
and be glorified throughout England.

My heart has ever since been so set upon that Study, that I have thought it
worthy to be followed with all care, by all men. Since also (Gods good
providence so disposing it) that I lived out of mine own Country, I did
observe that in diverse Churches, pure both for Doctrine and Order, this
Practical teaching was much wanting, and that this want was one of the chief
causes of the great neglect, or carelessenesse in some duties which nearly
concern Godliness, and a Christian life. My mind was set on, as it were by
violence, to try at least in private, whether I were able to prevail with some
young men that purpose the Ministry, more to apply their minds to this kind
of handling of Divinity; whence no small fruit was to be hoped for. Being
afterward called to a public charge of Teaching in the University, I
esteemed nothing better, or more excellent, then to go before those that were
Students for the Ministry, in this manner of teaching.

This part of Prophecy has hitherto been less practiced in the Schools of
the Prophets, because our Captains were necessarily enforced to fight always
in the front against the enemies to defend the Faith, and to purge the floor
of the Church; So that they could not plant and water the Fields and Vineyards
as they desired; as it uses to fall out in time of hot wars. They thought
with themselves in the mean while (as one of some note writes) If we have that
single and clear eye of the Gospel if in the house of our Heart the candle of
pure Faith be set upon a Candlestick, these small matters might easily be
discussed. But experience has taught at length, that through neglect of this
husbandry, a famine of Godliness has followed in many places, and out of that
famine a grievous spiritual plague; insomuch that the counsel of Nehemiah had
need be practiced; namely, that every man should labor in this work with one
hand, holding in the other a Spear or a Dart, whereby he may repel the
violence of the enemies. The same Experience has likewise taught, that these
small matters (if so be that so necessary things may be so called) are
despised with no less madness, then if one would suffer the fingers and toes
of his hands and feet to be cut off, as some small things, without which he
hoped to walk and use his hands well enough. All things therefore being rightly
weighed, I have taken in hand (God also liking it, as J am persuaded) these
instructions touching the power of Conscience. Not that I hope that any perfect
thing, in this kind, can come from me: (for there are more kinds of things
this way, then that certain answers can be given (by me at least) to every
one) but that I might do something, whereby the unlearned, and such as are
destitute of better help, might somewhat be helped; and that the more learned
might be excited to set forth some more perfect and exact thing. Of which duty
the godly, learned, grave ancient Preachers are properly the Debtors, whose
daily labor it is to deal with the Consciences of men; who through their
experience have learned much better, what those questions are, in which the
Conscience uses most to doubt, and out of what grounds they may be best
unfolded; then can easily be understood by one that lives privately in an
Academicall profession. And indeed, if such things were handled in the
meetings of Preachers, according to the variety of Cases that fall out; and the
more remarkable decisions set down in writing; the children of Israel should
not need to go down to the Philistims (that is, our Sutdents to Popish
Authors) to sharpen every man his Share, his Mattocke, or his Axe, or his
weeding Hook, as it fell out in the extreme necessity of Gods people, 1 Samuel
13. 20.

Furthermore if such as are addicted to the Ministry, were first instructed in
these things, and were seriously tried in them at the Examination, before they
were ordained, one might well hope, to have as well Preachers as Churches, more
according to Gods heart and Christ's, then now we have.

The Papists have labored much this way, to instruct their Confessors: and in
a great deal of earth and dirt of Superstitions, they have some veins of
Silver: out of which, I suppose, I have drawn some things that are not to be
despised. But they are without the life of this Doctrine: and death is in their
pot. The thing it self requires, that by others, other things be taught, and
the same things, after another manner. I have gone about to perform this in
part: and others I make no question, will endeavor it.

I follow here the same method, that I did in my Marrow of Divinity. Of the
second part whereof, the Med^la Theologi^.
three last of these Books are a full Exposition: which perhaps, those did
expect that desired importunatly, as it were by daily reproaches, that the
publishing of this Treatise might be hastened. But (to make an end at length
of my Preface) I will conclude many things in few words, and that in the words
of G. Parisiensis, Concerning these things, many things we have not written for
unskilfulnes, many for other necessary business, many for dullness, many
through fear of being tedious, many more because of our sins, which most of
all hinder both us and others in such things. We doubt not, but we are subject
to the danger of slanderous Backbiters; But by doing what we may, we have given
some fit occasion unto wise men; and we have set forth, not a dry sandy ground
of fruitless Disputations, but a most profitable and healthful place for Wits
to exercise themselves in.

W. AMES.

OF CONSCIENCE, AND THE CASES THEREOF. The First Book.
CHAP. I. The definition of Conscience.
THe Conscience of man (for I do not intend to treat of the Conscience of
Angels) Is a man's judgment of himself, according to the judgment of God of
him. Esai, 5. 3. Judge I pray you between me and my vineyard: 1 Cor. 11. 31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged, etc.

1 I call Conscience Judgment, First, to show that it belongs to the
Understanding, not to the Will. The very name of Conscience shows it to be
so. But this proves it, because all those actions, which in the Scriptures are
attributed to man's Conscience, do properly belong to the reasonable power, or
faculty; though the Will by some act or inclination can both command the
Understanding to judge, and also follow that judgment. This inclination, by
some, is called Conscience; by others, a part of Conscience; but not rightly.

2 Conscience being referred to judgment, it is distinguished from the bare
apprehension of truth. For Conscience does always suppose an assent that is
firm and settled.

3 By the definition of Conscience, it appears that Conscience is not a
contemplative judgment, whereby truth is simply discerned from falsehood: but
a practical judgment, by which, that which a man knows is particularly
applied to that which is either good or evil to him, to the end that it may be
a rule within him to direct his will. Whether Conscience be a Faculty, Habit,
or Act.


Seeing that this name of judgment, is sometimes taken for a power and
faculty, sometimes for an habit, sometimes for an act; this question arises,
to which of all these Conscience is properly.

4 The most grave Divine, William Perkins, who only of our Countrymen has
set forth a peculiar Treatise of Conscience, does place it among Faculties;
and he does so define it, as he puts for the general nature of it a part of
the Understanding, that is to say, as he explaines himself, A natural power
or faculty. He gives this reason of his opinion, namely, because the act of
Accusing, Comforting, Terrifying, etc. cannot be ascribed to the Conscience,
if it self were an act. Put this reason is weak: because in the Scriptures
such kinds of effects are attributed to the thoughts themselves, which
undoubtedly are acts. Romans 2. 15. Their thoughts Accusing one another, or
Excusing. The reason is, because things done, are the effects not only of the
Mover, but also of the motion it self. Besides, Master Perkins makes
Conscience, Understanding, Opinion, Knowledge, Faith, and Prudence, to be of
one kind or sort; but none would define these so, as that they should be taken
for distinct faculties of the soul.

5 Some of the Schoolmen will have Conscience to be an habit: as Scotus,
Bonaventure, Durand. Which though it might be granted of some part; or of the
principles of Conscience: yet it cannot be granted simply of all that which is
signified by the name of Conscience; for the only office of an Habit, as it
is an Habit, is, Inclinare ad prompte agendum, to make one do a thing readily:
but Conscience has other operations, which belong properly to it, as to
Accuse, Comfort, etc.

6 By Judgment therefore, in the definition of Conscience, (I understand most
properly with the best Schoolmen) an act of practical judgment, proceeding
from the Understanding by the power or means of a habit. Iudicium. Noeticum.
Dianoeticum.


7 The acts of judgment are, either a simple apprehension, or a discourse.
Whence it may be asked, to which of these belongs Conscience. Quest.


It belongs to judgment discoursing, because it cannot Answ.
do its act of Accusing, Excusing, Comforting, unless it be through the
means of some third argument, whose force appears only in a Syllogism, by
that which is deduced and concluded out of it.

8 The force and nature of Conscience therefore is contained in such a
Syllogism.

He that lives in sin, shall dye:
I live in sin; Therefore, I shall dye.
Or thus.

Whosoever believes in Christ, shall not dye but live.
I believe in Christ: Therefore, I shall not dye but live.
9 Conscience in regard of the Proposition is called a Light, and a Law; in
regard of the Assumption and conclusion a Witness; but in regard of the
assumption it is most fitly termed an Index, or a Book, and in regard of the
conclusion, most properly a Judge.

10 That which does dictate or give the proposition is called Synteresis, by
the Schoolmen Synderesis. The assumption especially and peculiarly is called
Syneidesis, the conclusion is the Krisis, or Judgment.

11 There be many other Syllogismes which belong to Conscience, as either they
do prove the proposition of such a principal Syllogism, or illustrate the
conclusion it self: but in that Syllogism alone is contained the whole nature
of Conscience. The Proposition treats of the Law; the Assumption of the fact
or state, and the Conclusion of the relation arising from the fact or state, in
regard of that Law; The Conclusion either pronounces one guilty, or gives
spiritual peace and security.

CHAP. II. Of the Synteresis, or storehouse of Principles.
THat Synteresis out of which the proposition of this syllogisine or the Law of
Conscience is taken, is most properly a habit of the understanding, by which
we do assent unto the principles of moral actions, that is, such actions as
are our duty, because God has willed, or commanded them; whence it has the
name in Greek from conserving; for through the goodness of God, the knowledge
of many things which we ought to do or shun, are still conserved in man's
mind, even after his fall.

That exposition of Durand who dreams that the Greek word Synteresis
signifies a Co^lection, is too harsh and absurd.

2 Because this Synteresis is an habit, therefore many do call Conscience, an
habit: but it is only the principle of conscience, neither does it make up any
part of conscience, but only as conscience is in its excercse.

3 This Synteresis is termed a natural habit in respect of the light, whereby
the understanding of man is fitted to give assent unto Natural principles; it
is likewise called an acquired habit, in regard of the Species, or of the
fuller understanding of that whereunto the understanding is naturally enabled,
and can (as it were) understand presently.

4 This Synteresis differs only in respect or apprehension from the Law of
Nature, or from that Law of God, which is naturally written in the hearts of al
men; for the law is the object, and Synteresis is the object apprehended, or
the apprehension of the object.

5 This Synteresis may for a time be hindered from acting, but cannot be utterly
extinguished or lost. Hence it is that no man is so desperately wicked as to be
void of all Conscience.

6 To Synteresis being taken after a large sense, ought to be referred, not
only general conclusions touching right or Law, which are deduced by good
consequence out of natural principles, but likewise all practical truths,
whereunto we give a firm assent, through the revelation we have by faith.

7 From hence arises the distinction of Conscience into that which is
Natural, and that which is Enlightened. Natural Conscience is that which
acknowledges for law the principles of nature, and the conclusions arising
from them. Enlightened is that which does beside those, acknowledge whatsoever
is prescribed in the Scriptures. The Scripture sometimes speaks of this last:
as Romans 6. 3. and sometimes of the other as 1 Cor: 6: 8.

8 From hence it appears that the perfect and only rule of Conscience is the
revealed will of God, whereby a man's duty is both shown and commanded. For
Synteresis in a more large sense consists, partly of moral principles that
are naturally in us, together with their conclusions; and partly, of those
which God besides them has enjoined. But the revealed will of God whereby man
knows his duty, contains both these.

9 Hence it is that the Law of God only does bind What it is that binds the
Conscience.
the Conscience of man. By the Law of God we understand that revealed will of
God, whereof we have made mention: viz. as it does also contain those things
which are commanded in the Gospel.

10 To bind (in this moral sense) is to have such an authority, as the
Conscience ought to submit it self unto: And it were a sin to do any thing
contrary to it.

11 Hence it is, that though men be bound in Conscience by God to observe in
due and just circumstances the laws of men, yet the same laws of men so far
as they are man's laws, do not bind the Conscience.

12 The Conscience is immediately subject to God, Why men's laws do not bind the
Conscience.
and his will, and therefore it cannot submit it self unto any creature
without Idolatry.

13 God only knows the inward workings of the Conscience; he therefore only
can prescribe a law unto it, or bind it by one.

14 God only can punish the Conscience when it sins; he therefore only can
forbid any thing to it.

15 Even a promise (which in it self is sacred) though it be confirmed by an
oath: as it is an act of man does not properly bind the Conscience, for the
former reasons; though men are bound in conscience by God to a strickt and
faithful keeping of them. For as it has been said before of the laws of
men, it may also in some sort be affirmed of all covenants and other
conditions, which being made, a man is bound to keep out of Conscience to God;
as for example, the sick person is bound in Conscience to obey the counsel of
Phisicians for his health: But the receipts prescribed by Phisicians, do not
bind the Conscience. So again, Parents and Children are bound to mutual
duties; he that has received a benefit is bound to show himself thankful,
(and the like may be said of many other things) yet none of these, either
Parent, Benefactor, relation, or benefit, do of themselves bind the
Conscience, but the will of God in them.

CHAP. III. Of the Office of Conscience.
THe office of Conscience, (if we speak with respect to the Synteresis or
Laws of it,) is one in Necessary things; Another in things of middle and
indifferent nature. In necessary things Conscience has two acts. 1 To bind, 2
To enforce to practice.

2 Conscience binds according as it is informed The acts of Conscience above
things necessary.
of the will of God: for in it self it has the power of a will of God, and so
stands in the place of God himself.

3 Gods will as it is understood, or may be understood, binds the Conscience to
assent; As it is acknowledged and received by Conscience, it binds the whole
man to obey and do it presently.

4 Conscience binds a man so straightly that the command of no creature can
free a man from it.

5 Hence man, as he makes Conscience of the will of God commanding him some
duty, is in that regard called a Debtor, Rom: 1 14. a servant, Rom 6. 16. is
said to be bound, Acts 20. 22. constrained, 2. Cor. 5. 14. to have a necessity
laid upon him. 1 Cor. 9. 16. so that he cannot do otherwise. Acts 4. 20.

6 Conscience inforceth to obedience by virtue of this its act of Binding. For
that is to the will an impulsive cause to make it carry it self
conscientiously.

7 This inforcement is signified in the forenamed places and phrases: the
strength and power thereof is declared, Ier. 20. 9. Wherefore I thought from
henceforth not to speak of him, nor to preach any more in his name, but the
word of the Lord, was a very Burning fire in my heart, and in my bones: Amos.
3. 8. The Lion has roared, who will not be afraid? the Lord has spoken who
can but Prophecy? Acts. 17. 16. his spirit was stirred in him.

8 If there be a constant disposition of will in a man consenting to this
instigation of Conscience, they do together make up a Conscience morally good.

9 In Indifferent things the Actions and Duties of The acts of Conscience about
indifferen^ things.
Conscience are likewise two. 1. To discern. 2. To Direct.

10 To Discern is to show and declare the differences The discerning of
Conscience.
of things what is necessary, what is free, what is lawful, and what is
unlawful.

11 To Direct is with regard had to circumstances, The direction of Conscience.
to order lawful actions unto a good end.

12 The ends which are always to be aimed at, even in indifferent things also,
are the Glory of God, the Edifying of our Neighbor, and the Help of our
necessary Actions.

13 The power of this direction is so great, that it makes an action to be
good, which in its own nature is but indifferent; as on the other side, not
only an evil direction, but the want of a good direction, makes the same
action to be bad.

CHAP. IV. Of an erroneous Conscience.
TOuching this doctrine, of the first acts and offices of Conscience, diverse
questions are moved, which being of great weight and moment, for the directing
of our Actions aright throughout our whole life, ought of necessity to be
here expedited, though briefly.

Quest. The first question is, Whether an erroneous Conscience does bind?

Answ. To unfold this question rightly, these five things are briefly to be
opened: 1. What an erroneous Conscience is. 2. About what things it is
conversant. 3. Whence the error of Conscience comes. 4. The general
differences of these errors. 5. The several ways of binding.

1 An erroneous Conscience is either opposed privatiuely Error privat^ve and
positive.
to a good Conscience, so it comprehends every Conscience that judges not
rightly when it ought, even the doubtful and scrupulous Conscience also: or
positiuely, so it signifies only that Conscience, that judges otherwise then
the thing is. This kind of erroneous Conscience, is distinguished from a
doubting and scrupulous Conscience, by the sin assent it gives, though it
erreth in giving it. In this question we speak of a Conscience positiuely
erring.

2 There are some principles so clear, and written in the hearts of all men,
that they cannot err to obey and practice them: such as this is, That God
ought to be loved* Perjurie ought to be eschewed: no man's Conscience can err
in such like things as these, or do them against Conscience. A man cannot love
God against his Conscience, etc. Conscience therefore does err properly about
conclusions that are gathered from such principles.

3 The error of Conscience comes, either because The cause of the error of
Conscience.
that the particular conclusions are not rightly drawn out of the general
principles: Or because those things which God in the Scripture has commanded
us to believe, are not sufficiently understood: Or finally, because the assent
of Faith is not given to those things which ought to be believed, though they
be understood. The cause of this (besides Gods secret judgments) is either
the not considering of those things which ought to be considered, or some evil
disposition, which either keeps the mind from due inquiry, or averts it from
judging rightly.

4 The error of Conscience is either about the Act, ^*
or the rule of it. The error which is about the rule, is either after the
action done, or before it. The error about the rule before the action be done,
consists, Either in that it judges that to be lawful, which is unlawful; Or
in that it judges that to be unlawful, which is lawful; Or in that it
judges that to be bounden duty, which either is unlawful, or but lawful.

5 To bind to a thing, and to bind, are distinguished ^.
by some; Conscience is said to bind to a thing ( Obligare) when its not only
a sin to do any thing against it, but also not to do according to it.
Conscience is said to bind ( Ligare) when one cannot lawfully do a thing,
whilst he makes such a Conscience of it. One shall sin in doing against it,
and sin though he do according to it. The sense and meaning of this
distinction is to be approved; as for the terms of it, let the Authors thereof
answer.

To bind to a thing, ( Obligare) is by some in regard of the object, or thing
bound to, distinguished thus. One is either bound to do according to
Conscience erring, or to lay aside that Conscience. But this distinction is not
exact, because Conscience binds not, but so far as it does dictate, or
declare a thing: now no Conscience while it erreth does declare, that the error
thereof is to be left, Or that it self is not to be regarded, because it is
erroneous.

Others put a difference between that Obligation, whereby one is tied to do
what Conscience commands, and that whereby one is tied not to do the contrary.
But neither is this distinction always good. For if a man's Conscience told him
he might lie to save his life, he must either lie, or of necessity go against
his Conscience.

6 Out of these grounds the question may be thus The Conscience erring binds.
answered: First, conscience, though erroneous, binds always so, that he
that does against it, sins. The reason is, because he that does against
conscience, does against Gods will: though not materially, and truly; yet
formally, and by interpretation: because what the conscience does declare, it
declares as Gods will. As for example.

He that uses a private man contumeliously, taking him for the King, and not
to be a private man, he is interpreted and judged to have done it to the King
himself; so likewise, he that contemns Conscience, contemns God himself;
because that which Conscience does dictate, is supposed to be the will of God.
Hence Why he always sins who goes against his Conscience?
it is that he always sins who does any thing against Conscience: but if
the conscience does not err, but the thing is as erroneous conscience
supposes, then he sins doubly. First, in doing that which is ill in it
self* and secondly, in doing it after an evil manner: evil it is in its own
nature, and evil because of the despising of conscience: but if the conscience
does err, that which it does is not evil, but it does it after an evil
manner; so that the evil is only this, namely, the contempt of Conscience.

7 The error of conscience which is about an action ^rror of Conscience is
sometimes blamlesse: sometimes worthy of blame.
(that is, the error which is about the object or matter, about which an action
ought to be exercised) is either unvoluntary and blameless, or voluntary and
worthy of blame. If it be unvoluntary and blameless, then conscience binds to
do a thing as much, as if it did not err. For example, If a man should verily
believe some thing to be his own, which is an other man's, he may, and ought in
conscience to make use of it as his own. If one do verily believe he is his
Prince, that is in truth a Tyrant; or that he is a lawful Magistrate, who
indeed usurpes the title; ^e is bound to yield due obedience unto him. We have
an example hereof in Iaa^ob that went in to Leah that was none of his wise,
whom he verily thought was his wife Rachel.

8 If the error be voluntary, then it is to be judged of, as an error is which
is of the law or rule.

9 Conscience erring touching the Law after the fact, (in believing that which
it has done well, to be sin; or contrariwise;) has no power to bind in
regard of that action which is past: because binding and obliging have ever a
regard to future actions: and a moral action (as the will it self) is always
guided and informed by a foregoing apprehension, and not by that which follows
after. Hence no action is made better or worse, for that conscience which is
after it. Yet does this conscience so far bind (through occasion of that
which is done) that one cannot lawfully go on to do the like again, so long
as he has such a conscience: viz. That he has sinned (though he has not) in
doing so before.

10 Conscience through error, judging that to be lawful which is unlawful;
as that it is lawful for one to lie, to save his own, or his neighbors life;
binds indeed, but does not bind to do so. It binds; because he that has
such a conscience, can neither lie, nor abstain from lying, without sin. He
cannot lie, because this is simply unlawful. He cannot abstain from lying,
with such a conscience, because such manner of forbearance is forbidden by God,
though forbearing it self be commanded: for God requires not only that we do
good, and abstain from doing evil; but likewise that we perform both these
with a good conscience, and not with a bad one. Such a conscience does not
bind to do what it says. First, because their is no obligation to unlawful
things. Secondly, because Conscience binds not to do, but by virtue of some
command of God; but such a conscience is not grounded upon any command: for the
Law of God can neither incline nor bind any man to sin. Thirdly, because this
error is always a sin, but a sin does not bind to practice it. Fourthly,
because such a Conscience has never so sure a ground, as that there needs
not further examination and inquiry into things. Fifthly, because man is bound
to lay down such a conscience; for although that be not exactly enough spoken
which some do affirm, namely, That such a Conscience binds a man to lay
down it self; yet it is most certain, that a man is tied to lay down such
an erronous Conscience, for it is a part of that old man, whom we are commanded
to put off, Ephesians. 4. 22.

11 Conscience judging that which is lawful to be unlawful, binds to
abstain from the practice and use of it. Romans 14. 23. The reason is, because
one may abstain from lawful things without sin.

12 conscience judging that to be bounden duty which is unlawful, binds, but
not to the practice of it, for the reasons set down in the ninth Thesis.

13 conscience Judging that to be bounden duty which is only lawful, binds
to the practice of it; as for example, If any man's conscience tell him that it
is necessary to uncover his hands always when he prays publicly; He must
pray so, because lawful things may be observed constantly without sin.

Object. If an erroneous conscience does so bind Of the perplexity of (...)
erroneous Conscience.
that we may neither follow, nor not follow it without sin, then there lies a
kind of necessity of sinning on those that do thus err, which cannot stand
with the equity of Gods Law.

Answ. This necessity of firming when one is entangled by his own erroneous
conscience, is not the same both ways: viz. whether one do, or do not,
according to conscience; for if one do according to his erring conscience, the
sin is in the action done; If he do what is not according to it, the sin is in
the manner of doing.

2 It is not an absolute necessity, but upon supposition; namely, if he keep
still such a conscience, which he both may, and ought to lay down.

3 This necessity does not flow from the nature of Gods law, but is contracted
and continued through man's sin, for no man is thus entangled without his own
fault.

Quest. Whether is it a greater sin to do against Whether it be a greater
sin to do with, or against an erroneous Conscience.
such an erroneous conscience, or to do according to it.

Answ. We ought to judge of the greatness of sin according to the quality of
the thing which is to be done or omitted, as it is in its own nature, and as
it is apprehended by us. If any man through error of conscience should hold it
to be an unlawful thing to go to the Church, and serve God there (which
otherwise he is tied to do) because he knows the Preacher to be a lewd and
naughty man, and thinks that he shall be partaker with him in his wickedness;
his sin is greater in staying away, then if he were present there: because it
is a greater sin, to neglect Gods service, then to communicate with an others
personal wickedness in that service. But if he should think it unlawful to
be present at holy duties for Idolatry, which he judges will be committed
there, he should sin more hainously if he should be present there: because
the sin of Idolatry, is greater then a neglect of true worship. In the first
instance; he sins more that follows his conscience, then he that does against
it; but in this, his sin is greater that does contrary to it: No certain and
general rule therefore can be set down in this matter.

CHAP. V. Of a surmising and doubting Conscience.
Quest. 1. WHether a man may content himself Opinante. What opinion is?
with a doubting Conscience?

Answ. For the unfolding of this question, it is to be noted, that Opinion
sometimes signifies a certain and settled judgment without all doubting. A
certain judgment nor arising from Sense, Knowledge, or true Faith, but
Reason. Sometimes it is taken more strictly; For that judgment whereby indeed
we assent to the truth of a thing, but not without suspicion, fear, or
doubting of its being otherwise.

Upon this distinction, I answer: First, in such things as are necessary to
salvation, and Gods worship, no opinion can be sufficient, though it have never
so great certainety of reason; because Faith is required to these, and Faith
takes only the infallible word of God.

2 In such things which are more remote from their principles, diligent care is
to be had, that we also get a certain persuasion, or belief of them, out of
the Scriptures; but if that cannot be obtained, it is lawful in our actions to
follow some such opinion, as is certain and tried by the rule of Scripture.

3 Using also all diligence to be certain (though we be not) it is lawful in
many things to follow that opinion, which is most probable.

4 It is never lawful to do against our own opinion, whether it be certain,
or probable, for respect to other men's authority.

5 No man can at the same time have two contrary probable opinions, concerning
the same thing; so as he may lawfully leave the one, and follow the other.

Quest. 2 What shall one do when his Conscience is doubtful?

Answ. For the declaration of this question, we must observe: First,
Conscience is said to be doubtful in a large sense, as when the assent even of
Faith, or Opinion prevails; yet there is some doubting joined. But strictly,
and properly, that Conscience is named doubting, which yields to neither part
of the question in hand, but sticks and staggers between assent and dissent,
not knowing which to do.

Touching the first sort of doubting, it has partly been spoken in the former
question, and shall partly be spoken of in the question following. Here we
treat of that Conscience, which in a proper and strict sense, is called
doubting.

Secondly, doubting is either Speculatiue, or Practical. A speculatiue doubt,
and a practical doubt.
Speculatiue is that, which is not immediately conversant about a practice or
action: as when one doubts, whether this or that thing be his or not.
Practical, is that, which immediately is conversant about some particular
action.

Answ. These things being laid down, it is answered;

First, in all those doubts which do any way belong to our practice, diligent
enquiry is to be made, that we may clearly perceive the truth and not doubt;
because while the mind remains in doubt, the action must of necessity want
that perfection which it would have, if it were done with Knowledge, and
certainty of judgment. For the more certain our knowledge is, touching those
things which we do, the more confident we are in doing, and more joyful when
we have done them.

2 Often times it is lawful to do a thing, though a speculatiue doubt remain,
because he that does so, does not necessarily do either against a doubting
Conscience, nor without a persuaded Conscience; for notwithstanding that
speculatiue doubt, he may assuredly conclude with himself; that, that which
he does, ought to be done. As for example, A man possesses a piece of ground
lawfully, and begins to doubt whether it be his own or not; yet if he know
not, that it belongs to any other body, he may lawfully keep the same still,
because other things being considered, possession is a better ground to keep
it, then doubting is to leave it.

3 It is not lawful to do any thing against a Practical doubt; that is, a
doubt whether the thing to be done be lawful: The reason is, 1. Because a man
cannot do it of faith, Romans 14. 23. 2 Because, he that does so, does not
sufficiently abhor sin: for willingly and wittingly he exposes himself to
the danger of sinning. 3. Because he is not fully enough addicted to Gods will;
for as he that does that willingly, whereof he doubts, whether it be
acceptable to his friend or no, does against the law of friendship: so he that
does that, whereof he doubts, whether it be acceptable to God or not; does
against the law of love to God. 4. In things doubtful, the safest way is to be
chosen; but that is the safest part, which if we follow, it is certain we
shall not sin. As for example, A man doubts whether Usury be lawful or
nor? the safest way is to abstain; for herein is no danger of sinning.

Some of the Philosophers had some knowledge of the equity of this rule, whose
Judgment thereof Tully relates, and approoues: Office: Lib. 1. Those give good
counsel (says he) who forbide to do any thing whereof one doubts, whether
it be just or unjust: the equity thereof is apparent in it self, because
Doubting imports, thought, or fear of being hurt.

CHAP VI. Of a Scrupulous Conscience.
Quest. WHat is to be done when the conscience is scrupulous?

Answ. For the understanding of this question, we must consider;

1 That a Scruple is a fear of the mind concerning its practice, which vexes
the conscience, as a little stone that cannot be discerned in a man's shoe,
paineth his foot.

2 Every fear is not properly a Scruple, but that which arises from slight,
or no arguments.

3 One is scrupulous either in examining what he has done, or in ordering
what he is to do.

4 Scruples do arise, (God so ordaining) to the end he may either punish, or
try men: sometimes out of the suggestion of the Devil, sometimes from want of
knowledge, sometimes from Melancholy, or some such like constitution of body;
sometimes from the society of scrupulous men.

5 A Scrupulous conscience differs from a Doubtful one, in this, that a
Doubtful conscience does assent to neither part of the question; but the
scrupulous conscience does assent to one, but is solicited to the other part,
by a kind of fear.

These things being set down, it is answered to the question. 1. (God being
instantly called unto for grace,) one must labor dilligently to remove these
scruples, which reason can take away by due trial of the grounds of them. For
then is the conscience most quiet, when it has most certain knowledge. 2 It
helps much (if it may be conveniently) that the thinking upon those things be
shunned, from which scruples may rise; for the fancy being once stirred, many
thoughts arise, which cannot be suppressed again, without great difficulty.
As we see in Tyles, that are linked together in order, if one happen to fall
down, the rest will follow: and from hence are scruples multiplied in timorous
consciences.

3 Many scruples when they cannot well be taken away by some contrary reason,
ought to be laid down as it were by violence, refusing to think or consider
of them. For so long as scruples are not actually applied, they are not
troublesome: And some be so troublesome that the weaker and more unskilful
sort, can by no other means be ridd of them. The bending of the mind
attentively to remove a scruple by reason, does often either engender or
increase a scruple: as for example, All people know that the name of God ought
to be called upon daily: yet one may be so vexed with impious thoughts, that
this scruple may arise in a man, whether he ought to pray or not? Here it is
not always a safe way to examine th^se thoughts, no^ yet to dispute about this
question long, but to throw away this fear, as it were with violence, and to
fall upon the duty of prayer so well as one can. 4 If they cannot be so
remooved, but that they do still molest, it is lawful, and the best course,
to do a thing against such scruples. As for example, If there be any man that
is so molested through the consideration of his unworthiness, that he dare
scarce be so bold as to come to the Lords Table, though he find in himself
true Faith and Repentance; he may and ought notwithstanding this scruple come
to the Lords Supper. Neither is this to do against Conscience, but according
to Conscience. For a scruple is a rash fear and without any ground, and so
cannot bind to do according to it; yea through custom of doing against such
like scruples, Conscience it self is made more strong and settled.

CHAP. VII. Of the attention of Conscience to its Facts.
HItherto we have spoken of that Synteresis, or Proposition, whence Conscience
tells what is Law. Now follows the second part of the judgment, whereby a
man's conscience bears witness of his fact according to that Law. By reason of
this act Conscience is named a witness, and in the common Proverb, a thousand
witnesses. It is likewise called a Book, Revel. 20. 12. because it is left
written in man's mind, at it were in a register, what he has done, and with
what intent, and at length is read and spoken of by Conscience.

The Assumption of that practical Syllogism wherein Conscience consists, is
nothing else, but the recognizing, or considering of our action, or estate, as
it has respect to that Law which Conscience gives. For the better
understanding of the nature hereof, some things must be made clear concerning
the action which is recognized; and some things concerning the recognizing
itself.

The action is either agreeable to that which Conscience teaches, or is
contrary to it.

The dictate of Conscience, whereunto an action is to be conformed, does
sometime go before and accompany the action, and sometimes follow it. Against
the dictate of Conscience that goes before, or accompanies the action, we
have an example in those, of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 32. Who knowing
the Judgment of God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death,
not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. We have an
example of an action committed against the judgment of Conscience, following
the fact, in those Jews which put Christ to death through ignorance, Acts 3.
17. 1 Cor. 2. 8. yet being afterward better taught, they judged far otherways
of their fact, then when they did commit it, Acts 3. 37.

Quest. From hence arises a hard question, how a How a man sins against his
Conscience.
man can do any thing against the dictate of Conscience which goes before, or
accompanies his action? the Question arises thus.

The Will, as it seems to many, cannot will or nill any thing, unless Reason
have first judged it to be willed or nilled; neither can it choose but follow
the last practical judgment, and do that which Reason does dictate to be
done: and by consequent, the Will cannot move against the determination of
Conscience.

Answ. For the unfolding of this matter, these conclusions are to be laid
down. It is so clear that no man can question it,

1. That many both may do, and do against Conscience, as it is an habit, or
Sy^sis
Summary of Principles: and in so doing, they do in some sense, go against
Conscience.

2. Against Conscience as it is an act, all those do, who do any thing against
that Judgment which they had actually, and yet have virtually or in the
principle, though actually they judge not as they have done formerly.

3. The Will cannot will, desire, choose, or follow after any thing, without a
speculatiue apprehension of it, because the object of the will is known Good.
No man was ever known to desire what he no ways knew.

4. A bare and simple apprehension of the object, without any practical
judgment, that forthwith it must be prosequuted, or avoided, may be sufficient
to draw forth the Act of the Will. This appears sufficiently in Mad men,
Infants, and in every undeliberate motion of the Will. The reason of this is,
because a Good, apprehended or known, has all those Conditions, which are
required to the Object of the Will. The Will is as able about its Object, as
the sensitive appetite is about its: But Sense is stirred up at the
apprehension of its object, as the Eye at sight of Colors, the Ear at Sounds,
etc.

5 The Will can at pleasure suspend its act about that which is apprehended and
judged to be good, without any foregoing act of judgment, that it should do
so; for if to suspend an act, and to leave of acting, an act of judgment, be
necessarily required; then to suspend that judgment, another judgment is
requisite; and to suspend that, another; and so in infinitum.

6 The Will can turn away the understanding from the consideration of any
object, which at present it apprehends and judges to be good, to the
consideration that it has formerly apprehended and judged to be so. By reason
of this commanding power, the Will is the first cause of unadvisednesse, and
blameworthy error in the Understanding. When the Will does first begin, to
draw away the understanding from that, which it has judged to be good, it does
it, by its own inclination without any judgment that it should do so;
otherwise these two judgments should be together; namely, this ought to be
followed, and this ought not, which were absurd.

7 The Will can move it self, toward an object that is apprehended and judged
good for profit or pleasure in some respect, though reason judge that it is not
lawful but sinful. The reason is: 1. Because whatsoever good the
understanding propounds to the will, in this life, it propounds it with a
kind of indifferency of Judgment, as not having any necessary connection, with
the universal good. Upon which the will is naturally set and determined. Hence
it is that freedom or liberty in an action, is said to be radically in the
judgment and reason. 2 Though the will be determined by the understanding in
regard of the specification or kind of thing to be willed, because it wills
nothing but that which the understanding has first apprehended; yet in regard
of exercise or act of willing, it mooveth both it self, and the understanding
with the rest of the faculties. And hence it is that liberty is in the will
formally, which should not be true, if it were necessarily determined by the
understanding. 3 If the judgment being right, the will could not but will
aright; then before the first sin of Angels and men, (which was in the Will)
there must necessarily be an error in the Understanding: and if so, then the
punishment of sin should be before the first sin; for all Practical error
in the Understanding, is either sin, or the punishment of it. 4. If the Will
do necessarily follow the judgment of the understanding; then there should
(in proper speaking) be no sin of malice, distinct from those sins, which
are committed through ignorance, or passion. But it is manifest, that this kind
of sin is found in Devils, and likewise in some men. 5. If the Will do
necessarily follow the Understanding, then in Regeneration the will it self
need not be internally renewed grace: for the inlightening of the
Understanding would be sufficient. But this is repugnant to Faith and
godliness.

8 Though the Will does not always follow the Judgment, yet does it ever
follow that command whereto it is subject; and that agrees oftentimes with
Judgment. But this command though as touching the direction, it does belong to
the understanding; yet as touching the power and efficacy, it belongs to the
Will. From hence we speak truly, and by the consent of all Nations, say, I
will Will. (...) velle.


CHAP. VIII. Of Conscience examining and reviewing actions.
WE are to treat next of that reviewing, which is conversant about our actions
and state.

1 I call this a Reviewing, rather then a knowledge, First, because a bare and
naked knowledge is not sufficient for this act of Conscience, but things must
be weighed over and over. Secondly, because there is a knowledge which goes
before, and accompanies the action, but this Reviewing follows it.

2 This Reviewing is a reflect act of the Understanding, whereby a man
understands, and with judgment, weighs his own actions with their
circumstances. It is commonly called, Consideration, or meditation on our
ways. It is called in the Scripture, A respect or beholding by the mind, Psalm.
119. 15. Considering, Psalm. 50. 22. Thinking, or thinking again, Psalm. 119.
59. Laying of the heart. Hag. 1. 5. a Saying in the heart, Ierem. 5. 24. Saying
to the heart, Hos. 7. 2. Returning to the heart, 1 Kings 6. 47. a Laying to
heart, Ier. 12. 11. Mal. 2. 2. and lastly, a Proving or examining of our
selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

3 The cause of the Reviewing of our actions ought to be, First, a care to
please God in all things. Secondly, a fear of sinning: For if we review our
actions upon other grounds, it is not an act of Conscience: because it
respects not the judgment of God; which without doubt, it is necessary an
act of Conscience should do.

4 The manner of this Reviewing does consist in these two things: First, that
we consider our own actions, not materially only, but formally also, that
is, that we consider not only, what we have done, as it is In ordin^ Naturae
Mor^m.
an action, but likewise what, and after what manner it is done, as it is good
or evil. As for example, It is not an Act of Conscience, for a man to think,
whether he has overcome his adversary, or not; but whether in so doing, he
has committed murder or not? whether it be just, or unjust, that he has
done? 2. The actions and the rule must be compared together. For as he that
speaks the truth, knows not that he speaks truth; unless he compares his
speech with the thing it self: So he that does well or ill, cannot know the
same, unless he compare the fact with its proper rule. The rule of this trial
or judgment, must not be our natural reason, the custom of others, or the
like; but the Law, or revealed will of God; For otherwise Gods judgment is not
respected (to which Conscience looks) but men's.

5 The time which is to be allotted to this Reviewing; In regard of evil
deeds, is in Scripture noted, sometimes to be before some threatening of God, 2
Sa^. 24. 13. sometimes after a threatening, but before the Judgment be
executed. Mal. 2. 2. and sometime after that God has inflicted his Judgments,
Hag. 1. 5. but the sooner we go in hand with it, the more acceptable it is
unto God, and more profitable it is unto us. Hence it is, that this Meditation
of what we do daily, is reckoned amongst the daily exercises of the godly, Job
1. 5.

6 Through want of this Reviewing, comes 1. Impenitencie in the greatest
sins, Isai 44. 18. Eccles. 4. 8. Presumption in greatest misery, Reu. 3. 17.
and so great a Stupiditie, that those which know many other things, are
altogether ignorant of themselves, and what they do. Hence it is, that some
after they have sworn rashly, and are admonished of their sin, almost with
the same breath affirm with an oath, that they did not swear.

7 The peculiar effects of this Reviewing of our ways, are 1. in regard of
God, A right judgment of our ways. Ezekiel. 19. 25. and thankfulness. 2. In
respect of ourselves, Humility: and 3. In respect of others, Equity and
Gentleness, Tit. 3. 3. 4.

CHAP. IX. Of the application of the Law by Conscience to the person, upon the
Reviewing of the Action.
1 THe third act of Conscience follows, whereby the conclusion is gathered
from the premises. This conclusion is an act of Conscience, whereby a man
applies unto himself the Law of God, which concerns either his Action or
Condition.

2 This conclusion therefore depends partly on that general Law, which is
pronounced by the Synteresis, in the major Proposition; and partly, on that
Reviewing of the action or condition which is contained in the minor
Proposition. So that it gathers together the strength of the former acts of
Conscience, and makes the Judgment thereof perfect.

3 Like as therefore Conscience is a Law in the major Proposition, Romans 2. 14.
and in the minor a Witness, Romans 2. 15 So in this conclusion, Conscience is most
properly a Judge, 1 Ioh. 3. 20. For as in the Proposition Gods Law is declared,
and in the Assumption, the fact or condition of man is examined, according to
that Law; So in the conclusion, the sentence concerning man is pronounced
according to his fact, or condition, by virtue of the Law that has been
declared.

4 It is well defined therefore by Application, because in such a conclusion,
Gods Commandment and man's fact are mutually joined together, and as it were
linked with man, whilst both pass sentence on him.

5 This Application, though in its own nature it The flownesse of Conscience
in the making of the Application.
follow the former acts of Conscience, like as the conclusion of a syllogism
is said to follow necessarily from the premises yet through man's fault it
falls out often, That Conscience does not do it for a time. Both
propositions are granted, yet the conclusion is not made: as for example; A man
may in general know and grant that every man that worshippeth not God, is
cursed: and may also be conscious to himself, that he is no true worshipper of
God: and yet not Judge himself accursed. One may also understand sufficiently,
that God is ready to pardon him who repents of his sins; He may likewise have
witness in himself of his own repentance: yet cannot presently apply to
himself pardon, and the mercy of God.

6 This Staying, or Hind^ing the Conclusion, is more usual in passing
Judgment upon evil actions, but happens sometimes also in such, as are good.

7 We have an example of the first sort in those Jews of whom the Apostle
speaks. Romans 2. 18. 20. 21. And in David himself. 2. Sam. 12. 5. 6. who knew
well enough, what his most evil fact deserved by law, and likewise could not
be ignorant of that which he had committed: but halted in the application of
the conclusion.

8 An example of the latter kind, we have in all those Believers who repent
truly, yet for a long time cannot apply Gods mercy to themselves. The causes
why Sinners do it not, are; 1 Because they do not consider seriously enough,
Gods law, and their own facts; for the conclusion proceeds from the power
and efficacy of the premises. 2. Because they have flat contrary conclusions
in their Judgments to the Law of God. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 3. Because they are afraid
of, and avoid these conclusions of Conscience, as most opposite to themselves
and their purposes, Ioh 3. 20. 4. Because they are careless and forgetful of
such things, Iam. 1. 23. 25. From such like causes wicked men use to gather
false conclusions, and deceive themselves, Iam. 1. 22.

9 The causes why believers, and godly men, ofttimes do not conclude for their
own consolation, are 1. Some prevailing temptation. 2. The remnants of
unbelief, which remain even in those that are regenerate. 3. The greatness
of that mercy which they ought to apply unto themselves. And 4. the Conscience
of their own unworthiness, especially after they have committed some grievous
sin.

10 Because of this slownesse in men to conclude, and apply, there is a
necessity laid on all Ministers, not only to declare Gods will generally; but
likewise so far as they are able, to help, and further, both publicly and
in private, the application of it, so far as men's condition and consciences
require.

CHAP. X. Of the effects of this Application, in the Conscience it self.
1 FRom the conclusion of Conscience, some effects follow, according as the
judgment thereof is.

2 These effects are either Acts of Conscience, which are virtually contained
in the conclusion, or Affections and Acts of the Will, which arise from those
acts of Conscience.

3 Amongst the acts of Conscience, some there be that respect that which is
well done: some respect sin.

4 Those that respect what is well done, are Excusing, Absolving, and
Aprooving, Romans 2. 15.

5 Excusing is an act of Conscience, whereby a man An Excusing Conscience.
is freed from the guilt of sin in what he has done: For Excusing here is
not taken in that stricter sense, whereby it signifies a ^essening or
extenuating of the fault, but in that sense which imports, a perfect taking
away of the fault, and guilt.

6 Absolution is an act of Conscience, whereby it Absolution of Conscience.
pronounces a man need not fear punishment for what he has done.

7 These two acts are tied so closely and fast together with a bond that cannot
be loosed, that they differ only in our apprehension not really. For Excusing
does most properly respect guilt, and Absolution the punishment; but neither is
the guilt taken away so long as the punishment remains; neither does the
guilt remain, the punishment being once taken away.

8 Approving is an act of Conscience, pronouncing Approbation of Conscience.
that a man in his action has pleased God.

9 Absolution and approbation differ from Excusing in this, that in Excusing,
Conscience does the part of the Law, and has respect unto God, as he is a
Judge, before whose judgment seat it excuses a man as a witness; but in
Absolving and Approving, Conscience properly does Gods part, and has respect
unto man, whom like a Judge it absolveth, and approves.

10 The acts of Conscience, which respect sin, are Accusation, and
Condemnation.

11 Accusation is an act of Conscience, convincing Accusation.
and prooving a man to be near unto punishment, because of his sin.

12 Condemnation is an act of Conscience, judging Condemnation.
a man that is guilty, to the punishment of eternal death

13 Accusation and Condemnation differ in the same degree and manner, that
Excusing differs from Absolution and Approoving.

14 Accusation and Condemnation sometimes follow presently upon the fact, as in
David, 2 Samuel 24. 10 Sometimes a little while after it, as in Judas, Matt. 21.
3. Sometimes a long time after, as in Joseph's brethren, Genesis 42. 21. 22. For a
man is not free from them by length of time, but by repentance only.

CHAP XI. Of the affections which arise from the judgment of Conscience.
1 THe first affection that rises in the heart, from Excusing, Absolving, and
Approoving of Conscience, Joy.
is Joy, whereby a man takes delight in that he has done well, as in a true
good that is come to him, Prove. 15. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Now this Joy differs
much from laughter, and vain joy: 1. Because it makes the heart glad. 2
Because it is a serious disposition of the heart, not a light stirring of it.
3. Because it has a good ground, and therefore grows stronger by right
meditation. 4. Because it brings forth found and good fruit. None of which
things are to be found in common and ordinary laughter and joy, Eccles. 2. 2.
Confidence.


2 The second affection is Confidence, whereby the heart is settled and
strengthened against the fear of evil, and the weak hope of good, Prove. 10.
9. and 28. For all misery springs from sin; and to those that do well, all
good things are promised, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

3 The first affection rising from the accusation and condemnation of
Conscience, is Shame, whereby a sinner Shame.
is displeased with himself, in and for that sin he has done. For sin
always changes a man from better to worse, Genesis 5. 7. This shame if it be
because of sin, and if it make a man forsake it, it is one of the signs of
repentance, Romans 6. 21. as impudency in sin, is always a token of an
impenitent and lost man.

4 The second affection is Sadness, or Sorrow, whereby Sorrow.
the heart is troubled, because of the evil that is come upon it, 1 Samuel 25.
31. Acts 2. 37. For the accusing and condemning of Conscience, does not only
make the sin, and the guilt thereof to be in a manner present, but likewise
the punishment.

5 The third affection is Fear, whereby the heart Fear.
flies from the evil that hangs over it, and from God himself, as from a
severe Judge, Genesis 3. 10. Prove. 28. 1. Revel. 6. 16. because the fullness of
misery is expected. The great degrees of this fear, are called Trembling and
Horror.

6 The fourth affection is Despair, whereby the Despair
Soul casts away all hope of escaping, Heb. 10. 27.

7 The fifth and last, is Anguish and vexation of spirit, Anguish.
because of the misery, which lies on it. This is that spiritual worm, that
perpetually tormenteth the damned souls in hell. Mark. 9. 44. Isai. 66. 24.

CHAP. XII. Of a good Conscience.
HItherto we have spoken of the nature of Conscience, according as it was laid
down in the definition: Now follows the distribution of Conscience,
according to its adjuncts.

1 Conscience is either good or evil:

2 Conscience may be called good, either for its honesty Quoad honestatem.
Quoad qui^em.
and integrity, or for its quietness and peace.

3 That Conscience is honestly good, whose judgment Conscience honestly good.
is Right and Powerful.

4 That the Conscience therefore be honestly good, 3. Things make Conscience
honest.
it is required: 1. That it uprightly and sincerely judge that thing to be
good, which God judges so; and that to be evil, which God judges evil. This
uprightness must first be in the judgment, of what is to be done, which
belongs to the major Proposition; and 2. in the judgment of what has been
done, which belongs to the minor.

5 To a Conscience honestly good, its 3. required that it excuse, absolve, and
approve a man in what is well done; and accuse and condemn him, for what is
evil.

6 Concerning the first office, which consists in Excusing, Absolving, and
Approving, there is no controversy amongst Divines: But of the second, which
consists in Accusing and Condemning, some doubt, and think that the
goodness of Conscience does no ways consist therein, but in Excusing only.

7 They bring two reasons: 1. Because Adams conscience by creation, did only
Excuse, and not accuse. 2. Because a good Conscience is troubled and wounded
when sin is committed, and occasion is ministered to accuse. But the first
reason is not good; because though Conscience in state of Innocence, did not
accuse actually, yet had it a power to accuse, if there had been occasion.
Neither could the Conscience be more blamed for accusing and condemning justly,
(...) the Law self, and the chief Judge, who did so after sin had once
entered, and not before.

8 So far is the just Accusation of Conscience from being to be blamed, that
Sinners have most need of it, as the only way to make them repent them of the
sins which they have committed. For to the end a Sinner may escape Gods
judgment, he must judge himself: that is, do justice and judgment upon
himself, as in Gods room, whom he has offended, 1 Cor. 11. 31. He does this,
by pleading Gods cause against himself, that is, by accusing himself,
witnessing, alleging, and confessing, or by acknowledging Gods Law against
himself, by revealing the secrets of his heart, and his hidden filthiness, to
his own ignominy and shame. Then by condemning himself, that is, by declaring
what torment and punishment God may justly inflict upon him; or by Proclaming
of himself guilty of everlasting death. Unto this judgment of Conscience,
stirring up suitable affections; if God of his great mercy add a change of
mind, with an appealing by Faith to the Judgment Seat of Gods mercy in
Christ; then is that true (which some use to say) that the Judgment
Paenitentiale iudicium evacuat iudicium paenale.
of repentance makes void the judgment of punishment; that the accusation,
witnessing, and condemnation to wrath to come, are prevented by these Actions
which supply there rooms; Yea, that God himself, in Christ shall be an
Advocate, a Witness, and Judge; for those that have pleaded against
themselves, in the court of Conscience by repentance.

9 Neither are we bound only to this Accusation and condemnation of our
selves, as to a means of Salvation, but by natural justice also. For if we
sin against a man, we ought to do him justice on our selves, by Accusing,
Condemning, and Acknowledging our offense; much more then are we bound to do
this to God. Besides, we are related to God as his servants, by which we are
bound to take his part in all controversies, debates, or quarrels, that he
has against sin, and chiefly against our own sin, which does us most
hurt, and against which we are able to do much more, then against other men's.
Add to these, the consideration of the equity of it, if we be bound (when it
will be no hurt to us) to assist a brother, in any of his lawful and just
suits, or judgments, either in appearing as a Witness, or as an Accuser, in
his behalf: how much more are we bound to do the same for God? for without
comparison, each person is more bound to stick close to God, then to himself:
and to assist God by accusing, testifying, judging, though it be in the
controversy which he has against himself.

These particular illustrations (which upon another occasion are propounded and
urged by G. P.) I have ^uliel Paris.
thought good to relate, both for the light which they give to this present
question, and for the excellent use, that they have in exhortations to the
practice of repentance.

10 The second reason (wherein the trouble of conscience upon accusation, was
brought to prove that an accusing Conscience, could not be good) is also of no
strength: Because that trouble and wounding, is either the accusation it self,
or an affection following it. The same Judge that condemns rightly and
justly, may, and uses to be sorrowful, that he has occasion to do so: for
he absolveth more willingly those that are good, then he condemns malefactors.

11 To speak home to the Matter; The act of Accusation follows indeed from
sin, not as a sin, but a punishment; Conscience therefore accusing, so
far as it accuses rightly, is honestly good, though in respect of the
trouble it brings, it uses to be called evil, as all other punishments
are. It may also be called evil, because the ground of it is always some sin
committed.

12 Thirdly, that the Conscience be honestly good, it is requisite that by this
upright judgment, it stir up strongly to do good, and draw back strongly
from that which is evil, Heb. 13. 18. but this cannot be done by Intentio
Voluntatis.
Conscience alone, there must be also an honest disposition, and bent of the
Will, answerable to the judgment of Conscience.

13 A Conscience peaceably good, is that, which Excusetb, Absolveth,
Comfort, Acts 24. 6. Hence also unto a good Conscience, in this respect, do
belong the affection of Joy, Confidence, Security, and Freedom.

14 A Conscience that is both honestly and peaceably (...).
good, is that, which by the Apostle is called pure and clean, 2 Timothy 1. 3.
Beautiful, Heb. 13. 18. Without offense, or not offended, which is the
consolation and rejoicing of the faithful, 2 Cor. 1. 12. To keep which they
are content to suffer all sorts of trouble unjustly, 1 Pet. 2. 19.

15 Conscience since the fall, or after sin, is made How Conscience is made
good.
good again: 1. By the blood of Christ applied through Faith, whereby the
guilt, accusation, and condemnation of it, are taken away, Heb. 9. 13. 14. and
10. 22. 2. By the virtue of the same blood, in repentance and sanctification of
the spirit, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Acts 15. 8. 9. whereby believers have a settled and
constant purpose to serve God. 3. By the witness of the Spirit, whereby we are
assured of the grace of God, not only for the present, but also for the
continuance of it, to the doing of every good work, Ephesians. 1. 18. 14. Romans 9.
5. and 1 Pet. 1. 5. 6.

16 A good Conscience is maintained by that exercise, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Acts 24. 16. Now this exercise does chiefly consist in these things:
1. That the fear of God be always lively and fresh in our hearts, Psalm. 36.
2. For this makes us look what Gods judgment is, in all things, Psalm. 119.
6. 2. That we meditate on Gods Law both day, and night, Psalm. 1. 2. For by this
the Major Proposition or Rule whereby Conscience judges, is established. 3.
That we examine our own ways with quick and sharp judgment, Psalm. 4. 5.
For this infers the application in the Minor Proposition. 4. That by daily
repentance and renewing of Faith, we wash off the filth that we contract, 1
John 3. 3. For therein lies the strength of the conclusion or judgment of
Conscience.

CHAP. XIII. Of a weak, and of a strong Conscience.
1 A Good Conscience admits of degrees, for which cause it is by the Apostle
distinguished, into a weak and a strong Conscience, Romans 15. 1.

2 A weak Conscience is that which is purged by unfeigned Faith, but is
troubled with these imperfections, which all believers, for the most part, do
outgrow by time.

3 True Faith is supposed to be in a weak Conscience, for he that is weak, is
a Brother, Romans 14. 15. 21. not to be condemned or set at naught, verse. 10. One
for whom Christ has dyed, 1 Cor. 8. 11. This Conscience therefore being good,
differs in kind from that which is weak through malice, Presumption, or
Superstition.

4 The imperfections wherewith this weak Conscience The imperfections of a
weak Conscience.
is diseased, are, 1. Lack of knowledge, because as yet it understands not
well what is lawful and pure, 1 Cor. 8. 7. Romans 14. 14. This weakness of
Conscience, is called the weakness of Faith, Romans 14. 1.

5 The second imperfection which depends on the first, is in Affection,
because it easily is made sorrowful, and disquieted, when it sees others do
that which it self approoveth not, Romans 14. 15. Because of meat thy brother is
grieved.

6 The third imperfection is in Judgment, because it quickly Judges and
condemns the liberty of others, 1. Cor. 10 29. Romans 14. 3. 15. Why is my
liberty judged by an other man's Conscience? Let not him that eats despise him
that eats not.

7 The fourth imperfection, is in the purpose and setlednes of heart, being
easily drawn to what is evil. 1. Cor. 8. 10. For if any man see thee which
have knowledge, sit at meat in the Idols temple: shall not the Conscience of
him which is weak, be Emboldned to eat those things, which are offered to
Idols? From this, a man is most properly said to be Offended, Scandelized,
wounded, destroyed. Romans 14. 21. 1 Cor. 8, 9. 12. Romans 14. 15.

8 A strong Conscience, is that which is established in the truth. Romans 14. 5.
Persuaded in his own mind. 2. Pet. 1. 12. Ye know and are established in the
present truth.

9 This stability consists in knowledge, yet not so much in the clearness
thereof, as in the certainty. 1. Cor. 8. 4. 7. We know that an Idol is
nothing in the world, but there is not in every man that knowledge, and their
Conscience being weak, is defield. For certainety belongs more to Faith,
which we are here to understand by Conscience, then Evidence or Clearness,
which belongs to knowledge, taken in the proper sense. 2 In such an affection,
whereby it is always willing to bear with, and bear the infirmities of
others. Romans 15. 1. We which are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak. 3. In Judging so, as that nothing be set before a brother, at which he
may stumble or fall, Romans 14. 13. but Judge this rather, that no man put a
stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. 4. In such a
resolution and setlednesse of heart, whereby it is so strengthened in truth and
godliness, that it cannot easily be remooved, Heb. 13. 9. It is a good thing,
that the heart be established with grace.

CHAP. XIV. Of an evil Conscience.
1 COnscience is said to be Evil, either because its Acts are sins, or
because it brings trouble and sorrow.

2 A Conscience Evil because of sin in its Acts, is that which gives not a
right and powerful judgment* such is the Conscience of all men that are
unregenerat, for it is in men according as Original corruption is. Of this a
polluted Conscience is not the smallest part. Tit. 1. 15.

3 The first fault of an evil Conscience is Blindness, whence it judges of
Good and Evil no otherwise: then one that is bodily blind uses to judge of
colors: He calls good evil, and evil good, Esai. 5. 10.

4 The second fault, is a kind of spiritual dullness, whence it neither
stirs up powerfully to that, which it sees is good, nor draws back from
that which it acknowledges evil, Romans 1. 18 Which withhold the truth in
unrighteousness.

5 The third fault, is false-witnesse-bearing, which principally appears in
Excusing, and Accusing falsely.

6 An Evil Conscience does Excuse falsely, either when it does not accuse
where it ought, or absolveth and approoveth where it ought to accuse and
condemn.

7 The former fault is esteemed as a piece of Religion, by the dangerous Sect
of Libertines, who place their chief happiness and perfection to have the
sense of sin extinguished.

8 It prevails also in all those, who being free from great and gross
sins, do seem unto themselves to be as it were perfect, and not to be
blamed for any sin, Luke 18. 20. Mark 10. 20. All these things have Iobserved
from my youth.

9 The second sort of Excusing falsely, when an evil Conscience approoveth,
where it ought to condemn; is chiefly to be found in those that are
superstitious. They think to be heard through their much babbling. Ioh. 16. 2.
The time comes that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service, Romans 10. 2. I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.

10 A' false Accusation of an evil conscience is, when it accuses and
condemns, where it ought to excuse: viz. For well doing: Romans 14. 22. Happy
is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he allows.

Conscience Evil, through trouble and sorrow is that, which accuses and
condemns: 1 John 3. 20. If our heart condemn us.

12 When Conscience is evil in this kind, these affections follow. Sadness,
Fear, Anguish.

13 This Conscience is honestly good, if it accuse justly: it is sinnefully
evil, if it do it uniustly.

14 A Conscience evil through trouble, and honestly good, is to be found both
in believers and unbeleevers. In such as believe not, it is a preparation unto
true repentance and Faith. Acts 2, 37.

15 A Conscience Evil, both through trouble and sin, is common also both to
believers, and those who believe not. But in those that believe, there is a
principle of grace, by strength whereof they are upholden, they wrestle and
withstand, and by little and little are healed of it.

CHAP. XV. Of diverse degrees and sorts of an Evil Conscience.
1 AN Evil Conscience may be distinguished into diverse degrees: 1. In respect
of defect, into a benumbed* stupid, and seared. 2. In respect of excess, into
a troubled and desperate one.

2 A benumbed Conscience is that, which is so dull A benumbed Conscience.
and heavy in its Acts, that there follows no strong stirrings of heart after
it; nothing to purpose comes of it. Those that have such a conscience, are
oppressed with a kind of spiritual sleep, wherein the sense of conscience, is
so bound, that it is no more moved, then a man that sleeps is by his own
dreams.

3 This dullness appears, 1. In a dull or faint pricking on to good: We have
an example in Agrippa, Acts 26. 28. thou almost perswadest me.

4 It appears secondly in a dull accusation for the evil that is committed,
we have an example in Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 18.

5 The cause of this benummednesse in many that are not apparently wicked, is a
certain carnal security, which creeps secretly upon them, from long peace
and prosperity, Ier. 48. 11.

6 A stupide Conscience is that, which does not its office A stupide Conscience.
in accusing and condemning, unless it be for the greatest sins, and when
it is forced by most grievous Judgments. For like as men sick of a Lethargy
or Drowsinesse, are not wakened commonly, unless it be through some great
noise: so likewise this Conscience is not moved, unless it be by the thunder
of Gods Judgments. We have an example in Pharaoh. Exodus 8. 9.

7 The cause of this stupidity is unbeleife, and custom in sinning, which
takes away the sense of it. A cauterised Conscience.


8 A seared or cauterized Conscience, is that which no ways can be moved, no
not by greatest sins, 1. Tim. 4. 2. Which have their Consciences seared with
an hot Iron: This sort of Conscience is found chiefly in those, who after they
have been enlightened, against their Consciences, do give up themselves to a
wicked life.

9 In these the Synteresis it self, or Law of Conscience, has its course
stopped, and for time is in a manner extinguished, Jude. 10. Whatsoever they
know naturally, as beasts which are without reason, in those things they
corrupt themselves. This suppressing of the natural practical knowledge,
which is ingraffed in all men, is by the Philosophers called (...) because such
kind of men are changed as it were into stones, as in the Scripture they are
said to have a hard and stony heart, by other Philosophers it is called (...)
and (...), because such men become altogether brutish. 2. Pet. 2. 12. Or rather
put on the nature of the Devil. Ioh. ^. 44.

10 The signs of such a kind of Conscience are, 1. If one rejoice in sin.
Prou. 2. 14. 2 If after he has sinned he will not be reformed, Prou. 27. 22.
3 If he give up himself to commit known Si certatim se dedat
sin, with all his might striving to sin more then others. Ephe. 4. 19.

11 Contrary to this evil Conscience, or hard heart, is a tender Conscience
which is easily moved by the word A tender Conscience.
of God, whereof we have an example in Josiah. 2. Kings. 22. 19. Because thine
heart did melt and thou have humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou
heardest what I spoke.

12 A troubled Conscience, is that which accuses in such a manner, that it
suffers not the Conscience to A troubled Conscience.
be at rest.

13 It brings with it an astonishing fear, and oppressing grief.

14 It is called in the Scripture, sadness, a casting down, affliction, or
disquieting of the mind, a broken spirit, Prove. 18. 14.

15 A troubled Conscience is sometimes honestly good: and sometime sinnefully
evil.

16 Honestly good it is, when it accuses justly. This is properly in those
which yet believe not in Christ: but happens sometimes to be in those, who have
true Faith.

17 In those which yet believe not, the Conscience evil indeed through
trouble, but honestly good, does make this kind of Syllogism.

He that believes not in Christ, is subject to the wrath of God:
But I believe not in Christ: Therefore, I am subject to the wrath of God.
This whole argument is to be granted; The only way to pacify such a
Conscience is, to bring him that is so troubled, into another state, by true
conversion and Faith. For then the Minor of that Syllogism, which before was
true, will be false, and may lawfully be denied.

18 In such as have true Faith, After grievous sins, which waste the
Conscience, the Conscience Evil through Trouble, but honestly good, makes
this kind of Syllogysme.

He that has sinned grivously, and has not duly repented of his sin,
cannot by true Faith find comfort in God.
I am such a one. Therefore, I cannot by true Faith comfort my self in God.
Here likewise must Conscience accusing be believed, and true Repentance be
gotten, that he who is so troubled, may at length rightly deny that Assumption.

19 A troubled Conscience, Evil through fault, or faulty in being troubled, is
most properly in those that are true believers. For although unbeleevers do
sin most highly, in not seeking after the true remedy in Christ, when
Conscience accuses justly, (but either fall down under the burden, or through
hardness of heart keep out trouble, or seek ease from things that are most
vain, as it were from the leaves of the Fig tree) yet the sin properly is
not in the judgment of conscience, or in conscience so judging them, but in
the Conclusions, which are deduced and drawn from it.

20 The Conscience of Believers is sinful, in being troubled, many ways. In
such a case the reasoning of Conscience is diligently to be examined. For the
major or minor may, and ought always to be denied and confuted, that
Conscience may be healed. As it is in those Accusations which come from want
of sense of Gods favor, from the sense of Gods wrath, from outward
afflictions, from horrid temptations to sin, and from diverse kinds of
sins. A dispairing Conscience.


21 A Desperate Conscience is that which so accuses and condemns, that it
takes away not only quietness and peace, but hope also of any quietness, or
remedy.

22 That manner of Despair, that takes away all such Hope as may come from
our merits, or strength, is honestly good.

23 But that kind of Despair, which in this life takes away all such hope as
comes from the free mercy of God, is not only Evil in respect of trouble
and vexation, but of sin.

24 The Despair of the damned, which utterly rooteth out all hope of remedy,
is the bottomless pit of misery.

25 Hence it is, that a Desperate Conscience (fully representing all sins,
together with their exceeding great and unpardonable guilt, and Gods fearful
wrath abiding upon Sinners, with the endless misery that follows thereon) is
Gods most powerful means to torment the Reprobate; like unto a worm, that
most sharply biteth and gnaweth their hearts for ever: Mar. 9. 46. their Worm
dies not.

26 To Trouble and Despair; Full Peace, Tranquillity, and the joy of a good
Conscience are contrary: which properly rises from perfect hope in God,
whereby the unchangeable enjoyment of happiness, is apprehended.

27 Hence it is, that a good Conscience, that is perfectly peaceable, and
joyful (as it represents to the soul, a full deliverance from the Evil,
both of sin and punishment: Such a life to be led with God, as is without all
trouble or end; consisting in union and communion with him in peace, and
greatest joy) is the formal and essential happiness of the Saints in the
life to come: Matt. 25. 21. 23. Enter into thy Masters Joy: Ioh. 15. 11. That
my Joy might remain in you, and that your Joy might be full; 1 Pet. 1. 8.
Rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and glorious.

A SVMMARY COLLECTION OF THE FORmer Treatise, according as it was set forth in
a public Disputation, to encourage and stir up to the study of Practical
Divinity.
DIVINE POSITIONS concerning Conscience.

1 KNowledge puffs up; Love edifieth: But greatest conscience ought to be
made of edifying the Conscience, 1 Cor. 8. 1. 10.

2 Conscience is a man's judgment of himself, according to Gods judgment of
him, Isai. 5. 3.

3 There is a certain inclination of the will, whereby it can naturally both
stir up the understanding to this kind of judgment, and also follow it:
This inclination by some is named Conscience, by others a part of Conscience,
but not truly; For neither the name of Conscience, nor the acts thereof, which
are mentioned in the Scriptures, import any other power or faculty, then the
understanding, Romans 2. 15.

4 Yet every of understanding is not Conscience, but only those which make up
such a Practical judgment, as was before handled in the second Position.

5 By Judgment, is most properly meant the act of judging, and not the habit
or faculty only, Romans 2. 15.

6 The whole nature of Conscience is contained in no other judgment, but what
is Dianoeticall, or Discursiue; because Accusing, Excusing, Comforting, and
such like acts of Conscience, cannot be, but by some middle or third argument,
whose strength appears in a Syllogism, only by the consequence, Romans 6. 11.
The word translated, Reckon your self, signifies Reason out. (...)


7 The Major of that Syllogism, wherein the whole judgment of Conscience is
laid open, treats always of the Law, the Minor of the fact and state; and
the Conclusion of the relation that arises from our fact or state, by reason
of that Law; which is either guilt, or spiritual Joy. For example,

He that lives in sin, shall dye,
I live in sin: Therefore I shall dye.
Or thus, Whosoever believes in Christ, shall not dye, But I believe in Christ:

Therefore I shall not dye, but live, Romans 8. 13. 33. 34. 1 Ioh. 3. 19. 20.

8 Conscience in regard of the Major, is called a Law: in regard of the Minor
and Conclusion, a Witness; but in regard of the Minor most properly, an Iudex,
or Book: and in regard of the Conclusion, most properly a Judge, Romans 2. 14.
15. Reu. 20. 12. 1 Ioh. 5. 10.

9 The Major is given by the Synteresis, which the Schoolmen call Synderesis:
the Minor is peculiarly called Syneidesis, or Conscience, the Conclusion is the
Krisis it self, or Judgment.

10 Synteresis is properly an intellectual habit, whereby we give our consent
to the principles of moral actions. It differs not therefore from the Law of
nature which is naturally written in the hearts of all men: but in respect
only.

11 Though therefore Conscience may be hindered from working for a while, yet
can it not be fully extinguished or lost. No man is so desperately wicked, as
to be without a Conscience altogether: No not the Libertines, who place their
deadly perfection, in putting out the Conscience of sin:

12 To this part of Conscience Synteresis being largely taken, belong all
Practical truths whereof we are persuaded; whether they be drawn out of
natural principles, by consequence, or communicated by Divine revelation.

13 Hence arises the distinction of a natural and an enlightened Conscience.
The Scripture sometimes does appeal to this, as Romans 6. 3. sometimes to that,
as 1 Cor. 6. 9. and 11. 14.

14 Hence the adaequate or full rule of Conscience is the revealed will of God,
which both declares and prescribes man's duty.

15 Conscience therefore is properly subject to Gods will and authority alone,
Iam. 4. 12. Neither can it be subject to any creature, without Idolatry.

16 Hence also it is, that though men be bound in Conscience before God, to
obey and keep the just Laws of men after a just manner, Romans 13. 5. Yet those
Laws of men, as they are men's Laws, do not bind the Conscience.

17 Conscience so binds man, in all those things which it judges are his
duty, by the will of God; that he cannot be free from it, by the authority of
any creature, Act. 4. 19. In this respect it is, that he that knows Gods
will, is said to be debtor, Romans 1. 14. a servant, Ro^. 6. 16. bound, Act. 20.
22. constrained, 2 Cor. 5. 14. to have necessity laid upon him, 1 cor. 9. 16.
so that he cannot do otherways, Act. 3. 20

18 The power of Conscience is so great, that it makes an action, which in its
own nature is indifferent, to be either good or bad: and that which in its
own nature is good, to be evil: although it cannot make that become good,
which is evil in its own nature.

19 Yet no action is better or worse, for that Conscience that one has after
he has done it.

20 An erroneous Conscience binds always so far, that he that does against
the judgment thereof, sins. For formally, and by interpretation he does it
against Gods will.

21 If the error of Conscience about the action (that is, the object or matter
about which the action is) be not sinful, the Conscience erring, binds as
much as if it did not err.

22 Conscience, through error, judging that to be lawful, or necessary, which
is unlawful, does so far bind, as that a man sins, who does contrary to
it; and sins also, if he do according to the direction of it.

23 Yet this necessity of sinning, wherein some are entangled, is not contrary
to the equity of Gods Law: 1. Because the sin is not the same on both hands:
on the one hand a man's sins in doing what is unlawful; and on the other, in
doing it unlawfully: viz. without or against Conscience. 2. Because it is not
an absolute necessity, but upon supposition only, viz. if they keep still
such a Conscience, which they ought to lay down, Ephesians. 4. 22. 3. Because it
does not flow from the nature of the Law of God, but both is contracted and
continued by man's sin. For no man is thus entangled but by his own fault.

24 Conscience judging that to be unlawful, which is lawful, binds to
refrain from that lawful thing, Romans 14. 14. 15. He likewise that judges
that to be necessary, which is but lawful, is bound to the doing of it:
because a man may abstain from lawful things: and may also constantly
practice them without sinning.

25 Nothing may be done whereof the Conscience doubts, Romans 14. 23.

26 In doubtful cases, the surest part is to be chosen; now that is the
surest part, in doing which, its sure there is no sin.

27 It is lawful, and the best sometimes, to do against some scruple of
Conscience.

28 The reviewing of our actions, or estate, as it respects the Law, which
Conscience dictates, makes up the minor of that practical Syllogism, which
the Conscience makes. It is called in Scripture, a beholding of the mind,
Psalm. 119. 15. Understanding, Psalm. 50. 22. A casting up ones ways, Psalm. 119.
59. A laying of the heart, Hag. 1. 5. A saying to the heart, or in the heart of
them, Hose. 7. 2. A turning again unto the heart, Ier. 12. 11. Mal. 2. 2. And
lastly, a proving and examining of our selves, 2 Cor. 13. 5.

29 In the conclusion of that Syllogism, a man applies to himself the Law of
God, which concerns his Action or condition, and passes sentence on
himself: whence there follows necessarily, either an Excusing, Absolving and
Approbation; or an Accusation and Condemuation, with affections answerable to
them, Romans 2. 15.

30 Though this application in its own nature follow the former acts of
Conscience, as a conclusion does the premises: yet through man's wickedness,
it falls out ofttimes, that though the Major be fully and firmly
acknowledged, and the Minor also in a sort; yet the Conclusion and Application
is not made, Romans 2. 18. 20. 21. 2 Samuel 12. 5. 6.

31 Hence it is, that a necessity lies upon all faithful Pastors, not only to
propound Gods will in general, but according to their abilities, to help men,
both in public and private to apply it, according as their understandings, and
consciences shall require, Romans 12. 7. Matt. 14. 4.

32 A Conscience honestly good is, that which judgeeth rightly and powerfully,
Heb. 13. 18. that which does otherwise, is sinnefully Evil, Isai. 5. 20. Romans
1. 18.

33 A Conscience peaceably good, is that, which excuses, absolveth,
comfort, Acts 24. 16.

34 Conscience since the fall, is not both honestly and peaceably good, but by
the sprinkling of the blood of Christ Heb. 9. 13. 14. and 10. 22. and the
virtue of him in the sanctification of the Spirit, 1 Timothy 1. 5. Act. 15. 8. 9.

35 A Conscience peaceably good may be sinnefully evil, and that which is
evil through trouble and accuses, may be honestly good.

36 A weak Conscience differs in kind from that which is acted, either by
malice, or arrogance, or Superstition.

37 There is but this one way, to pacify a Conscience troubled upon good
grounds: to bring him that is troubled into such a state by true Faith and
repentance, that the Minor of that Syllogism which troubles him, may upon
good grounds become false, and prove such as may be lawfully denied.

38 When the Consciences of (...) believers are sin full in being troubled,
the Major or Minor of that reasoning which caused the trouble, must always be
denied and confuted. This also is the only way to heal such a Conscience.

Corollaries.
1 The greatest violation of Conscience is the greatest sin.

2 The greatest anguish of Conscience is the greatest punishment.

3 That uncertainety of Gods favor, which the Papists hold, and that
uncertainety of Persevering in grace, which others teach, is clean contrary
to that solid joy, and strong confidence, which proceeds from a Conscience
truly good.

4 The interpretation of the Scriptures, or a judgment to discern Gods will
for a man's self, in his own Conscience, belongs to every man.

The End of the First Book.
OF CONSCIENCE AND THE CASES THEREOF The Second BOOK.
In which those Cases are handled, which concern the state of man.

CHAP. 1. Of a case of Conscience, and the state of man in general.
Hitherto we have spoken of the Nature, now we are to entreat of the Cases of
Conscience.

_1. A Case of Conscience is a practical question, concerning which, the
Conscience may make a doubt.

2. It is said to be a question, because it is not an axiom or proposition
that is manifest of it self, but has need of illustration and proof, by some
third argument.

3. It is a practical question, because of the doubts which do not
immediately belong to practice, do not immedatly (...)* to the judgment and
act of Conscience, which thing is not well observed by them who under the name
of cases of Conscience do handle many things, which do ^o more belong to
Gonscience then any other head of Divinity, purposely omi^d by them.

4. It is called (...) (...), because it is wont to fall out, or to Cafus quia
dicitur cadere solet.
happen in the course of man's life, and a case of Conscience, because when it
falls out, the Conscience ought, with all possible care, to give judgment
about it.

5. Of this sort are all those questions wherein (supposing the general
doctrine of Faith and Obedience) we enquire what our duty is, upon any
particular occasion.

6. Of these questions one says well. Because that Law which is written and
engraven in nature, containing the rules of honesty and natural justice, is in
a manner wholly buried by original corruption, and almost totally over whelmed
by custom in sinning, as it were with some heap of evil lusts laid upon it;
and because also the light of the understanding is invilved, and obscured with
manifold darkness, so that neither those rules of honesty, which are within
the book of the mind, are fully and perfectly legible, nor can our
understanding read any thing therein, distinctly and plainly: Hence it is, that
God, in his merciful providence has given us three helps, viz. The light of
Scripture, the assistance of his Grace, and the help of teaching. About this
last, we are now to entreat.

7. Now every question, or case of Conscience (as the nature of the thing it
self, and experience shows) is either about the state of man before God, or
about those actions which in that state he does put forth, and exercise.

8. The state of man belongs to the first part of Divinity, which is about
Faith, and the actions to the second part which is about obedience.

9. The state of man before God, is that relation which man has to God, as he
is the original of spiritual life, and happiness.

10. Concerning this state, the Consciente ought 1. to declare and determine
what it is. 2. to judge, that it is to be eschewed if it be evil, and to be
preserved, and increased if it be good.

11. Concerning the state of man in general there be three questions: The
first is whether a man can certainly know in what state he is?

Ans. He may, 1. Because without this knowledge he cannot have anaccusing, or
excusing Conscience in respect of his estate, But such a Conscience men both
may and are wont to have, Romans 2. 15. 2 Because no man can either eschew or
desire an unknown state: But one of these states a man ought to eschew, and to
labor for the other, Mat. 7. 8.

12. Quest. 2. Whether men ought to make inquiry into their estates.

Ans. Yes, and that with all diligence possible, for 1. This is a thing that
God requires, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2. without this knowledge a man cannot have peace,
or tranquillity in his Conscience, Romans 5. 1. and 8. 1. 3. Otherwise a man
cannot perform worship to God, with that preparation which is requisite, 1
Cor. 11. 28., 1 Cor. 11. 28.

13. Quest. 3. By what means comes a man to the knowledge How a man may come
to the knowledge of his estate.
of his estate?

Ans. 1. By consideration of those actions external, and internal, which
proceed from him, Mat. 7. 17. 2. By the inclinations, and dispositions, from
whence those actions flow, Romans 7. 15, 16, 17. 3. By that reflex act, which is
proper to man, whereby he has a power, as it were to enter into, and perceive
what is in himself, 1 Cor. 2. 11. 4. By a kind of spiritual sense, Luke 24.
32. Romans 7. 21. 28.

14. Quest. 4. what is it that hinders this knowledge? The hinderance of this
knowledge.


Ans. 1. Wicked and profane thoughts in many, Psalm. 14. 1. 2. 2. Presumption,
Apoc. 3. 17. Mat. 7. 21. 23. 3. The overcharging of the heart by the lusts of
the flesh, and care about the things of this life, Luke 21. 34. 4. An evil
Conscience, John 3. 20. 5. Spiritual sloth, and idleness, Esaias ^4. 11* 6.
Ignorance, Romans 6. 11.

CHAP. 2. Of the state of sin.
1. THe state of man since the fall of Adam is twofold. A state of sin, and a
state of grace Acts ^6. 18. ^ John 3. 10. 14.

2. The state of sin consists in the privation of spiritual life, and
happiness. From this estate therefore we are to fly, as from death and the
greatest evil: Concerning this state of sin the first question is, how a man
may discern, whither he do still continue in it?

3. Ans. The signs, o^ arguments, whereby this state may Signs of the state
of sin.
certainly be discerned, are in general, all those which are opposite to a
state of grace, and spiritual life. For if a man be not in the one state, he
must necessarily be in the other.

4. The first sign is a gross ignorance of those things, which belong to
spiritual life, Ep. 4. 18. for hereby* men are strangers to the life of God.
The reason is because it is impossible that any man should please God without
faith, Heb. 11. 6. And for Faith it is impossible to be had without the
knowledge of the will of God, which comes by the preaching and hearing of the
Word, Romans 10. 14.

5. The second sign, is a perverse disposition of will whereby The signs of
reigning sin.
it is in subjection to the rule, and dominion of sin, Romans 6. 12. The reason
is because those who do yield themselves servants to obey sin, are in a state
of slavery to sin, unto death Romans 6* 16.

6 Now the signs of raiging sin, are first if a man do not seriously, and in
good earnest, make opposition against the lusts of sin, but rather yield up
himself unto them. Romans 6. 13. Secondly, I^ in delibr^ate counsel either
profit, or pleasure be preferred by him, and prevail more with (...)* then
either honesty and piety, Phil. 3. 19. Thirdly, if the committing of sin stir
him up rather to pleasure, then grief, Pro. 2. 14. Fourthly, if he take
delight in the company of the wicked, Ps. 50. 18. 2 Cor. 6. 14.

7. The third sign, whereby it may be discerned whether a man be in the state
of sin, is the disposition of will, whereby a man opposes himself, to the
will of God, Romans 8. 7.

8. The signs of this perverse disposition are, 1. To reject the knowledge of
Gods ways, Job. 21. 14* 15. 16. 2. To hate correction, and instruction, Psalm.
50* 17. 3. To contemn the threatenings, and judgments of God, Psalm 36. 1. 2.
Dent. 29. 19.

9. The fourth sign, is perverseness of the affections whereby men, turn away
from God, and wholly cleave, and adhere, to worldly things, 1 John. 2. 15.

10. The averseness of a man from God, is wont to be seen, 1. By his alination
from the Word of God, especially when it is preached to him powerfully 2 Timothy 4*
3. 4. 2. By a neglect of prayer, and other parts of Gods worship, Psalm. 14. 3.
4. Psa. 79. 6. Ier. 10. 25. 3. By an alienation from the servants of God, Pro.
29. 27. 1. John 3. 10.

11. The signs of a man cleaving to, and as it were drowned in the things of
this world are, 1. If he employ his chiefest care, and diligence about these
things Mat. 6. 25. 31. 32. The reason is given Verse 21. and 24. for where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also. 2. If he be ready rather to forsake
God and his righteousness then these worldly things* Mat. 37. 38. 3. If he do
in his heart judge those men to be happy which have an abundance of these
worldly goods. Pro. 11 28. and 18. 11.

12. The fifth sign is the corruption of a man's life; or of the works of life
Romans 8. 13. This corruption of life does not consist in those sins which even
the godly sometimes through infirmity fall into, but in a continued course, and
tenor of sinning. It is called in Scriptures the way of sin, Psalm. 1. 1. A
working of iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. A walking in sin, Psalm. 1. 1. Pro. 1. 15. A
walking after sin, Jer. 9. 14. And a custom in sin, Jer. 13. 23. These
works of the flesh are manifest by themselves, Gal. 5. 19.

13. The sixth and the most desperate sign is, obstinancy in evil, whereby a
man shuts and stops up the way to all amendment, Esaias. 6. 9. 10. Ier. 6. 10.

CHAP. 3. Of deferring or putting off ones Conversion.
QUest. The second question is, whether a man may safely, rest for any time, in
a state of sin, especially if he purpose with himself to reform and amend
his life afterward.

1. Answer, it is not lawful to make the least delay at all in our conversion
unto God. The reasons are, 1. Because God requires this for the present, Psalm.
95. 7. Heb. 4. 7. And seeing sin is a debt, and an injury done to God, it is
manifest, that repentance for the same ought not, unless God consent and like
of it, to be deferred for one moment. As soon therefore as God shall require us
to correct our lives, and to be converted; so soon ought this duty to be
performed, besides this, no subject can keep and receive atheise, and
murderer, or a public enemy, against the will of the magistrate, but he shall
be guilty of a heinous crime. Now sin is a theife, a murderer, and an enemy
to Gods glory. Whosoever therefore shall keep and nourish sin against Gods
Will, although he determine to do it but for a certain time, he thereupon does
bring upon himself a very grievous guilt.

2. Because all delay of Repentance increases hardness of heart, Heb. 4. 7.
It does produce a custom of sinning, and makes the work of repentance to be
harder and harder Ie. 13. 23. The reason is, because thereby evil habits are
more strengthened and confirmed, the understanding becomes darker, Ep. 4. 18.
The will grows more obdurat, and addicted to sin, Heb. 4. 7. All the
faculties are more bound, and tied, as it were with chains, and knots, Acts 8.
23. A young plant is more easily plucked up then that which has taken deep
root. A nail the o^tner it is beaten with a hammer the more firmly it is
fastened, and the more hardly drawn out.

3. Because continuance in sin does increase the number of sins, our guilt,
and the wrath of God, Psalm. 95. 10. 11. For that sin which by repentance is
not taken away, has through its own natural inclination, the course of God
something in it like to the which in Gods things proceed from Gods blessing,
that is, it increases and multiplies, and it does, with its own weight draw
unto other sins, even as the deep is said to call unto the deep.

4. Because the duration of our life is altogether uncertain, Iam. 4. 13, 14.
Delay breeds danger. Thou fool this night shall thy soul be required of thee
and then where will that conversion be, which thou have deferred? when therefore
we have opportunity, let us set upon this business.

5. Because repentance is the gift of God, which he bestows at his own
appointed times, not at our pleasure, 1 Timothy 2. 25. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Luke 13. 9. We
must therefore let slip no occasion, but convert to day; And it is just with
God that (if we neglect our duty, in this point, and refuse to fall to it,
while we may) through his judgment and leaving* and forsaking of us, we should
not be able to do it, when we would.

6. Because the purpose of deferring repentance cannot stand with a sincere
purpose to repent, 1 Peter 4. 3. It is a point of dishonesty, and fraud, and a
sign of a debtor that never means to pay what he owes, when a man because he
is not minded to pay, defers, and puts it of, from one day unto another.

7. Because late repentance is very seldom true, and almost always
suspicions. The example of the theife which we read, of in the Scriptures is
only one, neither yet do we read of him, or of any other that was afterward
converted that did defer and put off his repentance. Yea the clean contrary is
threatened to such a man, Mat. 24. 48.

8. Because though we could be certain that we might afterward repent truly,
yet it were a base and unworthy part to deal so with God, as it is not fit we
should deal with men, Lev. 19. 13 To. 3. 28. And as we would be loath God
should deal with us, Ps. 13. 2. 8. and Cor. 3.

9. Such kind of delays may be convinced of folly, and of madness, even by
common sense, and experience, for all men would account him for a bedlam, that
should when his house were on fire, defer the quenching of it, though but for
one hour. Or that having received some poison into his body, should not
endeavor instantly to expel it; or the having received some grievous wound,
should not with all possible speed seek for remedy. But in neglecting the
burning, the poison, and death of sin, as there is more danger so the folly is
much more pernicious.

CHAP. 4. How the sinner ought to prepare himself to conversion.
QUest. 3. What ought a man to do, that he may be translated out of a state of
sin, into the state of grace?

Ans. Of those things which are necessarily required to this purpose, some
pertain to the pulling a man out of the state of sin, and some to the
setting him in the state of grace, Those things which pertain to the pulling a
man out of the state of sin, are such as serve to shake a man out of that
carnal security, in which he slept before, and to work in him a carfulness
of his salvation above all things else Act. 2. 37. and 16. 33. That this may be
done, many things are necessa^y.

1. For it is first of all required, that a man seriously look into the Law of
God, and make an examination of his life, and state according to 1. Iam. 1. 23.
24 25.

2. It is required, secondly that upon that comparing of our state with Gods
Law, there do follow a conviction of Conscience which in Scripture is called
(...) a being without excuse, Romans 1. 20. And a concluding one under sin, Romans
11. 32. Romans 2. 20 and 7. 7.

3. Thirdly, after this conviction of Conscience, there must follow, a despare
of salvation, both in respect, of all strength of our own, and of any help
which is to be had from the Creatures, Romans 7. 9. 11. 13.

4. Fourthly, after all these; there must follow, a true humiliation of heart,
which consists in grief and fear because of sin, and does bring forth
confession, Mat. 9* 12.

5. For the procuting of this humiliation, it is always necessary that there
be a distinct consideration of some particular finnes: for a general
apprehension of sin, causes a confused astonishment, but no right and true
humiliation, Romans 7. 7.

6. This humiliation is oftentimes occasioned by the sight of some one sin,
Act. 2. 23. 37.

7. It is helped forward often times by some heavy affliction, as in Manasses. 2
Chro. 33. 12. The degrees of this humiliation are not the same, in all that be
converted: for some feel greater trouble, and some less. But all those that
are truly converted are also truly humbled. So put a man in the state of
grace, it is required, that there be 1. Such an apprehension, upon the Gospel,
as whereby a man judges it possible that his sins should be forgiven, Romans
12. 23. Psa. 130. 4. 2 An earnest desire to obtain that mercy, which in
Scripture is called a spiritual hunger, or thirst, Esa. 55. 1. John. 7. 37.
Luke 1. 53. 3 An actu^ll union with Christ, which consists in Faith, that is
wrought in us by effectual vocation, John 15. 1. 4. True repentance, whereby
forsaking all sin, we give up and consecrate our selves wholly to God in Christ,
Acts 2. 38. and 3. 19.

CHAP. 5. Of the effectual Vocation.
BY effectual vocation, we have the first entrance into the state of saving
grace; But here (in general) arise four questions, which do nearly belong
to Conscience, The first question is, whether he that has Faith, may by
ordinary means certainly know, that he is effectually called of God and in the
state of grace?

Ans. He that has Faith, may, and is wont to know The Faithful may be certain
of their vocation.
certainly that he is in the state of grace. Diverse reasons of this assertion,
(besides those which before were, delivered in the questions of the state of
man in general) may be produced.

1. It is the office and the work of the spirit of God which the faithful
have received, to certify and assure them of those things which God of his free
grace has conferd upon them, 1 Cor. 2. 12. To. 8. 15.

2. The faithful are commanded to make their calling and election sure,
neither is this a legal precept but an evangelicall, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

3. That grace which we have received has the nature and force of an earnest,
in respect of that inheritance which is promised to us, Es. 1. 1, 4. and 4. ^0.
1 Cor. 13. 14. 2 Cor. 1 21. 22. For as much therefore as it serves for the
assuring us of the certain of something which is to come, it ought not it
self to be uncertain: for no certainty can be grounded upon an uncertainty.

4. A certain knowledge of the grace of God is required, as a necessary
foundation for that joy and thankfulness which God requires of us, in regard
of that grace, 1 Peter 1. 6. 8.

5. A Conscience purged from dead works does necessarily bring with it a
certain knowledge of grace, Heb. 10. 20. Romans 8. 16. and 9. 2.

6. The faithful are expressly said to have had this assurance, and that by
such arguments as are common to all believers, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 John 3. 14. and
4. 16. and* 5. 20.

The second question is by what signs the certainty of this effectual
vocation, and grace may be confirmed.

7. Ans The first sign is, a constant inclination of the will toward God, as
toward the chief good, Psalm. 119. 57. For there is no man that can indeed
place his chiefest good in the enjoying God, but such a one as is called by God
out of the world, and converted from his idols, which before he had set up to
himself in his heart.

8. The second sign is a purpose, and readiness of mind to hearken unto God
in everything, 1 Samuel 3. 10. Acts 9. 6. Psa. 40. 8 9. For in so doing a man
answers to the call of God, and becomes called* Ps. 27. 8.

9. The third sign is, a vehement longing after the word of God, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
For by this word the faithful are called, and regenerated* 1 Pet. 1. 23.

10. The fourth sign is a singular love toward them which are borne of the
same seed, and blood, 1 John 3. 14.

The third Quest. is, what a man ought to do that he may be The duties of a man
called to help forward his vocation and to make it sure unto himself.
partaker of this grace?

11. Ans. Although God of his unspeakable Grace be often times found of them
that seek not after him, yet there be diverse duties, which ly upon a man
about his vocation, and which both ought, and are wont ordinarily to be
performed before the certainty of this grace can be gotten.

12. He therefore that desires to apply himself to Gods Call ought to settle
in his mind an estimation of the Word of God, above all riches, Psalm. 119. 14.
The reason is, because a man will never seek the Kingdom of God to purpose,
unless he esteem it so highly that he judge all other things to be set after
it, Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26.

13. Secondly, he ought to employ his greatest care labor and industry, about
this business, John 6. 27. Pro. 2. 4. and 8. ver. The reason is because there
can be no serious, and solid estimation of a thing, where there is not an
answerable endeavor to obtain it.

14. Thirdly, he ought with all diligence, care, and constancy, to apply
himself to the use of all those means which God has sanctified for the
communicating of his grace. Pro. 8. 34. The reason is, because God only who is
the author of grace, can appoint means, and make them effectual. He ought
therefore to imitate those sick persons which lay at the poole of Bethesda,
waiting for the moving of the water, John 5. 3 4 7.

15. Fourthly, he ought to bring himself to that pass that he may sell all
that he has to buy this pearl, Pr. 23. 23. Mat. 13. 45, 46. For although God
does freely bestow life upon us, and receive nothing at our hands in liew of
it, Esa. 55. 1. 2. Yet we ought to forsake all unlawful things actually, and
all external and natural goods also, in the purpose, and disposition of our
minds, else we cannot obtain the grace of God.

The fourth Question is by what motives a man may be stird up to embrace the
call of God.

16. Answer, first if he do seriously, and much consider with himself, who it
is that calls him: for it is an omnipotent God to whom we ought to hearken and
give ear; although we should not know what the event would be, Heb. 11. 8.

17. Secondly, if he do consider attentively often what it is to which God
calls him: For it is no small matter, or light thing, but even eternal
happiness, and glory, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Ep. 1. 18.

18. Thirdly, if he do also weigh what that is out of which he is called: For
he is persuaded to forsake nothing, besides sin, and death, Acts 26. 18* Luke
3. 7.

19. Fourthly, if he do also consider what the cause is that moves God to call
him, which he shall find to be nothing else but Gods incomprehensible mercy
toward his enemy* Romans 8. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 10. He must have a heart of Iron, that
is not moved with such goodness as this, as we may see by Saul, 1 Samuel 24. 17.
19.

20. Fifthly, if he do humbly compare himself with others, to whom this grace
of vocation is denied. 1 Cor. 1. 26.

21. Sixthly, if he do call to mind how heinous an offense it is to neglect
this call of God, much more to despise it, Mat. 22. 7. 8. L^. 4 24.

22. Seventhly, if he do also consider of that misery, which he does by the Law
of equity bring upon himself by this sin, Pr^. 1. 24 -- 32.

CHAP. 6. Of Faith.
THe work of effectual vocation, is to work in man a true Faith in Christ,
and repentance toward God.

Concerning Faith, the first question is what a man is to do that he may
obtain true Faith in Christ. How to obtain Faith.


1. Ans. Besides those things which were propounded before, it is further
required, 1. that a man do go altogether out of himself, renouncing his own
righteousness* Romans 10. 3. Phil. 3. 9. The reason is because no man will seek
righteousness out of himself by Faith, unless he do first acknowledge himself
to be destitute of all righteousness in himself.

2. Secondly, he ought to propou^d unto himself the righteousness of Christ,
as his chiefest aim, and scope, so that he does contemn all things in respect
of that, Phil. 3. 9. 12. The reason is, because Christ is never sought as he
ought to be, unless he be preferred before all things else, as the only
means of eternal salvation.

3. Thirdly, he ought to fasten the eyes of his mind, upon the promises of the
Gospel; For the Gospel is the Ministry of the spirit of righteousness and of
life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 8. the reason is, because Christ is neither offered of God,
nor can be apprehended by man, but only in the promises of the Gospel.

4. Now in fastening our eyes upon the promises of the Gosspell, we must
consider first, that Christ only is propounded in them, and that crucified, 1
Cor. 1 23 34. and ^. 2. 2. Secondly, that in Christ there is a perfect
sufficiency of redemption, and salvation, provided for them that be in him,
John 3. 16. Whence also in Scripture it is called a rich, and plenteous,
abundant, and plentiful grace, Ep. 1. 6. 7. and 2. 4. Romans 5. 10. 1. Tim. 1.
14. Thirdly, that this grace is particularly offered to all those to whom it is
preached, Mark^ 16. 13.

The second question is by what motives a man may be stirred up to believe in
Christ.

5. Ans. First, if he consider that this is the Commandment Motives to Faith.
of God, that he do believe in Christ, 1 John 3 23. Secondly, if he meditate
of that misery, to which all those are subject which believe not, John 13. 18.

6. Thirdly, if he do meditate of the happiness of those which do truly
believe, 1 John 3. 16.

7. Fourthly, if he consider that there is no other way whereby he can escape
that misery, or obtain that happiness but only by Faith in Christ, Acts 4.
12. Heb. 11. 6.

8. Fifthly* if he do consider the injury which is offered to God by the man
that believes not, 1 John 5. 10.

9. Sixthly, if he weigh with himself how much they do honor God, which
believe in him, Romans 4. 20. John 3. 33.

10. Seaventhly, if he look upon the cloud of examples, which he has of those
which have believed and have been saved by Faith, Heb. 12. 1. For they were
for patterns to them which should afterward believe, 1 Timothy 1. 16.

The third Question is by what signs true Faith may be discerned?

Ans. Faith in respect of the adjuncts, may be distinguished into a sick Faith
and a lively.

11. A sickly Faith is that which is oppressed and hindered A languishing Faith.
so by temptations, and corruptions, that it cannot put forth it self in those
Fruits, which bring to the Conscience the sense of peace, delight and joy, Ep.
4. 30. an example hereof we have in David, Ps. 51. 14.

12. A lively Faith is that which does freely exercise its A lively Faith.
acts* so that it is felt of the believer himself with a great deal of
comfort, 1 Pet. 1. 8.

13. Faith also in regard of the degrees is distinguished into a weak and
strong Faith.

14. A weak Faith is that which is easily hindered in its course, To. 14. 1.
Ga. 6. 1. It is called in Scripture (...) little Faith, Mat. 16. 8.

15. A strong Faith is that which overcomes all difficulties, A strong Faith.
and proceeds freely in its course, it is called in Scripture (...) a full
persuasion, Rom 4. 24. Luke 1. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Col. 2. 2.

16. A lively and strong Faith is easily manifest and known to them in whom it
is, first because they have the testimony thereof in themselves, 1 John 5. 10.
viz. the Spirit of God bearing witness with their spirit that they are the
children of God, Romans 8. 16. Which spirit they have as the earnest of their
inheritance, 1 Ep. 13. 14. and by it they are sealed till the day of redemption,
Ep. 4. 30. 2 They have the Love of God shed abroad in their hearts by the same
spirit, Romans 5. 5. Whereupon it is that they have peace, and joy unspeakeable,
and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 6. 8. Romans 5. 1. 2. 3* They have and bring forth
those Fruits, whereby true Faith is wont to be manifested, and perfected, Gal.
2. 18. Gal. 5. 6.

17. A languishing, and weak Faith may be discerned to be true, and sincere,
principally by these notes. The signs of true Faith.


First, if there be a sincere desire of Union, and Communion with Christ, 2
Cor. 8* 12. This desire is distingu^sht from that which may be found in the
unregenerate, 1. because it is not a conditional desire, or a kind of
wishing, which even many wicked men have after these spiritual good things, if
they might also enjoy and still keep their sins, but it is an absolute
choice, Heb. 11. 25. 2 Because it is not carried after these spiritual things,
only as beneficial unto a man's self, but as simply, and in themselves good,
and things for their own sake to be desired of all, Psalm. 73. 25. and 43. 3. 3
Because it is carried after all choice that is as well after the sanctification,
as after the justification and redemption which are in him* 1 Cor. 1. 30. 4
Because such a man more esteems of Christ then of all things else, 1 Pet. 2.
6. 5 There is always joynd with this desire, a sense of sin, and a serious
sorrow for it, Mat. 11. 28. 6 This desire is not vanishing, and fickle, but
constant, Luke 18. 1. 7 It is not slothful but industrious, Pro. 21. and 26.
15.

18. The sincerity of Faith appears also, if it has been begotten, and is
preserved and stirred up by the powerful Ministry of the Word, Romans 10. 14.
Whereupon it comes to pass, that a man is affected toward the Word, as
toward spiritual Food, 1 Pet. 2. 2. The reason is because such a kind of
desire being a motion of spiritual Life, must needs presuppose life it self
which consists in Faith; for carnal presumption both consists without the
Ministry of the Word, and can by no means endure the effectual application,
and setting home of those things which belong to the power of godliness, 2 Timothy 4. 3. But Faith cleaves unto the word as its principal and foundation.

19. The sincerity of Faith appears in the third place from hence, that
although it seek justification in Christ, yet it embraces, with a sincere
assent, and subjection of heart, the whole Word of God, that is every precept,
prohibition and threatening, which comes from God, Psalm. 119. 6. Iam. 2. 10. 14.
Herod did assent unto many things, Mark 6. 20. The reason is because Faith
does unite a man's heart to God, and deliver it, up unto him, simply without any
exeception.

20. Fourthly, it appears by this, because as touching the purpose of the
mind, and his uttermost endeavor, it purifye^ a man's heart from all sin*
Acts 15. 9. Mat. 5. 7. The reason is because Faith does principally, and
singularly seek in God the utter abolition or sin.

21. Fifthly, it appears by this, that it stirs up in the heart a sincere
affection of love toward God, whereby it comes to pass, that we prefer the
glory of Gods Name above all things else, 1 John 4. 19. Hence it is that the
faithful in the Scriptures are wont to be described by this property of their
love toward God, Romans 8. 28. 1 Co. 16. 22. Ep. 6. 23, 24. The reason is,
because they place and apprehend their chief good in God.

22. Sixthly, it appears by that sincere love which it works in a man's heart
toward his fellow Brethren, 1 John 3. 14. and 5. 1. The reason is because the
Image of God appears in them.

CHAP. 7. Of those temptations which fight against FAITH.
BEcause the whole spiritual life of a man does depend upon his Faith, Heb.
10. 38. And by Faith as by a shield, a man is preserved safe against all the
temptations of the Devil, the World and the Flesh, Ep. 6. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 9.
Heb. 11. 25. Therefore it is that these three enemies do bend their forces
principally against Faith. It will be profitable therefore to be acquainted
with the principle assaults in this kind, as also with those means whereby
through the grace of God, we may repel them, that they do not overmuch weaken
our Faith.

The first Question then is, how the believer may support Of the want of the
sense of grace.
himself against those temptations, which are drawn from hence, that there
are no notable Fruits of his Faith to be seen and discerned.

1. Ans. first he ought to consider that Faith in its own nature is of those
things which are not seen or felt, Heb. 11. 1. And in this it differs from
vision, Romans 8. 24. 1 Cor. 13. 12. And therefore there is no more required to
the being of Faith but that man do with his whole heart make choice of Christ
for his Savior, and with his whole heart adhere unto him. Other things belong
to the well being of Faith, not absolutely to the being of it, Col. 2. 7.

2. Secondly, he ought to consider, that the want of many fruits may argue
Faith to be languishing, or weak, but it cannot argue that there is no Faith,
2 Pet. 1. 8.

3. Thirdly, he ought to consider that the Conscience is often supported much
by the remembrance of what is past, though for the present grace appear not,
Psalm. 77. 6. 7. 12. And by the judgments of others that are godly, and wise
concerning us, when our own judgment is troubled, Heb. 6. 9. 2 Cor. 2. 7. 8.

The second Question is, how a man may support himself Of the sense of the
wrath of God.
against those temptations which are drawn from hence, that he feels upon him
the signs of the Wrath of God?

4. Ans. First, he ought to consider, that many signs of Gods wrath may stand
with his love and favor. Psalm. 99. 8.

5. Secondly, he ought to remember that Christ himself who was the Son of
Gods love, did taste the wrath of God in this sort, Mat. 27. 46.

6. Thirdly, he ought to consider that it is required of the Faithful that
they believe against hope under hope, Romans 4. 11. And that they do, and they
wrestle as it were with God, by Faith, Genesis 32. 24. Hos. 12. 4. 5.

The third Question is how he may hold up his head a Of the want of growth and
progress in Faith.
against those temptations, which arise from hence, that his Faith increases
not, Romans 1. 17.

7. Ans. He ought to consider first that it is with Faith, as it is with plants
and living Creatures, which we may more easily perceive to have grown, then
to grow. Secondly, that the increase of Faith is not to be expected at every
moment, and at all seasons of our life, Heb. 5. 12. But then especially when
the Sun of righteousness approaches nearer to our Horizon, by a more
merciful communication of his grace, Acts 9. 31. 2 Pet. 1. 2. 3. Thirdly, that
those temptations which do hinder the increase of Faith for the present do
advantage it for the future, like the winter to the Plants, and like diverse
sicknesses to the bodies of young Folk.

Fourth Question is how a man may comfort himself against those terrors which
arise from the guilt of his sins, especially if they be greevous?

8. Ans. He ought to remember, 1. That such temptations as these, do proceed
from a defect in Faith, Romans 6. 11. Ep. 6. 16. 1 Pet. 5. 9. And therefore that
we are not to cast away our Faith because of such sins, but rather so much the
more to strengthen it, Lu. 22. 32.

9. He ought secondly to consider that it is the duty of the faithful not for
sin to fly away from God, but rather for God to fly away from sin, and to
adhere to God in Christ, that sin may be remitted, and abolisht, John 3. 14.
With Number. 21. 19.

The fifth Quest. is how a Christian may sustain himself in time of
affliction?

10. Ans. He ought to consider, 1. That such kind of trials are fruits of Gods
love, Heb. 12. 6. 2 They shall work for his good, Romans 8. 28. 3 The grace of
God in all these ought to be sufficient to him* 2 Cor. 12. 9. But of
afflictions more hereafter.

CHAP. 8. Of Repentance.
COncerning Repentance the first Question is, what a man is to do that he may
repent?

1. Ans. He ought, 1. attentively and seriously to consider his sins,
according to that nature which is most detestible, Esa. 1. 4. Apoc. 3. 17. For
as the consideration of sin under some false shape as a thing lovely, and
desirable, does draw a man to sin: so the true consideration of sin* as a
thing abominable, and by all means to be eschew'd, does withdraw the mind
from sin by true Repentance. To set on this consideration it will be
profitable, 1. To meditate upon the Majesty of God, which is by our sins most
grievously offended. 2. Weigh well the infinite and manifold obligations
whereby we are bound to please God, which yet we have not ceast wickedly to
violate. 3. To think upon the terrible wrath of God, which like a consuming
fire, remains upon impenitent sinners. 4. To set before our eyes, those
supernatural good things of which our sins deprive us. 5. To call to mind
those great evils which by our sins we bring upon our selves, and others,
and the dishonor which we do to God. And to this purpose it will be exceeding
profitable religiously to meditate upon the unsufferable torments, death, and
curse which befell Christ for our sins.

2. He ought, 2. to set before his eyes, Obedience toward God, as a thing
absolutely to be sought, necessarily to be followed after, Luke 13. 3 and 10.
42. They which are carried after any other thing, as absolutely necessary, are
by that very affection by which they are so carried, drowned in perdition. 1 Timothy 6. 9.

3. He ought, 3. to confess his sins before God, 1 John 1. 9. Psalm. 32. 5.
and 51. 5. For confession of sin makes a man take all the guilt, and shame
unto himself, and ascribe all the glory to God, Daniel 9.

4. He ought, 4. by Faith in Christ to expect, and pray for the change of his
heart according to that promise which we have, Ez. 36. 26. 32. For those which
go about the work of conversion leaning upon their own strength, do nothing
to the purpose in this business, 2 Cor. 3. 5,

5. He ought, 5. in the power of God, to turn himself with all his heart from
that which is evil, and to convert himself to that which is good in the sight
of God, Psalm 34. 15. Now turning from evil, consists primarily in the hatred
of evil, Psalm. 45. 8. Which hatred in respect of those sins which are past,
does necessarily bring forth an unfeigned sorrow, Zach. 12. 10. Together with a
shame, and dislike, Romans 6. 21. And conversion to good, does primarily consist,
in a desire, and purpose to do well, Psalm 119. 33. 106.

The second Question is, by what motives a man may be stirred up to true
repentance?

6. Ans. Let him consider, 1. That this repentance is a thing very pleasing to
God, Psalm. 51. 19. The force of the argument lies here, because he which has
given himself up to God by Faith, cannot but endeavor after all those things,
by which God is well pleased. 2. That it is absolutely necessary to salvation,
Luke 13. 3. The reason of the consequence lies here, because he which desires
the end, desires also those means, which he sees to have a necessary
connection with that end, 3. That sin is the cause of our separation from
God, Esa. 59. 2. This reason holds because the believer by his Faith does
adhere to God, and therefore turns away from all those things which work a
separation twixt God, and him, 4. That there is an utter opposition betwixt
sin, and ou^ vocation and Faith and Life, 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7. 1.
The argument is strong because he which affirms one of the contraries denies
the other, 5. That the mercies of God toward him, (by all which he is lead
unto repentance) are exceeding great, Romans 2. 4. 5. Ier. 84. 5. 12. 6. That
Christ suffered most grievous anguish for our sins. Zac. 12. 12. By which we
may learn how horrible they be, and how much to be detested, 7. That
impenitency in it self is the most grievous sin, and that it is the
continuation, the sealing up, and the amplification of all sins besides, 8.
That there are great promises made, and that the Kingdom of Heaven stands open
to all such as repent, Esa. 1. 18. 1 Kings 8. 48 49, 50.

The third Question is, what be the signs of true Repentance? Signs of
Repentance.


7. Answer, First a grief for sin in respect of the offense done to God by
them, and not only in respect of punishment; the reason is because repentance
does turue a man from sin as it is sin, now it is sin as it does
transgress the revealed will of God, and so offends him, and provokes him to
anger. This grief ought to be the greatest of all grief, Zach. 12. 10, 11. At
the least intellectively, in regard of the displeasednesse of the will,
although in respect of the sense other griefs may sometimes appear more
vehement. Grief, or sorrow is an offense of the soul, arising from hence that
it suffers something which it abhors as being a thing whereby it feels it
self to be hurt. Grief therefore for sin does necessarily accompany true
conversion, for the mind while it converts it self from sin, begins to
nill sin, or to abhor it, It perceiving therefore that somewhat sticks to
it which it does abhor, cannot choose but be troubled. And because the chief
reason why the converted soul does abhor sin, is that repugnancy which
sin has to the will of that God, to which the soul being converted is now
joined, hence it is, that grief for sin if it be right arises rather from
this ground, because God is thereby offended, then because any misery is
brought upon our selves.

8. Secondly, a hatred of sin, as a thing above all others most detestable,
Apocal. 2. 6. This hatred if it be sincere, 1. Is carried against all known
sins without any exception, 2. It is constant without intermission, 3. It is
implacable without reconciliation, 4. It is vehement without toleration.

9. A third sign is an earnest desire, and settled purpose to avoid all sin,
and to live after Gods Law for the future; The reason is because he which does
detest, and hate sin, for this reason because it is sin, and offends Gods
Majesty, will as well abhor future sins, as those which are past, for these
do every whit as much offend God as the other: and no man can avoid future
sins unless he do purpose and determine with himself, as strongly as he
can that he will never, upon any condition commit sin again. This purpose if
it be sincere, 1. Does cause a separation as far as possible may be from
present sins, and from occasions of future sins, 2. It intends every
thing that it is good, 3. It seeks for it effectually in a diligent endeavor
and use of the means, 4. It carefully labors to remove all impediments as
well internal, as external.

The fourth Question is how a man can repent of such sins as Repentance for
sins unknown.
he cannot come to the knowledge of?

10. Answer, He which formally and distinctly repents of all his known sins,
has a virtuall, and con^used repentance even for those sins which he
knows not, Psalm 19. 13.

The fifth Question is, whither it be sufficient for a man to Of the
continuation and renovation of Repentance.
repent once?

11. Ans. First, past sins are not to be forgotten, Deuteronomy. 9. 7. No not those
which were committed in youth, Psalm 25. 7. 2* This remembrance of former
sins is profitable, 1. to humble us, Deuteronomy. 9. 6. 7. 2. To stir up
thankfulness toward God, 1 Timothy 1. 12. and 3. 10. 3 To make us pitiful and
gentle to other sinners, Titus 3. 2. 3. But as often as our sins come to mind
we ought to be affected with shame, and sorrow for them, Genesis 41 9. Ez. 16. 61.
63. 1 Cor. 15. 9. It is true that horror which is wont at ones first
conversion to ceize upon the soul, returns not to the faithful by the
remembrance of their old sins, because of the Mercy of God, which thorough
Christ they have obtained, but yet shame, and blushing is a thing that does
become Saints very well, Romans 6. 21. So that it is made a note of a wicked man
that has not yet repented of his sins if he can think on them, and call
them to mind with pleasure, Job. 20. 12. Pro. 2. 14.

12. Secondly, Repentance is to be renewed daily, as sins are renewed, 2 Timothy
1. 6. Ier. 8. 6. For as a Candle newly put out, and yet smoking, is kindled
again and reviveth by a small blast, so the soul is freed from ordinary
straights and dangers by a seasonable, that is by a daily renewing of
Repentance. A member out of joint is to be set as soon as may be. 3. After
extraordinary sins extraordinary repentance also is necessary, Psalm. 51. 1. 1
Corin. 5. 2. 2 Cor. 7. 9. and 12. 21.

CHAP. 9. Of Adoption.
Upon Faith in Christ follows justification and adoptition, but because
justification does properly consist in relation therefore there is no peculiar
thing about it that belongs to Conscience, besides those which either were
spoken of before, in the Questions about Faith, or are hereafter to be spoken
of, amongst those things which belong to Sanctification, Glorification, and
Obedience.

If any one be certain of his Faith in Christ, and yet do doubt in Conscience
whether he be justified before God, this happens through want of wisdom to
infer the conclusion out of the promises. This defect therefore is remedied by
a right information about the nature of justification. For all the promises of
the Gospel concerning remission of sins, justification, and life eternal,
do as well belong to every particular believer, and may and ought as well to be
apprehended, and applied by him unto himself, as if his own name were written
in the Scriptures. The reason is, because whatsoever is promised to Faith, or
to the faithful in general, is promised expressly to all and every true
believer in particular.

There is the same reason for adoption also, save only that to this benefit,
there is attributed as an adjunct a certain operation of the spirit in respect
whereof he is called the spirit of adoption. For although it be the same
spirit, which does, 1. convince men of sin, and of righteousness, and
judgment, John 16. 8. 2 Illuminate them with the saving knowledge of Christ, 1
Corinthians 1. 10. 13. Ep. 1. 17. 18. 3 Ingraft them into Christ, Ep. 3. 6. and
4. 4. 4. Quicken them being ingrafted, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 5. Lead them into all truth
which is necessary to salvation, John 14. 17. and 16. 13. John 4. 16. Yet
because adoption has a primary place among those benefits which are sealed to
us by the holy spirit, hence it is that he receives a singular denomination
there from, and is called the spirit of adoption, Romans 8. 15. Means to
obtain the spirit of Adoption.
Concerning this spirit the first Question is, what a man ought to do that he
may obtain the lively act, and sense of it?

1. Ans. He ought, 1. to give diligent attention to the preaching of the
Gospel, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 8. The Ministers of the new testament are called the
Ministers of the spirit, and the Ministry thereof the Ministry of the spirit,
because by that means God does offer, and communicate his spirit, Gal. 3. 2.
Ye have received the spirit by the hearing of Faith, Ep. 1. 13.

In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel
of your salvation, in whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise.

2. He ought, 2. to beg this spirit of God, Luke 11* 13. Your Heavenly Father
will give the holy spirit to them that ask him.

3. He ought* 3. To open the doors of his heart that the spirit may enter in,
Psalm. 24. 7. Apoc. 3. 20. That is to call off his mind from earthly things and
to raise it upwards and to prepare himself, by all means to entertain the
motions of the spirit.

The proper Question is, what be the signs of the spirit of Signs of Adoption.
Adoption.

4. Ans. The first sign is a spirit of Prayer, whereby we call upon God as a
Father. Zach. 12. 10. Romans 8. 15. 26. Gal. 4. 6. For no man can have a true
filial affection toward, and confidence in God, but by communion of the spirit.

Now this is in that regard proper in a sort to the time of the Gospel, or new
Testament, because God has declared himself principally, ^tly, and in a more
excellent manner then formerly to be our Father.

5. The second sign is an high estimation of the dignity of Adoption, Ioh. 1.
12. 1 Ioh. 3. 1. For the spirit does not only seal unto us our Adoption, but
does also show us how great a blessing it is, and how much to be prised.

6. The third sign is the fear and honor of God, 1 Pet. 1. 17. Mat. 1. 6.
For true reverence follows upon an apprehension of great love and kindness
mixed with great power.

7. The fourth sign is filial obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 14. Which proceeds not so
much from hope and reward, as from love and desire to please God, Romans 8. 14.
For obedience springs from a religious reverence.

8. The fifth sign is conformity to the Image of God our Father, and Christ
our elder brother, Mat. 5. 48. To. 8. 29. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. For the Son is begotten
after the similitude and likeness of his Father.

9. The sixth sign is a firm hope of the eternal inheritance To. 8. 17. For
the inheritance and the expectation thereof is proper to some, not to peccants
or strangers.

The third Question is how the testimony of the spirit may be preserved?

8. Ans. 1. If we extinguish and quench it not by contempt or neglect of the
means of grace, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. 20. The reason is, because the word with the
like means of grace are the force of the spiritual life, by the use of which
the spirit is strengthened within us, and in the want of which the spirit in
regard of its inhabitation fails in us, and is said to be quenched.

11. 2. If we grieve it not by the filthiness of sin, Ephesians. 4. 30. The reason
is because as natural grief arises from the presence, or representation of
some repugnant, and unwelcome object, which is incumbent and prevails against
us, so that spirit is in a sort grieved by the prevailing of sin, a thing to
him most odious and repugnant.

12. 3. If we stir it up by holy exercises. 2. Tim. 1. 6. The reason is
because as fire in green wood burns not but by the help of bellows and
blowing, so neither does any spiritual heat continue in the hearts of
sinners, unless due means be used for the stirring it up.

CHAP. 10. Of Sanctification.
COncerning Sanctification the first question is, what a How to obtain
Sanctification.
man ought to do that he may be sanctified?

1. Ans. He ought* 1. wholly to submit himself to the word of God. For the word
of God is that truth which sanctifies u^. Ioh 17. 17. Ier. 31. 33. And it is
effectual to work sanctification, 1. Because of that utter opposition which
it has against sin, by reason whereof it repells sin out of the heart,
where it is seated, 2. Because it is the powerful instrument of God to
regenerate men, 1. Pet. 1 23.

2. He ought 2. By Faith to apply Christ unto himself, as in Sanctification, 1
Cor. 1. 30. He ought therefore, 1. To suck as it were holiness out of Christ,
that is, Considering that Christ is the Fountain of all spiritual life and
Sanctifying grace, Ioh. 1. 16. Col. 1. 19. and 2. 9. He ought to rely and put
his confidence in Christ for the obtaining of Sanctification, and to draw it
ought of that Fountain, Esa. 12. 3. He ought, 2. To provoke himself unto it
by the meditation of Christ, that is, seriously weighing and considering the
blessings of God in Christ, he ought to stir up himself to such an endeavor
after Sanctification as becomes such benefits.

3. Now because there are two parts of our Sanctification, namely
mortification, whereby sin or the old man is put off, and vivification,
whereby grace or the new man is put on, Ephesians. 4. 22. 24. Col. 3* 8* 10.
Therefore there are two parts of the application of it for Sanctification, the
first is the application of his death, the second of his Resurrection and life,
Romans 6.

4. The application of the death of Christ to the mortifying of sin, is when
Faith does effectually collect this mortification of sin, from the death of
Christ, Romans 6. 11.

5. By this application sin is said to be crucified* Romans 6. 6. Gal. 5. 24.
To be killed, Romans 6. 2. And to be buried, Romans 6. 4.

6. The Nails whereby in this application sin is fastened to the Cross, are
the very same with those, whereby Christ was fastened to the Cross. For there
is nothing more effectual, then if one would consider seriously, 1. The nature
and desert of his sins. For he which seriously considers that his sins do
deserve, and will procure his death, and destruction, he cannot but seek by
all means to prevent it, by the mortification of sin; for either sin, or
the sinner must needs die, Romans 8. 13. 2 The love and mercy of God the Father
toward him a sinner, in sending Christ to take away his sin. For the love of
God will constrain us to seek that for our selves, which God so earnestly
sought for us, 1 John 4. 11. 3 The love of Jesus Christ in undergoing, and
fulfilling all things that were required for the taking away of our sins. For
this grace and love of Christ, if it work but upon us as it ought, will
constrain us to set about this work, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Those were the very
Nails whereby Christ was fastened to the Cross, and not those material ones,
which his murderers did use for this purpose.

7. The application of the resurrection and life of Christ unto vivification,
is when Faith does effectually collect this life of grace, from the
resurrection and life of Christ. Romans 6. 11. Now it is effectually collected,
by a meditation of the efficient cause, and end, and fruits of the resurrection
of Christ, Col. 3. 1. The meditation of the efficient cause affords this
argument; If the said spirit which raised up Christ from the dead, dwellin me,
it will also raise up my soul from the death of sin, to the life of grace,
Romans 8. 11. The meditation of the end, this; As Christ was raised up, that
sin might have no more dominion over him, but that he might for ever live to
God, so also must we, Romans 6. 9. 10. The meditation of the fruits yields this
argument: As Christ being raised up sits at the right Hand of his Father in
Heaven, so ought we also to live as Citizens of Heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

8. He ought, 3. by a lively Faith, not only to apprehend the general
promises of salvation, but those particular ones also, which do in a singular
manner pertain to sanctification Ex. 30. 24.

9. He ought, 4. To yield up himself wholly to the holy Ghost, to be acted and
led by him in all things. To. 8. 13. 14.

The second Question, by what motives may a man be stirred Motives to
Sanctification.
up to labor for Sanctification?

10. Ans. If he consider, 1. That without holiness no man shall see God. Heb.
12. 14. Mat. 5. 20. 2 That holiness is the Image of God, and that perfection,
wherein we were created at the beginning. Ephesians. 4. 24. 3 That holiness is the
end of our election, redemption and vocation, Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 7. Tit. 2.
14. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 4 That it is not the least part of glory and eternal bliss.
Ephesians. 5. 27. 5 That there can be no true Faith or justification, or adoption
without sanctification, Iac. 2. 26. 2 Pet. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 6. 11.

The third Question, what are the signs of true sanctification. The signs of
Sanctification.


Ans. 1. A reformation of all the powers, and faculties of the whole man, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. 2 A respect to all the Commandments of God, Psalm. 119. 6. James
2. 10. 3 A constant care to avoid all sin, Pro. 28. 14. 4 A walking before
God, Genesis 17. 1. Acts 24. 16. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Col. 3. 23. 5 A combat betwixt the
flesh and the spirit.

CHAP. 11. Of the combat of the Spirit against the Flesh.
QUestion, how may the combat of the spirit against the flesh which is in the
regenerate, be distinguished from that fight which is often found in the
unregenerate when they sin?

First, Ans. 1. They differ in the causes. For, 1. the reluctation which is in
the wicked proceeds either from horror, and a s^vish fear of punishment, or
from some evil disposition, which is easily overcome, but the spiritual
combat arises from a certain new nature, which of its own accord, is carried
after those things which are pleasing to God, and does firmly, and constantly
shun, and make opposition against whatsoever is contrary, 2. That fight and
reluctation, which is found in wicked men, takes place only, in such gross
sins, as either are condemned by the Law of nature, or are wont to be abhorred
by all such as are in any small measure illuminated: but the spiritual combat
of the regenerate* is exercised against all sin, though it never come to be
perfected in any gross crime.

Secondly, 2. They differ in the objects: For that fight which is found in the
wicked, is either between the dictate of their Conscience and the inclination
of the will, or between some light inclination of the will to some moral good
things, and heady affections which rule, and bear sway: but that combat which
is in the regenerate, consists in the opposition and strife of a certain new
and supernatural quality of spiritual life, which has its seat principally
in the will, against corrupt inclinations, which dwell indeed within them, but
bear no sway over them.

Thirdly, 3. They differ in the effects. For 1. that fight which is in natural
men, may and is wont to consist with a daily and ordinary course of sinning:
But the combat of the spirit, does always cause that (although there may be
many slips, and infirmities) the course, and tenor of a man's life be squared,
and ordered according to the will of God, 1 John 3. 9. 10. 2 That opposition in
natural men, although it may sometime be a cause, why some good is done by
them, yet it cannot make a good principle, a good end, and a good manner of
working * all which the combat of the spirit against the flesh does bring
along with it, 3. The fight of natural men, does ordinarily admit such actions
as are for the substance of them evil: but the spirit does so prevail for the
most part that it admits not a sin in the fact it self although there may be
a failing in the degree, and manner of doing, 4. For those evils which the
unregenerate man does commit, this fight that is within him hinders not, but
that the sin may be, in all respects consummated, in regard of the precedent
consultation, and purpose, the concomitant pleasure, and delight, and the
following obstinacy and impenitency: but the spirit by its combat with the
flesh does abate the power of sin, partly before the commission, party in the
commission, and does afterward utterly break it, 5. That reluctation which is
in natural men seeks only to repress, and keep sin under, but the spirit
in its combat contends always for the very mortification of sin, and the
highest perfection of grace, although before death it be not attainable.

CHAP. 12. Of growth in Sanctification.
THe fifth Question is whether we ought to content our selves with this, that
we have some beginnings of sanctification?

1. Answ. No, there are two duties to be performed yet by us, in either of
which if we be negligent all our labor is lost.

2. The 1. Is a care to keep that holiness we have, 1 Timothy 1. 19. The reason
is because that many have escapt in some degree the pollutions of the world,
and yet have been entangled therein and overcome, and so the latter end has
been worse with them then their beginning, 2 Pet. 21. 22.

3. Now we shall hold fast our holiness, 1. If we be mindful of the
Covenant which we made with God, Job. 31. 1. And of our redemption, 1 Cor. 6.
19. 20. 2 If we take diligent heed, that we never repent of any repentance,
Ier. 34. 11. That is if we be careful that we never fall in love with that sin
which we have hated, or slight any duty which our Consciences have approved, no
not in those things, which the world counts small and as nothing.

4. The 2. duty is a study, and care to increase in holiness, with the
increase of God, Col. 2. 19. 2. Peter 1. 5. Phil. 1. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 15.

5. The reason is, 1. Because such is the nature of grace that it always stirs
up them in whom it is to an earnest desire of a larger fruition of it, 1 Pet.
2. 2. 3. So that although that thirst which is a thirst of total indigence or
want be excluded by grace, John 4. 14. Yet that which is for a more plentiful
fruition is no taken away but increast, 2. Because as the vital heat of our
bodies does never continue in one state, but is either increasing, or
decreasing always, so in this life of grace, unless we do give all diligence
that we may be on the growing hand, it cannot be avoided but there will be a
consumption through that opposition which the spirit meets with from the flesh.

6. Now we shall make a progress in Sanctification, 1. If we exercise our
selves daily to a more perfect denying of sin, and of the world, and of our
selves, and to a more earnest and serious seeking of God and his Kingdom, 2.
If we have our end always in our eyes, Pro. 4. 23. 3 If we keep our hearts
with all diligence, Pro. 4. 23* 4 If we watch to ^e holy use of all those
means which make to sanctification, and join earnest prayer with them.

CHAP. 13. Of the first fruits of Glorification consisting in the sense of Gods
Love.
ull in this life, the apprehension and sense of Gods Love is the chiefest, for
as the procurement of our salvation, had its beginning, and first foundation, in
the election, and love of God, so the beginning of the perceiving thereof is in
the perceiving of the same love, now concerning this love, the first Question
is how a man may obtain the apprehension and sense of the love of God?

1. Ans. The proper cause of this apprehension is the holy How to obtain the
Sense of Gods Love.
Ghost, who sheds this love of God in the hearts of believers, Romans 5. 5. That
is, certifies them particularly that this love of God is extended abundantly to
them. But yet there are many means whereby this work is promoted, and whereby
also believers come to be rooted, and grounded in this love, Ephesians 3. 18.
The principle of them are these that follow.

2. First, if the believer do apprehend that (God in regard of that relation
wherein he stands to him and the rest of the faithful is merely love) 1 John
4. 8. For so that phrase is to be understood, not of God considered absolutely,
but in relation unto the faithful, because all things which God does, to and
about believers, proceeds in some sort from his love, for the love of God is to
be sought for, and to be confidered in the effects thereof.

3. Secondly, if he consider how admirable all the circumstances be in the love
of God, John 3. 16. 1 In respect of the person loving. For God who has in
himself all good, all sufficiency, and perfection, that could receive no
profit, either by man, or by man's love and besides that was grievously offended
with man, this God notwithstanding loves man 1 John 4. 10. 11.

4. Secondly, in respect of the person beloved. For God has loved man, that
deserved no such thing from him, man his enemy, man unthanfull, To. 5. 8.

5. Thirdly, in respect of the gifts which are the fruits of this love. For God
out of love has given man his own Son, and in his son himself, 1 John 2. 24.
And with him all good things, Romans 8. 32.

6. Fourthly, in respect of the manner of the giving, which was out of mere
and abundant grace, without man's request, and beyond his expectation, Romans 10.
20.

7. Fifthly, in respect of the continuance, for this love of God was from
eternity, and shall remain immutably unto all eternity, Ep. 1. 4. Ier. 31. 3.
John 13. 1.

8. The third means to promote the sense of Gods love in the heart of a
believer is for him to labor with all his might in the use of those means
which tend to this purpose to get a more plentiful taste of this love, Psalm
34. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 3.

The second Question is how a man may know that God loves him?

9. Ans. 1. If he be certain that Christ is his, Gal. 2. 20. that is, if he be
certain that he has a true Faith in Christ. For Christ is the Son of Gods
love, by whom his love is derived unto others.

10. 2. If he be certain of his love to God, 1 John 4. 10. The signs of Gods
love to us.
Pro. 8. 17.

11. 3. If he follow after righteousness, Pro. 15. 9. For God cannot but love
his own Image.

12. 4. If the love of God do constrain, and effectually stir him up, to all
duties of piety toward God, and of love, and Justice toward men, ^ Cor. 5.
14. 1 John 4. 12.

A third Question is, whether a man may not collect the Love of God, from the
common good things which he bestows?

13. Answ. All the benefits of God, of what sort soever they be, do bring with
them an obligation, to love and obey that God which is the donor, but it is
proper to some of them to bring besides that, solid and spiritual comfort to
the receiver, by a demonstration of the singular love of God, which is made by
them. For nothing that is common, can demonstrate any special love. Creation
therefore, and preservation, and earthly and natural good things cannot by
themselves be any signs of a supernatural love, Eccles. 9. 2. But yet these
common good things, when they are received by Faith, as given in Christ, are
(in respect of the manner wherewith they are then clothed) proper to the
faithful, and are secundary signs of Gods love to them, Psalm. 22. 10, 11, 12.
For Faith makes such a kind of arguing as there the Psalmist uses, to be of
force, whereas without Faith there could no such consequence be drawn from
them.

CHAP. 14. Of the hope of eternal life.
FRom the apprehension, and sense of Gods love, follows a confirmed hope, or
confidence, and undoubted expectation of eternal life. Now concerning this
hope, and certainty, the first Question is whether a believer may be infallibly
be assured of his salvation?

1. Ans. There is not only a possibility for the believer to Hope may and
ought to be certain.
come to this certainty, but it is his duty also, never to rest contented till
he have obtained it, Heb. 6. 11. and 10. 22. Romans 4. 21 and 8. 35.-39. For

2. First, God has confirmed this to every believer by promise, by oath, by
earnest, by seals, John 3. 16. Ier. 31. 40, 41. Heb. 6. 17. Ephesians. 1. 14. Mark.
16. 16.

3. Secondly, Faith ought to receive all that which God has thus confirmed,
Heb. 4. 2.

4. This certainty is perfected in us by three Acts, 1. by an act of Faith
properly so called whereby we rest upon God by Christ, for the certain
obtaining of salvation: 2 By an act (...) of knowledge, whereby we believing do
understand that God has certainly adjudged this salvation unto us. 3. By an
act of confidence or of hope, whereby we certainly look for this salvation,
which is thus adjudg'd to us and made ours. But yet for all that the whole
application is attributed to Faith, because it depends first, and chiefly on
faith.

5. Thirdly, salvation, and life eternal is contained in the object of Faith.
For we believe life everlasting, 1 Peter 1. 3, 4, 5.

6. Fourthly, true grace (of the certainty of which we spoke before) is never
separated from life eternal, Heb. 6. 9. For the grace of justification is a
more certain cause of life, and the grace of sanctification is a part of
eternal life, John. 17. 3. Gal. 2. 20.

7. Fifthly, God the Father has decreed to bring to eternal life all those
that believe, for Faith is a fruit of election, Acts 2. 47. and 13 48.

8. Sixthly, Christ our Savior does perpetually intercede for the faithful,
that they may be preserved from evil, John 17. 15.

9. Seventhly, the holy Ghost does direct, and keep the faithful to life
eternal, John 16. 16. Ez 36. 27.

10. Eighthly, by the power of God, and Christ, the faithful are preserved,
John 10. 28, 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. And strengthened, Ephesians. 3. 16. Col. 1. 10. Pil. 4.
1.

The second Question by what motives a believer may be Motives to endeavor for
certainty of hope.
stirred up to seek for this certainty of hope with all diligence?

11. Ans. 1. God requires this, Romans 15 13. Col. 1* 23. Heb. 6. 11. and 10. 22.
1 Pet. 5 9.

12. Secondly, this hope is as necessary for a believer in time of temptation,
as a helmet is for a Soldier, and an anchor for a Ship, Ep. 6. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
8. Heb. 6. 19.

13. Thirdly, it brings with it freedom, and strength and courage, and
constancy, in every work of the Lord, Heb. 3. 6. 1 Cor. 15. 58. The reason is
because the end, and fruit of a man's work does allure, and wh^t him on to
industry, and constancy in working. For although our salvation be not the
chief, and last end of our obedience, yet it is the fruit of it, and in that
respect, partaketh of the nature of an end, Romans 6. 22. So that it is not only
lawful but very expedient also, for the help of our infirmity to set about
the work of piety, with an eye upon the recompense of reward, James 5. 7. Gal.
6, 7, 8* Heb. 12. 2. Ps. 19. 12.

14. Fourthly, it is the end of the calling of the Faithful, whence also it is
styled the hope of their calling, Ephesians. 1. 18.

15. Fifthly, this hope makes not ashamed, because it is never vain, neither
does it deceive, Romans 5. 4, 5. Romans 8. 24.

16. Sixthly, it is hope by which a believer is saved, Romans 8. 24.

The third Question is what a believer ought to do for the obtaining and
preserving of a lively hope.

17. Ans. He ought, 1. to preserve his Faith firm, and lively. For hope flows
from* and depends upon Faith, and that not only, the being of Faith, but the
degree, the measure, and the sense of it. Heb. 11. 1.

18. Secondly, he ought with all care to keep a good conscience: for such a
Conscience does make much for the confirming of Faith and hope, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.

19. Thirdly, he ought diligently to observe the experiment which he has had
of Gods love toward him. For experience causes hope, Romans 5. 4.

20 Fourthly, he ought oftentimes to set before his eyes the examples of those,
who have with happy success placed their hope in God, James 5. 10, 11.

21. Fifthly, he ought to be frequent in the exercises of piety, Romans 1^. 4.

The fourth Question is what are the signs of a true and The signs of true
hope.
lively hope?

22. Ans. 1. True hope is carried upon God only, who is therefore called the
God of hope, Romans 15. 1^. And the hope of Israel, Ier. 14. 8.

23. Secondly, it rests upon that free mercy of God which is manifested in
justification, and not upon any humane merits, or strength, nor upon any
external and common blessings of God, Romans 5. 1.

24. Thirdly, it does expect not only happiness, but sanctification also, Gal.
5. 5.

25. Fourthly, it is begotten, and preserved by holy exercises, Romans 15. 4.

26. Fifthly, it brings forth patience, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

27. Sixthly, it causes spiritual joy, Heb. 3. 6.

28. Seventhly, it begets a constant care of holiness, 1 John 3. 3.

CHAP. 15. Of Consolation.
FRom Christian hope or confidence, arises consolation, which is, a
confirmation of the soul, against the grief and fear that does oppress it,
for it is not properly a rejoicing of the soul (as some think) but rather a
repression, or a mitigation, o^ an allaying of grief, fear, or sadness. For
that man is said to receive comfort and consolation, when he has in some sort
put away grief, although joy be not yet come in the place, or if his sadness,
and sorrow, be at least in some sort mitigated, and lessend. For sometimes
there may be a mixture of sorrow and consolation together. Neither are men
either perfectly well or perfectly ill, when they begin to receive consolation,
Esa. 40. 1, 2. Now concerning this consolation

The first Question is, whether a believer may attain unto solid comfort
against all kinds of evil?

1. Ans. He may. For* 1. God the Father in respect of the faithful is the God
of all consolation, comforting them in all afflictions. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.

2. Secondly, Christ is the principle, or fountain by which the comfort of the
faithful does flow. 2 Cor. 1. 5.

3. Thirdly, the holy Ghost is the comforter of all believers imparting unto
them all consolation, John 14. 16. 26 and 15. 26. and 16. 7. 13.

4. Fourthly, the whole Scripture makes for the consolation of the faithful,
Romans 15. 4.

5. Fifthly, this consolation is made strong by the immutable counsel of God,
and by his strengthening of believers, Heb. 6. 17, 18.

6. Together with this consolation God does join the confirmation of his
grace, which consists in a reparing of their strength, and in a fortifying of
them against troubles. For whereas the faithful often times like weak women,
through the apprehension of some terrible evil, do fall as it were into a
swound, and all their strength is dissolved, God on the other side in this
defect makes a supply by his grace of confirmation: we have a notable example
of this, Dan. 10. and 8. There remained no strength in me, and 10. And behold a
hand touched me which set me upon my knees, and upon the palms of my hands, and
he said unto me, stand upright, and 18. Then there came again and touched me
one like the appearance of a man, and he strengthened me and said, O man greatly
beloved fear no^, peace be unto thee, be strong, yea be strong, and when he
had spoken unto me I was strengthened, and said let my Lord speake^ for thou
have strengthened me. And this is a grace which we are commanded to seek for,
Heb. 12. 12.

CHAP. 16. Of Afflictions.
THe second Question is, what those evils be against which the faithful ought
to seek consolation?

Ans. They are either corporal as the afflictions of this life and death, or
spiritual, as spiritual temptations and sins.

The third Question is, by what arguments, a believer Consolation for the
afflicted.
may be confirmed, and comforted against the afflictions of this life?

1. Ans. First, such kind of afflictions are common to man, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And
are wont to be accomplished in believers while they live here, 1 Pet. 5. 9. Act.
14. 22.

2. Secondly, without Gods Providence not so much as a hair of our head shall
perish, Mat. 10 30. Luke 21. 18.

3. Thirdly, the fatherly love of God is wont to be manifest in the afflictions
of the faithful, Heb. 12. 6.

4. Fourthly, Christ himself has suffered and overcome all the afflictions of
the World, to the intent he might succor us, Heb. 4. 15.

5. Fifthly, God together with the temptation, will strenthen by the spirit,
and make a way to escape, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

6. Sixthly, the time of affliction is but short, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 10.

7. Seventhly, the fruit of afflictions is saving. For every chastening
yeildeth the peaceable fruit of righteousness, unto them that are exercised
therewith, Heb. 12. 11.

The fourth Question is whether we are to comfort our selves after one sort in
all afflictions?

8. Ans. There be diverse kinds of afflictions, so there be several Diverse
kinds of afflictions.
ways of consolation. For some afflictions are brought upon us by men for
righteousness sake, for the cause of Christ and his Gospel and Kingdom, Mat.
5. 10. and 11. Mark 10. 29. Luke 18. 29. These afflictions are commonly styled
by the name of persecution, or the Cross, because of the resemblance which
they have to, and participation with the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 10. In
these kinds of afflictions, consolation is easy and at hand, for we ought even
to account the afflictions of this nature, and for such a cause to be
themselves an argument of great comfort, Mat. 5. 12. Acts 5. 14. James 1. 2. 1
Pet. 4. 14. 16. The reason is because in those persecutions which we suffer
for righteousness sake there is the nature of a testimony, m^tyrdome, and
example whereby we glorify God before men. And so out of the eater comes forth
meat according to Sampsons riddle, Iud. 14.

9. Some afflictions are laid upon us by God to prove us, and to try us, Exo.
15. 25. and 16. 5. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 1^. These are properly called trials and
temptations. In these kinds of afflictions our consolation is not to be fetched
from the temptation it self, but from our manner of bearing is, when we
through the grace of God in such a condition, do sanctify and glorify his Name,
Job. 1. 24. Our principal care therefore ought to be to frame and compose our
selves to a right bearing of these afflictions, and the comfort will follow of
its own accord.

10. Some afflictions are laid upon us, as punishments and corrections, Job.
36. 9, 10. H^. 12 6. For these although there be some comfort contained in Gods
Fatherly manner of chastening, Heb. 1^. 7, 8. Yet this comfort cannot (...)
solidly apprehended, but only in making right use of the afflictions
themselves, Ibid. 6. 11. Here therefore our first care must be to make right
use of these visitations before we seek after comfort.

11. These kind of afflictions are not so different but that they may meet
together, in one, and the same trouble. For in persecution the faithful are
always tried, sometimes corrected, but yet there may be trials and corrections
often times without persecution, and when they do meet together some of these
kinds may more appear in some then others.

The first Question is what a man in afflictions ought to The duties of the
afflicted.
do to the end that he may obtain true and solid comfort?

12. Ans. First, he ought to acknowledge the hand of God afflicting him, Esa.
26. 11. Job. 5. 6. 8. Amos 3. 6. For this consideration is the foundation of
patience, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Ps. 39. 10. And of all those saving truths, which are
received by afflictions, Esa. 9. 13.

13. Secondly, he ought to search his ways and acknowledge his sins, Lam. 3.
39, 40. Job. 36 9, 10. For although all afflictions are not always sent
directly and principally for sin, yet sin is the fountain, and foundation
of all afflictions, Romans 5. 1^. It is therefore a course most equal, most
safe, and most pleasing to God, that in our afflictions, we behold our sins,
which either have directly procured them, or at least deserved them.

14. Thirdly, he ought to submit himself in the presence of God, and under his
mighty hand, James 4. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 6. 2 Samuel 15. 20* Levit. 26. 41. Otherwise
the chastening of God is contemned, and men show their security and vain
confidence, Pro. 3. 11. Heb. 12. 5.

15. Fourthly, he ought by humble repentance to seek the face, and favor and
mercy of God. Psa. 57. 2. Lam. 3. 41. Amos 4. 12. Hos. 5. 15. and 6. 1 and 14.
2. There are three seasons wherein we ought to seek God by repentance, 1.
presently after sin committed, 1 Cor. 5. 1. 2. 2. after some fear of
punishment, or some threatening of God, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 3 After that the wrath of
God has in some sort broke in upon us Dan. 9. 13. Those Christians are the
best which lay hold upon the first opportunity, for they declare that they do
hate sin simply for it self, those that make use of the second season come
next to them. For such believe although they see not, but those that repent not
in the third season are altogether desperate.

16. Fifthly, he ought to see that he profit by his affliction in all the parts
of new obedience. 2 Cron. 28. 22. Esa. 26. 9. Job. 36. 10. Hebrews 12. 10.
Esaias 27. 11. Leviticus 26. 18. 21. -- 28.

17. Sixthly, he ought patiently to expect what end the Lord will make, 1 Cor.
10. 13. Iam. 5. 7. 8. 11. 2 Samuel 15. 25. Mica. 7. 9. He that seeks freedom by
unlawful means does offend God more, 2 Kings 1. 3. Neither yet is he free but
by an exchange of a less evil for a greater, Esa. 24. 18. Amos 5. 19.

CHAP. 17. Of Death.
COncerning Death the first Question is whether it be a thing to be contemned?

1. Ans. Death is not simply to be contemned, 1. because Of the contempt of
Death.
it is in its own nature a grievous judgment of God against the sins of men,
and so does represent, both our desert and Gods wrath, 2. because it is in its
own nature, a passage to an eternal separation from God, so that it is a
point either of desperate security, or affected wisdom, and valor, to
contemn death after that manner that some of the heathen have done, who have
been praised for so doing. But yet comparison being made betwixt death and
those things which after death are prepared for the faithful, death may, and
ought in some sort to be contemned by all believers, Heb. 12. 2.

The second Question is whether a believer ought to desire and pray for death?

Answ. Death is not simply and absolutely to be desired, 1. Because it is in it
self a evil, 2. Because God as a General has placed us in our station of
this life, and without his Commandment we ought not to forsake, nor simply to
desire to be dismissed before the time that he has appointed, 2 Cor. 5. 4. 9.
But yet the faithful may and ought so to expect the life which is to come
after death that they do account it much more pleasing to them then this
present life, 2 Cor. 5. 8. And to tend thither, with the des^e that is
moderate, (...) subject to the will of God, as being a condition much better,
Phil. 1. 13. To. 8. 23. 2 Timothy 4 8.

The third Question is, by what arguments the mind of a believer may be
strengthened against the fear of death?

2. Ans. First, if he seriously consider, and by faith apprehend How to
diminish the fear of death.
that Christ has by his Death destroyed the power of Death, H^b. 2. 14. and
taken away its sting, 1 Cor. 15. 56. So that death has been swallowed in
victory by Christ, and that victory is imparted to believers, Ibidem and 54. 57.

3. Secondly, if he consider also that this was one end of Christ's death, to
free us from the fear of death, as being a great bondage, Heb. 2. 15.

4. Thirdly, if he consider also with faith, that the love of Christ and of God
in Christ is so firm and constant that no death can separate us from it, To.
8. 35.

5. Fourthly, if he consider with himself that for Christ the death of the
faithful is precious in Gods eyes, Psalm. 72. 14. And be also fully persuaded
that the good hand, and fatherly providence of God, is present with, and
watches over the faithful for good both in life and death, Mat. 10. 28, 29,
30, 31.

6. Fifthly if he well consider from how many, and from how great evils he
shall be freed by death, as, 1. From sin, 2. From those miseries that follow
sin, Esaias 57. 1. 2. 5. Which cause others often times to seek for death,
Apoc. 9. 6. 3 From the temptations of the Devil Apoc. 12. 8. 4 From the
opposition and vexation of the World and the flesh, Apoc. 14 13. Eccles. 4. 1.
2. Hence it is that death is ca^'d a rest and a sleep, Esa. 57. 2. 6. 1 Thessalonians.
4. 13* 14. Thus much the Devil himself in the shape of Samuel did acknowledge
1. Sam. 28. 15.

7. Sixthly, if he cast his eyes always upon that happiness to which we shall
come by death, For after death. 1. The grace of God shall be perfected in us, 1
Cor. 13. 10. 2 We shall be with God, 2 Cor. 5. 8. With Christ and the blessed
spirits, Phil. 1. 23. 3. We shall enjoy a firm and immutable estate of
heavenly life, 2 Corinthians. 5. 1. Heb. 11. 10. 16. Luke 16. 9.

8. Seventhly, if he seriously set his mind to consider the vanity of all
those things which depend upon this preseut life, and which we forsake at our
death, Eccl. 2. 18*

9. Eighthly, if he persuade himself that Gods providence without him is
sufficient to provide for all those things concerning which he can be careful,
and do know withal that without it, no good can be done, though he should
continue in life.

The fourth Question is what a believer ought to do that he may enjoy this
consolation?

10. Ans. First, he ought to labor that he may have a special faith in God
through Christ, and that this faith be lively, and strong, Luke 2. 28. 2 Timothy
1. 12. 1 John 5. 4.

11. Secondly, he ought with all care to preserve his Conscience pure and
without offense, Acts 24. 15, 16. Heb. 10. 22.

12. Thirdly, he ought with this faith and Conscience to live in a continual
expectation of the coming of the Lord, so carrying himself here as becomes a
Citizen of heaven, Phil. 3. 20. 2 Pet. 3. 12.

13. Fourthly, he ought always to think the hour of his death to be near
and at hand, Psalm 19. 20. Esa^. 28. 15. 2 Timothy 4 6.

14. Fifthly, he ought always to exercise himself to a denial and forsaking
of the world, 1 Cor. 7* 29, 30, 31. Gal. 6^4.

15. Sixthly, he ought to make death familiar in a sort to himself both by a
frequent meditation of it, and by those exercises to which God calls him, 1
Cor. 15. 31. 2 Cor. 1. 9. and 4. 10, 11.

16. Seventhly, he ought to labor that as the outward man draws to
corruption, so the inward man may be renewed more and more, 2 Cor. 4. 16.

17. Eighthly, he ought not to think so much upon death it self, as upon Gods
grace both in death, and in those things which follow after, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

18. Ninthly, he ought in all humility to commend his soul unto God as unto a
faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. 16.

CHAP. 18. Of Temptations.
COncerning temptations the first Question is by what arguments a believer may
strengthen himself against their assaults? Of resisting temptations.


1. Ans. First, if he consider seriously that these temptations are part of
that warfare to which the faithful are called, Ephesians. 6. 12. and unto which they
have given up their names in baptiime, and have bound themselves by oath.

2. Secondly, if he consider that Christ is our Captain and General in this
war, Apoc. 12. 7. That he is every where present and beholds the combat with
his eye. This must needs be a strong incitement to provoke us to do valiantly.
For he does exhort us to fight, helps us to overcome, aids us when we faint,
and crowns those that conquer.

3. Thirdly, if he consider that the direction of the temptations themselves
does depend wholly upon the providence and disposing of God, Mat. 6. 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 2 Cron. 18. 21. R^. 4. 1.

4. Fourthly, if he meditate upon the fruit and the use of temptations, Lu. 21.
31. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.

5. Fifthly, if he propound unto himself Christ who was tempted, overcame
temptations, and succors them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18 and 4. 15. Col. 2.
15.

6. Sixthly, if he distinguish betwixt the evil of temptation, and temptations
themselves.

The second Question is, what a believer ought to do that he may apprehend
this comfort in the hour of temptation?

7. First, he ought to account all those temptations which entice him unto sin
as his utter enemies, 1 Pet. 2. 11.

8. Secondly, he ought to abhor and detest those very suggestions themselves
which lead unto sin, Romans 7. 15.

9. Thirdly, he ought to arm himself diligently against his spiritual
enemies, Ephesians. 6. 13.

10. Fourthly, he ought to resist them with all his might, James 4. 7. 1 Pet.
5. 9.

11. Fifthly, he ought in this combat not to trust unto his own strength, but
to implore the help of God, and to rest upon him, Mat. 6. 13.

12. Sixthly, he ought in foul temptations to abstain from all disputation,
and special deliberation about the thing suggested, resting himself satisfied
in that he does detest them, Mat 4 10. For such temptations are vile and do
easily cleave to us.

13. Seventhly, he ought to avoid all those occasions which may further the
temptation, Pre. 4 14, 15.

14. Eighthly, he ought to repel and exti^guish with all possible strength
troublesome suggestions, Ephesians. 6 16. Yea, and sometimes to contem^e them also,
when after all means used they cease not to be troublesome.

15. Ninthly, he ought (if they re^ne again and again with new assau^ts after
that they have been often repel'd) to remember that it is the part of a valiant
Soldier not only to suffer, and come clear off from assaults and sk^mishes
of his enemy, but also to endure the ted^ousnesse of a long siedge when there
is occasion.

The third Question is, how a man may discern whether a temptation have
prevailed against him yea or no?

16. A^s. First, this is not to be judged from hence that Signs of a
preva^ling temptation.
a man is either troubled in his mind, or does retain his calmnesse. For a
vexation of mind for the most part, which fol^owes upon foul temptations, is
not only no sign of their prevailing, but is also a demonstration of a
sanctified heart, and a quiet security does often times show that the
temptation has prevailed. The reason is because the opposition which is
apparent in this perturbation* is a sign that there is some thing in the soul
contrary to the temptation, and a quietness does betray some consent. For
water is not troubled by the pouring in of water but by the casting in of fire.
He which finds least trouble is in most danger, Luke 11: 21. So Ananias and
Saphira were quiet, Act. 5. 3. 8. But Paul found a great deal of inward
trouble, To. 7. 24. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. But if this trouble be such that it drives
away a man from God, and does not rather stir up to seek him, it is not to be
allowed or cherished, for then the temptation is, (although not directly and of
its own nature) yet indirectly and through the perverseness of our nature;
effectual, and the tempter has obtained his desire.

18. Secondly, a manifest sign of a prevailing temptation is the commission of
that sin to which the temptation did provoke, Mat. 6. 13. But here it is to
be observed that this falls out not only when the sin is fully acted and
committed, but also when there is even the very first degree of it, in the
consent of the will, or in the least delight in the evil thought of, although
there be no purpose to commi^ i^. Iam. 1. 14, 15. And this is so much the worse
if the delight be as they say Morosa, that is, if it continue for any while,
and be not presently repeld.

19. Thirdly, although we give no consent unto the temptation, yet if the
temptation arise from our selves, there is a sin of ours in it, even in its
first conception, because it flows out of our flesh and from our corruption,
although it may be kindled and blown up to a flame by the Devil, Mat. 15. 18*
19. Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. James 1. 14. But this degree of sin is such that
though it requires perpetual ^umiliation, yet it ought not to deprive us of
comfort, because it is the common condition of all the faithful, who this
notwithstanding are in Christ beloved, and accepted of God. But if the
temptation proceed merely from the Devil we ought to detest it, as much as
possible we can, but are not to acknowledge it for our own sin, Mat. 4* 36. 9.

20* Now a temptation is then to be judged to proceed from the devil alone and
not from our selves, 1. when it is repugnant to the light of nature, or to
reason it self, and to our natural inclination, 2. when is arises not as
other ordinary thoughts, but cease upon, and invades the mind suddenly, and
with a kind of vehemence, after the manner of flashes of lightning.

21. Fourthly, so long as by fervent prayers and such like spiritual weapons
we do resist and wrestle with any temptation. we may be sure that it has not
yet prevailed over us, and that it has not (...) yet gotten us within its
power, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. James 4. 7.

The fourth Question is how the Conscience of a believer Spiritual Desertions.
may be supported in a temptation of God, that is, in some spiritual desertion
upon which there follows much anxiety?

22. Ans. First, we must remember that even the best of Gods servants have had
experience of these desertions, as Job. 6. 4. 9. 13. 26. and 16. 9. David
Psalm. 6. and 77. And even Christ himself the beloved Son of God, Mat. 27. 46.

23. Secondly, we must know that these desertions are not so much real and in
very deed, as in our sense, and apprehension, Heb. 13. 5.

24. Thirdly, we must know that God does not forget his people, no not then
when he seems to have forsaken them, Esa. 49. 15, 16. But does for his own
glory and their good only seem to do so.

25. Fourthly, we may be sure by Gods Word and Covenant that this desertion
shall be but short, especially if i^ be compared with the time and continuance
of his mercies, Esa. 54. 7, 8. and 57. 20.

26. Fifthly, we must make inquiry in our Consciences with all diligent
examination whether our own sins have not been the cause of Gods so
dealing, Esa. 57. 21. Which if we shall find to be so, we must confess them
humbly, entreat for mercy, and seriously forsake them, Psalm. 51.

27. Sixthly, we ought to live by Faith, Heb. 2. 4. waiting for the Lord which
hides his face from us, Esa. 8. 17.

28. Seventhly, we ought to stir up our selves to lay hold upon God, Esa. 64. 7.

29. Eighthly, we ought always to remember that although God do seem to be
absent from us a long while, yet he does only wait for a fit time to show
mercy, Es. 30. 18.

CHAP. 19. Of the Conscience of sin.
COncerning sins the first Question is, how a Christian may be comforted when
his Conscience does reprove him for, and accuse him of diverse sins?

1. Ans. Sins are of two sorts. For some be properly called infirmities, or
faults, which do commonly cleave to the best and most vigilant of the
faithful, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Others are more heinous wickedness which neither are
to be found in all the faithful nor in any of them at all unless very seldom;
and by reason of some violent temptation, Romans 6. 13. Gal. 6. 1.

2. An infirmity is when a purpose to do well is present, but power of
performing it is absent, Romans 7. 18. A wickedness is when the purpose it self
at least in some particular fact is impious, 2 Samuel 12. 10. Now in case of
infirmities these following arguments may serve for consolation.

3. First, even the best and most perfect of Gods Children while they live here
are subject unto these failings, James 3. 2. 1 John 1. 8.

4. Secondly, God does pity his servants in their infirmities as a loving
Father pitties his little children, Ps. 103 13. Mat. 3. 27.

5. Thirdly, Christ himself is touched with the sense of our infirmities, Heb.
4. 15.

6. Fourthly, Christ himself is such a propitiation for such kind of sins,
that he offers us consolation for them before they be committed, 1 John 2. 1,
2. To. 6. 14.

7. Fifthly, by Christ we have access with boldness to the Throne of grace,
that we may obtain mercy, Heb. 6. 14.

8. Sixthly, God at our prayer will cure our infirmity, Esa. 40. 29. Ps. 103. 3.

9. Seventhly, the spirit helps our infirmities, Romans 8. 26.

10. Eighthly, these infirmities shall not be imputed to us for sins, Romans 7.
17. 10.

11. In more heinous sins, there can be no solid comfort had, till they be
taken away, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 6. The reason is because such kind of sins make even
believers themselves subject to the threatenings of the Law, and do in a great
degree, exclude them from the promises of the Gospel, wast the Conscience,
Heb. 10. 22. And expose them to the wrath of God, as being partakers with the
wicked and unbeleevers. Ephesians. 5. 6, 7. Gal. 6. 17. And therefore have in them a
cause of terror not of consolation. Heb. 10. 31. Yet a believer may in some
sort sufreine himself even in the greatest sins with the possibility and
hope of mercy, Romans 11. 23. Luke 22. 23.

The second Question, what a believer is to do that he may have consolation, in
case his Conscience accuse him for his sins?

12. First, he ought to be affected with sin, and to groan under it as a
burden, Mat. 11. 28, 29.

13. Secondly, he ought continually to detest all sin, To. 7. 15.

14. Thirdly, he ought evermore to have a care that he fulfill not the lusts of
sin, Gal. 5. 16.

15. Fourthly, he ought to endeavor the mortification of them. To. 8. 13.

26. Fifthly, he ought looking upon the promises to fly unto Christ and to
cleave unto him more and more, Romans 7. 25. Phil. 3 9.

27. But gross sins must first be removed and taken away before a man can be
fit to receive solid consolation, Esa. 1. 16. 27, 18.

Certain collections out of the Book of William Paris concerning temptations,
and the resisting of them, which I thought good here to set down for the
further illustration of the Doctrine of temptations, because they are not read
in the Author, except by a very few.
FIrst, Temptation in one sense is nothing else but a trial, and to tempt is
nothing else but to make a trial or experiment of anything, that we may know
it, that is, that it may be discovered, and become manifest, and this is all
that the Devil can do, he cannot with strength conquer us, or cast us down.
For unless we of our own accord trust him, and deliver our selves into his
hand, he can have no power over us. He can prevail no farther against us, then
we give him leave or permit him. All that he can do therefore is to tempt us,
that is to make an experiment what we are, whether weak or strong, whether we
be such as will yield to him, or whether such as will resist him valiantly. And
if in the beginning of the temptation, he find that we make valiant
resistance, he despairing of the victory, and being overcome and confounded,
for the most part departs presently. And this is the property of a tempter
when he has made his argument, and found what he sought for, to surcease the
work of temptation.

II. In another sense temptation signifies, a fighting against one, or a war,
or a battle, and it is very likely that whatsoever the Devil attempts against
us is by way of such a fight, if we consider the matter but diligently. For he
does all that he does with a purpose and desire to conquer, whether he lay
snares for us, or whether he make trial of us, or whether he pretend some good
things to deceive us, or whether he smite us with the staff, or sword, whether
he undermine the wall of our defense, or whether he take from us our spiritual
food, or procure it to be taken away, for he does do all these things with a
desire to do us a mischief. And in very deed, all these are parts of that war,
or combat, wherewith he fights against us.

III. Every sin has its temptations, and against the mind of man does the
devil fight, besieging it, in a circumventing way, and ordering his armies,
and forces, against the armies of virtues, and against the Castle of man's soul.

IV. The fightings which arise from the faculty of reason within our selves are
these, 1. Curiosity, that is a lust to know things not necessary, and things
the knowledge of which tend nothing to, nor help forward at all salvation, 2.
Slownesse to believe, 3. Levity in believing every thing 4. Doubtfulnesse, 5.
Suspitiousnesse, 6. A spirit of blasphemy which is a spring and fountain of
abominable thoughts, and of thoughts so horrible and troublesome, that such a
kind of temptation is like a martyrdom, and there have been some that have
rather desired to suffer Martyrdom then to endure such thoughts.

V. Any one may resist any temptation of the Devil, if he do simply and purely
will it, without any mixture of unwillingnesse. For no man is overcome, or
yields to the temptation utterly against his will, for so his will remains
unconquered, and victorious and uninclined to consent unto the temptation, and
so a man should both yield, and not yield. But that a man ^ay, simply, and
purely be willing to make resistance it is not from man himself, or from any
natural power in him but from the gift of God, and the help and assistance of
his grace.

VI. Now we must observe that when the question is, whether a man may have a
will to resist temptation? this word may does admit two significations; For it
signifies sometimes a possibility which is passive, in respect of capacity, and
sometimes in regard of virtue or power, or efficiency, now it is manifest, that
no man can resist any temptation by way of efficiency, but by way of
possibility, or passibility.

VII. Besides the gifts of graces and of virtues the providence and protection
of God is necessary for believers, that they may resist temptations, and so are
those manifold helps wherewith God succors his elect in the combat.

VIII. The first of these helps is a driving away of the enemies whereby they
are sometimes not suffered to tempt the Elect, Job. 1.

IX. The second help is a bridling of the enemies that they cannot tempt so
much as they would, Job. 2.

X. The third help is from the tempter himself, when even that very shape
under which he tempts affords us some help and instruction, so the form of
the Serpent might have caused Eve to have suspected his temptation.

XI. The fourth help is from the temptation it self, when it either stirs up
fear in us, which is the best keeper* or stirs us up to fight, and incourageth
us against the enemy.

XII. The fifth is, a new grace, or an increase of the former. For to those
that employ their talents well God gives an increase either in the greatness,
or number, Mat. 25. Luke. 19.

XIII. The sixth is a cessation, or peace, or rather a truce from the
temptation.

XIV. The seventh is a refreshment in the heat of temptation, which is a
mitigation of it, as when the tribulation is turned into a sollace.

XV. The eighth is a comforting, that is a stengthning, and lifting up of the
heart by a promise of strength and victory, and by a demonstration of the
weakness of the enemies, and the lightness of the fight.

XVI. The ninth is consolation, that is a chearing of the heart, in troubles,
in sorrow and grief.

XVII. The tenth is a bestowing of Faith and Hope, and a confirmation of the
same, against the shaking of fear, which arises from our own defect and
infirmity.

XVIII. The eleventh is an upholding of them that are set upon that they faill
not, that is, that they receive no hurt. Now they are often times so assaulted
that they are ready to fall, and that for this end that they may acknowledge
their own infirmities, and may ascribe it to Gods mercy and not their own
power, that they are kept from falling.

XIX. The twelfth is, Gods receiving of them that fly unto him, in respect of
which he is called, the hiding place of the Elect.

XX. The thirteenth is Gods fighting against and overthrowing the enemies.

XXI. The fourteenth is outward tribulation of which there are many profits
helping this way.

(...) where the (...) children as I may say insuasibili^, A^ children of
disobedience.
that are not to be (...). (...) they are opposed to those which 1 Pet. 14. are
called (...) obedient children. Opposite to this disposition is a hard, and
stony heart.

3. Thirdly, if we do prepare our selves to follow the will of God in all
things, Deuteronomy. 5. 33. Even in those which seem to be opposite to, and to cross
our profits, so that the flesh apprehends them to be evil, Ier. 42. 2. Heb.
11. 8. Phil. 2. 8.

4. Fourthly, if we do apply our selves to the obedience of Gods will, even
then when we see no reason for it, John 13. 7, 8. 1 Samuel 5. 9. 15. Otherwise we
follow not simply Gods will, but the reason of it.

5. Fifthly, if we be ready in regard of the disposition and bent of the heart,
to obey Gods will not only in those things wherein we know his pleasure, but
even in those wherein for the present we are ignorant of his will, Ex. 10. 27.

6. Sixthly, if we desire most of all, to know that part of Gods will that
concerns our selves, and our own duty, Ps. 119. 33, 34. Acts 9. 7. Job. 21.
13, 14.

7. Seventhly, if the fear of God be continually before our eyes, so that we
take heed of diligently, and shun carefully the offending of him, Heb. 12* 28.
29. 1 Pet. 1. 17.

8. Eighthly, if we depend not upon that success, and event of our obedience
which we find in this world, but resolve to hold on, though our obedience
procure us never so many afflictions, 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20, 21. and Dan. 3. 17.

9. Ninthly, if we exercise our selves in the use of those mercies whereby our
hearts may be framed to obedience, 1. Cor. 29.

The second Question is, by what motives a man may be stird up, to yield
obedience unto God?

10. Ans. First, If he apply his mind to consider of Gods (...) to (...).
Authority, Matthew 1. 6. Jeremy 35. Romans. 6, 18. 20. 1 Co^. 6. 19.

11. Secondly, if he consider also Gods power, Ier. 18. 6.

12. Thirdly, if he consider that the obedience that God requires of us, tends
not at all to his advantage but to ours, Job. (...) ^. and 35. 6 7.

13. Fourthly, if he consider, the benefits of God bestowed upon him, what and
how great they be, Romans 12. 1. Ex* 20. 2. And upon this point our soul should
settle as upon a consideration most effectual; for it is manifest, that the
obligation of debt, toward a benefactor is augmented and increased, according
to the greatness of the benefit. For there is no Question, but that every
benefit does bind him that receives it to the benefactor, and the greater the
benefit is the greater the bond. Well therefore does William Par. urge this
consideration after this manner: if any man should give to another a 1000
marks; questionless he which receives such a kindness should be much bound to
the giver, and if he should give him 2000 marks, the bond would be doubly
greater, and so on infinitely. If therefore he should give him any thing which
were infinitely better, or more precious, the receiver would be infinitely more
bound. Now a man's eye, or his tongue alone, (much more his whole body) is
incomparably better, then a 1000* marks, therefore every* one is infinitely
more bound to God, for his tongue, or eye alone, then he should be for the gift
of a 1000 marks. Again let us suppose that God should give to one man, a 1000
marks only, and to another a 1000000 it is manifest that the obligation and
debt of thankfulness, and service, from him that received the greatest benefit
infinitely, is infinitely greater then the bond, and obligation of him that
received the less; seeing therefore the obligation whereby a man is tied to
God for his tongue, or eye alone is infinitely greater then the other, it is
manifest that this obligation is infinite. Now then that obligation, wherein a
man is tied to God, for his whole body is after a sort more infinite, and that
for his soul is yet greater, and that again for eternal and everlasting
life, must needs be much greater, and so in the rest, it is manifest therefore
that our obligation and debt to God, of thankfulness and service is in many
respects infinite.

13. Fifthly, if he consider that the end of Gods greatest mercy is obedience,
Luke 1. 74 1 Pet. 1. 18.

15. Sixthly, if he do attend how he is called upon by God continually to
obedience, Titu^ ^. 12. 1 Thessa. 4. 7. 1 Pet. 1 15.

16. Seventhly, if he remember how we are bound by a most firm covenant to
serve God, Job. 31. 1. Heb. 8, 10.

17. Eighthly, if he consider the misery of those, that obey not God, for he
is the servant of sin, to death, Romans 6. 16. 21.

18. Ninthly, if he meditate of the promises that are made to obedience, 1 Timothy
4. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Heb. 5. 9.

19. Tenthly, if he always set before his eyes the threatenings against, amd
the vengeance which is prepared for the disobedient, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.

The third Question is by what means a man may be made fit, to yield obedience
unto God?

20. Ans. 1. He ought to have a special care that his Faith The manner how to
stir up, and p^ote the (...) of Obedience.
be solid and lively. For all the obedience which is acceptable unto God, is
obedience of Faith, Romans 1. 5. and 16. 26.

21. Now faith brings forth obedience four ways, 1. because while it cleaves
unto the Word of God, as the Word of eternal truth, it makes all those motives
to obedience, which are found in the Scriptures to be forcible, and effectual,
2. Because it does obtain all grace from God, 3. Because it does join us to
Christ, as to our head, without whom we can do nothing, and in whom we can do
all things, John 15. Phil. 4. 13. 4 Because it does as it were drive such a
spirit of life out of Christ.

22. Secondly, he ought to yield himself up to the spirit 1 Pet. 1. 22. that
he may be in the spirit, Romans 8 9. And that the spirit may dwell in him, Ver.
2. that he may be moved by the spirit, Ver. 14. walk in the spirit, Gal. 5.
16. be led by the spirit, Ver. 18. Live and go in the spirit, Ver. 25.

23 Thirdly, he ought to apply his mind to receive the word of God in the power
of it 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. Romans 6. 17.

24. Fourthly, he ought to use all his endeavor to present himself obedient
unto God, according to his Word Rem. 6. 13. 19.

CHAP. 2. Of Knowledge.
BEcause to the performing of Christian obedience there is necessarily required
some knowledge. Concerning knowledge therefore.

The first Question is, what a kind of study of knowledge ought to be in us?

1. Ans. First, we ought in this study to take heed of all affected ignorance,
2 Pet. 3. 5. Pro. 2* 22. 29. 7.

2. Secondly we ought al^o to avoid all curiosity, Deuteronomy. 29 29. Pre. 2^. 1. 1
T^m. 6 20. 2 Timothy 2. 23. Titus 3. 9. John 21. 22 Acts 1. 6 7.

3. I here is a fivefold curiosity of knowledge, 1. when we would know those
things that God has not revealed, 2. when we seek to know those things which
belong not to our selves, but to others 3. when we spend most study about
things least necessary, 4. When we desire to know the hardest things, and
neglect the principles, and fundamentalls, 5. When we rest not simply in the
Will of God, but would see a reason of it.

4. Thirdly, we ought to study for the knowledge of those things especially
which are most necessary for us in our life, Pro. 9. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 8.

5. Fourthly, we ought to labor for a growth in knowledge, not contenting our
selves to be children in understanding 1 Cor. 14. 20. Heb. 5. 12. Cor. 3 16.

6. Fifthly, we ought to take heed of all pride, which is wont to spring from
knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 1.

The second Question is what a man ought to do that Means to obtain
knowledge.
he may obtain solid knowledge?

7. Ans. First the mind is wholly to be devoted unto piety, Pro. 1. 7. 9 10.
Psalm. 25. 14 John 7. 17. For as knowledge is easy to the godly, Pro. 8, 9. and
14. 6. so to the wicked it is impossible, Pro. 24. 7.

8. Secondly, we must deny our carnal wisdom, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Pro. 26. 12.

9. Thirdly, the lusts of the flesh are to be avoided, because they blind the
mind, Ephesians 4. 18. By abusing, disturbing, allureing and pressing it down.

10. Fourthly, Heavenly wisdom is to be highly prized and to be sought with
proportionable care, Pro. 2. 4. and 3. 14. and 47.

11. Fifthly, it is to be desired of God by earnest prayer, Ia. 1. 5.

12 Sixthly, humility and modesty and sobriety must be observed, Pro. 11. 3.
Romans 12. 3.

13 Seventhly, we must confer and consult with those that God has endowed with
a larger measure of this knowledge, Pro. 15. 12.

14 Eighthly, we ought to glory in a holy manner in the possession of Heavenly
knowledge, Ier. 9. 24.

15. Ninthly, this wisdom is to be sought, in a daily and religious heeding
and hearing of the Word of God, 2 Timothy 3 16.

16. Tenthly, that knowledge which we have obtained must be turned into use and
practice, Muthew. 25. 29. Ioha 13. 17. (...),


The third Question is by what arguments a man may be stirred up to seek this
Divine knowledge?

A^s. 1. Because knowledge pertaines to the natural perfection of a man, as
appears by the temptation of our first parents, G^n. 3. 5. 2. It is that which
makes a difference betwixt man and the bruit beasts, Psalm. 32. 9. 3 They which
are destitute of this knowledge are in some sort more stupid then the bruit
beasts, Esai. 1. 3. 4 Knowledge brings along with it a certain singular, and
honest delight, Pro. 14 13. 14. 5 (...) knowledge the heart of man cannot be
good, (...). 1^. 2. 6 Knowledge is the key of the Kingdom of Heaven (...) 1^
(...). * Knowledge is the spiritual food of the (...). (...). 3. 10. 8 his
knowledge is necessary to make us (...) of God, Heb. 8. 11. 9 The faithful
(...) of ligh^ not of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. (...), and averiness^ to it is
foo^ (...). ^. ^. (...). 11 (...) is the cause of all wicked^sse, 1 Cor. 2. 8.
12 It does so corrupt good affections that it makes them become evil, Romans 10.
2. 13 It is a cause, and note of perdition, Hos. 4. 6. 2 Cor. 4. 3.

CHAP. 3. Of the Fear of God.
THe fear of God, has very near affinity with the knowledge of God, Psalm.
119. 79. Concerning this fear therefore:

The first Question is whether all kind of fear of God be A good and evil
fear of God.
good?

Ans. There is both a good and evil fear of God, Ex. 20. 20. And hence it is
that fear is sometimes generally commended, Pro. 28. 14. Sometimes again it
is generally found fault with, Apoc. 21. 8.

The second Question is what is that fear of God that is to be found fault
with?

2 Ans. 1. That fear which scarres men away from God, An evil fear.
or which drives them to fly away from him, Ex. 20. 18. Genesis 3. 8. Apoc. 6. 16.
2 The fear of them also which are only afraid of Gods anger. Ia. 2. 19. To.
8. 15.

The third Question is what is that fear of God which is commendable?

Ans. 1. When we reverence the Majesty and Power of God, so that the principal
cause of our fear is not any evil which we are in danger of, but the
excellent perfection of God, Genesis 28. 17. and 31. 42. 53. Eccles 5. 2. 2 When
we are most afraid of offending God, Eccles 9. 4. Pro. 13. 13. 3 When we are
affected with trembling upon the sight of Gods wrath, Psalm. 90. 10.

The fourth Question is whether the fear of punishment be not a servile fear?

4 Ans. If it be only in respect of punishment it is merely Servile (...).
servile, and vi^ious, 2. I^ in punishment we have a chief respect unto our
own misery. so far it is servile 3. But if punishment be respected only
secondarily, and be feared especially for this cause that it separat's from
God, and tend's to this end to make us more wary in waiting before God, such a
fear is laudable. 4. If the Minister of God, and the revenger be to be feared
for wrath, To. 134. much more is God himself, Heb. 12. 29. Amos. 3 and. 8.

The fifth Question is what be the signs of the true fear of God?

5. Ans. 1. If we seriously and carefully avoid those things that are
displeasing in Gods sight, Pro. 37. and 14. 16. and 16. 6. 2. If out of
Conscience to God, we abstain from those sins that are most secret, and
those which in respect of men, we might with safety enough commit, Lev. 19. 14.
Genesis 42. 18. Job. 31. 21. 22, 23. 3 If we not only abstain from sins but even
hate them and that for this cause especially because God does detest them, Pro.
8. 13. 4 If we be most careful to take heed that we depart not away from God.
Ier. 52. 40. 5 If we not only abstain from evil but study to do that which
is good Ecclesiastes 12. 13. Deuteronomy. 5. 20. 6 If we labor after perfection in
every part of Sanctification, 2 Cor. 7 1. Phil. 2. 12. 7 If we neither fear
men nor any creature so that they can scarre us from doing our duty, Mat 10 28.
^la 8. 12. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15. 8 If we employ our selves in the Word of God,
and other holy things with fear, 1 Cor. 7. 25. 9 If we use the very name and
attributes of God with reverence, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.

The sixth Question, by what motives a man may be stirred (...) G^d.
up to fear God?

6. A^s. 1. By a consideration of Gods Omnipotency, Ier. 5. 22. Job 37. 23. 24.
Psalm. 76. 4* 7. 2 By a consideration of the Kingdom of God Psalm. 99. 1. Ier.
10. 7. Dan. 6. 26. 3 His powerful government of all things, Es^. 25. 1, 23. 4.
4 His particular judgments against sin. Psalm. 119. 118* 119* 120. 17, (...)
^ 16. Ep^. 3. 5. ^. 5. His universal judgment of the (...) W^rld, (...) 12
13, 14. 1 P^t. 1. 17. 6 His threat^ 2 (...) (...). (...). Heb. 3. 16. 7. The
punishments that lie (...)* (...) 2. ^. 8 (...) er^ of God, P^al. 13^. 4. 9 His
(...) (...). 5. 24. (...). 7^. 5. 10 The promises that are made to them that
fear God, Psalm^ 25. 12, 13, 14, and 34. 9. and Proverbes 10. 27. and 13. 13.
and 19. 23. and 22. 4. Eccles 8. 12.

CHAP. 4. Of humility toward God.
BEcause the nature of obedience stands in subjection, therefore in the next
place we must treat of humility toward God in which there is a submission, In.
4. 6, 7. which is joined with the fear of God, Pro. 2^. 4.

The first Question is what are the signs of true humility toward God?

1. Ans. First, A serious acknowledgement of our own Sins of humility.
imperfection before him, Psalm. 30. 2. 3. Esa. 40. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 24. For pride
stands in an imagination and affectation of excellency;

2. Secondly, an acknowledgement of that same great guilt which lies on us by
reason of our ^ins committed against, him Romans 3. 19. For pride does exclude
the serious confession hereof, Luke 18. 11.

3. Thirdly, a submission with silence to the judgments of God, Psalm. 39 5. 1
Romans 3. 18. Job. 1. 21. and 39. 37. For a proud man answer^ again, Romans 9. 20.

4. Fourthly, an amplification of the grace and mercy of God in all his
benefits, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14 For a proud man does in some sort think himself
worthy of all good things, and that they are no more then his due, Deutri. 8.
14. 17. and 9. 4.

5. Fifthly, an holy admiration of those ways of God which are past finding
out, Job. 42. 3. Romans 11. 33, 34. Psalm. 13. 1. For a proud man thinks himself
able to comprehend all things, and that all things ought to be communicated to
him.

6. Sixthly, a laying aside all our dignity and excellency above others, in the
presence of God and duties of his worship, Apoc. 4. 10. For a proud man has
his thoughts upon his own excellency, and does contemn others even in the
presence of God. Luke 18. 11.

7. Seventhly, an apprehension of our own meanness and baseness in the
presence of God, and a trembling because of of his Majesty, Ge^. 18. 27.

8. Eighthly, an holy modesty in the worship of God, Eccles 5. 1, 2, 3.

9. Ninthly, a voluntary undertaking of those taskes which God puts upon us
although they may ^eeme to be but men and ba^e, P^l. 2. 8. John 13. 14.

The second Question is by what arguments a man may be stirred up to the study
of humility toward God?

10. Ans. First, if he se^ before his eyes the majesty and Motives to (...).
power of God, 1 Pet. 5. 6.

11. Secondly, if he consider of the nature of this humility to wit that it
makes the soul of man fit, that it may become an house or temple of God, Esaias.
66. 3. That it may be a sacrifice for God* Psalm. 51. 19. that it may be a
receptacle for the grace of God, pro. 3. 3. 5* that it may be capable of
wisdom, pro. 11. 2. For this is the mother of all other virtues, and is also
it self a singular ornament of the soul, 1 pet. 5. 5.

12. Thirdly, if he consider of the promises which are made to the humble. God
will respect them, Esai 66. 2. He will give them his grace Iam. 4. 6. 1 pet. 5.
5. He will exalt them, Iam. 4. 10. 1 pet. 5* 6. Luke 18. 14. He will reward
them with all kind of good things, pro. 22. 4.

13. Fourthly, if he consider that humility is necessary to the end that we may
seek God and turn away his anger, (...). 2. 3. 2 Chronicles. 12. 7.

14. Fifthly, if he consider that humility is required in every duty that we
perform to God, M^ca. 6* 8.

CHAP. 5. Of Sincerity.
BEcause sincerity is a proper quality of obedience* concerning it therefore.

The first Question is, wherein consists the sincerity of obedience? What
sincerity is.


1 Ans. First, that it be not only external, but chiefly, and principally,
internal, Psalm. 51. 8. Mat. 23. 25.

2. Secondly, that it respect God especially, and not men. Col. 3. 23. Mat. 6.
1.

3. Thirdly, that there be a shunning of all mixture of corruption, and
by-respects, 1 Cor. 5. 8.

4. Fourthly, that nothing be omitted, or neglected, which belongs unto
perfection.

5. Fifthly, that it expect its fruit from, God, and not from man, Romans 2. 29.

The second Question is, what are the signs of sincerity? Signs of sincerity*


6. Ans. First, if a man love the light of the Word, and come to it that his
deeds may be made manifest, John 3. 21.

7. Secondly, if he be obedient in the absence, as well as in the presence of
lookers on, in secret as well, yea and more, then in public, phil. 2. 12. Mat.
6. 6. Not only when God makes his presence manifest by his judgments, but even
when he seems to be absent, psalm. 78. 34.

8. Thirdly, if he cleave fast unto God in adversity, as well, as in
prosperity, Job. 1. 8, 9, 10, 11.

9. Fourthly, if he have a care of all Gods Commandments, even of those which
seem to be least, Mat. 5. 19.

10. Fifthly, if he abstain from all appearance of evil, These. 5. 22.

11. Sixthly, if he neither cover, nor excuse his sins, but confess them, and
forsake them, Pro. 28. 13. 2. Cor. 7. 11.

The third Question is, by what Motives a man may be stirred up, to endeavor
after sincerity?

12. ^s. First, because God is the searcher of the heart and Motives to
sincerity.
reins, Pro. 16. 2. and 21. 2 Psalm. 7. 10. and 26. 2. Apoc. 2. 23. Job. 31. 4.

13* Secondly, because it is the means to procure true peace, joy, and
security, Pro. 10 9.

14. Thirdly, God is delighted in sincerity. psalm. 51. 8. pro. 10. 20. And will
bless those that be upright with all sorts of blessings, pro. 28. 10. 18.

15. Fourthly, a double heart is a base, monstrous, and abominable thing.

CHAP. 6. Of Zeales
BEcause the highest degree of our obedience toward God, consists in zeal.
Therefore concerning this zeal.

The first Question is wherein the nature of zeal does The nature of ^eale.
consist.

1. Ans. It consists in that, that the affection of pleasing God, and
promoveing his glory be, in the highest degree, Apo. 3. 15. 19. Now because
such a kind of vehem^ney does principally show it self in the resisting of
those things which oppose the will and glory of God; Therefore for the most
part it is referred to that opposition, which is made against evil. Signs of
(...) zeal.


The second Question is, what be the signe^ of true zeal?

2. Ans. First, if it be according to Knowledge, Romans 10. 2.

3. Secondly, if a man be ready to perform whatsoever duty may be enjoined,
according to his strongth, yea and above his strength, 2 Cor. 8. 3.

4. Thirdly, if he be diligent in the execution of his duty, Act. 18. 25.

5. Fourthly, if he put no other limits and bounds to his obedience, then
those which God himself shall set, Exodus 36. 6.

6. Fifthly, if a man be mild in his own cause, and in those things which
concern himself, and servent in those which concern God, Numb. 12. 3. with
Eoxod. 32. 19. Galati. 4. 12. with Acts 13. 9. 12. For true zeal is therefore
called the zeal of God, because it is principally carried toward God;
Whereupon one says, it is an affection to revenge the injuries of God, or to
root out the enemies of God, or a jealousy persecuting the adulteries of
Christ's Spouse, together with the occasions and signs of Adulteries; or a
vohement love which does by a close and strait guard seclude the Spouse of
Christ from the World.

7. Sixthly, if that fervor and heat of it lie not principally in contentions
about questions and controversies, but in the study of good works. Tit. 2. 14.

8. Seventhly, if a man be affected in greater matters more, and in smaler,
less. Mat. 23. 23.

9. Eighthly, if he be no more indulgent unto himself then he is to others,
Math. 7. 4. An example of the contrary whereof we have, Genesis 38. 24. 2 Samuel 12.
5.

10. Ninthly, if he cannot bear with such as are evil, Apoc. 2. 2. though
they be such as in other respects are near unto him, 1 Reg. 15. 13.

11. Tenthly, if his indignation against sin be joined with grief and pity
in respect of the sinners, 2 Cor. 12. 21. For so, as well that dull remissenes
which is opposite to zeal, as that fu^y which looks like the heat of zeal,
will be with equal care avoided.

12. Eleventhly, if it be constant and the same in every condition, Gal. 4. 15.
18.

The third Question is by what motives a man may be stirred up to a zeal of
God? Motives ^o zeal.


13. Ans. First, because zeal is the property of the people of Christ, and one
of the things which Christ intended to our redemption, Tit. 2. 4.

14. Secondly, because those things which belong to God, to our duty toward
him, are (above all things) most worthy to be gone about, and done with zeal,
Gal. 4. 18. Although we should be even as it were eaten up with it, psalm. 69.
10. Ioh. 2. 17.

15. Thirdly, because there can be no true religion without zeal, Ap. 3. 15.
16. 19.

16. Fourthly, because if zeal be wanting, sins and scandals are not taken
away, but nourished in our selves, and others, with the offense of God, and
dishonor of his name. 1 Samuel 2. 29. Apoc. 3. 19.

17. Fifthly, because the want of zeal provokes God to inflict heavy
judgments, Apoc. 2. 5. and 3. 16. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10.

18. Sixthly, because there is a singular promise of Gods presence and
communion with Christ, made to such as are zealous, Apo. 3. 20.

19. Seventhly, because zeal perfecteth, and makes more acceptable all the
duties which we perform unto God. Iam. 5, 16. Romans 12* 11.

20. Eighthly, because that is the way and fittest manner of seeking the
Kingdom of God, Mat. 11. 12.

21. Ninthly, because that many that make only a show of Religion, are zealous
persecuters of Religion. Matthew 23. 15.

The fourth Question is, what is to be done of us, that we may get, confirm,
and excite the true zeal of God in our selves?

22. Answer, We ought, 1. to take heed of all those things which are enemies to
zeal. Such are, 1. Sundry speculations, and questions, which tend not to the
edification of men in Faith, and obedience. 1 Timothy 14. and 4. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 14.
23. Tit. 3. 9. For the intention of the mind about those things which are
merely speculative, although it may be a means to find out the truth, yet it
hinders the intention of the affections about things practical. And this is
the reason why there is more true zeal often found in poor simple Christians,
then in our Doctors and Masters, 2. Intention of the affections about worldly
things, Luke 8. 14. 3 A spiritual satiety or fullness, that is, a presumption
of our own sufficiency, and a resting in that degree and measure to which we
have attained, Phil. 3. 13 14. 4 Sloth, Fear, and carnal wisdom. Iud. 1 19.
21. 27* 28. 29, 30. 31, 32. 33. 5 Familiarity with the world, or the commonesse
of sin abounding in others. Mat. 24.

22. 6 The practice of such things as our conscience allows not, Romans 14. 20.
21. 7 Indulgence to our selves in our own corruptions, 1 Cor. 5. 6. 2
Corinthians 7. 11. Ephesians. 4. 29. 30.

23. Secondly, we ought often and seriously to meditate upon the love and mercy
of God toward us, Pro. 25. 21. 22.

24. Thirdly, we ought to meditate daily of our imperfections, Phil. 3. 13, 14.

25. Fourthly, we ought to be diligent in the use of all those means, which
God has appointed for the begetting of grace in us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. 20.

26. Fifthly, we ought to associat with them, that have the zeal of God, Pro.
22. 24, 25. and 27. 17. Among such we must especially desire those Ministers
whose tongues have been touched with a coal from the Altar, Esaias 6. For by
notorious and lamentable experience (even in reformed Churches) that is found
to be true, which the author (heretofore praised) writ long since. The words of
life in the lips of many Doctors and preachers are dead, in regard of the
virtue, and efficacy; For they do so coldly and dully preach the words of God,
that they seem even to be dead in their lips: Whence it comes to pass, that as
they themselves are cold and dead, even so do they leave their hearers cold
and dead, and I would to God they did not make them so. I knew a man that for
this cause left the City Paris; For he said that he was made colder, and colder
daily, with the Lectures and Sermons in Paris: And that he was afraid if he
should stay longer there, he should be quite frozen to death stiritually.
Wherefore he got him to certain zealous persons, as unto hot coals, that
conversing among them he might nourish and increase his heat.

The fifth Question is whether zeal is to be judged according How we must
judge of zeal*
to the sense thereof, and the manner of exercising?

27. Ans. Not always; For zeal is greater essentially, in regard of the
things about which it is conversant, or accidentally, in regard of some
circumstances which happen, and do not always remain the same. For example,
married folks loving one another dearly* are sometimes more affected upon the
very marriage* then in that constant society of life, which afterward follows.
But this is by accident, because of the novelty of the thing; But in very deed
they may afterward rejoice as much, or more.

28. So also the faithful in the first conversion may find often greater
motions of their affections, then afterward; because of the novelty of the
thing, though there be afterward an increase in the true zeal of God. Some
such thing is affirmed even of the Angels, Lu. 15. 7.

29. In old age, or in some such like decay of strength, although there may be
the same zeal, or more then was before, yet it is not put forth in some, in
the same manner, that it was in, in their younger days.

30. Variety of education may bring a great diversity in the manner of
exercising ones zeal, when yet there may be an equal zeal in respect of the
essence of it.

The sixth Question is whether one and the same thing How zeal and laughter
do agree.
may be lawfully a matter of zeal and laughter?

31. Ans. That this may be, appears in the example of Eliah, 1 Kings 18. 27.
with 19. 10. 14. But yet not in the same respect. For zeal has for its object
something either honest, or filthy, but laughter is caused by the apprehension
of an unexpected thing that lightly pleases, without the consideration of
honesty or filthiness.

CHAP. 7. Of peace and tranquillity of Conscience.
BEcause the concomitant object of obedience is a quiet Conscience. Concerning
peace of Conscience.

The first Question is how peace of Conscience does depend How peace of
Conscience follows upon obedience.
upon our obedience?

1. Ans. It depends not upon our obedience as upon the principal cause, but
rather upon that justification which we have by Christ Jesus, Romans 5. 1. Heb.
10. 22. 1 pet. 3. 21. 1 Cor. 4. 4.

2. They which go about to rest in themselves, or in their own works, can
never find any solid tranquillity in their Consciences, both because of the
diverse falls, and because of the manifold imperfections, which adhere to the
endeavors of the best men, while they live in this World. And hence it is that
those that are popish must needs be vexed with perpetual doubts, both in life,
and death, because of the opinion which they have of the Righteousness, and
Merits of their works, which are yet by their own confession uncertain.

3. Secondly, it depends upon our obedience, 1. as upon that whereby the
contrary is removed, or as upon that which removes the impediment, 1 Samuel 25.
31. 1 Ioh. 3. 18. 21. 2 As upon the proc^eant cause, or secondary reason
thereof, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

4* Now this is so to be understood, as that the tranquillity of Conscience in
regard of those actions which are agreeable to the Law of God, is to be
conceived to depend upon obedience in regard of the thing it self: But that
tranquillity which respects our state before God, it to be ^scribed ^o
otherwise to our obedience, as to the cause, but only in respect of the
certainty of our perceiving of it, and that our obedience respects the thing
it self, as the sign and effect thereof: hence that phrase so of^ used by
John, By this we know, and such like, Ioh 2. 3. 5. 29. and 3. 10* 14. 19. and
4. 13.

5. Peace of Conscience also depends upon obedience, as upon the conservant
cause. For righteousness (not impu^ed, nor inherent) but of the life and
conversation, is the brestplate of a believer, whereby he is guarded, and
defended and is perfectly safe, and quiet. Ephesians. 6. 14. 1 Ioh. 3. 7. 1 Cor. 4.
3. Hence it is that that righteousness which consists in obedience, is called
the righteousness of a good Conscience, Acts 24. 10.

6. Now obedience does, preserve and maintain peace of Conscience, not only as
a sign of our reconciliation with God, but also as a continuation and an
exercise of that life which is acceptable, and pleasing unto God, Col. 1. 10.
These. 4. 1. Heb. 12. 28. Not that there is any such perfection in our
obedience, as can satisfy the Law of God, but because that after our persons by
faith in Christ, become acceptable to God, then by virtue of the same faith,
for Christ's sake, our obedience though weak, and polluted, is accepted before
God, 1 Pet. 2. 5.

The second Question is, what is that obedience, by the What kind of obedience
is requisite to make the cons^ence peaceable.
presence whereof the Conscience may enjoy peace?

7. Ans. First, an absolute perfection is not required to this tranquillity,
for then it were a vain^ thing to seek for it in this life. Iam. 3. 2. 1 Ioh.
1. 10.

8. Yet such a porportion is necessary, as by Gods own testimony in his holy
word is acceptable to him, Heb. 11. 2.

9. Thirdly, this perfection consists properly in this, that all our studies,
and endeavors be good: and the imperfection be only in the manner of
performing, To. 8. 4.

10. Fourthly, all those imperfections which adhere to our obedience, are with
all humiliation of soul to be acknowledged, and pardon for them is to be
begged in Faith, Pet. 5.

The third Question is, what kind of tranquillity it is which does arise from
such obedience?

11. Ans. First, Such as the obedience it self is, that is, various, and
imperfect. 2 Cor. 1. 24.

12. Secondly, it does not therefore exclude motion from evil, unto good, but
only that perturbation which arises from the apprehension of Gods Anger.

13. Thirdly, Yet notwithstanding it does as with a guard keep the souls of
the faithful, Phil. 4. 7. And govern them. Col. 3. 15.

The fourth Question, how may the peace of a good conscience Disteren^ twixt
the peace of the godly, and the wicked.
be distinguished from that peace, which is in wicked men?

14. Ans. First, the peace of the wicked is not founded upon the Word of God,
but upon vain words, and imaginations, Ier. 23. 17, 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.

15. Secondly, the peace of the wicked is not wont to be constant, but is
interrupted with many grrpes, and pangs, that come between; and is wont to
vanish, when the judgments of God begin to light upon them.

16. Thirdly, the peace of the wicked continues, whether duties of piety, and
righteousness be done or omitted, so that only those crimes be abstained from,
which their natures, abhor.

CHAP. 8. Of Virtue.
QUestion. 1. Whether it be not enouh sor a man to do The necessiy of virtue.
that which is good, unless we labor also for an habit of virtue, whereby our
hearts may be inclined to that which is good?

Ans. We ought to give all diligence to add to our Faith, Virtue, 2 Pet. 1. 5.

1. Because the Word of God, whereby we are in special manner called upon for
the performance of our duty, ought to be ingrafted within us, Iam. 1. 25.

2. We ought to deliver up our selves unto the same Doctrine, as to a pattern,
or mould, the likeness of which is to be expressed in our heart 8, Romans 6. 17.
Now this inward image and likeness, is virtue.

3. As we ought to put off the old man together with his members, which
properly are internal vices, Col. 3. 5. So we ought to put on the new man with
his members, which properly are virtues.

4. We ought to be framed and fashoned after the Image of Christ, Col. 3. 10.
In whom did dwell all the fulness of virtues. Esaias 11. 2. Col. 1. 19. And
that for this end, that of his fullness we may receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1.
16.

5. If the habit of virtue be absent, although we should do some good works,
yet we are not rooted and grounded in good, but are rashly carried away with
evil, and that goodness soon vanishes. Mat. 13. 21. Col. 1. 23.

6. That good which we do without virtue, we do it not with an honest and
good heart, which yet is required to make it pleasing unto God. Lu. 8. 15.

7. Such kind of works, are not the obedience that is acceptable to God. Mat.
7. 18. and 15. 8.

Question, ^ Wh^ (...) ^ (...) to do^, that he may Means to obtain virtue.
grow and increas^ in any virtue?

8. Ans. First, he ought seriously and in a special manner to acknowledge his
failings, and weakness, ^ Cor. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 3. 18.

9. Secondly, he ought in Christ to apprehend that grace especially, which he
wants, that in time he may be strong, and complete, Phil. 4* 13. Col. 2* 10.

10. Thirdly, he ought diligently to take heed of all such things, as are
contrary to that virtue, which he labors for, Pro. 4. 14, 15. Ephesians. 4. 29. 31.

11. Fourthly, he ought to employ himself in those things, whereby that virtue
may be promoted, 2 Pet. 1. 12. 15.

12. Fifthly, he ought to seek the same virtue at Gods Hand, by daily and
earnest prayer, I^. 1. 5. Act. 4. 29.

13. Sixthly, he ought frequently and diligently to exercise himself in those
things, which are proper to his virtue, 1 Timothy 4. 7.

Question, 3. What be the signs whereby a man may Signs of virtue.
know that he has gotten, any virtue?

14. Ans. First, a propension and readiness in a manner natural to the
exercise of that virtue, 2 Pet. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9.

15. Secondly, firmness and constancy in that exercise, E^b. 4. 1^, 15.

16. Thirdly, a joy and delight arising from that exercise. Pro. 21. 15. 2 Cor.
8. 2. and 9. 7. 13.

17. Fourthly, an abomination of the contrary vice, 119. 163.

18. Fifthly, an alienation from those which are given to that vice, Pro. 29.
27.

19. Sixthly, universality, whereby it comes to pass, that, a man does not
only in part, and in some respect follow that which is good, and oppose that
which is evil (admitting a limitation, and measure according to carnal
wisdom) but simply, and absolutely. 1 Cor. 13. 7. Col. 1. 10.

CHAP. 9. Of Prudence.
AMong those conditions which are necessarily required to virtue, after that
general justic^, which notes out its essential rectitude, follows in the
next place, Prudence, or spiritual wisdom. Concerning it therefore.

Question, 1. In what thing does true prudence consist? The nature of Prudence.


1. Ans. First, spiritual wisdom does generally consist in such a discerning,
circumspect looking to, considering, and ordering those things which belong to
Gods Glory, and our duty, and salvation, that as much as may be, they may be
brought unto perfection. Pro* 14. 8. 15. and 15. 24. and 22. 3. But in a more
special manner it belongs to wisdom, 1. To propound a right end evermore unto
our selves, and to be endeavoring after it: Jeremy 4. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 15. 32. 29.
For, that man's wisdom is in vain, who is not wise for himself, and for his
own good.

2. Secondly, to make choice of such means as do tend certainly to that scope,
Pro. 2. 9.

3. To walk accurately, and precisely in the use of those means, Ephesians. 5. 15.

4. To take hold of, and to redeem every opportunity, for the advanceing, and
helping forward of this study, Col. 4. 5.

5. Carefully to take heed of, and avoid all such things, as do hinder this
study, Job. 28. 28.

6. To forsake all things else, for the attaining of this chief good, Mat. 13.
44. 45.

7. Not to trust to a vain hope, but to lay a solid foundation in all things,
Mat. 7. 24.

Question, 2. By what means may this wisdom be Means to get wisdom.
gotten?

8. Ans. First, it comes from none other then God alone, by the Holy Ghost,
Job. 28. 12, 13, 14. 20. 21. 23. Esaias 11. 2. 3. Ephesians. 1. 8. 17 Iam. 3. 15.

9. Secondly, that we may obtain it from God, we must seriously acknowledge
and confess our own foolishness. 1 Cor. 3. 18.

10. Thirdly, we ought to seek it in the Word of God. Psalm. 19. 7. and 119. 98.
99 104. Ier. 8. (...).

11. Fourthly, we must seek it of God in a due manner. Iam. 1. 5. 2. Cor. 1.
10. 11.

12. Fifthly, we ought to direct all our observation and experience to the
getting of wisdom, Ps. 90. 12.

Question, 3. By what arguments, we may be stirred up, to Motives to seek for
Prudence.
labor after this spiritual wisdom?

13. Ans. First, because therein lies the perfection of man above other
Creatures, Ps. 32. 8. 9.

14. Secondly, because it is a maine part of Gods Image, Col. 3. 10.

15. Thirdly, because it delivers from all evil, Proverbs 2. 11. 12.

16. Fourthly, because it conduces to all good, Proverbs* 3. 13. 14. 19.

Now because in Scripture there is mention made of an human wisdom, or
prudence, opposed to this spiritual wisdom* therefore the Question is

Question, 1. Whether all humane wisdom is to be condemned? Humane wisdom.


17. Ans. Humane wisdom is considered, 2. ways; either as it is simply an
humane perfection, or (as they call it) an intellectual virtue, whereby the
businesses that a man has to do, though they be many and great, are easily
conceived, judged, and directed; or as it is a corruption and abuse of that
faculty, and has some finne adhering to it, or mingled with it. In the former
sense it is a thing good in regard of nature: and so to be commended and
labored for: although in respect of any moral goodness, it is a thing of an
indifferent nature, neither good nor evil, as all other natural perfections
also are. Civil wisdom therefore considered in it self, is not opposed to
spiritual wisdom, but only as a disparate. But in the latter sense, it is a
thing evil in regard of the morality of it, and to be condemned, and avoided.
For it is opposed to spiritual wisdom as a thing adverse: For which cause also
it is called fleshly wisdom, earthly, sensual, divelish, Jam. 3. 15.

Question, 2. When is humane wisdom carnal, and in Carnal wisdom.
that respect to be condemned?

18. Ans. First, when it opposes it self directly to the wisdom of God, in
devising any evil, Exodus 1. 10. Pro. 21. 30. Pro. 6. 13* That is, when it
becomes an instrument of any impiety, or injustice. For wisdom when it is
joined with ungodliness, is nothing but wickedness armed. And to be wise to
do evil, is not to be wise, but to be unwise.

19. Secondly, when it contemns the wisdom of God, and accounts it
foolishnes, 1 Cor. 1. 23.

20. Thirdly, when it will by no means be subject to the wisdom of God. To. 8.
7.

21. Fourthly, when in some sort it yields to the wisdom of God, in regard of
the thing it self, which it seeks; but in regard of the means and manner of
seeking, trusts to it self, 2 Reg. 5. 11. 1 Cor. 2. 14.

22. Fifthly, when it makes a man more incapable of those things which are of
the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

23. Sixthly, when it is made a matter of boasting, Ier. 9. 23. Ez 28. 17.

24. Seventhly, when trust and confidence is placed in it, Pro. 3. 6. and 26.
12.

25. Eighthly, when it is separated from innocence, and sincerity, Romans 16. 19.
Mat. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Question, 3. By what means may a man be brought to contemn this carnal
wisdom?

26. Ans. 1. Because it sets men further off from the Kingdom of God, then
simple foolishness. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. Mat. 11. 26. 2 Because God does use to
infatuate, and bring to naught such wisdom. 1 Cor. 1. 19. 20. 3 Because it is
serpentine, and diabolical, Genesis 3. 1. Iam. 3. 15. 4 Because it destroys
those in whom it is. Pro. 11. 3. 5. It overthrows all humane society, and
takes away the comfort of life, 2 Samuel 16. 22. 23.

CHAP. 10. Of Watchfulness.
BEcause the exercised force, and (as I may say) activity of patience is
usually in Scripture set forth by the name of watchfulness. Concerning it
therefore.

Question, wherein does it properly consist?

1. Ans. Watchfulness is nothing else but an heedfull attention, whereby a
thing is gone about with diligence, Luke 2. 8. Heb. 13. 16. But this spiritual
act of vigilance, which is required of all men, is in Scripture referred to
three objects. 1. To the watches themselves, that they keep a watch over
themselves, Pro. 4. 23. and 2 To their duty, that they watch unto that, Ephesians. 6.
18. 3 To the future, for which they by this duty prepare themselves, Mat. 24.
43. 44. 45. The first may be called the object over which, the second the
object for which, The third the object to which. But although for teaching sake
we do distinguish these three, in practice they ought always to be conjoined,
so that we always observe our selves, watch to those duties whichly upon us,
and prepare our selves for the future. Eccles. 5. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5.

2. Watchfulness over our selves in general is nothing else, but a vigilant
observation of the Will of God, Psalm. 119. 4, 5, 6.

3. Particularly, there is required in it, as in the watching of a City that is
besieged, or any other way in danger, that we observe, and inquire, 1. Into all
comers in, whence they come, and whither they tend; and to all those things
which come in by our senses, as by the City Gates, that if they be hurtful,
they may be excluded, Psalm, 119. 37. Job. 31. 1. ^ Into all that go out, as
into all our thoughts, words, and actions, which proceed from us. Pro. 4. 23,
24. Ps. 39. 2. Eccles 5. 1. Iam. 3. 2.

4. Vigilance as it respects our duty, is nothing but a carfulness about
th^se things, which God has commanded, how we may please him in them, 1 Cor.
7. 32.

5. Vigilance is particularly required, 1. Before the duty is performed, that
the matter be duly weighed, Pro. 14. 15. That all impediments, (whether they
be things in themselves lawful, or unlawful) may be removed, 1 Pet. 2. 11. 2 Timothy 2. 4. That we may be fit and prepared for the doing of our duty. Lu. 21.
34. 36. And that we may lay hold on the occasions of doing it, that are
offered, Gal. 6. 20. And the contrary be avoided. Pro. 4. 15. and 5. 8. 2 In
the very duty, that it be done in an exact, and accurate manner. Luke 8. 18. 3
After the duty, that it be not marred by any following corruption. 2. Io^. 8.
Because it is easily wont, either to be corrupted by pride, 1 Cor. 4. 7. O^ by
inconstancy, and levity to be overthrown, Ier. 34. 11.

6. Watchfulness as it respects the future, which we are to have before our
eyes, is a due preparation, such as that, which we expect, does require,
whether it be good, that it may be received, or evil, that it may be avoided.
Mat. 2^, 42. 44. Particulary here is required, 1. That this preparation be made
in time, Mat. 25. 3. with 11. 2. That it be used constantly, and without
ceasing, Lu. 21. 36.

Question 2. What is principally required for the observing of this watch?

7. Ans. First, sobriety in the use of worldly things, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6. 1 Pet.
47. and 5. 8. For the heart is overcharged, not only with sur^etting and
drunkenesse, but also with the cares of this life, Lu. 21. 34. 36.

8. Secondly, a frequent consideration of Gods own presence, and beholding of
our ways, Pro. 1. 20. 21. Psalm. 119. 168.

9. Thirdly, a frequent examination of our ways, with a just censure, and
judgment passed upon them, Ps. 4. 4. Ps. 119. 59. 1 Cor. 11. 31.

10. Fourthly, the fellowship, and society of them, which will be to us in this
care, Phil. 2. 4. Heb. 10. 24. 5. frequent prayer. Mat. 26. 41.

Question, 3. By what arguments may we be stirrd up to this watchfulnes?

11. Ans. There is one essential reason, which is taken from Motives to
watchfulness
that danger, in which both we our selves are, and the Name of God by reason of
us, 1 Timothy 6. 1.

12. Now we are subject to that danger. 1. Through the infirmity of our flesh,
Mat. 26. 41. 2 Through the deceits of the devil, and the world. 1 Pet. 5. 8. 3
Through the uncertainty of the time of Christ's coming to judgment, either
general, or particular. Mat. 24. 42. and 25. 13. Mar. 13. 33. 35. Lu. 21. 35.
36.

CHAP. 11. Of Fortitude.
BEcause next after prudence, fortitude is requisite to the perfection of
virtue: concerning it therefore.

Question, 1. Wherein does Christian fortitude consist?

1. Ans. It is not to be confounded with animosity, or stoutnesse, which is to
be found not only in men void of all virtue, but also in the bruit Creatures,
the Lion, the Horse, the Bull, the Dog. Pr^. 31. 29. 30. 31.

2. Secondly, yet courage or greatness of mind, has the nature of a Genus, or
General, in respect of true fortitude: which therefore consists not so much in
the moderation of boldness, or hope, as in the moderation of fear, and
desperation, Job. 6. 11. 19.

3. Thirdly, it does not only consist in adventuring upon dangers, or
undertaking hard things, but also in suffering, and bearing evils, and
adversity, Hebrews 11. 34, 35. 36. 2 Timothy 2. 1. 3.

4. Fourthly, but true fortitude adventures upon dangers, and suffers
adversity, for virtues sake, and for the performing of his duty, 1 Pet. 3. 14.
and 4. 14, 15.

5. Fifthly, fortitude therefore is that courage, whereby we are ready to
perform our duty, even because it is our duty, what difficulties soever
happen. 1 Cor. 15. 58. and 16. 13.

6. Sixthly, he cannot be said to be truly courageous, which offers himself
to dangers, not one^ considering what they are, or why to be attempted, or
entangled in them by (...), or compelled by necessity, and not led ther^to by
virtue. It was not from fortitude, and courage, that the Demoniack, Mark. 9.
Often leap't into the water, often into the fire, but through the violence of
the evil spirit; so it is not from the virtue of fortitude, that many are
strong to power down drink, Esa. 5. 22. Yea, many attempts, by which men are
judged valiant and courageous, by foolish Acts, are nothing but made furies.

7. Seventhly, neither has he this virtue, who is scarred, or does desist from
doing his duty, through any fear, or danger, Pro. 24. 10.

8. Eighthly, yet it is here to be remembered, that the courage of the faithful
in this life, is joined with infirmity, and so some momentany shaking,
wherewith the godly sometimes are made to stagger, may consist with the
fortitude of virtue. Ier. 20. 9. 2 Cor. 4. 8.

9. Ninthly, and although in regard of purpose of mind, and preparation of
heart, the faithful do arm and fortify themselves against all such things,
as may hinder them in their duties. 2 Cor. 6. 4. Yet notwithstanding they are
not always equally prepared to the suffering and undergoing of all kinds of
molestations, as Satan observed, Job. 1. and 2. And the event in Job in some
sort proved. For that which experience teaches in corporal fortitude in a due
proportion, holds also in spiritual; Some are strong to suffer labors; others
to exercise warfare; others to carry burdens; others to repel things that are
hurtful; and many which are strong in one or other of those things, are found
infirm, and weak in the rest.

Qu. 2. By what means may this Christian fortitude be stirred Means to stir
up fortitude.
up in a man?

10. Ans. First, if he acknowledge his own weakness, Romans 5. 6. 2 Cor. 3. 5.

11. Secondly, if he consider that he is chosen and called of God to perform
that duty, which he goes about. 1 Chronicles. 28.

12. Thirdly, if he persuade himself that God will be present with him in that
which he has commanded him, Deuteronomy. 20. 3. 4. Ps. 27. 1^. 2 Reg. 6. 16.

13. Fourthly, if he expect and looks for all sufficiency of strength from God.
Ephesians. 6. 10. Phil. 4. 14. Ps. 73. 26.

14. Fifthly, if he call to mind, how the victory has been long since gotten
for (...) by Christ; and that nothing is required of him, save only, that he
adhering unto Christ, become a conqueror with him, and in him. John 16. 33.
Romans 37.

15. Sixthly, if he stick close to that promise, which testifies, that all
things shall work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8. 28.

16. Seventhly, if he have the recompense of reward, which is laid up for him,
always before his eyes. 1 Cor. 15. 58.

CHAP. 12. Of Boldness which is contained under fortitude
BEcause under fortitude is contained boldness, or confidence, perseverance,
and pa^ence; of these therefore briefly.

Qu. 1. What is this boldness of fortitude?

1. Ans. First, by it we understand not here properly that confidence of Faith,
whereby we rest upon God by Christ, unto salvation; Nor simply that confidence
of hope, whereby we expect the things, which God has promised: but that
confidence, whereby we being full of Faith, and hope, do^ cheerfully and
boldly set upon the duty laid upon (...) by God. Ier. 1. 7. 8. 19. Act. 4. 13.
29. and 9. 29. Ephesians. 6. 19. 20. Phil. 1. 14. 20.

Qu. 2. What are those adverse evils which are properly overcome by this
confidence?

2. Ans. Two especially, 1. The difficulties which hinder us in the performing
of our duties Pro. 22. 13. and ^6. 13. Eccles. 11. 4. Cor. 16. 9. (2) The
uncertainty of the success or event, which will follow upon the performance of
the duty, Daniel. 3. 17. 18.

Qu. 3. By what means is the mind confirmed against those vexations?

3. Ans. First, by the fervor, and heat of the spirit, or zeal Act. 18. 25.
26. Act. 4. 8. with 13. Amos 5. 24.

4. Secondly, by a true trust placed in God, Pro. 16. 3. Ps. 37. 5. and 55. 22
1 Pet. 4. 19. and 5. 7. Esa. 58. 11.

5. Thirdly, by faithful prayers, commending our selves to God. Phil. 4. 6.
Esth. 4. 16.

6. Fourthly, by a right judgment concerning the terrors, whereby we are
astonished. For sometimes the things which terrify us, are utterly to be
contemned, as the speeches of vain men, etc. Sometimes they are mere figments,
which if we pass an exact judgment of them, vanish presently, and they are
such always, that if they be compared with the dignity, fruit, and necessity
of our duty, they are of no force at all.

CHAP. 13. Of Constancy.
QUestion, 4. Wherein does perservance, or constancy of virtue consist?

1. Ans. First, In a perpetual continuation of the same purpose, and
disposition of well-doing. Gal. 4. 18. Psalm. 106. 3. Romans 2. 7.

2. Secondly, in a frequent ^teration of the same kind of actions, with
fervor, and zeal. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.

3. Thirdly, in a care to proceed and go on in a way of virtue. Phil. 3. 13,
14.

Qu. 5. Which are the evils which are opposed to this Constancy?

4. Ans. First, declining out of the right way. Job. 23. 11. 12.

5. Secondly, wearisomnesse, and fainting, Gal. 6. 9.

6. Thirdly, a desultory lightnsse whereby men are changed every hour, and
become unlike themselves. It is called childishness, Ephesians. 4. 14. And madness,
and bewitching, Gal. 3. 1.

Qu. 6. How are men stirred up to constancy?

7. Ans. Because the reward is not promised, save only to them that persevere,
Apoc. 2. 10. 26. And therefore it is vain for a man to begin, unless he hold
on, and go through with it. Gal. 3. 4.

CHAP. 14. Of Patience.
QUestion, 7. What is the nature of patience?

1 Ans. Christian patience has reference to a threefold object. 1. To God,
according to whose pleasure all adverse things, are ordered. Job. 1. 20. and 2.
9. 10. In which respect, murmuring against God is opposed to patience, 1 Cor.
10. 10. 2 To men, or those means which do directly afflict us. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 4.
with 6. 1 Pet. 2. 2^. and 3. 9. In which respect desire of revenge is opposed
to patience. Romans 12. 17. 19. 3 To that office, or duty, which by the
molestations of ad* advesity, we are tempted to forsake. Heb. 10. 36. Lu. 12.
19.

In which respect, faintness of mind is opposed to patience, Heb. 12. 5. And
drawing back, and departing out of the right way, which follows there, Heb.
10. 36. with 38. 39. and 12. 7. with 13.

2. In the first consideration, patience pertaines to Religion toward God; In
the second to charity toward our Neighbor. In the third, it is a part of
fortitude, and a general affection of virtue. Yet to the third confideration,
may the other two be referred, so far as our duty, either toward God, or man,
is considered in them: Although, besides this general nature, they have
special difference, by which they may be profitably distinguished from this,
and between themselves.

Qu. 8. How is this patience, and sufferance, to be distinguished that,
fortitude, which consists in confidence, and Constancy?

3. Ans. Those three are always joined together in true fortitude; but
confidence or boldness does properly respect the setting upon a duty,
constancy the continuation of it* patience, the defense of it.

Qu. What be the signs of this patience?

4. Ans. First, if we neither utterly contemn the difficulties, that we meet
with, nor ^aint under them. Heb. 12. 5. But do overcome all oppositions duly
weighed in a right judgment.

5. Secondly, if we be prepared in mind for righteousness sake, not only to
suffer those troubles, which are less, but even those which are most fearful.
Acts 21. 13.

6. Thirdly, if we do not only, not quite forsake our duty, because of
difficulties, we meet with, but not so much as remit, or lessen any thing of
our zeal, Hebrews, 10. 35. and 12. 13.

7. Fourthly, if we undergo these troubles not as by constraint and
unwillingly, but with spiritual joy and exultation, Mat. 5. 12. Col. 1. 11.
Heb. 10. 34.

Qu. 10. By what motives may we be confirmed in this Motives to patience.
patience?

8. Ans. First, because without this patience no good thing can be perfectly
accomplished* Iam. 1. 4.

9. Secondly, because without patience we want the possession of our own
souls, Luke 21. 19. Neither can we attain to have our hearts established in
any thing that is good, Iam. 5. 5. 10. Pro. 24. 10.

10. Thirdly, because by these troubles we are brought into trial by God who
takes a proof of us by the Devils temtations, Heb. 10. 32. Wherein unless by
patience we get the better we must needs to the dishonor of God, and our own
hurt be overcome by the Devil, Romans 12. 21.

11. Fourthly, because in this trial God himself will give both a supply of
strength and a happy issue, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

CHAP. 15. Of Temperance.
BEcause to the constitution of virtue there is required (besides the
uprightness of justice the direction of prudence and the firmness of
fortitude) the custody also or the guard of Temperance, therefore some thing
must be said of Temperance.

Qu. 1. Wherein lies the nature of Temperance.

1. Ans. First, As fortitude does arm virtue against those things, whereby men
are wont to be deterred and made afraid of doing their duty: so Temperance
does defend it against those things which are wont to allure, and entice men
away from the same.

2. Secondly, although in that victory which Temperance obtaines over
flattering Temptations (in the resistance of which there is often times much
molestation) and in that constancy also which is properly a fruit of
Temperance, there be to be found a magnanimity and height of mind near of
kin to fortitude: yet there is a difference betwixt it and fortitude because
of the difference of the objects.

3. Thirdly, because every object, that does allure and entice, has some show
of good; and the appeara^ce of an honest good, as such, does not allure to
sin, but to honesty: therefore the object of Temperance are things that have
a show of profit and delight; or profits and pleasures.

4. Fourthly, also love, desire, and delight are conversant about such kind of
good things; therefore temperance properly is occupied about the moderating of
these affections, about such objects.

5. Fifthly, Temperance does not utterly take away these affections, as being
natural, but does govern them, that is, takes away their inordinatnesse, in
regard of their degree, eextent, and manner.

6. Sixthly, this mordinatnesse, because in believers, it is taken away only
in part, therefore these affections are in some sort, but not perfectly
mortified. Hence it is, that Temperance is said to restrain, and keep under
the remainders of them, and to abstain from them.

Qu. 2. What are the signs of Temperance? Signs of Temperance*


7. Ans. First, if a man be not led with carnal and worldly affections, but
keep them tamed under the yoke of reason and Religion, and do, as it were,
deny them. Tit. 2. 12.

8. Secondly, if he abstain especially from those lusts, to which (either by
reason of the condition of ^isoife, or by evil custom, or by the example of
those amongst whom he lives) he is most inclined. 2 Timothy 2. 22. 1 Peter 4.
2, 3, 4.

9. Thirdly, if he abstain, not only from the outward works, whereby such
lusts are wont to be fulfilled, but also study to root out and mortify the
very inward inordinate affections, Col. 3. 5. 8. Romans 8. 13.

10. Fourthly, if he be neither lifted up inordinately in the fruition of the
commodities, and pleasures of this World, nor troubled in the want of them, but
when he has them, be as if he had them not, 1 Cor. 7. 29 30. 31. And when he
has them not, be as if he had them. 2 Cor. 6. 10.

Qu. 3. What is to be done by us, that we may attain Christian Means to
attain Temperance.
Temperance.

11. Ans. First, we ought to endeavor by all means to diminish and resist the
love, desire, and delight of the World and of worldly things, 1 Io^. 2. 15. 16.

12. Secondly, to this purpose it will be profitable to turn away our
thoughts, and senses from things perversely beloved: lest the appearance of good
which seems to be in them prove to be an incentive, and nourisher of perverse
love, Job. 31. 1. For it is remarkable that the two first perverse loves which we
read of in the Scripture, are said to come by the sight, Genesis 3. The Woman saw
that the Tree was good and pleasant to the Eyes, and Genesis 6. and 2. The Sons
of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair.

13. Thirdly, it is profitable also seriously to ponder of the fading vanity of
all worldly things, 1 Ioh. 2. 17. Eccl. 1.

14. Fourthly, to the end that we be not taken and carried away with the show
of pleasures, it is good to behold them not as they come flatteringly, but as
they go away, that is full of shame and sorrow, R^. 6. 21.

15. Fifthly, we must be watchful that the motions of concupiscence get not
strength by long delay, but we must do our endeavor that they be presently
and in the beginning repressed, To. 7.

16. Sixthly, we must often and seriously revolve in our minds how all those
that ever were wise and godly here, not without just cause despised these
pleasures, and judged them fit to be despised and eschewed by others.

17. Seventhy, the mind is to be occupied in other things; and our love,
desire, and delight, are to be turned to those things which are Spiritual, and
Divine, that so evil love may be driven out of the mind by good love, as one
nail is driven out by an other.

CHAP. 16. Of Drunkenness.
1. AMong the sins which are opposite to Temperance, those are most
remarkable which are conversant about the delights of touching, as Gluttony,
Drunkenesse, and such like, because such kind of abuses have most manifestly
in themselves, and of themselves a moral badnesse as appears by the Law of
nature, of God, and of man, all which do condemn them.

2. In all those kinds of excess, the inordinatenesse is commonly found to be
either in regard of the substance when more precious things are desired, then
do agree to a man's state; For in regard of the quantity when more is consumed
then reason requires, or in regard of the quality when too much curiosity is
used for the satisfying of ones lust, or in regard of the manner when a just
decorum is omitted, or lastly in regard of the ^ime when men give themselves
unto such things oftener then they should or when they ought not.

3. Now of drunkenness there is something in special to be considered before
other sins of the like nature, because of that singular opposition which is
betwixt it and the offices and works of virtue.

Qu. 1. What is drunkenness?

4. Ans. First, drunkenness is oftentimes taken for the privation of reason
which follows upon immoderate Drinking. And so it is not properly a sin by
it self, but rather an effect and punishment of sin.

5. Secondly, as it does note either a desire of immoderate drinking, or the
voluntary drinking it self so far immoderate, that a man by it is violently
deprived of the use of reason, so it is a grevious sin. Pro. 23. 30. 39. Esa.
5. 11. Hos. 4. 11. Luk^ 21. 34. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Ephesians. 5. 18.

6. The deformity and filthiness of this sin does appear from these grounds,
1. Because the Drunkard does for a contemptible pleasure sell that which is the
excellentest thing in the nature of man whilst he deprives himself of the use
of reason, 2. Because by this means he makes himself unfit not only for the
duties of piety. Luke 21, 34. But also for all honest actions, Hos. 4. 11. 3
Because he exposes himself to the danger of almost all kinds of sins,
whilst he deprives himself of the power to avoid those things which otherwise
he knows to be gross sins. For which reason and that which went before it is
apparent that Drunkenness is not so much a special sin, against any one
Commandment of God, as a general breach of the whole Law, 4 Because he does
so deforme the Image of God in himself, that he does in a sort cast himself
below the Beasts. 5 Because he does bring hereby many mischiefs to his body,
name, and outward condition, 6. Because he which is accustomed to this sin
proves in a sort incurable. For a Drunkard is seldom or never reclaimed
either from Drunkenness, or any other sin because his heart is taken away.
Hos. 4. 11.

7. Drunkenness is voluntary not only when it fallows from a direct
intention, but also when it comes of a notable negligence in preventing it.

The outrage^ which a man commits in Drunkenness are so far to be imputed
to him for faults, as the Drunkenness was voluntary; Now then especially, they
are both voluntary, and accounted faulty, when (all circumstances being
considered) a man might, and so ought to have foreseen, that he would commit
such things in his Drunkenness, either because he had tried it by experience
before, or because in the like case of Drunkenness, or upon the like
opportunity, drunken men are wont to commit such things, or at least do expose
themselves to the danger of commiting them.

9. Now, although complete Drunkenness do consist in the loss of the use of
reason by Drinking, whereby a man is made altogether unfit for the duties he
has to do; Yet all perturbation of the fantasy by Drink whereby a man is
notably made less fit, for the ordinary exercise of piety (as prayer and
reading) is a degree of the same sin, Lu. 28. 34.

10. Those also which are strong to drink, so that though they drink above
measure, they find no perturbation of their forces, yet if they like to sit at
their cups, to stay at the Wine, and to extend and prolong their drinkings,
they are not free from this sin. Esa. 5. 11.

11. He is a partaker in this sin, who does wittingly and willingly give wine
or drink to another, to make him drunk. For he does cooperate to his sin.

12. But much more are they guilty, who induce others to make themselves
drunk, whether they intend it directly, or indirectly, by inviting them to
drink, by calling for greater pots, by striving, by urging them without all
reason, to drink as much, and take their turn, as they call it.

13. We ought to abstain, not only from the imitation, but also from the
fellowship of such kind of sins, according to that of the Apostle: if any
that is called a brother, be a Drunkard, with such an one no not to eat, 1
Cor. 5. 11.

14. We are to abstain therefore (even from this ground* if there were no
other) from those rites, whereby drunkenness is artificially wont to be
brought about: of which sort are the adjuring of others to drink by the names
of some that are great, or dear to them; the sending of cups about, that all
and every one in his order may drink them off; that abuse of lots (as it is in
some places used) to impose a fained and (unwritten) Law and necessity of
drinking upon the guests, and such like mysteries of Bacchus, and introductions
to the excess of drinking.

CHAP. 17. Of Good Works.
BEcause from virtue proceed good Works; concerning them therefore.

Qu. 1. What is here to be understood by a Work?

1. Ans. A work in this place ought not to be distinguished from an action, as
it is distinguished by them, who do account those only for good works, which
produce something, that is good and profitable unto men; such as are alms, the
building and endowing of Temples, Colleges, Hospitalls, etc. For although
among men, which are affected with their own commodities, such works are in a
singular manner above others extolled. Yet such works may be so done, that that
action from whence they come, may be in many respects evil; although the
things done may be useful and good unto other men.

2. Again* even when in such works, not the works only, but the actions be
truly good: yet they cannot be equalled to some other actions, which carry not
so great a pomp 1 Timothy 3. 1. Iam. 5. 20.

3. This thing ought so much the more diligently to be observed, because it
pertains much to the comfort of the poorer sort of believers, who have hardly
any power to do any thing, that may tend to the external good of others. It
serves also to abate the insolency of certain rich Men, who think that they
only do good works, and none but they.

Q. 2. Concerning the efficient cause of good works, it may be domanded,
whether the works of (...) unregenerate, (whereby they do in some sort the
same thing which the regenerate do in their good works) be good works, or no:

4. Ans. In such kind of works, we are to distinguish between the substance
(as I may say) of the work, and the fault of the person, wherewith it is
defiled: the substance of such works is good, because they are the things of
the Law. Romans 2. 14. Now, every work so far as it agrees with Gods Law, is
good. But for all that, there be some vices cleaving to them, which come,
partly, from the person that does them, partly, from the manner of doing,
whereby such works are so defiled, that though in their own nature, and in
respect of others they be good, yet in respect of any spiritual obedience
yielded by them unto God, they are not good, Esa. 1. 13. Esa, 66* 3.

Qu. 3. How then can the works of the regenerate be good, seeing they are many
ways defiled?

5. Ans. Although evil does always cleave both to the persons and the actions
of the godly, Romans 7. 21. Yet this evil in their holy duties takes not away
the essence of a spiritual duty, but hinders and diminishes the degree and
perfection thereof; because all the causes of such works are good, and only the
adjuncts evil: and so the imperfection being covered in Christ, the works are
for Christ's sake acceptable, and pleasing unto God 1 Pet. 2. 5.

Qu. 4. Concerning the matter of good works, it may be demanded, whether it is
not lawful for us at our own pl^asure to make choice of something, in which
to yield honor and obedience unto G^d?

6. This is expressly forbiden, Deuteronomy. 12. 8. 32. Number. 5. 39. Mat. 15. 9. Mark.
7. 7.

7. Secondly it does imply a contradiction that we should yield obedience to
God in those things, whereof he has given us no Commandment: Neither without
obedience can we give any honor to God, that may be pleasing to him. All works
therefore of our own choosing are only good before men through a fained and
vain persuasion, but not before God.

8. Thirdly, yet there is some difference to be observed in good works, in
regard of the matter; for some are expressly and immediately enjoined to all, as
the duties of the moral Law; others are not commanded to all, but to some
only, and that is not expressly and immediately, but consequently, and upon the
supposition of certain circumstances, by which it comes to pass that ( bic
and nunc) in some particular case, they partake of the nature of precept^.

9. In such things, the will of God is to be gathered and collected by a
fillogisme, whose general proposition is contained in the Scripture; the
assumption depends upon gift, call, or such like special circumstances; and
the conclusion is out of the proposition so derived by the assumption, that in
respect of this or that man, such or such a time, it has the same force of
binding, with a general Commandment. For example, all ought to cut off
occasion of calumny and scandal, and to take that course which make* most for
the furtherance of the Gospel, and the edification of the Church. This is the
proposition. 1 Cor. 10. 31. 32. 33. Now Paul, considering all circumstances,
did thus assume, I Paul, if I shall freely preach the Gospel, shall cut off
occasion of calumny. 2 Cor. 11. 12. I shall further the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 23.
And edify the Church, 1 Cor. 9. 19. Hence this conclusion follows, therefore I
Paul ought to preach the Gospel freely, 1 Cor. 9. 15. Again, all ought
according to the gifts which they have, and their vocation, to promote the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 7. 17. I have the gift of continency, and the present necessity
makes the single life more fit to further the Gospel, then marriage, 1 Cor.
26. Therefore I ought to continue in that single estate.

10. If this explication be duly observed, it will easily without any longer
dispute, overthrow the Doctrine of the Papists, who make distinction between
Evangelicall counsels, and the Laws of God.

Qu. 5. Concerning the end of good work* it is demanded, what force intention
has to make an action either good, or bad?

11. Ans. A good intention by it self cannot make a good action, because
goodness is a perfection, and does arise from the perfection and integrity of
all the causes. Neither is there any action so wicked, but may be committed out
of some good end: the incest of Lots Daughter was upon a good end. Genesis 19. 32.
And many do kill Christians, thinking thereby to do God service. Io^. 16. 2.

12. Yet an evil intention does make an action evil, because evil, is a
defect, and does arise out of any defect, Mat. 6. 1. Take heed ye do not your
alms before men to be seen of them, etc.

Qu. 6. What kind of intention is necessarily required to make an action good?

13. Ans. First, it is absolutely necessary that it be done with a respect to
honesty, and in reference to the pleasing of God, and obeying his Will. Acts
24. 16. For an action cannot be good, unless it be don under the notion of
goodness; Now to do a good thing under the notion of goodness, is to have a
respect to honesty and goodness in the doing of it. For he that does a thing
that is honest, because it is delightful, or profitable, may be said to do
rather a thing profitable, or delightful, then honest. 1 Timothy 6. 5.

14. Secondly, a secondary intention of profit, or pleasure does in no sort
take away the honesty of an action, but adorn it rather. Romans 1. 12. and 15.

15. Thirdly, it is also absolutely necessary, that there be a reference of the
action to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10. 37. This is done vertually in the
intention of our doing our duty: but the more distinct and direct respect is
unto God in action, the more perfect it is, Ps. 16. 8.

16. Fourthly, it is meet also there be a secondary intention of setting our
own salvation. 1 Cor. 9. 24.

17. Fifthly, in such works as come to the notice of others, it is requisite
also that we think of stopping the mouths of the wicked, 1 Pet. 3. 16. And of
furthering others in the way of salvation. Mat. 5. 16.

18. Sixthly, the cause is otherwise in evil actions; for to make an action
evil, it is not required, that there be any respect to evil, or express
intention of dishonouring Gods Name, or of bringing death, or giving offense
unto others: because as the nature of sin consists in privation, so the want of
good intention is ^n evil intention, and (as it is chosen by the will)
interpretatively is reckoned for the intention of all those evils, which are
opposed to good intentions: and hence it is that the sinner is said to love
death, Pro. 8. 36.

Qu. 7. Of the form of a good action wherein it does consist?

19. It consists properly in the manner of doing, when the agent is not only
well disposed, and that thing which he does is approved of God, but also the
action is so ordered in respect of all the circumstances, as God prescribes,
what and of what nature this is, appears by the defect. 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28.
29. Comande. 3.

Qu. 8. Because the information and force of Conscience does nearly pertain
to the form of doing concerning it may be demanded, whether the Conscience of
man be a sufficient and absolute rule to work by?

20. Ans. The Conscience of a man since the fall is defiled, Tir. 1. 15. And so
by it self cannot be a perfect, and pure rule, yea: if we simply follow it as
a leader, we shall be brought oftentimes into vil^ wickedness. Io^. 16. 2.
Acts 26. 9. Phil. 3. 6. It is therefore only a subordinate rule, so far of
force, as it is directed by the Word of God. Hence an erring Conscience has
not that power to bind, that we are simply bound to follow the judgment of
such a Conscience. For we ought never to content our selves, till our
Conscience be certainly informed in those things which concern our duty;
although in this sense it may be said to bind, because against such a
Conscience, while such, we are to do nothing.

Qu. 9. What is to be done when the Conscience is in doubt?

21. Ans. If the Conscience do doubt whether the action be lawful we ought to
abstain from that action, till we be certain concerning it. To. 14. 23.

Qu. 10. What if the Conscience be in a perplexity, so that it thinks it a sin
as well to abstain^ from the action as to do it?

22. Ans. Out of the nature of the thing it self, and of the Conscience
considered by it self, such a case cannot fall out: for it cannot be that the
judgment of the Conscience should at the same time assent to both parts of the
contradiction.

Qu. 11. What is to be done when the Conscience is troubled with scruples?

23. The conscience is then said to be troubled with scruples when it does give
assent to one part of the question being hereunto induced by sufficient
arguments, but yet in some sort troubled with the objections of the other side,
which it cannot easily answer. Such kind of doubts (if it may be) ought by a
certain judgment to be laid down; but if this cannot be such an imperfection
of judgment (in as much as it does not hinder assent by a doubtefull wavering,
but only make that assent to be more weak) is no just cause to make us
forbear that, which such an assent leads us unto. Deuteronomy. 13. 1. 2. 3. 1 Kings.
13. 21*

Q^. 12. How ought a man to carry himself between contrary opinions, when he
is uncertain of the truth?

24. Ans. First, it is not enough for a good conscience to adhere to the
authority of men, though they be learned and godly; because the conscience is
not by it self to be subjected to the judgment of man: Neither has any
humane testimony, sufficient strength to argue Gods approbation of a thing* or
to excuse in Gods presence. Romans 14 12. 1 Cor. 8. 10.

25. Secondly, every one ought to follow that opinion, which (after due
diligence to search the truth) he judges to be improbable out of the nature of
the thing and the Law of God compared together, whether that probability
appear to him by his own search, or by the help of others. 1 Cor. 8. 4. with
7.

26. Thirdly, if after due inquisition made the mind be wholly in suspense,
whether the action be lawful or unlawful, then that doubtfullnesse remaining,
the safer part is to be chosen. Now that is the safer part in which there is no
danger of sinning, and in this case he sins not, who simply abstaines from
such an action, so that he condemns not another which does it. Romans 14. 5.
with 4. 23. We are therefore to abstain from all such things, about which
(after due diligence used) the conscience is in doubt, whether they be lawful
or no. They which do otherwise, do not only expose themselves to the danger
of sinning in the very action it self, but without doubt do ^in in the very
manner of doing.

Qu. 13. When a man does apprehend, that, of two sins he must needs commit one,
which is he to choose?

27. Ans. The precepts of God do never so jarre of their own nature, that it
is necessary to break one of them by sin: For when a less Commandment is
neglected, that a greater may be observed, that less Commandament does cease
for the while to bind; so that they who upon such an occasion neglect it, are
altogether blameless, that is, sin not. Math. 12. 5. 7.

28. For that usual saying, that of two evils we must choose the least, it is
meant of evils of punishment, not of sin.

29. A man ought therefore always to have a fixed resolution to eschew and
avoid all sin.

30. There is no necessity of fear, danger, or outward constraint whereby a
man can be excused, if he do upon that pretense commit the least sin.

31. Neither indeed is there properly any constraint, when any thing is done
with certain counsel, and the will (which cannot be compelled) induced by
fear, consents to the actinn.

32. Thirdly, if any through weakness be brought to those straits, that he
thinks he must needs of two sins commit one, the conscience cannot give
judgment in such a case, because that deliberation is made against the
conscience. Yet it cannot be doubted, but he sins less, which commits the
lesser sin.

CHAP. 18. Of things indifferent.
QVestion, 1. Wherein consists the nature of a thing indifferent?

1. Ans. First, adiaphorum (for so it is called) according to the
interpretation of the word, is that which has such a respect to two extremes,
that it is inclined no more to the one, then the other, and in the same sense
is called an indifferent thing, or a thing of a middle nature.

2. Secondly, now although according to this large acceptance of the word, any
middle thing may be called indifferent or adiaphorum, yet the word does
commonly signify only such a thing as is in the middle between moral good and
evil.

3. Thirdly, the middle between good and evil is either, 1. of mere denial
(as they term i^) in which there is neither good nor evil to be found; and so
all substances, whether they be things natural or artificial, are middle
things or indifferent: or it is, 2. a middle of participation, which does so
far agree with both extremes, as the extremes agree between themselves; and
thus no substances are properly things middle and indifferent by themselves,
because none of them are either good or evil, but only actions, and
dispositions to actions.

4. Fourthly, such actions therefore as are neither commanded nor forbidden,
and that be in their own nature neither points of obedience, or disobedience,
are indifferent or middle.

Qu. 2. Whether there be any actions indifferent in regard of their kind?

5. Ans. First, this may be understood two ways: either that indifferency be
of the specificall nature of any action, which is false: or that the common
nature of an action should have an indifferent respect to good or evil, which
is true.

6. Secondly, there is therefore no action of its own nature so indifferent,
but by circumstances it may be made good, or evil; but there be diverse actions
which in their common and bare nature, before they be as it were clothed with
circumstances, do include in themselves no goodness or badnesse; as, to eat,
to drink, to take a journey, to walk, etc.

Qu. 3. Whether indifferent actions differ nothing among themselves, but are
all equally distant from good and evil?

7. Ans. In their own intrinsecall nature they differ nothing at all; but yet
there are some* which for the most part have evil circumstances annexed to
them, and so bend more toward evil, and have an evil name, as to do the
work of an accuser, the office of an hangman, etc. Some there be also which
for the most part have good circumstances, and so bend toward good, and have a
good name, as, to till the ground* to follow our study diligently* etc.

Qu. 4. Whether do things indifferent make any thing for order and comeliness?

8. Ans. Whatsoever it is that of its own nature serves for order or
comeliness, or edification, is not indifferent: for when they do participate
the nature of goodness, they are not in the middle betwixt good and bad. And
when they produce good, they must needs have some good force and efficacy in
them: every thing brings forth its like.

Qu. 5 Whether do indifferent things cease to be indifferent when any certain
thing is set down concerning them, by such as are in authority?

9. Ans. Nothing ought to be commanded, but that which is good, nor to be
forbidden, but what is evil; That which is indifferent cannot simply,
absolutely, and for ever be either enjoined or forbidden; but commanded, as it
draws near to good, forbidden, as it approaches to evil.

Qu. 6. Whether any singular and individual action be indifferent?

10. Ans. First, there be some actions which though they be actions of a man,
yet they are not humane actions; such are those which proceed from imagination
only, and not from deliberate reason, as the rubbings of men's hands, ^o scratch
the head or beard, to take up a straw, etc. while we are thinking of something
else: these actions are not morally good or evil, they want that which is
required to make them so, namely counsel and deliberation. For although a man
may sin by those actions, as if in time of Prayer he suffer his imagination to
wander; and do give way to such toyings as those. Yet these actions considered
in themselves are neither good nor evil. It is true these motions are subject
to the command of man's will, but yet they are so subject, that they may be
exercised without any precedent act of reason: Neither are we bound any further
by reason to prevent them; but only so far that they hinder not the duties we
are about. So for moving of the eye lids, reason and the will have power to
moderate them, but it is not worth the while to take notice how often we wink,
if so be we take heed that in such things nothing be done which is undecent, ^r
against our duty.

11. Secondly, every action which proceeds from deliberate reason, and is
properly called humane, considered singularly and in the individual, as it is
an exercised action, is either good or evil. For such a kind of action is
either ordered to a good end, or it is not; If it be, ^hen it has the nature
of a good action, if other circumstance^ be correspondent; if it be not ordered
to a good end, it is an evil action because it wants the perfection, which
ought to be in it, and is not according to its rule.

12. Yet is not required to the goodness of natural action, that it be
always actually and explicitly referred to the due and, so that this be done
implicity and vertually; because reason in that exercise of such kind of
actions, may often with more profit be conversant about those objects.

13. Thirdly, some one or two circumstances of an human action may be
indifferent, as if one scholar be speaking with another, it is sometimes
indifferent whether they use the Latin tongue, or any other. But their talk
taken with all thee circumstances is necessarily either good or bad: the reason
is, because the determination of an action does not depend upon one
circumstance apart, but upon all jointly together.

14. Fourthly, there may be some singular action in which there is no goodness
special to be found, which may not be found in another, and so, that at this
time we do this or that, rather then another thing, therein is oftetimes
neither good nor evil. Opportunity, or the suggestion of our minds without any
respect of moral goodness, may be of weight sufficient to make the
determination*

15. Fifthly, although therefore there b^ no singular actions humane, that is
neither good, nor evil; yet there are diverse, which singularly and in
comparison of others are neither necessary nor unlawful. For as the C^rver
has oftentimes no certain reason, why he rather makes this image, then that:
yet if he make any, it is necessary that he either follow the rules of his Art,
and make a good one, or fail and so make a bad one. So it is in many singular
actions of men, which in respect of the exercise, have no proper reason beside
the inclination of the mind, but in the doing they are either good or bad.

CHAP. 19. Of a voluntary Act.
QUest. 1. Whether in a good or evil act there be necessarily required an
inclination of the will?

1. Ans. First, the will is the principle and the first cause of all humane
operation in regard of the exercise of the act. For we therefore do this or
that rather then another thing, because we will; As God himself is said to do
all things of his own Will. Ephesians. 1. 11. So also does man who is made after the
Image of God. The first cause therefore of the goodness or sinfulness of any
Act of man, is in the Will.

2. Secondly, liberty also of election is formally in the will: that therefore
any one does yield obedience to God, or refuses to do so, proceeds from the
will.

3. Lastly, our obedience stands in our conformity to the Will of God* and the
disobedience, in our unconformity thereunto. Now our conformity with the Will
of God is first and principally in our will, Apoc. 2. 6.

Qu. 2. What are those things which make an action to become not voluntary.

4. Ans. Nothing at all but either absolute violence of constraint, or chance
which could not be foreseen, or prevented. And for such things as are done
through absolute violence or mere chance, they have neither the nature of
Obedience or sin. As if one should be forced to offer incense or bow the knee
before an Idol, or should merely by chance kill another, D^ut. 19. 56* 10.

Q. 3. What are we to think of those actions which are done Of actions done
through ignorance.
through ignorance?

5. Ans. First, that ignorance which is in some sort a cause of the action (so
that if a man knew what he did he would not Do it) if it be unvoluntary both
in it self and in its cause, that is, not affected, nor procured, nor
tolerated, does make the action merely casual and unvoluntary and so excuses
from sin.

6. Secondly, ignorance of the Law does nevev wholly excuse, because all men
are bound to know the Will of God: but yet it does somewhat lessen the fault if
it be not affected, 1 Timothy 1. 13. John 4. 41. Acts 3. 17. But if it be affected
it is of it self a sin and so does not diminish but rather increase the guilt
of other sins, 2 Pet. 3. 5.

7. Thirdly, an Ignorance of the fact if a man ^ath used such diligence as he
ought, does excuse him* because by such an ignorance the fact is made casual.
So Jacob being deceived lay with Leah whom he took to be Rachell, Genesis 29. But
if due diligence have not been used, ignorance of the fact, does not
altogether excuse although it do somewhat lessen the fault. And this seems to
have been the case of Abimil^ch Genesis 20. 5. Of actions (...) through (...).


Qu. 4. What are we to judge of those actions which are done through fear.

8. Ans. First, fear does not simply make an action unvoluntary: but does
considering the circumstances of time and place, etc. impell a man to will this
or that. As appears in that known instance of the merchant, who is induced
through fear of death to throw away his merchandise into the Sea. Fear
therefore does never wholly excuse from sin: yea more, fear it self is often a
sin forbidden, and a cause too of most grievous sins* Mat. 10. 26. Phil. 1. 28.
1 Pet. 3. 14. Apoc. 21. 8. Although therefore a great fear or terror such as
is wont sometimes to trouble even a man of good courage before men, be
accounted for a good excuse, and is of force to make contracts done through
fear void, yet before God such an excuse will not be taken.

9. Secondly, yet that sin which is committed through some strong terror, is
not so grievous (if other things be alike) as that which is committed of the
voluntary inclination of the will without any such fear of danger, because in
fear the temptation is stronger: and such a fall, if repentance follow, does
proceed not so much from malice, as from infirmity and perturbation. And this
was Peter's case when he denied Christ.

Qu. 5. What are we to judge of those actions which are done Of actions done
through concupiscense.
through concupiscense.

10. Ans. Concupiscense does not make an act cease to be voluntary, neither
does it indeed diminish the voluntarinesse of it in respect of the act, but
increases it rather. For he that does a thing out of concupiscense, has a
will strongly inclined to that which it does, as is appears either delightful
or profitable to him, if therefore the concupiscense be fixed the sin's the
greater. as it was in ^das, who betrayed Christ out of coverousnesse of (...).

Qu. 6. What are we to judge of those actions which are Of actions done through
Inadvertency.
done through inadvertency* or through not minding of what we do?

11. Ans. Inadvertency or mindlesnesse is of the same nature with ignorance:
because it di^ers not from it, but only as the privation of an act does differ
from the privation of a disposition. Inadvertency therefore is it self often a
fin and is opposed to watchfulness. At such a time therefore as we are bound
to watch and attend, if we watch not and attend, not we may be rightly said to
will this watchfulness, not to will it, yea to will our inadvertency, Esa. 1.
3.

12. Again this inadvertency is sometimes voluntarily chosen in it self. Amos
6. 10. Sometimes it is voluntarily chosen in its cause. Mat. 13. (...).

Qu. 7. How are we said to will a thing in its cause? How a thing is willed in
its cause.


13. Ans. When we do will something upon which an other thing follows. He
which will be present at immoderatdrinkings may be said to will drunkenness.
He which willingly gives himself to sleep, and idleness, may be accounted
guilty of a willing neglect of the duties of his calling-He which will please
men, may be said with his will to dis^ please God. Gal. 1. 10.

CHAP. 20. Of the sins of the Heart.
QUestion, 1. What are the sins of the Heart?

1. Ans. The sins of the heart are partly thoughts, partly delights, and partly
desires.

Qu. 2. What thoughts are to be accounted as sins?

2. Ans. There Is a threefold thought of the heart about that which is evil. 1.
In the bare and simple apprehending of evil. Of thoughis
2. When with that apprehension there is joined some motion of the heart to
consent to the evil. 3. When there is a full approbation of and consent unto
the evil. In the first of these there is of it self no sin. For it was in
Christ. Mat. 4. 1. Hence it is rightly said to know evil is not evil. But the
other two kinds of thoughts are not without sin. For the third none makes
question, and for the second the Scripture is plain. James 1. 14. Where we are
also taught how to distinguish those thoughts which are evil from others,
namely when some thought about an evil thing begins in the least manner to
draw us toward it, when we begin to nibble upon it and are tickled with it.
The reason is because then it bgins in some sort to be received by us, and
stick in all, so that the evil of which we think becomes in a sort ours
whilst we begin to be moved toward it as toward an object betwixt which and
us there is some agreement. For although we stop here and proceed not, to a full
consent: yet even this fasten's some blot and defilement upon us (now we ought
to have such a care of our souls which were made after Gods Image, that we
keep them pure from all even from the least pollution and defilement. For it
is well observed by a great author that every man is appointed by God to keep,
and defend his own heart as Soldiers are sometimes appointed to defend a
Castle, or Town against the enemies. If therefore without seeking of any aid,
and without expecting succor from GOD he should upon the first attempt of the
enemy yield up this Castle, he commits manifest treason. What then shall we
say, if he should give up the Keys of this Castle before there be any assault
made? now the Keys of the Castle are the thoughts. For these open the heart,
and let in the devil. Certainly, he which voluntarily gives this Key to the
Devil shall never be able to clear himself from guilt of treason. Now a man
delivers this Key to the Devil, as often as he gives up his thoughts into the
Devils hands, or frames his thoughts to the Devils will. The roling of the
thoughts in the mind is like the turning of the Key in the Lock to open it.

Qu. 3. What delight about evil is to be accounted as How the heart sins by
delight.
sinful?

3. Ans. Not that only which comes from evil in the commission of it, or
after the Commission or while we have a purpose to commit it, Pro. ^. 14. 10.
23. But even the simple, bare, and ineffectuall complacency in an unlawful
thing, although there be no purpose ever to commit it. This delight is usually
called delectatio morosa not from the length of time, but from the stay of the
understanding which stays, and prolongs the time in the contemplation of an
unlawful thing with some pleasure. Now the reason why this delight is a sin,
is because that delight is a conformity of the affection with the thing thought
upon, and does contain some approbation of it. To. 7. 22.

Qu. 4. Is all delight in an unlawful thing sinful?

4. Ans. Yes, if 1. It be in an unlawful thing or an evil Whether s^e delight
in an unlawful thing may not (...).
action as its unlawful and evil, 2. If it proceed from an affection tending
and inclining toward such things, or from any unlawful provocation, 3. If it
be such a delight as in its own nature may have the force of a cause, or an
occasion to stir up evil affections. In these three cases it cannot be doubted
but such a delight is a sin* But if one be delighted in the thought of an evil
thing not as it is evil, but as there is some natural perfection excercised,
and put forth in it, without any danger of consenting to the evil, such a
delight is not simply, and of its self a sin. As when one takes delight in
that cunning dexterity, constancy, and courage, which appears in another, in
an unjust duel: the reason is because this delight is not properly, and
formally conversant about an evil thing but about a good thing.

Concerning absolute desires there is no doubt but if they be What ^desires ^e
sinful.
carried to things that are evil they are sinful; but concerning such
desires, as are only with a condition there may be some question made.

Qu. 1. Whether is it lawful for a man to wish any evil of punishment, or
misery to himself upon any condition?

5. Ans. That this is in some sort lawful appears, 1. By the example of Paul
Romans 9. 3. Who wished himself accursed for the Jews sake, 2. By the thing it
self, because actually to undergo and suffer such a kind of evil is not
only lawful, but expedient often upon some condition, Genesis 44. 33. 3 By
reason, because to suffer evil is not of it self an evil, or a sin: if
therefore the condition under which it is desired be good, the desire is good
also.

Qu. 2. Whether can the desire of an unlawful thing upon a condition become
lawful?

6. Ans. First, in those things which are only unlawful by man's Law such kind
of desires may be lawful, because such things have no intrinsecal evillnesse
in them; As if I would go out of the City over the Walls when the Gates are
shut, unless it were forbidden.

7. Secondly, in some things also that are forbidden, even by Gods Law which
have no such intrinsecall evil annexed to them, but that it may in thought be
abstracted and separated; such desires may be lawful by themselves, if there
be no danger of an absolute consent. As if a man should say I would take such a
Woman to be my Wife, if she were not too near of kin to me.

8. Thirdly, The desire to do that which is plainly, and intrinsecally evil
upon condition, if it were lawful and not forbidden, cannot be excused from
sin. As if a man should say I would commit fornication if it were not
forbidden. For our desires ought to stand at as far a distance from sin as from
any thing in the World, and to abhor it utterly: but in such kind of desires
there does appear some inclination, and propension to sin.

9. Fourthly, the desire to do any thing which is in it self evil, unless
the singular condition and state of ones life hindered it, is a sin. As if a
man should think I would be revenged upon such a one if I were not a minister.
Or I would keep company with such and such boon fellows, if I were not
toward the Ministry. For such men do not abstain from evil simply because
it is evil, but because it becomes not men of their callings or may tend more
to their prejudice then to the prejudice of others.

10. Fifthly, when the condition is such an one as does not except the evil in
the action, but the danger of punishment only, then the desire is a grievous
sin, and a sign of much inward wickedness. As if a man should say I would
kill such an one if I might do it, and it never be known. I would play the
Fornicator, or adulterer if there were no Hell: for although such a condition,
or wish puts nothing in esse, (as they say) that is, in being, in respect of
the thing it self, yet in the will it does suppose an affection toward such a
sin, and shows also that he which is so affected would commit those sins, if
he might escape punishment.

11. Sixthly, all such conditional desires in a manner are temptations of the
devil which we cannot admit without a great deal of danger.

CHAP. 21. Of the sins of the Mouth.
QUestion. 1. Whether if a man have conceived a sin in his Heart, is there no
evil added to it by the (...) of it?

1. Ans. If one do refrain from uttering with his mouth that evil which he
has in his heart, that he may the e^silier commit it without being hindered,
then the silence it self is a sin, and tends to the aggravation of the evil
which he h^th conceived in his thoughts: and a much greater sin is it if he
should in his words make a show of the clean contrary. Pro. 26. 24. 25. and 10
18. But if one do therefore abstain from uttering the evil which he has
thought, because it is evil and shameful, such an one stops the course of sin
and does well. Proverbs 30. 32. And if he should when he has thought evil,
proceed to utter it with his tongue, (...) increases his sin by making it more
complete then it was before the speaking.

Qu. 2. Whether is an idle word a sin? Of idle words*


2. Ans. 1. An idle word properly and stricktly is an unfruitful word, or a
word of no use, fruit, or profit. Now such a word can hardly ever proceed from
deliberate reason: because reason and the will of man does always propound
unto it self some end, and some good either moral or natural: so that of
necessity every word proceeding from deliberation must be either good or evil,
and so no word properly and rigidly can be said to be idle.

3. Ans. 2. This notwithstanding, those speeches in Scripture are called idle
Mat. 12. 36. Which are little or nothing regarded by the most, and of which
they think they shall never give account. Now of th^se words our Savior says
there is such an account to be given before God, as that even in them there will
be found matter enough, and desert enough for the infflicting of eternal
Condemnation.

Qu. 3. Whether are all words uttered in jest or sport, or by way Of words
spoken in sport, and just.
of m^rriment, idle and sinful?

3. Ans. They are not always idle because they have sometimes their use, at
least for recreation and to make mirth. Neither are they always sinful:
because they may have a lawful and honest use, Pro. 29. 9. 1 Kings 18. 27.
Such kinds of ^ests therefore may be both good and evil as they may be used.

Qu. 4. Whether are those words sinful wherein men do make profession of some
good, without any intention of performing it, James 2. 16.

5. Ans. They are sinful, and that not only in regard of the defect, because
a due intention is wanting, but also in regard of the deceit and fraud which
does accompany such words and has in some sort the nature of a lie.

Quest. 5. Whether is multiplicity of words a sin:

6. Ans. It is not o^ it self a sin for a man to use many words: but it is
often an occasion of sin, Poverbs 10. 19.

CHAP. 22. Of sins of Works.
QUest. 1. Whether the external Work of sin joined with the internal do
increase the evil of it?

1. Ans. 1. If one have an effectual will of sinning, viz. be so affected in
regard of his will toward sin, that nothing hinders him from the eternal
Work, but only that the occasion is wanting, such a man before God is
accounted as great a sinner, as if he had performed the outward action; this
appears by the contrary acts of obedience. 2 Cor. 8. 12. Heb. 11. 17.

2. Ans. 2. And yet such a sin in regard of the extension of it is made great
by the external work. For as sanctification is great when it has renewed the
spirit, soul and body, then if it should reform any one part alone, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 23. 1 Corinthians 6. 20. 2 Corinthians 7. 1. So also sin in the like
manner is greater when it has as it were invaded the body, then if it should
keep possession only of the soul.

3. Ans. 3. In regard of that hurt and mischief which is done to others,
either by reason of scandal, or by reason of some real discommodity, sin is
made greater by the external work. 1 Samuel 25. 32. 33.

4. Ans. 4. Hence it is that some punishments are justly infflicted for the
external act of some sins which are not infflicted for the internal. As a
divorce is made for the act of adultery but not for the intention.

Qu. 2. Whether do those discommodities which fall out in the event of an
evil work increase the sin.

5. Ans. These kinds of events may have a fourefold respect unto the will of
the sinner. 1 Sometimes they are directly intended, and then they do increase
the sin, in the internal nature of it whether they follow or follow not, 2.
Sometimes they are foreseen, although not directly intended, as, when one
sees an innocent person like to be much indammaged by the theft which he
intends, and then interpretatively, and indirectly they are said to be
increased, and likewise aggravate the sin, 3. Sometimes they are neither
intended nor foreseen, but yet they ought by some means to be foreseen and
prevented: and then also they aggravate the sin, because they are in some sort
presumed to be foreseen, 4. Sometimes the ignorance of them is void of sin,
and then they are not imputed as sins.

Qu. 3. How is the act of sin broken off?

6. A. 1. No^ by every physical interruption of the act: for if it be in a
moral sense continued, the sin it self remains.

7. 2. Not by a simple cessation of the act of the intention or will: for that
may come to pass through inadvertence, and distraction about other things.

8. The morality therefore of it is only broken off by a contrary will and
resolution: and yet that breaking off is imperfect; unless there be withal
such a change of the will, as is required to true Repentance.

FINIS.

