Humors Heaven on Earth; With The Civil Wars of Death and Fortune.

As also The Triumph of Death: Or, The Picture of the Plague, according to the
Life; as it was in Anno Domini. 1603.

By John Dauies of Hereford.

O! it is a sacred kind of Excellence,
That hides a rich truth in a Tales pretense!
Printed at London by A. I. 1609.



To the right Noble, Algernon, Lord Percy, son and heir apparent to the
right Honorable Henry Earl of Northumberland.
THrice Noble, and more hopeful Pupil I
(Who learnes thy Hand to show thy Hearts conceits
Would make thy heart, before it Vice does try,
To know her Lures, to shun her sly deceits.
But, in the Prime but of thy Pupillage
Before the joints of Judgment can be knit,
(Although for Wit thou mai'st be Wisdoms Page)
Vice throws her Lures above thy reach of Wit.
But yet when Time shall throwly close thy Mould,
Wherein all rare Conceits still cast shall be,
Then shall thou (with clear eyes) dark lines behold,
That lead thee to all knowledge fit for thee.
And, since that Childhood more in Tales delights
Then saddest Truths; I Will tell thee merry Tales,
Of Lords and Ladies, with their merry Knights,
Their merry Blisses, and their sorry Bales.
The outside of these Tales are painted over
With colors rich, to please thine eagre sense;
But, lined with naked Truth (yet richly poor)
More fit for thy more rich Intelligence.
When thou can crack this Nut, within the Shell
Thou shall a Kernel find will please thy Taste;
The Palate of thy Wit will like it well,
When thou shall swallow it, for joy, in haste.
Then make this Nut a whirligigge the while,
To make thee merry (if thou can be so)
To see the turning of our Sports to toil,
Wherein observe how pleasures come and go:
For, as a whirligigge does turn so fast,
That sharpest sights the fruit do scarce perceive:
So can no Palate fruits of Pleasure taste
When they are come, so soon they take their leave!
Read^ little Lord, this Riddle learn to reed;
So, first appose; then, tell it to thy Pecres:
So shall they hold thee (both in Name and Deed)
A perfect Pierc-ey that in darkness cleeres.
A Pierc-ey, or a pi^rcing Eye does show
Both Wit and Courage; and, if thou will learn
By moral Tales sins mortal to eschew,
Thou shall be wise, and endless glory earne:
That so thou mai'st, the meanest Tutors praise;
So, Percies fame shall pierce the Eye of Days:
Then, by those Rays my Pen (inflamed) shall runn^
Beyond the Moon, to make thy Moon a Sun!
Mean while, and ever, I rest pressed to honor thee with my poor uttermost,
John Dauies.

To the good Knight, and my much honored Scholar, Sir Philip Carey.
Since Death (dear Sir) has lately been so fell,
To reaue that life, than dear life deerer far;
This record of his greater rage may quell
The less (perhaps) in your particular.
Feign would I (if I could) beguile your grief,
With telling you of others heavy harms:
But (ah) such guile gives Grief too true relief,
In your true humane heart, that Pity warmes.
Life is a Plague: for, who does live, must die;
Yet some that have the Plague, do escape alive,
So life's more mortal than Mortality:
Then since that life (like death) does life deprive,
You may rejoice, since your Adolphus lived,
True Virtues life, which cannot be deprived.
Viuat post funera virtus.
As much grieved for your loss, as glad any way to show his love. John Dauies.

To the right worshipful my dear Scholar Sir Humfrey Baskeruile of Earsley,
Knight: And the no less lovely than virtuous Lady his Wife.
Since I am Lecturing my noblest Scholars,
(You being two) this Lecture deigne to read;
For though it treats of naught but death and dollers,
Yet it with pleasure may your passion feed:
For, plagues to see (vnplagu'd) does Nature please,
Although good nature (gladly) grieves thereat;
As we are well-ill pleased to see at Seas
The wofull'st wrack, while we are safe from that.
In health to tell what sickness we have past,
Makes us more sound; for, Gladness health defends:
O then your eyes on this Plagues-Picture cast
To glad and grieve you for glad-grieuous ends.
But my sole End by this poor Mean to ye,
Is but to tie your Ears, and Hearts to me,
John Dauies.

To my dear, meek, modest, and entirely beloved Mistress Elizabeth Dutton,
Mistress Mary, and Mistress Vere Egerton, three Sisters of hopeful destenies, be
all Grace and good Fortune.
Since on my worthiest Scholars I do muse,
How should my Muse to mind you once neglect,
Since you are such? The^, such she should abuse,
Should she not use you with all dear respect.
Thou virgin Widow (eldest of the Three)
(That hold'st thy widows state, of Death in chief)
Death in thy youth (being fast) has made thee free;
Free from thy Joy, and fastened thee to Grief.
But he that is the Lord of lordly Death,
Reserues thine honored Sires most honored Sire
From Deaths dispite; and while he draws breath,
Thou (lowly Soul) art likely to aspire.
Thy Sisters (like in Nature, as in Name,
And both in Name and Nature naught but good)
(Beloved Pupills) well may hope the same,
Since of like grace there is like likelihoode.
Yet in the height of Earths felicity,
A meek regard unto this Picture give,
To mind you so of life's mortality,
So shall you live to die, and die to live.
Mean while I hope, through your clear Stars to spy
A Trinity of Ladies ere I die.
He which (for the exercise of your hie humility) you please to call Master
John Dauies.

To my worthy, and worthily beloved Scholar, Thomas Bodenham Esquier, son and
heir apparent of Sir Roger Bodenham of Rotherwas, Knight of the Bathe.
ANd, if among them that are dear to me,
(Remembered by my Pen, my Muses Tongue,)
I should forget to show my love to thee,
My self, but much more thee, I so should wrong.
Nay, wrong the right which I to thee do owe:
But never shall my love so guilefull prove,
As not to pay thee so deserved a due;
For, I confess thou well deseru'st my love.
Thou were my Scholar; and if I should teach
So good a Pupil such a Lesson ill
(By mine example) I might so impeach
Mine honest fame, and quite disgrace my skill:
But when I learn thee such detested Lore,
Then loathe my love, and learn of me no more.
Yours, as what is most yours, John Dauies.

The last Book (being a Picture according to the Life) dedicated To the no
less high in Birth, then honorable in Disposition (right noble in either) the
Lady Dorothie, and Lady Lucy Percies.
GReat-little Ladies, greatly might you blame
My little care of doing as I ought,
Should I neglect to set your noble Name,
First of those Principalls whose hands I taught.
Yet, the more high your Birth and Places are,
The more ye ought to mind the blast of Breath:
As Philips Page did show his Masters care,
When most he flourisht, most to think on death!
Then, with most bliss, when you transported be,
Look on this Picture; so, perceive ye shall,
We fall, like Leaves, in Autumn from the Tree,
When Heaven puffes at Excess in general:
But from all woes excess I wish ye may
(Through Heaven on Earth) to heaven the easiest way!
Your Ladyships unworthy Tutor, John Dauies.

To my beloved Master, John Dauies.
When I thy Reasons weigh, and meat thy Rimes,
I find they have such happy weight and measure,
As makes thy Lines extend to Aftertimes,
To lead them to a Mass of Wisdoms Treasure.
With weighty Matter so thou load'st thy Lines,
As to dim sights they often seem dark as Hell;
But those clear eyes that see their deep designs,
Do joy to see much Matter coucht so well!
But these thy Numbers most familiar be;
Because strange Matter plainly they recount:
For which Men shall familiar be with thee
That know thee not; and, make thy fame to mount.
I know no Tongues-man more does grace his Tongue
With more material Lines, as straight as strong!
Ed: Sharphell.

To mine entirely beloved, Master John Dauies of Hereford.
IN all thy Writings thou have such a Vain,
As but thy self thy self can counterfeit;
Which, lying far beyond the vulgar strain,
Is harder well to open, then to get.
Few idle words thou have to answer for
In all thy works; but, thou do merit much
(Nay supererogate) who do abhor
Superfluous words, though thine be over-rich!
Both Words and Matter do so well agree,
To glorify themselves in either kind,
That we must needs renown both them, and thee,
Who nearly sought (for us) the same to find:
Thy Numbers flow from such a Minds excess
As all seem Raptures, in all happiness!
To: Cox.

To the Reader in praise of the Author.
IN every Tale which scarffed Truth contains,
We must that Truth unmask to see her face:
Else see we but the half the Tale retains;
Then such (how e're well told) lose half their grace.
But these are Tales, which (though their truth be maskt)
Tickle the itching'st Ears with wit^hing Touches;
And so such Ears to listen still are taskt,
By subtle clawing, that such Ears bewitches.
Can thou but Riddles read, and not areede?
These Riddles high (well read) stoop to thy reason:
That though they fat not Wit, yet Will they feed
With Wits pure Salt, that Wits fresh-Sweetes does season:
The Fiction is for gladdest Will as fit,
As is the Moral for the saddest Wit.
Anth: Greys.

Humors Heaven on Earth.
1
Upon a time (thus old wives Tales begin,
Then listen Lordings to an old wises Tale)
There were three men, that were, and were not kin, Kin, as they were of the
seven deadly sins, no kin as they were different sins.

(Reed me this Riddle) at the Wine or Ale,
Did strive who most should grace the dearest Sin,
For which the daintiest Souls are set to sale:
For Souls that are most delicate for Sense,
Against stings of honied sins have least defense.
2
The first (for first I Will tell you eithers name
To show their natures) hight The Glutton.
Poliphagus:
A greasy guts, of most unwieldy frame;
The second named was The Leacher.
Epithymus:
Light as a feather, apt to lightest game:
The third and last, hight ^he proud, vain, and ambitious man.
Hyselophronus;
That still looked on himself, as if he saw
That which the Gods did love, and Men did awe.
3
Nor is it utterly impertinent
Unto the matter subject, to describe
The Weeds they ware, which were as different,
As was their Names, their Natures, and their Tribe;
The Habit shows how the heart is bent:
For, still the Heart the Habit does prescribe:
And no external signs can more bewray
The inwardest Affects then garments may.
4
Poliphagus a Suit of Satin ware,
A description of the Gluttons habit.
Made wide and side; and yet his sides did swell,
So that his Trusse did couerscarse the bare,
And so his Panch (an homely Tale to tell)
Was filled with filth, that every stich did stare
Of that which casd it; and of grease did smell:
Which so re-glosst the Sattens gloss, that it
Was varnisht like their vailes that turn the Spit.
5
His Buttons and the Holes, that held them fast,
His brestmade still to strive which best could hold
But yet that breast made one another brast,
And so it self did swell as burst it would;
Who was some two else compass in the waste,
And had not seen his knees since two days old:
No Points he used; whose bumme and Belly burst,
Held up his Sloppes, as strait as they were trusst.
6
A pair of buttoned Buskins casd his Legs,
Which were all Calfe from Hams unto the Heel;
And after him (like clogges) the same he dregs:
His Shoes were lined, that he no cold might feele^
The Soales whereof thick Cork asunder gegs,
Made broad (without Indents) lest he might reele:
And over all, he ware a slabberd Gown,
Which cloakt his Buttockes hugely ouergrowne!
7
Thus have we casd the Slouen, save the Head;
And wittingly we do the same forbear;
Because his Shoulders stood in his Heads stead,
Which hardly did above their pitch appear:
The lump of flesh was all so ouer-fed,
As he no man, but some Behemoth were:
For they whose joy is all in drink and meat,
Though mean they be, they needs must be too great
8
Epithymus (the wanton) on his Crown, A description of the Wantons Apparel.

A Crown of Roses ware lasciuiously;
A falling Band of Cut-worke (richly sown)
Did his broad Shoulders quite ore-canopy:
A waste-coate wrought with flowers (as they had grown)
In colored silk, lay open to the eye:
And, as his Bosom was vnbutton'd quite,
So were his Points, vntrusst for ends too light!
9
His Doublet was Carnation, cut with green
Rich Taffataes, quite through in ample Cuttes;
That so his Wast-coate might, each where be seen,
When lusty Dames should eye this lusty Guts:
And many Favors hung the Cuttes between,
And many more, more light, in them he shuttes!
So that a vacant place was hardly found
About this Fancy, so well-fauour'd round.
10
His Hose was French, and did his doublet suit,
For Stuff and Color; to which sowed there were
Silke-stockings, which sat strait his thighs about,
To make his leg and thigh more quaint appear:
Their color was, as was the upper Suit,
Save that the quirkes with gold and gawdie geere
Were so embosst, that as the Gallant goes,
The gloss did light his feet to save his toes.
11
His Shoes were like to Sandalls, for they were
So carved above with many a curious Cut,
That through the same the stocking did appear,
And in the Lachets were such Ribbands put,
As shadowed all the foot from Sun well near,
Though, in Rose-forme, the ribband up was shut:
And to make up aright this Woman-Man,
He at his face still fenced with a fan.
12
But Hyselophronus unlike to him, The Prowd-ambitious man's apparel described.

Was richly clad, but much more grave it was;
For, he could not endure such colors trim,
Yet used trim colors to bring drifts to pass:
A Back too bright, does argue Brains too dim:
For, no such Ass as is the golden Ass:
But he that State to catch, does know the knacke,
Hides all his haughty thoughts in humble black.
13
His Hat was Beauer of a middle sise,
The Band, silke-Sipers fourfold wreathed about:
A shallow Cambricke Ruff, with Sets precise,
Closed with a buttoned string, that still hung out;
Wherewith he played, while he did Plottes devise;
To gull the Multitude, and rule the Rout:
His Suit was Satin, pinckt, and laced thick,
As fit, as fair, without each peevish trick.
14
His Cloak cloth-rash with velvet thoroughly lined,
(As plain as Plainness) without welt, or guard,
To seem, thereby, to be as plain in Mind;
For, he to seem good, still had good regard:
His rapier hilts were blackt, which brightly shined,
A velvet Scobbard did that weapon ward:
The Hangers and the Girdle richly wrought,
With Silk of Black.
poorest color, dearly bought.
15
His Stockings (suitable unto the same)
Were of black silk, and crosse-wise gartered:
The Knot whereof a Roses form did frame,
Which near the ham the sable leaves did spread:
His Shoes were velvet, which his foot became,
Thus was he clad, from foot unto the Head:
Who still was still, as one of judgment staid,
Before he heard, and poised, what others said.
16
While first (puft-panch) Poliphagus bespake,
(But panted as he spoke for want of wind;
And at each word his fat for fear did quake,
Lest that winds want that fat should melt, or bind,
O that (quoth he) then reached to perbrake)
Man's Neck were like a The wish of Philoxenus a philosopher.
Cranes, then should we find
More pleasure in our meat and drink, because
It Would longer pass, with pleasure to our mawes.
17
Eating and Drinking sweetly eats up Time
That eats up all; then, feeding most of all
We ought to love; for, we are made of Genes. 3.15.
Slime;
Then should we feed (lest we to slime should fall)
That so our flesh, by fat, to fat should climb;
Fat Capons, Turkies, Fezants we may call
The The Scale of Gluttony, for the p^nch to climb by.
Ladders to Perfection, and t'ascend
By such Degrees, is man's perfections end.
18
Dear Taste, the sense wherein Men-beasts do most delight.
Taste (quoth he) the life of all my joy),
Can they be blessed that say thou bredst our curse,
When thou do sweeten all our lives annoy,
That else were Hell it self, or rather worse?
For my part, I esteem that Gene. 3.6.
Tale a Toy;
And think that Taste alone does Nature nurse:
If thou be Natures Nurse, then say I dare,
Thou nursest That that makes us what we are.
19
Who are by nature Demigods at least;
Gramercies Taste, that make us so to be:
Man, but for thee, were far worse then a beast;
And, beasts were worse then nothing, but for thee:
For, man, and beasts do toil but for the taste;
Then if our taste should fail us, cursed were we:
Since both are borne to labor but for All the labor of man is for the mouth,
etc. Eclesiast. 6.7.
food;
That rather would offend; then do us good.
20
The mouth, and Maw are Pleasures blisfull Bowres,
Where she lies dallying with her love Delight:
The Maw ( Charibdis which Delight deuoures)
Takes from the mouth what giu's the members might;
Is That an Idol which such good procures?
Or should it not be Adored.
served by Natures right,
That keeps frail Nature in her vital heat,
That else would pine for want of tasting meat?
21
Psalm. 34.8.
O! taste, and see how sweet the Lord; but why
Do I enforce what Epicures believe not the Souls immortality, and so no
scripture.
forcelesse I esteem?
Yet, since it is held for written-Veritie,
I Will suck sweet from that weed, and holy seem:
The sou'raign'st sense, enthroned is in the Eye;
Yet Taste, this Truth (if truth) does better deem:
For, taste, and see, first taste, and after see,
Implies that Taste, of Sight has sou'raigntie.
22
O it is the Well from whence the Senses draw
Their summum bonum; sweet'st, though short, delight:
The right hie-way to Mirth, lies to the Mawe;
The way to mirth that cheares the flesh, and Good food comforts the heart,
cheeres the sprite.
sprite;
That warms the blood, and frozen hearts does thaw,
In spite of Nature, foiling Natures spite:
Then, who distasts these sweet Lauds of the Taste,
His Taste is senseless, and his Wits are waste.
23
Ask Proof, how all the Veins do flow with joy
When as the Mouth takes in confected Sweetes;
Or when the Palate does her Powers employ
To meet sweet Wines, which she with Which the tongue makes against the Palate.
smacks regreets:
What heart so faint, that the^ can fear anoy,
Though Hell itself with all the Senses meets?
Give strong drink to the damned, and they will sustain,
In Pains despite, with ease, the spite of Pain.
24
What Care can once but touch a merry heart,
That Is merry made with precious blood of grapes?
And, who can choose but play a frolic part,
That by strong Sack, from Sorrows sack escapes:
Smart, them annoyes that feel, or think on smart,
But not those that with Wine are Pleasures rapes:
For, while they gape to let in, They that drink much, must every way euacuate
much.
out to run,
They feel, and think on naught but Healths begun.
25
Thus did this gormandizing Epicure
What we most love of that we gladly hear and speak.
Insist in praise of That which Taste commends;
And, (for wind laboring) labored past his power
To make Man's gorge his god, for godless ends:
When lo, Epithymus (to make it sure)
In part approved his reasons; yet he bends
His power to prove the wenching practicke part,
To yield the joy which most affects the heart.
26
These Girls (quoth he) so they be fair, and young, Epithymus.

Are they alone that most do ravish Sense;
For which, no less then for our food we long; The praise of Touching.

The Touch, being furthest from th'Intelligence,
With much more Touching being furthest removed from the Understanding of all
the senses, makes it the more brutish.
liberty, and joy among,
Does play her part to prove her excellence:
It tickles all our veins with lustful pleasure,
Which the mean while, has neither mean nor mesure.
27
What Heart's so cold that is not set on fire,
With a trans-lucent beaming sunne-brightface?
But, of that face to have the hearts desire,
The Heart cannot desire a greater grace:
Who couets not bright Beauties golden wire,
His Heroike spirits soonest enthralled with love.
Sprite is abject, and his thoughts are base:
Since those wires wind about the turning thought,
And tie it to rich pleasures dearly bought.
28
Who meets with flesh that melts with tenderness,
And melts not in Desires ay-burning flames?
Whose kisses, steept in Sucket, Heaven do press
From lips Wanton Lovers most profane.
divine, too worthy for such names;
Can any Eyes look into Beauties Press,
And with her trimmest trinckets make no games?
No humane Eyes (I ween) if christaline,
But joy to see themselves in Eyes divine.
29
To see a Body more then Lilly-white,
With azur'd veins imbrodred here and there,
To see this blisfull Body This Object makes the Soul most abject.
naked quite,
And to behold Loves Hold some other where,
What Thing, with joy, can more intra^ce the sight,
Since to the sight Loves Heaven does appear?
Then add to this, a A glauncing aluring look.
Look that says approach,
It will the Vessel of all Sweetness broch.
30
O! to embrace her that embraces all
That Beauty can embrace, is to infold
In mortal Arms, Arms supernatural,
Of power both No passion more violent in the Soul of Man or Beast.
Gods and Men (ensnared) to hold;
And make them, as they please, to rise, or fall,
Serving Loves Sovereign as Vassals should:
For, Gods, and men do most obsequiously,
By nature, serve divine Formositie.
31
He that orethrew what ere his strength withstood, Hercules.

And underpropped the weight of Heavens frame,
Love, made to spinne in weak unmanly mood:
And He, for wisdom, that had greatest fame,, Solomon.

Love so, with Lust, inflamed his coldest blood:
That He a 700 wives, and 300. concubines.
thousand had to quench the same
For, no Age, Wisdom, Power, or Policy,
Have power t'impugne divine Formositie!
32
Ask Mars the stern and stubberne god of war,
How much frail Beuty made him (crouchi^g) bow:
Nay ask (if men may ask) the Thunderer
The highest of gods, by lordly Love brought low)
Why he did make his mansion in a Star,
Yet fell from heaven an earthly Danaae.
Dame to know,
But that both Gods and Men, most lowlily,
By nature, serve divine Formositie!
33
Give me a Wench that has the skill, and wit,
To let me (loue-sicke) blood in Lusts right vain;
And can, with pleasure, ease me in the fit,
Yet ease me so, that Love may still complain
Of With Loue-tricks to make Lustinsatiable.
heat, that is for Lusts life only fit,
Which to the life of Love yields pleasant pain;
That can so humor me, and what I feel,
That she may hurt me still, my hurt to heal.
34
Such a Crafts-mistris, in the Art of Love,
Does crown the Touch with an imperial A lascivious kiss bewitching wantons,
known best to such.
kiss;
For, she makes Touching taste joy far above
The reach of Art to tell men what it is:
For feelinglie, she can both stay, and move
About the Center of Loves boundless bliss
Then boundless is the Touches excellence
That, by a Less, can so beheau'n the sense.
35
Thus did this Orator of Lechery
Dilate the shortsweete of his lives delight;
Which, Hyselophronus did not The wicked conspire in evil, though they vary in
circumstances.
deny,
(As though quite opposite) but bent his might,
To prove highest bliss was borne of Majesty;
Begot by Potency, right or unright:
The greatest joy to Greatness appertains
For joy does reign (quoth he) in that which raigns.
36
A royal Robe, a Scepter, Mound, and Crown
Are the true Signals of the truest joy:
They need not fear the threat of Sorrows frown
That Sovereign aucthority can silence all, under heaven, that inueighs
against her inordinate pleasures.
can confound, all causers of anoy:
The hand of Majesty puts up, and down
The means of mirth, and those that mirth destroy:
He Is a rare Clarke that R^gnum can declyne
And Meus, Mea, Meum ad in fine.
37
What Heart is not enlarged, with joy, as much
As it can hold, when power is more enlarged
Then Earth can hold; or, on the same none such,
When all by him, and he by none, is charged?
No not so much as with the smallest What man shall say to the Sovereign, What
do thou? without incurring his ire, which is the precursor of Death. Prou.
16.14.
touch,
Touching his life, lest such be life-discharg'd:
It is the greatest glory of Man's state, Where the word of the King is, there
is power, and who shall say ta him, What do thou? Eccles. 8.4.

When man, like God, does reign in spite of Hate.
38
To eat and drink, and do the acts of lust,
Is common unto Beasts, as well as Men;
What praise get they that do what That which men and Beasts by the provocation
of Nature only.
needs they must;
But such as shames the praised now and then?
For, so may men be praisd for deeds unjust,
Since Men, by nature, wrong their Brethren:
But, to correct To rule men well is proper to God and men only.
Men, with directing Rods,
Is proper unto none but Demigods.
39
The Sphere of Greatness (like the highest sphere,
That turns the nether with resistlessesway)
Is the highest step to his Throne without Peer;
And, to the Sun that makes eternal day;
Where Bliss abounds an everlasting year,
For which the most devout do inly Few or none so mortified, but can be
contented to live, rather ruling then ruled.
pray:
Then, Greatness is the great'st good under heaven,
Which unto none but Gods on Earth is given.
40
O! how it rapts the Eye of Majesty,
To see all downe-cast underneath her feet;
That may, if please her, march upon the Hie,
Till she with none, but with the Lowly meet:
Then, Humane wisdom.
Wisdoms reach does tend to Emperie;
And none but fools neglect it as unmeet:
It is the highest Note that Art can reach,
To rule the voice when Sou'raigntie does preach.
41
And what a glory is it to mortal Man,
That when he bends his high-erected front,
Death in the The looks of sovereign majesty does either kill, or quicken.
foldes does play the Artezan,
And kill, but with alooke, the highest Count:
Yet, with a word (like Him that all things can)
To create others, making them to mount;
Then, who has power all men to mar or make,
Must be a God, that life does give, and take.
42
A Seepter's Circes Rod; which Men and Beasts
Does easlie tame, how wild so ere they be:
For, Birds that in the Stars do build their neasts,
Far, far above all Birds, of prey do flee:
To which pitch if they mount, they scorch their crests;
For, heat so high is in The indignation of a prince is most mortal.
extreme degree:
Highness is sacred, and the sacred Hie,
With their powers wing above all perils fly!
43
O! it is a blisfull glittering glorious state,
Able to make Mortality divine;
Which, with Ars d^minabitur Astris: Wise kings much more.
inspection, binds the hands of Fate,
And, like the Sun, among the Stars does shine,
Till Nature does the Flesh inanimate;
And in the mouths of Men men's fames enshrine:
Then, if in Earth be any divine thing,
It Is more then God, if it be not a King.
44
Poliphagus, though he his Intralls served,
As if they were his Fancies Sovereigns,
Or rather Gods, by which he was preserved,
Yet he allowance to their fancy faines;
That so The concord of the Evil condemns the discord of the Good.
fraternity might be conseru'd,
Which concord, in conceit, together chains;
And, thus immod'rately does moderate
The diffrence of the doubtful Questions state.
(...) 57
But now, as wak'ned from a tedious sleep,
* Logus, chief guide of * Psyche, their chief guide
(While they were plunged in all pleasures deep)
Thus began their sensuall-senslesse Souls to chide:
Whither, O whither run ye, ye lost sheep,
Not weying in what danger ye abide?
The Blind eats many a fly; and so do you,
That chew sweet poison, which ye should eschew.
58
But ere we further prosecute her speech,
We will describe their Garments (as we may)
For as we said the Coat and Cut do teach.
Sight to discern what mood the mind does sway:
Logus was clad, as could no State impeach,
Since she was clothed with mean, though clean array:
For, she with Garments far more fit, then fair,
But sauegard sought from Passions of the Air.
59
But, Psyche (whom she guided) like a Qu^^ne
Was richly decked, with ornaments divine:
Who lived so closely that she scarce was seen,
Yet through her Palace did her glory shine,
As if at least she had a Goddess been;
Whose virtues were apparent to the Eine:
Her Ornaments were Wit, Will, Memory,
Which richly roab'd her with Regality.
60
Upon her sacred Head she ware a Crown
(Like that of Ariadnes) all of Stars,
To light her feet in dark ways, and unknown,
And keep the safest way in Passions wars;
Those Stars were royal virtues of her own
(Which some call Cardinal) her guard in Iarres:
Who was decked inly with Power, Grace, and Art,
Being wholly in the whole, and in each Part.
61
Her Understandings Power that Power did line,
Which Heaven and Earth religiously adore;
And in her Will she ware Grace most divine,
But in her Memory she Arts did store;
That made the Whole most gloriously to shine,
But most divinely did those three decore!
Affects and Fantasies her Servants were,
Which were all cloakt with Good, how ill so ere.
62
Her pri^cely train, which was of works well wroght,
Was borne by Judgment her chief Officer:
Then, Contemplation held her, as she ought,
By the right Arm, so that she could not steer
From those right ways, whereon before she thought:
And double-Diligence before did clear:
The outward Senses her Purueiours were,
To whom the Common-sense was Treasorer.
63
Thus were these two attended and araid,
Which I have thus described by the way;
And now to prosecute what Logus said
From thence where I before did make him stay;
Quoth he, what mean ye thus to be betrayed
By sinful Sense, which seeks but your decay?
You are to seek to know her Fallacies,
But know them not by seeking in this wise.
64
How near to temporal and eternal death
You are (God wot) ye wot not, ne yet care;
Not weying how worlds Worlds weal uncertain in our life, but determines
utterly in our death.
weal wastes with your breath,
And that your breaths within your nostrills are;
Which to the Air you must of force bequeath,
Perhaps forthwith, at least ere ye beware:
If temp'rall death attach ye in this plight,
Your temp'rall days will turn t'eternall night.
65
To young and old Death is indifferent;
The Court and Cottage he frequents alike:
Yet, of the twain, he Courts does more frequent;
And loves those, that do Death is most familiar with those that are most
strange to him.
mind him least, to strike:
He wounds the lustful, vain, and insolent
With their own weapons, quickly to the quick:
For, ever he does envy life's delight,
And makes the same most subject to his might.
66
How can vain pleasures please men, having sense
To feel the sweet and sour of sin, and grace?
For, if they feel the The sting of Conscience kil^ our liueliest pleasures of
the flesh.
sting of Conscience,
All pleasures of the flesh will give it place:
That grieves the Will, that grieves th'Intelligence,
Which take no pleasure in their own disgrace:
But still the lusts offraile flesh to fulfill,
Is to disgrace Intelligence, and Will.
67
The object of the Will is perfect Good;
Which, the Intelligence to her presents;
That never yet was found in royal food,
In dainty Dames, or regal governments;
By Daily proof tells our understandings, that all worldly pleasures are as
^hort, as vain, and unsure.
Understanding these are understood
To yield but short, and counterfeit Contents:
If so they do, how mad are they the while,
That give their precious Souls for things so vile?
68
The Solomon.
wisest yet that ever breathed this Air
(Of sinful race) who in his wisdoms might
Made proof of all that was sweet, great, or fair,
Yea of all pleasures which the sense delight,)
Said of them all (like Wisedoms truest Heir)
They were than skumme of Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity more light:
If such great Wisdom found them to be such,
They are much more the^ fools that love the^ much.
69
Ask every sense what pleasure they do prove
In all their objects: they must needs reply,
(Since conscience knows it) naught to gain our love;
For, we love naught but what we Good is the object of love
good do try:
But, Proof these pleasures do, in fine, reprove;
Since they no sooner live, but sooner die:
For, Trial knowing them to be but vain,
Kills their delight ere we it entertain.
70
And, Crowns are Hiues, where stinging cares do swarm;
Pomp's but the White whereat fell Envy shoots:
which are as trees, whence groes their owners harm;
Harms are the fruit; crowns, flours; and ki^gdo^s, roots:
The Arm of flesh, is but a feeble Arm;
And, in such strong Extremes it little boots:
He knows not yet the nature of a Crown,
That knows not none may call the same his Our Crown says the Sovereign.
own.
71
What boots a purple Robe, when purple blood
Does issue from the woeful wearers heart?
And, of such issue there is more likelihood
Then issue of his loins to take his part;
For, often such issue does him little good,
Who conquer The love of a Crown often makes the son to hate the father.
Nature, by the aid of Art:
They learn by Art weak Nature to command,
When Crowns betwixt the Sire and Son do stand.
72
Sou'raignes, are subject to extreme Robert Countess, Edward the second,
Richard the second, Edward the fifth, Rich. the third, Henry the sixth.
despite,
For lo, a Dog, sometimes, supplide their place:
A King of Norway, conquering in fight
The King of Swethland, for the more disgrace,
Did make a Dog their King, to show his spite,
And made the^ near His Councillors.
him, that were near as bace:
Then are they worse then dogs that damn their souls
To catch a kingdom, that a dog co^troules.
73
What joy can be accompanied with fear,
Since that companion does all joy Fear betraieth the comforts and succors
which Reason offers.
confound?
But terrene joys about with them do bear
An hell of True joy co^tents the desire and excludes fear, which worldly joy
does not.
fear, wherein true Hell is found:
For, where is vnsuretie, fear must needs be there;
And all is unsure that surgeth from the ground
Of this vast Sea of extreme misery,
True Antitype of true felicity.
74
Besides, no pomp (how ever glorious)
No joy or pleasure, if sublunarie,
But brings sacietie soon with their use,
As they best know that have best means to try;
And none have right joy but the The joy of the Soul is incident to good and
ghostly livers only.
righteous;
For, never does saciate their felicity,
Which does content Desire, and Fear exclude,
Which is the sum of true Beatitude.
75
Then, if my power ore your Sovereign,
If my words (rules of Reason) can persuade,
Vain pleasures fly; through which ye fly to pain;
Which still have marred, but never any made:
Contain your selves, and you shall joy contain;
If you be good, then Glory atte^ds upon God and his only.
glorious is your trade:
For, naught is great on Earth, but that great heart,
That scorns all joys by Nature bred, or Art.
76
Rouse up your selves, shake off this sloth of sprite;
Put on the mind that men of mind becomes:
Away with all Vain pleasures do effeminate the mind.
effeminate delight,
That none but worse then women ouercomes:
Show your selves men of strength in Frailties spite;
For, graceles joys possess but graceles grooms:
O, it is To obey reason is to rule kingly.
Dominion in the highest degree,
When men to Reasons rules obedient be.
77
Hereat their Conscience touched to the quick,
Began, half fainting, inwardly to bleed:
No prick more mortal then the conscience prick;
It makes our faith to faint, and kills our Creed:
Yet, frozen in their dregs, therein they stick,
Without all feeling that which must succeed:
And, with hard hearts (though said for their behoofs)
They Logus thus reprove, for his reproves.
78
What wight art thou (presumptuous that thou art)
That come to Council, yer thou called be?
By what power do thou this? by what desert
Think thou we all should be controld by thee?
We know no power thou have, nor wit, Reason is thought to be most unreasonable
by the sensual.
nor Art
To take the guidance of our actions free;
Being a mere stranger to us and our state,
Yet do from either more then derogate.
79
Thou would be taught (that thus presum'st to teach)
To know good manners, persons, time and place;
These circumstances they should know that preach,
Or else they may disgrace their Sermons grace;
And those that live by preaching do Philem. 9.
beseech,
Not sharply check, which tends to disgrace:
Then think we over our passions have great power,
That give thee sweet advice for cheek so sour.
80
You may be gone, we need no counselors,
That breathe out worse the^ wormwood with their words;
We are twice seau'n, and our own governors,
Your proffred service no good Mer^ v^t^^nea putet.
sent affords:
We are the highest Powers Compettitors,
And fight for pleasure with our sense, and swords:
We are resolved to satisfy desire
With all the comforts that it can require.
81
Does Love (quoth Logus) with our selves begin?
It seems not so, for with your selves it ends:
Foes to your selves, since you are fold to sin;
Yet will not Not to see our sin, is to live and die in sin.
see whereto that purchase tends:
To lose your Souls, and all the world to win,
Is the worst fortune, that fell Fortune sends:
O be indulgent to your Souls, for why,
Christ Lord of life.
Life died it self, that so they might not die.
82
I am that Logus, which your Sovereign
(Great sovereign Psyche) gave you for your Reason, the eye of the soul.
guide:
Which you would never vouchsafe to entertain,
Though, Humane creatures are reasonable, though many live brutishly.
vnimploied, I still with you abide:
I pray you then (for your eternal gain)
That now at last I may with you reside,
To do you service, which if you will use,
I Will make your life and death most glorious.
83
Let not my plainness with you, make ye plain
Of my stern Course; for, since I am the Stern
That rules the Mind, I must her so restrain
(When Passions rise) that she, by me, may learn
The way to weal, which she seeks to attain,
Which she, by my Humane reason assisted by divine grace, true guide to perfect
felicity
direction shall discern:
Now, if the Stern resist repugnant winds,
The Bark, to which she is bound, to her she binds.
84
Ye often have heard, that Sores quite mortified,
(If ever they be cured as they ought)
Must have sharp Corrasiues thereto applied,
Else one sore part may bring the whole to naught:
Then leave your Gluttony, your Lust, and 3. sins most familiar with men's
nature.
Pride;
Be sober, chaste, and meek, in deed, and thought:
This must you do; and I must needs say this,
Except I should both say and do amiss.
85
Should I, your Guide, wink when ye go astray?
Or see you run in bypath of offense?
Else draw ye further on, out of the way,
And by all ways soothe up your erring sense?
So should I, like a traitor, you betray;
Which would, in time, your Souls to We hate our evil Counselors, when we are
plagued for following them.
hate incense:
O then let me have leave your Souls to love,
Which least I do, when least I you reprove.
86
Repentance often (too often) comes too too late,
(Though, better late then never to repent)
But never too soon can Grace it animate;
For, Men, All men are conceived in sin.
beyond their birth, are evil bent:
So, yer they sin, they are in sinful state;
For, sin in their conception's resident:
Then since yer men Be (whole) it Is (in part)
Repentance should take Being yer the Heart.
87
Time past, is gone, in it none can repent,
If in that Time they did the same neglect:
The Time to come (although incontinent)
Is as unsure, as is that rare Repentance.
effect:
Therefore the The present time is sure to repent in, which is no sooner thought
on, but gone for ever.
present Time for it is lent,
Which strait is gone, then do it not reject:
Since so small time may all your time ingrosse,
The loss of it may be your utter loss.
88
But, what auailes an Angels tongue to move
A fiend to goodness, that by kind is ill?
From which he is resolved never to remove;
No more can They are enemies to reason that desire to live sensually.
Reason their desires fulfill,
(Though with all reason he does seek their love)
For, they desire to live corruptly still;
And thus, with bitter taunts they do requite
His love, that ever loves to guide them right.
89
What ere thou art (quoth they) we know thee not;
Nor will we know thee, since we know thou art
Repugnant to us; and, thou seem a Sot,
To seek to gain love by contentions Art:
Thou never knew'st, or else thou have forgot,
That manners The Iay sits with ^he lay. Eccles. 17.9.
like, do still like love impart:
Therefore farewell, except thou worse wilt fare,
We are resolved, in what resolved we are.
90
So they to excess fell excessiuely;
Sinning, with A true mark of reprobatio^.
grief, that they could sin no more:
Now, they enlarge their Bounds of liberty,
Although it were but too too loose before:
Like Water they Job 15.16.
lap up iniquity,
Which, through the^, ouerflows both Sea and Shore:
A cauterized Conscience being checked,
Becomes far worse, in Cause, and in Effect.
91
Logus thus cast from their society,
Waxt passing pensive (as one desolate)
Because his Council was no more set by,
And, with their mother Nature.
Phusis fell at bate;
As being assured in her the fault did ly,
That they from him so much did derogate:
Yet, knew one Custom.
Praxis, Phusis follower,
Had made them worse, then she them made, by far.
92
But by the way we should not do amiss, Phusis her habit described.

To show how Lady Phusis was araid,
(Since she the mother of each matter is)
Yer we do prosecute what Logus said:
For, so her nature may be known by this,
As outward, inward Things have often bewraid:
For, though it seem the Tale, by force, to part,
Its recompensed with Descriptions Art.
93
Upon her Head she ware a Crown of Corn,
Like that of Ceres; saving that the same
Was mixed (like Achelous his plenteous Horn)
With fruits of every kind, which her became;
Her Hair by her was still disheuled worn,
Who naked was, yet her hand hid her shame:
Or if a Veil she ware, it was but when
She was to come among licentious men.
94
About her Neck she ware a Carcanet
Of every Iemme as it created was:
About her Wrists, in Bracelet-wise, were set
The ores of Gold and Silver, Lead, and Brass:
Thus have we made this Ladies Counterfeit,
Who being bare, as barely must it pass:
And now return we eft to Logus speech,
Who thus to Phusis chidingly did preach.
95
Phusis (quoth he) I speak with grief of heart,
I needs must chide, since your fault it procures;
Because you have not played a mothers part
Touching the breeding of these Sons of yours:
I know you have, by nature, so much Art,
As might make them obey their Governors:
And, that you do not, it is your disgrace,
That kill your Children with a kind As it is said of the Ape.
embrace.
96
You may, perhaps, suppose your self you clear
By saying, Custom is another nature.
Praxis has abused you much;
In alt'ring of their natures, which were dear,
For that from you they all received such;
Which could not be, if you not faulty were,
For, you might have restrained them with a touch:
If then you had corrected Custom is overcome by Custom* if Nature be willing.
Praxis lore,
They would have bin far better then before.
97
Little do Mothers know what hurt they do,
By their indulgence, to their saucie Sons;
They make them wanton and rebellious too;
For, let loose Nature, it to Natures loosenes must be restrained by Reasons
stedfastnes.
looseness runs;
Till Soul and Body it does quite undo;
For, Custom ill good nature ouer-runnes:
But, if the Mother be as Mothers ought,
She will by Use amend what Use has wrought.
98
Phusis, not being used such checkes to take,
Began to kindle with disdainefull ire;
And, like a Ouer-kinde mothers make unkind Children.
doting mother, she does make
A stiff defense, for her sons lewd desire: Though fire be good, yet fire in
flax is not good: so, though pleasure be good, yet in you^ hi^ is not good.

Alas (quoth she) should they all joys forsake,
Which both their years, and natures do require?
Or should they wear their days in wastful thought
To bring themselves, and me with them, to naught?
99
You are no friend of theirs, if so you would;
And, if not theirs, then mine you cannot be:
For, me and them in one Loves Band does hold;
Whom factiously you seek to disagree:
I take their part but as a Mother should,
That her dear Childrens A good pretense for a fault maks the fault the fouler.
good desires to see:
For, it a tender Mother does become,
As life to love the Children of her womb.
100
And, are they not of flesh and blood composed?
Then can such mixture be aught else but frail?
Or would you have them otherwise disposed
Then Adams heirs, that hold but by the Tail?
And flesh and Founts of Frailty.
blood to strength are still opposed;
Yet Strength of pleasures.
strength, in weakness, against it does prevail:
Since so it is, my Sons may be excused,
That have in weakness powrefull pleasures used.
101
Now well I see (quoth Logus) thy fond love
Makes thee Affection transports judgment into partiality.
unapt to judge what is requisite;
But, how if their loose lives the monster move
(Monstrous Gehenna) to devour them quite?
For, he loves such to eat, as such do prove;
May you not thank your self for such despite?
If Babes do burn them in a Candles flame,
Are they, or those that give it them, too blame?
102
These heavy words suncke deep in Phusis mind,
Who (as astonished) at the same did muse;
Breathed short, in Reason is very preualent with the attentive.
passion, as if wanting wind,
Yet at the last, hi^ Spirit she up did rowze,
And asked of Logus, in the kindest kind,
What practice she to save her Sons might use:
I hate, as Hell, that Monster, and I would
My Sons (quoth she) from him, by force, withold.
103
Now Logus, glad her nature had such grace,
Said, for mine own part, I will but advise,
Not deal with them; since they did me When Reason is rejected, men are lest to
all brutishness.
disgrace;
Therefore I council, that in any wise
You hie you to the Lady Truth.
Aletheias Place,
And there inuoke her aid, with careful Cries;
Who is indu'd with power, will, and skill,
To tell them of their miss, and mend their ill.
104
Entreat her, who will soon entreated be,
(For, she does love to satisfy Good Will)
To go unto thy Sons of each degree,
And tell them of this Monster, made to Hell made for torment. Esa. 30 33.
spill
All those that live secure in Pleasures glee,
And greedily their hungry lusts fulfill;
I will (said Phusis;) but where does she dwell?
Thou know (dear Logus) but I cannot tell.
105
She wonted was (said he) to neighbor me;
But since that Deceit and Guile excluded Truth from the Earth,
Fraus and Dolus (wicked Twins)
The World produced, I do her seldom see;
For, she from my sights reach so slily rinnes,
As though to her I were an enemy,
Or made prodigious through my subjects sins:
Who prosecute her with extreme despite,
That now she even loathes to see the light.
106
Shall I (quoth Phusis) on the Earth her find?
Hardly (quoth Logus) being chased from thence.
In The Air, or Water then, or in the Wind;
Or else within the Fires Circumference
Is she (quoth she?) said Logus, these by kind
Are mutable, and full of difference;
Which she cannot abide, for she is Truth is one, but Error is manifold.
one,
And rather will, then with such, live alone.
107
Is she to Heaven returned (quoth she) again?
That Is like (said Logus) but thou art never the near:
For, without As without the Sun none can see the Sun, so without Truth none
ca^ come at the Author of Truth.
her, thou can not Heaven attain;
For, all by her must come, that must come there.
Alas (said she) how shall I her obtain,
Since I must have herself her self to clear?
For, as without the Sun, none sees the Sun,
So, without her, none wots where she does won.
108
This once (quoth Logus) I will thee direct
The best I can, but cannot as I could;
I often have heard, and find true, by effect,
That she is seen about the Mansion old
Of father Time.
Chronus, which he did erect
For him, and her, (his daughter dear) to hold;
Or, Death.
Thanatus, his Man, who riddes away
That which his Master brings to decay.
109
Which Man, and Masters habites we might paint, The description of Chronus and
Th^natus.

Though we but Chalk, and Coals, and Ashes had:
For, Chronus clad is like a mortal Saint
In skins of Beasts, to show how life does fade;
(Which of their age did seem to make complaint)
Girt with an Halter, or with Girth as bad:
Upon whose Head, in stead of Hat, there stood
An Houre-glasse, as an Emblem of his mood.
110
His Hair was white as was the driven Snow,
And from his Head it seemed to hang, by drifts
Turned up again; even as the same does show
When it does hang, so driven upon Clifts:
His Beard, beneath his girdle-stead did grow,
Which, platted, in his bosom often he shifts:
Whose right hand did a Sith, still moving weld,
And in his left, an Horologe he held.
111
His Man hight Thanatus, bare to the bones,
Was more then naked from the top to toe:
All hairelesse, toothlesse, eielesse, stocks, or stones,
Are all as quick, though he much more can do:
And all he said, I was as you are, once;
Which was in sullen silence spoken to:
Upon a Spade he leanes, as if he did
By his day-labour live, called Wincke, all hid.
112
To these did Logus Phusis wish to wend
Which were to her the Nature cannot abide* Death, nor Time running thereto.
loathsom'st wights alive;
And hardly thought that Logus was her friend,
(Although she could not otherwise believe
Since her and hers she sought still to defend)
That would to her such woeful council give:
And, with the water swelling in her eyes,
She thus to Logus mournefully replies.
113
Alas (quoth she) and to them must I go?
To their most hateful houses must I hie,
That are the greatest workers of my woe,
And feign would have me utterly to die?
What A well tunde tongue cannot please an ear utterly out of tune.
words can please a proud insulting foe,
That holds in scorn his foes humility?
Then, what hope have I with them to prevail,
Who, though I kneel to them, will me assail?
114
What shall I say? alas, what shall I do?
To win their favor, that will not be won?
To go to them, I shall my self undo;
For, though I kiss their feet, they will me ore-runne:
If not, they will pain me, and compel me to;
The choice is miserable where the best is misery.
Both which, if I do go, I cannot shun:
I am amazed, I know not what to say,
If go, I die; if no, my Sons decay.
115
What shall I do? dear Logus, tell me In case of distress we willingly
embrace the advice of Reason.
what?
O happy were I, if this fear were past:
There is no cause (quoth Logus) to fear that
That no wight living can avoid at last;
The Stag, the Raven, and the nine-liu'd Cat
Must know those houses, then be not aghast,
But go on boldly with erected Front,
Where you shall see her live in high account.
116
If at the first you cannot see her face,
Their Porter Sickness.
Nosus will you soon direct
Unto her privy chamber, where her grace
Will talk with you, in secret, in effect:
But, see you bribe the Porter of the place
With Natural heat sustaines the vital powers in sickness.
Calor naturalis, most select:
So may you pass securely through each Gate,
That leads to this obscured Ladies State.
117
Sickness described.
This Nosus was a true Anatomy
(Though Thanatus be truly called the same)
Of mortal grief, or curelesse malady,
Whose Head was ha^p'red (which him ill became)
With homely clowts (tide as vnhansomly)
And with a staff he went as he were lame:
A Gown (with Potions stained) he, girded, ware,
Who panted as he went, and went with care.
118
Four pair of Stockings did his Legs comprize,
And yet his Shancks (God wot) but little were,
Although the upper Stockings were of Frize,
Thick Frize, or Rugge, or else of warmer gear:
Whose Slippers were with Cotton lined likewise;
And yet of taking cold he still did fear:
Who looked as he had not an hour to live,
And every step he trod, his Soul did grieve.
119
His Face was of the color of that clowt
That did his head inuolue, save that his Face
Did look more white: his Eyes both seemed out,
For, they were sunck, and shrunk out of their place:
His Nose was sharper then an Adders snowt;
His Tongue, and Teeth were furred, in loathsome case;
His Lips were chapp'd, his Beard was driueld ore,
And ever breathed as he should breathe no more.
120
And therewithal he was so waiward still,
That none might please him, but he fault would find
With the best words and deeds of mere good will;
His bodies pains so perverse made his mind:
His wozen whez'd when his breath it did fill,
As, through the straitest passage does the wind:
And when he spoke, his tongue was furred so thick,
That often his words within the same did stick.
121
Yet ne'rthelesse, to these must Phusis hie,
For, Logus held her to it by strong persuasion,
Which thus she pressed; Go, or thy Sons must die:
Thou needs must do it, there is no evasion:
Herein their life, or death alone does lie;
Then, of their peril if thou have compassion*
Thou must to These, that they may be secure,
Then lively go; for, Love can Hell endure.
122
Phusis, though while-ere somewhat weakened,
(By reason of these uncouth Accidents)
Yet thus, by Logus, being Reason begets in us resolution to die coragiously.
comforted,
To his direction and advice assents:
And now (all heart) she holds high the Head,
Scorning her wonted dread, and dririments;
And, in her love to her Sons, thither goes,
Their case to Aletheia to disclose.
123
A weary journey had she, and a foul,
But, what pain is it a mothers True love deemes no pain intolerable endured
for the beloved.
love will shun?
Who almost will forsake her dearest Soul,
Yer once forsake her deere-bought deerer Son:
By Logus help, she does her fears control;
And to these houses goes not, but does run:
And as she hies, she more and more does learn,
This Ladies Lodging rightly to discern.
124
The description of the house of Time.
When to the House of Chronus near she drew,
(Which was a Cave in Rock of Flint cut out)
It, to the sense more horride was in show;
For, it with Moss was inlaid all about,
And ore the Gate, Hart's-tongue, and Bra^bles grew;
As on the top, did Oaks, old, stiff, and stout:
Which rocks rogh sides huge mossie Beeches bare,
As if the Flint the weathers threats did fear.
125
This antique Top, where these trees did not shade
A kind of Moss ore-sprad, as hard, as hoar;
The upper Crust of a Rock unfrequented.
Which ne'rthelesse, did softly seem to vade,
And grew far shorter then it was before;
Ore which strange vermin pretty Paths had made,
Which there did still increase in needless store:
For, in those Places where men least frequent,
There vilest vermin are most resident.
126
About the groundsills of this hideous house
(Without) grew Nettles, Noisome Plants produced from Man's more noisome offense.
Hemlocks, and the like;
Among who^ were Snakes and vermin venomous;
Which unawares th'vnwarie foot do strike:
Within the Cave was naught for Natures use,
Save water, which there leakt through many a creek:
Where naught was seen but Darkness, naught was heard,
But holow Echoes, making Noise afeard.
127
Near to this uncouth Cave is situate
(As it were a vault dug underneath the same)
The House of Deaths house described.
Thanatus, which all do hate;
For, none came ever thence that thither came:
Then Chronus house its much more desolate;
More deadly too, in nature, and in name:
For, flesh does faint, when but b'imagination
She The Grave is irksome to flesh and blood
sees this fearful ugly Habitation.
128
The Roof whereof, with Sculles is seeled quite;
Whereon (in frets) hang shin-bones here and there:
The walls are hung with Mantles of the night;
Which, all with vermin vile, imbrod'red were:
If it, through any Chinke, received light,
It Was If Graves open by reason of the earths hollownesse, they soon are closed
again with feet that tread on the^.
soon stopped up with feet which it did bear:
It paued was with Joints and Knuckle-bones,
Set in no order, but like scatt'red stones.
129
The Gate whereof is made of man's just size,
Which yet receives all The Grave and Destruction can never be full: Prou.
27.20.
men that ever were;
Upon whose Pauement all flesh rotting lies;
And, to the sense most Nothing more noisome to the Nose and Eye then a rotten
Carcass.
odious does appear:
For, here lie Arms, and there lie Legs, and Thies;
Hete rotten Teeth, and ragged Iaw-bones there;
Within whose pores, the worms do keep their hold
Until they all convert to perfect mould.
130
No one here keeps this grim Lord company,
But sullen Silence, dust, and nastie mud;
And, yet he seeks all men's society,
For, still he feeds on their flesh and blood:
Friends of those that are in burying.
Hard at the Gate do mournful mourners cry,
And tear their hair, too like the Fury-brood:
Which yet is never heard that house within,
For, Thanatus is No sense enjoyed in the Grave.
deaf, and hears no din.
131
Rotten Corruption here does revel keep;
Where Worms (her Minions) out of mesure dance:
For, all about they trace, they turn, and creep,
And merry make with Fleshes foul mischance;
Who all the while lies drowned in puddle deep,
As full of Soil, as full of Sufferance:
Where Irksomeness sits on a dustie Throne,
As if he were Lord of that The earthly* Carcass.
Earth alone.
132
For, Beauty comes no sooner to the Gate
Of this true earthly Hell, but she does look
As if she were in worse then damned state;
And all her Graces had her quite forsook:
The Lures of Love, here turn to Hoods of Hate;
Hate that no Love (though Love it self) can brook:
For, Christ the Lord of Love.
Love itself, which once three days lay there,
Fled from the same as if it hateful were.
133
Here Isa. 34.14.
Zijm and Iim do love alone to be,
(Grimme Desola^ions stern Consociates)
The vale of Visions this does seem to me,
Where Sense may see what Sense quite ruinates:
Whose Organs here, lie in variety
Of transformation; which Sense deadly hates:
Where lie all Objects which the sight annoy,
Yet it is the Death is the beginning of ^oy, or misery.
entrance to all grief, or joy.
134
Here Sense (says Sense) lies in a Lethargy;
Whose powers are quite suppressed with Earth and Stones:
Here The Grave is the re^t of the restle^^^.
Rest of Labor has the victory:
And, Sorrows here surcease their sighs and groans;
Where lasting sleep beguiles Calamity:
For, Flesh feels not, if rotten to the bones;
This is the Lake, which Men most loathe, and yet,
It is the Lethe where they grief forget.
136
Down a dark staire (the passage to this house)
On every step sits all the impes of Fear;
Confronted with Chymaeraes hideous,
Which maks all men to hate their coming there;
Save such as daily do that The mortified in conversation most familiar with
Death.
passage use,
And with feete-mortifide those steps do wear:
To them it seems not strange, how ever strange,
Those Monsters do their ugly fashions change.
137
The Elements, whereof all Flesh is made,
Do, with their The Humors are the Children of^ be Elements.
Children, the four Humors, lie
Confused there, in Deaths confused Shade,
That no Eye can the one from the other spy;
But His that saw them ere they Being had,
On whom alone, they all do still rely:
This is the Picture of Not-beings Pit,
Where it does seem (but does but seem) to sit.
138
Sometimes, for pride, or praise, or both, some do
Bestow a stately Tomb or Pyramed.
Cover on this house;
For, worldly pomp does press them thereunto,
To make the glorified more glorious;
But Chronus spite that Cover does Time ruins al monuments how ever
substantial.
undo,
Which cannot brook the pomp of Thanatus:
It is but vain the dead to honor then,
With other honor then with Tongue, or Pen.
139
Hard at the door of this confused den
Sit rau'nous Ravens, watching for their pray;
Which door if Chronus opes, they enter then,
And with the Relickes, there, they prey, or play:
This Rooms description, no Pen well can pen
But such as marks the measure of In a Grave lies the Anatotomy of Ruin.
Decay:
O! it is a Heaven to hear Hell well set forth,
And Heaven, if ill described, seems nothing worth.
140
The Rowme is little, this description great;
And yet too little, for so great a Rowme,
Where all mankind have, and do find a Seat,
Until they have received their later doom:
Let Truth. True descriptions are able to quicken things dead.
Aletheia then make it complete;
Since all descriptions true, come from her womb:
Suffizeth me to show but even a glaunce
Of Thanatus his Houses countenance.
141
The Porter of this Place (as erst was sed)
Is Sickness is manifold: for, we are borne one way, and die an hundred ways.
hundred-headed Nosus; much more stern
Then Hells grim Porter, with his threefold head;
The sight of whom made Phusis heart to yerne;
But, Logus said, she, by him, should be Nature is ^ed by reason to the
knowledge of Truth.
led
The Lady Aletheia to discern:
In hope whereof she did the better brook
The horror of his most detested look.
142
Now, by this time, she was within his touch,
Who, to him trembling came submissiuely;
And Gifts get favor, but not with Death, or Sickness: saving that Sickness
is the better borne by the gift of natural heat.
gave him of her Calor (though not much)
That she might be the better used thereby:
Nosus, whom though diseases made to grutch,
Yet, through that Calor looked more cheerfully:
And gently, with familiar aspect,
He opes the Gate, and strait did her direct.
143
For, he denies passage unto none
That makes Who tenders sickness shall have his company.
much of him, or does love him well;
But, had he well the Lady Phusis known,
Perhaps he would have bin to her more fell:
For, when she gave him Calor, she did groan,
To think how soon he would the same Sickness extinguisheth our vital flame.
expel:
And, Phusis by no means can well endure,
That Nosus should her any Nature can not endure to be bettered by Sickness.
good procure.
144
But he to her is most officious,
He tenders her his guidance, and what not?
But yet the An inbred hate twixt Nature and Death.
odds twixt her and Thanatus,
(Although by Him it was more then quite forgot)
Made Her entreat this Porter courteous,
To call that Lady forth, whom Chronus, got:
And gave him some more Calor in a Box,
Which gave him strength to open the Ladies Locks.
145
Herewith he went to Aletheias Bed,
Who over head and ears lay covered quite;
And being naked, yet thus Truth is hid with clouds of mysteries that she is
hard to be found.
covered,
He could not have, of her, an open sight:
But, he aloof his errand uttered;
Wherewith she rose, yet came within the night:
For, she being naked Darkness seeks to hide her;
For, men without a Mist have seld espide her.
146
But, out she Truth being masked we must use the more diligen^^ to discover her.
(masked) comes to Phusis late,
Who knew her not, because she came concealed:
But, asked who she was, who did relate,
Both who, and what, and strait her self revealed:
It me behoues (quoth she) to hide my State,
For, most men have with me like Monsters deal'd:
Who, like to devils, authors of untruth,
Would force erroneous sense into my mouth.
147
I go thus masked (quoth she) since men like fiends,
Of my destruction make no conscience:
Statesmen seek for me, but for subtle ends;
Some Churchmen would have me Non residence,
But where their pleasure, or their Many of the^ measure truth by their present
worldly profit.
profit tends;
And, fond Philosophers pervert my sense:
Strong thieues, and Lawyers, wound my tender heart,
The one by force, the other by their art.
148
The Merchant and the sly Artificer
Will, for a penny profit stifle me
With Falsehoods cloak. The biting Usurer
Does use me better, though but cruelly;
And, has a will to use me worse by far,
So he a farthing might the better be:
But, of all men, that seem me most to pain,
Upon poor Poets which all men tax for lying, do least lie of any, the
moral of their fictions considered.
Poets I can least complain.
149
For, though they hide me from the vulgar view,
With robes (as they suppose) that sumptuous be,
Yet give they me my right, with more then due;
As they best know, that have best eyes to see:
They are my friendly foes, false-louers true;
Which hate, in show, but do, indeed, love me:
Whom I will one day feed with more then praise,
Which Manna makes the^ look Their souls abhor that light food, for
feeding, it does but famish.
lean now adays.
150
All those that Offices, by coin, come by,
(To come by coin, by buying Offices)
In Church or Commonweal, do me defy,
For interrupting their by-passages:
No, not so much as Somners but can spy
The way to wound me on advantages;
In sum, all sorts are resolute herein,
To loose me quite, so they thereby may win.
151
Have I not reason then, concealed to go,
To shun these Helhounds, having me in chase;
Who study, by all means, to work my woe,
And with their craft transform my constant face?
I were unlike my self, and mine own foe,
If I went like my self in such a case:
By nature, I the Ignorant do hate;
Then should I loathe, if I knew not my State.
152
But, wherefore Phusis art thou come to me?
Who told thee where I lay? who found'st me out?
Thine eyes are dim, too Natures eyes are dimd by Adams transgression.
dim me well to see;
Then though thou see me, thou thereof may Whether I be my self, or no,
because every like is not the same.
doubt.
Quoth Phusis, that full well I did foresee,
By Logus, therefore brought I this about;
Who told me truly who, and where thou wart,
Whose sayings, touching thee, I kon'd by heart.
153
And I am come to thee for thine advice,
Touching my children; who (as I am told
By my friend Logus) are in love with Vice;
Or rather to that strumpet they are sold:
Who, with fair Vices persuasions are most forcible with the Sons of Nature.
words does sweetly them entice
To think, and say, and do, but as she would:
Who, as its known to all that knows ought,
(In fine) does bring her Lovers all to naught.
154
They being bound to Thanatus his house,
Are bound likewise (ah woe is me) from thence
On the left hand, to the land tenebrous,
Whereas Gehenna holds his residence,
Which Monster, being more then ravenous,
Will quite devour their Bodies, Souls, and Sense;
The manner of whose house, no tongue can tell,
But such as can describe the lowest Hell.
155
Here, by the way, we will awhile digress,
And prosecute the rest of Phusis plaint,
When as we have described this little less
Then more then hell, which colors cannot paint:
For what so black as depth of all distress,
Where utter darkness reigns without restraint?
Then since we colors want, as all do see,
Our too light shadows must excused be.
156
There lie two ways from Thanatus his house,
(That still are two, since they still disagree)
One on the right hand lies, scarce now in use,
The other on the left, used commonly:
That, on the left, is full of all abuse,
And leads unto a world of misery;
Wherein Gehennaes Hold is situate,
Which, without Hell is much more horrible then can enter into the thought or
understanding.
Pattern, thus we figurate.
157
A ruinous Rowme, whose bottom's most profou^d; An ample description of Hell.

A Pit infernal full of endless dole;
A loathsome Lake where choking damps abound; Revel. 20.3.

A dungeon deep, a dreadful darkesome hole,
Where noght but howli^gs, shriks, and grons do sound,
And humane flesh still makes a quenchlesse Cole:
The common Burse, where none but Bugs repair,
An Harbor full of horror and despair.
158
Whose light is dark, which dark is Ma^th. 8.12. and 25.30. Job. 10.21, 22.
palpable;
Whose pleasur's Isai 30.33.
pain, which pain no pen ca^ tell:
Whose life is Reave. 20.14
death, which death is damnable:
Whose peace is Reave. 16.11.
strife, which strife is discords well:
Whose ease is Mark 9.44.48. Isa. 66.24
toil, which toile's vnthinkable:
Where most obedience, learnes most to Reave. 16.11.
rebel:
Where all Revel. 6.8.
confusion reigns in endless date,
In a tumultuous State-disord'ring State.
159
Where Reave. 16.13.
toads, and vipers, snakes, and vermin vile,
(Whose hissings make an hellish harmony)
With slimie gleere, the place do clean defile,
Swimming in Suddes of all sordiditie,
While one on others back themselves they pile
To touch the top of toplesse misery:
Where heat, and coldness, are in their extremes,
And frozen hearts do floate in sulphred streams.
160
The walls are hung with Cobwebs, which co^taine
Soule-catching hellhounds, clad in Spiders shape;
The Roof, of burning Brass, which drops like rain;
From which no one below could ere escape:
The pauement's full of groundless gulfes of pain,
Which though they still devour, they still do Hell, and the Grave are insatiable.
gape;
Whose glowing Mawes cannot The damned still are dying, and never dead.
co^coct the meat
Which there lies boiling in an hell of heat.
161
Here, weeping warbleth notes that anguish show;
And, Math. 24.51
gnashing Teeth tunes Iigges vntuning joy:
Here, Seas of And men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed the name of God
which bath power over these plagues, and they repented not to give him glory.
Reave 16.9
boiling Lead their Bounds oreflow,
To make a boundless deluge of annoy:
The Sands whereof are Souls orewhelm'd with woe;
Which though destroi'd, yet death cannot destroy:
For, endless Devils.
lords of death still life do give
To those that in that death there still do live.
162
From whose wide open Throats great flames they cast,
Which thu^der forth with sense-co^founding noise;
The din whereof makes Horrors heart aghast,
Which in that den no other bliss enioyes:
Such Gall of Gall affords no better taste,
Which still does feed, with that which still annoyes:
Such boistrous Bugs can yield no other glee,
But mirth is moan whereas such Monsters be.
163
Whose foul blasphemos mouths are fraught with spite,
That boils with heat of baneful poiso^ there;
Which spite they Revel. 16.9
spit against the Cause of Light,
Such is the envy which to It they bear:
Yet, from their glowing eyes fly sparkles bright,
As they no eyes but Vulcans Forges were:
The sight whereof the sight does so annoy,
As though that sight that sense would quite destroy.
164
Imagine now you see, (as there is seen)
Millions of Legions of this foul mouthed crew,
With fangs more huge then Elepha^ts, more keen
Then Crocadiles chief grinders, to pursue
Souls diuing in those Revel. 20* 3.
deepes to be unseen;
Which, ouergorg'd, them up again do spue:
While these dogs watch to take them in the rise,
With teeth to tear, and fear them with their cries.
165
Here may you see a Goblin, grisly grim,
(With hook and line) stand fishing for a Soul;
Which, in those boiling Revel. 20.10
Seas, do sinking swim;
Baiting their hooks with Salamanders foul:
Which, being hanged he hales it to the brim,
And, all the while, as hunger-band, does howl:
Which fingred, forthwith, in the devils name,
In go the fangs, that inch-meale tear the same.
166
Then others watch (as Spiders for a Fly)
In obscure Nookes, to catch a flying Ghost;
That to those Nooks to hide it self, does fly;
Which caught, they bind it, lest it should be lost,
And, to their webs of woe, with joy they hie;
Where the poor Soul is still in torment tossed:
In whom they all their deadly poison So fares the Fly with the Spider.
pour,
Which more then kills them, since they it endure.
167
Now, sullen Silence reigns as all were dead,
Then, suddenly a world of Clamor rings;
Whereby the much more horror still is bred;
For, sudden fear with it most horror brings.
No heart so heavy as the heart of Lead;
Yet sudden fear does start it when it stings.
The Lightnings flash does The light of Lightning is much more horrible then
comfortable.
fear more than the flame
That still is seen, and still is seen the same.
168
Here, in a Chimney, all of burning Brickes,
Sits Grimnesse, and a red-hote Spit does turn;
Whereon a humane Creature, Revel. 17.16
melting, sticks;
Whose grease does make the fire the more to burn;
Which Turne-spit, often, his filthy fingers lickes,
And, with this liquor, does his lips adorn:
Basting the roast with what most torment gives,
Whiles the poor Creature dies, because he lives.
169
But, that which is most horrid to be heard,
But much more hateful to be felt, or seen;
These Cooks often gash their Flesh of the tormented.
flesh, to interlard
The same with sulphur, with woe waxen lean:
Lest the soft marrow the hard bone should guard,
From feeling woes incomparable keen:
So bone, and marrow, sinew, nerve, and vain
Do there endure pains, far exceeding pain!
170
In other Coasts of this infernal Realm;
(Confusions Land, Gehennaes lording place, A prudent man sees the plague, and
hides himself: but a fool goes on still, and is punished. Prou. 22.3.
Frigida Gehenna.

True Antitype of new Jerusalem)
It freezeth flesh, which pines in staruing case;
Where, some do, naked, stick amidst a stream
To ice congealed; whom cold winds freeze apace:
Yet draw they breath, more cold the^ coldest frost,
To freeze their intralls, and congeale their ghost.
171
If any spit (for rheums cold places breed)
Its blown, in Ice-cicles, into their face:
For, those keen winds do forthwith do the deed,
And Revel. 16.21
hail, of drops, make in a moments space:
On ycie morsells there the mouth must feed,
Since mouths to ycie morsells turn apace:
Here is cold comfort where is naught but cold,
That all congeales, on which it takes hold.
172
Here some (but new arrived) while blood is warm,
Attempt, by motion, so to keep the same;
But strait they cannot stir, nor Leg, nor Arm;
For, in the offer, they freeze stiff, and lame:
Yet hold they vital heat (the more their harm)
For Ice, like Oil, does feed their vital flame:
If such a foe to life, as such a cold
Keeps life in being, life has hateful hold.
173
Who are so mad with pain that they do cry,
O what is this we feel! we feel, O what!
Is It limbs of Flesh that brook this agony?
All they have raged with pain; but this, to that
Is like the Ocean to a fountain dry:
This flesh, nerves, joints, once Racks did lacerate,
Yet that with this compared, was Heaven to Hell,
O what is this we feel? Sense die, or tell.
174
It Is but a moment since we hither came,
Yet feel what pain Eternity inflicts;
And though eternally we feel the same,
Yet us with what we never felt, it afflicts:
Proteus like still pains new fashons frame;
And one another ever interdicts:
Is this the Soul we thought with flesh should die,
Which feels these mortal plagues immortally?
175
Here, some with hands fast frozen to their mouth,
Do seek to thaw them with their warmest breath;
But lo, the Revel. 16.2^
frost that breath so fast pursuth,
That it does freeze in coming from beneath:
So, hand and mouth thereby the faster growth;
Yet live they still, though frozen quite to death:
For, like to Alabaster Tombs they stand,
Frozen to death, yet live at Deaths command.
176
Here, boistrous Bugbeares do at football play
With a still-tost and tumbled groaning Ghost,
To catch the^ heat; which done, they da^ce the Hay
About it (breathless) being ouer-tost;
So, with transmuted forms, it to dismay
With fear that may afflict the seeing most:
While that poor Soul lies panting like an Hare,
Among foul hounds that seek the same to share.
177
Now Matacheyns they dance, with visage grim, Reward her as she has rewarded
you, and give her double, according to her works: and in the Cup which she
ha^h filled to you, fill her the double, Revel. 17.6.

And at each change they change their horrid shapes:
And at each turn, they torture life and limb
Of this tormented Soul, that, gasping gapes,
As if the Ghost were yielding at the brim
Of deep Not-beings Pit; which yet it scapes:
At point of death to live immortally,
Is still to live, and living, still to die!
178
Now comes a chased Ghost that flies, for life,
Before a foul-mouthed cry of hellish hounds;
And being caught, twixt them is deadly strife,
Which of them all shall give it deadliest wounds:
Each of whose teeth is like an Hangmans knife,
Which torments, if not utterly confounds:
O! think then what an hell of fear that heart
Must hold, that such infernal Hounds do start.
179
Here winds, that whistle while they freezing are,
(As if they merry were for freezing so)
Bring, with their working, pitchy clouds of Care,
Wherewith they are involu'd that thither go;
Those biting frosts do, there, make all things bare,
Which make the same a naked world of woe:
Where naught but nipping frosts are felt, and seen,
Ne'r-vading griefs do flourish ever green.
180
Deliver thy self as a Do from the hand of the hunter, and as a Bird from the
hand of the Fowler. Prou 6.5. They shall pass from the waters of the snow to
over much heat. Job.
Here stands a Fowler, foul, with Nets of Wire,
To take a flight of Souls that staruing flee;
Late fled from whence they never can retire;
So, when in that fast-holding Net they be,
He dragges them to the frost, or to the fire,
Where either are in the extream'st degree:
This is the welcome which they first receive,
That of their life misspent have taken their leave.
181
This flight thus caught, the Legions of the North,
Fill all those Regions with their hellish houles;
And, with their vgliest forms, come roaring forth
To share among them those feare-shaken Souls:
The The greate^ the devil the worse.
worthiest takes the Soul of smallest worth
To execute thereon the greatest doles.
Quake flesh to hear what frail flesh here does feel,
For endless plagues turn here still like a Psalm. 83.13.
wheel.
182
Here may you see, for anguish, some to tear
Their And they gnawed their tongues for sorrow. Reu. 16.10.
flesh from bones, yea bones and flesh to And they gnawed their tongues for
sorrow. Reu. 16.10.
gnaw;
That so they may no more those torments bear,
Which make the^ burst, with choler, in their Maw:
Some grate their Math. 24.5^
teeth, as teeth they gri^ding were,
To cut the flesh which they before did saw:
And all, and some, are so with tortures tired,
That they seem quietst, when they most are fired.
183
Here Bugs bestirre them, with a bellowing rore,
(As at a Scamble we see Boys to stir)
Who for Souls scamble on a glowing flore;
Biting and scratching, like the Cat and Curre;
Whiles with their Talons they their prey do gore,
And though they strive, they do, In tormenting.
therein concur:
Within whose gripes the Soul, in silence groans,
For fear of feeling thousand hells at once.
184
Here, in a corner sits an ugly form,
That on the matter of a living Corse
Finds matter of much mirth; which is, t'informe
Himself of all the sinews, and their force;
Who, with a knife, the flesh does all deforme,
To pull out nerves and sinews in their course:
Which like strings, broken, hanging at a Lute;
So hang these nerves the Body all about.
185
Here may you see some others driving nails,
Under the nails of endless sorrows slaves;
Some others, threshing them (like flax) with flailes;
The^ moow the^ up, in grou^dlesse Revel. 20.3.
gulfs by thraues:
Some, playing on their hart-stri^gs with their nails;
Some others, broaching them on ragged staves:
And all and some more busy far then Bees,
To gather honey from the gall of these.
186
If Pain her utmost power awhile for bear,
(As seld she does; for, there she is still in force)
It is supplied with fear, surmounting fear,
For lo, in Azur'd flames, with voices horse,
Far off approaching grisly Forms appear
Which fear far off, and near at hand, much worse:
For, Fantasy with pain is more overcome,
When it is coming, then when it is come.
187
And, all about in darkness, Matthew. 8.12.
thick as dark;
Are seen to shine (like Gloworms) ugly eyes;
Which (like a Partrige sprung) each soul do mark;
So, that to escape no Souls power can devise:
For, should they mount (as does the nimble Lark)
A ghastly Griphon does them strait surprise:
Or should they sincke into Pits bottomless,
There should they meet the like, with like distress.
188
In mortal life (though mortal be men's woes)
Three things their utmost rage do qualify;
That Is Comfort, Hope, and Rest; but, none of those
Come near this place of pains The pains of the damned are without end,
mean, or measure.
extremity:
Men's Rackers, here, being tired, do let them loose;
But, they are Sprites that men, there, crucify;
Who can endure all labor, without pain,
While they do Sprites (that is for ere) remains.
189
But, if men's plaguers here immortal were,
And were of power, vntir'd, to plague them still,
Yet would they them, yer long, to nothing Nothing in this world that is
violent, is permanent.
wear;
Or them with lacerating torments kill;
But all, so plagued, are made immortal there,
Who though they still are spoiled, yet noght ca^ spill:
The^, though Time wears that on Time does depend
Yet they wear not, for Time does them attend.
190
Yea, though their Plaguers and themselves were Immortal.
such
Yet, in this life, the Instruments of pain
To naught would waste, with using long, and much;
But, that same fiery Revel. 19.20
Lake does still remain,
Which though it quite co^founds, but with a tuch,
Yet, it confounds but to torment again:
And, lest the fire should out, prepared there is,
A Sea of Isay 30.33
Sulphur, which still feeds this.
191
These present pains the Wit do (pining) waste;
But those to come the Will do martire most:
The Memory is plagued with pleasures In this world
past,
And Understanding with the pleasures In heaven.
lost:
Which on the Soul the Soul of The more our loss, the more is our grief.
Sorrows cast;
For, endless Joys to lose, crosse-wou^ds our Ghost:
To have bin well, does but increase our curse,
But, to lose endless being well, is worse.
192
Then, what remains to ease the wounded The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can bear it? Pro. 18.14.
spright,
When Hope, that keeps it Were not for Hope, Heart would break
whole, becoms Despair:
For, in that dungeon of eternal night
That most does ruin, that should most repair:
For, Immortality right good, by right,
The Soul and Bodies powers does most impair:
Then, having but one Immortality naturally is good.
good thing natural,
Yet that made worse then Ill, how ill is All?
193
There, reigns what not? (that is not to be told
With tongue, nor The pain of the damned are as great as the wisdom of the
Creator could devise, which is infinite, and unutterable.
pen) that sense afflicts with grief;
There is Perditions home, Damnations Hold;
Which gives death life, and death, gives life relief:
It is the utmost reach of Hot and Cold,
And of Despair the habitation chief:
In sum, it is the sum of all distress,
Which subdivided makes it nothing less.
194
These are Gehennaes Consorts; these are they
That still associate those that thither go:
This is the Place of that fell Monsters stay;
The Place where pain is infinite in woe:
The way thereto is The way to Hell is heavenly in show.
plain, broad, green, and gay,
All strewn with flowers, to tice men thither so:
All which to Phusis, erst by Logus, told,
On Aletheia made her fasten hold.
195
Now, to return to Phusis, and her plaint,
Quoth she, (and her embraced all the while)
Dear Aletheia, help me, for I faint;
To think my Sons are near this monster vile;
Who, with his Tuske, will tear, and all to taint
Their tender flesh, which filthy Lusts defile:
Which to prevent, I feign would learn of thee,
For, thou best know, what is best for them, and me.
196
And, for I know thou can aright persuade,
(For all thy words are held in All the earth calls for Truth, and the Heaven
blesses it: and al things are shaken, and tre^b^e, neither is there any unjust
thing in it. 1. E^dr. 4.36.
reverence)
I thee beseech from Vice them to dissuade,
And from this Land; since none In He^l is no redemption.
returns from thence:
O bid them leave their idle wandering Trade,
And tell them of this inconvenience:
Go, Lady go; the way thou can not miss,
To all their homes, and tell them home of this.
197
I would (quoth Aletheia) gladly go,
But that, I fear, they will entreat me ill
For Logus sake (near Truth, and Reason near of kin.
kin to me, they know)
But thy desire I will herein fulfill:
For, I will go, though I my self forgo,
To bar their course, and break them of their will;
For, life is won, though lost, in those Assaies,
Wherein the loser gains immortal praise.
198
Go, gracious Lady, Truth is the strength, and kingdom and the power, and
majesty of all ages, 1. Esdr. 4 40.
glory be thy guide
(Quoth Lady Phusis, to this hardy Dame)
And I, mean while, will at this Gate abide,
With my friend Nature is greatly grieved till her sons be reformed.
Nosus, Porter to the same.
So, on this journey Aletheia hi'd,
For, she, though wounded often, was never lame,
In all her Actions she is most upright still;
For, she will never halt, how ever ill.
199
This while sat Phusis at this narrow door,
Talking with Logus, who came to Reason does cheer the heuinesse of our nature
in case of distress.
her there;
Because she did as he her willed before;
Who told him all her hope, and all her fear;
How Aletheia did her case deplore,
And went to school her Children every where:
For, Hearts are eased when Tongs unfold at large,
The griefs, or joys, which do them ouercharge.
200
Logus her course, herein, did much commend;
And cheered her, as she could, with heu'nly words:
Praid her, with Patience a daughter of the Heavens, the best companion of a
forlorn fortune,
patience, to expect the end;
And comfort every way to her affords:
Strengthening her hope that now her sons would mend;
Since Aletheias sayings would (like swords)
Subdue all rank rebellion of the sense,
For, powrefull words win more then violence.
201
They had not thus sat reasoning there awhile,
But Aletheia they far off might see
Flying to them-wards over stop and Style,
Often looking back, as those that chased be;
The^ well they knew hope did their hopes beguile,
Which they, till they had tried, could not Contingent Accidents are hid from
the eye of Reason.
foresee:
For, that which is contingent who does kno,
Are only wise, and none but God.
ONE is so.
202
But coming near the^ (almost breathless quite)
She, panting, told them (windlesse as she could)
How she had bin (by virtue of her might)
About the whole world, and, with courage bold,
(For which, she said, she was in painful plight)
All Phusis children of their Reprehensio^ unwelcome to all resolute in evil.
errors told:
To whom (quoth she) in diverse forms I came,
Yet kept my Truth is like herself in unlike subjects.
nature, though I changed my name.
203
Some took me for gross Error, some for mad;
Some, superstitious; some, heretical:
Some, for Deceit; and some, for Vice, as bad:
Presumptuous some; some, hipocriticall:
But, the This guileful world is mortal enemy to Truth.
most part, most malice to me had;
For they, at first sight, drove me to the wall:
Some seemed to take my part with Tooth and Nail,
That did (indeed) me most of all assail.
204
The Curious rent my Mask to see my face;
The Proud, ore looked, nay, troade me vnderfeete,
The Learned, graced themselves with my disgrace;
Th'vnlerned (graueld) filld my mouth with Made Truth to speak most for the
maintenance of earthly matters, etc.
Greet;
Which made me feign, and speak as one in chase,
So, all I met withal, with me did meet:
Truth gets but hate, but Adulation love:
That this is truth, unto my pain I prove.
205
So, when I saw the peril I was in,
Away I fled, thus The wine is wicked, the King is wicked, women are wicked,
and all the children of men are wicked, and al their wicked works are such,
and there is no truth in them, but they perish in their iniquity, But Truth
does abide, and is strong forever, and lives and reigns for ever and ever.
1. Esdr. 4.37.38
wounded as you see;
I held it base to keep vnscar'd my skin,
Since mine adventure might bring ease to thee:
But Phusis, this I did thy love to win,
Whom I do love, how ere thou love me:
No dearer love can Love bewray then this,
To venture that, for Love, that dearest is.
206
Ah, woe is me (quoth Phusis) that thou should
For my poor Love (which thou do well deserve)
Venture that Jewel, which thou dearest holdst,
Yet that rare Truth is in extreme peril of deprauation among the unclean.
hazard, not my turn to serve:
Thy will I see, in that I see thou would
Venture thy life my sons lives to preserve:
And that thou should for that be wounded so,
And they the worse for that, the worse my woe.
207
Can neither Caueats of Mortality,
(Which flow from thy mouth with almighty force)
Nor my persuasions, more then motherly,
Give them some feeling of their senseless course?
Are their The Soul that has no feeling of sin, is dead in sin.
Souls seared with impiety,
That they for it, therein, feel no remorce?
Then what shall I a woeful mother do,
But wish I Were not, and my children too?
208
But what, I pray, did Princes say to thee,
When thou did mind them that they once must die?
They said, and therewith stabbed at me (quoth she)
I, like a devil, in my Throat did lie:
These, of all others, most I sought to They that lack least worldly things
most lack friends that will tell them the truth.
flee;
And yet I Verity and Justice supports the Thrones of Princes.
honor royal Majesty:
Without my hand sustain, Thrones reeling stand;
For, all staid Thrones are stayed by my hand.
209
And how (quoth Phusis) do the Judges live?
Many of them (replied she) doomed me death,
Because I would not (as did others) give
Them golden Ever since Astrea forsook the earth whosoever offers Justice a
golden Scabberd she will sheathe her sword therein,
Scabberds, Justice Sword to sheath.
How Lawyers? They by others losses thrive,
And often (quoth she) on all sides sell their breath.
Physicians how? They reason doubtfully
Till Fees they finger past recovery.
210
Poor Poets how? while they (quoth she) do fill
The world with Fables, feed themselves with hopes
More fabulous; so hold they but at will
Their term of life, of some great That life is worse then death that depe^ds
on a mi^^ers pleasure.
Lord that opes
His Mouth, more then his Purse, their Ears to fill
More then their Mawes; which greedy Famine grops:
Whose biting stomachs still do stomach it,
The while they starve for want of wealth and wit.
211
Ah these dear Hearts I pity in my heart,
Who live by sweet Immortal lines in Poesy, are worse then mortal lines that
end our misery* for the first make us labor for our travel, the last make us
labor for heaven, if we die well.
Lines, which do end their life;
For, to live long, they hang themselves by Art;
Or kill themselves with sharp Inventions knife:
Since they, to live, thus die, without desert,
Long may they live where glory is more rife:
For, greater glory no flesh can attain,
Then die for glory, so to live again.
212
And do my sons (quoth Phusis) fare but thus?
O then advise me (Lady) what to do:
Who said, since they no better are for us,
Thou must Justice.
Astrea (my dear Sister) woo
To rule them with the Rod of Summum ius,
Before themselves they utterly undo:
And woo thy self to take it patiently,
For, better thou shuldst bear, then they should die.
213
For, if she rule them not when wild they be,
She will ore rule them being truly tamed,
If, in their life, she do them not oresee,
She, in their death, will see they shall be damned:
Though she be blind, she with mine Justice sees with Truth^ eyes.
Eyes does see,
And I do see how life and death are framed:
And thus, the best advice that I can give,
Is them to mortify, that they may live.
214
Which having said, she Logus with her took
(To dress her wounds) and hi'd her to her Bed;
So Phusis, being of them both forsook,
Sat at the door of Thanatus, near dead,
And fell asleep till Logus her awooke,
Who came again to her as if he fled:
Whom when she saw, her heart received cheer,
And in her face the same did soon The countenance bewrais how the heart is
affected.
appear.
215
Logus advised her strait to take advice
Of Thanatus, and Chronus, what to do:
Which to perform, she seemed somewhat nice,
Because she thought they sought her to Time and Death enemies to Nature.
undo:
Yet, her love to her sons did her entice,
Her enemies, in this behalf, to woo:
And, thus resolved, she boldly rushed in
Those Gates, which erst to her had fearful bin.
216
Whose slippery thresholds had near made her fall
Into the Lake of Lethe, hard at hand;
But, Logus held her up; yet, therewithal
She grew so fearful, that she scarce could stand;
But held by Logus, and a Body of clay
lomy Wall:
Then Logus her besought (that might command)
That she no more that passage would attempt,
For, it is not good the Fates too much to tempt.
217
But I (quoth she) will Chronus call outright;
Who forthwith came, on her sweet sounding call;
Help by two wings, one Day and night are the wings of Time.
black, the other white;
And in his hand a Sith, to cut down All:
Who seemed behind but low, and When men die, their yere^ seem but so many
days, and before they die all their days so many years: The time future seems
long but that past, extreme short
poor in plight;
But yet before, most precious, trim, and tall:
Thus came he forth, and to these Ladies said,
Who calls? and spoke with motion most Time's ever in motion.
unstaid.
218
It Was I (quoth Logus) know thou not my voice?
Or wilt not, since thou will become unkind?
The time has Before man's fall.
bin when It did thee rejoice;
Though now (it seems) to thee it seems but wind:
Wilt be unconstant, so to change thy Choice?
And shall I Time, made by God, the fountain of Reason.
making thee, thee fickle find?
But, if I shall, of this thou shall be sure
Thou shall the lesser while, for that Iniquity shall shorten Times continuance.
endure.
219
Thus Logus Chronus did reprove, because
He would not know that voice which well he knew;
But, Chronus he himself, from them, withdrawes;
As one that feared worse chiding to ensue:
But, Logus bade him stay, or show a cause,
Which Reasons are yielded by Reason.
shows to Logus are all only due;
Without whose help, old Chronus does but dote,
And cannot sing or say, right Word, or Note.
220
On this Iniunction, Chronus mute did stand;
Yet stood as one that still on Still moving.
Thorns had stood;
While Logus seemed his service to command,
And gave his Tongue The office of Reason.
power to be understood:
Quoth he, let Phusis have thy helping hand,
To make, if so thou can, her children good:
For, they that hurt must heal, or make amends,
Then (hurting them) on thee their help depends.
221
Here Phusis, hearing how he thus was chid,
Was at the point, at him, likewise to Our Nature is apt to insult upon the
least incoragement
ra^^e,
But Logus bade her (in her Ear) take heed;
For, fair words would with Chronus most prevail:
Wherewith her headstrong Will she bridle did,
For Logus love, and for her sons avail:
But yet she said, he did great havoc make
Of her dear children in that Lethe Lake.
222
In which respect she meekely him besought
(By way of satisfaction) that he would
Prevent her Childrens going all to naught;
And, with A forcible mean to reduce the evil to good.
Examples, them from that withhold:
For I their Mother, (quoth she) still have sought
To make them live as toward children should:
And if they perish, it shall be their blame,
For, I Will leave naught unsought, to let the same.
223
I will, quoth Chronus; and away he flew;
And, in one instant, made (the world throughout)
Babes, youths: youths, Men: Men, Old: Old, Babes anew!
Ph^sis, mean while, with Logus talked, about
The hope she had that Chronus would subdue
Her sons to Logus rule; which He did doubt:
For, no man of a rational discourse
Can think thei'l mend that still wax worse and worse.
224
While thus they talked, they on the sudden saw
Chronus, upon his wings, returning fast;
Which in her smoothest hope did make a flaw;
For, so he fled as he had been aghast:
What news (quoth she) as he near them did draw,
Fearing, ere she had spoke, he would be past:
What do my Children? Chronus say, O what?
Speak, speak, O speak, I Every moment seems an Age to ^ne that longs to
hear that which his soul desires to know.
long to hear of that.
225
They are (quoth he) I know not what to say,
Following their pleasures; and, do think of noght
But how they may shift me with ease away;
Yet I thereby the sooner them have caught:
O what a world it is to see them play
(Like Apes) with each vain Foolishness is joy to him which is destitute of
understanding, etc. Prou. 15.21.
toy too Vanity holds nothing too dear, for things nere so worthless, that
may any way tend to her pleasure.
dearly bought,
He is no man that cannot do what not?
That wise men never knew, or have forgot.
225
Aim therefore (quoth she) but did not thou
With thy Sith menace them, to manage them?
Did thou not tell them thou their Backs would bow,
And that this mortal life was but a Job 7.6.
dream?
O! could thou not, with all this, cast them low
To mount them more to high Jerusalem?
What, have they sense, and cannot use the same,
That have no kind of sense of sin, and shame?
226
When night was come (quoth he) I told each one
The day was past: and when the Sabbath came,
I said a week was fully past, and gone:
A month expired, I No warning will prevail with the wilful.
told them of the same:
And when the Sun his complete course had run,
I said a year was past, and spent, with shame:
But* they that take delight to run awrie,
Learn so to run by Sols The Sun runs an oblique course in the heavens
which measures time, and in time men learn to do amiss.
course in the Sky.
227
In Childhood, I did teach; in Youth, did threat:
In Manhood, I reproved: and in Age,
With their own bones, their bones I sore did beat:
And in Decrepitenesse, I worse did rage;
For, I did even quench their vital heat:
And to the gripes of death did them engage.
Yet for all this, they worse and worse became,
Still spoiling me, till them I Men lewdly living make a spo^le of time, till
(...) spoil them.
overcame.
228
What life then do my Yonglings live (quoth she?)
The life (said he) of wanton skipping Roes: The vices familiar with our
natures in the several ages of our life.

What the Yongmen? Of Goats, in Lechery:
And what me^ grown? Of Cocks, proud, prone to bloes:
What aged men? Of wolves that greedy be
And what old Age? Of crafty Foxes those:
But, most of all, do most of all transgress,
And There is none that does good, no not one. Psalm. 17.
all, and some offend, some more, some less.
229
Ah out alas (cride she) what then remains
To me, or them, but miserable woe?
But, I will try if yet my care and pains,
Can move them their wrong courses to forgo:
Logus and In time, by reason, and experience we reform our manners, if we be
not utterly void of grace.
Chronus to you it pertaines
To take my part herein, as friends should do:
Not I (quoth Logus) for, against their will,
I can save none, that long themselves to spill.
230
So, Logus left them, and away he hide
To seek Astrea; (who, the earth had Leaving her last ^oo^esteps among the men
which n^w are least acquainted with her or her steps, Husbandmen
left)
That she of Phusis sons might take the guide;
While Phusis ran about (of Logus rest)
And on her sons, with tragic voice, she cried
Pity, O pity, me, she cried est:
Grief, wanting vent, the Heart (tormented) breaks,
And Paine's not sad, while she at pleasure speaks.
231
Whereat Poliphagus (whose hearing was
All for the Belly) said, me think I hear
(Yet Ears the Belly Venture auribus caret.
wants, but let that pass)
The No graceless wretch so unnatural but knows the voice, and law of
nature, because it is written in all men's hearts.
voice of Phusis, our kind mother dear:
The other two said, How comes this to pass
That she is come? wherewith she did appear,
And to them said, Dear Sons, how do ye fare?
Exceeding well (quoth they) and frolic are.
232
But, do ye not consider (Sons) quoth she)
How near ye are to be devoured quite
By that Gehenna, which I loathe to see,
(Damned hellish monster headsman of Delight)
Except you change your course, and wary be
To shun him and his hardly Satan winnoweth us like wheat. Luke 21.31.
shunned spite?
For, that spit's hardly shunned that has both force
And will, to make her Object worse and worse.
233
Alas (quoth they) we live, as live we should,
Prolonging They live ill that think to live ever.
Life with life's immunities;
Except the overthrow thereof you would,
Do not It is an abhomin^tion to fools to depart from evil. Pro^. 13.19.
persuade us to live otherwise:
What though our Souls to pleasure quite are sold,
Are they not sold thereby to To have heaven in this life, is to hold hell in
the other.
Paradise?
The Sale is good, as Reasons law maintains,
When both the Buyer and the Seller gains.
234
Phusis (too fond, as too kind Mothers are)
Seeing them well (for well they seem to be
That live, how ever ill, without all care)
Was We measure our frinds well-doing altogether by the line of worldly
prosperity.
pleased with what she did both hear and see;
Who said, that Logus sed, they ill did fare,
And were in more then mortal ieoperdy:
But since she saw they were in perfect plight,
She would (she said) partake of their delight.
235
Indeed (quoth they) that solemn A scorner loves not him that rebukes him,
neither will he go to the wise. Pro. 15.12.
Sage we saw;
Who (algates) would have drawn us from our sports:
But, whilst he drew us, we made him withdraw
Himself from us, with many mortal Reason is ever impugned and impeached by
carnal Libertines.
hurts:
He would (forsooth) have had us keep his Law;
And done our Suite and Service to his Courts:
Then, since he would needs Lord it over us,
We as free men have served his Lordship thus.
236
Would that (quoth she) ye had forborne, because
Many obey him that do rule aright;
For, Equity does limit all his Laws;
And they are held for mad, that with him fight:
Hereat, as loath to offend, she made a pawse,
For, in their Fronts she saw the face of This makes so many miseries by reason
of flatterers in the world, for every one couets to please for fear of frowns.
night:
When men look black, then if you peace desire,
Look white, for Blackenesse is the child of fire.
237
Here, with a smiling, and indulgent look, (sweet)
(To change their sour look with looks more the^
She told them Aletheia undertook
To show them what was for their safety meet:
For, her (quoth they) we never yet forsook,
Because we never yet with her did Vicious livers are strangers* or rather
enemies to Truth and her doctrine.
meet:
Yet have we heard that she is too precise,
To live with us in Pleasures Paradise.
238
But doubtless (quoth she) Chronus was with you;
What said he to you? what was his advice?
He to and fro (quoth they) about us flew,
Yet to stay with us seemed more then nice:
He These are the last, and there fore the worst times, which rather seek to
reform by windy, then explanary doctrine, which persuades coldly.
coldly sought our lusts heat to subdue,
But yer we wist, we lost him a trice:
Yet, yer he went, with him we merry made,
And made him most familiar with our Trade.
239
Wherefore, we pray you, when you go away,
Leave him with us; For, we do well All times apter to Vice then Virtue.
agree:
I will (quoth she) so left them at their play,
And Chronus sent to bear them company:
With whom they reuelld out the night, and day;
Though He from them still sought away to flee:
For Chronus wears not his Wings for naught,
Since he does far out fly the swiftest Thought.
240
While they thus gamesomely with Chronus toy'd,
(Deceiving him with Fancies fallacies)
They heard a voice (which sorely them annoyed)
That sommon'd them to leave their luxuries;
Herewith by Thanatus, they were They that live without thinking of their end,
do commonly die ere they think of Death.
destroyed;
To satisfy Gehennaes gurmandize:
At whose approach, old Chronus fled away,
For he could never yet, with neither stay.
241
Chronus thus leaving them to be devoured
By fell Gehenna (their foe capital)
(Of whom, by The first death, to the wicked, is the entrance into the second.
Thanatus, he was assured)
He fled to Phusis, and so, told her all:
Who was within the Earths womb then immured,
Providing food for her Brood great und small;
Assuring her He schooled them as they ought,
Till Thanatus had them past schooling brought.
242
Phusis herewith tormented in the Soul,
Ran (as distracted) where sick Fancy pleased;
Till, at the last, she heard her Sons to howl,
As those that were most damnably diseased:
Exclaiming on their lives, and Repentance may be too late, but never too soon.
follies foul,
That pleased the Sense with all that now displeased:
But such compunction never comes but where
The penitent does desperate appear.
243
So, when she had well wai'd their agonies
Which they endured in that Monsters Jaws,
And, having viewed the like extremities,
Proceeding from the like, or worser cause,
Of cruel Tyrants.
Kings, that of Blood make but Size
To glue together their most bloody Laws:
Of corrupt Judges; and Priests negligent,
The three that If good, ^hey raise* if bad, they ruin it.
raise, or ruin Government.
244
The working woes of th'idle-curious;
Of the Rich-couetous; and the Poore-prowde;
Rebellious Subjects; Courtiers vicious:
Lascivious Dames; damned Bawdes; the cursed Crowde:
Erroneous Teachers; Poets A great torment, in the life to come, is due to
those that can, and will take such an immortal revenge for any mortal in^urie.
Libellous:
Cau'ling Philosophers, (by fools allowed)
Of crafty Merchants; lying Advocates:
And swearing Seamen; roving Runnagates.
245
In few, when she had seen the many woes
Of all that in Gehennaes Hold abide,
She was, by Fear.
Phobus, (who attended those)
Brought to the place where she did erst reside;
Where she did many Prayers sweet compose
Unto Astrea, (whom the Heavens did hide)
That she would digne to teach, and to correct
The rest of her wild Children of each Sect.
246
So, at these holy Prayers her I leave,
(Since they are never None are forsaken of God that cleave to him by humble and
hearty praiee.
left that so do pray;)
Now, Poets say (that all in all perceive)
Is this a Fiction? or a true Essay?
If both, then both are ready to deceive
Those that would pick this Lock without a The Kay of Intelligence.
kay:
But, be it what it will, it is the same
That is in earnest true, how ere in game.
Been cogitata, si excidunt, non occidunt.
Mimi. Publiani.
THE SECOND TALE: Containing, The Civil Wars of Death and Fortune.
1
THere was a Time (as I have heard it sed,
By those that did, at least, in Print it find)
A certain Marriage was solemnized
Between a mortal Pair of noble kind;
And, for the love of those whom Love does wed,
Immortal Gods the The Son of Gods first miracle he wroght at the marriage,
Ioh. 2. honoring the feast with his personal presence.
company refined
^ith their pure presence; who, the Feast to grace
^id revel (as did all the rest) a space.
2
Among the rest of that immortal Crew,
Danced Death and Fortune, whose Masks were so like,
That none, that danced, the one from other knew;
So, in their choice of them they were to seek:
For, some that soght for Fortune, The wisest men are often thus mist^ken for not
being able ^o foresee perfectly future events.
Death out-drew;
And some that soght for Death, did Fortune strike^
T^me was their Minstrell, who did ever play,
As Well when they did dance, as they did stay.
3
Fortune delighted most to dance with those
That best could flatter, and the time observe;
But Death still loved to foot it with his foes;
Or else with such as he saw best The best me^ Death soonest ^akes away,
because this wicked world is unworthy of them.
deserve:
When Fortune danced, she turns, she comes, and goes,
And kept no time, though Time her turns did serve:
But, when death danced, he did those Mesures tread,
Whose times were long, and short, and tunes were dead
4
So, Fortune used Lauoltaes still to dance
That rise, and Fortune is ever in that m^^ion like a wave mo^ued with the wind.
fall, as Time does either play:
And Death the Measure of least dalliance,
That Is Passing-measure, and so strait away:
Or else the shaking of the Sheets (per chance)
Which he would dance, untired, night and day:
Wherein he put them down, so that he did
Drive them from dancing unto A sport so called.
Winck-all-hid.
5
The da^cing done, while yet their bloods were hot,
Fortune and Death began on terms to stand;
Which, for their dancing, had most glory got;
And, who their actions did best command:
From which dispute (with choler ouershot)
They fell to The contentious take small occasion to contend.
urge their powers by Sea and Land;
The while the Gods stood most attentively,
To hear their more contentious Colloqui.
6
When lo Death (Lord of all that breathe this air)
Thus began t'inforce his power, beyond compare;
I know (says he) their honors they impair
That strive with those that their Yet mighty men of our present times think
otherwise, as appears by their actions. Oppression.
inferiors are:
Yet Foulness is not made a whit more fair
By being compared with Beauty, much more rare;
But, Foulness takes the greater foil thereby,
And Moles are foiles to set forth Beauties die.
7
Were thou not blind (bold baiard) thou woldst see,
A mighty diffrence twixt thy might and mine;
Since among those that most almighty be,
I do admit no power more divine:
For Empire large, who can compare with me,
Since Earth and Air the same cannot confine:
Nay, in Earth, Water, yea, in Air, and All elementall Bodies subject (...)
death.
Fire
(That Is all in all) I rule as I desire.
8
What breathes, or has a vegetative Soul,
But paies me tribute, as unto their King?
Nay, do I not the host of Which shall have an end.
stars control?
Then Heaven and Earth I to obedience bring:
And Kings, as Beggars, are in my Checke-role;
Nay, Kings more often then Beggars do I sting:
As far as any thing has All that has motion is subject to dissolution.
motion, I
Play Rex, for, all that live, do live to die.
9
And therefore testify thie modesty
(For error to defend is impudence)
In granting that which thou can not deny,
And to be true, thou know in conscience:
Thou sure woldst blush, if thou had but one The Eye is said to cause our
blushing, etc.
eye,
To stand on terms with mine omnipotence:
But since thine Eyes are blind, and Judgment too,
Thou can not blush at that thou can not do.
10
Thy reasons seem (quoth Fortune) strong to such,
As do but slightly weigh them; but to me,
(That sees more then thou, at least as much,
For, thou wanst Justice, Fortune, and Death are eielesse since they have no
respect of persons.
Eyes, as well as I, to see)
They are too base, to brook my Trialls Touch,
For, Tyrranny is no true Sou'raigntie:
And, Empire large, consistes not of large Parts,
But in the free subjection of whole Hearts.
11
Can any King be happy or secure
That drawing bodies, clean withdraw the hearts?
Or is it like that Kingdom should endure,
That is, by Hate, divided into Parts A kingdom^ divided, is at point to be
dissolved.

And Hate a cruel Prince must needs procure,
That seeks his weal by all his Subjects smarts:
The Will is free, and will not be constrained,
How ere, for it, the body may be pained.
12
As universal as the Universe
Extends (I grant) thy grand authority:
And that thy Takers (more then most perverse)
Sickness, Mischance, Disgrace, and Destiny,
Thy tribute take from Man, Beast (tame or fierce)
To fill thy still-consuming Treasury:
But, their Untimely, as well as unreasonable taxings withdraw the loves of the
Subjects.
untimely taking, with high hand,
Makes thy rule odious on Sea and Land.
13
Such Officers, in each crazed commonweal;
(That under color of their Offices,
Do, with the Sou'raignes favor badly deal)
Great Mischiefs Princes often become odious to their subjects through the fault
of those who^ they put in trust to govern under them.
cause, and Inconveniences;
Which though they touch the Subjects, kings do feel
Who often smart for suffering that disease:
When Princes tend their private, and neglect
The common good, they cause this sore effect.
14
But balance, on the other side, my might
In the upright Schools of true Indiffrencie,
And, thou shall find I have their heart and spright
Freely obaying mine authority:
For, thou compellest, but I do inuit:
I Favors The readiest way to win hearts.
give, whose use thou do deny:
I do promote all those that rise to me,
But thou subuertest those that fall to thee.
15
Then, though that universal be thy power,
Think not, therefore, Love must to thee be such:
For Wit and Courage may high place procure,
But Love and Bounty the best Baits to catch men.
Love and Bounty ampler power by much;
Then of my current Cause I am so sure,
That I dare rub it hard on Trialls Touch:
And, for my part, to end this Civil War,
I Will put it to judicious Jupiter.
16
Although I justly may (quoth Death) deny
To put a question, without question,
Unto the Judgment of selfe-Equity,
(For so I hold just Captare beneuolentiam.
Jupiter alone)
Yet (not affecting Singularity)
I Will make him Judge in this Contention:
Now Fortune, prove thy power, as I will mine,
And then let Jupiter judge both in fine.
17
So, when they were (to play this masters Prize)
Entered this round worlds spacious Theater,
Fortune adorned her self with Dignities,
With Gold, and Men are honored and followed in this world, only for their
fortunes.
Iems which made All follow her:
These did she fall, to make her followers rise,
To gather which, they did themselves bestirre:
Keisars and Kings, that vsherd her the way,
Often caught much more then they could They got Territories which they could not
hold.
bear away.
18
Here might you see (like Beggars at a dole)
Some thronged to death, in sca^bling for her alms;
He often sped best, that was the veriest Fortune favors fools,
fool;
Some took up Come, some Crowns, and others Palms
For which they pulled each other by the Pole,
While Chirurgions.
othersome, for the^, found precious Balms:
Some found odd ends to make their States entire,
And all found some thing that they did desire.
19
But, that which was most notable to see,
Was the poor Priest, who still came lagging last,
As if (God wot) he cared not rich to be,
To whom kind Fortune Livings large did cast
(As it were to guerdon his humility)
Which, in the name of God, he still held fast:
And still looked The way to thrive in that function.
down to find more, if he might,
For, well he found, he found well by that slight.
20
Philosophers (that gold did still neglect)
Looked only but (wise-fooles) to find their Elixir.
Stone;
Which toy, in truth, was nothing, in effect,
But to get all the world to them alone:
For, with that Stone they would pure gold project
Worth all the A little thereof multiplies infinitely, as Alchymists affirm.
world by computation:
But, whiles they sought a Stone so rich and fair,
They perfect gold but turned t'imperfect air.
21
Thus, at the heels of Fortune all attend,
Whom well she feed for attending so:
On the other side, Death to and fro did wend
To seek one that with him would gladly go:
But, none he Life is sweet.
found; which made him those to end
He ouertooke, in going to and fro:
For, those which are unwilling Death to meet,
He is most willing soonest them to greet.
22
Nor could those Officers that him foreranne
(Sickness, Mischance, Disgrace, and Destiny)
Affect, with his affection, any Man;
For, none they found that willingly would die,
Since all, before, with O Death, how bitter is thy remembrance to a man that
has pleasure in his riches? Ecclus. 41.1.
favors, Fortune wan,
And, such desired to live eternally:
For, it is death to think on Death with such,
That Fortune makes too merry with too much.
23
Through Camps, and Hosts he trauel'd with a trice,
(For, soldiers needs must meet death by their trade)
At last he came where some were throwing dice,
Who first a Breach should enter newly made;
Lord how some chafed (through Glories avarice)
For missing that which they would not have Fron^^ ^ullae ^ides.
had:
And, he that wan, to lose his life did strive,
Yet so, as feign he would have escaped alive.
24
Among the rouing Crew, at Sea, he sought
For one that willing was to go with him,
Who, though they valued all their lives at naught,
And often for trifles ventred life and limme,
Yet when their woorthlesse bloods were to be bought
They sold them dearly, and in blood did swim
From bloody death, as long as they could move,
For though they feared not death, they life did love
25
Through the Turks Galleys, among the Slaves he went
To seek some desp'rat slave that lo^g'd to die;
But lo, not one to die would yield consent,
For, all, through Hope of future good, in this life, maks men fear death as
an intolerable e^ill.
hope, still looked for liberty:
Hope does the heart enlarge that Grief forespent;
And Faith keeps Hope and Life, in charity.
Despair can never seize that hopeful heart,
That can, through 1. John 5.4.
Faith endure an hell of smart.
26
At last he to a Monastery came,
(Where mortified life is most professed)
And sought for one to meet him in the same;
But, all therein from sudden None so mortified but fears death in point of
dying.
death them blessed:
And pra^'d to Jesus so their lives to frame
That suddenly Death might not them arrest:
A Pater noster, Aue, and a Creed,
They thought right well bestowed, so well to speed.
27
Thence went he to an holy Ancrets Cell,
Who seemed to be quite buried there alive;
He Death embraced, but yet the fear of Hell
Made him with Death, for life (in love) to The fe^re of final or particular
judgment makes Death unwelcome.
strive:
He knew himself (old Fox) perhaps, too well
Strait to presume that God would him forgive:
So, was most willing, and unwilling too,
To do as present Death would have him do.
28
In fine, Death doubting in his Cause to fail,
Entreated Sickness such an one to find,
That would not flinch, though Death did him assail,
And scorned the favors of that Godddesse Fortune.
blind:
So, Sickness went, through many a loathsome Iaile*
And found, at last, one mortified in mind:
Who though he were but poor, yet held it vain,
To follow Fortune that did him disdain.
29
On whom seized Sickness, with resistlesse force,
And, pulled him down so low, he could not stand;
To whom Death came, to make his corpse a Corse,
Yet, as his friend, first shak'd him by the hand;
And by Deaths eloquence is harsh to the ear of flesh and blood
persuasions, would him feign enforce
With willing mind, to be at his command:
Which if he would, Death promised faithfully,
He should die sleeping, or most easily.
30
This forlorn wrech tha^kt death for his good will,
But yet desird one happy hour to live,
Which ended, he would Deaths desire fulfill,
Who from him with a Purge, did Sickness drive,
That which cures one may kill another.
Which shortly did one of his Kindred kill,
From whom, as heir he did some wealth receive:
And being well in state of health, and wealth,
He followed Fortune more the^ Death, by stealth.
31
Now, he betook him to a Furriers Trade,
And having Stock, he multiplide his Store;
Then Death did mind him of the match he made,
But, him he answered as he did before:
Quoth he, O mar me not ere I am made,
But let me get (kind Death) a ^ouetousnes is l^ke the Dropsy the more it
drinks the more (...) may.
little more:
Conte^te (quoth Death) thou shall have thy desire,
So I may have thereby what I require.
32
Sables and Ermines Death for him did kill,
And made his wealth thereby, by heaps, increase;
Who having now (death thought) the world at will,
He asked him if now he would decease:
Who yet desired life, of Dearh, to fill
His coffers to the top, the^ would he The more interest we have in this
world, the more loath we are to leave it.
cease:
Death yet seemed pleased, and brought all those to naught
Th'reuersions of whose States he erst had bought.
33
Then, when he had a world of wealth obtained,
Death came again for his consent to die;
But now he told Death, his mind more was pained
With thought, and ^hen life is at the best, th^n Death i^ better.
care, then erst in poverty:
Therefore he prayed his death might be refrained
Till he had gotten some Nobility:
And then he would go willingly with Death,
And (nobly) yield to him his dearest breath.
34
Death yet agreed (since his good will he sought)
And gave him leave to compass his intent;
Who, of a nobleman, decayed, bought
Both Land and A custom among the Germane^.
Lordship, Honor, House, and Rent;
Then He turned Courtier, and with Courtiers wroght
(By Deaths assistance, and with money lent)
That he, in time, became a mighty King;
And al his Proiects to effect did bring.
35
Then, Death (not doubting of his will to die)
Unto him came, to know his will therein;
But, he did Death entreat (most earnestly)
That since to him he had so gracious bin,
He yet might gain imperial Which had, makes death the more irksome.
Dignity
Before his Death, which soon he hoped to win:
And then he would most willingly resign
His life to Death, although a life divine.
36
Death, hoping, that the greater he was made,
The greater glory he, by him, should gain,
(Which might the vmpire Jupiter persuade
That Death in power, was Fortunes Sovereign)
Made neighbor Kings each other to invade,
To whom this King a Neuter did remain;
Who when they had by wars themselves consumed,
He all their States, as Emperor, assumed.
37
Now being Caesar, Death came strait to him,
As most assured of his company,
But to the Emperor he seemed more grim
Then erst he did, which made him loath to die;
Come on (quoth Death, and therewith held a limme)
No odds there must be now, twixt you and I:
To Men in fortunate estate had rather go with life to the Diue^ then by death
to God.
Jove I Will bring you, then with goodwill go
To him, with me, and see you tell him so.
38
Alas (said he) I am but newly come
To honors height, and will thou throw me down
Ere I be warm, or settled in my Room,
And so my Brows scarce Its a double death to die when we have attained the
highest happiness of life.
feel th'^mperiall crown*
O suffer me to live, to tell the sum
Of the Contentments, from my Grandeur grown;
For, better had it bin still Low to lie
Then, being at the Highest, strait to die.
39
Either (quoth Death) come willingly with me
Or thou shall die a death thou most do Death yields double terror.
fear:
He hearing this, from Death did seek to flee,
And cried on Fortune to assist him there,
Peace villain then (quoth Death) I conjure thee,
Or lower speak, that Fortune may not hear:
Yet Fortune (which he followed) was at hand,
And laughed for joy to hear him Death withstand.
40
But by this Time, the Time prefixed by Jove
Expired was: and Fortune with her brought
A world of people, following Her in love,
Who, willingly, for Fortune long had sought:
These, as she moved, with her still did move,
Because she raised them higher then she ought:
In which respect she had more Where the Carcases are the Eagles resort. Matthew.
28.
followars
Then Sol (that lights Heavens lamps) had waiting Stars.
41
Lord how some (sweating) dropped in foll'wing her,
To who^ she dropped that which be dropped the^ more;
For, they were laden so, they scarce could stir,
Who underwent the same with labor Gain take away the thought of pain.
sore:
And othersome, themselves did so bestirre,
That they in each man's Boat would have an Ore;
But, seeking to gripe more then well they could,
Were forced to All coue^ all lose*
lose that which they had in hold.
42
Among the rest, there was an Usurer,
(Whose Back his Belly did, for debt, arrest)
Who being fearful of just Lest he would plague him, for plaging others with
racking.
Jupiter,
Made nice to go with Fortune, and the rest;
Since well he knew, He was a Thunderer,
In, and from whom, he had no interest:
For he did never deal with such, perhaps,
That gave for intrest naught but Thunderclaps.
43
The Soldier came, and gave them much offense,
That stood between his Breast, and Fortunes Back:
So, Soldiers have backe-fortune ever since,
For they, for others good, go still to Wrackt for those that will rather rack
then any way relieve them.
wrack;
And for their wracks have wrackful recompense;
For, they are sacked, if they chance not to sack:
And if they do, the Public Purse must have,
That which must keep them as a public Slave.
44
They, with right Swords, do balance kingdoms rights;
(A glorious office they perform the while)
The woorths of The soldiers sword cuts out the Portions of Kings
Kings appears by those their weights;
Which prove the^ to be valorous, or vile:
Yet they gain naught but blows, in blody fights,
So, Of blows.
store they get without, or fraud, or guile;
The while the gown-ma^ keeps vnscarr'd his skin,
And with his Pen (in peace) the world does win.
45
O thou true Jove, bow down thine upright Ear,
To hear thy lowest Servants Orisons,
Which, in the love which he to them does bear,
He makes for them (that wrack still ouer-runnes)
Incline the hearts of Princes far and near,
As Marses Minions to love Marses *sons:
And, make this little Land yield great increase,
To stay their stomachs great, in war and peace.
46
A Soldiers sword, from sheath, here Fortune took,
To knight all those that her had followd well,
Now every man did for a Knighthood look,
That scarce had found an house wherein to dwell:
Yet some did much their betters ouer-looke,
And thrust in for it, while their looks did swell:
So, Fortune seeing them to look so big,
Possessed them Audac^s fortuna iuuat.
knights, without or Turffe or Twig
47
Sois Cheualier; Arise sir Knight, (quoth she)
Then up he springs, for fear lest Fortune would
Recall her word for his debilitie;
Now Knight he is, for naught but being bold;
For Fortune favors Squires of low A Squire of low Degree is a Squire of no
degree.
degree,
If they be more audacious then they should:
Now Honor has He, get Grace where He can,
Yet Fortune gave him grace to keep a man.
48
Some laid on all which they, by Fortune, got
Upon their backs, that bravely sought to bear
The Sword upon their shoulders, yet could not;
For, it fell in the sheathe ere it fell there:
Fell luck it was that so they were forgot;
Yet they Not remembering who, or what they were.
forgot themselves, as did appear;
But when they saw they mist of what they sought,
They barred their backs, to line their guts, for noght.
49
Which Jupiter himself did laugh to see;
For, these so much were moved with this disgrace,
That they were at the point to Death to flee,
And Fortune leave, for such their fortune bace:
Yet followed her (most malecontentedly)
Beceuse they followed her unto that place:
To cast away long service on a spleen,
Is not to foresee, but to be oreseene.
50
O! it was a world to see what shift was made
To hold up Greatness with a little stay;
It Were sin to say some used the Cheaters trade,
To borrow with a purpose A venial sin at most as these ^imes esteem it.
never to pay;
And get all, howsoe'r, that might be had,
No, no, they did not so, I dare well say:
But this I say, perhaps, they lived by wit,
And so to live, some great Ones think it fit.
51
Now, in these knightly times ye might have seen
(If you, for pleasure, had but taken the pain)
Each one ye met withal, a Knight in green;
And so the world, b'ing old, grew green again;
As if the same but in the Blade had been;
For, each one did his A Hangerblade in a green scabbard
Hanger on, sustain:
Now, Time stood still, to sport himself in May;
For, all was Green, and at that state did stay.
52
Some shuffled for some Office: some to gain
Some Monopole, which then could not be got:
For, Fortune did those Monopoles restrain,
Because she thought it was to her Rule a Blot
To pleasure One by all her Subjects pain,
Though often they made the^ seem, as they were Changed their Countenance with
artificial complexions.
not:
Some cried for war, and othersome for peace,
But Fortune, though they cried, still held her peace.
53
Now, some, for Coin their Offices did sell,
As if they had bin cloid with Fortunes grace;
And those that bought them, others did compel
To That which is dearly bought, must be dearly sold.
pay for them, when they were in their Place:
And some, in seeking somewhat, did rebel;
But Fortune brought them soon to wretched case:
Some strong, sent long men to Jerusalem,
Out of the way, to make a way for them.
54
Now, for Truths Matters, there was much ado;
Some this, some that, some none of both would have:
And yet all three did (restless) Fortune woe,
To yield to neither, that did either crave
In worlds behalf, or fleshes fixed thereto;
But all, in All is not gold that glisters.
show, did seek but Truth to save:
For, all seemed to solicit Sions cause,
Which they would have confirmed by the Laws.
55
Some sed they lied that only Truth did teach;
Some envied them that lived by teaching so:
And at their lives, and livings sought to reach,
The injurious offer.
Which they forgave, but would not so forgo:
Somes Tongues defended Truth, which they did preach,
Whose actions gave her many a bitter They had Jacobs voice and Esaus hands.
blo:
Some lived, as dying, while they sought to live;
And some died living; yet did most reliue.
56
Some, Liers called Carnall-libertie
The glorious Liberty of Truths dear Sons;
And Truth.
her they urged to prove that verity;
But, Truth's betrayed by such untrusty Ones,
That Sacrilege do gild with Sanctity;
Yet, for that, look for high promotions:
O it is a world of mischief when Pretense
Does shroud a world of Inconvenience!
57
When Truths sons play the Politicians,
Heaven help thee Truth, in Earth thy case is hard:
Truth's hardly matched with Machiauelians,
That her will wou^d so they themselves may ward:
For, pious Politicians are black For their raritie.
Swans;
And, blessed are Realms that they do (ruling) guard:
But whereas Statesmen mere Earth meditate,
There Heavenly matters squared are by the State.
58
Some others followed her, by following others;
Upon great men these greatly did Such dependencie is as full of difficulty as
uncertainty: Enuyings among the servants cause of the first, mutabilitie of
those great men's minds occasioneth the last.
depend,
All those, for likeness, might have bin my brothers,
Who then began to live, when life did end:
Or if before, they were blessed in their mothers;
For, those they tended that themselves did tend:
It is absurd that Lords should tend their men,
Yet some Lords (Gods fools) do it now and then.
59
Some of these Servants were so fortunate,
That they came forwards, In their own not in their Lords right: for many get
money in their Lords service, to buy their Lords lands to do them service.
while their Lords went back:
For, Love beginning with ourselves, we hate
Ourselves; if we by Service go to wrack:
Their Lords they loved for their own estate;
And loved to have that which their lords did lack:
O they are careful Servants that will keep
Their lords estate, while they, with Pleasure sleep.
60
And some of this sort thriu'd, not by their Lords;
Yet by their Lords; for, by their leave, they sell
Their favors, nay their honors, deeds, and words,
And care not who do ill, so they do well:
Whose Clarkeship so much Art to them affords,
That for an Inch, alow'd, they took an London measure.
Ell:
So mere Cliffs made they of their Lords to clime
To some high note, by keeping Tune, and Time.
61
These Climers in each Clime are highest of all
In their Who are wise in their own eyes, there is more hope of a fool then of
such. Prou. 26.125
conceit; for, they conceive they can
The round world bandy like a Racket-Ball;
And make a mere fool of the wisest Man:
They ween the world without them were so small,
As Ladies well might weld it with their Fan:
O there is no measure in the pride of such.
That from too little, rise to reach to too much!
62
Some others thought they Fortune gracious found,
Genus and Mere Scholars.
Species throwing in their way;
Which they took up, and them together bound,
To stay with them to be to them a stay:
But in the binding did them so confound,
That they proou'd fools in Men learned, without judgment, whom the Proverb,
The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men, concerns.
specie to betray
Genus and Species to such bitter Bands,
For which they lost both honor, goods, and lands.
63
Lord, how some cloisterd up themselves like Friars,
To find out Genus and Species.
These, whom thus they did betray;
And lay in ambush for them many years,
Watching, by Candlelight, often night and day;
Spending much money of their friends, or theirs,
And all (God wot) but to abuse their Misuse that little learning they catch.
pray:
O Genus, Genus, Species, Species, ye
Be most accursed, that thus still coursed be;
64
Some Mathematitians.
others looked for Euclids Elements,
Whereof, they thought, the whole world did consist;
Which found, they found therein such sweet co^te^ts,
That Euclide carried them which way he The Mathematiques are most pleasing and
alluring knowledges i^l rewarded, yet, they steal the studier^ thereof from
themselves.
list;
They looked for nothing less then Regiments,
But held themselves in Euclide only blist:
Who blessed them so, that if for lands they sought,
They got no land, but measured land for ^or little.
naught.
65
Others there were, that sought to find a Magi^ians.
Spell,
And needs would rise to Fortune by a Fiend;
Whom they would raise, for that intent from hell;
These te^ded fiends too much, Coniurers and Witches are always Beggars.
good Fate to tend:
Who whiles they soght the gods themselves t'excel,
They died, like damned Beggars, in the end:
So, they that needs would rise through devils aid,
Down to the devil were, at last, conuai'd.
66
Some others looked for Spirits, not Sprites of hell,
But spirits of Distillators and Extracters of Quintessences.
sack, and liquors of that kind;
Wherewith they thought (if once they could excel)
They could the hands of Fortune loose or bind:
This made them (like poor Crickets) still to dwell,
In, or about the fire till they were blind:
And then, like Bats, that still do loathe the light,
They keep the dark conuersing with that Of liquo^s.
sprite.
67
Others there were that sought to find the way
T'annatomize the Corpse of Reasoning,
With Logical Conclusions; these would play
As Iugglers play with Boxes, or a Ring;
Make men believe what ere they please to Subtle Sophister^.
say;
And to a Nonplus Reas'n herself to bring:
On these, indeed, too often would Fortune smile,
To see how they the fond world did beguile.
68
Orators.
Some wordy-men, by words, sought worthiness,
These raught at Rethorikes Rules to rule thereby;
And they that found the same, found little less
Then greatest Fortune does well most commonly by men that do speak well
Rule, for they ruled wordily:
These me^, for need, could make some me^ confess,
They Treachers were, and yet themselves belie:
These still were Fortunes Minions; for they could
With wind of words orethrow wits stro^gest hold.
69
Others there were that still gazed on the Stars,
As if by Stars, they should the Sun transcend:
Astronomers, Prognosticators.
These told of future weathers, woes, and wars,
Of the beginnings of them, and their end:
Of Prophets that should rise (to kindle Iarres)
And of I wot not what, which they defend:
But while they blabb'd out Fortunes Secrets, she
Made them but poor, and liars held to be.
70
Some sought for Notes, so to be notable,
Musitions.
Not Notes to rule themselves, but Notes in Rule;
To rule the voice by those Notes tunable,
Yet many did themselves the while mis-rule:
Who while their Heads held points commendable,
In many points they erred from Reasons Rule:
So, this gift Fortune gave their Heads: they should
Still hold more Crochets, then their Purses Gold.
71
Some others sought for Tongues as if they would
Have stopped their flight, as they from Babel fled, Linguists.

By catching them in nets; so them to hold,
For themselves only, till themselves were dead:
These rich in Tongues, were not still so in gold;
For, their Tongues tasted often too much of Many golden Lingu^sts have leaden
invention.
Lead:
So, these wel-tong'd men tied were by the Tongs,
Often to be authors of their proper wrongs.
72
As some sought Tongs, so others Penne-men, or fair writers.
Hands did seek;
Italian, Roman, Spanish, French, and Duch,
With Letter Freeze among, and Letter Creek;
Those with their hands, did Fortune seldom touch;
For, they would needs teach those hands in a week,
So, sold for little, that they sold for much:
For it is much to give a Crown for naught)
But only to mar hands, too evil taught. It is a badde bargain to give
aught for naught.

73
These pasted up, in each place where they came,
(And no place was there where they did not come)
Bills (and those Hands they held were often but lame)
That they would give their Hands, for some small sum;
To those that would but trust the^ for the same
So, in a week, they coson'd all and They shame the (...) utterly.
some:
For, in a week, and some odd hours beside,
They promised that which they could not abide.
74
Their occupation brought thus to disgrace,
They, though they would with all For their recompense.
aforehand be,
Yet ran behind hand still, from place to place:
So, with their Hands they caught but A, B, C:
Which by interpretation of the place,
Is, a all b base c Cheaters are, that so do flee:
I wish those Hand-men their hands well had used,
For, I know Penmen that are so abused.
75
But some of Fortunes followers were her foes,
And Deaths true Fencers.
friends (who for him swords vnsheath
But showed it not, lest she should the^ dispose
Where, if they would, they could not meet with In strait prison.
death:
These followed her for nothing but for blows,
For they, with fencing, kept themselves in breath:
And, for they could but breath by that their trade,
They still were willing Fortune to invade.
76
Some followed her by Stage plaiers.
acting all men's parts,
These on a Stage she raised (in scorn) to fall:
And made them Mirrors, by their acting Arts,
Wherein men saw their Showing the vices of the time.
faults, though never so small:
Yet some she guerdond not, to their W.S.R.B.
deserts;
But, othersome, were but ill-Action all:
Who while they acted ill, ill staid behind,
(By custom of their manners) in their mind.
78
If manners make men's fortunes good, or bad,
According to those manners, bad, or good, Sui cuique m^r^s fingunt fortunam.

Then men, ill-manner'd, still are ill bestad;
Because, by Fortune, they are still withstood:
Ah, were it so, I muse how those men had
Among them some that swamme in Foizons flood;
Whose manners were but apish at the best;
But Fortune made their fortunes but a Jest.
79
There were knights-arrant, that in Fortunes spite,
(Because they could not king it as they would)
Did play the Kings, at least proud kings in sight,
And often were prowder then a Caesar should:
Yet Nature made them men by Fortunes When men have gotten wealth they are said
to be made.
might,
And Fortune made them Natures Zanees bold:
So those, in nature, Fortune flowted so,
That though she made them Kings, she kept them low.
80
But some there were (too many such, there are)
That followed Fortune in more abject kind;
These matches made between the Hou^d and Hare, Panders.

I would say whore; for, men hunt such to find:
These faithless beastly Brokers of cracked ware
Had too too often Fortune in the wind;
Who followed so the sent, They live like flesh flies upon the sorts of men.
that often they did
Find her where she, from those they spoiled, lay hid.
81
Land-badgers Drouers.
Some others followed her by badging Land,
Or beastly grazing (yet made men thereby)
For, they that did those myst'ries understand
Caught hold of Fortune in obscurity;
To whom she (strumpet-like) lay at command,
Who, lusting for her, gript her greedily:
Till they grew great by her: O monstrous birth,
Where She the He makes great with Grass and Earth!
82
Lawyers.
The Lawyers went with these, with hands as full
Of Deeds, and Manuscripts as they could hold*
But, Fortune from the same those Scripts did pull,
Gold sets an edge on an Orators tongue, and makes it cut like a razor.
And in exchange filled either fist with Gold:
For, whiles they had but Papers their were dull;
But being wel-mettl'd they were blithe and bold:
For, Gold's a sovereign Restoratiue,
And makes men more then dead, much more then live.
83
Aurum potabile is of that power
(If store thereof be powrde in out of hand
Like Jupiters prevailing Gold is the God of this world that ^uines and winds
the same as it lists.
Golden Shower)
That it will make Death lie at Life's command:
It is the Aqua-vitae which does cure
All sore Consumptions that our weal withstand:
Nay it is the Aqua fortis which will eat
Through leaden Breasts, Cares, fretting, thence to fret.
84
O give me Gold, and I will do, what not?
And let but store of Angels wait on me,
I Will make my self a God, with Hire Mercenary Swizers and Soldiers to
maintain all unjust quarrels even with Monarchs.
Thunder-shot;
Nay, I will make the Earthly Gods to flee
To Hean'n, or Hell, where they shall be forgot,
Since there no God but I will minded be:
But God, thou know, the Age is iron the while
That hammer can a God of thing so vile!
85
O! gold, the god which now the world does serve,
(This Midas-world that would touch naught but gold
Gilding her body while her soul does sterue)
How glorious art thou (held fast) to So says the rich miser. Riches gather
many friends, but the poor is separate from his neighbor. Prou. 19.4.
behold?
Thou make a Beast a Man, and Man to swerue
More then a Beast; yet thou do all uphold:
For, whom thou take into thy Patronage,
It matters not what is his Title Page.
86
Men value men according to thy weight; The world in his unjust Balance
weighs men accordidg to their Wealth and not by any other worthiness.

For, be their value never so valorous
Its held but base and made, by nature, slight;
Nor can it be nor good, nor glorious,
Without thy virtue do it ouer-freight;
And so remain they without Grace, or Use:
But, if thou list to lade a leaden Ass,
(While thou rid'st on him) he ore gods does pass.
87
Come Gold: the^ come (dear Gold) and ride on me,
I Will be thine No wisema^ comparable to the golden Ass.
Ass, or Pack-horse, which thou will;
Although thou heavy art, I Will carry thee;
Albe't thou art much heavier through thy guilt:
Lade me (good Gold) till my back broken be:
Since, thou again can make me, being spilt:
For all men now may use me like a Sot,
(That bears abuse) because I bear thee not.
88
Then foot it not whiles Copper rides on me,
Base Copper dogs, being made themselves to bear
But it is mere madness not to b^^re with insensible creatures: and blessed
are those that in this in^^^ious world, possess their Soule^ in patience.
But logs and faggots (for a staruing fee)
And in a Chimneis end away to wear:
Then up (fair Gold) I Will so mount under thee,
As if no ground should hold me, when I rear:
For, by how much the more thou make me bend,
So much the more thou make me to ascend.
89
Ride on me Gold, and I will ride on those
(If so I lust) of men, or women-kinde,
That shall be great, or fair, or friends, or foes,
Until I ridden have them out of wind:
Better is a little with the fear of God, then great treasure, (...) trouble
(...) 15 16.
But Heaven my Heart still otherwise dispose,
For, riding so, I blister should my mind:
Which still would run with matter of annoy,
And Soul, and Body so, perhaps, destroy.
90
Then, gold, since thou woldst The touchstone tries gold and gold tries men.
Be^rer is a dry morsel with peace then an house full of sacrifices with
strife. Prou. 17.1.
te^pt me to this spoil
Farewell (dear Gold) I Will not buy thee so dear;
I am content, without thy help, to toil
For so much Silver as will arm me here
Against wounding Wants, which there do keep a coile,
Where nothing is but care, and grief, and fear;
My Back and Belly kept, in rest I Will sleep,
(Through coniuring Books) from gold, that devils keep.
91
The Fox will eat no Grapes: well, be it so; That that is to be desired of a
man, is his goodness, P^. 19 22. which seldom is found among much goods.

I Will eat no Grapes that set my teeth on edge,
To eat such bittes as bane where often they go,
And Heart and Mind do all alike besiege:
Who gathers golden fruits in Hell that gro,
Do for the same often put their Souls to pledge:
But in that state that stands with little cost,
Is found the golden life that Adam lost.
92
Touching this World (to my blame be it sed)
I think of nothing, but what nothing brings;
And yet no thing more musing then my head;
And yet my Muse my head with nothing mings:
Head, and Muse*
Both feed on Praise.
Air, wherewith is nothing fed
But dead, or dull, or else mere witless things:
For sure that wit never came near wisdoms schools
That weenes mere Air fats any thing but fools.
93
I would, and would not, have, what I have not:
I would not have, that had, the Heart inflates:
Yet would I have my Luck light on that Lot
That As far from want as from too much.
mends the drouping Mind, and Bodies states:
In too much, Nature often is ouershot;
And often too little, Art disanimates:
Then, in this life, that seek I, for my part,
That Nature keeps in life, and quickens Art.
94
To bury Living thoughts among the dead,
(Dead earthly things) is, ere Death comes, to die:
For, dead they are that lie in Minds always conversant with these me^talls
are dull, and make the bodies dead to all goodness wherein they are.
Gold, or Lead;
As they are buried that in Earth still lie:
The thoughts are most relieved when they are fed
With Angels Divinity.
food, or sweet Philosophy:
But, some seem on this Manna still to live,
Whom Quails and Woodcoks most of al relieve.
95
Well, let these some out-liue as many years,
As they have hairs, they do but living die:
If so; their Souls must needs be full of fears,
Whose Hopes in this dead life alone do lie:
For, they wear ever double as Time wears;
In Soul and Body wear they double- Die eternally in both
die:
O then, how painful is that pleasant life,
Wherein all joy, with such annoy, is rife.
96
Bear with me Readers (that's the recompense
I ask for telling you this merry Tale)
For running out of my Circumference,
I Will come in strait, before a merry Gale:
But, yet a word or two, ere I go hence,
And then have with you over Hill and Dale:
Nothing shall let me to relate the rest,
For, commonly behind remains the best.
97
This world (me seems) is like, I wot not what:
That's hard; for, that is no comparison: The world is like nothing: since by
sin^^ (...) was m^rre^ after it (...) made: and (...) is nothing, because^ he
(...) that made a^l things made it not.

Why that's the cause I it compare to that;
For, who is he like to, that is like to none?
It Is not like God; for, it is too full of hate:
Nor like the Diu'l, for he fears God alone:
It is not like to Heaven, Earth, nor Hell,
Nor aught therein, for, they in compass dwell!
98
Then what is it like? if like to any thing,
Its like itself; and so it is indeed:
Or, if you will, like to the oldest Ling, Simile.

That limes their fingers that on it do feed:
So that, all things they touch, to them do Every ^^nger as good as ^ lime
twi^ge.
cling, Proverb

And let them so, from doing purest deed:
If so it be, how mad are men the while
To cleave to that which do them so defile?
99
Now, this most noghtie thing, or thing of noght,
I cannot skill of; though but bad I am;
Therefore by me it least of all is sought,
Though often I seek for pleasure in the same;
Which yet (I hope) shall not be ouer-bought,
For, I will give but good will for my Harmless recreation.
game:
And if good will will me no pleasure bring
I Will buy therewith (I hope) a better thing.
100
Now from my self, I eft to Fortune fly,
(And yet I fly from Her, and She from me)
Who came thus followd with this Company,
That Jupiter did envy it to see:
There did she muster them, in policy,
That Jove of all might well informed be:
For, when an heap confused are called by Poll,
The many parts do make the number It makes the number appea^e as it is.
whole.
101
Philosophers and Poets furthest off Fortune.
Among whom Philosophers and Poets came,
(Last of the Crowde) and could not well appear;
To who^ blind Fortune gave noght else but fame,
Whereof they fed; but looked lean with their cheer:
So, they in Heaven deifi'd this Dame,
Since they (poor souls) could not come at her here:
And ever since a Goddess called she is,
Poets thank her for That, She you for This.
102
Who, though they be (perhaps) but passing poor,
Yet can they de^fie whom ere they will;
Then Demy-gods should cherish them therefore,
That they may make the^ whole They affect misery much more then Divinity.
gods by their skill:
Twixt whom there should be interchange of store,
And make of Wit and Wealth a mixture still,
That may each others woeful wants supply;
For, men by one another live, or die.
103
Vain fools, what do ye mean to give her heaven,
That gives you nothing but an earthly hell?
That's only Flesh-pineing Praise
air, which she to you has given,
To make ye pine, whilst ye on earth do dwell:
Never speak of Wit, for ye are Wit-bereau'n
To lie for naught, and make Men, like the devil great and naught.
Naught so excel:
For, now, who for him If thou be wise, thou shall be wi^e for thy self. Prou.
9.12.
self's not wise alone,
Is vainly wise, though wise as Solomon.
104
By this time Death came with his Emperor,
Who followed Death, far off, which Jove did see;
To whom Death said, Lo upright Jupiter,
This Kesar (though a Caesar) follows me:
He does indeed (said Jove) though somewhat far
(But kept in off, to show indiffrencie)
For, though the Judge do judge aright (sometime)
Before both Tales be heard) it is a crime.
105
How say (quoth he) Lieutenant* did thou come
With Death to us of thy mere own accord?
Whereat the Emprour was stricken dumb,
For, he feared The more we love the world the more we fear death.
death, as slaves do fear their Lord:
Yet, with desire of glory overcome,
At last he spoke, yet spoke he but a word,
Which was, save I the shortest word of words,
For, No a letter more then I affords.
106
Which he with submisse voice (scarce audible)
Vtterd, as one that would not well be heard;
But Jupiter (although most sensible)
Took on him not to hear, and pressed him hard
To speak (through fear) not so insensible;
For, my vice ^^are is a stranger to great hearts.
Jove's (quoth he) are never afeard:
Therefore, on thy allegiance unto me,
I charge thee speak, as thou from death were free.
107
Then, with a princely death-out-daring No courage (...) the d^sperate Cowards.
look
He said, Dread Jove, I had bin worse then mad,
Since your Lieutenancie to me you took,
If I so great a grace neglected had;
Which so I had, if so I had forsook
Without your notice, that which made me glad:
Nor would I have with Death come now to you,
But that he threatened me to bring me low.
108
Wherewith the Judge (just Jove) did sentence give Jupiters Sentence.

On Fortunes side; which made Death rage so sore,
That at the Emprour he amain did drive,
Whilst Jove looked on, and Fortune fled therefore:
Short tale to make, he did him life deprive,
And ever since Death rages more and more:
That now all men false Fortune do prefer,
Before just Death; nay iuster Jupiter.
109
And, thus with Death (that All in fine does end)
We end our Tale, and, if a lie it be,
Yet naked Truth dares such a lie Scripture Parables contain truth in their
morality, though not in the Letter.
defend;
Because such lies do lie in verity:
But though loud lies do lie, they will not bend
So low as most profound Morality:
Then, be it lie, or be it what it will,
It lies too high, and low for Death to kill.
Been cogitata, si excidunt, non occidunt.
Mimi Publiani.
Finis.
The Triumph of DEATH: OR, The Picture of the Plague: According to the Life, as
it was in Anno Domini. 1603.
SO, so, just Heavens, so, and none otherwise,
Deal you with those that your forbearaunce wrong
Dumb Sin (not to be named) against us cries
Yea, cries against us with a tempting tongue.
And, it is heard; for, Patience often prouokt
Conuerts to Furies all-consuming flame;
And, fowlest sin (though never so cleanly cloakt)
Breaks out to public plagues, and open shame!
Never did the Heavens bright Eye such sins behold
As our long Peace and Plenty have begot;
Nor ere did Earths declining proppes uphold
An heavier plague, then this outrageous Rot!
Witness our Cities, Towns, and Villages,
Which Therefore ha^h the curse devoured the Land, and the inhab^tantes thereof
are desolate. Isai. 24 6.
Desolation, day and night, inuades
With Coffins (Cannon-like) on Carriages,
With trenches ram'd with Carkases, with Spades!
A shiu'ring cold (I sensibly do feel)
Glides through my veins, and shakes my heart and hand,
When they do prove their virtue, to reveal
This plague of plagues, that ouerlades this Land!
Horror stands gaping to devour my Sense
When it but offers but to Who among you shall harken to this, and take heed
and hea^e for afterward. Isai. 42.23.
mention it;
And Will abandoned by Intelligence
Is drowned in Doubt, without her Pilot Wit!
But, thou, O thou great giver of all grace,
Inspire my Wit, so to direct my Will,
That notwithstanding eithers wretched case,
They may paint out thy Plagues with grace, with skill,
That so these Lines may reach to future Now go and write it before them in a
Table, and note it in a book, that it may be for the last day for ever and
ever. Isai. 30.8.
times,
To strike a terror through the heart of Flesh;
And keep It under that by Nature climbes,
For, Plagues do Sin suppress when they are fresh.
And fresh they be, when they are so expressed,
As though they were in being seen of Sense;
Which divine Poesy performs best,
For, all our speaking Pictures come from thence!
The object of I am the man that has seen affliction in the rod of his
ind^gnatio^. Lament 3.1.
mine outward Sense affords
But too much Matter for my Muse to form;
Her want (though she had words at will) is words,
To Express this Plagues unutterable * Storm!
Fancy, thou needst not forge false Images
To furnish Wit to express a truth so true;
Pictures of Death stop up all Passages,
That Sense must needs those obuious objects view.
If Wit had power to express what Sense does see,
It would astonish Sense that Hear, ye deaf, and ye blind* regard that ye
may see. Isa. 42* 18
hears the same;
For, never came there like Mortality,
Since Death from Adam to his Children came!
Scarce three times had the Moon replenished
Her empty Horns with light; but th'empty Grave
(Most ravenous) devoured so the Dead,
As scarce the dead might Christian burial have!
The Almighty's hand that long had, to his pain,
Offered to let his Plagues fall, by degrees,
And with the offer pulled it back again,
Now breaks his Vial, and a Plague out-flees,
That glutts the Air with Vapors venomous,
That puttrifie, infect, and flesh confound,
Thou have for sake^ me, says the Lord, and gone backward: therefore will I
stretch out mine hand against thee, and destroy thee: for I am weary with
repenting. Ierem. 15.6.
And makes the Earthes breath most contagious,
That in the Earth and Air but Death is found!
A deadly Murraine, with resist less force,
Runs through the Land and leuells All with it!
The Coast it scoured, in vncleanlie Course,
And thousands fled before it to the Fear, and the pit, and the snare are upon
thee, O inhabitant of the earth. Isai. 24.17.
Pit!
For, ere the breath of this Contagion,
Could fully touch the flesh of Man, or Beast,
They on the sudden sink, and strait are gone,
So, instantly, by thousands, are decreast!
No Physic could be found, to be a mean,
But to al^aie their Pain, delaie their Death;
In this Physicians Harvest, Physicians.
They could gleane
But corrupt Air and Danger by that Breath.
All Arts and Sciences were at a stand,
And All that lived by them, by them did die;
For death did hold their heads, and staid their hand,
Since they no where could use their Faculty.
The nursing Universities.
Mothers of the Sciences
Withdrew their Foster-milke while wit did fast;
For, both our forlorn Universities
Forsaken were and Colleges made fast*
The Magistrates did sly, or if they staid,
They staid to pray, for if they did command,
Hardly, or never should they be obaid;
For, Death dares all Authority withstand.
And, where is no Magistrate, no Order is;
Where Order wants, by order does ensue
Confusion strait, and in the neck of this
Must silent Desolation all subdue!
For fear whereof, both king, and kingdom shakes,
Since Desolation threatens them so sore;
All hope of earthly help the Land forsakes,
And Heaven powers Then said I, Lord, how long? and he answered, until the
Cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the Land
be utterly desolate. Isai. 6 11
plags upon it more and more!
Now, Death refreshed with a little rest
(As if inspired with the Spirit of Life)
With fury flies (like Air) through man and beast,
And makes eftsoons the murraine much more rife!
London now And the Cities that are inhabited shall be left void, the land shall
be desolate, and ye shall know that I am the Lord Ezech. 12.20.
smokes with vapors that arise
From his foul Sweat, himself he so bestirres;
Cast out your Dead, the Carcasse-carrier cries,
Which he, by heaps, in grou^dlesse graves interres!
Now scowres he Streets, on either side, as clean
As smoking showrs of rain the Streets do scowre;
Now, in his Murdring, he observes no mean,
But tagge and ragge he strikes, and strikes sure.
He lays it on the skins of Young and Old,
The mortal marks whereof therein appear:
Here, swells a Botch, as hie as hide can hold,
And, Spots (his surer Signs) do muster there!
The South wind blowing from his swelling cheeks,
Soultry hot Gales, did make Death rage the more,
That on all Flesh to wreake his Wrath he seeks,
Which flies, like Zephon. 2.2
chafe in wind, his breath before!
He raises Mountains of dead carkases,
As if on them he would to Heaven ascend,
T'asswage his rage on divine Essences,
When he of Men, on Earth, had made an end.
Nothing but Death alone, could Death suffize,
Who made each Even the mouse shall be consumed together, says the Lord, Isa.
66.17.
Mouse to carry in her Coat
His heavy vengeance to whole Families,
Whilst with blunt Botches he cuts others throat!
And, if such Vermin were thus all imploide,
He would constrain domestike Tame Pigeons, Cocks, Hens, Capons, etc.
fowls to bring
Destruction to their haunts; So, men destroid
As swiftly as they could bestirre their wing!
So, Death might well be said to fly the field,
And in the House foil with resistlesse force,
When he abroad all kind of Creatures killed
That he found living in his lifelesse Course!
Now like to Bees, in Summers heat, from Hiues,
Out Arise and depart, for this is not your rest, because it is polluted, it
shall destroy you even with a sore destruction. Michah 2.10.
fly the Citizens, some here, some there;
Some all alone, and others with their wives:
With wives and children some fly, All for fear!
Here stands a Watch with guard of Partezans
To stop their Passages, or too, or fro;
As if they were nor Men, nor Christians,
But Fiends, or Monsters, murdring as they go!
Like as an Heart, death-wounded, held at Bay
Does fly, if so be can, from Hunters chase,
That so he may recover (if he may)
Or else to die in some more easy place.
So, might ye see (dear Heart) some lusty Lad
Struck with the Plague, to hie him to the field,
Where in some Brake, or And he that flies from the noise of the fear shall
fall into the pit, etc. Isa. 24.18
Ditch (of either glad)
With pleasure, in great pain^, the ghost does yield!
Each Village, free, now stands upon her guard;
None must have harbor in them but their own:
And as for life and death all watch, and ward,
And fly for life (as Death) the man unknown!
For, now men are become so monsterous
And mighty in their power, that with their breath
They leave no ils, save goods, from house to house,
But blow away each other from the Earth!
The sickest Sucklings Ye shall conceive chafe, and bring forth stubble, the
fire of your breath shall devour you. Isai. 33.11.
breath was of that force
That it the strongest Giant overthrew;
And made his healthie corpse a carrion Corse,
If it (perhaps) but came within his view!
Alarm, alarm, cries Death, down, down with All;
I have, and give Commission All to kill:
Let not one stand to piss against a wall,
Since they are all so good, in works so ill.
Vnioynt the body of their Commonweal,
Hew it in pieces, bring it all to naught;
With Rigors boistrous hand all Bands canceale,
Wherein the heavens stand bound to Earth in aught.
Wound me the scalpe of humane Policy,
Since it would stand without the help of heaven
On rotten proppes of all impiety;
Away with it, let it be life-bereau'n.
With plagues, strike through Extortions loathed loins,
And riuet in them glowing pestilence:
Give, give Injustice many mortal foynes,
And with a plague, send, send the same from hence.
Wind me a Botch (huge Botch) about the Neck
Of damned disguised, man-pleasing Sanctity:
And Simony with self same Choler deck,
Plague these two Plagues with all extremity.
For, these are Pearls that quite put out the eyes
Of Piety in Christian Commonwealths;
These, these are they, from who^ all plagues do rise,
The^ plagues on plagues, by right, must reaue their healths.
Dash Veng'a^ce vial on the cursed brow
Of Ask now among the Heathen, who has heard such things? the virgin of
Israel has done very filthily Ierem. 18 13.
Zodomy, that euer-crying sin;
And that it be no more whole A mountain in Thes^al^e.
Pelions throw
Of plagues upon it both without, and in!
Through black Auernus a lake in Italy, where they say this sin is frequent.
Auernus (hels mouth) send the same
Into the deepest pit of lowest hell;
Let never more the nature, nor the name
Be known within the Zones, where me^ may dwell,
Oppress Oppression, this Lands burning-feauer,
With burning sores of feauers-pestilent;
And now or never, quell it now and ever,
For, it does quell the Poor and Innocent
Bring down damned Pride with a pure pestilence
Derived from all plagues that are vnpure,
Extracted to the extremest quintessence,
For Pride all Sins, Pride, the cause of Adams fall, and so of all sin
and plagues for sin, procures.
In Atheismes breast (instead of her cursed heart)
Set an huge Botch, or worse plague, m^re co^pact;
That it may never convert, or pervert,
Nor have power to persuade, much less coact.
Beblaine the bosom of each Misteris,
That bares her They are waxen fat, and shining, they do ouerpasse the deeds
of the wicked, etc. Iere 5.2^
Breasts (lusts signs) ghests to allure;
With a plague kiss her, (that plagues with a kiss)
And make her (with a murraine) more demure.
Our puling puppets, coy, and hard to please,
My too strait-laced all-begarded Girls
(The skumme of Niceness) London Mistresses)
Their skins imbroder with plagues orient Pearls.
For these, for Strawberies, Cherries, etc. when they first come in.
First Fruits, have Shillings, Crowns, or Pounds.
Fifteenes to spare
But to a Beggar say, We have not for ye:
Then do away this too-fine wastefull Ware
To second death; for they do most abhor me.
Then scowre the Brothel-houses, make them pure,
That flow with filth that wholsomst flesh infects;
Then will I turn mine hand upon thee, and burn out thy dross, till it be
pure, and take away thy Tin. Isai 1.25.
Fire out the Pox from thence with plages vnpure;
For they do cause but most vnpure effects.
Plague carnal Colleges, wherein are taught
Lusts beastly lessons, which no beast will brook,
Where Aratine is read, and nearely sought;
And so Lusts Precepts practiced by the Book.
Who knows not Aratine, let him not ask
What thing it is; let it suffice he was:
But what? no Mouth can tell without a Mask;
For Shame it self, will say, O let that pass!
He was a Monster, Tush, O nothing less:
For, Nature monsters makes (how ere unright)
But Nature never made such a Fiend as this,
Who, like a Fiend, was made in Natures spite!
Therefore, away with all that like his Rules,
Which Nature does dislike as she does Hell:
Break up those free (yet dear and damned) Schools,
That teach but against kind Nature to rebel.
Rogh-cast the skin of smooth-faced glozing Guile
With burning blisters to consume the same,
That swears to sell cracked wares, yet lies the while,
And of gain, by And every one will deceive his fri^d and will not speak the
truth: for they have taught their tongues to speak lies, and take great pains
to do wickedly. Ierem. 9 5.
deceiving, makes her game.
Who, but to utter, but a thing of naught,
Vtters all oaths, more precious then her Soul:
And thinks them well bestowd, so it be bought
So, vtters wares with oaths, by falsehood foul.
This foul offense to Church and Commonwealth,
Sweep clean away with Wormwood of annoy:
For, it consists but by lawful ^s a Cage is full of Birds, so are their
houses full of deceit, thereby they are become great and waxen ^ich. Ierem.
5.27.
stealth;
Then, let the truest Plagues it quite destroy.
Of Tauerns, reaking still with For all their Tables are full of filthy
vomitings: no place is clean. Isai. 28.8.
vomitings,
Draw, with the Owners, all the Drawers out;
Let none draw Air, that draw on Surffettings,
But Excess, and her Slaves, botch all about.
Since such by drawing out, and drawing on
Do live; let such be drawn out on a Bear:
For, they with wine have many men undone,
And famisht them, in fine, through belly-cheare.
Browne-paper Merchants (that do ven^ such trash
To heedlesse heirs, to more wealth borne then wit,
That against such Paper-rocks their houses dash,
While such sly Merchants make much use of it)
Use them as they do use such heirs to use,
That is, to plague them without all remorce:
These with their Brokers, plague; for they abuse
God, King, and Law, by Laws abused force.
Then, petti-botching-Brokers, all bebotch
That in a month catch eighteen pence in pound;
Six with a Their Bill of Sale.
Bill, and twelve for use they catch,
So, use they all they catch, to make unsound.
That they may catch them, and still patches make,
Which in the pound do yield the^ eighteen pence;
Forced, like sheep trespassing, the Pownd to take,
Leaving their And they lie down upon cloths laid to pledge by every Altar,
and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God. Amos 2.8.
Fleece, at last, for recompense.
Hang in their hang-mans wardrop plagues to air
That all may fly, or die that with it mell;
And so, when none will to their rags repair,
They must forsake their lives, or labor well.
Briefly, kill cursed Sin in general,
And let Flesh Be no more to harbor it;
Away with filthy Flesh, away with all
Wherein still-breeding Sin on brood does sit.
This was Deaths charge, and this charge did he give,
Which was performed (forthwith) accordingly;
For now the dead had wasted so the live,
(Or wearied so) that some unburied lie:
For, All observed the Pestilence was such
As laughed to scorn the help of Phisickes art;
So that to death All yielded with a touch,
And sought no help, but help with ease to And death shall be desired rather
the^ life of all the residue that r^ma^n of this wicked family. Iere 8 3.
part.
An hell of heat does scorch their seething veins,
The blood does boil, and all the Body burns,
Which raging Heat ascending to the Brains
The powers of Reason there quite ouerturnes!
Then, it is no sin to say a Plague it is
From whence immortal miseries do flow;
That makes men reason with their rest to miss,
And Souls and Bodies do endanger so.
Here cry the parents fot their Childrens death;
There howl the children for their parents loss;
And often die as they are drawing breath
To cry for their but now inflicted cross.
Here goes an husband heavily to seek
A Grave for his dead wife (now hard to have)
A wife there meets him that had done the like,
All which (perhaps) are buried in one Grave.
The last suruiuor of a Family,
Which yesterday (perhaps) were all in health,
Now dies to bear his fellows company,
And for a Grave for all, gives all their wealth.
There wends the Thy Sons have fainted, and ^e at head of all the streets, as
a wild Bull in a net, and are full of the wrath of the Lord, and rebuke of thy
God. Isa, 51.20.
fainting Son with his dead Sire
On his sole shoulders borne, him to interre;
Here goes a father with the like desire,
And to the Grave alone, his Son does bear.
The needy, greedy of a wealthy Pray,
Run into houses cleans'd of Families,
From whence they bring, with goods, their bane away,
So end in wealth their lives and miseries.
No Cat, Dog, Rat, Hog, Mouse, or Vermin vile,
But vsher'd Death, where ere themselves did go;
For, they the purest Air did so defile,
That whosoever breathed it, did his breath forgo.
At London (sincke of Sin) as at the Fount,
This all-confounding Pestilence began.
According to that Plagues most woeful wont,
From whence it (flowing) all the realm o'reranne.
Which to prevent, at first, they pestered
Pest-houses with their murraine-tainted Sick:
But, though from them, and thence the healthie fled,
They, ere suspected, mortified the Quick.
Those so infected, being ignorant
That so they are, converse with whom soere,
Whose open Shops and Houses all do haunt,
And find most danger, where they least do fear.
And so not knowing sicke-folke from the sound
(For, such ill Aire's not subject to the sense)
They One with I will d^sh them one against another even the ^athers and the
sons together, says the lord, I will not spare I will not pity, not have
compassion upon them, but destroy them. ^erem. 13.14.
Other do themselves confound;
And so confound all with a pestilence.
Out flies one from the Plague, and bears with him
An heavy Purse, and Plague more ponderous;
Which in the hie-way parts life from limb,
So plagues the next of his coin covetous.
In this ditch lies one breathing out his last,
Making the same his Grave before his death!
On that Bancke lies another, breathing fast,
And passers by he baneth with his breath.
Now runs the therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moa^h, and to the house
of Judah as a rottennes, Hosea 5.12.
Rot along each bancke and ditch,
And, with a murraine strikes Swine, Sheep, and all
(Or man, or beast) that chance the same to touch,
So, all in fields, as in the Cities fall.
The London Lanes (themseluet thereby to save)
Did vomit out their undigested dead,
Who by cart loads, are carried to the Grave,
For, all those Lanes with folk were ouerfed.
There might ye see Death (as with toil oppressed
Panting for breath, all in a mortal sweat)
Upon each bulk or bench, himself to rest,
(At point to faint) his Harvest was so great!
The Bells had talked so much, as now they had
Tired all their tongs, and could not speak a word;
And Grief so toild herself with being sad,
That now at Deaths faint threats, she would but bourd.
Yea, Death was so familiar (ah) become
With now resolved London Families,
That wheresoere he came, he was welcome,
And entertained with joys and iolities.
Goods were neglected, as things good for naught;
If good for aught, good but to breed more ill:
The Sick despised them: if the Sound the^ sought,
They sought their death which cleaued to the^ still!
So Sick, and Sound, at last Neither their silver nor their gold shall be
able to deliver them in the day of the lords wrath, etc Zepha. 1.18.
neglected them,
As if the Sound and Sick were near their last;
And all, almost, so fared through the Realm
As if their Souls the Judgment day were past.
This World was quite forgot; the World to come
Was still in mind; which for it was Her filthiness is in her ski^^s: she
remembered not her last end, therefore she came down wonder^ully: she had no
co^forter. etc. Lament. 1.9.
forgot,
Brought on our World this little day of Dome,
That choakt the Grave with this contageous Rot!
No place was free for Freemen; ne for those
That were in Prisons, wanting Liberty;
Yet Prisoners freest were from Plagues and Woes
That visit Freemen, but too lib'rally.
For, al their food came from the helthy house,
Which then would give Gods plags from thence to keep;
The rest, shut up, could not like bounty use,
So, woeful Prisoners had least cause to weep.
The king himself (O wretched Times the while!)
From place to place, to save himself did fly,
Which from himself himself did seek t'exile,
Who (as amazed) not safe, knew where to lie.
Its hard with Subjects when the Sovereign
Has no place free from plagues his head to hide;
And hardly can we say the King does reign,
That no where, for just fear, can well abide.
For, no where comes He but Death follows him
Hard at the Heels, and reaches at his head;
So sincks all The mir^h of tab^ets cease: the noi^e of them that
rei^^ceendeth: the joy of the harp cease. Isa^ 24.8.
Sports that would like triumphs swim,
For, what life have we, when we all are dead;
Dead in our Spirits, to see our Neighbors die;
To see our King so shift his life to save;
And with his Council all Conclusions try
To keep themselves from the insatiate Grave.
For, hardly could one man another meet,
That in his bosom brought not odious Death;
It was confusion but a friend to greet,
For, like a Fiend, he baned with his breath.
The wildest wastes, and places most remote
From Man's repair, are now the most secure;
Happy is he that there does find a Cote
To shroud his Head from this Plagues smoking shower
A Beggars home (though dwelling in a Ditch
If far from London it were situate)
He might rent out, if pleased him, to the Rich,
That now as Hell their London homes do hate.
Now, had the Sun the Libra September.
Balance entered,
To give his heat by weight, or in a mean,
When yet this Plague more heat recovered,
And scowr'd the towns, that erst were cle^sed clean.
Now, sad Despair (clad in a sable weed)
Did All attend, and All resolved to die;
For, Heat and cold, they thought, the Plague would feed
Which, like a A Beast never but feeding, and when he has eaten as much as his
(...) hold, go, to a for^ed t^ee, and there strains out his fond undigested
betweane the twist of the ^^ee, and so ag^ine presently falls to se^ue, and
being full, again to the tree, and so eftsoons to feed.
Ierffe, still sin;d in gluttony.
The heavenly Coape was now ore-canopide,
(Near each ones Zenith (as his sense supposed)
With ominous impressions, strangely died,
And like a Canopie at top it closed.
As if it had presaged the Judge was nie,
To sit in Judgment his last doom to give,
And caused his cloth of State t'adorne the Sky
That All his near approach might so perceive
Now fall the people unto public Fast,
And all assemble in the Church to pray;
Early, and late, their souls, there take repast,
As if preparing for the later day!
Where (fasting) meeting with the sound and sick,
The sick the sound do plage, while they do pray;
To haste before the Judge the dead and quick,
And pull each other so, in post, away.
Now Angels laugh to see how contrite hearts
Encounter Death, and scorn his Tyranny;
Their Judge does joy to see them play their parts,
That erst so lived as if they never should die.
Up go their hearts and hands, and down their knees,
While Death went up and down, to bring the^ down;
That up they might at once (not by degrees)
Unto the Highest, that does the humble Isai. 57.15.
crown^!
O how the thresholds of each double door
Of Heaven, and Hell, were worn with throngs of ghosts
Never since the Deluge, did they so before,
Nor ever since so pollisht the side-posts.
The Angels, good and bad, are now all toiled
With intertaining of these ceaselesse throngs;
With howling some (in heat and horror broild)
And othersome in bliss, with joyful Songs.
The Infernal Legions, in Battallions,
Seek to enlarge their kingdom, lest it should
Be cloid with Collonies of wicked ones;
For now it held, more then it well could hold!
The Angels, on the Cristall walls of Heaven,
Help thousands ore the Gates so glutted were;
To whom authority by Grace was given
(The prease was such) to help them over there.
The Cherubin eie-blinding Majesty
Upon his Throne (that ever blessed has bin)
Is compast with The world is divided into twelve parts, and ten parts of it
are gone already, and half of the tenth part: and there remains that which
is after the half of the tenth part. 2. Esd. 14.10, 11
unwonted Company,
And smiles to see how Angels help them in.
The heavenly streets do glitter (like the Sun)
With throngs of Sons but newly glorifide;
Who still to praise their Glorifier run
Along those streets, full fraught on either side.
Now was the earthly Mammon, which had held
Their Hearts to Earth, held most contagious;
A Beggar scornd to touch it (so defilde)
So, none but castawaies were covetous.
Now Avarice was turned Cherubin,
Who naught desired but the extremest Good;
For, now she saw she could no longer sin,
So, to the Time she sought to suite her mood,
The loathsome Leacher loathed his wonted sport;
For, now he thought all flesh was most corrupt:
The brainsicke brawler waxed all-amort;
For, such blood-suckers Bane did interrupt.
The Pastors now, steep all their words in Brine,
With woe, woe, woe, and naught is heard but woe;
Woe and alas, they say, the powers divine
Are bent Mankind, for sin to overthrow.
Repent, repent, (like Jonas) now they cry,
Ye men of England, O repent, repent;
To see if so ye may move Pitties Eye,
To look upon you, ere you quite be Nevertheless says the lord, at those d^ys
I will not make a full end of you. Ier 4.18.
spent.
And often whilst he breathes out these bitter Words,
He, drawing breath, draws in more bitter Bane:
For, now the Air, no Air but death affords;
And lights of Art (for help) were in the wane.
Nor people praying, nor the Pastor preaching,
Death spared ought; but murd'red one and other;
He was a walme, he could not stay impeaching,
For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the ve^e^^ re^^rence for the
i^dgement of (...) Isai. 34.8
Who smoakt with heat, and chokt, all with the smother.
The babe new born hempt strait in the head
With air that through his yet unclosed Mould
Did pierce his brains, and through the^ poison spread,
So left his life, that scarce had life in hold.
The Mother after hies, the Father posts
After the Mother; Thus, at Base they run
Unto the Gole of that great Lord of Hoasts
That for those keeps it, that runs for his Son.
The rest Death trippes, and takes them prisoners;
Such lose the Gole without gainesaying-strife;
But, all, and some, are as Deaths Messengers
To fetch both one and other out of life.
The Sire does fetch the Son, the Son the Sire,
Death, being impartial, makes his Subjects so:
The Priuate's not respected, but entire
(Death pointing out the way) away they go.
The ceremony at their Burialls
Is Ashes but to Ashes, Dust, to Dust;
Nay not so much; for, strait the Pit-man falls
(If he can stand) to hide them as he must.
A Mount thus made, upon his Spade he leanes
(Tired with toil) yet (tired) pressed to toil)
Till Death an heap, in his inu'd Harvest, gleanes,
That so he may by heaps, ^ft seed the Soil.
Not long he stays, but (ah) a mightier heap
Then erst he hid, is made strait to be hild;
The Land is scarce, but yet the Seed is cheap,
For, all is full, or rather ouerfill'd.
The Beer is laid away, and Cribbes they get
To fetch more dung for Fields and Garden-plots; Dung-cribs.

Worke-men are scarce, the labor is so great,
That (ah) the Seed, They shall die of deaths and diseases, they shall not be
lamented, neither shall they be buried, but they shall be as dung upon the
earth, etc. Ier. 16.4.
unburied, often rottes.
It rottes, and makes the Land thereby the worse,
For, being rotten, it ill vapors breeds,
Which many mortal miseries do nurse,
And the Plague (ouerfed) so, ouerfeedes.
Here lies an humane Carcass half consumed;
And there some fow or beast, in self same plight;
Dead with the Pestilence, for so it fumed,
That all it touched, it consumed quite.
Quite through the host of Natures Animalls
Death like a Conqueror in Triumph rides;
And ere he came too near, each Creature falls,
His dreadful presence then no flesh abides.
Now man to man (if ever) fiends became,
Fear of infection choakt Humanity;
The empty Maw (abandoned) got but blame
If it had once but sought for Charity.
The Poor must not about, to seek for food,
And no man sought them, that they might be fed;
Two Plagues, in one, invaded so their blood,
Both Famine, and Infection strikes them dead.
Some staid, in hope that Death would be appeased,
And kept the towns, which the^ and theirs had kept;
Till their next neighbors were (perhaps) diseased;
Or with Deaths fatal Fan away were swept.
The^, fain would fly but could not (though they would)
For, will they, nill they, they must keep their house,
Till through some chink, on the^ Death takes hold,
And used them, as he did their neighbors use.
If any at some Posterne could get out,
As good they staid, since sure they staid should be;
They have compassed her about, as the witchmen of the field, because she has
provoked me to wrath, says the Lord Iere. 4.17.
For, all the Countries watched were round about,
That from the town, none might a furlong flee.
Then, who from Death did fly, the fear of Death
Made Freemen keep the fliers in his Jaws;
Where (poisoned with his foul infectious breath)
Their flesh and bones he (never suffized) gnawes.
Now might ye see the Plague devour with speed
As it near famisht were, lest in a while
It might be so, and want whereon to feed;
So fed, the future hunger to beguile.
Now does it swell (hold hide) nay, If the botch break not, the Patient lives
not.
break, or die)
Till skin does crack, to make more It killes others with breaking.
room for meat
Yet meat, more meat it (never cloid) does cry,
And all about does run the same to get.
The Graves do often vomit out their dead,
They are so ouer-gorg'd, with great, and small;
Who hardly, with the earth are covered;
So, often discovered when the Earth did fall.
Those which in hie- They that feed delicately perish in the streets, they
that were brought up in scarlet, embrace the d^^g Lament. 4.5.
ways died (as many did)
Some worthless wretch, hired for no worthles fee,
Makes a rude hole, some distance him beside,
And rakes him in far off; so, there lies he.
But, if the Pit-man have not so much sense
To see, nor feel which way the wind does sit
To take the same, he hardly comes from thence,
But, for himself (perhaps) he makes the pit:
For, the contagion was so violent,
(The will of Heaven ordaining so the same)
As often struck stone-dead incontinent,
And Natures strongest forces strait orecame.
Here lies one upon his burning breast,
Upon the Earths cold breast, and dies outright;
Who wanting burial, does the Air infest,
That like a Basaliske he banes with sight!
There reeles another like one deadly druncke,
But newly struck (perhaps) then down he falls,
Who, in the And their corpse shall lie in the streets of the great city,
etc. Revel. 11.8.
Streets, or ways, no sooner suncke,
But forthwith dies, and so lies by the walls,
The Hay-cockes in the Meades were often oppressed
With plaguey Bodies, both alive, and dead;
Which being used, confounded Man and Beast,
And used they might be ere discovered.
For, some (like Ghosts) would walk out in the night,
The City glowing (furnace-like) with heat
Of this contagion, to seek if they might,
Fresh air, where often they died for want of meat.
The Traueler that spied (perhaps his Sire)
Another far off, coming toward him
Would fly, as from a flying flame of fire
That would, if it he met, waste life and limb.
So, towns feared towns, and men each other feared;
All were (at least) attainted with suspect,
And, sooth to say, so was their envy stirred,
Because of their pride the Cities shall be troubled the houses shall be
afraid, men shall fear. 2. Esd. 15.18.
That one would seek another to infect:
For, whether the disease to envy moved,
Or humane natures malice was the cause,
The Infected often all Conclusions proved
To plague him that from the^ himself withdrawes!
Here do they Gloves, and there they Garters fall;
Ruffs, Cuffs, and handkerchers, and such like things
They strew about, so to endanger all:
For, Envy now, most pestilently stings!
So, heaven and earth, against Man did conspire,
And Man against Man, to exrirpe his Race;
Who Bellows were t'augment Infections fire,
And blow abroad the same from place to place.
Sedition thus marched (with a pestilence)
From town to town, to make them desolate; Destruction upon destruction is
cried, for the whole Land is wasted etc. Iere. 4.20.

The Browne-Bill was too short to keep it thence,
For, further off it raught the Bill-mans pate.
Nor walls could keep it out; for, it is said
(And truly too) that Hunger breaks stone-walls:
The plague of Hunger with the Plague arrai'd
It self, to make way, where ere Succor calls.
For, hungry Armies fight as Fiends they were:
No humane power can well their force withstand:
They laugh to Job 41.20.
scorn the shaking of the Spear:
And against the gods themselves, themselves dare band
Some ran as mad (or with wine ouer-shot)
From house to house, when botches on them ran;
Who, though they menaced were with Sword, and Shot,
Yet forward ran, and fear nor God nor man!
As when a Ship, at Sea, is set on fire, Simil.

And (all on flame's) winde-driuen on a Fleet,
The Fleet does fly, since that Ship does desire
(Maugre all force opposed) with it to meet:
So flies the Bill-man, and the Muskettire
From the approaching desperate plaguey wight, Plagues are sent unto you^ and
who can drive them away. 2. Esd. 16.4.

As from a flying flame of quenchlesse fire;
For, who has any life, with Death to fight?
At all, cries Death, then down by heaps they fall:
He draws in By, and Maine, amain he draws
Huge heaps together, and still cries, At all:
His hand is in, and none his hand withdrawes.
For, Simil.
look how Leaves in Autumn from the tree
With wind do fall, whose heaps fill holes in ground;
So might ye (with the Plagues breath) people see,
Fall by great heaps, and fill up holes profound.
No holy Turffe was left to hide the head
Of holiest men; but, most vnhall'wed grounds
(Ditches and Hie-waies) must receive the dead,
The dead (ah woe the while) so Many dead Bodies shall be in every place, they
shall cast them forth with silence. Amos 8.3.
oreabounds!
Here might ye see as it were a Mountainet
Founded on Bodies, grounded very deep,
Which like a Trophee of Deaths Triumphs set
The world on wonder, that did wondering weep:
For, to the middle Region of the Air,
Our earthly Region was infected so,
That Fowls therein had cause of just despair,
As those which over Zodome dying go!
Some common Carriers, (for their own behoof,
And for their good, whose Souls for gains do
Fetching from Lo^do packs of Plags, and stuff (groan)
Are forced to inn it, in some Barn alone.
Where, lest it should the Country sacrifise,
Barn, Corn, and Stuff a Sacrifice is sent
(In Aire-refining Flames) to th'angrie Skies,
While th'owners do their Faults and Loss lament.
The Carriers, to some Pesthouse, or their own,
Carried, clapped up, and watched for coming out,
Must there with Time or Death converse alone,
Till Time or Death does free the world of doubt:
Who though they Cariers were, yet being too weak
Such heavy double Plagues as these to bear,
Out of their houses some by force do break,
And This no fiction, nor inserted by poetical license: But this verily was
performed in the borough of Leominster in the county of Hereford: the one at
the commandment of sir Herbert Crossed knight, one of the Council of the
Marches of Wales: the other by the instigation of Satan, and prococation of
the disease.
drown themselves, themselves from plags to clear.
These are reuenges fit for such a God,
Fit for his Justice, Power, and Majesty;
These are right ierkes of divine Furies Rod,
That draw from Flesh the lifeblood mortally.
If these are but his temp'rall Punishments,
Then what are they surmounting Time and Fate?
Melt Flesh to think but on such Languishments,
That Soul and Body burn in endless date.
His utmost Plagues extend beyond the reach
Of comprehension of the deepest Thought;
For, he his wisdom infinite does stretch
To make them absolutely good for naught.
Then, O what heart of sensible Discourse,
Quakes not, as if it would in sunder fall,
But once to think upon such Furies force,
As does so far surmount the thoughts of all?
If humane Wisdom in the highest strain,
Should yet stretch further Torments to devise,
They would be such that none could them sustain,
Through weight of woes, and raging agonies:
Then (O) what be they that devised are
By Torments, devised by infinite wisdom, are infiite in pain.
Wisdom that of Naught made all this All,
That stretch as far past speech, as past compare,
Surmounting Wonder; supernatural!
They be the Judgments of that Trinity,
Which (like themselves) are most inscrutable;
Then can man's heart, but either swoone or die,
To think on anguish, so vnthinkeable.
And can our Sense, our Sense so much besot,
To think such worlds of woe no where exist,
Since in this sensual World it feels them not,
And so in sin (till they be felt) insist?
Then happy That, that is insensible,
Since we employ our happiness of Sense
To feel and taste but pleasures sensible;
And see no Pain that at their end commence.
To break the Belly of our damned Desires
With honied Sweets that soon to poison turn;
And in our Souls enkindle quenchlesse fires,
Which all the frame thereof quite ouerturne.
Mortal life is no more (at the most) compared to Eternity.
To please it self a Moment, and displease
It self for ever, with ne'r-ending pains;
To ease the Body with the Souls disease,
To glad the Guts, to grieve the Heart and Brains.
To make the Throat a Through-fare for Excess,
The Belly a Charibdis for the same;
To use Wit still but only to transgress,
And make our Sense the Sponge of Sin and Shame:
So fares it with sensual Epicures and Libertines.
Then happy are sweet Flowers that live and die
(Without offense) most pleasing unto all:
And hapless Man that lives vnpleas^ngly
To Heaven and Earth; so, lives and dies to fall.
The Rose does live a sweet life, but to please,
And when it dies, it leaves sweet fruit behind;
But Man in Life and Death does none of these,
If Grace by The conversion of a sinner is most miraculous.
Miracle never mend his mind.
Blush Man, that Flowers should so thy self excel
That wast created to excel what not?
That on the Earth created was to dwell;
Then blush for shame to grace thy Beauties blot.
Art thou Horizon made (unholy one)
Betwixt immortal Angels, and bruit beasts?
Yet wilt twixt beasts and fiends be Horizon
By that which Angels grieves, and God detests?
Then Plagues must follow thy misguided Will,
So to correct thine ill-directing Wit;
Such as these are, or others much more ill,
The worst of which Sin (ill of Ills) befit.
And lo, for Sin; how yet the Plague does rage
(With unappeased fury) more and more,
Making our Troy-nouant a tragic Stage
Whereon to show Deaths power, with slaughters sore.
Great Monarch of Earths ample world he is;
And of our little Man is Microcosmos.
Worlds (that worlds content)
He gives ill Subjects Bale, good Subjects Bliss;
So, though he reigns, just is his Regiment.
Our sins (foul blots) corrupt the Earth and Air;
Our sins (souls botches) all this All defile;
And make our Souls most foul, that were most fair;
For, naught but sin we all, all naught the while!
When sharpest wits are whetted to the point,
To pierce into all secrets, but to sin!
And all the corpse of Luxury vnioint,
To see what sensual joy might be therein:
Whenas such tricks as no Sun ever saw
Devised are daily by the Serpent-wise,
To cramme all Flesh into the Devils maw
By drifts, as scarce the Devil can devise!
Can God (most just) be good to men so ill?
And can the Earth, and Air, wherein such live,
Keep such alive? O no, all Plagues must fill
That Air, and Earth, that do such plagues reliue.
What are those men but plagues, that plague but men?
All men are such, that teach sin in effect;
And all do so, that sin but now and then,
If now and then they sin, in ouert act.
What can contain us, if these plagues cannot?
If neither these we feel, nor those we shall,
Be not of force to keep our lives from blot,
What then remains but plagues to scowre us all?
Till we wax less, and they so multiplide,
That we be nothing less, than what we are;
Converted, or confounded we abide
In, or without God, with, or without care!
If when his iron Rod draws blood from us,
And is upon our backs, yea breaks our bones,
We cease not yet to be rebellious,
What can convert us but plagues for the nones!
For Natures heart does yrne with extreme grief,
When well she weighs her childrens strange est^^,
Subject to sin, and so to sorrows chief,
For both in counterchange renew their date:
For now we sin (yea with a witness sin,
Witness our conscience) then we plagued are,
Plagued with a witness, (witness plagues that
With fury on us) then, when so we fare
Fall we to pray and creep to Grace for grace,
Which being got, and ease, and weal at will,
We fall to sin, and so our souls disgrace:
Thus sin and plagues run round about us still
This euer-circling Plague of plagues and sin,
Surroundeth Mankind in an hell of woe,
Man is the Axis standing still therein,
And goes with it where ever it does go:
For since he fell, who at this Center stays
By Nature (most unnatural the while)
Here moves man mouelesse as the Axis plays,
And Times turns (turning with him) does beguile.
And yet this Plague (if Griefs tears quench it not)
Is like a spark of fire in flax too dry,
And may, if our Lusts cool not, burn more hot
Than erst it did; so waste us utterly.
We see it will not out, but still it lies
In our best Cities Bowels like a Cole
That threats to flame, and still does fall and As appears by the Plague bills
every week. Simil.
rise,
Wasting a part, thereby to warn the whole.
None otherwise than when (with grief) we see
Some house on fire, we strait, to save the town,
Watch, fast, and pray, and most industrious be,
With hook and line to pull the Building down:
So does this fire of heavens still kindling ire
Blister our Cities public Body so,
As we are blister'd, but with so much fire,
As we may quench with tears if they do flo.
(...) if it should break forth in flames afresh,
(As (ah) what stays it but vnstinted Grace?)
What thing should quench it but a world of Flesh?
Or desolation it away to chase?
Time never knew since he began his hours,
(For aught we read) a Plague so long remain
In any City, as this Plague of ours:
For now six years in London it has lain.
Where none goes out, but at his coming in,
If he but feels the tendrest touch of smart,
He fears he is Plague-smitten for his sin;
So, ere he is plagued, he takes It to the heart:
For, Fear does (Loadstone-like) it often attract,
That else would not come near; or steal away;
And yet this plaguy-feare will scarce coact
Our Souls to sin no more, this Plague to slay.
But thou, in whose high hand all hearts are held,
Convert us, and from us this Plague auert:
So sin shall yield to Grace, and Grace shall yield
The Giver glory for so dear desert.
Too dear for such too worthles wicked Things,
At best but clods of base Infirmity;
Too dear for sin that all this murraine brings;
Too dear for those that live but twice to die.
In few, what should I say? the best are naught
That breathe, since man first breathing did rebel:
The best that breath are worse tha^ may be thought,
If Thought can think the best can do but well:
For, none does well on Earth, but such as will
Confess (with grief) they do exceeding ill!
The best is but a Micah 7.4.
Briere, and Psalm. 14 2.4
none does good,
But He that makes Us blameless in his Ephesians. 5.12.
Blood.
FINIS.

