THE ANCIENT, FAMOVS And Honorable History of Amadis de Gaul. DISCOVRSING THE
ADVENTVRES, Loves and Fortunes of many Princes, Knights and Ladies, as well of
Great Britain, as of many other Kingdoms beside, etc.

Written in French by the Lord of Essars, Nicholas de Herberay, Ordinary
Commissarie of the Kings Artillery, and his Lieutenant thereof, in the
Country and government of Picardie, etc.



Printed at London by NICHOLAS OAKS, 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight of the Bath at the
Coronation of our dread Sovereign King James; Lord Baron of Sherland; Earl of
Mountgomerie, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
Having already presented your Honor, with the Third and Fourth Books of this
famous History of Amadis de Gaul, and standing engaged by my promise, to
translate so many more of them, as time and your noble acceptance shall thereto
enable me; finding also those two imprinted parts, to appear as a body without
an head, because these former Books are the guide and dirction to them all: I
have now finished them, and therefore make a fresh representation of them all
four to your Honor. The fifth, sixth, seventh and eight Books (being already
in good forwardness of translation) with as much expedition as possible may
be, and your worthy encouragement for their proceeding; shall very shortly
present themselves before you, in the best habit that mine ability can put upon
them.

It is not vnknwne to your honor, that the manifold impressions of this
history, the Books thereof being now come to be five and twenty in number,
and printed in places far distant a sunder: through neglect in the
publishers, or defect of the Books which are perfect indeed, many false
volumes have flowne abroad, and the world thereby very much abused. But by the
help of that worthy Lady, I have had such Books as were of the best editions,
and them (as I have already begun) I intend to follow.

In the mean time (Noble Lord) accept of these four Books I beseech you, and
defend them from the venomous tongue of foul mouthde detraction, burying all
my imperfections herein committed, in the urgent importunity of that worthy
Lady, by whom I have thus boldly presumed, and the rest will bear me
blameless against your least mislike.

Your Honors in all duty. A. M.

THE FIRST BOOK OF AMADIS DE GAVLE.
Discoursing the Adventures and Love of many Knights and Ladies, as well of the
Realm of great Britain, as sundry other Countries, etc.

CHAP. I.
Of whence the Kings Garinter and Perion were, and the Combat between Perion
and two Knights, as also how he fought with a Lion that devoured a Heart in
their presence: with the success following thereon.

Soon after the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, there reigned in little
Britain a King named Garinter, enstructed in the law of verity, and highly
adorned with many laudable virtues: hauiug a Noble Lady to his Wife, by whom
he had two beautiful Daughters. The eldest (being married with Languines King
of Scotts,) was commonly called the Lady of the Garland: because the King her
Husband, taking great pleasure to behold the golden tresses of her hair, would
have them no otherwise covered then with a fair circle or chaplet of flowers:
Languines enjoying by his Queen, Agraies and Mabila, of whom this present
History often makes mention. The other youngest Daughter to this King Garinter,
was named Elisena, very much excelling the eldest in beauty, and though she had
been oftentimes desired in marriage, by sundry Princes and great Lords: yet as
then she had no will thereto, but for her solitary and holy life, was commonly
called of every one, The lost Virgin in devotion, considering that in a person
of such estate, endued with such excellent beauty, and solicited by so many
great Princes, this strickt religion was not convenient. King Garinter being
sumewhat in years, for recreatio^ took pleasure in Hunting, when at one time
among other it happened, that hauiug appointed a meeting near one of his
Cities called Alyma, a Heart was put forth, in pursuit whereof himself wandered
very far: wherefore seeing, he had lost both his people and game, commending
himself to God, he began to make sumwhat the more have, til having trauersed
first one way and then another, at the very entrance into a Wood, he saw two
Knights fighting against one. Soon had he knowledge of the twain, in that
they were his own Subjects, of whom he had heard sundry complaints: but
slender order was taken in the cause, by reason of the great alliance they had
in the Country, as also for that they kept themselves still in this
greatforrest. Who the third should be, he meruailed, and for that time he so
well liked the valor of the one Knight, as he feared not what might happen to
the other twain: wherefore he withdrew himself a little further into the
Forest, because he might the better behold the issue of the fight, which
sorted to such effect, as by the strength of the one Knight, both the other
were vanquished and slain. The King beholding what had happened, came forth of
the Wood, when the Knight seeing one so near him alone, thus demanded. Gentle
Sir, what Country is this, where Knights errant are thus assailed by robbers
and thieves; Let this be no wonder to you Sir, answered the King, for this
Country yields as others do, both good and bad: as for them that thus
assaulted you, they have done diverse and villainous outrages, not only in this
Wood, which has been their accustomed receptacle: but likewise in many other
places, and cheefely against their Lord and King, who could not execute justice
on them, in that they were allied to the best houses in this Realm. And where
may I find the King you speak of; said the Knight, for I am come to seek him,
to bring him news from a great friend of his. Happen what shall, answered
Garinter, I will tell ye so much as I know: understand then for a truth, that I
am the man you ask for. At these words the Knight took off his Helmet, and
throwing down his Sheeld, ran to embrace him: saying that he was King Perion
of Gaul, who of long time had been desirous to know him. Greatly were these
Kings contented, that their meeting was in such fortunate manner, and
conferring together on many matters, they took the way through the Wood
toward the City, where they thought ^o find the Hunters: but suddenly a Heart
ran before them, which with some danger had escaped the toils: wherefore the
Princes gallopped after the Dear, hoping to kill it ere they gave over. But it
fell out otherwise, for in the pursuit^, as they came into the thickest of the
Wood, a chased Lion ran before them: which in their sight seized on the Heart,
and having with his strong paws torn it in pieces, turned again, when
running furiously against the two Princes, he watched his advantage, as if they
had angered him, which the King Perion perceiving, in laughter said. You shall
not be such a glutton, master Lion, but you shall leave us part of the game.
And herewith presently he alighted, because his Horse would not come nere the
beast, so drawing his Sword, and clasping his sheeld on his arm, not
regarding the cries of King Garinter, who labored to dissuade him from the
attempt, he marched to the Lion, who for defense of his pray, ran eagerly
against the King, and so between them began a new war. But the Lion being
quick and nimble, did so much as he got his enemy under him, yet was the
Kings heart so good, that albeit he was in very great peril of his person, he
was not abashed one iotte: but turned himself in such sort, as he thrust his
Sword into the belly of the beast, which at that instant fell down dead before
him. The King seeing what had happened, was so overcome with meruailing at this
deed as he said within him self. In sooth it is no shame to renown one of the
best Knights in the world. In this mean while, the rest of the train came
thither, who for to find their king, had searched long time up and down the
Forest. Then was their pray and Venison laid on two horses, and carried to the
City, where the Queen was immediately advertised of king Perions arrival, and
therefore made speedy provision of all things necessary, to welcome and feast
so great a Prince. At their coming they found Dinner ready, and the tables
covered: wherefore (after the welcomes and reuerences done on all sides) the two
kings sat down, so did the Queen, and fair Elisena her Daughter. Now had
love secretly ambushed himself, because he had long time assailed this young
Princess, without any power to overcome her: but now he saw her so unprovided,
as at this instant hour he might touch her to the quick, and thence forward
hold a sure conquest of her. The like in king Perion, who thought of nothing
but a friendly entertainment, yet when he cast his eye on the Lady Elisena, and
she in like sort upon him: by virtue of this pearcing regard, her wonted
chaste and holy life, had no longer power to privilege this Princess, but
she was wonderfully thralled in extreme love to this young king, and he in
self same manner to her, albeit till that hour, he had his heart francke and
free, without subjection in any other place. In this sort during dinner time,
they found themselves (for each other) in a strange opinion, till the tables
were with drawn, when the Queen would depart to her Chamber, wherefore
Elisena arose to follow her: but as she stepped forward, she let fall a Ring
which she had put in her bosom when she washed her hands, and so had forgot
it, by reason of this new love, that made her think on other matters. Now was
king Perion somewhat near her, and desirous to let her know how willingly he
would be hers, stooped down as soon as she to take it up, and so right did
their hands meet together, as the king had the mean to close her fingers,
yet feigning to take up her Ring. Whereupon this amourous Lady began to change
color, and (notwithstanding) by a sweet regard humbly th^^ked him. Ah
Madame, quoth he, this shall not be the last service I hope to do you, for my
whole life time shall be employed to obey you. Constrained was Elisena (without
answering him) to follow the Queen her mother, so surprised and altered, as
very near she had forgoten her self: so that not able to endure this new fire
of love (which so sudden and vehemently had conquered her wonted chaste and
choice determination:) with the tears in her eyes, and her heart full of
anguish, she went and discovered the same to a faithful Damoseloshers, named
Dartoletta, praying her most instantly to council her, how she might safely
know, if King Perion had not elsewhere placed his love, and whether the
affectionate semblaunce he had shown her, might proceed from force of that
impression, which had so lately seized on her heart. The Damsel meruailing at
this so sudden mutatio^, and in a person thought so far from any such matter:
taking (nevertheless) compassion on her piteous tears, thus answered. I see
well Madame, that according to the extreme passion, wherewith the tirant Love
has tormented ye, he has left no place in your judgment, where counsel or
reason may be entertained: and therefore following not what I ought for your
service, but the will I have to obey you, I shall do what you have commanded
me, by the most honest means that my little discretion and great desire I have
to please ye, will permit me. So without any more words, Darioletta went to
the Chamber where King Perion was, and at the door she found his Squire, who
brought other garments for his Lord to wear, which the Damsel took of him.
For (quoth she) it is necessary that I perform this service, and you (gentle
Squire) may go if you please about your other affairs. The Squire thinking it
was the custom of the Country, made no denial, but willingly suffered her to
take the Garments, whereupon she entered the Chamber, where she found the King
laid on his bed: who seeing her enter, and knowing well it was she, whom he had
seen to confer with Elisena most privately, and in whom (above al other) she
put chiefest trust, he thought that she would not come in that sort to him,
without bringing him some remedy for his mortal passions, for which cause, all
in trembling, he said. Fair friend, what demand ye; If it may so like you my
Lord, quoth she, I have brought other garments for ye. Much rather would I,
said the King, that you had brought some comfort to my heart, which at this
present is left and despoyled of all pleasure. As how my good Lord; answered
the Damsel. Thus quoth he. When first I arrived in this country, I was free
from all passions, and doubted nothing but of adventures that might happen to
Knights errand: but now (I know not in what sort) entering this Court, by some
one of your Ladies, have I received a deadly wound, for which if you (fair
Damsel) know how to give me any remedy, your recompense shall be so good, as
you shall repute your self beholding to me. Certes, quoth she, I should
imagine my self happy, by doing service to so high a personage, and so good a
Knight as you are, if I could tell wherein. If you will promise me said the
King, as you are a loyal Damsel, not to discover me but where it is
requisite, I shall tell ye. Say boldly your pleasure, answered Darioletta, for
by me (without your liking) it shall not be known to any. Damsel and my
friend, quoth he, I give you to understand, that at what time I beheld the
excellent beauty of Elisena your Mistress, I became extremely tormented with
her love, and in such sort, as I cannot excuse my self from death, if I find
not remedy for my grief the sooner. Darioletta (who knew thoroughly the mind of
the Princess) hearing what the King had said, returned him this answer. My
Lord, if you will assure me by the faith of a King, which before all other
things ought to be kept, as a person most bounden to virtue, and as a loyal
Knight, who ought (as is said) to suffer much, for maintenance of right and
equity, that you will take to wife my Lady Elisena when time shall serve:
right soon will I bring ye to the place, where not only your heart shall be
satisfied but hers likewise, who (it may be) is in as much or more thought and
dolor, then you are, by reason of the new anguish that touches her through the
self same means. But if you do not (my Lord) what I have said, you shall not
there recover her, not shall I have other cause then to think, that your words
proceeded from no loyal heart, nor to credit any thing you say hereafter. The
King whom love had already deprived of liberty, to unite him self with
Elisena, (to the end that he might be adorned with the great and gracious
fruit, which afterward happened, as shall be recited unto ye,) took his
Sword, and setting his right hand on the Cross thereof, said these words.
I swear by this Cross, and on this Sword, wherewith I received the order of
Knighthood, to do what you (fair Damsel) shall command me, at all times,
and when soever your mistress Elisena shall be thereto advised. Be you then
frollicke and merrye, answered Darioletta, for I shall likewise accomplish what
I have promised. And at that instant she returned to the Princess, declaring
to her what she had concluded with king Perton, wherewith the amorous Lady was
so pleased, as she had utterly lost her former countenance, and incessantly
embracing Darioletta, thus demanded. My dear friend, when will the hour
come, that I shall hold between mine arms, my Lord whom thou have given me?
I shall tell ye answered the Damsel, you know that in the Chamber where King
Perion lodges, there is a door on the Garden side, which your father sundry
times used for his recreatio^, and which at this present is covered with the
cloth of Arras, but I have the key thereof: wherefore at night when every one is
at rest, we may easily there enter unseen of any, and when needful time of
return comes, my self will call ye. When Elisena heard this device, she was
highly contented therewith, yet breathing forth a sighe, she said. Alas my
faithful friend: how shall we bring this to pass? seeing my father is
determined to lodge with King Perion: and if he perceive us, we shall be both in
very great danger. Refer that doubt to me, answered Darioletta, and I shall
easily provide for this matter: whereupon for this time they brake off
conference, because the tabels were covered for Supper. And in like manner as
the feasting began in the morning, so now it continued, till the tables being
voyded, each one prepared himself to rest. Now a little before, Darioletta went
to King Perions Squire, and thussaide to him. Gentle Squire, and my friend I
pray ye tell me in good faith, whether you be a Gentleman or no, why ask ye?
answered the Squire. For the desire I have, said the Damsel, to know one
thing of you which I entreat ye (by the faith you owe to God and to the King
your Master) not to hide from me. By Saint Mary, quoth he, I will tell you
what you pleased to ask, provided, that it be not to the damage of my Lord.
Herein, said the Damsel will I consent with ye, for I would not demand any
thing of you that should give him displeasure, nor were it reasonable that you
should acquaint me with any such matter: but I desire to know, who is the Lady
he loves most perfectly. The king my Master, quoth the Squire, loves all
ingenerall, and I assure ye, that I know no one, to whom he bears such
affection as you speak of.

While they were thus talking, the King Garinter came, who seeing Darioletta
conferring with King Perions Squire, demanded what she had to do with the
Gentleman? In sooth my Lord quoth she, he tells me that the King his Master
is wont to lie alone, and therefore I think he loves not to have any company.
When Garinter understood that, he went presently to King Perion, saying, My
noble Brother, there are certain affairs suddenly befallen me, and likewise I
must rise somewhat early in the morning, which has made me think, that (not
to trouble you) the best way is, that I break company from lodging with ye. My
Lord, answered king Perion, do as shall seem best to your liking, this answer
appeared to king Garinter, conformable with that the Damsel had said,
wherefore right soon he commanded his bed to be fetched from king Perions
Chamber. When Darioletta heard thereof, she imagined their affairs would
fall out the better, and therefore returned to Elisena, acquainting her with
all that had passed between the two kings. In good faith quoth she, I now
believe, that seeing God has granted so good a beginning, our enterprise,
which at this present seems a great sin, wi^ereafter redound to his service:
but tell me what we shall do? for the great joy which I have, has taken from
me the most healthful part of my judgment. Madam, said Darioletta, this
night will we execute what we have determined, seeing the door (whereof you
know) is certainly open. To my self I keep it, answered Elisena, and to you
only I commit the charge, to provide, when the hour shall permit: and so they
remained attending for the favorable time.

CHAP. II.
How the Princess Elisena and her Damsel Darioletta, went to the Chamber
where King Perion was lodged.

THe time being com, when each one most commonly betake themselves to rest:
Darioletta (who for the contentment of her Mistress, had used extreme
diligence) came and told her. Madame, now is the time to finish our
enterprise, then let us go if you please. When Elisena heard what she said,
you must think she gave no occasion to be reproved with slothfulnes: but
hastily arose, and without tarrying, casting only a mantle about her shoulders,
went forward, and afterward they both entered the Garden. The time was then
calm and gracious, the Moon fair and splendant, giving clear light to the
two Ladies: but surely the one had more cause of content then the other, who
gladly would have tasted this good hap, or such an other for her self, if she
could any way have compast the mean, and so much she gave in outward
apearance, as Elisena perceived well, that she wanted but the executor to
perform the same: for Darioletta feeling in her spirit, the ease at hand which
she should receive whom she conducted, could not but very plesantly jest and
dally with her Mistress, breaking many a bitter sigh among, as though she were
to participate in Elisenaes future good fortune, to whom she said. Alas
Madame, how happy is the Prince, by whom the night you shall receive such
pleasure? You say true answered Elisena, but what? think you not that fortune
is as favorable to me, as to him? for if I be fair, is not he one of the most
perfect men that has been heard of, either in personage, good grace or
hardines? assure thy self, Darioletta my friend, that I imagine my self so
happy, as I think it is impossible for me to be more, and therefore let us make
have I pray thee. These words she uttered with such affection, that she
trembled like the little leaf on the high tree, and as she ended those
speeches, they arrived at the Chamber door where King Perion was lodged: who
(for the strangnes of this new amorous flame, as also the hope he had in
Darioletta) had not as yet taken any rest. Nevertheless, being as then wearye
with travail, and overcome with sleep: began (even as they opened the door)
to slumber, and dreamed that one entered his chamber at a false door, without
knowledge who it should be: but he thought that he thrust his hands into his
sides, and rent forth his heart, afterward he saw him throw it into the River,
when the king said. Wherefore commitye such cruelty? This is nothing at all
answered he that did this ourtage, for with you shall remain another heart,
which I must take from ye against my will. In great fear he suddenly awaked,
and making the sign of the Cross, commended himself to God. Now had the
Ladies opened the door and entered the Chamber, wherefore he hering the noise,
suspected some treason, especially by reason of his fearful dream, and
lifting up his head beheld through the curtans the door open, whereof he knew
nothing, and afterward by the light of the Moon, he saw the shadow of the
Ladies that were entered. For this cause in fear he started out of bed, took
his Sword, and went to the place where he had seen them: but when Darioletta
saw him so affrighted, she spoke to him in this manner, What shall be done here?
Do you draw arms against us, that come to you with so slender defense? the
king who quickly knew them, especially Elisena whom he so much desired, threw
his Sword to the ground, and casting a mantle about him which lay near at
hand: in great affection he came to her, whom he loved better then himself,
kissing, embracing and showing the best countenance could be devised, which
Darioletta seeing, as one jealous and envious of such favor, said to Elisena.
Now are you somewhat better contented, for in my judgment, although till this
time you defended your self from many. And he likewise has withstood sundry
assaults: notwith-standing at this present, neither the one or other of you
has force or mean, which way any longer to warrant or defend your selves. As
thus she spoke, she looked where the king had thrown his Sword, which she took
up, as a witness of the oath and promise he (...) her, concerning the future
marriage of Elisena and himself: then shutting the door after her, she went
into the Garden, and so the king remained alone with his fair friend, whom
(after many amourous embracings, infinite kissings, and execution of delights)
he beheld, verily persuading himself, that all the beauty of the world was in
her, reputing himself much more then happy, that the heavens had allowed him
so good an adventure. See now how it chanced to this Princess, that for so
long time, in the cheifest flower of her youth, being requested by so many
mighty Princes and great Lords, she had withstood all, to remain in the
liberty of a Maiden: now won in less space then one day, and at such time as
her fancy (in her one thinking) was farthest off from such matters.

Thus Love breaking the strong bands of her holy and chaste life, caused a
sudden alteration of her purpose, making her soon after, of a fair virgen, a
fair woman: serving for example to many other, who assaying to withdraw their
thoughts from worldly things, and despising the great beauty wherewith nature
has endowed them, and tender youth, which makes them ignorant of the plesures
and delights in their Fathers Courts, whereof sometime they might have tasted:
yield themselves (for salvation of their souls) in poor and religious
houses, thereto in offering their free will, vowing themselves to the
subjection of others, hoping to pass their time without any renown or glory
of this world. Certes such Ladies, ought with great solicitude to stop their
ears, close their eyes, and give themselves to continual devout
contemplatio^s and prayers, accepting them as their true and singular pastimes,
as to such they are: and above all, they should exempt themselves from sight of
Parents neighbors and friends, because oftentimes the talk and frequenting of
such, procures a change of their holy and chaste will. and not without cause
have I made this little discourse, for it is to the end that it happen not to
them, as it did unto the fair Princess Elisena, who so long labored in
thought to preserve her self: yet notwith-standing in one only moment, seeing
the beauty and good grace of King Perion, changed her will in such sort, as
without the advice and discretion of Darioletta, who would cover the honor of
her Mistress under the mantle of marriage: you may see she was at the point to
fall, into the very lowest part of all dishonor. As it has happened to many
other, of whom has commonly been heard speech: who not keeping them selves
from what I have said before, have been taken bad enough, and taken will be,
if they admit no better foresight.

Now then are these two lovers in their solace, Elisena demanding of the king,
if his departure should be shortly or no. Wherefore Madame do you ask? said
king Perion. Because, quoth she, this happy fortune that with so great delight
has given ease to our affectionate desires: does threaten me already with
extreme anguish and sorrow, which by your absence I shall receive, and fear
it will rather cause my sudden death, then long life. Have no doubt thereof
said the king, for although my body is separated from your presence, my hare
for ever shall remain with ye, which shall give strength to us both, to you to
suffer, and to me by my speedye return. These two contented lovers are thus
devising, when she that had bin the cause of their meeting (seeing it was time
to call her mistress, who by this pleasure forgot her self in her lovers
arms) entered the Chamber, and speaking somewhat loud said. Madme, I know
that heretofore you thought my company more agreeable, then you do at this
present: but it is needful that you arise, and let us go, for the time
calls us. When the King heard her, knowing that perforce it must be so, he
prayed Darioletta to walk into the Garden, and to bring him word in what
corner the wind sat: in mean while he took his amourous conge, with such
reciprocal pleasure, as you that love may easily judge, then sweetly kissing
her, he said, I assure you Madame, that for your sake I will stay longer in
this Country then you imagine, therefore I pray ye be not unmindful of this
place. So arose Elisena, and went to her Chamber with Darioletta, leaving the
king alone, not a little contented with his new acquaintance: but dreading his
dream, as you have heard, and willing to know what it might signify, he
became desirous to return to his own Country, where as then were good store
of Philosophers, that were well seen in those Sciences: himself likewise in
former times took great pleasure therein, and understood sundry rules thereof.
Nevertheless, he foiourned ten days with king Garinter, after his sporting
with Elisena, who never a night failed to visit her lovely haunt. The ten days
being spent, king Perion (forcing his will, and notwithstanding the tears and
entreaties of Elisena which were excessive) resolved to depart, and therefore
took his leave of the Court: but as he would have mounted on horseback, he
perceived that he wanted his good Sword; whereat he became somewhat offended,
because it was one of the best, and fairest in the world, yet durst he not
demand it, fearing least the love of him and Elisena should thereby be
discovered, or King Garinter angry with them that visited his Chamber. In these
thoughts, accompanied with infinite regrets, without longer stay, he took his
way toward Gaul: albeit before his departure, Darioletta came and entreated
him, to be mindful of the great grief wherein he left his Elisena, and of the
solemn promise he had made her. Alas my dear friend, said the King, I pray
ye to assure her on my part, that she shall have no cause of offense, and that
right soon I mean to see her, in mean while, I commend her to you as mine
sown proper heart. Then taking from his finger a Ring, sembleble to another
that he had, he sent it to the desolate lover, in treating her earnestly (for
his sake) to give it her. This present did no whit lessen her great grief, but
increase it, so that if she had not been comforted by Darioletta, without
doubt, she had then finished her days: but so well she persuaded her to take
good hope, that by the alligations she laid before her of dangerous
occurrences, she came somewhat better to her self, and learned thence forward
more smoothly to dissemble her sorrow, till she felt her self great with
Child, by means whereof, she not only lost the taste of her food, but also
the pleasure of rest, and the fair color of her countenance.

Now on the highest step of mis-hap was her sorrow set, and not without cause,
for in that time was there an inviolable law, that any woman or maiden, of
what quality or estate soever, offending in such forte, could no way excuse her
self from death. This sharp and cruel custom, endured til the coming of
the virtuous King Arthur, the best Prince / that ever reigned in that Country:
which he revoked at the time, as he killed Floian in battle before the Gates
of Paris. But many other Kings were between him and Garinter, who maintained
that law, and for this cause the sorrowful Lady could not be absolved by
ignorance thereof: albeit that by the oaths and promises of King Perion on
his Sword, God would remit the offense, yet knew she not how to excuse her
fault to the world, because it was done so secretly as you have heard. See
here the distress wherein King Perion left his Elisena, which g^^dly she would
give him to understand, if possible she could: but it might not be, for she
knew the promptitude of this young King, that took no rest in any place where
he came, nor was his heart satisfied, except in this, with following arms, as
also seeking strange and hazardous adventures, and therefore he was the harder
to be found. Thus dispairing of this succor, she thought there was no remedy
for her life, for which she made not so much moan, as the loss of the sight of
her true friend and only Lord. But at that instant the great and puissant
maker of all things, by whose permssion this act was appointed to his service,
inspired Darioletta with such council, as she only should remedy these
occurrances, in such sort as you shall presently understand.

In the palace of King Garinter, there was a Chamber-vault separated from the
rest, near to which was a river, whereto one might easily descend by a little
Iron door, this Chamber (by the advice of Darioletta) did Elisena request of
her father, as well for her ease, as to continue her accustomed solitary life,
and would have none other companion then Darioletta, who (as you have heard)
knew the occasion of her dollorous greefes. This request she lightly obtained,
the King thinking his daughters intent to be as she feigned, and hereupon was
the keye of the Iron door given to Darioletta, to open when it pleased Elisena
to recreate her self on the water. By this mean had she a place proper to her
affairs, and so was in better rest and assurance then before: for well was she
advised, that in this place more commodiously then any other, might she provide
to escape without danger. Wherefore being there one day alone with her
Damsel, they fell in conference, and she required council, what should be
done with the fruit that she travailed withal. What? answered Darioletta:
Mary, it must suffer to redeem you. Oh poor maidenly mother, said Elisena,
how can I consent to the death of the creature, begoten by the only man of the
world, whom most I love? offend not your self, quoth Darioletta, for if you
should dye, hardly would it be permitted after you to live. In sooth, said
Elisena, although I dye being culpable, it were no reason the little innocent
should suffer. Leave we this talk, answered Darioletta, seeing it were great
folly to hazard the safety of that, which hereafter may be the only cause of
your loss, and your friend likewise: for well you know, that if you be
discovered, you shall dye, and the infant shall not live, and you dying, no
longer can he live that so dearly loves you. So shall you alone cause the
death of all three, where contrariwise, if you escape the peril, the time will
come, when you may have together children enough, which will make you forget the
affection you bare to this first. And as this Damsel was thus inspired, so
would she before hand seek to prevent the inconvenience, in this manner. She
got four little boards, of such largenes as was necessary to make a Chest
wherein to put the infant, with the clothes and the Sword which she kept, then
did she give them together in such sort, as the water should have no place to
enter. This being done and made fit, she put it under the bed, without
declaring any thing thereof to Elisena, until the time of childbirth
approached, and then Darioletta said. What think ye Madame this little Cofer
is made for? In good faith I know not, quoth she. This shall be to serve us,
said the Damsel, when we have need. Believe me answered Elisena weeping, but
little do I care for any thing that may happen, for I feel my self too near
the loss of my good, and all my joy. Very soon after, the Princess felt the
anguish of traualle, which was to her very strange and troublesome, oppressing
her heart with sundry bitter passions: yet notwithstanding al her yrksome
plunges, poor soul she durst not but be silent, greatly fearing least she
should be heard. Her agonies thus redoubling, the most mighty (without danger
of her person) gave her in deliverance a fair Son, which the Damsel
received, and as she held it, it seemed to her of wonderful feature, and happy
would she have reputed him, had he not been borne to hard fortune, where-to
Darioletta was constrained to send him, for the redemption of the sorrowful
mother, and therefore she deferred it not. But even as before was concluded,
she wrapped the infant in rich clothes, and after-ward brought it with the
Cofer to Elisena: which when the good Lady saw, she demanded what she would do
therewith. Madame quoth she, herein shall your little Son be put, then will I
send it forth on the water, and if it please God, he may escape and live. Alas
my sweet infant, said Elisena, how full of danger is thy destiny? In mean
while, Darioletta took ink and parchment, and writ therein these words, This
is Amadis without time, Son to a King: by these words without time, she
meant, that she thought his death to be near at hand, and the name of Amadis
was of great reverence in that Country, because of a Saint there so ca^, to
whom this little infant was reco^mended. The letter being written and sealed,
was covered and wrapped in silk, and then with a little golden Chain,
fastened about the Childs neck, with the Ring that King Perion sent Elisena
at his departure. Each thing thus appointed, Darioletta came to the woeful
mother, and in her sight put the Child into the Chest, laying by him the King
his Fathers Sword, which he threw on the ground the first night he came to
Elisena, and this is the cause wherefore the Damsel had so well kept it: then
after the Mother had kissed her Son, as her last farewell, the Cofer was made
fast very arteficially, and Darioletta opening the iron door, commending the
babe to the heavenly protection, she set it on the water, the course whereof
being very speedy, full soon carried the Cofer into the Sea, which was less
then half a mile from the place.

Now began the break of day to appear, and the little infant followed his
fortune, now thrown here, then there, according as the boystrous waves
pleased: but by the will of the highest, who (when he pleases) makes
impossibilities easy, caused it so to fall out, that at the same time as this
was done, a Scottishe Ship sailed on the Sea, wherein was a Gentleman named
Gandales, who from little Britain sailed with his wife into Scotland, she
having been lately delivered of a son called Gandalin. The morning was both
calm and clear, wherefore Gandales might easilye perceive the Chest floting
on the waves, which he presently sent out for, thinking it to be some matter of
great value: then the Mariners casting forth a Skiffe, made toward the Cofer
and took up: when they had brought it to Gandales, he got open the cover; and
beholding the goodly infant within, as also the rich clothes wherein it was
wrapped, he suspected that it came from no mean place, as he gathered by the
ring and the good Sword. So taking it in his arms, he was filled with such
compassion, as he began to curse the mother thereof, who through fear had
forsaken so cruelly such a beautiful creature: and carefully did he cause al
things to be kept which he found in the Cofer, desiring his wife, that this
infant might be nourished as his own Son. She was heerewith very well
contented, and so the two children were equally fostered together, for never
had young Amadis sucked the teat, but so soon as it was given him by his new
nursse, he made no refusal thereof, but being very thirsty sucked very
heartily, whereat Gandales and his wife were exceeding glad. Now had they the
time so favorable, as shortly they landed in Scotland, near to a City named
Antallia, and soon after they came to their own Country, where little
Gandalin, and the Child found in the sea were nourished together. And because
Gandales forbad his servants to use any speech of his good hap, requesting the
like of the Mariners, to whom the ship belonged, and were to sail else where:
the two children were esteemed brethren by such as were ignorant of their
fortune.

CHAP. III.
How King Perion parting from little Britain, traveled on his journey,
having his heart filled with grief and melancholy.

KIng Perion being on his way toward Gaul, as already has been recited,
entered into a marvelous melancholy, as well for the grief wherein he had left
his Elisena, to whom in his heart he wished well: as also for his doubtful
dream, being in such sort as you have heard. So long rode he in this
heaviness, till he arrived in his country, and soon after he sent for all his
great Lords as also the Prelates of his Realm, giving them express charge, to
bring with them the most learned Clarks in their Countries, and this he did, to
the end they might expound his dream. When his vassailes had made known his
will, not only those he sent for, but many other came to the court, showing the
desire they had to see him, and their readiness to obey his command: for they
did so love and reverence him, as oftentimes (being fearful to loose him)
they were for him in very great grief and sorrow, thinking on the dangerous
perils, that in chiualry (to win honor) he hazarded himself, so that they
would more gladly have had him daily with them, which could not be, because his
heart was discontented, til by arms he had brought the greatest adventures to
end.

The Lords and Princes thus assembled, the King conferred with them on the
estate and affairs of the Realm, but it was with so sad countenance as could
be: for the occasion of his dream made him so pensive, as his Subjects (being
abashed thereat) were in marvelous doubts, notwithstanding, after he had
given them to understand his will, and appointed all requisite matters in
order, he gave them leave to depart, sending each one home to his house, only
staying with him three Astrologers, reputed the most skillful in those actions,
and therefore he made choice of them. These men he called into his chapel,
there causing them solemnly to swear and promise, that without fear of any
thing, how dangerous soever it were, they should interpret to their uttermost,
and truly express what he would declare to them, whereupon he told them his
dream, as has bin already before rehearsed: then one of them being named Vngan
the Piccard, the most expert of them all, thus answered. My Lord, dreams are
vain things, and for such ought to be esteemed: notwithstanding, seeing it is
your pleasure that some account should be made of yours, give us some time to
consider thereon. It likes me well, said the king, within 12 days look that
you make ine answer. But to the end they should not disguise or co^ceale the
truth from him, he c^^sed them to be sepereted, so that during the time agreed
upon, they might neither see to speak together: wherefore to their uttermost
they travailed in what they had promised the King, so that the day being come,
when they should render an occompt of their labor, he first took Albert of
Champaigne aside, and said to him. Thou know how thou have sworn and
promised, to tell me what thou have found by thy skill. Sir answered Albert,
let then the rest be called into your presence, for before them will I tell ye.
Well have thou advised, said the King whereupon they were sent for, afterward
Albert thus began. My opinion is, my Lord, that the closed Chamber, and him
whom you saw enter by the secret door, signifies this Realm which is close
and well guarded: notwithstanding by some right thereto, some one shall come to
take it from you. And like as he thrust his hands into your sides, renting
forth thence your heart, and afterward threw it into the River: even so shall
your Towns and Castles both more and less, be privily stolen from you, and
put into his hand from whom you shall not easily recover them. And what means
the other heart, said the King, which I dreamed should remain with me, and yet
he said, that soon after I should lose it, against the will of him that took
the first from me? It seems by this, answered Albert, that some other shall
invade your Country as the first did, yet constrained more by force of another
that commanded him to do so, then by any will thereto in himself: thus see ye
(my Lord) all that I can tell ye. Now said the king to the second named
Antalles, tell us your advise. Me thinks Sir, quoth he, that Albert has very
well said, and I am of his opinion, except in this, (for ought I can learn,
and as the cause shows me) that what he says shall happen, is already
effected, and by the person that most loves ye: notwithstanding I am greatly
amazed thereat, seeing there is not as yet any part of your Realm lost, and if
you do loose any thing hereafter, it must be by such a one as loves you
dearly. When the king heard this, he nodded his head, for it seemed to him,
that he came near the mark: but Vngan the Piccard, who knew much more the^
the other, fell into a laughter, which he was sildome wont to do, because he
was a man very sad and melancholy, yet (by chance) the King perceived it,
wherefore he said. Master Vngan my friend, now remains none but you, say
boldly what you have gathered. My Lord, quoth he, peradventure I have seen
into things, which is not necessary to be known to any other then your self,
and therefore let these give place a while, if you please. At these words they
withdrew themselves, leaving the King and Vngan alone, who thus spoke.

If your Majesty saw me ere while to laugh, it was at one word which little you
think on, yet it is true, and will you know what? It was that which Antalles
said, that what he found by your dream was already happened, and by the person
that best loves ye: Now shall I reveal what you keep in secret and think
that none knows but your self. You love (my Lord) in such a place, where you
have already accomplished your will, and she whom you love is surpassing fair,
then told he all the gests and fashions of her, as if she had been there
present. But as for the chamber you found shut, you know Sir, full well what it
means, and how she whom you love, desirous to deliver her heart and yours
from grief and sadness: came to ye, entering your chamber by the false door
that was hid from you. The hands that opened your sides, is the conuinction of
you twain: then the heart taken from ye, shows that she has by you a Son or
a Daughter. Now tell me said the King, what means the casting thereof into
the River? My Lord, quoth he, that nothing concerns you, therefore never
labor for further knowledge thereof. Yet would I, said the King, feign
understand it, and therefore fear not to tell me for any harm that may
happen. Seeing you will needs have it, answered Vngan, I beseech ye Sir assure
me while you live, for any thing that I shall reueal, you wilnot be displeased
with her who loves you so loyally. That promise do I faithfully make thee,
said the King. In good sooth Sir, quoth Vngan, that heart that you saw thrown
into the water, is the first infant she shall have by you, who must of
necessity be forsaken. And the other, said the King, that shall remain with
me, what means that? You may, answered Vngan, understand by the one,
desseigne of the other, which is, that she shall conceive another child, who
shall be carried away against the will of her, that caused the loss of the
first. Thou have told me strange things, said the King, and would God the
misfortune of my Children were not so true, as what thou have told me
concerning the Lady I love. For things ordained and appointed by the highest,
answered Vngan, none knows how to gainsay or remedy, and therefore men of
wisdom should never be sad or rejoice at them, because oftentimes the Lord
disposes matters beyond the capacity of men and far otherwise then they
expect. For this cause my Lord, forgetting all that I have said, and which you
have bin so curious to understand: refer all things to God, desiring him in
these your affairs and all other, to limit the end of them to his honor and
glory, and thus (in mine opinion) you ought to set down your rest. The King
was highly contented with Vngan, and so esteemed of him, that from thence
forward he had him near his person, by means whereof he received many great
favors. Now it happened, that at that instant as the king parted from the
Philosophers, a Damsel presented her self before him, right costly in
garments and fair in beauty, thus speaking. Understand King Perion, that when
thou recouerest thy loss, the Kingdom of Ireland shall loose her flower. So
giving her Palfrey the bridle, and the King not able to stay her, she rode
away: these words made the good Prince more sad and pensive then he was before.

For this time the Auther le^ ueth this purpose, and returns to speak of the
infant, that Gandales caused to be nourished, whom he made to be called the
Gentleman of the Sea. Now was he curiously entertained, wherefore in short time
he grew and became so faite, that all which beheld him meruailed thereat, but
one day among other it happened, that Gandales rode to sport himself in the
fields, arming himself as became a good Knight: for he had daily accompanied
the king Languines, at such time as he searched after adventures, and albeit
the king discontinued Arms, yet Gandales would oftentimes exercise himself,
and as he rode, he met with a Damsel that thus speak to him. Ah Gandales, if
many great personages were advertised of what I know certainly, I assure thee
they would cause thee to loose thy head. Wherefore? quoth he. Because, said the
Damsel, thou nourishest their death in thy house. The knight knew not the
woman that thus talked with him, but you must understand, how she was the same
that said to king Perion, that when he recovered his loss, the Kingdom of
Ireland should lose her flower, yet notwithstanding he was far from the
matter, because he knew not whereof she spoke, and therefore thus replied. For
Gods sake (Damsel) I pray ye tell me, on what occasion you use these
speeches. Believe me Gandales, qooth she, I have told thee nothing but truth.
At these words she departed from him, leaving him very sad and pensive: yet
long he did not continue in these thoughts, but he saw her return again, in
great have, thus crying and calling. Ah Gandales, for Gods sake succor me: then
Gandales turning about, beheld a knight follow her with his Sword drawn,
wherefore he gave his horse the spurs to meet him, and placed himself for
the defense of the Damsel, then coming to him that pursued her, he said.
Stay thou bad advised knight, what moves thee thus trecherously to outrage
Ladies? What now? answered the other, do thou hope to save her, who by
trumpery has made me loose both body and soul? That meddle not I withal,
said Gandales, but I will defend her to my power, well knowing that Ladies
ought not to be corrected in this manner, albeit they did deserve it. We shall
presently see that, answered the knight: and so gallopped to the place from
whence he came, which was a little thicket of trees, where stayed a very
beautyfull Lady, who when she saw him return, came forth, bringing him a
Sheeld and a strong Lance, which he took, and without longer tariance,
returned to his enemy, Gandales being a stern knight, would not refuse him:
whereupon they met together in such sort, as their lances were broken no
their Sheelds, and they with their horses cast to the ground, yet quickly did
they recover footing, when began between them a marvelous combat, which
worse would have bin, but that she which desired succor of Gandales, stepped
between them, saying. Stay Gentlemen, fight no more. At these words, the
Knight who before pursued her went back, then said the Damsel to him. Come
now and ask pardon of me. Most willingly, answered the Knight, then throwing
his Sword and Sheeld down, came and humbled himself on both his knees before
her, whereat Gandales was greatly amazed, afterward the Damsel said to the
Knight. Go command the Lady under the trees, that she get her away immediately,
unless thou shall take her head from her shoulders. To this charge the Knight
yielded himself obedient, and to her whom he loved more then himself (by
sudden change from love to hatred) he came and angerly said. Traiterous woman,
I know not how I shall defend my self from killing thee presently. Well
perceived the poor Lady, that her friend was enchanted, and that contestation
would nothing at all profit her: wherefore incontinent she mounted on her
palfray, and rode away, making the most grievous sorrow that ever was heard,
and there remained she whom Gandales had defended, speaking to him in this
manner. You have (Sir) done so much for me, as I shall be beholding to you
while I live, and now you may depart at your pleasure: for if the knight
offended me, I have pardoned him with all my heart. As touching your pardon,
answered Gandales, I have nothing to do therewith: for my self, I will end
the Combat, or he shall hold himself vanquished. It behooves that you
acquit him, said the Damsel, seeing that if you were the best Knight in the
world, easily can I make him overcome ye. Do therein what you can, replied
Gandales, but I will not acquit him, except you first declare to me, wherefore
(even now) you said, that I kept the death of many people in my house. Then
will I rather tell ye, quoth she, because I love you both: He as mine own
Soul, and you as my defender, albeit constraint cannot make me do it: so
taking him ^side, she said. You shall swear to me as a loyal Knight, that no
other shall know it by you, until such time as I command it: hereof he made
her faithful promise. Know then, said the Damsel, that he whom you found in
the Sea, shall one day be the flower of chiualdry, and shall cause the very
strongest to stoop, he shall enterprise, and with honor finish what other
shall fail off: and such deeds of arms shall he do, as no one thinks can
be begun or ended by the strength of one man. The proud shall he make humble
and gracious, being cruel and pitiless, as also benign and amiable to the
debonaire: this Knight most loyally will maintain love, and shall effect in
place answerable to his magnanimity. Moreover, I assure thee Gandales, that he
is the Son of a King, and (without doubt) all this will happen which I have
told thee: but if thou keep it not secret, it may return thee more harm then
good. Madame, answered Gandales, I pray ye tell me where I may meet with you
hereafter, to conferne with you on the affairs of this infant. That must you
not know by me, said the Damsel, or any other. Yet tell me your name, quoth
Gandales, if so it be your pleasure. By the faith you bear to the thing you
most love in the world, replied she you co^iure me so, as you shall know it:
albeit the thing that most I love, is he that wishes me least good, and would
you know what he is? it is the Knight against whom ere while you combated:
notwithstanding, I will not leave to entreat him at my pleasure, without he
being able to remedy himself. My name is Vrganda the unknown: and to the end
you may remember me an other time, behold me well at this present. At that
instant, she who showed her self to Gandales fair, young and fresh, as one of
eighteen years, became so old and over spent, as he meruailed how she could
sit on her horse, if then he was stricken into admiration, you may judge. But
when she had been a prittie while in that state, she took out of a little
bottell (which she carried) a certain unguent, wherewith she rubbed her face,
and right soon recovered her former countenance, saying to Gandales. What
judge ye now Sir? think you to find me hereafter against my will, using all
the diligence you can devise? never therefore put your self to such pain:
for when all living creatures go about it, if I list, they shall loose their
labor. In good faith Madame, answered Gandales, I now make no doubt thereof,
yet I beseech ye to be mindful of the Gentleman, who is forsaken of all but
my self. Do not you trouble your self therewith, said Vrganda, this
forsaking will be a recovering of much more. My love to him in greaterthen you
can imagine, being she that shortly intendes to receive by him two aids, which
no other can give me. In recompense whereof, I will give him two likewise,
wherewith he shall think himself highly satisfied. Let this suffice ye for
this time, because of necessity I must be gone: aduising ye, that you shall see
me again sooner then you think for. At these words the Damsel departed,
and Gandales, who had not all this while regarded the Knight against whom he
fought, seeing him now bareheaded, reputed him one of the goodlyest Gentlemen
that ever he had seen: who after he had taken up his Sheeld, and laced on his
helmet, followed the Damosel, wherefore for this time we will let them go,
continuing what happened to Gandales.

Vrganda being departed, he returned toward his Castle, meeting by the way with
the Lady, who^ Vrganda had caused to be chased from her friend, and this
sorrowful woman was heard by a Fountain, where she wept and lamented very
bitterly: when she espied him that came toward her, she easily knew him,
wherefore she thus spoke. Is it possible, Sir Knight, that the wicked creature
whom you succored, has done so much as to let you live? wicked she is not,
answered Gandales, but wise and virtuous: and if you be otherwise, I will make
you deny these foolish words. Ah God, said the Lady: how can the villain
deceive every one? How has she deceived you; replied Gandales. Alas, quoth the
Lady, she has taken from me the fair Knight that should be mine: and so may I
well say, seeing he would be more content to be with me, then with her. This is
mere folly, answered Gandales, for in mine opinion, both you and she do love
without reason. How ever it be, said the Lady, if I can I will be avenged. You
trauile in vain, quoth he, thinking to injury her that knows it, not only
before you execute it, but when you imagine it. In sooth answered the Lady,
this afternoon ye may be gone when you please: and nevertheless it often
happens, that those which think they know most by presumption, fall into the
greatest dangers. Gandales seeing her so impatient, commending her to God,
followed his way, thinking more of the young Gentleman's affairs, then what the
Lady had spoken to him. Being come to his Castle, and seeing the little boy
come running toward him, he took him up in his arms, and lovingly embracing
him, remembered what Vrganda had said to him, which made the tears stand in
his eyes with joy, saying within himself. Fair Child, I pray God I may live
so long, as to see thee such a one as I hope for. At this time the young Prince
was about three years old, who seeing his Lord weep, (as one moved with
compassion) he wiped his eyes, which made Gandales imagine great humanity in
him: and that as the child grew in age and strength, so waxed he in will, the
better to help him if he had occasion. Wherefore thence forward, he was very
careful of him, devising all means for his best education, and compayning
continually with his play fellow Gandalin, he took very great delight in
shooting.

He being come to the age of six years, King Languines and his Queen riding
through the Country, came to Gandales Castle, where they were royally feasted:
But before they there arrived, Gandales being advertised of their coming,
caused the young Prince and his companions to be hid in a back Chamber, fearing
that in respect of his beauty and good grace, the King would be desirous to
take him away with him, or else that the children would be troublesome to the
house. But it fortuned, that the Queen being lodged in one of the highest
rooms in the Castle, as she looked forth at a window, which was on that side
where the Children were, she espied the young Prince and his playfellowes
drawing their bows, and marking him very well, she liked him above all the
other, taking great pleasure to behold his countenance, thinking he was Son
to the Lord of the house: yet being doubtful, and not seeing any of whom she
might ask the question, she thus called to her Ladies. Come and behold the
fairest young creature that ever was seen. At these words they al came running,
and soon after, the Child being dry, left his bow by his companions, going
to drink at a conduit pipe, which was hard by: in mean while, one of them
that was bigger then the Prince, took up his bow to draw it, but Gandalin
would not suffer him, whereupon a great strife fell between them, and Gandalin
being the weakest, cried out: Gentleman of the sea, come help me. When the
Prince heard him, he left his draught, and ran to him that misused his brother,
taking his bow from him, giving him therewith a great stroke over the head,
saying: In an evil hour (varlet) do thou outrage my brother. The other not
content therewith, came to the Prince, and they fought together: yet he that
began the noise was glad to run thence, and by the way met their Governor, who
said: Whether runnest thou; Master, quoth he, the Gentleman of the sea will
beat me: then the Governor coming to the Prince, rigorously threatened him,
saying. What; are you already so bold to beat your companions; you shall be
talked withal by and by for it. When the Prince heard his threatening, he fell
down on his knees, saying. If you will appoint that I shall be beaten, more
gladly will I take it, then suffer my brother to be wronged in my presence.
With these words the tears trickled down his cheeks, which moved pity in the
Governor, wherefore he thus answered. If ever you do so again I will make ye
weep in an other sort. The Queen who had heard and seen all the debate, was
greatly abashed, wherefore they called the little boy, the Gentleman of the sea.

CHAP. IIII.
How King Languines carried away with him the Gentleman of the sea, and Gandalin
the Son of Gandales.

WHile the Queen thus beheld the Gentleman of the sea, the King entered her
Chamber accompanied with Gandales, of whom she presently demanded, if that
fair young Son were his. Yea Madame answered Gandales. And (quoth she) why
suffer you him to be called the Gentleman of the sea? Because Madame, said he,
that at return of my last voyage into little Brittayne, he was borne upon the
sea. Truly quoth she, he resembles you but little: and this was her opinion,
because the Prince was exellent fair, and Gandales somewhat heard favored,
yet a most gentle companion. It chanced during these speeches, that the King
cast his eye on the little Prince, to whom he seemed no less beautyfull then
he did to the Queen, wherefore he commanded Gandales to fetch him: for when I
go hence (quoth he) I will take him with me, and have him brought up with mine
one Son. In sooth my Lord, answered Gandales, he is yet to young to leave his
Mother: but having brought him, presented him to the King, who said. Fair
Child will ye go with me to the Court; My Lord, answered the Child, I will go
whether you please, if my brother shall go with me. And I quoth Gandalin, will
not tarry here without him. I perceive my Lord, said Gandales, that if you
take the one, you must needs have the other, for they will not be separated. I
am the better pleased, answered the King: then calling Agraies to him, said. My
Son, I will that you love these two Gentlemen, as I do their Father. When
Gandales saw, that the King would have them away in good earnest, with the
tears in his eyes, he thus spoke in his heart. My child, that so soon
beginnest to prove fortunate, now I see thee in the service of them, who one
day may (happily) serve thee, if it please God to guide and protect thee, as I
shall humbly pray for, and suffer that the words of Vrganda the unknown spoken
to me, may prove true: making me so happy, as to live to see the time, of those
great meruailes, promised thee in Arms. The King who noted Gandales, seeing
that his eyes were filled with tears, came to comfort him, saying. Believe me,
I never thought you had been such a fool, as to weep for a Child. Ah my Lord
answered Gandales, it may be upon greater occasion then you think for, and if
it please you to know the truth, I will presently tell ye here before your
Queen. So he told the whole discourse, how he found the Gentleman of the sea,
and in what equipage: and he had proceeded with that which Vrganda foretold
him, but that he remembered the oath he took. Now my Lord said Gandales, deal
for him as you shall please, for (so God help me) according to his beginning,
I think him to be issued of great lineage. When the King heard this, he
esteemed much the better of him, that he had so carefully nourished the child
he found, and thus answered. It is great reason (seeing god has done so much
for him, as to preserve him from so great a danger) that now we be diligent
inhis education, and endowe him with habilities when time shall serve. In good
faith my Lord, said the Queen, so please you, he shall be mine during his young
years, and when he comes to man's estate, I will deliver him to serve you. Well
Madame, quoth the King, I give him you. Now early on the next morning, the King
would set forward, wherefore the Queen, not having forgot the gift of her
Lord, took with her Gandalin and the young Gentleman of the sea, whom she
commanded to be so carefully attended as her own Son, for she took such
pleasure in beholding him, that daily she would have him near her own person,
because he had such a cheerful spirit, and so well governed withal, as he
was well liked of every one, so that whatsoever he did, passed with general
allowance, and no other pastime had he, but in shooting and cherishing dogs
for the chase.

Now does the Author leave this matter, returning to that which happened to
King Perion, and his new friend Elisena. King Perion (as you have already
heard) being in Gaul, where he understood by his Philosphers the exposition of
his dream, as also what the Damsel had told him: That when he recovered his
loss, the Kingdom of Ireland should loose her flower: he became more pensive
then before, yet could he understand nothing thereof. As he thus sadly spent
his days, it chanced that another Damsel entered his Palace, who brought him
a letter from Elisena, whereby she gave him to know, that King Garinter her
Father was dead, and she remained alone, and for this cause he should pity
her, in that the King of Scots would take her Kingdom from her. For the death
of King Garinter was Perion somewhat sorrowful, but yet he comforted himself,
by thinking he should go to see his friend, toward whom he had not diminished
one jot of his affection, wherefore he quickly dispatched the Damsel, saying
to her. Return and say to your Mistress, that without staying one whole day,
I shall be in short time with her. The Damsel well pleased with this answer,
returned, and after the King had set his affairs in order, he parted in good
equipage to see his Elisena, and iournied so speedily, as he arrived in little
Britain: where he heard news that king Languines had already gotten all the
chief of the Country, except those Cities which Garinter gave to Elisena, who
now abode (as he understood) at a place named Arcate, whether he addressed
himself. If he were there well received, I leave to your judgments, and she
likewise of him whom she loved so much. After the welcomming and feasting of
one another, the King told her that he would now marry her, and for that cause
she advertised her kindred and Subjects: which she did with all diligence could
be devised, as also with so great contentation as her heart might desire, for
herein only consisted the sum of her affections. Which being heard by the
King of Scots, and how to accomplish this, King Perion was already arrived with
his Sister: he sent immediately for all the noble men of his Realm, to bear
him company in doing honor and wel-come to the King his brother. At his
coming, he was graciously received by King Perion, and after by embracings
they had saluted each other, and the nuptials likewise thoroughly ended: the
kings derermined to return home into their own Countries.

King Perion travailing toward Gaul with his Queen Elisena, and somewhat
weary with tediousness of the way, he would refresh himself along by a River
side: and while the tents were erecting, he rode softly alone by the
waterbancke, imagining how he might know the truth, whether Elisena had a
child, according as his Philosophertold him in expounding his dream. But so
long continued he in this thought, that riding on without any regard, he came
to an Hermitage which was near at hand: wherefore finding himself at a place
of devotion, he alighted, tying his Horse to a tree, that he might go in to
say his prayers. And entering the Church, he found there a very ancient
religious man, who coming to meet him, said, Knight, is it true, that king
Perion is married to our kings daughter? yea verily, answered the king, Praised
be God, said the good Hermit, for I know certainly, that she loves him with
all her heart. How can you tell that; replied the king. Even from her own
mouth, said the good old man. The king then hoping he shoud hear of him the
thing which he most desired to know, said. I pray ye Father tell me, what you
have understood of her and me, for I am King Perion. Truly Sir, answered the
wise man, herein shall I greatly fault, and justly might she repute me an
heretic, if I should manifest what she has told me under confession: suffice
your self with that I have declared, namely, the true and sincere love she
bears you. But seeing I have met ye in a place so convenient, I will that ye
know, what a Damsel (in mine opinion very wise) said to me at the time you
came first into this country: yet spoke she to me so darkely, as I never knew
well how to comprehend her words, for she said. That from little Britain
should come two great Dragons, that should hold their government in Gaul, and
their hearts in great Britain, and from thence they should go to devour the
beasts of other Countries: but against some they should be brave and cruel,
and against other some humble and gracious, as though they had neither nails
or heart. At these words I became very pensive, nor could I ever since learn
the signification hereof. Nor did the King at this instant understand them, but
was in no less marvel then the Hermit: notwithstanding, no long time after
he found this prophecy to be true. Now the king having commended the holy man
to God, returned to his tents, where he saluted his Queen, yet would he not
tell her (as then) any thing of that wherewith his mind was troubled: but
dissembled the same till they were in bed, and after their accustomed
embracings, the king by an apt mean recou^ted to her, what his Astrologers had
said on his dream, earnestly desiring her to tell him, whether she had any
Child by him or no. When the good Lady heard this, she was surprised with shame
in such sort, as willingly she could have wished her self dead: and therefore
altogether denied the truth, so that at this time the king might not know what
he desired. On the morrow they departed thence and arrived in Gaul, where this
noble Queen was generally received with great joy. And because that (as it has
been heretofore rehearsed) the king bare hersinguler affection, he did for her
sake stay more in his Realm, then he was wont to do: so that not long after,
the Queen brought him a Son, who was named Galaor, and next a daughter
called Melicia.

B^e little Galaor being two yee^ and a half old, it chanced that one day
the king his father, soiourning not far from the sea side, in one of his
Cities named Orangill, standing at a window toward the Garden, where was then
the Queen with her son and Ladies sporting: there entered at a postern door
such a horrible Giant, as no man that ever saw him but was exceedingly
affraide, bearing on his neck a huge and mighty Mace. When the company of women
espied him, some fled among the trees, and other (not to see him) fell on the
ground: but the Giant made no reckoning of them, only he came to little Galaor,
whom he took in his arms, and in a laughter said. By my faith, the Damsel
said true. So without any thing else, taking away the Child, returned the same
way he came: and entering a Brigandine that there stayed for him, departed under
sail. In mean while the sorrowful Queen, who saw her son carried away.
(Forgetting through motherly love the fear of the Giant) followed him very
near, hoping to recover her little Galaor: but when she saw him enter the
Brigandine, God knows in what anguish she was, for her Son in crying said:
Ah help me mother. Alas she could not, and more strange then death she took
it, to see him carried away, (...) she loved as her own life: ^s extreme
dollour, she (...) her other Son thrown into the sea, wherefore the woeful
mother fell down in a swoune. King Perion her husband, who saw all this in the
p^ce where he stood, from whence he could not quickly come to aid the Queen
or her Son: at last came to the Queen, finding her in that case, and did so
much as he recovered her again. Then began she to make the most grievous moan
in the world, regreeting this new loss, by whom she before hoped to understand
of the first: and dispayring ever to hear any news of comfort, moved great
compassion in all that beheld her. All this while the king labored to persuade
her, whereby at last she reobtained the reason that before was absent,
whereupon the king said. Madame, we must thank God for all, and cheefely in
this case, for now I evidently see has happened, the effect of my dream,
whereof sometime I told ye: thus is little Galaor the last heart, that must be
taken from us against our will. Henceforth therefore fear not to declare, what
is become of the first, for considering the estate you then were in, you ought
not in reason to be blamed. At these words the mournful mother forgetting
none of the fault committed, told him the misfortune of her first borne Son,
entreating him to pardon her, seeing she did it throw fear of death, according
as was the law of the Country. In good faith Madame, answered the king, well
may ye assure your self, that while I live I will not be offended with ye on
your behalf, therefore I pray ye, take their desteny so secretly as you may:
for I trust in God, that seeing it has pleased him at our beginning, to
afforde us so little joy and comfort by our children, in time to come he will
recompense us with better success, and it may be yet one day, that we shall
hear good tidings of them.

Now leaving this, ye must note, that the Giant who bare away the young Prince,
was of the Country of Leonois, Lord of an Isle named Gandalan, wherein he had
two strong places. He was not a bloody man, as many other were, but of a gentle
and peaceable conversation; except when he was offended, for in his fury he
would do great cruelties. At one instant was the little barque so carried by
the wind, as he arrived in his country, which he had caused to be peopled with
Christians, and there he kept a Hermit of most holy life, to whom he went
saying. Father take this child, and nourish him for me, teaching him all that
is convenient in a knight, for I assure ye, he is the son of a king and a
Queen. Ah, said the Hermet, why have you done such a cruel deed? I will
tell ye, answered the Giant. Being minded to go combat with the Giant Albadan,
who most unhappily killed my father, as you know, and at this present forcibly
holds from me the Rock of Galteres, which by right appertains to me: being
thus embatqued to exccute mine intent, there came a Damsel to me, who said.
Thou abusest thy self, for what thou go about, must be done by the son to
king Perion of Gaul, who is much more strong and hardy then thou art. I
demanded by her faith, whether she told me true or no. That shlat thou see,
quoth she: At what time the two branches of one tree shall be joined, which at
this instant are severed: then did she tell me, where I should find him of
whom she spoke, and this is he I give you in guard, even as you love me. By
these means remained little Galaor in the holy man's charge, and there he
stayed so long, till he was of years to receive the order of Knighthood, as
hereafter shall be recited to you.

At this time reigned in great Britain a king named Falangris, who dying
without children, left one of his brethren his heir: no less prudent in all
affairs, then prompt at arms, and Knightly chiualry, being called Lisuart,
who married (not long before) with Brisana, daughter to the king of Denmark,
the fairest Lady that then was to be found in all the North parts.

And albeit she had been requested in marriage by great Princes of the country,
notwithstanding for fear of some, the father durst not consent to the oth^
which he would provide (...) sing one himself, and so (...) her to the young
Prince Lisuart, who for love served him, nor was he ignorant of the virtues
harboring in hi^ heart. Now after the death of Falangris, the Princes of great
Britain, knowing the right of Lisuart, sent for him to succeed in the Realm:
for he being in a strange country, whereby his hauty deeds and chiualry, he was
married in so good a place, therefore they pispatched their Ambassadors to him,
entreating him to accept the Realm and subjects of great Britain, and to
come to inuest himself therein.

CHAP. V.
How King Lisuart sailing by sea, landed in Scotland, where he was greatly
honored, and well entertained.

PRince Lisuart understanding his Subjects desire for his short return,
provided his equipage by Sea, being aided and assisted by the king of Denmark
his father in law, and afterward set sail toward great Britain. And because
he coasted along Scotland, he took landing there, whereof Languines being
advertised, came and received him very royally. Now was this new king of great
Britain accompanied with the Queen his wife, and a fair Princess their
daughter, aged (as is thought) about ten years, named Oriana, one of the
fairest creatures that ever was seen: and therefore (during the time of her
abode in Denmark) she was commonly called The only, because her paragon was
not to be found in beauty. This young Lady Oriana, being not used to travail on
the sea, found her self somewhat weary, and her father fearing a worse
mis-hap, entreated the king of Scotland she might stay with him till he sent
for her. Right gladly did king Languines and his Queen accept this charge,
wherefore king Lisuart, (without longer stay in Scotland) went to sea, where
weighing Anckers and hoising sails, in short time landed in his own Country,
where being arrived, before he could abide in quier, as in such occasions it
often falls out: certain rebels were found, whom in time he ouer-maistred,
which was the cause he could not so speedily send for his daughter that he left
in Scotland.

In this place the author leaves the new King peaceably ruling in great
Britain, and returns to the Gentleman of the sea, who by this time has
attained the age of twelve years: albeit in stature he seemed past fifteen,
and for his good grace (both of the Queen and the other Ladies) was loved and
esteemed more then any other. Now according as has been already declared, the
young Princess Oriana, daughter to King Lisuart, was left with the Queen of
Scots to refresh her self, till the King her father should send for her, and
to her did the Queen use all the gracious courtesies could be devised, saying
to her withal: Fair Madame, henceforth (so please you) shall the Gentleman of
the sea serve you, and be yours. Which the Princess Oriana willingly accepted,
wherefore the young Prince made such an impression of this kindnsse in his
spirit, as during life he meant to serve nor love any other; and therefore for
ever bequeathed to her his heart: but so well it came to pass, that this love
was mutual and equal between them both. Notwithstanding, the Prince for a
while having no knowledge thereof, thought himself unworthy so great good:
reputing it a very bold enterprise to think thereon, which was the cause he
durst not speak, but show his good will in outward semblance. The young
Princess who was of the same mind, and also in like pain, forbear to talk
more with him then any other, thereby to avoid all suspicion: but the eyes of
the two lovers doing their deuoire and office, entercoursed the thing which
most they esteemed, and thus covertly they lived, without acquainting each
other with this amorous affection. Soon after, this young unknown Prince,
seeing that to attain the good grace of the Lady he loved, it was necessary he
should take Arms, and receive the order of Knighthood, he said to himself. If
once I were a Knight, I would do such exployts, as should deserve the favor of
my Lady, or die in the attempt. And in this desire, one day finding king
Languines at leisure for his request, and coming to him in the garden where he
walked, he fell on his knee, using these speeches. My Lord, might it stand with
your pleasure, I gladly would receive my Knighthood. When the King heard him,
seeing his young years, he was greatly abashed, and thus answered. How now
Gentleman of the sea? Do you think your self already strong enough for such a
weighty charge? I^ sooth it is an easy thing to receive honor: but to
maintain it as behooves (it may be) is more hard then you esteem, so that
oftentimes a right good heart is troubled therewith. For if through fear or
cowardice he forsake what he ought to do, more better is death to him, then a
shameful life: therefore by mine advise, I would have you yet a while to
forbear. The Prince not contented with this answer, replied. I will not
forgo honor, my Lord, through any such fear as it pleases you to allege,
for if I had not the desire to do all that appertains to Chivalry, I would
not have been so bold to make this request: but seeing by your gracious favor
I have been hitherto nourished, most humbly I beseech ye to grant me this
petition, that I may receive no occasion of loosing your service, to seek else
where for obtaining my suite. The king highly esteemed the courage of the
youth, and doubting least he would depart indeed, answered. Assure your self
Gentleman, that I will do it when I see it necessary for ye, in mean while
provide your Arms and what else belongs: Yet tell me (fair Sir) to whom
(if I refused) would you go for your order. To King Perion, said the Prince,
who is reputed a good and hardy Knight, for he has married the Sister to your
Queen, who makes me believe that he will not deny me: when I shall let him
understand, how she has nourished me, and that I am her servant. It is true,
quoth the King, but for this present have a little patience, and when time
serves, you shall be honorably knighted: in mean while he gave charg, that all
his needful accoutrements for the cause should be provided.

Now did the king advertise Gandales hereof, who was so contented therewith,
as he soon dispatched a Damsel toward the young Prince: by whom he sent the
Sword, the Ring, and the letter covered with wax, which he found in the chest
he took out of the sea. Such speed made the Damsel, as she came to the
Prince, at what time he was sporting with Oriana and the other Ladies, while
the Queen slept. At that instant was he in such a sollemne thought of Oriana,
as not daring to lift up his eyes to behold her, said within himself. Ah God,
why have thou endued this Lady with such exellent beauty, that unhappy I should
suffer so extreme passions by loving her? Ah mine eyes, too high did ye look
when ye beheld her, of whom you are not worthy: but if the worst happen, death
shall satisfy this timeritie, whereto my heart (for her) is humbled. In this
thought he was like to fall down, so had he forgotten and ouergone himself:
when a page came to him, saying. Gentleman, there is a strange Damsel
attending without, who has brought you certain presents, and would speak
with ye. When she (who loved him) heard this message, her heart began to tremble
in such sort, as being not able to endure this new flame, she called to the
Prince, saying. I pray ye stay here, and let the Damosel come in, that we may
have the sight of what she has brought: which he did, and the Damsel being
entered, thus spoke to him. My Lord, your good friend Gandales saluteth you, as
the man whom he only loves, and has sentye this Ring, this wax, and this
Sword, which he desires ye (for his sake) to keep while you live. The Prince
having received the presents, laid the Ring and wax aside, to behold the
Sword, which being without a sheath, was ^apped in a fine linen cloth, whereat
he greatly meruailed: and (...) was musing thereon, Ori^ the wax, thinking it
to be some other thing, and said. Believe me Gentleman, for my part I would
have this wax. You may have it if you please Madame, quoth he, but me thinks
this fair Ring were better forye. I will have nothing but this wax, said
Oriana, and so took it. During these discourses, the King came, who said to
the Prince: What think ye of that Sword? My Lord, quoth he, I find it a very
fair one, but I marvel wherefore it has no scabbard. It is said the King,
very near fifteen years since it had one: and having so said, he laid it
aside, proceeding thus. You would be a Knight, and know not whether you ought
to be one or no: therefore it is necessary that you understand what you are,
and I to tell you so much as I know. Hereupon he declared, how he was found in
a chest on the sea, with the ^rd and the Ring, as you have alre^rd. I believe
my Lord, quoth the Prince, that for your pleasure you use this invention,
because the Damsel when she entered said: that my good friend Gandales sent me
these presents, but I think she failed in her words, and would have said my
father Gandales. Notwithstanding (my Lord) if it be so as you have rehearsed, I
am not displeased thereat: except in not knowing of whence I am, nor they me,
yet do I think my self a Gentleman, for my heart persuades me of no less. Now
therefore it is more necessary that I be Knighted then before, to the end I may
labor to become such a one as may acquire honor and reputation, seeing I have
no parents by whom I may be named, not knowing what I am. When the King heard
him speak so virtuously, he esteemed much better of him then before, thinking
himself, that he could not but be a man of calling and hardy.

As thus they were devising, a Gentleman came to the King, and said. My Lord,
King Perion your brother is come to the Court. The King very glad thereof,
departed to receive his brother, and embracing him, thus spoke. I see my good
brother, you meant to take me unprovided, for little did I think of your so
sudden arriual in this country. Noble brother, answered King Perion, I come to
request the aid of my friends, because I have more need of them at this time
then ever I had: for Abies King of Ireland threatens me with strong war, and
is with great puissance entered my Kingdom, so that he and Dagauel his Cousin,
have laid very severe siedge to me. And which is worst of all, Fortune has so
hardly dealt with me, that certain whom I trusted have forsaken me, and the
greatest part of my other friends are ouerthrown in the skirmishes we have had
together, so that now I come to request your succor in this extreme need.
Truly brother, answered Languines, you may be sure thereof, and your
misfortune grieueth me not a little: but I will provide therefore so well as I
can. Agraies who was newly knighted, being hot and ready to Arms, having heard
the request of his Uncle, and the grant the King his father had made him of
assistance: came and fell on his knee before him, saying. I beseech ye father
let me obtain one boon at your hands. The King who loved him as himself,
answered. Demand what thou will, for it shall not be denied thee. I desire your
sufferance, quoth Agraies, that I may go to Gaul to aid the Queen my Aunte.
In good faith, said the King, well content am I, and in good equipage shall
thou go and strongly accompanied. When the Gentleman of the sea heard this
determination, he was more earnest to compass his enterprise then before: and
seeing king Perion was present, he could not glut his eyes with beholding him,
only for the good report he had heard of him: for he thought not then of any
affinity or parentage, but would rather be Knighted by his hand then any
other, in respect of his high and hautghy deeds of Arms. And to attain his
purpose, he thought best to entreat the Queen, hoping that if she would do so
much for him, as to move the King her brother therein she should not be
gainsaid: and for he saw her so sad, that he durst not speak to her, he boldly
went to Oriana, and setting his knee to the ground, said. I pray ye Madame tell
me what causes the Queen to be so pensive? Orina beholding the man before
her, whom she loved in her very Soul, albeit neither he or any other knew it:
was surprised whith such vehemence of love, as she couldhardly tell how to
dissemble it, yet thus she answered. Gentleman of the sea and my friend, I will
take pain to know, then shall I tell ye with all my heart, seeing it is the
first request that ever ye made to me. Madame, quoth he, I know in my self so
small deserving toward you, that I account my self unworthy to request any
thing of you: but I should think I were happy if I had the mean to obey you,
or that it would please you to command me. What? said she, have you so base a
mind, and such small estimation of your self? Madame, answered he, in what sort
soever it be, I have no forces at all, but such as have left me in great desire
to serve you: for my heart is altogether yours, and can receive nothing but from
you. Mine? quoth Oriana, and since when? Since the time it pleased you Madame,
replied the Prince. And when was it, quoth she, that it pleased me; At that
time, answered the Prince, when the king your father left you in this Country,
if you remember, and when the Queen presented me to you, saying: I give you
this Gentleman to serve you, and at that time you accepted me as yours, when
you answered, that you were well contented. Then was I given to you, and yours
only I reputed my self, so that I have no authority over my self. Certes,
said Oriana, you took her words to better end, then at that time she meant
them: which I take in good part, and am content it shall be so. No sooner had
she thus said, but the Prince was overcome with such joy, as he had no power to
answer. Oriana perceiving it, made no show thereof, but said she would go to
the queen, to do what he had desired: and returned soon after, telling him,
that her grief was for the Queen of Gaul her sister, because the King of
Ireland so oppressed her country. So please you Madame, answered the Prince, if
I were Knighted, I gladly would go succor her, with your leave. And without my
leave, quoth Oriana, will ye not go? Not for death, said he, for without your
gracious favor, my conquered heart can have no force or virtue in any peril.
At these words Oriana smiled, saying. Seeing then you are mine, I grant you to
be my Knight, and you shall aid the Queens sister. Most humbly did the Prince
give her thanks, telling her, how the King thought it not good to give him the
order of Knighthood, but had denied him: yet, quoth he, is King Perion here as
you know, at whose hands (so pleased you to entreat it) I would more willingly
receive it, then of any other. Nor will I let for that, said she, and the
better to compass your desire: I will cause the Princess Mabila to bear me
company, for whose sake he will the sooner grant it. So presently she went to
her, and told what she and the Gentleman of the sea had concluded, to attain
his Knighthood, and how feign he would have it at King Perions hand, for which
cause she entreated her assistance in the suit. Mabila who loved the Prince
very well, thus answered. I assure ye (sister) there shall be no want in me, for
so well does the Gentleman deserve, as would make one do much more then this
for him, wherefore let him be ready this night in the Queens Chapel: then
when time shall serve, we will go with our women to accompany him, and I will
send for the King mine Uncle (which shall be somewhat before the break of day)
that he may come see me, and he being come to us, you and I will move him in
the matter, which I hope he will grant us, considering he is a very gracious
and affable Prince. This is very well appointed, answered Oriana: wherefore
they sent for the Prince, and told him all the platform they had laid: who
humbly thanking them, would provide all things ready for himself, and
therefore departed. Then went he to find Gandalin, making him acquainted with
the whole, saying. I pray ye brother, convey mine armor so closely as you can
into the Queens Chapel, because I hope this night to receive mine order: and
for I must right soon depart hence, I would know if you have any will to bear
me company. Believe me, quoth Gandalin, never with my will shall I depart from
ye. Of these words was the Prince so glad, that the tears stood in his eyes
with joy. Well said he, provide all things ready as I told ye: wherein Gandalin
failed not, for ere supper he took such order, as all was done unseen of any,
and the Prince got him secretly into the Chapel, where he armed himself
except the head and hands. So staying there for the Ladies and King Perion, he
fell on his knees before the Alter, desiring God to be his aid: not only in
conquering such as he should deal withal in Arms, but also in obtaining her,
who caused him to endure so many mortal passions. The night being come, and the
Queen with-drawne, the Princesses Oriana and Mabila with their women, came to
the chapel where the Gentleman of the sea attended, and Mabila having sent for
K. Perion, he was no sooner entered but she thus began. My L. seeing you have
taken so much pains for me as to come hither, I pray you grant Madame Oriana,
daughter to King Lisuart, a small request she will make to ye. I would be
loath, said the King to deny her, as well for her Fathers honor as her own
sake. Oriana arose to thank him, whom when he beheld so fair, he thought all
the world could not match her in beauty: thus speaking to her. Madame, does it
please you to command me any thing? Not command my Lord, quoth she, but entreat
ye to give my Gentleman the order of knighthood: this said she, pointing to
him as he kneeled before the Altar. When the king saw him, he wondered at his
goodly stature, and said to him. My friend, would you receive the order of
Knighthood; Yea my good Lord, answered the Prince, may it please you to give
it me. In Gods name be it done, said the King, who give you grace so well to
proceed therein, as he has bestowed seemly perfection on you. Then putting
on his right spur, and dubbing him with his Sword, thus spoke. Now have ye the
Order appertaining to a Knight, but I would oppertunity had served me, to have
given it you with greater honor: notwith-standing, according to mine opinion of
you, I hope you will prove such, as your renown shall supply what wants here
in performance. Afterward King Perion took leave of the Ladies, who highly
thanked him, and then set on his way toward Gaul, commending the new Knight to
the heavenly protection: this was the first act, that might bear testimony of
these lovers sweet desires. If it seem to the Reader, that their purpose was
not according to affection, but simple in respect of their vehement passions: I
answer, that they ought to excuse their age, likewise it often comes to
pass, that they which think themselves most expert in those pleasing and
amorous actions, have been by this God so strongly bound, and lively
attainted: as not only he deprived them of speech, but of judgment also, and it
is necessary for such persons to use greater words, then these two who as yet
had not learned them. But this new Knight being thoroughly furnished, and ready
to his journey by his Ladies consent: would in thanking the company, take a
more secret conge of Oriana. And she who for his sudden parting, felt new
passions in her heart, yet nevertheless dissembling the^: took him by the
hand, and walking aside, thus spoke. Gentleman of the sea, you will be gone
then, but first I pray ye tell me, whether you be the Son of Gandales or no:
for according to the good opinion I have of you, I think you to be issued of
better place. Then rehearsed he all that King Languines had told him, wherein
she conceived very great pleasure: which done, they committed each other to
God. So departed the Prince from this company, and right-soone found Gandalin,
who attended for him at the Kings lodging door, with the rest of his Arms and
his Horse, whereon he mounted, and left the City unseen of any, because as
yet it was not day, so rod they on till they came into a Forest.

Now is the greatest part of the day spent, before they would refresh
themselves in any place: but hunger constrained them to feed on such viandes
as Gandalin had brought with him from the City. During this time, they heard
in the Wood on their right hand the voice of some one, which seemed to them
very doleful, wherefore the Prince rode presently that way: where he found a
knight dead, and hard by him another in little better case, for he was so
wounded, that he had no hope to live. As for the party that so cried, it was a
woman who lay upon the knight, pressing him so sore, as made his heart to fail
him: and which was worst of all, the villainous woman to cause his death the
sooner, cruelly thrust her hands into his wounds. But when the wounded knight
espied the Prince, so well as he could he craved succor, saying. Ah gentle Sir,
for Gods sake suffer me not to be thus murdered by this ribaud. Greatly was
the Prince abashed at this wicked dealing, and therefore very roughly thus
spoke. Woman withdraw your self, for you do the thing not beseeming you or
your like. She as one ashamed, retired, and the Knight full of anguish fell in
a swoune, which made the Prince very desirous to know what he was: but fearing
that he had already yielded his breath, quickly alighted, and used such good
means as revived him again, when he began to cry. Ah I am dead, good friends
bring me to some place where I may have council for my soul. Take courage,
answered the Prince, for you shall have what you demand: but I pray ye tell me,
what fortune brought ye hither, or where is he that has thus hardly entreated
ye? It is, said the Knight, through this wicked woman, who (albeit I was rich
and puissant, yea far much more then she) I made choice, for the good love I
bare her, and espoused her as my wife: nevertheless she discourtebus creature,
forgetting the good and honor I had done her, has sundry times abandoned her
honest regard, namely this night past with this Knight here dead, whom I
having never before seen, by chance yesterday he came to me: and this last
night thus villanously abused me, where taking him with the head, we had a
combat together, wherein (as you see) he lost his life. But when this strumpet
saw I had slain him, fearing I would do as much to her: she fell at my feet
and desired pardon, whereto I easily condiscended, provided, that she offended
no more. Hereupon, I entreated her to bind up my wounds, but she perceiving how
grievously I was hurt, and brought into very weak estate through overmuch
loss of my blood, to revenge the adulterous villains death, she assaied to
kill me outright: and to make me languish the more in dying, cruelly she thrust
her hands into my wounds, so that well I perceive I cannot long live. Therefore
I beseech ye good Sir, help me to an Hermitage which is near at hand, where I
shall find some religious man, to comfort me in the agony of my Soul. Such
compassion took the Prince on him, as he and Gandalin taking him in their
arms, carried him on a Horse to the Hermitage: in mean while the wretched
woman stole away privily, and a little before, she fearing that her Husband
would be revenged on her, sent for help to three of her brethren, who dwelled
not far from that place, giving them to understand which way they should come.
In her wandering they met with her, and she had no sooner espied them, but she
thus cried out. Ah help me good brethren, for here before is a these, who
has slain this Knight which lies here, and has beside so wounded my
Husband: as there is no hope of life left in him: let him not therefore escape
ye, not he that is in his company, because the one is as deep in the evil as
the other. Such like speeches used this Harlot, that by the death of the Prince
and Gandalin, her treason might be covered: therefore that her Husband should
not die alone with her will, she showed them the Gentleman of the sea, even as
he returned from the Hermitage where he left the wounded Knight. Here-upon the
three brethren (too light of belief) galloped toward him, crying. Traitor
thou art but dead. You lie villains, answered the Prince, for right well shall
I defend my self from such traitors as you are. Bestirre thy self then, said
the brethren, for thou have offended us all three, and we all will be revenged
on thee if we may. By good hap the Prince had his Sheeld and Lance ready, and
his Helmet very well laced, wherefore without any further answer, he sharply
charged them, and meeting with the first, pierced through both his Sheeld and
arm: and withal threw his Horse and him so fiercely against the ground, as
his right shoulder was broken in the fall: in like manner was one of the Horses
legs, so that neither the one or other could rise. At this encounter he brake
his Lance, wherefore he suddenly drew his Sword, and addressing himself to
the other twain, gave one of them such a forcible stroke, as slicing through
his Armor, entered the flesh to the very bone on his shoulder likewise, so that
therewith he fell from his saddle. Being thus dispatched of two, he came to the
third, and saluted him with such a sound blow on the Helmet, as the poor
Gentleman was constrained to embrace the neck of his Horse, thereby to sheeld
himself from falling, finding himself as greatly amazed as the other were.
Here-upon the woman that brought them thither fled away, which the Prince
perceiving cried to Gandalin that he should stay her: in mean while the first
Knight having recovered himself, used these speeches to the Prince. We know
not Sir, whether this fight has been for right or wrong, For right it could
not be, answered the Prince, unless you think I have done wrong, in
succouring the husband to this traitorous woman, whom cruelly she has caused
to die. When the three Knights heard that, they were very much abashed, and then
thought they had been abused by their sister, wherefore they thus replied. In
sooth my Lord, so please you to assure us, we will show on what occasion we
assailed you. You shall have good assurance so to do, said the Prince, yet
will I not acquit ye from the combat. Then he that first spoke, rehearsed all
the words of their sister, according as has been already declared. In good
sooth quoth the Prince, never was villainy disguised in such sort, for she
has done far otherwise: as you may understand by her husband himself, who
being nere his death, I conuaied to an Hermitage hard at band. Seeing it has
so fallen out, said the three brethren, dispose of us as they that remain at
your mercy. And mercy shall ye have, answered the Prince, if first ye will
loyally swear to me, that you will carry this woman and her husband, to the
Court of King Languines, and there before him recite all that has happened:
saying withal how you were thereto constrained by a young Knight that sent ye
thither, and who this day departed from his Court, desiring him to censure on
this mis-deed as he shall think good. All this they promised and swore to
perform: wherefore commending them to God, he rode away, leaving them together.

CHAP. VI.
How Vrganda the unknown, brought a Lance to the Gentleman of the sea.

THis quarrel thus ended with the three Knights, the Gentleman of the sea
took the way which before he had left: but they had not ridden long, till they
saw two Damsels come toward them by two sundry ways, who addressed
themselves to meet together, which when they had done, they entered into
communication. One of them bare a Lance in her hand, and when they were come
to the Prince, she with the Lance advanced her self to him saying. My Lord,
take this Lance which I give ye, because I can assure ye, that within three
days it will stand ye in good steed, as therewith you shall deliver from
death, the house from whence ye are descended. The Prince amazed at these
words, thus answered. How can it be Lady, that a house should live or dye; It
shall be, quoth she, even so as I have said, and this present I was desirous to
bring ye, as a beginning of recompense, for two favors I hope to receive by
you, the first whereof shall be: When one of your best friends, shall by you
have one of the greatest honors that ever he can receive, whereby he shall fall
into the deepest danger, that any Knight has done these ten years space.
Believe me Lady, answered the Prince, such honor (if God please) I will not do
my friend. Full well I know, quoth the Damsel, that so it shall come to
pass: then putting on her Palfray, departed: this Damsel you must note, was
Vrganda the unknown. When the other Damsel (who heard the words) saw her
forsake her company, she determined for certain days to stay with the Prince,
to see what he should do, wherefore she said. My Lord, although I am a
stranger, if you think it conueneient, I would gladly for a while abide with
ye, deferring a iourny that I have to my mistress. The Prince well perceived
she was a stranger, which made him to demand of whence she was: where-to she
replied, that she was of Denmark. And that himself could not gainsay,
because her language gave assurance thereof, for having heard his Lady Oriana
at her first coming into Scotland, it made him the better remember that
Country speech, whereupon he said. If you please (fair Damsel) to go with
me, I will defend ye to my power: but I pray ye tell me, if you know the other
Lady that even now gave me this Lance? Truly Sir, quoth she, never did I see
her, till now I met her on the way, and then she said to me: that the Lance
she carried, she would give to the best Knight in the world, desiring me
(withal) to let you understand after her departure, that she bare you great
affection, and how she was named Vrganda the unknown. Ah God, quoth he, how
unfortunate am I (...) not knowing her, if I forbear now presently to follow
her, you must think Lady the cause is, that I cannot find her against her
will: and thus devising they rode on, until the dark evening ouer-tooke them.

At this time it so chanced that they met with a Squire, who demanded where
they intended to find lodging travailing so late. Where we can, answered the
Prince. In good faith, said the Squire, if you mean to have lodging, you must
leave the way which now you take, for you cannot long time come to any that
way: but if you will follow me, I will conduct you to a Castle belonging to my
father, who shall do you all the honor and good entertainment may be devised.
The Damosel thinking this council good, desired the Prince to accept thereof,
which he did, therefore the Squire rode before them as their guide, leading
them derectly forth of the way, because he had never seen the combats of
Knights errand: and hoping to conduct them the day following to a Castle where
such pastime was used, but that night he brought the^ to their lodging,
feasting and entertaining them very sumptuously: yet could the Prince take no
rest all the night, for thinking on the Lady that brought him the Lance. On
the morrow very early they would be gone, and taking leave of their host, the
Squire said he would bring them again into their way, acquainting the Prince
as he rode, with the custom of the Castle, which being very near at hand he
showed them: the Castle standing very strong and pleasantly, for before it ran
a huge swift River, and no passage thereto, but over a long drawbridge, having
at the end a fair. Tower for defense thereof. When the Prince beheld it, he
thought he must needs pass thither by the bridge, yet he asked the Squire if
there were any other way. No my Lord, quoth he, for this is the vsaull passage.
March on then, said the Prince, wherewith the Squire, the Damsel and their
company set forward, but the Gentleman of the sea remaining behind, entered into
such a thought of his Lady Oriana, as he had well near forgotten himself: but
at length he heard the noise of six Halberders, armed with Corslets and
Helmets, who at the entrance of the bridge had arrested the Damsel, and there
would force her to take an oath, that she should never bear love to her
friend, if he would not promise her to aid King Abies of Ireland against King
Perion: which she refusing, cried to the Prince for his assistance. This
clamor made him forget his musing, when adressing himself to the Pal^^ardes,
he said. Traitorous villains, who commanded you to lay hands on this Lady
being in my charge; In speaking these words, he came to the chiefest of the
six, from whom right-soone he caught his hatchet, and gave him such a stroke
therewith, as he fell to the ground. All the other together presently set upon
him, but one of the^ he sliced to the very teeth, and soon after another bare
him company, with the loss of his arm. When the three that were left saw
their companions so handled, they took themselves to flight, and the Prince
followed them so near, as one of them left his leg behind him, the other
twain he let go, returning where he left the Damosel. to whom he said. Now
boldly go on, and like evil fortune may they have, that encourage any villainy,
to lay forsible hand on Lady or Damsel. She being assured by these words,
went on with the Prince and his Squires: but ere they had gone any thing far,
they heard a great noise and tumult within the Castle. Me thinks Sir, said
the Damosel, I hear a marvelous murmuring within this Fortress, therefore I
would advise ye to take the rest of your armor. Go on quoth the Prince, and
fear not, for where Ladies are evil entreated (who ought every where to go
in safety) there hardly abides any man of value. In sooth, said she, if you
do not what I have desired, I will not pass any further: and so much she
persuaded him, that at length he laced on his Helmet: afterward he went into
the Castle, at the entrance whereof, he met a squire weeping, who said. Ah
God, why will they murder (without cause) the best knight in the world? aias
they would enforce him to promise, what is impossible for him to accomplish.
These words of the Squire, could not stay the Prince, for he saw King Perion
(who had so lately Knighted him) very hardly used by two Knights, who with the
help of ten armed Halberders had round beset him, saying swear, if not, thou
die. Greatly did it grieve the Prince, to see such outrage offered to King
Perion, wherefore he thus called to them. Traitorous villains, what moves you
to misuse the best Knight in the world; by heaven you shall all die for him. At
these words, one of the Knights left the King, and taking five Halberders with
him, came to the Prince, saying. It likewise behooves you to swear, if not,
you can escape no better then an other. What? quoth he, shall I then swear
against my will; by Gods leave it shall not be so. Then they of the Castle
cried to the Porter, that he should shut the gate, wherefore the Prince now saw
he must stand upon his defense: whereupon he ran fiercely against the Knight,
charging him in such sort, as he fell down dead over the crupper of his
Horse, for in the fall he brake his neck. Which the Prince beholding, not
tarring any longer with the Halberders, came to the other knight that combated
with K. Perion, piercing his Lance quite through his body, so that he
accompanied the first in fortune. King Perion seeing himself thus succored,
so cheered up his heart, as he did much better then before against his enemies,
causing them by sharp strokes of his Sword to retire: in mean while the
Gentleman of the sea, (being on Horsebaeke) ran among them and scattered
them, tumbling one down here, and another there, so that at length by the aid
of the king, they were all slain, except certain that fled away on the top of
the walls. But the Prince alighted and followed them, whereat they were so
affrighted, as they cast themselves down headlong from the walls: only two got
them into a Chamber, where they thought to remain in safety, notwithstanding
he pursued them so near, as he buckled pel mel with them. But within the
Chamber on a bed lay an ancient knight, whose unwieldy age had taken from him
the use of his legs, to them that came in he used these speeches. Cowardly
villains, from whom run ye so shamefully; From a knight, answered one of them,
who has plaide the Devil in your Castle, for he has slain your two
Nephews, and all our companions. As thus he spoke, the Prince caught him by
the head, saying. Tell me (villain) where is the Lord of this place, or else
thou die. The poor man seeing himself in such peril, showed him the old
knight lying on the bed: but when the Prince saw him so old and decrepite, he
blamed him in this manner. Thou wretched old man, has death already seized on
thy bones, and yet do thou cause such a wicked custom to be maintained
here? Well does thine age excuse thee from bearing Arms, yet shall I give
thee thy desert belonging to such a villain. With these words he made offer to
smite off his head: Wherefore the affrighted old man cried: Alas my Lord, for
Gods sake mercy. None at all, quoth the Prince, thou art dead if thou swearest
not to me, that while thou live, such like treason shall be no more
maintained in this place: whereto the old knight right gladly took his oath.
Now tell me, said the Prince, wherefore have thou heretofore kept this
custom here; For the love of King Abies of Ireland, answered the Knight, who
is mine Nephew, and because I cannot aid him with my person in his war, I was
desirous to succor him with such Knights errand as pasfed this way. False
villain, answered the Prince, what have Knights errand to do with thy desire:
so spurning the bed with his foot, threw it down, and the old Knight under
it: where commending him to all the Devils, he left him, and coming down into
the Court, took a Horse which was one of the slain Knights, and bringing it
to the King, said. Mount your self my Lord, for it little likes me to stay any
longer here, where such bad people have their habitation. The king presently
went to Horse bake, and so they rode together out of the Castle: but the
Prince fearing least the king should know him, would by no means take off his
Helmet, notwithstanding as they rode along, the king thus spoke to him. I pray
ye Sir knight tell me of whence you are, that have succored me when I was so
near my death: warranting me also hereafter from the enemies of this place,
and showing your self a good friend to Ladies and knights errand. As for me, I
am the same man against whom they kept this straight passage, importing the
cruel oath for which you combated. My Lord, answered the Prince, I am a knight
desirous to do you any service. Believe me, quoth the king, that have I already
well perceived, for hardly should I have found so good a friend to help me:
yet will I not give over till I know ye. Alas my Lord, said he, that will
little profit ye. Notwithstanding, quoth the King, I pray ye take off your
Helmet: which he would not do, but put down his Beuer a little. When the king
saw that his entreaty would not prevail, he desired the Damsel to obtain
so much for him: whereto she condiscended, took the Prince by the hand,
saying. I beseech ye Sir, grant the king what he has requested. He seeing her
importunate, took off his Helmet, when presently the king knew him, that it was
the same man he had knighted at the Ladies motion, wherefore embracing him, he
said. Right glad am I to know so dear a friend. My Lord, quoth the Prince, I
knew you so soon as I came to the Castle, to be the man that gave me mine
order of knighthood, wherewith (so please it God) I mean to serve you while
your war continues in Gaul: and willingly I would not be known by any one
till your troubles be finished. You have already, said the King, done so much
for me, as I rest bounden to you while I live, allowing you to dispose of me
and mine: and if (as you say) you come into Gaul, you shall augment with
advantage the honor due to you, then justly may I term the hour happy, that
it was my fortune to make so good a Knight. Such like words used King Perion*
little thinking how near they were allied together, and thus they rode
devising, till at length they came to a double way, when he demanded of the
King, which of those ways pleased him to take. This on the left hand, answered
the King, because it guides directly to my Country, God have you then in his
keeping, said the Prince, for I must needs side this other way; I pray ye,
quoth the King, remember your coming into Gaul as you promised me, for the
hope I have in you, has abridged part of my sorrow, and gives me assurance
withal, that by your means I shall recover my loss. So took they leave of
each other, the king toward Gaul, and the Prince in company with the Damsel
and Gandalin: but because she had now seen what she desired, namely the proof
of the Lance which Vrganda gave him, she would travail no further out of her
way, but turning to the Prince, said. I have hitherto (my Lord) with right good
will kept ye company, because the Lady that gave ye the Lance, said she
brought it to the best knight in the world, and surely I have seen so much, as
I stand in no doubt of her speeches: wherefore I shall now shape my course to
find her I am sent to, as before I told ye. I pray ye Lady, quoth he, tell me
what she is. It is, said she, the Princess Oriana, Daughter to king Lisuart of
great Britain. When he heard her named whom he loved so dearly, his heart
began to tremble in such sort, as he had fallen beside his Horse, but that
Ga^dalin stayed him, yet fetching a great sigh, said. Ah God, my heart fails
me, the Damsel thinking some sudden sickness was the cause thereof, would have
had him unarmed: but he told her it was needless, for he was oftentimes wont
to feel such passions. The Squire (who all this while had been their guide)
took leave of the Prince, asking the Damsel if her way lay toward the Court
of King Languines: which she affirming, he said he would accompany her thither,
because he had business of some importance there. So having courteously saluted
each other, they returned the same way they came, and the Prince rode on with
Gandalin to seek adventures.

Here leaves the Author, to tell ye what happened to Galaor, whom the Giant
earied away, and gave in keeping to the aged Hermer, as already you have heard.
By this time had Galaor attained the age of sixteen years, (...) increasing
in stature and comely perfection: having no other exercise, then reading on a
Book which the old man (...) him, discoursing the deeds of Arms of sundry
ancient Knights. Here in he took in great pleasure, as on this occasion, as
also by a natural instinct he was desirous to be Knighted, never the less, he
knew not whether by right such honor appertained to him, Very earnestly he
questioned thereon with the Hermet, but the holy man who knew right well, that
so soon as he received the order, he should combat against the Giant Albadan:
his eyes being filled with tears, he thus answered. My son, much better were
it for you to labor in the safety of your soul, then to adventure on the
order of Knighthood, which is to be maintained with wondrous travail.
Father, quoth Galaor, very hardly shall I follow the calling, which I take
against my will: but in that whereof my heart has made choice, if God grant me
good success, will I advance his service, for there-out may I not be during
life. The good Hermit, who then well perceived his grounded resolution,
replied. Certes my Son, seeing you are determined to follow Arms, I can well
assure ye, that through fault of high lineage, you need not despair of good
hap, in respect you are son to a King and Queen: but keep that to your self,
and let not the Giant know how I told ye so much. When Galaor heard this, he
was exceedingly contented, saying to the Hermit. In sooth Father, the care I
have had all my life time to be a Knight, has been very great: but now I
thank God and you, I am rid thereof, for by that you have told me, I cannot
miss of it. The Hermit noting his earnest affection, doubted least soon after
he would be gone: wherefore he gave the Giant to know his Scholars forwardnes,
as also how his constitution did now very well serve him, being wonderful
desirous of his knighthood, and therefore he should now deal in the cause as
best himself pleased. No sooner was the Giant informed hereof, but presently
he got him to Horseback, and rode to the Hermit, with whom he found Galaor,
of more large stature then his years expressed, very comely and beautyfull in
every part, whereupon he thus spoke to him. I understand Son, that you would
be a Knight to follow Arms, truly you shall, prepare yourselfe to go with me
when time serves, and your desire shall be honorably satisfied. Father answered
Galaor, herein consists the sum of mine affection: so not long after, the
Giant departed from the Hermit, taking Galaor with him, who falling on his knee
before the reverent old man, desired that as he had fatherly nourshed him, so
still he would remember him in his devout orisons. The holy man with the tears
tricling down his cheeks, kissed and blessed him, then mounted Galaor on
Hors-back and followed the Giant, who brought him home to his Castle: where
for certain time he practiced to combat at Arms, as also bravely to manage
Horses, having all things convenient for the same, and two masters very expert
therein. When he had continued a year at these exercises, the Giant seeing him
worthy to receive honor, and strong enough to endure chivalry: disposed
thereon as you shall read hereafter.

Now again does the Author leave him, and discourses of that which chanced to
the Gentleman of the sea, who after he departed from King Perion and the
Damsel, rod two days together, without any adventure: and on the third about
midday, he arrived at a very goodly Fortress, that appertained to a Gentleman
named Galpan. This Galpan was then the most valiant Knight in all that Country,
and therefore was greatly feared of all his Neighbors, yet did he there
maintain an abominable and wicked custom: forgetting God, who was cheefely
to be honored, bequeathed his endeavors to the service of the Devil. For he
constrained all Ladies and Damosells that passed by his Castle, to enter in,
where vilainously he took his pleasure of them: and not contented therewith,
enforced them to swear, that while they lived they should bear affection to
none but him, if any denied, he caused them cruelly to be put to death.
Likewise he compelled such Knights as travailed that way, to combat one alone,
against his two brethren, but if they were vanquished, he would force the
conqueror to deal with himself, he being the most hardy knight in all those
parts. If it happened that he brought the into any debilitie, he would take
from them all they had, turning them away on foot, after he had made them
swear, to name themselves while they lived, the vanquished by Galpan,
otherwise, he would deprive them of life. But God displeased with the cruelty,
which so long time he had used to the hurt of many good people, would now alter
this great inconvenience, and that Galpan with his accomplices should receive
guerdo^ to their deserts, making them an example to all other, as you shall
hear presently recited.

CHAP. VII.
How the Gentleman of the sea, combated with the guarders of Galpans Castle,
and afterward with his brethren, and in the end with Galpan himself.

BY this time the Gentlemam of the sea is come nere the castle, where he saw a
Lady coming toward him greatly afflicted, having no other company then a
Squire and a Page. This sorrowful woman breathed forth many griueous sighs,
showing a violent kind of war, between her hands and the golden tresses of
her hair, which she discheueled and rent very pitifully. Hereat was the Prince
not a little amazed, and willing to know what moved her to these extremes, he
came to her with these speeches. Fair Gentlewoma^, I pray ye tell me the cause
of your sorrow. Ah my Lord, quoth. she, death would be now right welcome to me,
being the only friend to bear me company: for such is my misfortune, as
tears are more convenient for me then rememberance of the cause. In sooth
Lady, said the Prince, if in any respect I can do ye good, you shall find me
ready withal my heart. Being sent Sir, quoth the Damsel, by my mistresses
commandment, to a young Knight, a man of some account in these parts, and
passing along this way: four cruel villains set upon me, and (whether I
would or no) brought me into this Castle where a traitorous Knight dishonorably
forced me, compelling me after-ward to swear, that I should ne-uer love any
friend but him. This complaint moved the Prince to great admiration, and thus
he answered. Follow me Lady, for your injury shall be revenged, if God give me
leave. Hereupon the Damsel immediately went with him, and by the way he
desired her to tell him, what the man was to whom she was sent. If you revenge
my wrong quoth she, I will tell ye: but I can assure ye he is such a one, as
will be right sorry when he hears of my misusage. Great reason, said the Prince,
has he so to do: and as thus they communed together, they came to the place
where she showed him the four Gardants, to whom he presently said. Disloyal
varlets, wherefore have ye abused this Lady as she travailed on her journey?
Because (quoth they; we stood in no fear of you: but if you get ye not the
sooner, your entertainment shall be worse then hers was. Without any more talking
he drew his Sword, and coming to one that heaued his hatchet against him,
quite cut away the right arm from his body: then turning to another, cleft him
over the face to the very ears. When the rest saw their companions thus
mained, they fled away so fast as they could, running through a by way along a
River side: but the Prince making no show of pursuing them, wiped his Sword and
put it up again, then coming to the Damsel, bad her go forward. My Lord,
quoth she, hard by is a gate, where I found two armed Knights attending. Well,
said he, and I shall find them when I come thither. So rode they on, and as the
Prince entered the base court, he saw the Dungeon door open, and an armed Knight
on Horseback come forth, after whom they within let down a Port-cullis, and
shut the door again: then the Knight of the Castle advancing himself, very
boldly thus spoke to the Prince. Poor wretch, too soon art thou come hither
to receive shame and dishonor. Dishonor? quoth Prince, tush these are but
words, leave what shall happen to the presence of God, who only is skillful
therein: and tell if thou be the villain that did force this Lady? No,
answered the Knight, but if it were I, what then? I mean, quoth the Prince, to
revenge her wrong if I can. Go to, said the Knight, I shall see then what kind
of reuendge you use. So giving the Spurrs to his Horse, ran as fiercely as he
could against the Prince, yet he failed in the attaint: but the Prince meeting
him with full carire, gave him such a greeting with his Lance through the
Sheeld, as the armor being unable to resist it, let pass the iron through
both his shoulders, whereby he fell down dead in the place. Having with-drawne
his Lance, prepared himself for another that came to succor the first, who
pearcing quite through the Princes Sheeld, left the head of his Lance in his
armor, which was of sufficient proof: but in the encounter he met his enemy
so derectly, as he rent his Helmet from his head, casting him so violently off
his Saddle, as he was able to sit no more on Horseback. The Knight seeing
himself thus unarmed, cried for some other to come help him, whereupon three
Halberders issued forth, to whom he said: Look well my friends that this man
escape us not. At these words, they ran all three violently on the Prince,
and buckled so near him, as they slew his Horse between his legs, whereby he
was constrained to fight on foot: and so offended was he thereat, that having
recovered himself, he smote his Lance through the Knights head, which made
him presently yield the ghost. And now he bestirres himself against the other
three, who cowardly stealing behind him, wounded him on the shoulder, whereby
he lost a great quantity of his blood: but full well he recompensed the
villain that did it, letting forth the dearest blood he had in his body, by
cleaving him with his Sword as it bad been an Axe. The other two terrified
heer-with, ran up into a long Gallery, crying: Come my Lord, come quickly,
for we are all vanquished. In mean while, the Prince seeing his own Horse was
slain, mounted on that belonged to the knight he slew last: soon after he saw
another Knight stand looking forth at a door, who perceiving the Prince had
espied him, said. What has moved thee to come in here and kill my people?
Nothing else, answered the Prince, the^ the desire I have to revenge this Lady,
who has been here wronged most dishonorably. As thus he spoke, the Damsel
came to him, and knowing the Lord of the Castle that forced her, she said. Ah
gentle Knight, see that this monster escape you not, for by him have I lost my
former honor. Libidinous Ruffian, quoth the Prince, dearly shall thou pay for
thy disloyal dealing: Go arm thee, else will I slay thee naked as thou art,
for to thee or such like villains ought to be used no favor: but the Damsel
more and and more still cried. Kill, kill the Traitor, that hereafter he live
not to abuse any more, otherwise will their shame be laid to your charge. Lewd
woman, answered the Knight, in an evil hour came he hither by thy council,
and in thy company. And thou that threatnest me so bravely, attend my coming,
and fly not away, for by no other means can thou warrant thy self. So he
departed, and soon after came armed into the Court where he mounted on a lusty
white Courser: then coming to the Prince, he began to menace him, saying. Well
may thou curse the time that ever thou saw this Damsel, for it will
cost thee the price of thy head. Each one, said the Prince, must keep his head
so well as he may, and he that cannot, let him loose it. Without longer stay
they coutched their Lances, which at their encounter ran into their Sheelds
and armor, wounding somewhat deep into their flesh: and so forcibly did their
bodies meet together, as they were both laid along on the ground, when quickly
recovering themselves, with their Swords drawn they prepare to the combat.
Fierce and cruel strokes were given on either side, to the great admiration of
such as beheld them, for many pieces of their Sheelds and armor was scattred
round about them: and which is more, their Helmets were so torn and battered,
as often times their bare heads bore off the blows, so that the ground was
colored with their blood: but Galpan had received a wound through the sight of
his Helmet, which made the blood trickle into his eyes, and he to wipe them
retited back alittle. What Galpan? said the Prince, desire thou to breath?
do thou not remember that thou fightest for my head? if thou defendest not
thine own well, thou art like to loose it. Be patient a while, answered
Galpan, and let us breath a little, for we have time enough to make an end. It
is no reasonable motion, said the Prince, seeing I fight not with thee for
courtesy, but to revenge the dishonor thou have done to this Lady. With these
words he gave him such a stroke on the head, as made him fall to the ground on
his knees, yet quickly he arose and took heart a fresh: but the Prince would
not let him range about as he desired, for he was so out of breath, that he
could hardly lift up his Sword, wherefore he did nothing but croutch under his
Sheeld, yet was it so sliced away in pieces, as very little was left to defend
himself withal. Galpan seeing he had no other remedy, began to fly before
the Sword of his enemy, and at length (as his last refuge) thought to save
himself in a little Tower which his Gardants used to stand in: but the Prince
following him hard at the heels, got him by the Helmet and pulled it off, and
giving a full stroke at him, therewith smot his head from the shoulders,
afterward he came to the Damsel, saying. Fair Lady, now may you chouse an
other friend if you please, for he to whom you promised, has discharged ye of
the bargain. Thanks be to God and you Sir, quoth she: and as they returned
from the Tower, they heard the door shut too, wherefore he mounted on Galpans
Horse, which was esteemed one of the goodlyest in the world, and said to the
Damsel. I pray ye Lady, now let us be gone hence. My Lord, quoth she, if it
like you, I will carry his head to him whom I am sent, and present it to him on
your behalf. Do not so, said the Prince, for the carriage will be too
troublesome, but take the Helmet if you will. The Damsel liking well of his
advise, commanded her Squire to carry it with him: and so they rode from the
Castle, the servants whereof were all gone, and had left the gates wide open.
But the Prince not forgetting the Damsels promise, that she would tell him the
Knights name she was sent unto: therefore earnestly he entreated her to
satisfy him therein. Good reason, quoth she, his name is Agraies, Son to the
King of Scotland. Praised be God, said the Prince, who made me able to do so
much, as so good a Knight shall be no more wronged by traitorous Galpan: for
you are (in mine opinion) well avenged, and worthily may you call Agraies a
good Knight, in respect he is one of the best I know, and if for him you have
received dishonor, it now returns to your commendation. Go then and say to
him, that a Knight of his, humbly saluteth him, whom he shall find at the
wars in Gaul when he comes thither. Gentle Sir, quoth she, seeing you love
him so well, I pray ye grant me one request. That will I, quoth the Prince. Let
me then, said she, understand your name. Lady, quoth he, at this time forbear
the knowledge thereof, and command what else you please, you shall not be
denied. No other thing will I desire answered the Damsel. Believe me, said
the Prince, it is little courtesy to request the thing, which willingly I
would not reveal to any one. Yet must I needs know it, quoth the Damsel, or
else you do not perform your promise. When he perceived she would not be
dissuaded, somewhat moved with anger he replied. Such as know me, call me the
Gentleman of the sea. So setting spurs to his horse, he gallopped away from
the Damsel, who was not a little glad that she knew his name: but when he was
gone from her, he remembered the wound on his shoulder, which still bled very
freshly, so that he might easily be tract by his blood, and on his white Horse
it had dropped in many places. At evening he came somewhat near a Fortress,
where he beheld a knight unarmed coming toward him, and after he had well
viewed him, he said. My Lord, I pray you tell me where have you been so
wounded? In sooth, quoth the Prince, at a Castle not very far hence. And how,
said the Knight, came you by that goodly white Horse; I took it, answered the
Prince, in requital of mine own, that was there slain by traitorous
villains. But would Galpan, quoth the Knight, suffer ye so to do? Yea mary
Sir, replied the Prince, he is now become more patient, for he has endured
the loss of his head. When the Knight heard of Galpans death, he presently
alighted from his Horse, and ran to kiss the Princes feet: but he would not
suffer him, yet could he not hold him from embracing his Sheeld, saying. Ah
Gentle Knight, how highly am I indebted to you; you are to this place the most
welcome man in the world, for by your means have I thoroughly recovered mine
honor. Leave we this talk, said the Prince, and say where I may quickly find
some remedy for my wounds. In my house, answered the knight, abides a Niece of
mine, who shall heal your hurts better then any other. So riding on they
arrived at the castle, where being dismounted, they walked into the great hall,
the Knight reporting by the way, how Galpan had kept him from bearing Arms one
whole year and a half, compelling him to change his name, and swear to call
himself while he lived, the conquered by Galpan: but now, quoth he, seeing he
is dead, mine honor is restored me again. Afterward he caused the Prince to
be unarmed, and laid in a sumptuous bed, where his wounds were dilligently
attended by the Lady, who assure him in short time to make him well again: if
he would be advised by her council, which he promised faithfully to do.

CHAP. VIII.
How the third day after the Gentleman of the sea departed from king Languines,
the three Knights, came to the Court, bringing with them the wounded Knight in
a Litter, and his disloyal wife.

ON the third day after the Prince lest the Court of King Languines, where he
received the order of Knighthood, the three Knights came thither, with their
wounded brother and his trothlesse wife, of whom the discourse has been
already recited. At their arrival they presented him before the King, letting
him understand the cause of their coming, and delivering their prisoner on the
new Knights behalf, to deal with her as he should think convenient. Greatly
did the King (...) at the woman's disloyalty, not imagining such wickedn^^
could have ^boured in her: notwithstanding, herthanked the Knight that had sent
them to his Court, yet could he not guess who it was, for he nor any body
else knew that the Gentlman of the sea was Knighted, but the Princess Oriana,
and the Ladies which accompanied her in the Chapel. Full soon was he
advertised of his absence from the Court, but he thought he was gone to
visit his father Candales: the^ the King turning to the knight in the Litter,
said. Me thinks that a woman so unfaithful as your wife has been, deserves
not to live. My Lord, quoth the Knight, do therein as it shall like your
maistey: as for me, I will never consent that the thing I most love should die.
This said, the Knights took their leave of the King, carrying back again with
the their brother in the Litter: leaving their sister to receive justice by the
Kings appoint me^t, who after their departure called for her and said. Woman,
thy malice has been too great in respect of thy husbands kindness, but thou
shall be made an example to all other, that they hereafter offend not in the
like: and so he commanded her to be burned alive. The execution being done,
the King was in greater pensiveness then before, because he knew not who the
new knight should be, that parting so suddenly from his Court: but the Squire
standing by, which lodged the Gentleman of the sea, and afterward conducted him
to the Castle, where he delivered King Perion from death, began to imagine
that it was his guest, wherefore he said to the King. It may be (my Lord) a
young Knight, with whom the Damsel of Denmark and my self were certain
days, and then we left him when we came thither. Know thou his name? quoth
the King. No my Lord, quoth the Squire, but he is both young and very
beautyfull: beside I saw him do such rare deeds of Chivalry in so little time,
as in mine opinion if I live, he will prove one of the best Knights in the
world. Then discoursed he at large every action, as also how he delivered King
Perion in the time of great danger. When the King had noted well his tail, his
desire to know him increased now more and more. My Lord, quoth the Squire, the
Damsel that came hither with me, happily can tell ye more tidings of him, for
it was my chance to meet them together. Of what Damsel speak thou? said
the King. Of her, answered the Squire, that lately came from great Britain to
Madame Oriana. Presently was she sent for, and he demanded what the Knight was
of whom there went such report. Whereupon she declared so much as she knew,
cheefely the occasion wherefore she rode with him, and in what manner the
Lance was given him by Vrganda, as to the only Knight in the world: but in
sooth, quoth she, I know not his name, for never could I learn it of him. Ah
God, said the King, how may it be? Now was Oriana void of all doubting, for
she well knew it was her Gentleman of the sea, but she was so grieved with
the news, which the Damsel of Denmark had brought her, as she well knew not
whom she might complain to: for the king her father sent her word how she
should prepare her self in readiness to come to him, so soon as his
Ambassadors should be sent for her into Scotland. But much more willingly
could she afford to stay in that Country, then there whether she should now
go against her mind, not only in respect of her gentle usage there, but
because she imagined by being far thence, she should be further from him that
had the prime of her affection: beside, she might there hardly afterward hear
any news of him, but continuing in Scotland she could easily compass it. In
these melancholy thoughts was the amourous Princess, and the King (on the
other side) in daily musing, what he might be that sent the four Knights, with
the wicked woman whom the fire had consumed. But five or six days after these
matters were thus passed, as the King was conferring with his Son Agraies,
(who now stood upon departing toward Gaul to succor the king his Vnc^le)
there entered a Domosell, who falling on her knee before all the assembly,
framed her speeches to Agraies in this manner. May it please ye my Lord, that
in the presence of his highness and this assembly, I deliver a message of
importance to ye; then taking the Helmet from her Squire, she thus proceeded,
This Helmet thus broken and battered as ye see, I present ye in place of
Galpans head, as a token to you from a new Knight, to whom (in my judgment) it
better belongs to bear Arms then any other: and the cause why he sends it
you, is, for that Galpans vilainously abused a Damsel, that came to you on
urgent affairs. What; quoth the King, is Galpan overcome by the hand of one
man; believe me Damsel you tell us meruailes. Worthy Lord, answered she, he
only of whom I speak has done him to death, after he had slain all the
other that resisted him in Galpans Castle and he thinking to reueng their
foil himself, combated hand to hand with the Knight, but such was his bad
success, as there with dishonor he lost his head, which I would gladly have
brought to this Court, yet doubting the corrupt favor thereof, and being
otherwise advised by him that sent me to my Lord Agraies, as testimony of his
victory this Helmet may suffiise. Undoubtedly, said the king to al there
present, ^t it the same Knight of whose name we are ignorant: how say you Lady,
cannot you resolve us. My Lord, quoth she, I obtained it by exceeding
importunity, for otherwise he would never have told me. Say then good maiden,
replied the King, to rid us of all other doubles He names himself, said the
Damsel, the Gentleman of the sea. When the King heard this, he was greatly
abashed, and so were all the other likewise, afterward he thus speak. By my
faith, I am assuredly persuaded, that whosoever Knighted him, needs not be
ashamed thereof, seeing so long time he requested it of me, and I deferred it
for occasions which I needed not to have done, seeing Chiualry is in him
already so well accomplished. Then Araies taking occasion to speak, demanded
of the Damsel, where he might meet with his gentle friend. My Lord, quoth
she, he humbly commends himself to your good grace, giving you to
understand by me, that you shall find him at the wars in Gaul if you come
thither. Good news fair Damsel, said Agraies have you brought me, now am I
more desirous to be gone then before I was: and if I may find him there, with
my good will shall I ne-uer leave his company. You have reason so to do,
answered the Damosel; for he loves you as becomes a Gentleman. Great was the
joy for these good news of the Gentleman of the sea, and if any one received
displeasure, you must think it was Oriana above all the rest, yet was it
handled so covertly, as the watchfullest eye could not desceme it. Now in mean
while the king enquired by diverse means, how and by whom the Prince was
Knighted, when at length he was advertised, that the Ladies attending on the
Queen, could tell better then anybody else, which with much a do he obtained of
them. Then may the Gentleman of the sea, quoth he, vaunte, that he has found
more curtisie in you then in me: but the cause why I prolonged the time of his
honor, was that he seemed too young for so great a charge. In this time Agraies
courteously wellcomed the Damsel, who beside the Helmet, delivered him
letters from a Lady that dearly loved him, of whom the History hereafter
makes mention. But now for this present occasion, the Reader must imagine,
that Agraies (without longer tarying in Scotland) is departed with his Army,
travailing toward Gaul to his Uncle King Perion.

CHAP. IX.
How King Lisuare sent for his Daughter the Princess Oriana, for that long
before he had left her in the Court of King Languines: who sent her accompanied
with the Princess Mabila his only daughter, as also a noble train of
Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen.

ABout ten days after Agraies was departed the King his Fathers court with his
troup, three Ships of great Britain took port in Scotland: wherein as chief
was Galdar of Rascuit, accompanied with an hundred knights of king Lisuarts, as
also many Ladies and Gentlewomen that came for Oriana. Being arrived at the
Court of king Languines, they were very graciously entertained, especially
Galdar, for he was esteemed a wise and hardy knight. After he had given his
Majesty to understand his Ambassadge, which was hearty thanks from king Lisuart
his Master, for the gentle entreatance of the Princess his daughter: he
requested now to have her home, and Mabila his daughter with her, to whom he
would do all the honor could be devised. Right thankfully did king Languines
accept this offer, and was content that his daughter should go with Oriana,
thence-forward to be educated in the Court of King Lisuart. Certain days
soiourned Galdar and his train in Scotland, during which time they were most
honorably feasted, and in this while the king prepared other Ships to accompany
the voyage. When Oriana saw that matters fell out in this sort, she knew well
it was impossible longer to dissemble or tarry: wherefore as she placed all her
little trifles in order, she found among her Jewels the wax, which she had
taken from the Gentleman of the sea. This gave her such a remembrance of him,
as the tears entered her eyes, and (through vehement love) often wringed her
hands, so that the wax which she held in them, suddenly brake, and she espied
the letter enclosed therein, which so soon as she unfolded, she found there
written these words. This is Amadis without time, Son to a King. At these
news she conceived such joy, as quickly she left her former countenance, and
not without cause, for she was now assured, that he who before was esteemed (at
the most) but the son of a simple Gentleman, or it might be of less, because
he was unknown both of name and parents: the man whom she so faithfully loved,
was Son to a King, and named Amadis, therefore without longer deferring, she
called the Damsel of Denmark to her, on whom she entirely trusted, and thus
spoke. My good friend, I will declare one thing to ye, which no over then mine
own heart and you ^all know: therefore regard it as the secret of such a
Princess as I am, and of the best Knight in the world beside. On my faith
Madam, answered the Damsel, seeing it pleases you to honor me so much, more
willingly shall I dye the^ fail therein, and well may you be assured, that
what-soeuer you disclose to me, shall be altogether kept secret, and executed to
my power. The^ so it is dear friend, said Oriana, that you must needs go seek
the Gentleman of the sea, whom you shall find at the wars in Gaul, and if
you chance to come thither before him, there must ye of necessity stay for
him: but so soon as you see him, give him this letter, saying, he shall find
his name therein, written on the day that he was cast into the sea, whereby I
know him to be the son of a king, which ought inspire him with higher courage
and hardines, to increase the fame he has already so well begun. You shall
likewise tell him, how the king my father sent for me, and therefore I am gone
toward great Britain: which I was desirous to acquaint him withal, and when
he returns from the war where he is, he should immediately come to the
place of my abode, limitting^ things in such sort, as he may live in my
fathers Court, until he receive other commandment of me. Such was the speedy
dispatch of the Damsel, as without longer stay she iourned toward Gaul, and
executed her enterprise, whereof hereafter you shall understand more. But not
to discontinue the purposed voyage of Oriana, after that Languines had provided
all things necssary for the same, Oriana, Mabila and their company were
imbarqued: the^ taking leave of the King and Queen at the sea side, they set
sail having the wind so prosperous, as in few days they landed in great
Britain, where they were all right worthyly wellcommed.

Hereof does the author at this time make no more mention, because he means
to tell ye what happened to the Gentleman of the sea, having left him at the
Knights Castle that was vanquished by Galpan, in the Damsels charge who
attended his wounds, which in fifteen days were almost thoroughly healed.
Notwithstanding, despising rest, determined to set on his way, so that on a
Sunday morning, taking leave of his host and his gentle Surgeon: he mounted
on Horseback, accompanied only with Gandalin who never would forsake him,
and not far from the Castle they entered a great Forest It was now about the
month of Ap^^ll, when the Birds tune their Notes most pleasantly, and that
all Trees, Herbs, and Flowers declare the coming of the Spring time: this
delightsome change made him remember her, who above all other flowred in
excellent beauty, and for whom (abandoning his liberty) Love has taken him
captive, so that in these thoghts, he thus (somewhat loud) parled with himself.

Ah poor Gentleman of the Sea, without Parents or Lands, that thou can
avouch, how durst thou lift thy heart so high, as to love her who is beyond all
other in beauty, bounty, and birth? Ah wretch as thou art, ought thou not
to consider by these three things, wherein she is most perfect: the best Kinght
in the world may not be so hardy as to think of loving her? And thou poor
unknown, art wrapped in a labirinth of folly, loving and dying, not daring to
tell it, or make show thereof. In this complaint was the Gentleman of the Sea
so carried away, as forgetting all other matters, he rode cross the forest a
long space, with his Helmet closed: till at length lifting up his head, he
beheld a Knight well mounted, in the wood by him, who long had kept company to
hear his sad discourse. When the knight saw the Prince had discryed him and
for that cause held his peace, he approached nearer him with these words.
Believe me knight, it seems you more love your Friend then she does you, when
in commending her you dispraise your self: and for ought I understand by your
speeches, you are no such man as ought to pretend love, therefore it is
necessary I should know who she is, to the end I may supply your defect and
serve her. Sir knight (answered the Prince) you have some reason for these
speeches, yet hap what shall, you can know no more then you do: and I can
assure ye, that by loving her you can get no advantage. So do not I believe,
said the knight, for a man ought to conceive glory in travail, or any danger
in the service of so fair a Lady, seeing that in the end, he cannot but gain
his long looked for recompense: wherefore he that loves in so high a place as
you do, should not be agreeued at any thing that happens. When the Prince
heard him speak so sensibly, imagining he used these words to comfort him,
he was of better cheer, and came more near to him to continue this talk, but
the Knight said. Keep ye back, for either by friend-ship or force, you must
tell me what I have demanded. Now trust me, answered the Prince, it shall not
be so. Go too then, quoth the knight, see what will happen thereon, and defend
your self. With right good will said the Prince. So began they lace their
Helmets, taking likewise their Shieldes and Lances: but as they severed
themselves for the Ioust, a Damsel came and spoke in this manner.

Knights, I pray you forbear a while, and tell me one thing before the
combat if you can: for such is my haste, as I have no leisure to tarry the end
of your fight. At these words they stayed themselves, demanding of her what
she desired. I would fame, quoth she, hear some news of a Knight, called the
Gentleman of the Sea. And what would you with him? said the Prince. I have
brought him tidings, answered the Damsel, from Agraies Son to the King of
Scotland. Attend a little, replied the Prince, and I will tell ye so much as I
know of him. All this time was the Knight of the Forest ready for the Ioust,
and much offended at her that came to stay them, wherefore he called to the
Prince to gaurd himself, giving him such an attaint in the encounter, as his
Lance slew in pieces: but the Prince met him full, as both Horse and Man were
thrown to the ground, when the Horse (being more nimble then his Master)
seeing him self at liberty, ran about the field, yet the Prince found the
means to take him again, and bringing him to the dismounted knight, said,
Here Sir, take your Horse, and henceforth desire not to know any thing
against a man's will. The knight would not refuse his gentleness, forhe found
himself so shaken with his fall, as he could hardly follow to catch him
again and in mean while he assayed to remount on his Horse, the Prince left
him, coming to the Damsel that stayed for him, demanding if she knew the
man she enquired after. No truly, quoth she, I did never see him: but Agraies
told me, that he would presently make himself known, so soon as I should say
that I came from him. He did not deceive you therein answered the Prince,
therefore ye must understand I my self am the man: and with these words he
unlaced his Helmet, when the Damsel saw his face, she said. In truth now do
I verily believe it, for your beauty I have heard very much commended. Then
tell me, quoth the Prince, where have you left Agraies? Hard by a River not
far hence, said she, where he staieth with his Troop, attending a fit wind
for Passage into Gaul: and is very desirous (before he go any further) to know
if you will bear him company. With all my heart, replied the Prince, ride
then before and conduct me the way. So rode he on with the Damsel, and in
some short time after, they came near the place where Agraies and his Army
were encamped: but yet before they arrived there, they heard behind them one
cry: Stay knight, for thou must tell me what I demanded. The Prince turning
back, behold the knight who^ he so lately dismounted, and another that bare
him company, wherefore he stayed to take his Arms. Now were they so near the
Prince Agraies Camp, and he as they all might see the Tourney, having a far
off noted the Princes coming, maruailing what he was that so gallantly managed
his Horse: and to say sooth, he was (in his time) a Knight of the comlyest
grace that ever was seen, and where he strove to hide himself, he was soonest
discovered, by reason of his bravery in horseman-ship. The two Knights ran
together in full course against him, breaking their Lances in pieces on his
shield: but the Prince meeting him that had the foil in the forest, threw him
again from his saddle so roughly, as in the fall he brake his arm, the grief
whereof made him lie still as if he had bin dead. When he perceived he was so
well rid of one, he drew his sword: and came to the other, giving him such a
stroke on his Helmet, as the Sword entringlin, he pulled it back with such
force, that the laces brake, whereby he brought it quite from his head upon his
sword: then he lifted up his arm to have smitten him, but the knight quickly
clapped his Shield before. In mean while the Prince got his sword into his left
hand (which he could do very hardly) and with his right hand took hold on
his enemies shield, renting it violently from about his neck, and afterward
gave him such a blow on the head, as in great amazement he fell to the ground.
Thus did he leave him there with his companion, and rod with the Damsel to
the Tents of Agraies: who having seen the conclusion of this quarrel,
meruailing what he was that had so soon overcome two knights, therefore when
he came toward him, he went forth to meet him, and so soon as they knew
each other, you need not make no doubt of their kind salutations. Soon after
the Prince alighted, and by Agraies was conducted into his Tent to be unarmed,
but first he gave commandment, that the knights dismounted in the field
should be brought thither, where they were no sooner arrived, but Agrais thus
spoke to them. Believe me, my friends, you attempted great folly to meddle
with this Knight. You say true my Lord, answered he whose arm was broken, yet
once to day I saw him in such plight, as I little thought of any such
resistance. Afterward he declared all that happened in the Forest, and the
communication they had together: yet he omitted the Princes complaints because
he stood in fear to displease him. During the repitition of these matters,
the patience of the one and boldness of the other, was entercoursed among
them, and all that day they soiourned there, but on the morrow Morning they
mounted on horseback, shaping their course to Palingues, a right good City on
the frontires, and the outmost part of Scotland, where they found shipping, and
embarked themselves toward Gaul. The wind serving according to their
desire, in few days they landed in the Haven of Galfrin, and marching thence
in seemly order, without any hinderance, they came to the Castle of Baldain,
where King Perion was befieged, having already lost great number of his people.
When he was advertised of this succor, you must imagine him comforted thereby,
and their welcome to be good and gracious: chiefly by the Queen Elisena, who
having knowledge of their arrival, sent to entreat her Nephew Agraies to come
visit her: which he did, being accompanied with the King, and the Gentleman of
the Sea, and two other knights of good account. But you must note, that king
Perio^ knew not the prince at the first sight, yet at the length he called him
to remembrance, that it was the same man whom he had knighted, and afterward
saved his life at the Castle, wherefore thus he spoke. My dear friend, on my
faith I had forgotten ye, you are most welcome to this place, for your presence
gives assurance, that I need fear this war no further, having the only
Knight of the world so near me. Dread Lord, answered the Prince, God give me
grace to serve you accordingly, for persuade your self, that while these
troubles endure, I will make no spare of my person.

As thus they devised, they entered the Queens Chamber, when the King taking
the Prince by the hand, presented him to her saying. Madame, this is the good
Knight of whom here-tofore I told ye, he defended me from the greatest danger
that ever I was in: and therefore I pray ye let no spare of curtisie be made to
him here, but give him the best entertainment the time will afford. The Queen
advanced herself to embrace him, but he fell on his knee with these words. I
am servant (Madame) to the Queen your sister, and from her I come to serve you,
with (...) obedience as to her own person Right graciously did the good Lady
give him thanks, yet little thought she that he was her Son, for she
imagined the sea had devoured him: yet was the Princes presence at that very
instant so pleasing to her, as her eyes could not be satisfied with beholding
him, and (through a secret moving of nature) she wished more good to him the^
any in the troop. At this time likewise was her remembrance solicited, with
the former loss of her two Children, whose years she thought would have
equaled the Princes, if God had preserved them, and these occasions urged the
tears in her eyes. Thus wept she for him that nature touched her withal, and
yet unknown was in her presence, but when the Prince beheld her so sorrowful,
he reputed it to the reason of the war begun, wherefore he said. Madame, I
hope with the aid of God, your King, and the fresh supply we have brought: in
short time to recover your joy, and for mine own part, trust me I will make
no spare. Heaven prosper ye, answered the Queen, with happy success, and for
you are the Queen my sisters Knight, I will that ye provide no other lodging,
but abide here with us, and all things shall be appointed for ye to your own
contentment. Such was their conference together, until Agraies would go
refresh himself, wherefore taking leave for that night, he went to his lodging
where it was provided: and gladly would the Prince have followed him, but the
Queen with held him by such importunity, as he was constrained now to remain
in his unknown mothers custody. Right soon was the news of this fresh
succor, brought to K. Abies of Ireland and Daganel his Cousin, who made very
small account thereof, because (in those times) was King Abies accounted for
one of the best Knights that ever was heard of, and in respect of his hot
desire to the fight, determined (seeing new aid was come to his enemy) very
quickly to bid him battle, and for this cause he said before all his people
there present. If King Perion were so gentle aco^panion as to come see us, I
had rather he would do it to day then to morrow. Assure your self, answered
Daganel, he is nothing so hasty as I think: for he fears you to much,
albeit he makes little show thereof. Know you, said Gal^^ Duke of Normandy, by
what means we may thereto constrain him? First let us make an ambush of the
greater part of our Army, which shall remain with the King in tSpan^. Forest
of Baldain, then you Lord Daganel and my self will go with the rest, to
present our selves it break of day before the City: and I am certain that
being descried by our enemies, who imagining our strength is altogether, will
take heart, and not fail to come running forth upon us. When we see them
approach, we will dissemble a timorous fear, and take our flight toward the
Forest, where shall abide the King with his company: then our enemies pursuing
assured victory in their own conceit, will seek advantage by our shameful
retire, and so be taken the^seues in the snare. Very well have you advised,
answered King Abies, do you your self worthy Duke give order, that all things
be done as you have appointed. Now might ye there behold armed men on
Horseback, the Soldiers mustring, the drums thundering, and the Trumpets
cheerfully founding, as in one instant, matters were so well ordered, that the
Kings Commandment failed in nothing: whereupon the next morning at the break
of day, Daganel and the Duke of Normandy, showed themselves with their
Squadron before the Town. Little did King Perion at that time think of any
such enterprise, but altogether refreshed his succor, and honored the Prince
by who^ he had found such friend-ship. And to make some show of his affection
toward him, in the morning he came with his Queen to the Princes Chamber.
where they found him washing his hands, and perceiving his eyes red, swollen
and blubbered with tears, they easily gathered he had taken no good rest that
night: and very true it was, for continually he thought of her, whose love had
deprived him of liberty, and likewise compared withal the slender means he
had to attain so high, which made him enter into such profound grief, as he
expected no other remedy but death. The Queen desirous to know the cause of
his sadness, took Gandalin aside, thus speaking to him. My friend, your
Masters countenance berayweth some inward displeasure, has any one here
offended him in ought? No Madame, answered Gandalin, he has by your Majesty
received great honor: but he is wont to be tormented in sleep as you see.
During these discourses, the Sentinel came to advertise the King, how he had
discoured the ambush and the enemies were very near the City, where presently
he commanded to doraine the Army. Now was each one ready to horseback,
especially the King and the Prince, who went directly to the City gate, where
they found Agraies chiding, because they would not let him go forth, thinking
he should tarry too long from the fight: for he was one of the hardiest
Knights, and the best to give assistance in need that could be found, so that
if good advise had been as ready with him, as he was possessed of
unconquerable courage, his like might not have been found in the world. At the
Kings coming the gates were suddenly opened, and then went forth the men of
Gaul in order, who seeing their enemies to be so great a number, albeit the
whole Army was minded to go no further, reputing it overmuch boldness to
assail such an vneaquall strength, and therefore arose among them a murmuring
contestation. Which Agraies perceiving, without further trifling gave the
spurs to his horse, crying aloud, Beshrow him that tarrieth any longer:
seeing them he is to deal withal, shall we not venture? So saying, he
gallopped toward his enemies, in like manner did the Gentleman of the Sea, and
the rest of their train, who without any order of marching, ran among them,
and were immediately mingled together. He whom the Prince first met withal, was
the Duke of Normandy, who^ he charged so courageously, as breaking his Lance
on him, ouer-threw both man and horse to the earth, and with this rough fall,
his leg was broken. So passed on the Prince setting hand to Sword, as a
chafed Lion entered the preasse, showing such deeds of Arms, as none durst
with-stand him: for he ouer-threw all that encountered him, killing some
outright, chining and dismembring others, so that every one was glad to give
him way. When Daganel saw his men in such disorder, by the means of one
Knight, he got the most of them together so well as he could, and round about
beset the Prince to beat him down: which they had done, but that Agraies
perceiving it, came with his troop to rescue him. At their arriual you might
behold Lances broken, Knights tumbling down, helmets rent, and shields
scatred on the ground making a great conflict and disorder, amongst the
Irish-men, for King Perion likewise came fresh upon them with his band. Daganel
(on the contrary side) did the best he could to retire back, but the Gentleman
of the Sea was among the thickest, showing such chiualry, as he found before
him not any resistance, each one was so abashed at his behavior: and Agraies
above the rest, showed that his arm was not benumbed, for the more to hearten
and cheer up his men, he cried aloude to them: follow my friends, follow the
best Knight that ever bare Arms. When Daganel saw his side to have the worst,
and what great damage he received by the Prince, he determined to kill his
horse, and so to make him fall among the crowde: but he was deceived, for the
Prince coming to him, let fall so mighty a stroke on his Helmet, as rent it
clean from off his head, and so remained Daganel unarmed. Which when King
Perion espied he reached him such a salutation with his Sword, as cleft his
head through the very brains: whereupon his men seeing him slain, they that
had the best horses fled away for life, and stayed not till they saved
themselves where King Abies was ambushed. But King Perion still pursuing
victory, discovered the rereguard (that came from the Forest) marching in very
great haste toward him, showing by their countenance a revenge of their loss,
wherefore joining together, they cried; Set on them men of Ireland, see that
none of them escape us, but let us enter pellmell in the field. When the Gauls
found themselves thus surpized, never were people more astonished, for they
imagined the ambush had not been so great, and which most of all affrighted
them, was, that they must now deal with fresh and lusty men, themsolues being
sore wearyed, and their horses so ouer-laboured, as they could hardly endure
their burden. Beside, they knew king Abias was there in person, being (as you
heard before) accounted one of the best knights in the world: and for this
cause the most part of the Gauls began to tremble. But the Gentleman of the
Sea foreseeing the disorder was like to ensue, came and persuaded them rather
to die then loose one jot of their honor and reputation, saying: My friends
and companions, be of good cheer, each one make known his virtue, and
remember the esteem the Gauls have gotten by Arms. We are to deal with the
people astonnied and half overcome, let us not make change with them, taking
their fear, and delivering our victory: for if they but only behold your
resolute countenances, I am certain they are nor able to endure ye, let us
then enter among them, for God is our defender. At these words the most
disheartened took courage, concluding to stay and fight manly with their
enemies, who soon after in great fury set upon them. Now did King Abies make
known his magnanimity, and hardly could Prince Agraies men endure the
assault, nor the Squadron that King Perion brought: for King Abies maimed some,
other he overthrew, and while his Lance held, he dismounted every knight that
met with him. Afterward he laid hand to Sword, wherewith he carried himself
so valiantly, as the hardyest were amazed thereat, for he made way where ever
he came: so that king Perions men, not able longer to hold out, began to retire
so fast as they could toward the City. When the Gentleman of the Sea, saw that
Fortune was so contrary to them, in great spite he entered the throng, and
fought so fiercely, as the most part of the Irish-men were glad to stay, while
the Gauls without disorder retired toward the Castle, then turning his horse,
he followed them. To defend this brunt there was also king Perion, and the
Prince Agraies, who delivered testimony to their enemies (by the keen edge of
their Swords) how well they knew to govern themselves in such extremities:
notwithstanding, the Irish-men seeing they had the better, still pursued them
with eagar courage, driving them confusedly into the City, hoping that now
would be the end of their war. Such was the retire of the Gauls, still more
and more pressed by their enemies, as doubtless the Irish had entered the City
after them, but that they were hindered by king Perion, Agraies, and the Prince,
who wholly did repulse the throng, till their people by them were gotten in.
But now was tidings brought to king Abies, that his cousin Dagenel, and Gallin
Duke of Normandy were slain, whereat he waxed very displeasant: and seeing
King Perion with his people were enclosed in the City, he resolved to take
leisure for his revenge, wherein he was deceived, for soon after he was very
strongly repulsed, which made him almost mad with anger. And as he thus raged
up and down, one of his knights showed him the Prince, saying: My Lord, he
whom you see mounted on the white Horse, is the man that slew Prince Daganel
and the Duke of Normandy, with many other, the best in our Army. When King
Abies heard that, he rode to the Prince with these words: Knight, thou have
slain the man whom most I loved in the world: but if thou will combat, I hope
to be revenged so well, as I shall have cause to be quit with thee. Your men
(answered the Prince) are two little travailed to meddle with ours,
notwithstanding if thou will as (a Knight) revenge him thou louedst, and
declare the great hardiness for which thou art renowned: choose of thy men such
as thou shall like, and I (if it please the King) will do as much of mine, for
being equal in number, thou shall gain more honor then with so great an
Army, which thou have brought into this Country without just occasion.

Believe me, quoth the King, thou talkest well, go to, choose thou thy self the
number of men, how many or few thou think good. Seeing you leave it in my
choice, replied the Prince, I will make another offer, which (it may be) you
will account more convenient. You are mine enemy for that which I have done,
and I yours for the wrong you have done to this Realm, so for our several
cause of anger, it is not reasonable any other then our selves should suffer:
let then the battle be between you and me only, and presently (if you will)
without longer dallying, yet shall you assure me from your men, as I will do
you from mine, so that none shall move, whether the one or the other be
vanquished. Right well said King Abies, do I allow of thy offer: whereupon he
choseten Knights on his part to guard the field. And as the Prince labored to
gain the like of the King, with his consent, he found King Perion and Agraies
somewhat loath to grant the Combat: as well for the consequence that might
ensue, as also because the Prince was much wearyed and sore wounded beside,
wherefore they entreated him to defer the matter till the day following. But
the desirous affection he had to be conqueror, as also to make a final
conclusion of the war, that he might roturne under her obeisance, from whom
he came to serve king Perion: would not suffer him to make any longer delay, of
the glory and honor which he saw so near at hand. For this cause he used so
many persuasions to the king, as in the end he was granted the Combat, and on
his side likewise were ten knights appointed, for his guard and safety in
the field.

CHAP. X.
How the Gentleman of the sea fought a Combat with King Abies, on difference
of the war he made in Gaul.

YOu have heard in what manner the combat was accorded between King Abies and
the Gentleman of the sea, and now already is the greatest part of the day
spent: wherefore it was agreed by the Lords on either side, (very much against
the wills of the two Combatants) that all should be deferred till the morrow
morning: as well that they might refresh themselves, and repair their battered
armor, as also for regarding such wounds, as they had received in the passed
encounters. Hereupon the two Kings withdrew themselves, the one to his Camp,
and the other to his castle. But such is the brute spread through the City,
what worthy exploits the Gentleman of the sea had done: as he could not pass
by them, but thus they spoke with general voice. A^ famous Knight, God give
thee grace to proceed as thou have begun: impossible is it to find a Gentleman,
so accomplished with beauty and Chivalry as he is, for our eyes are judges of
the one, and our enemies full well have felt the other. But you must note, that
in the morning when they went to the field, the King had given the Queen in
charge, that so soon as the Prince returned from the war, she should send
one of her Ladies to him, requesting him not to be unarmed in any other place
then in her chaber: wherefore as he went near the Kings lodging, the Lady came
unto him, saying. Sir Knight, the Queen desires you not to be elsewhere
unarmed, but in her Chamber, where she stays your coming. In sooth, said the
King, you must needs grant this request, and I desire it may be so. The Prince
condisending, went where the Queen stayed with her Ladies, and no sooner was
he entered, but presently the Ladies help to vn-arme him: yet the Queen her
self took the greatest pain of all, and as she had off his coat of Mayle,
she perceived he was sore wounded, which she showing to the King, he said. I
marvel Gentleman, seeing you are so hurt, that you took no longer time for
your co^bat. It had bin needless, answered the Prince, for I have no wound (I
thank God) that can keep me from the Combat. Right soon were the
Chirurgions commanded to look thereon, and they found it greater in show then
danger. In the mean while supper was prepared, during which time, they had
much talk of the accidents that day past: until the hour of rest came, when
each one departed till the next morning. Which being come, after they had
served God, the king sent a rich and goodly Armor to the Prince, of better
proof and strength then that he had on the day before: wherewith he armed
himself, and having taken leave of every one, mounted on Horseback in
company of the King, who bare his Helmet, the Prince Agraies his Sheeld
(wherein was portrayed two azured Lions in a golden field, rampant the one
against the other, as if they both intended murder,) and another Prince carried
his Lance. In this equipage he set forward to the field, where the King of
Ireland attended his coming, well armed, and mounted on a goodly black
Courser: but because King Abies had in former time fought hand to hand with a
Giant, and vanquished him with the loss of his head, therefore he brought to
the Combat the like figure in his Shield, describing the whole order as the
deed was done. On either side resorted thither a number of people, placing
themselves for most convenient sight of the Combat. And now were the Champions
entered the lysts, each one courageously resolving against his enemy, wherefore
without longer tarying, lacing down the sight of their Helmets, and commending
themselves to God: they gave the spurs to their horses, meeting together so
furiously, both with Lance, body and horse, as their staves flew in shiuers,
yet piercing their Armor, and both were laid along in the field. But heat of
heart and desire of conquest, made them recover footing quickly, and plucking
forth the spields of their Lances wherewith they were wounded: set hand to
Sword, beginning such a strange and cruel fight, as each one was amazed to see
them endure so much. For this fight was not equally matched, in respect the
Prince was but young, well proportioned, and of a reasonable height: but King
Abies was so great, as he never found any knight that exceeded him a handful
every way, being (withal) so strongly made, that he was rather to be accounted
a Giant the^ a man, yet was he highly loved and reverenced of his subjects, for
the virtue and prowess which remained in him, albeit he was too much audatious
and proud.

Now were these Champions so animated against each other, as well for honor as
the consequence of the Combat, that without any stay for breathing they laid
on such load, as their strokes resounded the fight of twenty men together. And
well they witnessed no great good will between them, for there might ye see
the earth tainted with their blood, the pieces of their Shields, the plate of
their Armor scattered abroad, and their Helmets so bruised: that by reason
their Arms being so squandered, they were unable to hold out their strokes,
for every blow caused the blood to gush out abundantly, yet were they of such
invincible courage, as they seemed to feel none of this annoyance. Hereupon
they maintained such bravery the one against the other, as it could not be
judged who had the better or worse: notwithstanding, about the hour of three,
the Sun gave an exceeding warm and violent heat, whereby they found
themselves so chased in their Armor, as they began to wax somewhat feeble:
especially King Abies, insomuch as he was constrained to retire back, thus
speaking to the Prince.

I see thee very near failing, and my self am likewise out of breath, if thou
think it good, let us rest awhile, for afterward we may more easily finish our
enterprise. And thus much I tell thee (although I have no cause or desire to
favor thee) that I hold better opinion of thee, then any knight that ever I
combated withal: moreover it displeases me that I had an occasion to see thee,
and much more that I am so long in conquering thee, whereby I might take
vengeance for his death whom most I loved in the world, and as thou did slay
him in open battle, so likewise will I overcome then in sight of both our
Camps. King Abies replied the Pinc^, I now (...) it displeases thee that thou
can (...) no more harm, entering so like a Tytant as thou did to (...)
this Country. And as it often happens, that he which deligh^ in evil, can
never broke any other saour: so hope I to reward the^ (...) well for thy
pains, as thou shall confess thou have wronged these people, Beside, thus
much I advise thee before hand, that I shall give thee as little leisure or
respite, as thou have given them who have tasted thy cruelty: therefore stick
close to thy tackling, and defend thy self against the Knight, whom thou
reputest failing. The King then taking his Sword, and what was left of his
Shield, thus answered. Well may thou curse the beldnesse that made thee
enter these Lystes, for hence thou shall not escape without loss of thy head.
Do what thou can said the Prince, for thou shaltrest no more, till thou or
thine honor be dead. Herewith more cruelly the before they began again their
Combat, as if they had even then entered the field, and albeit king Abio^ so
expert, by reason of his long exercise in Arms, that he know right well how to
defend and offend: nevertheless the lightness, hardines, and promptitude of the
Prince, made him in the end forget all his industry, for he was closely
followed at an inche, as he lost alto^her the rest of his Shield, by which
means the Prince could endomage him far better then before: whereof he failed
not, and in so many places withal, that the blood streamed down his Armor in
me^lous abundance, causing him by little and little to lose his strength, and
being in this agony, staggering from one side to another, he could not devise
what to do, to escape the pursuing sword of his enemy. Seeing himself now
deuoyd of all hope, he concluded either soon to dye or have the victory, and
taking his sword in both hands, he ran with all his might against the Prince,
and pierced it so far into his Shield, as he was not able to pull it forth
again. Which when the Prince beheld, he gave him such a furious stroke on the
left leg, that being quite cut from the rest, the King was enforced to fall
down: and right soon did the Prince set foot upon him, rearing violently
his Helmet from his head, saying. Thou art dead King Abies, if thou do not
yield thy lelfe vanquished. Believe me I am dead, answered tht King, not
vanquished alone, but of both the one and other, my ouer-weening has been the
only cause. Notwithstanding, since it is so come to pass, I pray thee let
assurance be given to my Soldiers, that without injury they may carry me into
my Country, and dying like a Christian, I may pay my debt both to God and men.
Feign would I have council for my over burdened Soul, then afterward shall I
render to King Perion what I usurped from him. And as for thee who have
vanquished me, I despise not to dye by the valiance of so gentle a Knight as
thou art: but withal my heart pardon thee my death, wishing thou may
continue honotable, and yet hereafter to remember me. When the Prince saw him
in such debilitie, he was exceeding sorrowful for his death, although he knew
assuredly, that if he had won the glory of the combat, he would have dealth
much worse with him. During these speeches, the Knights appointed on each side
came to them, wherefore King Abies commanded his Captains, to render King
Perion what he had conquered in Gaul: which was accomplished, and by these
means the Irish men had assurance to carry home their King, who dyed soon
after order was g^for their affairs. These matters thus ended, King Perion,
Agraies, and all the Lords of Gaul came to the Prince, accompanying him with
great joy from the field into the City, even with such triumphant glory as to
Conquerours is accustomed: who by their prowess not only overcome their
enemies, but restore the Country that is well near ruinated.

Now must ye understand, that a little before the beginning of the Combat, the
Damsel of Denmark who came from fair Oriana to the Prince, was arrived at
king Perions Court: and-before she would make her self known, she desired
to behold the issue of the fight. Afterward, seeing him return with so
honorable a victory, she showed her self, and taking him aside, said. Knight,
may it please you to hear a word in secret, of such matter as does very near
concerneye? Even what you will, answered the Prince: with which words he took
her by the hand, and keeping her from the throng, she thus spoke. The Princess
Oriana who is only yours, has sent me to you, and this Letter withal,
wherein you shall find your name written. When he heard her named, by the
remembrance of whom only he lived, he was so perplexed, that without
understanding what else the Damosel said: having taken the Letter, he ^et it
fall, being ready himself to ^eare it company, which the Damsel seeing,
she took up the Letter and came to him again. Every one that beheld him in
these passions, meruayled what news she brought to procure this alteration:
but she pulled him by the arm so roughly, as made him forget his former Trance,
thus speaking. What now my Lord? Take you the Message in so ill part, that
comes from the only Lady in the world, and who above all other loves you? for
whose sake likewise I have taken so great pain to find you? Ah Lady (quoth
he) on my faith I knew not what you said to me, for even as you began to speak,
I felt the pain to renew in me, which heretofore you have seen me endure.
It is true (said the Damsel) but now it is needless for ye to conceal your
self any longer from me, for I know more of your affairs and my Ladies, then
you imagine, because her self has bewrayed them to me. And if you bear her
affection, you need not be ashamed thereof, in that she loves you beyond all
other: in respect whereof, she tells you by me, that she must go to the King
her father; requesting after your departure from this war, you would come see
her in great Britain, appointing all things in such order, as at your arriual
you may remain there in the Court, until more a mply you understand her mind.
Beside, she gave me charge to tell ye, how she certainly knows you are Son
to a King, wherewith she is no less pleased then she thinks you will be: and
seeing (being ignorant of your Lineage) you have proved so good a Knight, now
understanding your Nobility, you should labor to increase your Fame if you
can. And then again she gave him the Letter, saying. Take here the Letter
wherein your Name is written, and which you had hanging about your neck, at
such time as you were found in the Sea. The Prince took the Letter, and when
he looked on it, remembering to what good purpose his Lady had taken it from
him, fetching a vehement sigh, somewhat softly, he thus spoke.

Ah happy Letter, most divinely wast thou found, in respect thou have been
kept by her, who has my heart in her custody, and for whom I have so often
assayed to die, yet cannot. For thinking on her perfection, I seek to augment
it by strength and commendation, but of so slender value is my puissance found:
that striving thereby to gain her favor, the least pain I feel surpasses a
thousand deaths: which (nevertheless) are now recompensed by this present
benefit. O highest God, when shall I see the time, wherein I may give her to
understand, how great my devotion is to obey her by some agreeable service?
Having finished these words, he opened the Letter, and saw his Name written
therein, which was Amadis: then thus spoke the Damsel again to him. I was
charged, Sir, when I had done my Message, to return with all speed to her that
sent me to you; therefore be-thinke your self if you will command me any
thing. You shall not depart (so please you) in such haste, answered the Prince,
but stay with me two or three days: during which time, for what occasion so
ever it be, you shall not forsake me, and then will I conduct you whither you
please. In obeying you (said the Damsel, I trust I do service to my Lady
Oriana. Their talk thus breaking off, he returned to the King and Agraies, who
stayed for him him at the entrance of the City, where the people were
wonderfully assembled in the streets. Then came the Queen with her Ladies and
Gentle-women to unarm him, and the Chirurgions to visit his wounds, which
when they had regarded, albeit they were many and yrkesom to behold, yet were
they to be healed without any great danger of his person. For this night the
king desired, that he and Agraies, would supp with him, but the Prince making
his excuse by his wounds, went to his Chamber, willing to have no other company
then the Damosel: to whom he did all the honor that could be devised, hoping
through her to find remedy for part of his griefs. This Damsel soiourned
with him certain time, and in respect of the good News she brought him, no
wound could hinder him from visiting the great Hall, there walking and
conferring with euety one: but most with her whom he caused to stay, attending
his disposition till he might bear Arms. And between them happened a strange
occasion, which was cause of his longer abode in Gaul, then he expected: so
that the Damsel returned to Oriana without him, as you hereafter shall
understand.

CHAP. XI.
How the Gentleman of the Sea was known by King Perion, his Father, and by the
Queen Elisena his Mother.

IN the beginning of this History, it has been recited, how King Perion gave
his Queen Elisena, being then in little Britain, a Ring like another that
commonly he wore, and these two Rings were of such an uniform, as there was
no difference to be discerned between them. Likewise ye have understood how
when the young Prince was put upon the water, this Ring was fastened about his
neck, which Gandales kept, till time he sent it by the Damsel (a little
before he was knighted) with the Sword and the wax. Now had the King sundry
times demanded of the Queen for the Ring, who made him diverse doubtful
answers, and in the end said she had lost it. But it came to pass, that as the
Prince walked with Orianaes Damsel, which commonly he was wont to do, young
Melicia daughter to king Perion, passed by him weeping, when the Prince stayed
her; saying. Fair friend, why weep ye? Ah my Lord, quoth the Princess, I
have even now lost a Ring, which the King my Father gave me to keep while he
slept. Weep not so fair Virgin, answered the Prince, you shall have another
of me to give him: So taking his own Ring from his finger, he gave it her.
When she beheld it, (thinking it was the same she had lost) she said. Ah my
Lord, have you found it, wherewith I am not a little glad, for I have all this
while sought it. What now? quoth the Prince, this is not your Ring. In mine
opinion it is, answered Melicia, or the only thing of the world that most
resembles it. So much the better, said the Prince, for more easily will it be
judged the same you lost. Herewith went Melicia to the Kings Chamber, and
finding him awake, he asked her for his Ring, then gave she him the same she
had of the Prince, which the King put on his finger, thinking it was his own.
But soon after as he walked through the Gallary, he espied in a corner lying
the other Ring, which he gave his daughter before to keep, and taking it up,
he compared them together: where-upon he remembered, that one of these two was
the same he some-time gave the Queen, so he asked of Melicia where she had the
Ring. The young Princess afraid of beating, durst not lie, but thus answered.
My Lord and Father, your Ring I lost, and as I searched for it, I met with the
Gentleman of the sea: who because he saw me weep, gave me one of his, which I
delivered you in stead of your own, and if that be not it, I know not where it
is. When the King heard this, he presently conceived suspicion between his
Queen and the Prince, imagining in respect of his beauty, how she was fallen
into some dishonest liking of him. and therefore had given that token. Hereupon
he went to the Chamber where she was, and shutting the door, sat down by her,
not speaking one word a good space, but silently fixed his eyes on the ground:
then breathing forth a passionate sigh, he said. I will not marvel any longer
Madame, why you would never make me any certain answer, when I demanded for
the Ring I gave ye in little Britain: you have lost it in such a place, where
you would be loath I should know of it, but hardly can you conceal affection,
when it proceeds to such effects. The Gentleman of the sea inconsideratly
gave it to Melicia, little thinking that it came at the first from me: and
thereby do I know what he suspecteth not, and your self would I should not
understand. When the Queen (who already by his countenance saw he was
troubled) heard what he had said, she now determined not to dissemble with him
in any thing, but summarily made a true discourse of her childbirth. And (not
without tears) she recounted to him, how standing in fear of the king her
father, as also the severe law used in his Kingdom, she was constrained to
commit her son to the mercy of the sea, and in his cradle coffin put with
him, both the Ring, sword, and what else has been already declared. Confounded
was the king with marvel when he heard the whole truth, and presently
imagined the Prince might be his first son, whom God had so miraculously
preserved, wherefore he said to the Queen. According to your circumstances
revealed, it may be, that he who is unknown to us, is our son, and the
rather I conjecture so by the name he bears of the sea. Ah God, said the
Queen, may it fall out so happily? I beseech ye my Lord, send presently for him,
and we will desire him to tell us of whence he is. Let us go then, quoth the
King, to seek him.

So went they to his Chamber, where they found him sleeping, wherefore (without
making any noise) he approached nere the bed, espied his Sword, which he took,
and after he had well viewed it, knew it to be the same he esteemed so much,
and wherewith he had finished many famous adventures, whereupon he said to the
Qeuene. On my faith, this is the sword I left in the Chamber of the King your
Father, the first night we were acquainted together, and now do I the better
believe what you have said unto me. Ah God, said the Queen, let us suffer him
sleep no longer, for my heart cannot endure this weighty burden: herewith she
took him by the hand and awaked him, saying. My Lord, sleep no more at this
time, for other accasions calls you. Easily was the Prince raised from
sleep, but when he beheld the Queen weeping, as one amazed thereat, he said.
Madame, from what occasion proceed these tears? is there any thing I may do
ye service in, to remedy them? Noble friend, quoth the Queen, you only may
quallifie my grief by your words, in telling me whose son you are. So God
help me Madame, answered the Prince, I know not, for by strange adventure was
I found in the sea. The good Lady was then so overcome with joy, as not only
speech, but vital sense was taken from her, and she fell down in a swoune:
which the Prince perceiving, quickly ran to recover her, saying. What aile ye
Madame? further could he not imagine on the cause of this alteration. Ah my
son, quoth she, now know I better then thy self who thou art. The King
likewise was so carried away with joy and admiration, as he stood not able to
speak a word: now was it hard to judge, which of these three felt greatest
contentation, but the mother throwing her arms about the Princes neck, said.
Now may I boldly dare to kiss in safety, having been so long deprived of thy
sight and knowledge: highly am I beholding to the divine bounty, who has
favored the offense I committed through fear, which was, in delivering thee
to the courtisie of the waters, and see here thy Kingly father that begot
thee. With these words the Prince fell at their feet, extreme joy reducing
the tears into his eyes, and altogether praised God for this good adventure:
especially the Prince, because he had been preserved in so great danger, and
now at length to find such honor and good hap, as to meet with his Parents,
being all this while unknown to them. As thus they devised on the fortunes
passed, the Queen demanded of him if he had no other name, the^ that which
now he called himself by? Yes Madame, quoth he, but it is not fully three
days past since I knew thereof, for as I came from the Combat against King
Abies, a Damsel brought me a Letter which I have, and (as she says) was
fastened about my neck, being wrapped in wax, when I was found in the sea,
wherein I find that my name is Amadis: and here-with all he showed the letter
to the Queen, which she full well knew so soon as she saw it. Believe me,
said the Queen, this truly is the Letter that Darioletta wrote, when she made
the separation between you and me: thus though I was ere while in great grief
and sorrow, yet now (praised be God) I feel as much joy and pleasure. Now
seeing assuredly your name is Amadis, it is needless you should bear any
other contrary title: so thence forward he was called no more the Gentleman of
the sea, but Amadis, and sometime Amadis de Gaul. It was not long before the
brute hereof was spread through the city, that the good and famous knight was
son to King Perion and the Queen Elisena: wherefore if every one rejoiced
(you must think) the Prince Agraies was not sorry, for they were found to be
Cousin germans. Among the rest, the Damsel of Denmark had knowledge
here-of, wherefore considering what comfort this would be to the Princess
Oriana, she labored so much as she could to return toward her: knowing she
would give her friendly countenance, bringing her so good News, what gracious
fortune had happened to him whom ^ue all other she loved. For this cause she
entreated Amadis, to dispatch her return to her Mistress: In that I well
perceive, quoth she, you can not so speedily depart hence as you would, nor
were it reasonable, but you should give some contentation to them, who for the
love of you have shed so many tears. These words caused the tears to
trickle down his cheeks, yet smothering his grief so well as he could, he
made this answer to the Damsel. Lady, I will pray that the Heavens may
safely conduct ye; yet let me entreat your friendly remembrance, commanding
the uttermost of my endeauours, for without your gentle care my life cannot
endure: withal, I find my self so endebted to my gracious Mistress, as I
dare not request any thing at her hand. Nevertheless you may say to her, that
right soon shall I come to show my obedience, and in like Armor will I be clad,
as when you saw me combat with the King of Ireland: because both she and you
may the more easily know me, if I cannot compass the mean to speak with you;
and in this manner departed the Damosel of Denmark. On the other side, Agraies
seeing his Cousin Amadis was to remain longer in Gaul, determined to take his
leave, and calling him aside said. Fair Cousin, for this time I must be
enforced to leave ye, albeit your company is more pleasing to me then any
other: but my passionate heart will allow me no quiet, until I be with her,
who both far and near has power to command me. It is Madame Oliuia,
daughter to the King Vanain of Norway, who sent for me, (by the Damsel that
brought me the Helmet of Galpan, which you sent me, in revenge of the dishonor
she received by him) that I should come to her with all convenient speed: and
therefore I neither may or dare fail, which is the only cause of my parting
with you.

Now must you note heere-withall that at the time as Don Galuanes brother to
the king of Scotland, was in the Realm of Norway with Agraies his Cousin: this
young Prince became so enamoured of the Lady Olinia, as he concluded never to
love any other then her, and this made him the more earnest to depart by her
commandment. And to tell ye what this Galuanes was, he had the name of Galuanes
without l^d, because all the portion his father left him, was only a poor
Castle: for the rest he had spent in following arms, and entertaining
Gentlemen, whereupon he had the Surname of without land. Such as you have
heard were the speeches Agraies had with Amadis, of who^ he requested to know,
where he should find him at his return from Norway. Cousin (quoth Amadis) I
hope at my departure hence, to visit the Court of king Lasuart, where I have
heard Chivalry to be worthily maintained, with greater liberty and honor,
then in the kingdom of any Emperor or King. But seeing it likes you to take
another way, I desire when you shall see the King your Father, and the Queen,
to remember my bounden duty to them both: assuring them (on my behalf) that
they may command mein their service, eue^ as your self, or any other, as well
in respect of our alliance together, as also for the gracious entertainment I
had in my youth, being by them most carefully educated and esteemed. This done,
Agraies took his leave, being Honorably conducted through the City, by the
King and all the Lords of his Court: but so soon as the King entered the
fields, he saw a Damsel coming toward him, who boldly laying hold on the
rain of his Horse bridle, thus spoke.

Remember thy self King Perion, what a Damsel some-time said unto thee: That
when thou did recover thy loss, the Kingdom of Ireland should loose her
flower. Think now (I pray thee) whether she said true or no, thou have
recovered thy Son whom thou reputedst lost, and even by the death of valiant
King Abies, who was the Flower of Ireland, and such a one as that Country
shall never have his like: Until time the good brother of the Lady must come,
who shall by force of Arms cause to be brought thither the tribute of other
Countries, and he must die by the hand of him, that shall accomplish for her
the only thing of the world, which most he loves. And so it happened by Marlot
of Ireland, brother to the Queen of that Country: whom Tristan of Leonnoys
killed, on the quarrel of tribute demanded of King Mark of Corne-wall his
Uncle: which Tristan after-ward dyed for the love he bare to Queen Yseul,
being the only thing of the world that he most loved. Now must thou be
mindful hereof, said the Damsel to the King, for Vrganda my Mistress so
commands thee. When Amadis heard her speak of Vrganda, he took occasion
thus to answer. Damsel, and my friend, I pray you say to her who sent you
hither, that the Knight to whom she gave the Lance, commends himself to
her good grace: being now assured in the matter whereof then she spoke, how
with that Lance, I should deliver the house from whence I first descended: and
even so it fell out, for I delivered my Father unknown to me, being then at
the very point of death, So without any other reply, the Damsel turning
bridle rode back the same way she came, and the King into the City, with
Amadis his Son so lately recovered: for which cause he assembled all the
Princes and Lords of his Realm, meaning to keep a more magnificent Court then
ever he had done before, to the end that every one might behold Amadis, in
regard of whose honor and happy coming, there were Knightly Tourneys daily
used, beside great store of other pastimes and delights.

During these pleasures, Amadis was advertised in what manner the Giant had
carried away his brother Galaor, wherefore he determined (happen what might)
to go seek him, and if possible he could to recover him, either by force of
Arms or otherwise. Notwithstanding, his heart being daily moved to go see
her that hourly expected his presence, one day he entreated the King his
Father: seeing now he had peace with his enemies, that with his leave he might
go seek adventures in great Britain, because he was loath to remain idle.
But little pleasing was this request to the King, and much less to the Queen,
yet by opportunity he obtained permission for his Voyage: nor could they all
have power to with hold him, by reason of the love he bare to Oriana, which
made him obedient to none but her. Hereupon, being clad in such Armor, as he
promised the Damsel of Denmark, he set forward on his journey, embarqing
himself at the nearest Port of the Sea, where by good hap he found passage
ready. Not long was his cut into great Britain, landing at Bristow, a most
noble and ancient City of that Country, where he heard that King Lisuart
soiourned at Windsore, royally accompanied with Knights and Gentlemen: for all
the Kings and Princes (his neighbors) did highly favor and show him obey
sance, which made Amadis shape his course directly to the Court. Not long had
he ridden on the way but he met with a Damsel, who demanded of him, if that
were her ready way to Bristow? Yea marry is it (answered the Prince.) I pray
ye then tell me, quoth she, if I may find any shipping there, for my speedy
passage over into Gaul? What affairs calls you thither? said Amadis. In
sooth, replied the Damsel, I go thither to find a Knight named Amadis, whom
King Perion not long since had known to be his Son. Greatly did Amadis
marvel hereat, for he thought these news had not been so far spread
abroad, wherefore he demanded how she heard thereof? I know it, qouth she,
from her, to whom the most secret things of all are manifest: for she knew
Amadis before he knew himself, or that his Father heard of Amadis; and if you
would understand what she is, her name (by common report) is Vrganda the
unknown. She has at this time especial affairs with him, and by no other
can she recover that, which she now stands in fear to loose. Believe me
Damsel, answered Amadis, seeing she who may command every one, does now
please to employ Amadis, I assure ye it is needless for you to travail any
further: for I am the man you are sent to seek, and therefore let us go
whither you think convenient. What? said the Damsel, are you Amadis? Yea,
verily am I, answered the Prince. Come, then and follow me, quoth she, and I
will conduct ye where my Mistress is, who attends your arrival in good
devotion. Heere-with Amadis rode after the Damsel, and thus are they gone
together in company.

CHAP. XII.
How the Giant bringing Galaor to King Lisuart, that he might dubbe him
Knight, met with his brother Amadis, by whose hand he would be Knighted,
and no other.

THe Giant of whom sundry times we have spoken heereto-fore, causing young
Galaor to be instructed in managing horses, and all other exercises beseeming
a Knight: found him so capeable of every thing, as in less space then a year,
he was grown marvelous perfect, so that now nothing remained, but to know of
him, by whom he most willingly would receive his order of Knighthood.
Notwith-standing; before the Giant moved this matter to him, one day among
other, Galaor came to him in this manner. Father, quoth he, you have daily
promised me that I should be Knighted, I desire you would be so good as your
word: for there is too much time spent since I ought to have had it. In sooth
my son (answered the Giant) you have reason for your words: yet tell me by who^
you would receive your Order? King Lisuart, quoth Galaor, is reputed a gentle
Prince, and a right good Knight, wherefore if so it like you, I shall be
contented to have it at his hand. Well have you advised, said the Giant: so
presently preparing all things in order, they set forward on their journey.
About five days after their departure by good hap they came near a very fair
and strong Castle, named Bradoid, seated on the top of a mountain, environed
about with Fennes and Marshes, as also with a salt water, that ran before it
wondrous swiftly, so that without a Barque it was impossible to get thither.
And because the Marish was very long, there was to pass over it a fair long
Causey, being so broad that two Chariots might well meet together on it: and at
the entrance of the Causey was a drawbridge, where-under the water ran with
such a violent fall, as no one was able by any means to pass it. Here must
ye note, that equally facing this bridge, there grew two goodly Elm trees,
where-under the Giant and Galaor beheld two Damsels and a Squire, with a
knight mounted on a black Courser, this Knight was armed, bearing figured in
his Shield, two Lions rampant: and because the bridge was drawn up, he could
pass no further, but called with a loud voice to them within, that some
should come to give him entrance, which Galaor perceiving said to the Giant. My
Lord (if it please you) I would grady see what this Knight will do here. Soon
after, they espied at the further end of the Causey, by the Castle side, two
other Armed Knights, accompanied with ten Halberders, who came and demanded
of the knight, what he would? Marie enter in, answered the Knight. It may not
be, said one of the two Knights, except you mean to combat first. I will not
stick for that, answered he that would enter, cause you the bridge to be let
down, and come to the combat: which presently they did. But one of the twain
(more hasty then his companion) advanced himself first, and placing his
Lance, ran with a swift carreer against the knight, who received him so
bravely, as he sent both Horse and man to the ground. The friend to the
dismounted knight thinking to revenge his injury, gave forth to meet him, and
failing in the attaint with their Lances, so furiously encountered with their
bodies, as the knight of the Castle fell into the water where he was drowned,
and the conqueror rode on, which the Halberders seeing, presently drew up the
bridge again after him.

When the Damsels saw he was thus closed in, they cried out aloud unto him
that he should return, and as he was about so to do, he espied three other
Knights well armed come toward him, who very audaciously thus spoke. Unhappy
was the hour to thee when thou did pass this bridge, for thou shall dye in
this water, where he is drowned that was of greater reputation then thou art.
Here-with they all three together ran against him, and met him so firmly, as
his Horse was like to have fallen over backward, yet having broken their
Lances on him, he was at this encounter wounded in two places, nevertheless,
one of them he met in such order, as his armor unable to resist the point of
the Lance, pierced through with such violence, that the trunchion still
remained in his body. This done, courageously he drew his sword, adressing
himself to the other twain, and they in like manner against him; where-upon
began a dangerous Combat between them: but he with the Lions in his Shield
doubting his death, labored so much as he could to overcome his enemies,
giving one of them such a stroke on the right arm, as (being cut from the
body) it fell sword and all to the ground: wherefore feeling himself thus
wounded, he galopped with all speed to the Castle, crying. Help my friends,
help your Lord who is in danger of killing. When the Knight of the Lions
heard, that he with whom he must yet deal, was the Lord of the Castle: he
delivered him such a rigorous blow on the Helmet, as made him loose his
stirrops and ready to fall, had he not got hold about the neck of his Horse: in
this staggering the Knight of the Lions rent his Helmet from his head, and he
perceiving himself unarmed, thought to escape by flight as the other did, but
his enemy got between him and the Castle, saying. Thou art dead, if thou
yield not thy self my prisoner. Alas, answered the amazed Knight, I am dead
indeed if you please, but as you are a Gentleman take pity on me, for I do
yield my self your vanquished. Suddenly the Knight of the Lions looking about,
espied other Knights and armed men on foot, that came in great have from the
castle to succor their Lord: wherefore he stepped to his conquered prisoner,
and holding his sword against his throat, said. Command thy men to return
else shall thou presently die. Then he who saw his life in such peril, cried
to them, and made a sign with his hand, that if they loved him they should
return: where-upon, they beholding their Lords life at his enemies swords
point, obeyed his command with all possible speed. Yet is not this enough,
said the conqueror, cause now the bridge to be let down: which he did, and
they came both forth on the causey where the Ladies tarried: but when the Knight
of the Castle beheld them, and that one of them was Vrganda the unknown: Ah
my Lord, quoth he, if you keep me not from this Lady, I am but dead. Nay
believe me, answered the Knight, that will not I do, but rather am to deal
with thee as she shall command me: then stepping to Vrganda, he said. Madame,
see here the Lord of the Castle, what is your pleasure I shall do with him?
Smi^e off his head, answered Vrganda, if he will not deliver you my friend whom
he keeps in prison. Here-with he lift up his sword to fear him, when the
Knight falling on his knee, cried. Ah my Lord, kill me not, I will obey
whatsoever she commands. Dispatch it quickly then, said the Knight of the
Lions. So caled the Lord to one of the halberders within, saying. Go to my
brother, and tell him if ever he intend to see me alive, let him quickly cause
the imprisoned Knight to come hither, and the Damosel that brought him with
her. Right soon was the messenger gone on this errand, returning immediately
with the Damsel and the Knight, to whom the Knight of the Lions thus spoke.
Thank this Lady who has done so much for ye, and truly great cause you have
to love her, in that she has taken wonderful pains to deliver you from this
^hraldome. I do love her, answered the restored Knight, and so will continue
better then I have done heretofore. But before he could finish these words,
Vrganda ran and embraced him, the like did he to her: afterward the conqueror
demanded, what should be done with her that brought him thither. It is
necessary that she die, replied Vrgada, to let her know the price of so heinous
an offense. Presently was the poor Damosel so strangely enchanted, as she ran
skipping over the marrish quag-mires, and turning back again, would have
thrown her self into the water, had not the knight of the Lions entreated
Vrganda, to pardon her trespass for this time. Provided, said Vrganda, that
she return no more to offend me, otherwise she shall pay for altogether. When
the Lord of the Castle saw the Damsel was remitted, at his request who
overcame him, he thus spoke. My Lord, I have performed what has bin commanded,
therefore I pray ye give me leave to depart from her that never loved me. In
sooth, answered Vrganda, for honor of him by whom you make your suite, I am
content, and you may return. He being gone, the Knight of the Lions (who yet
maruailed, by what occasion the Damsel was driven into that fury) asked what
moved her so to do? Ah my Lord, quoth she, me thought one came round about me,
and would have burned me with a lighted torch, therefore to save my self, I
sought to leap into the water. At these words the Knight fell into a laughter,
saying. Your folly has been over great, fair Damosel, to work her ill who
knows how to revenge it.

Galaor stood and had seen all these things, where-upon he thus spoke to the
Giant Believe me father, I very much desire that this worthy man should give me
my order, for if King Lisuart be renowned, it is for his possessions, but this
Knight deserves it by his strength and valor. I am well content answered the
Giant, go and request it of him, if he deny you the fault is his own. So
Galaor went forward, accompanied with four squires and two Damsels, when
coming to the Knight of the Lions, he found him yet under the trees. At his
arrival he was courteously received by the Knight, who reputed him one of the
most comely Gentlemen that ever he had seen, afterward Galaor thus began.
Gentle Sir, I am come to entreat a favor at your hand. Truly, answered the
Knight, if your request be reasonable, it will the sooner be granted. My suite
Sir, quoth Galaor, is for nothing else, but that it might please you to give me
the order of knighthood, and in so doing, you shall save me a great deal of
travail to king Lisuart, to whom I am going for the same cause. My friend,
replied the knight, you shall do your self overmuch wrong, to leave so good
an occasion by the best king in the world, for so poor a knight errand as I
am. My Lord, quoth Galaor, the great state of the king can put no such strenght
into me, as I have seen performed by you in the late Combats: therefore (so
please it you) accomplish in me my earnest desire. I can be much better
content, answered the knight, to grant any other thing you will demand: for
such authority appertains not to me, nor to you likewise is it so honorable.
As thus they stood on these terms, Vrganda (unlooked for) came to the^,
wherewith the knight of the Lions was very glad: and she having as yet not
heard any of their talk, thus spoke to her champion. What is your opinion of
this Gentleman? Me thinks, quoth he, a brauer person was never seen: but he
requires such a thing of me, as is neither in him or me convenient. What is
it? said Vrganda. That I, quoth he, should give him the order of knighthood,
and yet he is now in travail, with determination to request the same of the
famous king Lisuart. Certainly, answered Vrganda, to make him stay, will be a
greater cause of evil to him then good, and I will council him not to desist
from his former motion: for you ought nor to deny him, seeing I can assure ye,
that honor will be better employed by him, then any other in all the Isles of
the sea, except one. Seeing it is so, replied the knight, in the name of God
let it be done: go we then to some Church to perform the vigill. It shall be
needless, quoth Galaor, to stand about such matters now, in that I come not
unprovided of them already. It suffiseth then, answered the Knight: so put he
on his right spur, and embracing him, said. You are now a knight, wherefore
take the honor of the sword by whom you shall think it more convenient. Do you
then give it me, said Galaor, if you please, for by no other will, I ^eceiue it
with my will. Then he called a Squire that held a sword ready, but Vrganda
stepped before, saying. No, no, you shall have a better: take that which
hangs on yonder tree, and you shall find it far more fair and good.
Heere-with they looked upon the tree, yet saw it not, wherefore they all began
to smile, and she doing the like, said to them. In sooth it is almost ten
years since it first was hanged there, yet no passenger by ever saw it: look
better about the tree, for sure you cannot but easily behold it. Now did they
all perceive it tied to a branch of the tree, even as though it had but even
then been hanged there: and by it was a Scabberd covered with gold, showing
most fine and curious Worke-manship on it. The Knight of the Lions took it
down, and afterward girded it about Galaor, saying. So fair a Sword beseems
a knight so formal, and think she hated you not, who of so long time has
kept it for you. Most cheerfully did Galaor give her thanks, and the knight
likewise, thus speaking to them. I beseech ye to hold me excused, for I am
constrained presently to depart from ye, and were it not I must go where I am
attended, no company in the world would I desire more then yours; therefore I
desire ye Sir, to tell me where I may find ye at my return. In the Court of
king Lisuart, answered the knight, where I shall be very glad to see you: and
because it is no long time since I was knighted, I am the more desirous of some
abode there to attain honor, as you cannot choose but do the like if you come
hither. Certes, said Galaor, to that place will I shortly follow ye: and
Madame, quoth he to Vrganda, you have so strictly bound me to your service, as
may it please you to account me your knight, I am ready wheresoever you shall
command me. So departed he from them, returning to the Giant who stayed for
him by the River side, where he had hid himself, least he should be seen.

But now you must here observe, that as Galaor thus devised with Vrganda and
the Knight, one of the Damsels that was in Galaors company, had conference
with her that attended on Vrganda, of who^ at large she understood, how the
knight of the Lions was Amadis, Son to king Perion of Gaul: whose coming
thither Vrganda had caused, to deliver by force of Arms her friend that there
was kept prisoner, for by inchantme^t she could not compass it, by reason the
Lady of the Castle was too cunning in that Art, and there had first enchanted
him in despite of her, fearing no way to loose him again but by knightly
chivalry.

On this occasion the custom there was appointed, which Amadis ended, and
restored (as you have heard) the man for whom they came thither: and he by the
Damsel, Niece to the Lady of the Castle, that in enchaunted fury would have
leapt into the River, was conducted to this place.

So soon as Galaor had left Vrganda, she demanded of Amadis, if he knew the
man to whom he) gave the Order of Knighthood. No, truly Madame, quoth he. In
sooth answered Vrganda, it is great reason you should know what he is: for he
bears so brave a mind, that if you both should meet without further
knowledge, there might happen between ye great inconvenience. Therefore I
give ye to understand, how he is your own brother both by father and mother,
and the very same whom the Giant carried away, being then but two years old and
a half: now he is of so goodly stature as you have seen, for whose sake and
yours likewise, I have a long time kept the Sword, wherewith (I assure ye) he
shall do more in exploits of Arms, then ever any knight did in Great
Britain. Amadis concieued hereat such inward joy, as the tears trickled
down his cheeks, wherefore he said to Vrganda. I beseech ye Madame, tell me
where I may find him. It is not necessary, quoth she, that as yet you should
seek him. Why said Amadis, is he then constrained to accomplish some
predestinate matter, before I may find him? Yea verily, answered Vrganda, and
it is not so easy to know as you may imagine. Long time thus continued their
conference, till Vrganda would depart alone with her friend: so she commended
Amadis to God, who presently took his way toward Windsore, where at this time
King Lisuart soiourned.

Our History (at this time) pauseth of him, continuing what happened to Galaor
the new Knight, who being arrived where the Giant stayed for him, thus spoke.
Father, I am now thanks be to God, and him you sent me to, a confirmed knight.
My son, quoth the Giant, I am not a little glad thereof: and seeing it is so
well effected, will ye grant me one request? What? said Galaor, am I to
deny you any thing, except you would withold me from seeking honor? My
son, answered the Giant, I rather desire thy happy proceeding therein, and
that which I would have appertains thereto. Demand then what you will, said
Galaor for I grant it. Fair Son, quoth the Giant, heretofore you have heard
me complain of the Giant Albadan, who by treason slew my Father, and yet
forcibly detaineth from me the Rock of Galteres, which justly does belong to
me: I pray ye to take revenge on my behalf, for no other then you may do it:
remember how well I have nourished and used you, as also my true and unfeigned
love, which is such, as I will yield my person even to the death for safety of
yours. This matter said Galaor, you need not request, but command me to do it:
as for my self, I desire you to rest content, till with Albadan I have tried
this difference, seeing it concerns you so near. Beside, hereof you may be
persuaded, that if I escape with life, I shall continue evermore in readiness,
to accomplish any thing else for your honor and profit: in which deuoire, the
whole circuit of my time is bound, as witness of the duty I owe to you,
therefore without any longer trifling, let us set forward to him with whom I
must try my fortune. So took they the way to the rock of Galteres, but before
they had travailed far, Vrganda ouer-tooke them, and being acquainted with
each other, she said to Galaor. Know ye (gentle Sir) who has this day made
you Knight? That do I Madame, answered Galaor, even the best knight that ever
I heard of. It is very true (quoth she) yet is he of greater esteem then you
think, but I would have you to know his name: then called she Gandalaz the
Giant, saying. Gandalaz, do not thou know that this knight (whom thou have
nourished) is the Son to king Perion, and his Queen Elisena, and how by such
like words I bad thee take him, since which time thou have been his Foster
father? It is very true, answered the Giant. Now then Galaor, my friend, said
Vrganda, the man that made thee knight is thy brother and elder then thou by
two years: wherefore when thou see him, give him honor, and labor to
resemble him in hardiness and kindship. May it be possible? replied Galaor,
that King Perion is my Father, and Queen Elisena my mother, and I the brother
to so good a knight? Doubt not thereof (quoth she) for it is so. Praised be
God, said Galaor, now may I assureye, that I am in greater care the^ before:
nor will I make any spare of my life, seeing it is necessary I should resemble
him you talk of. Thus returned Vrganda the same way she came, and the Giant
with Galaor rode on as they purposed, the Prince demanding of the Giant, what
the Lady was that had communed with them? It is quoth he, Vrganda the unknown,
as she names her self, because she often trans-formeth and makes her self
unknown. As thus they devised together, they came to a Rivers side where they
would refresh themselves, and by reason the heat of the day was very vehement,
they caused a Tent to be erected: where long they had not sitten, but they
beheld two Damsels coming toward them by two several ways, and met together
directly before the Pauillion. So soon as they espied the Giant, they would
have fled, but Galaor came to assure them, and courteously caused them to
return, demanding afterward whether they travailed. I go (quoth one of them)
by the commandment of my Mistress, to see a strange fight, which one only
Knight has enterprised in Combat, against the strong Giant at the Rock of
Galteres, to the end I may bring her true tidings thereof. When the other
Damsel heard her say so, she thus replied. I am amazed at your speeches, is
there any knight in the word dare venture on such folly? Certes, said the
first, it is most true. Believe me, answered the other, although my occasions
be elsewhere, I am content to stay and go with you, to see a matter so
incredible. Hereupon they would have taken leave of Galaor, but he said to
them. Make no have fair Damsels, but tarry if you please, and we will bear
ye company: where-to they condiscended, as well for the good grace they noted
in this new Knight, as also in respect of his amiable countenance, which made
them take great pleasure in beholding him: then Galaor walking with the Giant
aside, said, Father, I could wish that you would go no further with us, but
let me go with these Damsels to accomplish what I have promised: this he
spoke because he would not be known what he was, or that his enterprise
should be suspected by them, whereto the Giant (unwillingly) did accord. So
rode Galaor with the Damsels, and three Squires* the Giant left him to bear
his Armor, making such speed in their journey, that they arrived within two
Miles of the Rock of Galteres, where they lodged in the little Cottage of an
Hermit, to whom Galaor imparted some of his secret thoughts: but when he
revealed that he came for the Combat, the good Hermit (abashed thereat)
discoursed with him in this manner.

My Son, who has advised thee to this boldness, seeing there is not in all
this Country ten such Knights, as dare assail the Giant, so fearful and
monstrous is he to behold: and you being but young, to hazard your self in this
danger, adventure the loss both of body and soul, because such as wilfully
seek their own death, are very homicides of themselves. Father, answered
Galaor, God work his will with me, for by no means may I let pass mine
enterprise. Greatly was the good man moved to compassion, so that the tears
be deawed his milke-white beard, being able to make no other answer, but
thus: If not my Son, I desire God to assist ye, seeing you will give no
better credit to me. Good Father, quoth Galaor, be mindful of me in your
devout Prayers: and thus till next morning they spent the night.

Galaor having armed himself, went to the Rock which was not far from the
Hermitage, for there might be easily discerned the Fortress and great Towers,
which delivered good mark of a most strong Castle. When one of the Damsels
saw they approached so near, she demanded of Galaor, if he knew the Knight
that should perform the Combat? I think (quoth he) I have seen him
some-time: but tell me (I pray ye) from what place are you come to behold this
pastime? And what is the Lady that sent you? None must know so much, said the
Damsel, but the Knight himself which deals in the Combat. Thus continued
their talk, till they arrived at the Castle of Albadan, the gate whereof they
found fast shut, but Galaor stepping thereto called the Porter: at which noise,
two menshewed themselves over the Porch, demanding of him what he would have.
Go, quoth Galaor, and say to Albadan, that here is a Knight, who is sent from
Gandalaz to defy him: and if he come not out the sooner, he will show himself
of less valor then reputation. You have reason (said one of them in mockage)
but he will quickly bring a remedy for your chollor, if you do not help it
your self by running away. So departed the Watchmen to inform the Giant of
these News, and when the Damsels understood, that Galaor himself must
execute the enterprise, being terrified with amazement, they said. Ah my Lord,
you attempt a matter of overmuch folly, would God you might speed so well, as
with honor to accomplish an enterprise of such consequence: As for me (quoth
one of them) I dare tarry no longer with ye, for I shall die at the sight of
the Monster with whom you have to deal.

Damsels, said he, seeing you may not be assured here, depart I pray ye to
the Hermitage, where we lodged this last night, and if I dye not in fight, I
will not be long from ye. Believe me, replied the other Damsel, what-soeuer
happen I will not go, for I determine to see the end.

The boldness of the one made them both tarry, yet did they sunder themselves
by the Forest side, because the Giant should not see them, and hoping the
better to escape away if the Knight sped not well.

CHAP. XIII.
How Galaor vanquished the Giant at the Rock of Galteres.

Soon was the Giant advertised of these news, wherefore not long after he
came forth of the Castle, mounted on a horse proportionable to such a huge
body: for it seemed an elephant, and he on his back made ample resemblance of a
huge Colossus, or like a mountain moving, rather then a man. Armed he was in
plates of iron so long, as from his throat they covered all the saddle on the
horse, having on his head a bright shining Helmet, and in his hand a mighty
iron Mace, being the weapon wherewith he commonly used to fight. Wonderfully
affraide were the Squires and the Ladies that beheld him, and Galaor was not so
assured, but he stood somewhat abashed: notwithstanding, he resolved so
courageously, as the nearer he approached, the less account he made of his huge
enemies Mace. When the Giant saw him come marching so bravely toward him, he
said. I marvel demie man, how thou dare with such boldness tarry thy
death: he that sent thee hither might either borow thy courage, or thou his
corpulence, but he intended I should break my fast, before the hour of dinner
came. Galaor somewhat discontented with these despisings, thus answered.
Think thou huge beast that thy barking can advantage thee, or hinder me? my
confidence is in him who abated the pride of the great Philistine, and can
likewise deliver thee more base and vile the^ the dust. Exceeding angry was the
Giant at these words, wherefore without any more talk, he lifted up his Mace
to strike, seeming in his marching as though a Tower had been carried about,
but Galaor being prompt and nimble, stooped his Lance, and with a rough
cariere of his horse, attainted him on the stomach so bravely, as he caused
the mighty Poliphemus forgo one of his stirrops, his Lance therewith
shiuering in pieces in the air. At this encounter the Giant thought to have
stricken him down with his Mace, but he was too roughly and suddenly stayed,
whereby his blow was given in vain: for the Mace which was heavy, and
comparable to a huge beam in bigness, being delivered with full force of both
his arms: fell down so weightily, as the Giant himself was not able to hold
it, whereby it lighted on the head of his own horse so peazantly, as being
feld therewith, dyed presantly under him, the Giant tarying a good while
before he could recover himself again. Yet the horse being of courage, did
often strive to get up, but Galaor thrusting his sword into his belly, caused
him at length to lie there still enough: but in the end, the Giant did the like
to Galaors horse, and he seeing in what great danger now he was, by his wonted
dexterity quickly got footing. Then approaching his enemy, drew the sword
Vrganda had given him, wherewith watching when the Giant lifted his Mace, he
gave such a stroke at it where he held his hands, as breaking the stoke in
pieces, he left but little length for the Giant to hold it by: yet he made
shift to buffet Galaor therewith in such sort, as he was constrained to set
one hand to the ground to sustain himself. But all this did no jot astonish
him, for coming to the Giant, (who yet kept play with the remander of his
Mace, which by wary escapes the Prince still prevented) he gave a stroke at him
with so full force, as clean cut away the left arm from his shoulder, and the
sword passing further with like strength, met the Giants leg so directly, that
it wounded him through the flesh, with a wide gaping wound to the very bone.
Feeling great pain by both these maimes, he cried out aloud: Ah unhappy wretch
that I am, to be thus overcome by the strength of one man. Being in extreme
rage, he sought to fasten hold on the body of Galaor, but the sore wound on his
leg would let him stand no longer, constraining him to fall on his knees to the
ground: and as the Prince aproch't to him, he thought with his other arm to
pull him down, but Galaor perceiving his intent, stroke at him again and smot
off his hand. Now was the Giant despoiled of all force, being so wounded and
ouer-trauailed withal, that he was no longer able to endure: by which means
Galaor more easily parted his head from his sholders, which he delivered his
Squires to carry with him. When the Damsels beheld this famous conquest, they
left their ambush, and came to regard this marvel, saying to Galaor. In sooth
worthy Knight, great good nar^ure has been bestowed on you by your educator:
for as we have here-tofore heard, he has the profit and vengeance, and you the
honor exceeding all.

As they were about to rerurne, they saw ten Knights come forth of the castle
chained together, who cried to him. Come my Lord, come take this place, seeing
you have done him dead that so miserably detained us prisoners. What think
you^ said Galaor to the Damsels, may we soiourne here this after noone?
Truly, quoth they, we think nothing to the contrary. So went they into hhe
Castle, where Galaor discharged the prisoners: and soon after, viands for
dinner was brought him and his company by the servants. When they had re^^eshed
themselves, and at their pleasure visited the Fortress, the subjects
inhabiting the Rock came all to him, and would have done him honor as to their
Lord: but he by no means would ^cept thereof, for he told them that what he
had done, was on the behalf of Gandalaz, to whom that place by right
appertained. And I, quoth he, as bound to him by duty, came hither to prepare
his lodging: therefore I pray ye that he may be well received of you all, and
obey him as your true and natural Lord, for well am I assured, that he will
entreat you with love and gentleness. These requests were presently answered by
one for the^ all, who said. Hither shall he be most heartily welcome, because we
hope, that he to whom we shall be vassailes and Subjects, will cherish and
favor us: in stead whereof, the other used us as villains and slaves, and you
(being the conqueror) we hold for our only deliverer. All things thu^ bated
and accorded, Galaor departed thence with his company, returning to the
Hermitage, where the Hermit attended for happy news: but he was not alittle
glad to see Galaor come with such success, wherefore he thus spoke. My son,
daily are you bound to praise the divine bounty, whose love has given you
grace to execute this notable vengeance. On the morrow, after he had received
the good man's benediction, he set forward on hias way, and one of the Damsels
intreted him, that he would suffer her to travail in his company, whereto
right willingly he gave consent. And I, quoth the other, must take another way,
in that I had not come thus far, but only to behold the issue of the combat,
which I have seen with such content, as I must needs make commendable report
thereof to other, and so shall I not fail to do in the Court of King Lisuart,
whether now I go to find a brother of mine gone thither before me. Fair
Damsel, answered Galaor, if you meet a young Knight, who bears in his
Shield a couple of Lions, I pray ye say to him, that the Gentleman, to whom not
long since he gave the order of Knighthood, does humly salute him, adding this
withal, how he endeuoure^h to honor the order, and when they both shall meet,
he will acquainte him with such matter between them, as yet perhaps he knows
not. So took the Damsel her leave of Galaor, who afterward thus began to
commune with the other. You know Lady, that I have finished the combat with
the Giant, and you said to me before I began it, how the Knight himself
should know what she is that sent you thither. Very (...), answered the
Damsel, but if you would be resolved therein, follow me, and within five
days I will show you her. That shall not let me, said Galaor: thus rode they
on together so long, till at length they came to a forked way, and Galaor who
rid muzing before, thought she had followed him: but she arrested behind
alittle, and when she hoped to ouer-take him again, it was her hap to take the
wrong way. This chanced at the entrance of the Forest of Braganda, which
seuereth the Countries of Claire and Gresca, where long he had not ^rred, but
he heard a voice thus calling to him. Ah good Knight, help me. Galaor turning
his head to see what was the cause: I think, quoth one of his Squires, it
should be the Damsel that departed from us. What? said Galaor, has she left
us* Yea truly, answered the Squire, she took the way leading on the left
hand. Believe me, quoth he, I had very little care of her, and hastly without
taking his Helmer, having only his Shield and Lance, he galopped so fast as he
could to the place where he heard the voice, and hard at hand he espied five
men on foot, armed with Croslets and Halberds, and a Dwarffe on horseback,
who cruelly laid on the Damsel with a staff. When Galaor approached near
them, he came to the Dwarffe, saying. Thou villainous and deformed creature,
soon shall I send thy soul to the Devil: and running fiercely against him
with his Lance, threw him against the ground maruailously amazed. Then came
the other eagerly upon him, compassing him on every side: but to the first he
gave such a grieting with his Lance, as he lay sprangling on the earth.
Another of them buckled close to him, laying load on his Shield with his
Halberd, but at length he pierced his Lance quite through his body. When the
other three saw this massacre, they ran away so fast as they could overthwart
the Forest, and Galaor not able to overtake them, returned back again to the
Dwarffe, who being gotten on horseback, fled away after the other, crying.
Accoursed Knight, in hapless hour have thou misused my men, for thou shall die
an evil death. Galaor seeing the Dwarffe labored so hard as he could to save
himself, would follow him no further, but went to see if his Lance were
unbroken, which he had left in the body of the dead man: and finding it sound
as it was before, gave it to his Squire, saying to the Damsel. Ride now
before me, and I will guard you better then I have done.

So took they the way again they had left, that brought them to a River named
Braz, which could not be passed at the foord: now rode the Damsel somewhat
far bef^ Galaor, finding the passage so ready, as she went over before he
came. In mean while he stayed the return of the boat, he espied the Dwarffe
come after him crying. Villainous traitor thou art dead, if thou deliver not
the Damsel thou tookest from me. Little account did Galaor make of his words,
but looking back, he saw three Knights come after the Dwarffe well mounted,
one of the three thus speaking to the rest. It were great dishonor for us, to
set all three together upon one man: and as for my self, I think scorn to be
assisted by any. Having so said, with a full course he ran against the Prince,
who likewise was ready to entertain him, and they encountered in such sort, as
the Knight pierced Galaors Armor, making him feel the naked point of his
Lance: but Galaor bad him so bravely welcome, casting him from his saddle with
such might, as he lay on the ground not able to stir, whereat the other
twain were so abashed, that they ran against the Prince, the one failing,
and the other breaking his Lance: which Galaor determining to revenge, stroke
his Lance into the sight of the last Knights Helmet, as he made it fall from
his head, and he (having lost his stirrops) ready to lie along. Mean while,
the second who had not broken, returned against Galaor, and sped in meeting.
Now albeit the encounter was with great vigor, yet escaped the armor on
either side. Having thus galantly shiuered their staves, they drew forth their
swords, beginning a fierce and cruel combat, and while the fight endured, the
Dwarffe without ceasing cried to his men. Look well that he escape not, but
kill him least he get away. Then Galaor coming near him who had lost his
Helmet, reached him such a stroke on the head, as he tumbled down dead before
him. And when the third saw his companion slain, being afraid of himself,
he turned his back and away: but Galaor pursued him so near, that he gave him
a blow between the neck and the shoulders, which brought off a great many
plats of his Armor. Now did the run-awaies fear more and more increase, when
he felt his enemy so near at hand, wherefore the better to save himself, he
cast his shield back over his shoulders, and fled away faster then he did
before: which Galaor perceiving, would follow him no longer, but hastily
returned, thinking to take the Dwarffe and bind his legs to a tree, from which
the Dwarffe kept himself well enough, for he had gotten more ground in running
away then the other. Here-upon he came to the first that he dismou^ted, who
having somewhat recovered himself, Galaor thus spoke to him. Insooth your
misfortune grieueth me more then your fellows does, for like a good Knight
you came alone to me, albeit I know not on what occasion, in respect I never
offended ye as I remember. It is very true, answered the Knight,
notwith-standing you must note what the Dwarffe said to us: how you had beaten
him, slain his men, and taken a Lady perforce from him, that was in his
company.

Believe me, quoth Galaor, showing him the Damsel on the other side of the
River) he falsely lied, and were it that I had brought her away perforce, she
would not carry for me, so willingly as she does: but she unhappily straying
in this Forest, the Dwraffe met with her, offering to lead her away against
her will, and because she would not obey him, he gave her many cruel strokes
with a staff. Ah, Traitor that he is, answered the knight, for this villainie
shall I reward him if ever we meet again. And because Galaor found the
Knight in so good sort, he ho^pe to take his horse that had escaped: desiring
him to punish the Dwarff for his treason. This done, he entered the boat and
past the water, afterward he and the Damsel rode on their way, she showing
him soon after a Castle near at hand, which stood very bravely on the top
of a Mountain, saying. Here will be the best lodging we shall find this
night: and alighting from their horses, they were enter^ained there with
maruailous cortesie, it being the dwelling of the Damsels mother. Soon after
was the Prince unarmed, and then the Damsel came to him in this manner.

To the end (my Lord) I may keep promise with ye, if you please to stay
here till I return, which credit me shall be very spedily: I will bring ye
news of her whom you desire to see. I am content, answered Galaor, provided
that you make no tarriance, because I have affairs of importance elsewhere.
Let it suffice, replied the Damsel, you shall see me again sooner then you
imagine. And so she departed, using such diligence, as Galaor was not
displeased with her stay. At her return, they mounted on horseback, and rode
together cross the Forest, which when they left, the night ouer-tooke them:
whereupon the Damsel forsaking the outright way, turned aside, and by time
the greater part of the night was spent, the^^ arrived at a very fair City,
named Grandares, where coming to a Castle gate, the Damsel said. Now let us
alight, and follow me, for here will I show you her, I promised: but leave not
your weapous and Armor, because one can scant tell what may happen. The
Damsel went before, and Galaor followed her till they came near the wall.
Get up here said the Damsel, and I will go on the other side to attend you.
With much ado he ascended the wall, by reason of his weighty Armor, as also
being troubled with his Shield and Helmet. When the Damsel saw he was
amounted, she entered the Palace to guide him as she begun: in mean while
Galaor was descended, and sat hard by a Posterne that entered a Garden, where
he tarryed so long, till the Damsel came and opened the door with one of her
companions, but ere he entered, they thus spoke. Although you have attained
thus far, yet before you pass any further, you must needs tell us whose
son you are. Let that alone answered Galaor, for I have such a Father, as til
the time of better hap, I am content not to name him. Nevertheless, quoth
one of them, it is very necessary we should know, for it shall not be any way
to your hinderance. I am (answered Galaor) Son to King Perion of Gaul, and
the Queen Elisena, and it is not six days past since I could not tell ye so
much. Stay then, said the Damsel: so they caused him to be vn-armed, casting
a Mantle about his shoulders; and afterward went on, the first Damsel going
before, and the other coming behind him. In this manner they entered the
Palace, passing through a chamber, where many Ladies and Gentlewomen were in
bed: and if any one demanded who went by so late, the Damsels (his guides)
made answer for him. Thus not perceived by any, they came to another Chamber,
wherein when Galaor entered, he saw sitting on a gorgious bed a most
beautiful Lady, with an Iuory comb kembing her fair locks: but when she
espied Galaor, she pre^enly cast on her head a Chaplet of Flowers, and came to
mere him whom the Damsels had brought, saying. My Friend, you are right
heartily welcome, being the best knight in the word that I know. And you,
Madame, quoth he, are most happily found, being the fairest Lady that ever I
saw. Then the Damsel that had guided him thither, thus spoke* My Lord, see
here my Mistress, how am I discharged of the promise I made ye, and if you
would have me say any more: she is named Aldena, daughter to king Serolys, and
because the wife to the Duke of Bristoya, is sister to her mother, she
nourishes her here, as her own daughter. And you Madame, (quoth she to the
young Princess, have here present (as I can assure ye) the Son to King
Perion of Gaul: wherefore you being both the children of Kings, excelling in
beauty and natures perfections, if ye love together no one dare blame ye.
Here-with she went presently forth of the chamber, and making fast the door
after her, left the two loves alone: by which means they spent this night so
amorously, as they that have tasted like fortune may conceive, and therefore
^eed I make no further talk thereof.

But the hour being come when Galaor should depart, he was warily advised
thereof by the Damsels, who brought him to the place were ouer-night he had
left his Armor: and after he was invested therein (as he ought to be) he
went along the Garden again where-through he came in. And as never any good
chances, without some mishap attending thereon, so now came it to pass* for
there found he the Dwarffe ambushed, that had so misused him before, as you
have heard, who no sooner espied him, but he cried out. Believe me, Sir
Royster, unwise wast thou to enter here, for thou dyest, and the traiteresse
that did conduct thee. Come forth Knights, come forth, here is a man that
secretly came out of the Dukes Chamber. It was no time then for Galaor to
sleep, but lightly getting up the wall, cast himself on the other side,
where finding his horse ready, he presently mounted: notwithstanding, the
Dwarffe and the rest (well acquainted with the secret issues of the Castle)
with all speed pursued him, and perceiving how this villainous Dwarffe was
cause of all this trouble, stayed, saying to himself. Either I will die, or
be revenged on this rediculous creature, if I catch him. Then came the other
and set upon him, but so bravely did he defend himself, as none of them durst
be bold to tarry near him: for he being moved to exceeding impatience, thrust
himself in the midst among them, laying about with courage, as well they found
who they dealt withal. Galaor seeing the Dwarffe still kept aloof,
determining to die, but he would lay hold on him, and entering among the
thickest of them, before his Lance brake he slew two outright: then drawing
his Sword, made them so soundly acquainted with the sharp edge thereof, as he
that thought himself hardyest, was glad to give him way, for no one meddled
with him but was laid along. At length they compassed him in such sort, as they
found means to kill his horse, which made him fall to the ground in very great
danger, for now they verily intended to murder him, and the Dwarffe persuading
himself that he could not escape, came near to show some part of his
manhood: but when he saw Galaor had in spite of them recovered his feet, and
happy was he which kept furthest from him, he turned his horse to escape away,
yet by chance Galaor got hold on the reins of his bridle, giving him such a
blow on the stomach with the hilts of his Sword, that he fell to the ground
so loutishly, as the blood gushed forth at all the conduits of his head. Then
lightly mounted he on the Dwarffes horse, and the Beast seeming to storm at
this change, from an euill-fauoured Dwarffe to one of the best knights in the
world, made proof whether his Rider could sit fast, or no, running violently
with him a good distance from his enemies. And turning to make an end of his
work, as by chance he lifted his eyes to the Castle, he saw in one of the
windows the Lady whom he had chosen as his friend, she shaking a white
hand-kercher to him, meaning he should be gone with all possible speed, which
he did, because thee perceived more enemies at hand. With nimble pace he hyed
him away, not tarrying till he recovered the Forest, where to refresh
himself a while, he gave his Helmet to his Squire.

Now shall ye understand, how when the Dukes Knights saw him make such haste
away, some were of the opinion to follow him, the rest said it was in vain,
seeing he had gotten into the wood, and thus debating, they went no further,
but stood as men confounded, with maruailing how one man could be able to
vanquish so many. Mean while the Dwarffe was come to himself again, but he
felt his body so sore and bruised, as very hardly could he stand on his feet,
yet still he cried to them in this manner.

My friends, carry me to my Lord the Duke, for I will let him know what he must
needs revenge. Through these importunate acclamations, he was brought by them
before the Duke, to whom he declared, how he met the Damsel in the Forest,
and because he would have accompany her home, she cried out till a Knight came
to aid her, who killed his men, and beat him likewise very cruelly.
After-ward, how he followed him again unto three Knightts to have her from
him, and they in like manner were discom^ited.

Lastly, that she brought the same Knight to his Honors Castle, and suffered
him to be with her in the Dukes own Chamber. The Duke being highly offended
hereat, demanded if he knew the Damsel he thus complained on. Yea, my Lord,
quoth the Dwarffe, if I see her again. Here-upon all the Ladies, and
Gentle-women were sent for, and so soon as the Dwarffe beheld her he said.
This is she (my Lord) by whom your Palace is dishonored. Ah Traitor,
answered the Damsel, thou lie fasly, for had not the Knight come to rescue
me in the Forest, thou would have abused me: etc. illanously did beat
me, because I would not consent to thee. Very much intensed with anger, was the
D^^e^ again (...) Damsel, and said in (...) (...) mine honor (false woman) I
will make thee (...) Afterward he sent her to close (...) yet notwithstanding
all the pain she endured, she would not discover any thing touching her
Ladies st^* albeit she was there very long tormented: to the no little grief
and sorrow of Aldena that dearly loved her, and knew not by any other how to
understand of her Galaor. But the Author thinking he has kept ye too long from
Amadin, returns to him* intending when place and matter shall serve, to
finish that which afterward happened to Galaor.

CHAP. XIIII.
How after Amadis departed from Vrgand^ the unknown, be arrived (...) a
Castle, where it chanced to him as you shall read in this discourse.

GReat joy had Amadis at his departure from Vrganda, as well for understanding
that the man whom he had Knighted, was his own Brother, as also because he
approached near the place where his Oriana soiourned, hoping ere-long to have a
sight of her. And so long travailed he through a Forest where-into he had
entered, as he was surprised with dark night before he could find any house
for lodging, yet notwithstanding the obscurity of the night, he espied in the
wood a great fire: wherefore he rode thitherward, and by the way chanced on a
fair Fortress, as he gathered by the lights he beheld through the glass
windows, and coming near ther^ he heard the voices of men and women singing,
tunable to sweet Music that consorted with them. When he came to the gate, he
knocked and called for some to open it^* but the harmony of the Music, and
other noise in the Castle, made such hinderance, as he was not heard.
Notwithstanding, he still more loud knocked and called, ^ill certain came and
p^^ped forth at small (...) in the gate, and seeing him, one of them demanded
what he would have there so late. Sir, answered Amadi^, I am a strange Knight
that seeks for lodging. Strange? quoth he within the Castle, it appears so
by thy language, but more by thy manner of walking so late: our countrymen
desire the day time, and thou shunnest i^, fearing to be seen, or least thou
should have occasion to (...)* and at such an hour as this is, none
travail the way except they be Devils. Believe me, answered Amadis, little
courtesy doe^ you know or show, that use these words, seeing without further
knowledge what I am, you not only rebuke but condemn me: and I think if you
are possessed either with sense or manhood, you have sometime been in like
distress as I am, and having found it in your self, never reprove it in
another. Thou may make trial thereof if thou will, quoth he in the Castle:
but get thee walking, for here shall thou set no foot this night. Now trust
me, said Amadis, I think thou would have no man of value in thy company:
yet before we (...), I am desirous to know what thou art. That will I tell thee,
quoth the other, on this condition, that when so ever we meet, thou shall
combat with me. I will not stick for that, answered Amadis. Know then, said he
within, how I am Dardan, who commands thee not to stray so far this night,
but that I may find thee tomorrow morning. Thou vauntest of thy self very
much, quoth Amadis, but if thou will cause Torches to be brought hither to give
us light, and come forth presently without longer stay* we shall soon see who
ought to have the worsse lodging this night. What? said Dardan, to co^bate with
an (...), the enemy of the day, must I bring Torches, and this night take
Arms? unwise is he, that so late to gain such simple honor, will either put
on spur or Cuyrate: and with these words he went from the gate.

Here may the Read (...) by himself discourse awhile, what fruit
ouer-braining commonly brings with it, and contrariwise, what perfection
(among all other virtues) is in modesty: No well grounded courage, or gallant
disposed body, can duly put in exercise the benefit of the one or other, if
moderation and temperance be not their guids therein. And albeit val^ance and
hardines is a great gift of God* yet are they so pernicious in such as have
them, (who are transported with passions, or the glory of ambition,) as they be
even no better then cowardice and presumtion. Eloquence, and the faculty of
well speaking, is a rich and precious gift of nature, augmented and increased
by long use and study, to give light and decking to the fair conceptions of
the spirit: but it is there a more hurtful pestilence in a common wealth, then
when a well spoken Orator will misuse his art and sweetness of language? Have
not some bin known to persuade simple people, to enterprise things which
afterward have brought their ruin and subuertion? I leave the confidence of
the wise, and the opinitiue in their own beauty, the one procuring to many the
loss of their souls, and the other to infinite number the destruction of
honor: so hurtful in all things it too much vsurpatio^ of ouer-weening, and
immoderate estimation of our selves. I will not here compare the wisdom of
Ulysses, with the arrogancy of furious Ajax, or the violence of Turnus, with
the temperance of Aeneas: nor make other remonstrances by the success of great
matters, happening to mighty personages both Greeks and Latins. It shall
content me, to set for example this only accident of indiscreete Dardan, to the
end that young Gentlemen, who take delight to read this History: seeing on the
one side the patient magnanimity of Amadis, and on the other the furious
brutality of Dardan, may propose the virtues to be imitated, and the vices to
be detested and punished.

Amadis then somewhat displeased with the outrageous speeches of Dardan,
departed, not so much caring for his lodging, as how to be revenged: and
concluded, some-time in walking obout, and other while in resting by a bush, to
pass the incommodity of this night in the Forest, thus to beguile the time
till day rising. As there he traced up and down, he heard the speech of some
body nere him, and looking about, espied two Damsels on horseback accompanied
with a Squire: after they had saluted him, and he them, they demanded from
whence he came so late armed, wherewith Amadis thoroughly reported, all that had
happened to him at the Castle. Know you, said the Damsels, the name of the
Knight? That do I, quoth he, for he told me his name is Dardan. Very true,
said they, he is called Dardan the proud, the most audatious Knight in this
country. I believe it well, answered Amadis. Sir Knight, quoth they, seeing you
are so unprovided of lodging, if you will take patience to remain this night
in our tents, which are pitched here hard at hand, you shall be welcome. He
glad of this courtesy, rode with them, and being there alighted, Amadis caused
his Squire to unarm him. When the Damsels saw him so fair, and of such
honest conversation, they were well pleased with his company: and so they
supped together merrily, afterward they gave him a pallad to rest upon.
Nevertheless, before they parted, they demanded of him whether he travailed.
To the Court of King Lisuart, answered Amadis. And so do we replied the
Damsels, to see what shall happen to a Lady, one of the best and most noble in
the Country, who has committed her welfar to the trial of a Combat, and it
must be within few days following be performed before King Lisuert but yet
we know not who will be the man, for he against whom the cause must be
defended, is one of the best Knights in all great Britain. What is, said
Amadis, the Knight so much esteemed, especially among so many good? It is the
same Dardan, answered the Damsels, from whom so lately you came. And on what
cause, said Amadis, arises the Combat? I pray ye (fair Ladies) if you know,
let me understand it, Sir, quoth one of them, this Dardan loves a Knights
daughter of the Country, who at his second nuptials married her I am to speak
of: now has this Damsel the beloved of Dardan, conceived such hatred against
her fair mother, that she has said to her friend, how she will never love
him, except he bring her to King Lisuarts Court, and there openly maintain,
that all the poor Ladies goods appertains to her, and if any gainsay (...),
he to justify the same in Combat. These news were highly pleasing to Amadis,
for by these means he intended to compass occasion, to be revenged of the
wrong he did him: and that in the presence of Griana, who should there perceive
what her Knight was, which made him enter into such thoughts, as the Damsels
well noting it, one of them thus spoke. I pray ye Sir, for courtesy, acquaint
us with the reason of your sudden musing, if it may without offense be known.
Fair Ladies, answered Amadis, if you will promise me as loyal Gentle-women,
to keep it secret and reveal it to no one, willingly shall I tell ye: all
which they solemnly swear to perform. I intend (quoth he) to combat for the
Dame you spoke of, and mind not to fail: but I would have it concealed from
any but your selves. When they heard what he said, they were much abashed,
notwithstanding they made great esteem of him: seeing what they had uttered in
praise of Dardan, could not affray him, but he would hazard the Combat, and
therefore she that already had broken the matter, thus replied. Gentle Sir,
your intent proceeds from a high resolved mind, and we will pray for your
prosperons success. So gave they each to other the good night, and went to rest
till the morning, when they dislodged together. Then entreated the Damsels,
that seeing he went to the same place they did, and in the Forest kept men of
evil behavior: therefore he would not forsake their company, whereof he made
them promise.

Along they ride with sundry discoursings, where among other talk, they
desired, in respect they met so happily together, that he would be content to
let them know his name. My name, quoth he is Amadis, but I pray you keep it
only to your selves. Proceeding on by vaste and unfrequented places, one day,
when furthest they were from doubt, they beheld before them under a tree, two
Armed Knights prepared for the Ioust: who seeing them coming, stepped into the
midst of the way, the one saying to his companion. Which of these two Damsels
would thou have, and the other I mean to take my self? I will said (the
other) have the first. And I her companion, answered the other: so without more
words they came to lay hands on them. Amadis who misliked such dealing, without
the Damsels consent, addressed himself to the Knights: demanding what manner
of behavior this was, to Ladies coming from honest place? Such, quoth they,
as beseems women of their age. What answered Amadis, would you then force
them? Who shall let us (quoth they) if we please? Marie, that will I replied
Amadis: then lacing his Hemet, he took his shield and Lance, saying. Let the
Damsels alone you shameless men, and defend your selves. Without any more
talk they gave their spurs to their Horses, meeting together with such
puissance, as the Knight brake his Lance, and Amadis gave him such an attaint,
that he carried him from his horse to the ground, with his head under, and his
heels upward: breaking the laces of his Helmet in the fall, so that his head
remained without shelter.

When the other saw his companion down, he would revenge him, and couching his
Lance against Amadis, met him so full, as piercing his Armor, wounded him a
little, and his staff was shiuered all in pieces: but the Prince failing with
his Lance, encountered him so fiercely with his body and Horse, as he lay
tumbling hard by his fellow, the^ coming to the Damsels, he said. I pray ye
heere-after come no more behind, but for your better surety keep ye before. A
while he tarried to see if they would rise again, but perceiving they made no
show thereof, he forbear to charge them any further, and so rode on with his
company. Soon after they came to a fair plain, whereby a pleasant River had
his course, and there they caused their Tents to be erected: as well to regard
the hurt of Amadis, as also to refresh themselves. But as they sat at meat,
the two dismounted Knights came riding thither, saying to Amadis. Sir Knight,
you have won the Ladies at the Lance, now must ye defend them by the sword,
otherwise we will carry them hence in despite of you. But you shall not, quoth
he, if I can let it: so drawing his sword against him that first made offer, in
short time he brought him into such distress, as without the succor of his
companion, he was unable to hold out any longer: which Amadis perceiving, said.
Ah Knight, the Ladies make slender account of you, that you must come both upon
one man. Yet notwithstanding he would not forbear, but as the pattern of
unconquerable valor, gave him likewise work enough to do, so that all their
wrong turned to his honor: for he gave the last such strokes on the helmet, as
the sword glaunsing on his shoulders, cut in twain the cuyrates of his armor,
and sliced his flesh to the very bone, which made him let fall his sword, and
run away half dead. Then turning to the other, he cut off his hand under his
Shield, the pain whereof was so yrkesome to him, as he cried. Ah I am slain.
Thus speaking, he threw his sword to the ground, and the Shield from about his
neck. All this avails not, said Amadis, for I will not leave thee, except
first thou swear, never to offend Lady against her will. Alas, quoth he, I
promise faithfully, and will perform it. Here-with Gandalin came, who gave him
his sword and Shield again, permitting him to go for help whether he would:
and Amadis returned to the Tent, where the Damsels rejoicing for his safe
return, said. In sooth Sir, we had been dishonored without your aid, which
is much better then we expected, and such, as not only assures your revenge
for Dardans injury, but the Ladies also, if fortune permit, you do undertake
her quarrel. Then was he unarmed, and after his wound was dressed, he sat
down to meat again.

At their departure thence, they lodgded at a good Ladies Castle, where they
were most courteously entertained, and on the morrow travailed all day, without
any adventure worthy rehearsal, arriving near Windsore where King Lisuart lay,
when Amadis thus spoke to the Damsels. Fair Friends, I would not be known to
any one, therefore til such time as the knight come to the combat, I intend to
withold my self from the place: and when the hour is, let-your Squire bring
me tidings thereof hither. Sir, quoth the Damsels, as yet there wants two
days of the assignation, therefore if you please we will tarry with you: and
our Squire shall go into the Town, and bring us word when the Knight is
arrived. I am well content, said he: whereupon they pitched their. Tent
between a little wood and a River, and Amadis presntly put off his armor. Now
did the Damsels change their opinion, and thought it better for them to go
into the Town, to see how things were in preparation, saying, they might
return when they pleased. Amadis not misliking thereof, willed them to do so,
in mean while (being unarmed) he mounted on horseback, inte^ding to stray
abroad a little for his pleasure, and Ga^dalin guided him through the wood.
Riding along, as they were on the side of a little mountain, he might easily
behold the Town, and when they were at the highest, they alighted from their
horses: when Amadis sitting down under a tree, cast his eye toward that part
where he judged the Princess Oriana should be, then regarding the walls, the
Towers, and the whole Castle, breathing forth a vehement sigh, he said. Ah
happy Towers, within you is the only flower of the world: and thou fair
Town, how fortunate art thou in containing that, which all the hearts and
praises of men cannot comprehend? High in divine grace were he, who for
maintenance of this quarrel should spend his life: but much happy he, that
without other combat then his small desert, should reach a bliss so
incomparable. Then resting his head on his arm, he entered into a deep
conceit, which provoked him to sudden silence, and in this melancholy the
tears trilled down his cheeks: in mean while Gandalin who knew his
complexion, standing where he was unseen of any, espied a goodly troop of
Lords and Ladies coming toward them, whereof he made have to advertise the
Prince, but he was so perplexed, as he could not answer, wherefore Gandalin
took him by the arm, saying. My Lord, see you not what a great train makes
toward us? At these words he came to himself, beginning to sigh, and lifting
his eyes to heaven, said. Gandalin, if in this love I were master of my
strength, as I am in diverse other actions: neither should thou have need to
advertise me, not my self be without council so much as I am. But I feel my
self so oppressed, as all the enemies in the world cannot bring me to such
extremity, as this over ruling passion does: therefore I pray thee talk to me,
of the felicity a man shall enjoy in death, for other may I not taste, and
practice no means of my life, seeing the contrary does surmount it. What my
Lord? answered Gandalin, esteem you the victory over your self so difficult,
after so many conquests of stout and bold strangers? Why do you not think, that
peradventure she loves you well, for whom you endure such (...), and happily
by as great reason as you love her? your persoage, prowess, beauty, and
nobility of lineage, can they deserve less, then the good grace of the most
rare and and exellent Lady in the world? let these humors (my Lord) repel
your desperations. Further he would have proceeded, but Amadis brake him off
in anger, saying. Wretch dare thou blaspheme so much, as to say, that he who
has merited no condition in the world, may be equalled with so perfect a thing
as is my Lady? enter no more into such terms, if thou will not have me thine
enemy, and so loose my conversation. Well, well, said Gandalin, I pray ye wipe
your eyes, least those that come hitherward perceive you have wept. What?
answered Amadis, comes their any body? Yea mary, quoth Gandalin, and now they
be at hand: here-with he showed him the Knights and the Ladies, who were hard
by them, by time Amadis was mounted. Then (as though he had stayed for their
company) he saluted them, and riding among the train he beheld a Lady
(very comely and beautiful) who wept very grievously, where-upon he left the
rest, and rode with her, saying. Madame, God comfort ye, and give you joy. In
sooth, answered the Lady, and there of have I need, in that (as now) it is very
far from me, which except Heaven favor me with better grace, I am utterly
out of hope ever to see again. And so high a Majesty, said Amadis can provide
therefore when he pleases: Not-withstanding, if you were so contented, I
gladly would know the cause of your sadness.

Believe me my friend, quoth she, all that ever I enjoy in this world,
consists in the trial of a Combat. By these words he knew this to be the
Lady of whom the Damsels had told him before, wherefore he enquired further,
if as yet she had found a knight on her behalf? No truly, said the Lady, and
(which greiueth me most of all) to morrow must my delay be exterminate. What
will ye then do? answered Amadis. What would you that I should do? quoth
she, but lament and loose all, unless (by hap) I find one in the Kings
Court, who moved thereto by charitable compassion, will courteously defend the
right of a desolate widow. Such fortune said Amadis, shall I pray may befall
ye, for I should not be a little glad thereof, as well for your own sake, as
also because I never thought well of your adversary. I thank ye gentle Sir,
quoth she, to God, I commit the revenge of my wrong. So passed on the Lady,
and Amadis turning bridle, rode back to the Pauillion, where he found the
Damsels, who were already returned from the town: and presently they told
him, how Dardan was come into the field, with full resolution to do his
deuoire. And trust me, said Amadis, it was my hap to meet the distressed
Lady, even the same whom the case concerns: heere-with he declared all the
talk they had together.

But now is the hour of quiet come, and each one went to rest till the point
of day, when the Damsels being risen, came to tell Amadis, how they would go
before to the Town, and send him word when Dardan was ready. Not so, quoth
Amadis, I will not be far behind ye, but let one ride before, to advertise
me when Dardan shows himself in the field. After he was armed, they went all
to horseback, and being come to the issue of the Forest, he said to the
Damsels. Now may you go (if you please) for I will not depart this place till
I hear some news from you. Away they went, when Amedis alighting, took off
his Helmet to refresh himself.

No sooner did the Sun appear in the East, but the King came to the place
appointed for the Combat (which was without the Town, hard by the Walls)
where Dardan not long after showed himself, in such manner and equipage, as an
ambitious man uses to gain goods and honor, also like an amourous Champion
to maintain the quarrel of his beloved: who to countenance him with the
greater favor, was queintly led by the reins of his Palfray, the^ presenting
himself before the king on his knees, he said. My Lord, according to the
ordinance by you appointed, this Lady and I humbly beseechye, that the goods
may be delivered her, as is no more then reason: for if any Knight oppose
himself against her, here am I ready for the Combat. The king then called
for the Ladies defendant, but she (poor soul) appeared alone. Why Lady, quoth
the King, are you unprovided of a Champion, that you come without any to
defend your right? So help me God (answered she weeping) I am (my Lord)
forsaken of all, except you grant me mercy. Great compassion had the King on
her, for he knew her to be very virtuous: but he could not together order
reason and the Law. In the mean while, Dardan who thought no resista^ce would
come, sat down in the midst of the field, attending the third hour, which
was the time according to the custom, when the King would pronounce sentence
to the Conqueror: but one of the Damsels seeing now the needful time, made
haste to let Amadis understand, what want of his presence was in the field. For
this cause he immediately mounted on horseback, and being armed as
appertained, commanded the Damsel and his Squire to go some other way, for
he would not be seen by any from whence he came: assuring them, that if he
were Victor, he would return again to the Tent. So departed Amadis alone,
riding on a brave white Courser, (as he promised the Damsel of Denmark in
Gaul) and arrived at the place where Dardan held the world in wonder of him.
The king and his Nobles seeing him come from the Forest, stood somewhat in
doubt of him, for he carried such a gallant and Knightly counteuance, as
promised a-farre off that his enemy should find him of hautie disposition:
which made the King (above all other) desirous to know him, and thinking she
for whose cause he came knew his name, he called and demanded of her the
question.

Dread Lord (answered the Lady) I never saw the man before, nor do I know
what he is. By this time was Amadis entered the field, when doing reverence to
the king and the Ladies; without longer stay he came to Dardan: demauuding if
he were the man, that would maintain the quarrel of her, for whom the poor
Lady was put to such trouble; because, quoth he) I am come in her defense,
and also to keep promise with thee. What did thou promise me? replied
Dardan. That I would see thee in the daytime, said Amadis, and wettest thou
when? It was at such a time, as thou being whitled with wine, or glory, or
else the trust thou had in thy strong Castle, spakest so out-ragiously to me
standing without, wearied both with travail and hunger. And therefore do I
make the less account of thee, answred Dardan: but cause her to come hither,
for whom thou will do such a doubtie deed, to know if she will accept thee as
her Champion, and afterward do the vtter-most thou can. When the King saw
they talked so long together, he would have heard what they said: but the good
Widow came, and to her, Dardan thus spoke. Dame, this Knight would maintain
thy right, will thou submit all to what he can do? With all my heart (quoth
she) seeing it pleases him to stand so much my Friend, and God speed him no
otherwise then my cause is just. When the two knights were at the very point to
combat, the King perceived that Amadis Shield was bruised in two places, both
with strokes of the Sword, and point of the Lance, wherefore he said to such
as stood near him, that if the Knight demanded another shield, he would gladly
give him one: but Amadis was so hot in desire to revenge himself and the
Lady, that he listened to nothing but the Combat. Thus the Ladies accord
being received, the two Champions took their carrire against each other so
roughly, as their Lances pierced their Armor and flew in pieces, without any
other harm as yet: but when their bodies met, Dardan was sent to the ground,
yet it happened so well for him, as holding fast the reins of his horse, he
recovered himself more nimbly, and mounted again, as one both valiant and
bravely disposed, boldly setting hand to his Sword. When Amadis saw him so
quickly up again, and in such readiness for his own defense: he approached
to him, when began such a battle between the^, as every one present
maruailed thereat. On all sides were placed the inhabitants of the Town, and
many other that came far off, as well on mighty Scaffolds in the field, as
also on the towers and walls of the Castle: but above the rest, the Queen was
there present with her Ladies, most desirous to behold who should bear away
the honor of this cruel Combat; for they seemed two so gallant companions,
as it was hard at first sight to judge the better. Such were the rigorous
strokes delivered on either side, that sparks of fire flew forth of their
Helmets and Armonr, their Shields cut in pieces, and their blood coloring the
ground, which moved exceeding compassion in the Regardants, who seemed
copartners in their danger, according as each one favored the welfare of his
Friend: but the two Champions gave no respect thereto, because their desire was
to make known both to the Ladies and themselves, the man deserving highest
account.

When King Lisuart saw them endure so long, he said aloud, that he never
beheld a more singular Combat, pursued with greater courage and manhood:
wherefore he determined not to depart, until he had seen the final issue
thereof, permitting them to proceed as themselves pleased. And to the end
(quoth he) that the Conqueror may be dignified with more their accustomed
honor, I will cause his deserts to be lively carved in Marble, at the entrance
of my Palace, to provoke the like perfection in all other, that are desirous
to follow Arms. In such manner as you have heard continued the two Knights a
long time, the standers by being not able to discern who had the better: for
without taking breath or rest their fury continued, as though their strength had
more and more increased. But Amadis who by chance turning his head to the place
where the Ladies stood, espied his fair Mistress, lovely Oriana, whereby he
felt his virtue augmented in such sort, that he was as fresh and lusty, as if
but then he entered the field; i^gining he was become more then a (...). Now
followed he the fight with such cruel extremes, as in short time he
dissolved the doubt who should be superior: for Dardan (not-withstanding all
his defense) was constrained to draw back, seeking how to escape the
wreakefull strokes of his enemy, which without ceasing wounded his body in
many places: his horse likewise no longer able to endure, stumbled so often,
till at length he set both his knees to the ground, which made Dardan think it
better to fight on foot, wherefore he said to Amadis. Knight, our horses are
weary, and fail us, by reason we cannot do as we would: and if we were on
foot (me thinks) in short time the doubt would be discided. These words did
Dardan speak so loud, as the King and his Lords easily heard them: whereat
Amadis seemed ashamed, thus answering. Although it be dishonorable in a Knight,
to forsake his horse so long as he can keep him: yet since thou think to
combat better on foot then on horseback, we will a light and defend thy self
well, for thou shall have need.

Here* with they dismounted, assailing each other so furiously, as if but now
they begun the Combat, showing more sharp cruelty then before they had done:
yet Amadis euer-more kept the advantage, commonly delivering two strokes for
one, which made Dardan do nothing, (...) defend his enemies (...), who
compelled him to (...) and (...) as himself pleased, so that (...) one
accounted him very near ^^^quished, blaming him because he kept not still on
horseback* But as he turned here and there flying the ^^^ing Sword of Amadis,
he was driven under the Ladies scaffold, which made them cry: Dardan can hold
out no longer, he is overcome if he enter the Combat again. Yet for all this
Amadis would not leave him, but pressed him still with such pursuit, as he
brought him hard by the Queens Scaffold, when she and all the Ladies said.
Without question, Dardan is dead.

At this clamor, Amadis understood the voice of the Damosel of Denmark, and
lifting up his head, espied her standing by the Princess Oriana: by means
whereof, he became so far beside himself, as he set the point of his Sword
to the ground, forgetting not only the danger wherein he was, but also stood
amazed at the sight of his Mistres. Which when Dardan beheld, he took heart
afresh, and charged his enemy so bravely, that if he had longer continued, he
would have gone away Conqueror: but the Damsel of Denmark noting this
change, spoke out aloud. In an unhappy hour did the Knight behold any Lady in
this company, whereby he has lost what he wun of Dardan: it is no time now for
his heart to faint. These words confounded Amadis with shame, that gladly could
he have given entertainment to death, fearing least his Lady would suspect
cowardice in him. For this cause lifting up his Sword, he gave Dardan such a
stroke on the Helmet, as made him set both his hands to the ground: then
falling upon him, he rent the Helmet from off his head, and trampled in such
sort on him with his feet, as he fell down like one deprived of his senses.
Afterward, taking him by the locks of his hair he beat him on the face with
the pummell of his Sword, saying. Thou dyest Dardan, if thou confess not the
Lady free. When Dardan saw himself in such estate: he replied: Ah gentle
Knight, for Gods sake mercy, kill me not, I will acquit her.

Now approached the King and the other Lords to hear what he said, and while
they stood conferring with him, Amadis as yet ashamed of his fault committed,
drew back through the throng: and seeing he had gotten behind them all, so
covertly as he could he ran toward the Forest, leaning them al musing at
Dardan, who filled the empty arie with his complaints. In mean while his
beautiful friend came to him, who in sted of giving comfort for the ^oile he
sustained through her, began ^o de^est and despise him, saying. Dardan,
hereafter seek thee some other friend then me, for while I live, will I
neither love thee, or any other, then the good Knight who valiantly overcame
thee. How now Lady* quoth he, is this the reward of my honor and life
adventured for you? you then are not the friend to Dardan, but to fortune, who
is no sooner contrary to me, but presently ^ou are mine enemy. Hau^ I then
escaped death by the mercy of my foe, to endure worsse then death by the
cruelty of my friend? Heaven suffers me to live, and yet you repine at my
unfortunate life: now shall I make know^e ^o all women by your example, that
ingratitude is no less hurtful to such as exercise it, then to any one
offended therewith. Hereupon he took his sword, and before it could be
imagined what he meant to do, he smo^e her head quite from her shoulders: then
as a man transported with madness, staring every where round about him, declared
by his angry, countenance, that high and not vulgar, was the enterprise he
embraced in such an extremity.

The King sent his archers to convey him thence, but ere they came to him, he
stroke himself so violently to the heart, as the blood spouted in the archers
faces, and then he cried out, ^aying. Now friend art thou revenged by my
vengeance, and thine enemy satisfied with the despised life thou leftst me. So
falling down, he delivered the last sign of his death, whereat each one was
confounded with marvel, as well for the no^elty of the case, as pitting the
very last words he breathed: but when they remembered his passed life, wholly
addicted to ouer-weening folly, they repu^ed this unfortunate end happened to
him, not so much by accident* as the divine ordenance, which made them sorrow
no more, but couerted their thoughts to commend the conqueror.

CHAP. XV.
How King Lisuart caused a Sepulcher to be made for Dardan and his friend* with
an Epit^ in rememberance of their death: and the honor he did to Amadis after
he was found and k^owne.

AF^ the unfortunate end of these ill advised Lovers, the King in memory of
this strange accident, commanded that in the field where they lay dead, should
be erected a sumptious Sepulcher of black Marble stone* fashioned like a
Roman Obelisque, and thereon was engra^e^ in the Brit^aine language an
Epitaph, declaring the whole matter as it happened. And when he had knowledge
of the conqueror (as hereafter the manner how is declared,) his name was
placed thereon, and four great Lions at the four corners of the sepulcher,
importing the de uise which Amadis bare in his Shield.

But now the rumor being appeased, and they teturned to the Palace, he called
for the stranger that won the honor of the day: but after long enquiry, no one
could certainly tell what was become of him, albeit certain coming from the
wood, reported how they saw a Knight return from the field thither-ward, being
alone and making great have. He that is worthy, said the King, to bear him
company, may imagine himself happy enough: for seeing he has showed himself
so brave a combatant, it is impossible but he should be a wise and virtuous
Knight. And for no less each one reputed him, who understood the imuries of
Dardan used to him, and saw how he requited them with gentleness and courtesy:
albeit I make no doubt but he knew right well, that if Dardan had got the
better, he would not have pardoned him. Such as you have heard were the words
of king Lisuart, but Oriana, who day by day expected the arrival of Amadis,
seeing the incomparible valor of him that fought against Dardan, began to
suspect that it was he: for (quoth she to the Damsel of Denmark) I am sure
he would not send me a fabulous message, and this is the just time he assured
you of his coming. In good sooth Madame, answered the Damsel, you say very
true, and which maks me conceive the better hope, is, that he promised me to
ride on a white courser, with the like arms he had when he combated against
King Abies: and I remember how the knight who overcame Dardan, had the like
horse. But did you, (quoth Oriana) take no regard of his Arms? Yea mary did I,
replied the Damsel, albeit the cruel strokes received thereon, made me
hardly perceive what devise was there figured: yet me thought the ground was a
golden field, and the like I told ye he bare in Gaul, with two azured Lions
rampant portrayed therein, which being battered all in pieces, he presently
made him such another, assuring me to wear no other when he came into this
country, and therefore I will doubt no further but it is he. Sweet friend,
said Oriana, if it be he, either he will shortly come, or fend into the Town,
therefore you must be watchful and diligent to hear thereof. Madame, quoth
the Damsel, reserre these matters to my charge. This conference caused Oriana
to remain very pensive, and breathing forth many bitter sighs, she said. Ah
gracious heavens, what favor have you done me if this be Amadis? now shall I
compass the means (better then ever I could to speak with him.

So attended the Princess for tidings from her friend, who returned as he
promised to the Damsels Tent, yet was it somewhat late ere he came thither,
finding them ready to sit down to supper. After he had unarmed himself, they
told him the misfortune of Dardan and his friend, as also the whole
circumstance of their deaths h^ at he was very much abashed: then falling to
their cheer, they begiled the time with sundry pleasane devises, yet Amadis
could think of nothing else, but how he might make his arrival known to
Oriana, wherefore they were no sooner risen from the table, but he took
Gandalin aside, and thus began. My friend, thou must of necessity go to the
Court, and labor secretly to find the Damosel of Denmark, to whom thou shall
report that I am here, attending to hear from her what I shall do. Gandalin
with all possible speed departed, and the better to execute his enterprise, he
went on foot, when being come to the Palace, not long had he stayed till he
saw her he looked for, who was as busy as he in the selfsame cause: yet at
the first she knew him not, but quickly remembered she had seen him in Gaul
with Amadis, and embracing him, demanded where his Master was. Why Lady? quoth
Gandalin, did not you see him to day? it was he that vanquished proud Dardan,
and has with-drawne himself to the Forest to hear from his mistress,
desiring you by me, to let him understand what he must do. Right welcome, said
the Damsel, is he into this Country, being the man desired above all oaths:
but my Lady must needs see thee, therefore follow me. If any one ask who thou
art, say thou bring letters to Oriana from the Queen of Scots, and likewise
thou art come to look for Amadis, who is arrived here as thou have heard: by
these means thou may come to her without heere-after suspicion.

Thus was Gandalin conducted into the Queens chamber, where the Princess
Oriana was, to whom the Damsel of Denmark came, and speaking somewhat
loud, said. Madame, here is a Squire sent to you from the Queen of Scots.
Oriana weening she had said true, arose to wel-come him: but when she knew
Gandalin, the vermillion color arose in her cheeks and was so overcome with
joy, as she knew not well what countenance to use: yet Gandalin (as well
advised) set his knee to the ground saying. Madame, the Queen my Mistress
heartily saluteth you, as the Lady she loves and esteems above all other of
her Kindred, desiring to hear some news from you, for here she greetes you
with all that she does know.

Then gave he her a Letter, which he had feigned, having nothing written
therein, but the superscription on the outside: where-upon she went aside with
Gandalin to one of the Windows, making show to hear the rest of his charge,
but she demanded where he had left his master? Madame, answered Gandalin, he
withdrew himself into the Forest, so soon as he had conquered Darda^. Good
friend, said Oriana, tell me, by the faith thou bear to him, how he fares?
Even so (fair Princess) quoth Gandalin, as the man that is altogether yours,
he lives only by remembrance of you, and yet suffers such anquish in his
soul as never Knight endured: by the only fear he susteineth least he
should not be yours: mistrusting his own deserts for so high a service. His
greatest hope is in your princely kindness, and knowing him so long, as
alsowhat he is, that you will not forget him. Wherefore, I beseech ye Madame,
take compassion on him, appoint, a meeting together, then resolve him, make me
a happy messenger, and discharge your self of your deuoire: for hitherto has
he endured such sorrow, as no man is able to suffer the like. Often have I
seen him (thinking on you) so far beyond himself, as he has fallen down
dead in (a manner) before me, so that I have imagined (noting the abundance of
his tears) his poor heart to be distilled into water, through the conduits of
his eyes. If he should die ye offered him great wrong: for he is yours, and
easily can ye not find another so worthy of you. Nor need you doubt, but if
you grant the hour of lengthning his life, he will surpass in Chivalry the
best Knight that ever bare Arms: wherein if he be happy by his virtue, yet
has he mishap to counterpoise the same, only through the passions he endures
for you. If now you will not deigne to afford him remedy, much better had it
been for him, that fortune had let him preish in the sea, to the mercy whereof
in his cradle coffin he was committed: then after his preservation by such
strange means, to suffer him dye by a worse shipwreck then the other. But if
his dismal stars will not divert this danger, happy might he have accounted
himself, if he had never come to the knowledge of his parents, whose grief
likewise he greatly increases, to see him so consume and dye before his day,
being unable to divine or understand the cause thereof.

Gandalin all this while accompained his words with such tears, and often
among breathed forth so many mournful sighs, as would have enforced the
very Rocks to rueth: but perceiving Oriana was touched to the quick, he began
again in this manner. Ah, gentle Madame, consent not to the death of such a
Servant of yours, and so good a Master of mine: for beside the common loss
which will be great, in you alone shall consist the fault, more-ouer you shall
maculate that perfect beauty, with the high condemned stain of cruelty and
ingratitude. Here did he knit up his persuasion, attending an answer from the
Princess, but she was not able to deliver one word, so vehemently was her
heart surprised and overcome: and holding down her head, let fall wonderful
streams of tears down her dainty cheeks, which enforced her to turn on
the other side, least she should be discried: then when as Gandalin would have
begun again, she stayed him with a piercing sigh, saying. Ah, my friend, I
pray thee say no more, unless thou be willing to see me die here presently.
Now stood she silent a pretty while, often wringing and straining her fingers
with grief, then setting apart all dissimulation, she softly thus spoke. The
assurance thou give me of thy masters love, is highly pleasing and agreeable
to me: but the passion thou say he endures, tormenteth me to the very
death, so that I feel both his pain and mine own. Ah God, let me not be the
occasion of death, to a man so high and precious of desert as he is, rather
let me work mine own death, for if he die, I may not live one hour. Thou art
come to tell me his painful travail, and now thou may go to let him
understand mine, which if thou knew so well as thou do thy masters,
instead of blaming me with cruelty, thou would rather judge me unfortunate,
and if I use any cruelty, it is against my self, whom I have deprived of
rest, pleasure, and well-neere life it self. The less succor can I give to
mine own destresse, because (as it often happens to our sects, when thinking
to draw near such as we desire, we are furthest off, and seeking for a harbor
of contentment, glaunce into a place of torment and vexation: so falls it out
with me by thy master, whom fortune has ever kept me furthest from, but God
knows my good will has always been with him: and gladly would I provide for
his griefs and mine own, if I were able to compass the means.

Do then, Madame, what you may, answered Gandalin, if you love him (as I am
sure he does you) and begin at this instant to let him know how he shall
behave himself in this Country. Oriana then showed him a Garden, which was
under the window where they talked, saying. Return to thy master, and tell
him, that this night he must secertly come to the place thou see, and
remember this withal, how the chamber (under where we stand) is the same that
Mabila and I lodge in, and there is a cross barred window near the ground,
where-through we may easily discern each other, and talk together: for his
Cousin is acquainted with mine affairs, nor is it necessary they should be
concealed from her. Then taking a costly Ring off her finger, she thus
proceeded. Deliver him this token from me, as the only Jewel I most esteem,
and ere thou go thou shall see the Princess Mabila, who is so wise and
discreet, as she will easily understand thee: yet thou must say somewhat loud
to her, that thou have brought her tidings from her mother. Here-upon Oriana
called her to talk with the Squire, whom the Queen of Scots (her mother,) had
sent to her: but when she saw it was Gandalin, she then suspected how matters
went: wherefore Oriana went to the Queen, leaving them in deep talk
together. In mean while the Queen demanded of her daughter, if the Gentleman
were to return shortly, or no: For, quoth she, I would send a token to the
Queen of Scots by him. Madame, answered Oriana, the chief cause of his
coming into this Country, was to seek for the good Knight Amadis, Son to the
King of Gaul, of whom you have heard such famous report. And where is he? said
the Queen. The Squire says, quoth Oriana, it is more then ten months since
he heard that he was here, and now he maruaileth to miss of him in this
Court. Now trust me, answered the Queen, right glad would I be, to see so good
a Knight in the Kings company, for it would be a great comfort to him many
ways having to deal with so many Countres: wherefore I assure ye, if he do
come hither, he shall find here such honorable entertainment, as he shall
have no cause to depart in haste. Of his Prowess Madame, replied Oriana, I
know little, but what common brute has blazed abroad: but hereof I am
certain, how he was one of the most brave young Gentlemen that ever I saw,
when in the King of Scots Court he served Mabila and me. All this while Mabila
continued with Gandalin, enquiring if his master were as yet arrived. Yea
Madame, answered Gandalin, the same was he that vanquished Dardun, and express
charge he gave me to salve you on his behalf. The name of Heaven be for ever
praised, quoth she, having preserved our Kins^man from such exceeding danger,
and now sent him hither to honorably. Ah Mad^, said Gandalin, he were happy
indeed, if the force of love made him not in worse case then dead: for Gods
sake therefore do you assist him, being thus fully persuaded, that if he find
no ease to cure his afflictions, you shall loose the best Knight in the world,
and the vpholder of your fathers fame. He may be well assured, answered Mabila,
how he cannot with greater desire employ me, then I have to do him pleasure:
and will him not to fail in what the Princess has commanded him: as for thy
self, being judged to come from the Queen, my mother, thou may come and
speak with us at al times as need shall require.

Gandalin took his leave for that time, returning toward Amadis, who attended
the answer of life or death, and into such debilitie was he brought by these
extremes as he had scant force enough to support himself: for the short sight
he had of his Lady at the Combat, increased such a desire in him to see her
at more liberty, as every hour seemed to him longer then a year. When he
saw that Gandalin was returned, in hope of happy news, he came and embraced
him, not daring to demand any thing of him, fearing least matters should not
fall out to his contentation: but Gandalin with a cheerful countenance, told
him that he brought no sad tidings, and rushing into the matter at first,
said. My Lord, God make ye as constant, as you have cause to be content, for
if you have that virtue, you are the most happy and accomplished Knight in the
world. Ouer-whelmed with joy, Amadis caught him in his arms, demanding what
he had done, seen, and heard? I have seen and heard, answered Gandalin the
felicities of Paradise, and know that they are provided for you, if you hinder
it not your self. Ah Gandalin, quoth Amadis, jest not with me, but tell me the
very truth. Then Gandalin declared word by word, how every thing happened,
first of the counterfeit Letter, and next the appointed meeting at the window:
and (by the way) reported some part of his own speeches, moving a change of
conntenance in Oriana, then her answer, even to the conclusion before
rehearsed: likewise how he talked with Mabila, and how willing she was to
assist him with her uttermost ability. Amadis was so fed with content by
these reports, that he made him rehearse one thing ten times, and I cannot
tell which of them was most affectionate: either Gandalin in reporting, or
Amadis in hearing, for both the one and the other seemed insatiable, in the end
Amadis thus spoke.

My faithful Companion, I thought my self altogether indebted to thy Father,
who saved me from the danger of drowning in the Sea, but I confess, that duty
belongs more necessarily to thee: because (by thy diligence and discretion)
thou have given me a better life then he preserved. But tell me now, did thou
take good mark of the place to which she commuanded me? Assure your self
thereof, quoth Gandalin. for she her self showed it me. Ah God, said Amadis,
how shall I deserve the great good she does for me? Away from me now all
sorrow and complaining. Yet this is not all my Lord, quoth Gandalin, See here
a token she has sent ye, as a testimony of her honorable love to you: so he
gave him the Ring which came from Oriana, and after he had long beheld it,
kissing it a thousand times, put it on his finger, saying. Fair Ring, that
have been so happy, as to be carried and accounted dear by the most
accomplished creature in the world, albeit thou be now in a place of much
inferior honor yet have thou not changed thy mistress, for both thou and I
are hers, and she does compass my heart hith greater force, the^ thou can
possibly bind in my finger. Let us leave this talk, answered Gandalin, and
return to the Damsels, who tarry for us in the Tent: but you must dissemble
conningly, for if they see you altered from your wonted mellanchollie. it may
be some hinderance to your determination.

So they brake off communication, and went into the Pauillion, where Amadis,
(notwithstanding) Gandalins council) could not but show himself pleasantly
disposed, whereat the Damsels were very glad, because such behavior, better
beseemed him then his former pensiuenes.

When the hour of rest was come, each one went to his accusttomed lodging, and
soon after Amadis seeing the time commodious for his enterprise, arose and
found Gandalin, who had already prepared for their journey: wherefore being
armed, they mounted on horseback, taking the most convenient way for their
purpose to the Town. When they came to the Garden, which Oriana had before
showed Gandalin, they alighted, and tied their horses at a tuft of trees nere
adjoining, afterward they went through a hole which a watercourse had made in
the Garden wall, and approached the window where Oriana lay: fair and softly
did Amadis knock thereon with his finger, she not yet sleeping who expected his
coming, and when she heard the loving signal of her friend, she awaked
Mabila, saying. Sweet sister, I think your cousin knocks at the window. My
cousin? answered Mabila, it may be so, but you have greater intrest in him then
I, or all other of his lineage together. Mabila presently arose, and lighted a
wax taper which she had hid for the nonce, when Oriana likewise was got out of
bed, they came together and opened the casement, where they found Amadis no
more attending then hec was attended. If they were then well pleased, it were
folly to inquire, for all the contentments in the world, might not be compared
to the joy of seeing each other. And without question, they had two inducing
reasons thereto, for beside the nourishment they received together in their
younger years, and their first amity, continued by the rememberance and good
opinion they had of each other: their beauty and perfections were so
correspondent, as if they had never seen one another till that very instant,
yet had they cause enough to love together. Oriana had on such brave attire
beseeming the night, as set the heart of her love on fire, for under a fine and
dainty white frontlet, appeared the rarest golden tresses of hair that ever
nature made, and about her shoulders she had a mantle of figured cloth of gold,
imbroidered all over with rich and costly flowrets, as it might beseem the
greatest Majesty in the world. And for her self, a thing more fair was
impossible to be found, the inward conceit of her present comfort, decked her
face with such a heavenly beauty, as it seemed that nature in pride of her art,
made this piece to excel all other in perfection. I will leave you then to
consider on the judgment of Amadis, who (when she was nothing so glorious in
fairenes) thought her worthy the love of the best Knight in the world: now if
he stood mute, blame him not, having the only jewel of his heart before him,
and therefore she to break off this silence, first spoke in this manner. My
Lord, if I have given you the liberty (contrary to my duty and custom) to see
me in this place at an hour so unfitting, you must commit the offense to the
security, which our former nurturing together loyally promised, and likewise to
the good opinion of your great virtues since that time increased: which has
conquered no less favor in me, then honor and renown in all other places.
Amadis to avoid further silence, thought it better to let his speeches pass
at adventure, then (by holding his peace) to be reputed unworthy this happiness,
or not so fervently touched with love as she was, to exclude all which doubts,
he thus replied. Madame, I account my self not so much favored by fortune in
any thing else, as honored at my first entrance into your service, even the
very highest tipe of grace she could afford me: nor do I feel my self so
beholding to my virtues, as I rest double bound to the^ that report so well of
me. But when both these benefits shall be excluded, yet is my love and service
to you so affectionate, as they can deserve no less then this secret
gentleness: and when you shall allow me more ample courtesy, it may command a
stricter bond of duty, but not affection, for that is already so substantially
grounded, that the uttermost good you can do me, is neither able to augment it,
or the sharpest unkindness diminish it. I know not whether it be seemly for a
man, to confess the extremities he has infinite times endured by this
passion, the very least grief I received, has been the loss of rest, and
banishment of sleep from mine eyes: and yet to afflict me with greater
torment, my spirit has seen in a dream what it incessantly desired. How many
times has it happened to me, in thinking on you to be so confounded, that such
as have seen me, reputed me not only deprived of common since, but even of
very life it self? What moman, what child well beaten, has ever powered forth
so many tears, as I poor Knight have done? yea my very chiefest enterprises
huae I sprinkled withal for your sake: not as feeling my self a happy
subject in love, but rather too little merit of my self, and much less hope.
This favor proceeding from you in deigning to hear me, is greater then ever I
durst hope for, and so far does it surmount my passions, as I cannot express
the least part of my joy: my tongue likewise seems as unprofitable and
ignorant of his office, having bin so long from serving me to you. But above
all, this impuissance in speech, shall on my behalf testify to you, what all
the words in the world cannot deliver with sufficient truth: for as all other
beauty in comparison of yours is nothing, so before mine affection, all the
other habilities of my soul vanish away, and become of no reckoning. Will you
the^ (good madame) with your courtesy supply my insufficiency, and (with
pity) give me both life and my self: and conserve that which else cannot be,
unless it be yours only. These words uttered Amadis with such interruption of
sighs and tears, as witnessed he had no intent of feigning, but rather knew
how to suffer then speak: wherewith Oriana moved to compassion, thus answered.
I make no doubt (dear friend) but you love me, in respect of the pains you
have taken for me, as also by what you have now told me: and though I should
have no sign thereof by speech or ought else, yet am I content to believe,
because my heart has no other desire, but herein conceiueth greatest
contentment. And yet the torment I see you in with impacience, troubles my
quiet, for you being assured by sufficient proves, and especially this, that I
love ye: me thinks you should have no further cause of so severe affliction,
but rather ought to temper your pains, in that (through the union of our
spirits) I feel no less then you do your self. If you will not appease them
for your own sake, I pray ye let it be done for mine, the rather, that we may
the oftener meet (if you please) publicly: when such sadness will but
discover, what we most willingly would keep unknown, whereby may arise two
great inconveniences, and be a mean to hinder the thing we chiefest desire.
Sweet Lady answered Amadis, I have such felicity in seeing and hearing you,
as wanting strength enough to underprop the burden of so especial
contentation: I am feign to fall down under it, experimenting no less the
pain of not accustomed pleasure, then the other beside of continual
pensiuenes, which makes me wonder that I cannot dye here in this solace. If
then I have offended you by this transportation, pardon it in your own self,
who brought me to this happy misfortune, and likewise gave me this hurtful
medicine: suffer me then yet longer to use it, that in the assurance of your
grace, I may by little and little learn to support it, and attain the
knowledge of living content: excusing my apprenti-shood in this felicity, being
yet scant skillful enough how to use it. Love is sickness, and be it
favorable or contrary, it cannot be without passion, working the like affect
in other, which you reprove in me. Well have you said my friend, answered
Oriana, how you are as yet but an Apprentise: and so you show very well by your
words, proving that love cannot be without passion. I hope to see the time,
when you (attaining greater and more perfect knowledge therein, then yet you
have) shall be in higher tranquillity of mind, which (it may be) you think
cannot be had in this world. Nor shall it not happen to you by admiration of
that which now you most love, and is likewise of far more less account: but
by the fruition of the thing wherein felicity consists, the knowledge whereof
unites and lifts the spirits so high as heaven. And albeit I am yet so young
in years and discretion, as I cannot be exempt from the ill you complain on:
yet am I not unprovided of desire to hasten the time, when we shall live
together merry and contented. Ah Madame, said Amadis, the hope of that happy
day, shall make me pass this mournful life in patience, supporting for your
honor my inward pains so covertly as I can, and bearing the outward with what
courage possible I may: but I beseech ye do me the favor, as to tell me when
it will be. Well perceived Oriana, that he had not thoroughly understood her
meaning, wherefore in smiling she said. It is already begun, but the da ling of
your eyes will not let you see it. Heere-with Amadis became very pensive,
holding his eyes steadfastly fixed on her, and she to change his sadness, took
him by the hand through the window: which Amadis kissed a thousand times,
without any word passing between them, and Mabila noting it, she came to them
saying. Gentles you forgot your selves. Amadis lifting up his head, courteously
saluted her, she doing the like to him, and after sundry speeches of welcome,
as also how long they desired to see him: Mabila demanded, what length of time
he intended to stay in the Court. So long as it shall please Madame Oriana,
answered Amadis. It must be then continually, quoth Oriana, and you shall grant
it if the King request it. Sweet Madame, answered Amadis, if it please his
Majesty so much to honor me, I will obey both him and you: yet will I
dissemble strangnes awhile. All the better, replied Mabila, and in the mean
time I pray ye visit us often. Longer they would have continued in talk, but
Gandalin gave them warning how the day appeared, wherefore he said to Amadis.
My Lord, me thinks you are importunate, but then you must needs accuse the
day. Amadis gave no ear to him, for he proceeded on still with his devise: but
Oriana perceiving Gandalin said true, thus spoke to Amadis. Now go my Lord if
you please, for it is time, and forget not your promise. Then taking her by the
hand, and kissing it, he went to horseback, returning to the wood where he
left the Damsels, who had by entreaty earnestly persuaded him, to go deliver
their cousin that the King held captive, until such time she presented her
Champion, as you have heard: wherefore after they had rested till morning, they
returned to the Town, in the greatest favor and expectation of the world.

CHAP. XVI.
How Amadis made himself known to King Lisuart, as also the Princes and Lords
of his Court, of whom he was honorably received and feasted.

Early the next morning, Amadis armed himself, and mounting on horse back,
rode presently to the Town accompanied with the two Damsels: where being
arrived, they brought him to their cosins lodging, when the good Lady knowing
her worthy cha^pion, falling on her knees before him, said. My Lord, all the
goods I have you gave me, for of you I hold them and no other, dispose
therefore of them as you please: but Amadis brake her off in this manner. Come
Lady, let us go before the King, to the end he may acquit you, and I return
where urgent affairs call me: so taking off his Helmet, he rode on to the
Palace with the three Ladies. The people knowing him to be the man that over
came Dardan made such thronging in the streets to see him, as the king was
given to understand thereof: and he rejoicing at his coming, honored him so
much, as he came to meet and receive him on the way, thus speaking to him.
Worthy knight, hither are you so wel-come, as may be devised, because we have
been very desirous to see you. Amadis noting this gracious entertainment,
setting his knee to the ground, thus answered. The God of Heaven give your
Majesty a long and happy life: then the king taking him by the hand, caused
him to arise, saying. Right glad am I to have knowledge of you, being a knight
of so excellent deserving: these words enforced Amadis to blush, yet he
replied in this manner. My Lord, to desire the Ladies discharge whom you caused
to be detained, I am bold to come before your Highness: and seeing she has
answered the Law according to your appointment, (hereafter) I hope she may
enjoy her liberty: yet till this present, she knew not who maintained her
quarrel against Dardan.

While the King and Amadis thus conferred together, a great number of people
gathered about the^; some commending his beauty, other his gallant youth, and
all in general his famous Chivalry: in that he being so young, had the power
to vanquish Dardan, who was redoubted and feared through all Britain. By this
time, sundry speeches past between him and the King, where-among he dissembled
his speedy departure, to provoke a desire in him to stay him, and thus spoke
Amadis.

Dread Lord. seeing the Lady is free, I desire leave for my return again:
but if in ought I may do your Majesty any service, I am the man ready to be
commanded: and you the Prince whom most I desire to honor. Good Friend, quoth
the King, your departure must not be so soon, except you delight to displease
me. God forbid, answered Amadis, in respect my endeauout is altogether to obey
you. Do you think, said the King, it is any obedience, if I may not entreat a
longer stay? In sooth, my Lord, quoth Amadis, you may and shall command, for in
greater matters then this I will not offend ye. Go then and vn-arme you,
replied the King; and speaking these words, himself took him by the hand
conducting him to a sumptuous chamber, where he left him to take some
refection, with Arban King of Norgalles, and the Duke of Gloucester, whom he
commanded to keep him company: for King Lisuart was a Prince, that especially
favored and honored strange Knights. Having left Amadis thus worthily
accompained, he went to the Queen, and told her in what manner he had stayed
the good Knight who overcame Dardan. But do ye (my Lord, quoth she) know his
name? No verily, answered the King, for in respect of the promise I made him I
durst not demand that question of him. It may be, said the Queen, he is the
Son to King Perion of Gaul. I would it might fall out so well, answered the
King. Do you know, quoth the Queen who may put us out of this doubt? even the
Squire that talked with Mabila, who came to search him in your Court, and said,
how he was advertised of his arrival in this Country long before.
Immediately the King caused Gandalin to be called, and without declaring any
thing to him, thus spoke: Follow me, for I must show a Knight to thee, that I
may be resolved if thou know him or no. Gandalin attended on the King, entering
the chamber where Amadis was, and Gandalin viewing him very earnestly, seigned
to have seen him long time since, then setting his knee to the ground, said.
Ah my Lord, great travail have I endured to find you, since I departed from
the Scottish Court. Gandalin, my good friend, right heartily art thou will-come
to me, what news do thou bring? None but good, my Lord, answered Gandalin,
all your noble Friends are in perfect health, commending themselves to your
Excellency, but hence forth Sir, you must conceal your self no longer: then
turning to the King he thus proceeded. Mighty King, he that has been so
long time unknown, is this brave Prince, the famous Amadis, Son to the
invincible king Perion of Gaul: and then came his Fathes to understand so
much, when he slew in combat the puissant King Abies of Ireland, by means
whereof he recovered his Realm which was well-neere lost. By these devises was
Amadis discoured, and better wel-commed then before: for till the^ he was not
known, but through his famous deeds, the renown whereof was euery-where
blazed abroad, and now was he so well honored for his virtue as his
Nobleness required. So spent they the whole day in honorable Feasting, until
such time as each one withdrew himself; when king Lisuart commanded the King
of Norgalles, that he should lodge in Amadis chamber: afterward when they were
alone, to sound his mind, and understand by all means possible, if he would
consent to remain in his service. Thus leaving them together, he returned to
the Queen, and to her thus spoke. Madame, hardly shall I cause Amadis to stay
(as mine) nor can I tell which way to compass it, albeit, I never had greater
desire to any Gentleman of long time, for the high account is held of him,
would cause me to be much more feared and redoubted. My Lord, quoth the
Queen, grant him any thing he shall demand, and do your self present him
what you imagine will best please him. He requesteth nothing of me, replied
the king, for if he did, I would consent thereto more willingly then he could
desire. Me thinks it were good, said the Queen, to entreat him first, by some
other of our Court, and if they cannot prevail, will him to come see me, your
daughter, and our Cousin Mabila: they likewise shall solicit the matter, for
they knew him when he served them as a Squire. Then shall we let him
understand, how all the Knights here are yours, and none but thinks himself
honored thereby: him will we desire to be one of the Company, that you may
enjoy his service when need shall require. This will be a good mean, answered
the king to procure his stay, and if he will not be won by you, we may well
judge him of less ciuility the^ Chiualry. Now because it waxed somewhat late,
the King bade his Queen goodnight, and went to his Chamber. On the
other-side, the king of Norgalles persuaded his newcome guest, that he would
abide in the Court of king Lisuart: but Amadis could so cunningly dissemble,
that he altogether disguised the chief point of his desire, and might not by
all these entreaties be won. When he perceived he labored in vain, on the
Morrow-morning he brought him to the king, of whom Amadis made offer to take
his leave: But the king answered him in this manner. My good friend, you should
have done me pleasure not to depart so soon, yet can I not constrain ye to
tarry against your will, but my Queen would gladly see you before your
departure. Nor will I go my Lord, answered Amadis, before I have done my duty
to her: where-upon taking him by the hand, he brought him into her Chamber, and
thus spoke to her. See here, Madam, king Perions Son of Gaul, who is come
to salute you before his departure. In sooth my Lord, answered the Queen, he
does me great honor, and he is very heartily wel-come hither.

Then Amadis stepping to her, fell on his knee to kiss her hand, but she
caused him to rise and sit down by her: when the king perceiving they would
enter into further talk, with drew himself to discourse with his knights,
while they conferred together. In mean while the Queen courteously entertained
Amadis, but the other Ladies and Gentle-women, who had heard such same of his
beauty and excellent perfections, began to eye him very diligently,
maruailing that Nature had so enriched him, with the only thing they most
desired. Now knew Amadis by their countenances what judgment they held of him,
yet durst he not turn his head aside, fearing least seeing his Oriana, by some
sudden mutation, he might reveal what carefully he couetted to hide. And as
he continued in this perplexity, the Princess Mabila came and did him
reverence, where-upon the Queen (the better to compass her intent) called her
daughter, who dissembled as if she seant knew him, and thus she spoke to her.
Fair daughter, remember you not the son of king Perion of Gaul, who served
you well while he was your Squire. and yet may do (if it please him) now he is
a Knight? in soothe, you must al assist me in desiring him to grant me one
request. And know ye what it is? quoth she to Amadis, the king earnestly
entreats you to remain in his Court, and yet as I understand, you have no
will to afford him so samll a favor. We shall see anon, if Ladies hold greater
Privilege in knights, then men do, therefore we all join together in one
suite, that you would be knight to my daughter and my self, and likewise to
whom them you see in this fair company. And if you will do so much for us,
you shall deliver us from seeking support in any other, who happily cannot be
so agreeable to us: for well we know if you be our knight, we shall surpass all
them that attend on the king. The Ladies were before advertised, what they
should do in this case, wherefore they flocked about him altogether, and with
signs of earnest Supplication, confirmed the Queens request: especially
Oriana, who gave him a sign that he should consent, but very wisely dissembled
it, although he had no other desire in the world: wherefore the Queen seeing
him so slow in answering, as if she would have pressed him thereto, said. Well,
Sir Amadis, what? shall we be denied? Madame, replied Amadis, what is he that
dare do otherwise, then grant your will and these Ladies present, seeing you
are the most honorable Queen of the world, and they likewise deserve the
highest point of service? therefore madame, by your commandment and the
Princess Oriana, as also these other Ladies who are loath to be denied, I am
content to tarry with you: yet under this condition, that I will do nothing
but for you only, and if I accomplish any service for the King, it shall be
yours and none of his. Then as our Champion, answered the Queen, all we accept
you: and these glad tidings she soon sent to the King, who was so highly
pleased therewith, that he commanded the King of Norwales to go and bear him
company, and himself for joy went presently to him, when taking him in his
arms, he said. Gentle Knight, right glad am I of your consent to the Queen,
and for my part be you well assured, that my desire is to entreat you according
to your deserts. Amadis on his knee humble thanked him, albeit he only stayed
by the commandment of Oriana, and no such other matter as he feigned to the
Queen.

For this time the author leaves Amadis, returning where he left the Prince
Galaor, who being departed from the Duke of Brystoyaes Castle, where the
villainous Dwarffe unhappily discovered him: all that day he wandered in the
Forest of Arinida, not meeting any one to direct him a more ready way, yet
toward evening, he saw a Squire come toward him, mounted on a right good
Courser. Now had Galaor received a certain wound, by one of the three Knights
that assailed him as you have heard, which by reason of dallying with his new
friend the night past, began to fefter and ranckle very much, and feeling
himself not half current, he said to the Squire. My friend, know thou
where I may find cure for a small wound I have? What if I do? answered the
Squire, yet will I not company any such coward as thou art, because it were to
my shame and discredit if I should. Enough of that, said Galaor, tell me where
I may find help for my wound? Rather, quoth the Squire, would I seek one to
give thee another. Show me the way, answered Galaor, and I will adventure what
thou fear me withal, I may choose, said the Squire, except I list. Nay thou
shall do it, quoth Galaor, by friendship or force. By force, replied the
Squire, think thou I will do any thing for so bad and false a Knight as thou
art? When Galaor heard him speak so imperiously, he drew his sword, making
show as if he would smite off his head, saying. Villain thou shall conduct me,
else will I send thy soul to all the Devils. The Squire being afraid, thus
answered. Seeing thou enforcest me, I will bring thee to a place where thy
folly shall be chastised, and my outrage revenged. Heere-with he rode before,
leaving the right way, Galaor following some distance behind him, and by time
they had ridden the length of a mile, they came to a Fortress seated in a
pleasant valley, bravely enuiro^ed about with trees: the Squire the^ pointing
him to the place, said. Now may thou let me go, for here I hope will be
revenged the injury thou have done me. Go thy way to all the Devils, replied
Galaor, for I have enough of thy company. Scant will thou like my conducting,
said the Squire, before thou departest from this castle: wherewith he turned
brible and away, but Galaor followed the path that guided to the Castle, which
in his judgment was but newly edified, and being come to the gate, he saw
within a Knight armed mounted on horseback, attended on by five halberders,
provided to forbid entrance into the Castle: who coming to him, demanded if he
were the man that abused their Squire. I know not, answered Galaor, whether he
be your Squire or no, but hither am I come by the conduct of a varlet, the most
audatious rogue that ever I knew, It may be so, replied the Knight of the
Castle: but what would you have in this place? Sir, quoth Galaor, I am sore
wounded, and seek for one to give me help. Enter then, said the Knight.
Galaor rode in, but presently the Knight and his soldiers very fiercely
assailed him, yet the first that came before him, thinking to strike at his
head with his halberd, was followed so near, as Galaor snatched his weapon out
of his hand, giving the Knight such a wound therewith, that he fell down dead.
Then entering among the other, he gave them so many rough and sharp charges, as
in the end three of them were slain outright, the other two fled so fast as
they could into the Castle: and Galaor would have pursued them, but that his
Squire cried to him: My Lord take your Arms, for within me thinks I hear a
great rumor of people, my self will take this hatchet to assist ye if ye
stand in need: and although I am unworthy the order of Chiualry, yet will I
defend my Lord to my uttermost hability: so threw he down the hatchet, taking
up a halberd and a Shield belonging to one of them that were slain. Assure thy
self, answered Galaor, so soon as I find him that gave me Knighthood, thou
shall for thy forwardnes likewise have thine. So passing further, they saw two
other armed Knights come forth, and ten Soulders with them, who were brought
out at the gate by the other that fled away. Now was the Squire that conducted
Galaor to this Castle, standing showing himself at one of the casements, and
he cried aloude to this fresh supply. Kill him, kill him, but save his horse to
do me service. Galaor looking up, presently knew him, at whose words his heart
was so enraged, that he fiercely ran to meet the new assaylants: in which
encounter their Lances brake, especially Galaor on him that gave the first
charge, as he made him sure enough from ever bearing arms afterward. The^
setting hand to sword advanced himself to the other, delivering him so sound a
greeting, that he tumbled from his horse with his heels upward: and turning to
the halberders on foot, he saw his Squire had dispatched two of them, wherefore
to harten him the more, he thus cried to him. My friend thou have begun very
well, not one of the rest shall escape us, because such villains are unworthy
to live. When the Squire that was in the window few this bloody conflict, he
hastily ran up a ladder into a high Tower, crying out so loud as he could in
this manner. My Lord, arm your self unless you mean in be slain. By chance
Galaor understood him, whereupon he stepped aside to behold what should ensue,
when presently he saw a Knight come forth armed, and one bringing a horse for
him ready to mount: but Galaor stepping between, said hand on the bridle,
giving these speeches to the Knight. Another time Sir, learn to mount your
horse sooner, for I have occasion to use this horse, and mean to keep him til
you can get him from me. Greatly astonished was the knight when he heard him,
because all this while he had not seen him, whrefore he returend this answer.
Are you he that have slain my two Nephews, and the other here in the Castle?
I know not who you ask for, replied Galaor, but this I can assure ye, how I
found here the most disloyal and bad minded people, that ever I dealt withal. I
tell thee, said the Knight, they who^ thou have slain were better then thou
art, and dearly shall thou pay for thy boldenes. Heerewith they began a fierce
and cruel combat on foot, for the Knight of the Castle was a man of great
valor, and such as had seen this dangerous fight, would have maruailed that
they could endure half so many blows. Yet in the end, the Knight found
himself too weak for Galaor, wherefore he thought to save himself by
flight: but he was followed so near, as having entered a porch, he was
constrained to leap out at a window, and falling on a great heap of stones,
with weight of his armor brake his neck. When Galaor saw his desparate end,
he returned back cursing the Castle and the wicked inhabitants, and passing
by a chamber, he heard a very doleful voice crying. Ah my Lord, leave me not
to suffer any more. Galaor stepping near, said. Open the door then. Ah Sir, I
cannot, answered the voice, for I am tied with a strong chain. By these words,
Galaor knew well it was some prisoner, wherefore he ran against the door with
his foot so strongly, that he made it fly from off the hindges, and entering,
beheld a fair Damsel tied by the neck with a great chain, who thus spoke to
Galaor. Alas my Lord, what is become of the master of this Castle and his
company? They be all dead, quoth he, for coming hither to seek cure for a
wound I received in fight, they caused me to enter, and afterward set upon me:
but by the help of God I have so well defended my self, as they shall never
do more harm to any living body. Heaven be praised, answered the Damsel,
for your happy success, and leave me not in this misery, for being delivered,
right soon shall I make whole and sound your wounds. Presently did Galaor
break the chain, and the Damosel took out of acofer two little bottles, with
other precious things belonging to the Lord of the Castle, and so came down
together into the Court: where Galaor perceived how the first Knight he
iousted withal was not yet dead, but travailing to his end, wherefore to let
him languish no longer, he so tra^pled on his breast with his horse feet, as
quickly his soul forsook the body, afterward they rode away devising on many
matters.

This Damsel was wise, well governed, and of good grace, whereby she could so
queintly answer and entreat Galaor, that he became highly enamoured of her:
and being able to endure no longer this kindled fire of affection, thought good
to make some proof if she would love him, whereupon he thus began. You know
(fair Damsel and my friend) that I have delivered you from prison, but in
giving you liberty, I am become my self captive, and brought into great danger
unless you help me. You may be well assured my Lord, quoth she, that the
matter were very difficult, wherein I would not obey you, standing so deeply
bounden to you as I do: for otherwise I might be reckoned among the most
ungrateful women of the world, considering the misery you so lately delivered
me from, and therefore do I remain at your disposition. In these familiar
conferences they proceeded so far, as the execution of this hot love soon
after followed, tasting together the benefit of such content, as other may do
the like that have so good fortune: and thus merrily they pass this night, in
the Pauilion of certain Hunturs they met withal in the Forest. So Galaor
received by this Damsel, ease of his new wound love had made, and cure of the
other he got in fight.

For certain days they remained in this wood, during which time the damosel
told him, how she was daughter to Thelois the Fleming, not long since County of
Clare by the gift of King Lisuart, and a Lady whom he had often entreated as
his friend. But one day, quoth she, being with my mother in a Monastry not far
hence, the Lord of this Castle (whom you have slain) demanded me in marriage,
and because my parents misliked thereof, by reason of his ungracious behavior:
he watched a day when I was sporting among other Damsels, from whom he
forcibly carried me away, furiously thrusting me into the prison where ye found
me, saying. Be well assured Damsel, that seeing thou have disdained to match
with me in marriage, and made so little account of my great renown: while thou
live thou shall not depart hence, til thy mother and the rest of thy kindred
come entreat me to take thee as my wife. Perceiving how severely he was bent
against me, I set down my rest on patient hope, thinking it better for a time
to endure that captivity, then by making him my husband suffer a worse. Great
reason had ye therein, answered Galaor, but tell me now I pray ye, at parting
hence what shall become of you? for I am constrained to make little stay, and
must travail very far, being too much trouble for you to follow me. I desire
ye, quoth she, conduct me to the Monastery from whence I was taken, for my
mother is there, who will be right joyful to see me at liberty. With all my
heart, replied Galaor: so mounting on horseback, about Sun setting they arrived
at the monastery, where they were received with great joy, especially when the
Damsel had declared his worthy deeds of Chiualry done for her: and albeit he
determined a speedy departure, yet at the request of the fair fisters, he
tarried there longer then before he intended. Here paused the Author on this
matter, to tell ye what happened to the Prince Agraies, since his return from
the waries in Gauls

CHAP. XVII.
What were the adpenturs of the Prince Agraies, since his return from Gaul,
where he left Amadis.

AGraies returned from his enterprise in Gaul, after Amadis had vanquished
king Abies of Ireland, and was known to his father and mother as you have
heard: addressed his journey toward Norway, where he hoped to find his Lady
Oliuia. Riding one day along somewhat near the sea side, on a sudden he had a
Heart in chase, which when he had some prittie while pursued, he gained at
length the top of a mountain, from whence he might easily deserne the raging
bellows of the sea. Suddenly arose an exceeding great tempest, which with
mighty winds so troubled the water, and the thunder ratled with such violedce,
as if heaven and the nether religion would have met together. At length he
espied a ship tossed in the tempest, veterly destitute of any safety, and
(which was worse) subject to the mercy of a dark comfertlesse night ensuing:
wherewith he being moved to pity, commanded his Squires (as a signal) to
make certain blazes of fire, that they in the ship might choose their best
la^ding place, without perishing in the dark, himself minding to stay to
see the end: which happened so well, by the help of God and diligence of the
mariners, as the ship took safe harbor nere where Agraies was, when they
landed certain Ladies, who were greatly affrighted with the maruailous
tempast, thinking they could not have escaped so long, Agraies being one of the
most courteous Princes in the world, seeing them so well landed and free from
danger, sent one of his Squires, to will them come and refresh themselves in
his pauillion: which gentleness they refused not, and because he was loath to be
troublesome to them, knowing they had now need of nothing more then rest, he
concluded this night not to see them, keeping himself close in his chamber.
The Ladies being separated to their own co^tentme^t, the mariners made great
fires on the shore to dry their garments, and afterward fell to sleeping, that
they wakened not till next morning. Agraies desirous to see strange women, yet
more to serve and honor them, then to remove his affection from where it was
setlaed: privily pried in to behold their countenances, they being round set
about a fiere, reciting to each other pleasantly their passed danger. As thus
he listened their discourses, among the rest he knew the Princess Oliuia,
toward whom he was travailing by virtue of her message: and you must imagine
him so entirely addicted to her service, as also she in affection to him, that
they might well be termed happy in their love. No sooner had Agraies, espied
her, but he was so overcome therewith, as being no longer able to dissemble,
having before his eyes her so late peril of ship-wracke, he breathed forth a
vehement sigh, saying. Ah divine comfort, help me. When the Ladies heard this
cry, especially Oliuia, thinking some one of their company was not well,
commanded her women to open the door: which presently they did, when Agraies
told one of the^ who he was, that she might secretly imparte the same to her
mistress; the news whereof were so welcome to her, as immediately she commanded
him to enter. Then were embracings and kissings freely entercoursed, with all
other gracious favors so kind lovers could devise, even the very point wherein
love triumphs: so that the fair Princess lost the name of a maiden, with
like contentme^t as other who have assaied, and can more then imagine what I
mean. So pleasing was this happy meeting, as they soiourned there six days
together, beguiling the time with riciprocall courtesies; yet so secretly, as
none in the company (except her Damsels) perceived.

Mean while the sea became nauigable, the weather fair, and the waters calm:
which made the Princess determine to go aboard her ship, that she might pass
into great Britain, whither the King her father had sent her, to be nourished
by the Queen Brisena. Which being understood by Agraies, after he had
acquainted her with the cause of his journey, he gave her assurance: that very
shortly he would come to her, as well to show her his faithful service, as
also to seek his cousin Amadis in king Lisuarts Court, according as he made
him promise; wherewith she was not a little contented, desiring him earnestly
not to tarry long from her. Thus courteously taking leave of each other, the
Princess Oliuia departed under sail, and in few days after they landed in
great Britain, when coming to Windsore, where King Lisuart kept his Court:
both by him, the Queen, Oriana, and all the other Ladies, was the Princess
and her train graciously welcomed, as well to honor the King her father, as
also in respect of her excellent beauty.

Now remained Agraies on the sea shore, giving many a long look after the ship
which carried away the jewel of his heart; and having lost the fight of it, he
took his way to Briantes, a right good town in Scotland, where the King his
father soiourned, and his Uncle Galuanes Without land, in whose company he
intended shortly to visit King Lisuarts Court. For there, quoth he to
Galuanes, shall we find more good Knights, then in any other Court of King
Christian, there likewise may we gain honor and renown better then in
Scotland: where we have none to try our selves against, unless some few that
slenderly follow Arms. This Galuanes was of gentle heart and a good Knight,
desirous among other to reach the top of honor, yet of simple ability, as you
have heard before: now the enterprise of these twain thus concluded, after
they had obtained license of the King, they went on board with their horse and
armor, each one likewise a Squire atte^ding on him. Having wind at will, in
short time they landed at Bristow, where they made no long abode, but riding
through a Forest, they met a Damsel who demanded of them, if that way would
conduct her to the Rock of Galteres. No, quoth they, but tell us Damsel why
you travail thither? To see if I can find the good Knight, said she, who
knows how to remedy a grief I endure at this present. You abuse your self
Damsel, answered Agraies, for at the Rock you demanded, you shall find no
other Knight then the great Giant Albadan, to whom if you bring any cause of
sorrow, he will quickly double it on your own head. If you knew so much as I do,
quoth the Damsel, you would not imagine me to be abused: because the Knight I
ask for, has vanquished the Giant, and killed him in battle hand to hand.
Believe me virgin, replied Galu anes, you tell us matter of great marvel, in
respect never any Knight dealt alone with a Giant, unless it was King Abies of
Ireland, who combated with one, himself being armed, and the Giant naked,
which was the cause of his death; and yet this attempt of the King, is thought
the greatest stratageme that ever was heard of: then sound not your speeches,
to any likelihood, for this Giant surpasses all other in strength and
cruelty. Gentleman, answered the Damsel, the Knight I speak of has done no
less then I told ye: wherewith she rehearsed the whole manner thereof; they
reputing it strange, and almost incredible: which caused Agraies to ask her,
if she knew the Knights name. His name (quoth she) is Galaor, son to King
Perton of Gaul. Ah Lady, said Agraies, you declare the only news of the world
to content me withal, naming my Cofin, who more commonly was reputed dead then
living. Hereupon he reported to Galuanes, what he had heard concerning Galaor,
how he was taken away by the Giant, and till this instant he never heard of
him. By my faith, answered Galuanes, the life of him and his brother is
miraculous, and their beginning of Chivalry so famous, as I think their like
is not to be found through the world; but Damsel, what would you have with
that Knight? My Lord, quoth she, I seek his aid on the behalf of a Damsel,
who is imprisoned by the accusation of a Dwarffe, the most villainous creature
that ever was born: hereto she added the whole discourse of Galaor and the
Dwarffe, as has been already declared to you, yet she co^cealed the lovely
pranck of Aldena. And because Sir, said she, the Damsel will not confirm
what the Dwarffe has avouched, the Duke of Bristoya has sworn, that within
ten days she shall be burned alive: which is an occasion of great grief to
the other Ladies, doubting least she through fear of death will accuse some
of them, and tell withal to what end Galaor came into the Dukes Castle:
more-ouer, of the ten days, four are already expired. Seeing it falls out
so, answered Agraies, you need travail no further, for we will perform what
Galaor should do, if not in strength, yet in good will, and therefore be you
our guide to the place. The Damosel turned her haqueney, and led them with such
speed to the Dukes Castle, that they arrived there the day before the
execution should be. Now was the Duke set down to dinner, when the two Knights
entering the great hall, humbly saluted him, and when he saw them, he requested
they would sit down to dinner with him: but they answered, that he should
presently know the cause of their coming, where-upon, Galuanes thus began. My
Lord, you detain a Damsel prisoner, by the false and disloyal accusation of
a traitorous Dwarffe; we desire that she may be delivered seeing she has no
way mis-done: and if it be needful to prove her innocence by battle, let
come two other to maintain the quarrel, for we are ready as her defe^ders.
Well have you said, replied the Duke: and calling for the Dwarffe, thus spoke to
him. What answerest thou to these Knights challenge, who say that falsely thou
have caused me to imprison the Damsel, and will prove it against thee in open
battle? it behooves thee to find some defense for thy self. For that I am
not to seek my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, I have such on my behalf, who shall
make known the truth of what I have said. Here-with he called a frollick Knight
his Nephew, so like him in pitch and proportion, as one would have thought he
had no other father, to him he said. I pray ye Nephew maintain my quarrel
against these two Knights. Scarce had he thus spoken, but his Nephew returned
this answer to Galuanes and his companion. Well Gentlemen, what will you say
against this loyal Dwarffe, who was so injured by the Knight the false Damsel
brought hither? It may be one of you is the man I speak off: but whether it be
or no, I will prove in Combat he dealt villainously, and the Damsel ought to
die, because she brought him into my Lord the Dukes Chamber. Agraies who found
himself most touched in his own conceit, stepped forth with this answer. In
sooth, neither of us is the man, albeit we desire to imitate his virtues, but
we avouch he has done no wrong, and if the Duke please, this difference shall
be soon decided: for on his behalf will I maintain, that the damosel ought
to be delivered, and the Dwarf in her stead burned as a traitorous villain. I
justify the contrary, replied the Dwarffes Champion: then calling for his
armor; full soon was he mounted on a gentle Courser, and turning to Agraies
who presented him the Co^bare, thus spoke. Would God Knight thou were the man
by who^ this quarrel began, too high a price should I set on thy folly. We
shall quickly sea; quoth Agraies, what thou can do, but I am assured if he
were present, he would make no account of two such braggers as thou art, how
just or unjust the cause were on his side, by greater reason then do I leave
thee to judge, how notably he would handle these in this, consisting on truth
and equity. While these menaces thus pass on either side, the Duke stirred
not from the table till dinner was done, when seeing the Knights prepared to
execute their speeches, he conducted them with a brave company of Gentlemen, to
the place appointed to end such controversies, where all accustomed ceremonies
being observed, the Duke thus spoke to Agraies. Perform the uttermost of your
ability, yet shall not the Damosel be delivered: for to the Dwarffe has not
been offered injury alone, but to such beside as are of higher reckoning then
your self. My Lord, quoth Agraies, you caused her to be apprehended only by
his false accusation, and he has deceived your judgment with a lie: wherefore
if my for^ me Conqu^our* you ought by good reason to deliver her. I have told
you what I mean to do; ^^id the Duke, and otherwise it shall not be. Agraies
carrying for no more words, turned his horse; running a brave carrire against
the Dwarses Knight, and in the encounter brake their staves gallantly, meeting
likewise so furiously with their bodies, as they were both laid along on the
ground: yet quickly they recovered themselves, and unsheathing their weapons,
delivered fierce and cruel strokes to each other; their Swords being very
sharp, the Knights valiant and haurily disposed, by means where-of, their
Armor, Helmets and sheeldes, were in short time made of slender resistance:
yet Galuanes well saw, how his Nephew had still the better of his enemy; if then
he had before esteemed him a good Knight, far greater reason had he so to
do: notwithstanding, he was so hot and vigorous, as oftentimes he seemed out
of breath, which made every one imagine (regarding his violence) that he could
not long endure. But in him it proved far otherwise, for the longer the
Combat endured, his courage and strength the more increased, by reason whereof
he became the Conqueror, as shall hereafter be declared. The Nephew to the
Dwarffe found himself so hardly handled, as he drew back a little, thus
speaking to Agraies. Me thinks Sir Knight we have made proof enough, of what
we are able to perform in these affairs, wherefore I am of the opinion, that
he whose quarrel I undertake, and the other for whom you entered fight, are not
^^^lty in any thing wherewith they are charged; otherwise our combat could not
thus long have endured, but victory wouldful to (...) of us. Well have thou
said, answered Agraies, that the Knight for whom I venture is just and loyal,
but the Dwarffe is a villain and a (...) nor will I suffer thoe to rest, till
with thine own mouth thou confess as much: defend thy self therefore better
then thou have done. These angry words did somewhat eleuate the Dwarffes
Knights courage, but he had lost so much blood, that he was no longer able to
hold out; by means whereof Agraies took his pleasure on him, because the
other did nothing but defend his strokes: which when the Duke beheld, by reason
he favored him, he was highly displeased, and to shun the sight of his death,
departed toward his Castle, swearing thence-forward to work revenge for him on
all Knights errant, by doing them all the shame he could possibly devise. He
being in this fury spoke so loud, as Galuanes ouerheard him, wherefore he
thus answered: Duke thou do enterprise a great war, especially against such
as are known to more worthy Lords the thou art, seeking thus to smother up the
blame of others. As thus he contended with the Duke, the Dwarffes champion fell
at Agraies feet, who immediately snatching off his Helmes, caught him by the
head, giving him many blows with the hilts of his Sword on the face, saying:
Confess the disloyalty of the Dwarffe, otherwise thy life is at an end. Ah
gentle Knight, quoth he, give me my life, for I truly confess, that he who
you sight for is virtuous and loyal, and promise withal to gain the Damsels
release from impriso^ment: but for Gods sake I desire ye, let me not reprove
the Dwariffe mine Uncle with treason. These words were by all the assistance
easily understood, which moving Agraies to pitrie, he thus answered: For the
Dwarffe I will do nothing, but for you being a good Knight, I grant the favor
of your discharge: provided that you labor to your uttermost for the Damsels
release from prison, according as you have faithfully promised.

All this while the Duke heard none of these words, because he was gone
somewhat further off: but Galuanes laid hold on his horse bridle, saying: By
God (Duke) you shall not depart hence, until you have seen he extremity of
your Champion: for he is either dead or vanquished; what answer then make ye
concerning the Damsels right, and the treacherous injury offered her by the
Dwarf? What? said the Duke, think thou I will break mine oath, or do any
otherwise then I have determined? I know not, quoth Galuanes, what conclusion
you have appointed. Mary this, replied the duke, that she shall be to morrow
morning burned, if she tell not what moved her, to cause the Knight come hither
who^ she conducted. Why? quoth Galuanes, will ye not then deliver her? No, said
the Duke, and if thou provide not for thy speedy departure out of my Country,
thou shall well know that thou have displeased me. Is it true? answered
Galuanes, do ye threaten me contrary to all equity, and will not discharge
the Damsel so honorably justified? By heaven henceforth I desie thee, as
well on mine own behalf, as all other Knights errant whatsoever. Very well,
quoth the Duke, the like do I to thee, and al such as thou resemblest. So went
the Duke into his Castle, and Galuanes returned in an exceeding chafe to
Agraies, but rejoicing at his Nephews glorious victory, he somewhat quallified
his angry choler: yet did he tell him all the Dukes menaces, and what defiance
had passed on either side, wherewith Agraies was very much moved, chiefly for
the wrong he threatened to the Damsel; whereupon he thus replied. In sooth my
Lord and Uncle, it is against all reason, that such a pailiard as the Duke,
possessed of so great a signorie, should carry so vile and bad a mind. Having
thus spoken, he called for his horse, which being brought him, he mounted
thereon, speaking thus, to the vanquished Knight: My friend remember your
promise, and accomplish it so soon as you can that the Damsel may he released
from her imprisonment. In good faith, quoth he, I will perform my uttermost
hability therein. So rode away Agraies and Galuanes, toward the Forest of
Arinida, where when they entered, Galuanes thus began^. You know Nephew, that I
have defied the Duke, in respect of the injury he offered us: but if I might
give advise, I would think it good for us, to ambush our selves a while in
this wood, where we may easily take him or some of his. I promise ye, said
Agaies, I like well your counsel: wherefore without passing any further, they
made choice of a little thicket, where they alighted, sending their Squires to
the Town to provide them victuals.

On the other side, the Duke (as you have heard) being withdrawn to his
Castle, grew into such displeasure against the Damosel, as he thought
presently to send her to the fire: where-upon he called for her, and willed her
for to have mind of her soul, because the next morning she should be
burned, if quickly she declared not the truth of the Knight: but all these
threatenings could not draw one word from her. Now because the vanquished
Knight had promised Agraies, to labor for her deliverance to the Duke, so
soon as he returned from the field, he came and fell on his knees before the
Duke: beseeching him most instantly to grant, what he had promised on the
Ladies behalf. But the Duke by all means excused the matter, saying, he had
sollemnely vowed she should dye, if she revealed not the thing he was desirous
to know. Therefore (quoth he) I will rather consent to the ruin of my whole
Estate; then in one iotte to the breach of my oath. In this manner was the
Knight denied, and the next morning, very early he sent ^^r the Damsel, to
whom he spoke thus as follows:

Thou loud and disobedient woman, now make choice of the fire, or resolve me in
the matter I have demanded, for one of them thou must do. My Lord, quoth she,
you may appoint what you think good; but if I die in this manner, it will be
against all law and reason. Presently he committed her to two Sergeants at
Arms, accompanied with ten Knights well provided for their defense: and for
the more surety that she should not be rescued, himself mounted in person on
a goodly great horse; then leaving the town, along they ride through the
fields by the Forest side, and being come to the place prepared for
execution, he commanded foorth-with she should be thrown into the fire,
saying: Let the stubborn Strumpet die in her obstinacy. But Agraies and
Galuanes being ready armed to adventure their fortune, discerned when the
troop came from the town toward the forest; wherefore without longer
tarying, (having given express charge to one of their Squires, to have a
special care of the Damsels safety) flyly left their ambush, beholding the
poor maiden ready for the fire; when she perceiving her present danger,
cried to the Duke, that she would tell what he desired, only to delay the time
of her death. The Duke believing she intended as she said, came to her; when
suddenly he espied Agraies and Galuanes gallopping toward him, calling so loud
that he might easily hear them; Duke, now shall thou be forced to deliver the
Damosel. At these words were all the Dukes Knights greatly astonished, yet
prepared they for their own defense, where-upon began between them a fierce
and cruel fight. Now though Agraies and Galuanes were alone against so many,
yet did they so bravely behave themselves, as at the first onset they quailed
the greater part of them, before they could devise which way to turn
themselves: whereat the Duke was so amazed, that fearing his own death was
near at hand, he withdrew himself behind his men; yet Galuanes perceived it,
wherefore he cried to him: Traiterous Duke, This day thou beginnest to feel
the war thou did enterprise against Knights errant: then rushing through
the preasse, he minded to charge the Duke, but he retired aside, willing his
Knights to kill their enemies horses, which they on foot might easily
compass. In brief, these two Champions showed such chivalry on their
footmen, as they were vanquished and driven to flight, the most of them so
cruelly wounded, that they were scant able to keep themselves on horseback
in their escaping away: and the Duke who was better mounted then any of them,
made such haste, as he brought the first news hereof to the town, being
eagerly pursued awhile by Galuanes: but when he saw it was in vain, he
returned to the Forest, where he found his Nephew and the Squires with the
Damsel.

Such was the rescue of the poor maiden, and shameful foil of the Duke, who
being arrived at the Town, caused with all speed a great number to arm
themselves, returning to the Forest to revenge their late injury, thinking
to find the Knights there as yet, but they were dislodged: wherefore failing
of their purpose, they dispersed themselves in several troops, by five and
five in a company to seek them, the Duke likewise (being one in the search)
ha^^g four of the best knights he could make choice off. And as they rode
along in a valley, he espied the Knights conducting the Damsel, wherefore he
said to his men: Behold (my Friends) the Traitors we have to deal withal,
let us set on them before they get leisure to escape: for if they gain but a
sight of us, they will run away faster then ever we did. But Galuanes espied
them ere they came near, and showed them to his Nephew Agraies, who he
thought was ouer-wearyed with the last assault, which made him say: We already
have felt what these villains can do, but now must we warily defend our
selves, that we may be no more followed in this sort. I know the Duke to be he
comes foremost, if good hap befall us, I hope he shall have his payment first of
all: be now (good Nephew) mindful of your wonted courage, having passed
through greater dangers then this can be. Why Uncle? quoth Agraies, in time of
peril do you think I will forget my self? especially being in your company?
Dream of no such matter I pray ye, but let us serve these as we did their
companions. By time he had thus spoken, the Duke gave the spurs to his
horse, and coming near them said: I am sorry (villains) you should dye so
honorably, but afterward I mean to hang ye by the heels on the tops of
these trees. Galuanes and Agraies buckled close with them, showing how much
they despised such shameful burial: on the other side, the Duke and his
knights stuck to it closely, especially himself, to whom Agraies came, and
angerly reached him such a blow with his sword, beneath the fight of his
helmet, as quite cut away the nosthrils from his face. The Duke imagining
himself wounded to the death, turned his back and fled, Agraies following
him, but seeing he could not ouer-take him, he commended him to all the
devils, returning to succor Galuanes, whom the other four had very sore
labored, yet did he hold out so courageously, as no^ of them durst come near
him; for one was tumbled headlong from his horse not showing any motion of
life was left in him. Agraies being now come from pursuing the Duke, buckled so
closely with the first he met, as he fell down deprived of life: so that there
remained but two, who found themselves too weak to uphold the honor of the
vanquished, and therefore trusted to the speed of their horses, following the
first runaway toward the Forest, by which means they escaped the fury of
Agraies and Galuanes, they suffering them to enjoy that benefit, and returned
where the Damsel attended for them, of whom they demanded, if any Town or
place of lodging were near. Gentlemen, quoth she, I know the dwelling of a
Knight hard by, named Oliuas, who is a mortal enemy to the Duke, by reason he
slew a cousin of his, which makes me think he will the better welcome us. Be
you our guide thither, said Galuanes, and so she was, they being very kindly
entertained there, especially when he knew what had happened. On the morrow
they took their leave of Oliuas, but calling them aside, he thus spoke.
Gentlemen, the Duke treacherously killed a cousin german of mine, who was a
good Knight, wherefore I am determined to accuse and combat with him before
King Lisuart. Now since I understand you are Knights errant, and such as know
how, or else your selves can redress the wrongs offered to the unable, yea, by
them who (without care of God or their honor) durst proceed so far. In footh,
answered Galuanes, you are deeply bound to prosecute the murder, being
committed in such shameful manner, and we will assist ye in your quarrel on so
just a cause: if the Duke will bring any Knights to maintain his wrong, we will
be for you; for so little account makes he of us, that he has openly given us
defiance. Most heartliy I thank ye, replied the Knight; and for this cause I
will go with ye if you please. Content quoth they. Here-upon Oliuas armed
himself, and so they rode together to Windsore, where they had good hope to
find King Lisuart.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Amadis tarying with his good will in the Court of King Lisuart, heard
tidings of his brother Galaor.

BY the discourse past you have understood how Amadis (after he had in open
field foiled and overcome the audacious proud Dardan) was stayed in King
Lisuart Court by the Ladies request, expressly to be the Queens Knight: his
entertainment by the King, favor and manifold other courtesies, you have
likewise heard. It now came so to pass, that as he was one day among the
Ladies, a Damosel entered the Queens Chamber, who falling on her knees before
the Queen, said. Madame, is not a Knight here that bears azured Lions in
his Arms? The Queen perceiving she meant Amadis, answered, Damsel, what
would you with him? Madame, quoth she, I have brought him tidings of a new
Knight, who has begun in deeds of Arms so rarely as ever did any. You speak
very much, answered the Queen: but you perhaps being acquainted with none but
him, think therefore he is beyond all other. It may be so, replied the
Damsel, yet when you understand what he has accomplished, I think your
self will agree to my saying. I pray ye then, quoth the Queen, tell us what
he is. When I see the good Knight, answered the Damsel, he who carries such
estimation from all other: I will tell him in your presence, and other news
which I am charged to acquaint him withal. The Queen was now more desirous to
know him then before, wherefore showing her Amadis, she said: See here
(Damsel) the man you ask for. Madame, quoth she, in respect you speak it, I
believe it, for a Queen of such state as you are, is free from beguiling; then
coming to Amadis, she thus proceeded. My Lord, the young Gentleman whom not
long since you Knighted before the castle of Bradoid, when you vanquished the
two Knights on the bridge, and the other on the cawsey, where you took the
Master thereof prisoner, and delivered by force of arms the friend to
Vrganda: most humbly saluteth you by me, being the man whom he reputeth as his
Lord, and gives you to know, how he endeavors to reach the height of honor,
which he will attain, or dye in the attempt: likewise when he shall perform
somewhat worthy the name of Chivalry, he will acquaint you with more then yet
you know, until which time he shrowds it in silence. Amadis soon remembered
she spoke of his brother, wherefore with joy the tears dewed his cheeks, and
the Ladies well noting this alteration, maruailed thereat, especially Oriana:
who (as you have heard heereto-fore) was grounded in such affection toward him,
as she was well near deprived of power to dissemble it. In mean while, the
Queen desirous to hear what deeds of prowess the new Knight had performed,
said to the Damsel, I pray ye continue your message, and tell us the brave
beginning of chivalry you speak of. Madame, quoth she, the first place where
he made proof of himself, was at the Rock of Galteres, where he combated
with the great and terrible Giant Albadan whom (in open field hand to hand) be
overcame and slew: hereto she added the manner of the fight, assuring her that
she had seen the same Greatly were all the hearers abashed at these news, but
above all the rest the Queen: who demanded of the Damsel, if she knew
whither he travailed from thenee^ Madame, quoth she, I parted from him soon
after, leaving him in the company of a Damsel, who came from her mistress to
seek him, because she was desirous to know him; at which time he went with
her, and since I never saw him. What think you hereof Sir Amadis? said the
Queen, do not you know of whence he is? Yes truly Madame, answered Amadis,
although I can say but little h^: I think he be mine own brother, for so
Vrganda not long since affi^red me, Doubtless, quoth the Queen, the fortune
of you both is admirable, and I marvel how you could come to the knowledge of
your Parents, or they of you* yet would I be glad to see that Knight in the
Kings service. While these speeches endured, Oriana who sat far from the
Queen, and heard none of these (...) was in such grief to see Amadis shed
tears, as being unable to conceal the same, she said to Mabila: I pray ye
(fair friend) call your cousin Amadis, that we may know what has happened to
cause him mourn. Mabila made a sign to Amadin to come, and when he was with
them, Oriana showing herself ^what grieved, thus began. Sir Amadis, it may
full well be said, that by some Lady you are now moved to pity, I pray ye
(...) us what she is, and from (...) this Damsel brought you these tidings.
Amadis quickly perceived his Mistresses disease, wherefore he declared all
that the Damsel told the Queen: which appeased the jealousy of her hot
Lover, and made this show more amiable conntenance, thus speaking to Amadis.
Alas, my Lord, I must entreat you to pardon the fault, raised only by false
suspicion against you. I promise ye Madame, quoth he, there is no cause of
pardon, nor did my heart ever think amiss against you: but could you like
thereof, that I should go seek him the Damsel departed from, and bring him
hither with me to serve you? for this I am assured, if I bring him not, it will
be very hard to get him hither. Believe me, answered Oriana, I would gladly
wish so good a knight in his company, and therefore you shall do well to go
seek him: yet before you depart, acquaint the Queen herewith, that she may
imagine, how by her commandment only, you enterprise this journey. Humbly did
Amadis regratiate his Mistress: and according to her counsel he went to the
Queen, to whom he began in this manner. It were good (in mine opinion^ adame,
that the King had this knight likewise, to attend on his service. Certes, quoth
she, I would it might be so if it were possible. If you will grant me leave,
said Amadis, to go find him, I have no doubt of bringing him hither:
otherwise I know you shall hardly see him, till he have made himself known
in many other places. You do very much for the king, quoth she, if he do
come; nevertheless, I refer it to your own discretion.

Thus Amadis obtained license to depart, which he did very early the next
Morning, having no other company then Gandalin; and spending most part of the
day ryding through the Forest, he saw a Lady come toward him, accompanied with
two Damsels and four Squires: who weeping very grievously, conducted a knight
in a Litter, whereat Amadis being abashed, demanded what moved them to be so
sorrowful, and what he was they had in the Litter. He is, quoth the Lady, the
only cause of my care and pensiveness, my Lord and Husband, who is wounded in
such sort as I fear his death. Amadis advanced himself to behold the man,
and lifting up the couerture of the Litter, saw a Knight lie there, of goodly
personage: but of his face he could make no judgment, by reason it was
cruelly cut and mangled; whereupon he called to him, saying. My friend, who
has thus wronged thee? yet did the Knight make no answer; which made him go
to the Lady again, and ask her the question. Gentle Sir, quoth she, a knight
that keeps a Bridge not far hence, did it, who as we passed by said to my
Lord, how he must swear whether he were of king Lisuarts court or no: which
made my husband demand why he would know. Because, said the knight, no friend
of his shall pass here, but I will kill him. What is the occasion of your
hatred, replied my husband? I wish so much ill, quoth the knight, to that
ungracious king, as I would gladly have him in my power, to take vengeance on
him at my pleasure: and in despite of him, hence-foorth shall I slay all such
as are belonging to him. Because he keeps a knight that killed the valiant
Daodan, for whose sake I mean to deal in such sort, as the king and his
wel-willers shall receive by me infinite displeasures and dishonours. When my
husband heard him, as one agreeued at his villainous speeches, he answered.
Know thou that I am one of his Court, and his vowed servant, who neither for
thee or any other will deny him. Highly displeased was the knight of the Bridge
with this answer, and without any more words charged my husband, so that
between them grew a cruel combat: but in the end, my Lord was brought into
this hard extremity, and far more worse in the knights opinion; for he
reputed him to be slain outright, commanding us within three days to carry
him before king Lisuart, to despite him withal. Lady, quoth Amadis, I pray
you lend me one of your Squires, who can show me the knight when I come where
he is: for seeing your husband has been so wronged for my sake, it behoofeth
me (more then any other) to revenge the same. What? said the Lady, are you he
for whose cause he so hates the king? Yea verily, answered Amadis, and if my
hap prove so good, he shall never hereafter abuse any other. Ah, gentle
Knight, quoth she, I will pray for your prosperous success. Afterward she
gave him one of her Squires, and committing him to GOD, rode on with her
husband; and Amadis ne-uer stayed till he came to the Bridge, where he saw
the knight playing at Tables with another: but quickly leaving his pastime,
being ready armed, he mounted on horse back, calling for Amadis in this
manner. Holla, holla Sir, I forbid ye to pass any further till ye have
sworn. What shall I swear? answered Amadis. Whether thou be of king Lisuarts
Court, or no, said the Knight: for if thou belong to him, here must thou leave
thy head behind thee. It is a question, quoth Amadis, if thou can do so
much: but I assure thee, I belong to the Queen his wife, ever since not long
ago. Since when? replied the knight. since a disinherited Lady, said Amadis,
came hither for her right. But thou art not he, quoth the knight, that
foughtest the Combat for her? I am the man, answered Amadis, who won her
peace. By my head, said the knight, now shall thou loose thine, if I can; for
thou did kill the only honor of my lineage. I killed him not, said Amadis,
but made him discharge her of his outrageous demand, and afterward he became a
murderer of himself. All this cannot profit thee, quoth the knight, for by
thee and no other he dyed: now for his sake, shall thou loose thy life.
Hereupon they gave the spurs to their horses, and breaking their Lances
bravely, met so furiously with their bodies, as the knight of the Bridge was
thrown to the ground; whereof he was not a little ashamed: but by reason the
helmet of Amadis was unlaced in the running, while he amended it, the knight
had leisure to mount himself again, and to give his enemy two or three
strokes with the sword, before he had time to draw out his. All which afterward
he very well requited; for striking full at his head, he brake away the
skirts of his helmet, and redoubling his blow, met so directly with his
neck, as his head hung down behind his shoulders, his soul passing to the
Author of his pride and cruelty. When his gardants of the bridge saw him thus
slain, they trusted to their heels, yet Amadis would not follow the^, but
returned to the Squire that co^ducted him thither: willing him to make haste to
his Lady, and let her understand how he had revenged her husbands injury:
which he immediately did, not sparing the worthy attaints at Sword and Lance,
which he had seen Amadis bestow on the Knight of the bridge.

Amadis having there no more to do, issuing forth of the Forest, entered on a
large and goodly plain, bravely beautified with violets, sweet herbs, and
all other devises of natures tapistrie, which presently provoked the
remembrance of his Oriana: riding on in diverse amorous thoughts, he saw come
toward him an evil favored Dwarffe, on a simple Palfrey, who^ he called to
know from whence he came. My Lord, quoth the dwarf, I come from the house of
the cou^tie of Claire. Have thou not seen a young Knight, said Amadis, named
Galaor? No truly, answered the Dwarffe, but I know where (within three days)
I can show you the best Knight that ever bare Arms in these parts. When Amadis
heard this, thinking he had meant his brother, he said: I pray thee my friend
conduct me to the place where I may see him. With all my heart, replied the
Dwarffe, on condition you will grant me one request, and go with me whither I
shall guide ye. The great desire he had to find his brother, made him soon
consent. Come with me then, quoth the Dwarffe, and I will bring ye where you
shall behold the good Knight. So rode they on till dark night ouertooke them,
which the Dwarffe perceiving, he said to Amadis, My Lord, hard by is a Castle
where we may lodge this night, for there is a Lady who will friendly welcome
us. Thither they rode, and had kind entertainment, when supper being ended,
Amadis was brought to lodge in a sumptuous bed: but he could take no rest, his
thoughts so hammered on the perfection of his mistress. And taking leave the
next morning of their friendly hostess, continued on their journey till about
midday, when they saw two Knights fighting against one, then Amadis approaching
to them, said: Gentlemen, may it please ye to pause a while, and tell me on
what occasion your quarrel arises? At these words they ceased, and one of the
two thus replied: It is because this Knight maintains, that he alone is as
able as we two together, to bring a hauty enterprise to end. In sooth, said
Amadis, your difference is very slender, for the bounty of the one diminishes
no jot of the other. The Knights perceiving he spoke the truth, ended their
strife, demanding of Amadis, if he knew the Knight in King Lisuarts Court, who
co^bated for the injured widow, whereby the good Knight Dardan was slain. Why
ask ye? quoth Amadis. Because, said the Knights, we would gladly meet with
him. I know not, answered Amadis, whether your meaning be good or bad, yet is
it not long since I saw him in the Court of King Lisuart. Having so said, he
rode on his way, when the three Knights having conferred a little together,
they began to gallop after him: and he no sooner heard them, but turned again;
then doubting they intended some harm to him, he clasped on his Helmet and his
Shield, yet had he no Lance, nor they likewise. Alas my Lord, quoth the
Dwarffe, what will ye do? consider you not they be three, and you alone? What
matters that? answered Amadis, if they assail me without reason why; by good
right I must assay for mine own defense.

On these speeches, they came to him in this manner. Sir knight, we would
demand one thing of you, which we desire ye not to deny, otherwise you may
not so easily escape us. The sooner shall I grant it, quoth Amadis, if it be
reasonable. Tell us then, as you are a loyal Gentleman, where you imagine we
may find him that slew Dardan? He who could do no less then speak ^he
truth, thus replied. I am he, albeit I would have you think, that I do not
so soon fulfill your request, in respect of adding any praise to my self. When
the knights heard him, they cried altogether: Ah traitor, thou dyest; and
drawing their swords set violently upon him. Amadis offended to see himself
thus assailed, by them whom ere-while he had so friendly pacified: resisted
them with such resolute courage, as at the first stroke he smote one of their
arms from the body, the grief whereof made him fall beside his horse: the
second also felt his sword so peizantly, that he cleft his head to the very
teeth, and sent to keep his fellow company. When the third beheld their bad
success, he put the spurs to his horse and got him away, but Amadis being
not so well mounted, let him escape, returning to Gandalin and the Dwarffe, who
thus spoke. Credit me my Lord, hence-foorth will I trust better to your words
then I did: let us therefore make haste hence if you please. So riding along,
at length the D^ffe showed him in a pleasant valley two high Pine-trees, near
which was a Knight mounted on a lusti^ Courser, and two other whom not long
before (...)* shed, they running to catch their horses there strayed about the
field. And looking again, he espied another knight lay leaning on his helmet,
having his shield by him, and twenty Lances reared against the P^s, with two
spare horses likewise ready furnished. My Lord, quoth the dwarffe* do you see
the Gentleman that leans on his Helmet? What then? said* Amadis. He is,
replied the Dwarffe, the good Knight I promised to show you. K^o^ thou his
name? quoth Amadis. He names himself, answered the Dwarffe, Angriote distr^,
and is the best knight that I have heard report of. Tell me then, said Amadis,
why he keeps there so many Lances? I can therein, answered the Dwraffe, full
well resolve ye, listen then awhile. He loves a Lady of this country, who
hates him above all other: nevertheless, he has prevailed so much by fight,
as her parents were constrained to give him her. After he had gotten her into
his power, he thought himself the happiest man in the world: but she told
him, he should wade into no such fond opinion, because he took a young Lady
against (...) will* And albeit, quoth she, (...) you have enjoyed me, yet
(...) (...) never shall I love, ye if you do (...) perform one thing for me.
What Lady answered Angriote, is it within compass of my puissance? That is
(...), said she. Command then sweet Madame, replied Angriote, for I will
accomplish it even to the death. The Lady whose evil will was toward him
exceeding great, thinking to appoint him a place most convenient for his death,
or else to get him there so many enemies, as her Parents might enjoy better
assistance to take her from him: entreated him and his brother to guard this
vale of Pines, against all knights errant that should pass this way, causing
them by force of Arms to take an oath, how they should afterward travail to
King Lisuarts Court, there to confess her more beautiful the^ the Ladies they
loved. And if it so fell out, that the brother to Angriote (whom you see on
horseback) were vanquished, and could endure the combat no further: then
Angriote should keep this passage alone, during the space of one whole year.
For this cause they depart not hence all the day time, and at night return to
a Castle on the mountain you see at hand: having already maintained their
enterprise three months, in all which time Angriote never set hand to Sword
against any Knight, because his brother has still been conqueror. Trust me,
said Amadis, I believe thou say true, and so I heard in the Court of King
Lisuart, where not long since a Knight arrived, who confessed Angriotes Lady to
be more fair then his friend, and me thought he called her name Grouonesa.
Very (...), quoth the Dwarffe: but now ^ing you are resolved, remember your
promise to me, and bare me company as you said you would. With right good
will, answered Amadis, which is the way? Even ever this vale, replied the
Dwarffe, but because of this hinderance, a^ yet I think we shall very hardly
pass. Care not thou for that said Amadis: so giving his horse the spurs, he
rode on, and soon after he met a Squire, who thus spoke to him. Go no further
Gende^, if you will not grant the Lady under the Pine, to be more beautiful
then your Mistress. Never will I yield to such a slander, replied Amadis,
without force or extreme constraint. Return thee, said the Squire, otherwise
you must combat with the twain you see before. If they assail me, quoth
Amadis, I must defend my self so well as I can: so using ^o more words, he
rode on forward.

CHAP. XIX.
How Amadis combated against Angriote and his brother, who guarded the passage
of the valley, against such as would not confess, that their Ladies were
inferior in beauty to Angriotes choice.

WHen Angriots brother saw him coming, he took up his weapons and met him,
saying: Believe me Knight; you have committed folly, in not granting what our
Squires gave you warning of, you must therefore enter combat with me. As for
the combat, answered Amadis, I like it much better, then to confess the
greatest lie in the world. I know well, said the Knight, you must do it with
disadvantage in an other place. And trust me, quoth Amadis, I think not so.
Stand on your own defense then, replied the Knight: wherewith they gave the
carrire against each other, meeting together so furiously, as the knight was
vnhorssed: yet held he fast the raines of his bridle, till they brake in his
hand, which caused him to fall on his neck to the ground, where he lay
without remembrance of himself or any other. Hereupon Amadis alighted, and
pulling the Helmet from his head, perceiving that he was in a sound, wherefore
he buffet^ed him in such sort, as he came to himself again. Thou art but
dead, said Amadis, if thou yield not thy self my prisoner. When the Knight saw
the naked sword over his head, fearing his death, he yielded. Then Amadis
mounted again, perceiving Angriote already on horseback, ready to revenge
his brothers injury: and a Squire came to the Prince, bringing him a Lance,
which he presented him withal from Angriote. Soon after they encou^tered so
galantly, as their Lances flew in pieces without any further harm, and
ending their carrire, Amadis quickly drew his sword, turning to Angriote, who
thus spoke. Make not such have (Knight) to combat with the sword, because thou
shall have time enough for that anon, (this he said, in respect he reputed
himself the best at the sword that might be found:) But I pray thee, quoth
he, let us just till our Lances fail, or one of us be sent to the earth.
Knight, answered Amadis, I have weighty business elsewhere, and may not trifle
time with tarrying here. What? said Angriote, think tho^ to (...)? I
promise (...) it i^ (...) least part of my thought: yet I pray thee let us try
one course more Amadis was content, and taking such Lances as each of them
liked, finished (...) Just with such violence, as Angri I ^^e was cast down
and his horse upon him. Amadis leaping from his saddle, saw that a small
trunchion of a Lance had a little entered his body, yet scorning any shame
should be deserned on his side, fighting for the honor and beauty of his
Goddess Oriana: snatching forth the trunchion, and marched with his sword
drawn against, Angriote, who seeing him come, said. I see Sir Knight thou art
very young, and me thinks before it be worse* with thee, thou were better to
confess my Lady fai^r then thine. Then should I lie very fowlly, answered
Amadis, and (by my will) I shall not dissent so (...) from the truth. Those
speeches enkindled collor on either side, which made them charge each other with
such vigor, as not only they that beheld them, but even themselves were
driven into doubts, thinking it impossible to endure so extremely. And to say
sooth the cause was hard, for Amadis undertook the honor of his Lady, for
which he could rather choose a thousand deaths, then she should loose one jot
of her excellence: and this opinion still whetted on his courage, that Angriote
was compelled to diverse simple shifts, to avoid the fierce assaults of his
valiant enemy, who had wounded him in twenty several places, and he perceiving
his death at hand, stepped aside, thus speaking to Amadis. Believe me Sir
Knight, there is more valor in thee then I imagined. Yield thy self, said
Amadis, so shall thou do wisely, seeing tho (...) art already brought into such
danger, for with the sinishing of our combat, thy life will likewise end:
which can be no pleasure at all to me, in that I esteem of thee better then
thou weenest. These words he used, as well for the brave Chivalry he noted in
Angriote, as also the great honesty he showed to the Lady in his possession:
whereupon Angriote returned this answer. It is reason I should yield myself to
the best Knight in the world, and the like all other to do that bear arms:
Believe me then gentle Knight, I not so much sorrow for my foil, as the
wrackfull chance threatened to me, by loosing this day the only thing in the
world I most love. That shall you not, quoth Amadis, if I can help it, beside,
the Lady should show her self very ungrateful, if she acknowledge not your
honorable pains in her defense, and it cannot be, but she will requite ye with
the good you have deserved. As for me, I promise ye to employ my uttermost
hability, in causing her consent thereto, so soon as I shall return from a
search I have now in hand. My Lord, said Angriote, in what place may I
hereafter find you? In the Court of King Lisuart, answered Amadis, where (by
Gods help) I mean shortly to be. So took he leave of Angriote, who gladly
would have had him in his Castle, but he might not be hindered of his journey.

Thus does Amadis follow the Dwarf, who guided him five days without any
adventure, showing him at length a marvelous strong and pleasant Castle,
saying: Sir, within yonder hold you must perform the promise you made me. And
I will do it for thee, answered Amadis, if it confist in my power. I am in
good hope thereof, quoth the Dwarffe, in respect I have seen some proof of
your fortune: but know ye Sir how the place is named? No verily, said Amadis,
for till now I was never in this Country: It is called Valderin, replied the
Dwarffe: and thus devising, they came near the Castle, when the Dwarffe willed
him to take his Arms. Why? said Amadis, shall we have any such need? Yea
mary, quoth the Dwarffe, for they suffer none to come forth that enter so
lightly. Amadis buckled on his helmet, riding in before, the Dwarffe and
Gandalin following after, then looking on every side they could see no
creature. This place said Amadis is not inhabited, where is the request thou
said I should do for thee? Credit me Sit, said the Dwarffe, I have some-time
seen here a most brave Knight, and the strongest in Chivalry that ever I
saw, who in that porch killed two Knights, one of them being my master, him
he put to death very cruelly, without regard of favor or mercy: In revenge
whereof, I would desire that traitors head, which I have long failed in
obtaining, because all such as I brought hither, have lost their lives or
remain here in captivity. Thou do the part of a loyal servant, answered
Amadis: yet ought thou to bring no Knight hither, before thou tell him
against whom he shall fight. My Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, the man is known well
enough, and reputed for one of the best Knights in the world: therefore when I
have named him, I could not meet with any so hardy as to revenge my cause.
Belike then thou know his name, said Amadis. Yea my Lord, replied the
Dwarffe, he calls himself Arcalaus the enchanter, Amadis hereupon went
forther in, looking round about if he might see any body: but all was in
vain, wherefore to rest his horse, he stayed there till evening, saying to the
Dwarffe. What will thou I shall do now it is so late? Alas my Lord, quoth he,
the night being so near at hand, me thinks it were good we departed hence.
Nay trust me, answered Amadis. I will not budge hence till the knight come, or
some other that can tell me tidings of him. But I dare not tarry, said the
Dwarffe, least Arcalaus chance to know me, and imagine I practice the means of
his death. Yet shall thou bear me company, replied Amadis, as I will not
excuse my self from the promise I have made thee. As thus they co^muned,
Amadis espied a Court somewhat more backward, where-into he entered and found no
body: but he saw a dark place underneath, and certain steps leading into the
earth Gandalin got hold on the Dwarffe, who would have run away, and Amadis
took great pleasure to behold his trembling, speaking thus merrily to him.
Fear not tall fellow, but let us go down these stairs, to see who is beneath.
My Lord; quoth the Dwarffe, for Gods sake spare me, nothing in the world can
make me go into such a fearful place. If thou go hence, said Amadis, how
will thou enjoy the thing I promised thee, or know that I do my endeavor
therein? Ah Sir, quoth he, I acquit you, and hold my self fully, satisfied.
But so do not I, answered Amadis, because hereafter thou shall not say I brake
my promis. On my faith Sir, said the Dwarffe, I freely discharge ye, and if you
please to let me go, I will tarry for you in the way as we came hither. Get
thee gone then, replied Amadis, for here will I abide till to morrow morning
attending the Knight.

In this manner the poor dwarf escaped thence, and Amadis went down the
stairs, coming into a plain place so dark, that he could not imagine where
he was: yet he proceeded on, and by groping on a wall felt a bar of iron,
whereat hung a key which he took, opening therewith a chain that locked a
port-cullis, then heard he a lamentable voice thus complaining. Ah God, how
long shall we remain in this misery? sweet death why stayest thou from
succouring us, who call to thee as out last refuge? Soon after the voice
ceased, which made him hold on his way, and enter a vault having his sword and
Shield ready: then passing further, he came into a great Palace, at the
entrance whereof hung a lamp burning, and six men laid along asleep, with
their Shields and Hatchets lying by them, the best of which he took himself.
They not awaking he went on by them, and soon after heard another grievous
lamentation in this manner. Ah God full of pity and mercy, send death if it
please thee to deliver us from this hell. Now was Amadis in worse case then
before, for one of the six Soldiers suddenly awaking, said to his fellow:
Arise, take them rods and make that cursed creature sing another kind of song;
who has thus disturbed us in our sleep. Mary and I shall, answered the other:
so he arose and took the rods, but as he wont, he chanced to see Amadis
before him, whereat he was somewhat afraid, yet to be better assured, he
demanded, who is there? I, quoth Amadis. What art thou? said the other. I am,
quoth he, a strange Knight. Who brought thee hither, said the Soldier,
without any license? No body, answered Amadis, but my self alone. The worse
for thee, replied the Soldier, now must thou be enclosed among these
unfortunate people, who cry as thou hear. Then stepping back, he shut the
door against Amadis, and waking his companions, said. My friends I have found a
strange knight, who to his harm has entered on his good will. Let me talk
with him, answered the Iaylor, and if I lodge him not worse then the rest, then
blame me. So taking his hatchet and Shield; he came to Amadis with these words.
Caitife, if thou will not die, throw down thy weapons, least with my hatchet I
slice thy flesh, and make carbonadoes of it. Very angry was Amadis to be thus
threatened, wherefore he returned this answer. Slender is thy reason in thinking
to fear me with thy words, but the Devils shall affright thee a great deal
more: for I will make them a present with thy soul, which so long has given
power to thy wicked body in doing evil. Presently they smote at each other
with their hatchets, the iaylor delivering his stroke on the helmet of Amadis,
so that it entered very far therein, and Amadis cutting through the iaylors
Shield, enforced him to throw both it and his hatchet down to stand to the
only defense of his sword: which endured not long likewise, wherefore he minded
to grapple Amadis about the body, because he was a man of maruailous strength,
yet could he not do so much as he meant, in respect Amadis was a Knight both
stiff and sturdy. Ne-uerthelesse, the iaylor griped him very cruelly, till the
Prince gave him such a blow on the face, as brake his iaw bones, which
compelling him to fall down amazed, Amadis had the mean to accomplish his
promise, seperating with his sword the body from the soul.

The other Soldiers that beheld this fight, not thinking the iaylor was dead
indeed, cried to Amadis: how on peril of his life he should not kill him,
least they likewise should send him after. I know not, answered Amadis, what
may become of me, but I am certain he is safe enough for doing any more harm:
herewith he drew his sword, and taking up his hatchet again, marched toward
them that came against him, who charged him very sharp and roughly: yet the
first he encountered with, followed the iaylor, so did the second, and the
fourth being smitten on his knees to the ground, had dyed, but he appealed for
mercy, the other twain bearing him company in the same suite. Cast down your
weapons, said Amadis and show me them that complained so woefully: which they
did, guiding him the way to the captives, when Amadis hearing another voice
somewhat near him, demanded what he was. My Lord, replied the Soldier, it is a
Lady in extreme anguish. Open the door, quoth Amadis, that I may see her. Then
one of them ran where the iaylor lay dead, and taking two keys from his
girdle, opened the dungeon where the Lady was enclosed: but she imagining the
iaylor entered, cried. Alas man, take pity on me, and oppress me with no more
torments. Ah King, quoth she, breathing forth a bitter sigh: hard was my lot to
be beloved of thee, seeing I buy my affection so dearly. Her grievous moanes
moved such co^pation in Amadis, as the tears trickled down his cheeks,
returned her this answer. Lady, I am not the iaylor that locked you here, but
the man who means to deliver you hence if I can, a strange Knight, seeking my
fortune every where. Alas my Lord, said she, what is become of the iaylor and
his companions? He and some of them, answered Amadis, are sent to hell to look
their copes-mates: then one of the Soldiers having brought a light, the Prince
saw how the Lady was tied by the neck with a great chain, which had so worn
and disployed her garments, as the naked flesh appeared in many places, and
when she beheld that Amadis pitied her, she thus spoke. Although (my Lord) I
am at this present sequestered from al my lifehood, yet time has been, when I
was the wealthy daughter to a King, and for a King you find me in this misery.
Lady, quoth Amadis, it behooves you to embrace patience, these are but the
mutabilities of fortune, which no one is able to prevent or escape: and if the
man for whom you have thus suffered, be of any account, or loves you, I am
sure he will convert right soon this poor estate into rich abundance, and
remunerate your long sorrows with joy and gladness. So he caused the chain to
be taken from her neck, commanding garments to be brought and put about her:
wherefore he that brought the lights, ran for a scarlet mantle, which Arcalaus
not long before gave the iaylor, and cast it about the Ladies shoulders. This
being done, Amadis took her by the hand, conducting her forth of the dark
prison, saying; She should never return thither again, but he would loose
before: and passing by where the iaylor and the other lay slain, the Lady
began thus to complain. Ah cruel hands, how many wo^s and torments have you
given me, and diverse in this Castle without desert? althought your bodies at
this instant cannot receive co^digne ve^gance, your damned souls may evermore
abide in sufferance Madame, said Amadis, while I go to deliver the rest of the
prisoners, I leave ye in my Squires custudy: so passing on to the port-cullis,
he met the Soldier that brought the lights, saying. Sir, Arcalans demands
wheree the Knight is that entered here, whether he be dead or taken. He who
carried the tore^ before the Prince, was so afraid at these words, that he let
it fall, which Amadis made him take up again, thus speaking to him. Villain,
searest thou being in my guarder go on. The^ assending the stairs, they came
into the open Court, where they saw the greater part of the night was spent,
the Moon shining clear, and the weather fair but the Lady feeling the air,
and beholding the hea^, was so repleat with joy, that she fell on her knees
before Amadis, saying. Ah gentle Knight, the Almighty protect thee, and requite
the good (...) have received by thee, delivering me from comfortless
darkness. Amadis looking round about for Gaudalin, and finding him not,
fearing he had lost him, wherefore he said? If the best Squire in the world be
dead, I will take such revenge for his death may I but find his (...) derer; as
never was the like heard before. Being thus overcome with grief, he heard
one cry, wherefore he ran which way he thought best, and found the Dwarffe
(that parted from him the night before) hanging by one leg on high at a great
piece of wood, having a fire underneath him full of filthy stinking savors:
and near him he espied Gandalin tied to a tree, toward whom he was going to
unbind him, but he saw the Dwarffe had greatest need of help, wherefore he
cut the cords in twain that held him up, catching him in his arms to set him
on his feet, afterward he unloosed Gandalin, saying: In sooth my friend,
whosoever entreated thee thus, made little reckoning of thy good deserts. Now
because he would deliver the other prisoners, he met the Lady coming forth of
the Castle, as he returned back again, but going on, he found the gates fast
shut against him: whereupon he stayed til day light in a corner of the Court,
sitting down by the Lady, accompanied with two of the Soldiers, the Dwarffe
and Gandalin. And as they communed together, Gandalin showed the Prince a place
where-into he saw a horse led, which Amadis being desirous to see, came to the
door and found it shut, but he ran so strongly against it with his foot, that
he made it fly open, finding the horse there ready sadled and bridled, whereon
he mounted, attending the day and sight of Arcalaus, who he knew was already
arrived at the Castle, by matters he heard of Gandalin and the Dwarffe. In
mean while he conferred with the Lady, demanding what the King was she loved
so deerly, and for whom she had sustained such injury. Worthy Lord, quoth she,
Arcalaus getting intelligence, of the Princes affection toward me whom I love
so loyally, this devilish enchanter being his mortal enemy: thought he could
be no better revenged on him, then by depriving me of his presence, imagining
the grief here-of would be greater to him then any other. Being thus
persuaded, he stole me away, at what time I was with many great personages, who
were not able to give me any succor, by reason of the traitorous villainous
sorceries: for they could not devise what was become of me, because a
wonderful dark cloud environed me, which hindered them from following me to
this place, since when, I never saw light till now you brought me forth. The
disloyal wretch said by the way as he brought me, that he would be revenged on
my love and my self by these means: I poor soul enduring the torments, and
my love the grief of my absence, yet ignorant where. Madame, said Amadis, I
pray ye name the man you spoke of. It is King Arban of Norwales, answered the
Lady, whom it may be you know. I know him right well, replied Amadis, for he is
one whom I deerly love, and now do I less pity your sufferings then before:
because they have bin for one of the best men in the world, who will so well
recompense them, as by rendering you incomparable joy, your love and honor shall
both be satisfied.

While thus they communed together, fair day appeared, when Amadis saw a
Knight leaning in a window, who thus demanded. Art thou he that did kill my
iaylor and my servants? Art thou he, answered Amadis, that so treacheroufly
puts knights to death, abusing likewise both Ladies and Gentlewomen? by
heaven thou art one of the vilest villains that ever I heard of. As yet thou
know not, said Arcalaus, the uttermost of my power, but soon shall thou
have experience thereof, to rid thee of such boldness in asking me what I can
do, whether it be wrong or right. Here with he went from the window, and nor
long after came down into the Court, being well armed, and mounted on a lusty
bay courser. Now you must note that this Arcalaus, was one of the mightyest
Knights in the world, yet no Giant, wherefore when Amadis beheld him of such
stature, he doubted not of his great force and strength. Arcalaus perceiving
he eyed him so much, demanded what moved him so to do? I imagine, answered
Amadis, that according to thy large proportion, thou should be a man of
exquisite Chivalry: but thy perverse and human actions are a foul blemish
thereto. Now trust me said Arcalaus I think my self highly beholding to
fortune, who has brought thee hither to make me such a smooth sormon: but all
this will not help thee, therefore defend thy self. So charging their
Lances, they brake so bravely on their Shields, as the shiuers flewe up into
the air, and with such violence met their horses and bodies, that they were
both laid along on the ground. Quickly they arose, and with their swords
began a bloody combat, wherein desire of victory, and hauty resolution of
vnco^querable courage, made the^ continue a long time, till Arcalaus retiring
aside, thus spoke to Amadis. Knight, thou art in danger of death, and because I
know not who thou art, tell me, that when I have slain thee, I may yet commend
thy boldness in entering here. My death, answered Amadis, is in the hand of God
whom I reverence, and thine in the power of the Devil, who is weary of helping
thee: and bequeatheth thy body to so innumerable mischiefs, as a present
perishing of soul and altogether. But seeing thou would so gladly know my
name. I am commonly called Amadis of Gaul, Knight to the Queen Brisana: let
us now then chat no longer but fall to the combat, for on my part I promise
no more resting. Arcalaus advancing his Shield, came with foming fury against
Amadis, who knew full well how to welcome him: and such eager strokes past on
either side, as their shields were scattered in pieces about them, and likewise
many plates of their Armor. Now was it about the third hour, when Arcalaus
having sustained great loss of his blood, was forced to send up and down
before his enemy, and seeing the imminent death before his eyes, fled to that
part of the Castle where he came out: yet Amadis by close pursuit still
continued his fear, whereupon he stepped into a chamber, at the door whereof
stood a Lady beholding the combat, and he was no sooner entered the room, but
he caught up another swotd, turning his face to Amadis, saying. Enter this
chamber to make an end of our combat. The open Court, answered Amadis, is more
spacious and convenient. I will not come forth, quoth Aro^laus, for thy
pleasure. What? said Amadis, think thou so slily to escape? so placing his
shield before, he entered the chamber: but as he lifted up his sword to strike,
he was deprived of strength and the use of his members, so that he fell to the
ground as he had been dead. Yea mary, said Arcalaus, this is the way to make
thee dye as I desired, sleep then till I wake thee. How say you Lady? quoth he
to her that stoodby, am I not (in your opinion) well revenged on him? Indeed
said she, he is now altogether at your commandment. Presently he unarmed him,
Amadis not feeling any thing was done to him: afterward Arcalaus put on
himself the Princes Armor, thus speaking to the Lady. Madame, look (on,
peril of your life) that no one remove him hence, until his soul have
forsaken his body: then he intended to journey to the court, where each one
seeing him in the Armor of Amadis, might think he had slain him.

But now the sorrowful Lady so lately delivered from prison, made such moan as
would have melted a heart of Adamant, and what Gandalins countenance was, you
may easily judge: when Arcalaus saw the Lady lament, he said. Dame, seek
some other to deliver you from prison, for I have dispatched your hardy
Chamhion. These words made Gandalin in such despare, as he fell down like one
senseless, and Arcalaus called the Lady to him in this manner. Come hither
mistress, and you shall see him dead that durst so boldly combat with me.
When he had showed him to her, he demanded if he were not now quiet enough, The
comfortless Lady seeing him in such estate, wanted no tears to express the
abundance of her grief, and withal: Ah God, quoth she, how yrksome will the
report of his death be to many? then Arcalaus calling his wife, said. So so
oue as this wretch is dead, imprison this Lady where she was before, for I will
go to the Court of King Lisuart, and there declare how I combated with Amadis,
by covenant, that the conqueror should cut off the head of the vanquished, and
within fifteen days following, to publish his victory openly in great
Britain. By these means none shall quarrel with me about his death, and I
shall obtain the greatest glory in the world, having overcome him that
conquered every one. The^ went he where he left Gandalin and the Dwarffe,
commanding them to be locked up in a prison: but Gandalin who wished death,
thinking his master was dead indeed, would not go with him, desiring some
one to (...) him: and to enforce Arcalaus do him so much favor, reviled him
with names of traitor and villain, having slain the most* loyal knight in
the world, Arcalaus made no account of his words, but beacause he would not go
willingly, he dragged him by the ears, and thrust him into the dungeon,
saying. If I presently kill thee, thou should endure no more pain, but
here thou shall suffer worse then death. So mounted Arcalaus on the horse of
Amadis, and accompanied with three Squires, rode toward the Court of King
Lisuart.

CHAP. XX.
How Amadis was ^^t baunted by Arcalaus, when he would have delivered the Lady
Grindaloya, and other from prison: and how afterward escaped the enchantments
by the aid of Vrganda.

GRindaloya the Lady delivered by Amadis from prison, made such excessive
lamentations for him, as every one pitied her, she thus speaking to the wife
of Arcalaus, and the rest in the company. Ah fair Ladies, behold ye not the
beauty of this brave Gentleman, who in so young years was the only Knight in
the world? mis-hap attend on such, who by enchantment, in jury men of virtue:
O sovereign creator, why do thou suffet so bad minded people to live? The
wife of Arcalaus, who though her husband was addieted to shameless cruelty,
yet she being of gracious and pitiful disposition, grieved in her very soul
to behold his dealings, and continually prayed for his amendme^t, comforting
the woeful Lady so well as she could. As thus they were devising together, they
saw two other Ladies enter the chamber, each one bringing in her hand good
store of candles lighted, which they set round about on the cantons of the
chamber: finding Amadis thus lying before the wife of Arcalaus and the rest,
they being not able to lift or stir him. Then one of the Ladies so lately
there arrived, took (out of a little casket she carried) a Book, whereon she
began to read, and diverse times another voyse answered her. As thus she
continued her lecture, many other voices were heard, as they imagined them more
then an hundred: then came another book flying into the chamber, seeming as if
the wind carried it, and seeming down at her feet that (...), she pulling it
in four parts, burned he at the four corners of the chamber where the candles
stood. This done, she returned to Amadis, and taking him by the right hand,
said. Lord Amadis arise, you have slept too long uneasily (...) Immediately,
Amadis awaked, and vising up, thus spoke. Alas where am I? I marvel that I am
alive. Believe me Sir, answered the Lady, such a one as you are must not dye in
this sorts, rather will the heavens (...), that they who have deserved it shall
^y by your hand. Herewith the two strange Ladies, not saying any more, returned
the same way they came, leaving Amadis much amazed at this adventure, and
looking about for Arcalaus: but he was advertised by Grindaloya, how he was
gone to the court of King Lisuart, clad in his Armor, and mounted on his
horse, to report that he had stain him in combat. Indeed I felt, quoth
Amadis, when he unarmed me, but on my faith me* thought I dreamed, and seeing
he is gone with my (...), I will make his to serve me at this time. Having put
on the aim or of Arcalaus, he demanded of Grindaloya, what was become of
Gandalin and the Dwarffe: she told him they were imprisoned. Evil befall the
villain that so hardly used them, say de Amadis (...) and Lady, quoth he to
(...) wife, upon your life look to the safety of this noble woman till I
return. Coming fourth into the Court, it was a pastime to see how Arcalaus
servants fled his sight: but Amadis let them run, and went to the dark
vncomfortlesse prisons which were filled with captives.

Now to tell ye in what distressed manner they were, you must note, the place
was a vault of an hundred toyses long, yet no more the^ one foot and a half
in breadth, without air or light, and (which was worst of all) so full of
prisoners, as they could scantly stand one by another. Amadis called Gandalin,
who being in a manner dead, hearing his masters voice, began to tremble: yet
thinking it was not he, because he verily imagined him to be dead, entered into
diverse doubts of himself, whither he dreamed, or was enhanted. All this while
Amadis greatly grieved, because Gandalin made no answer, wherefore he called
aloud again: Gandalin where art thou? why do thou make me travail so much?
speak I pray thee. When he saw (for all this) Gandalin answered not, he asked
the other prisoners, if a Squire so lately brought in there, was dead or alive:
but the Dwarffe remembering the voice of Amadis, cried out. Alas my Lord, we
are both here together alive as yet, albeit we have often enough wished for
death. Then Amadis caused candles to be lighted at the lamp, which hung at the
entrance of the dungeon, commanding them all to come forth, to their no little
joy and comfort, seeing themselves delivered from such miserable servitude: and
when they came into the open Court, they fell on their knees before the Prince,
thanking God and him for this happy benefit. Amadis beholding their faces so
pale, wan, and ouer-spent, seeming rather bloudlesse ghosted then living
creatures, was moved to exceeding compassion, especially they being an hundred
and fifty prisoners in all, and thirty of them were Knigh^ Arms: as he cast
his eye e^ where among the^, he made (...) account of one then all the (...),
who notwithstanding his sickness and debility, seemed of brave and comely
constitution, and he perceiving that Amadis noted him so much, stepped to him
in this manner. Who shall we say (my Lord) has done us this grace, by
delivering us from so long wretched thraldom? Such as know me, answered the
Prince, do call me Amadis of Gaul, Son to King Perion, Knight to the Queen
Brisana, and domisticall servant to king Lisuart her husband: in search of a
Knight I was brought hither by this Dwarffe; to whom I made promise in a suit
he had. In sooth my Lord, replied the other, I am a Knight likewise, and
servant to the same King, who knows me full well, as likewise the most in his
Court do, with whom I have been seen in greater honor then now I am: because
ever since my departure from the Court, I have lived in the misery from which
you redeemed me. How may I call your name? said Amadis. Brandoyuas, answered
the Knight. Full well did the Prince remember, that he had heard report of him
in the Court, wherefore courteously embracing him, he said. Right glad am I,
my stars so favored me, to deliver you and these other from such a hellish
place: and though I never saw you til this present, yet often have I heard the
King and his Barrons talk of your Chivalry, your long absence being no
little grief to them. The rest of the prisoners confessed their bounden duty
to him, desiring him to appoint them what they should do: he willing them to
shape their course whether they thought best. My Lord, quoth they, albeit we
know not what several Countries may harbor us, yet will we still continue
your devoted servants, to attend on you when and wheresoever need shall
require. So each one kissing his hand, they took their lean, limiting their
iournys as they thought good, not any of them tarying with Amadis, but
Brandoyuas.

Now go they to the wife of Arcalaus, Amadis thus speaking to her. Lady, for
your sake and these other Gentlewomen, I forbear to set this Castle on fire,
albeit the evil behavior of your husband is sufficient warrant therefore: but
in regard of the courtesy Knights owe to Ladies, I am content to remit all at
this time. Alas my Lord, quoth she, heaven bears record of the grief my
soul has endured, through the behavior of Arcalaus my husband: yet could I
do nothing but show obedience, as beseemed a wife to her wedded Lord, with
intercession for his change, notwithstanding, I remain at your disposition.
What I will do, answered Amadis, I have already told ye, it now remains,
that at my request you give this Lady Grindaloya honorable attirements, because
her birth and behavior deserves no less: in like manner, I would have an
Armor for this Knight, to requite his own which was taken from him, and a
horse as beseems one of his profession. If you mislike of my demand, do more
or less as you think good, but for mine own part, I will have hence the
armor of Arcalaus in liew of mine, and his horse, by reason mine own was
better: yet must I tell ye withal, that he has taken a sword from me more
worth then all the rest. Sir, answered the Lady, your request is so reasonable,
that beyond the power you alone have here, I stand bound in duty to fulfill
your commandment. Then sent she for the same armor belonged to Brandoyuas,
and caused a horse to be delivered him: as for the Lady, she brought her into
her chamber, where she clothed her in most sumptuous accoustrements, and
returning to Amadis, desired him to eat somewhat before he departed, whereto
he willingly condiscended. Now was the best viandes brought forth, so short
warning might afford, but Grindaloya was in such have to be gone, as she was
loath to be troubled with any: whereat Amadis and Brandoyuas merrily smiled,
especially at the Dwarffe, who looked so pale and wan with fear, that it was
impossible for him to offer one word, which made Amadis, thus to jest with him.
Tell me Dwarffe, will thou that we tarry here till Arcalaus come, and I to
give thee the suite thou desire? In sooth, my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, so
dear has the request cost me I made to you, as (while I live) neither of you
or any other will I crave the like: for Gods sake then let us be gone ere the
Devil come again, for I cannot stand on the leg he hung me by, beside, my
nose is so full of sulphurous and stinking smells, as never shall I give over
sneezing till I die. The Dwarffes words made them all laugh heartily, and after
they had repasted, Amadis bidding Arcalaus wife farwell, mounted on horseback
with his company, the Lady thus speaking at his departure. I shall pray Sir
Knight, that God may send peace between my husband and you. Believe me Lady,
quoth he, though I never care for it with him, yet shall it remain twixt you
and me, because you deserve it. So fortuned it after-ward these words took
effect, and highly profited the good Lady, as in some part of this history you
shall hear recited.

Now are they departed from the Castle of Arcalaus, riding till the night
ouer-tooke them, lodging at a Ladies place five leagues thence, where they were
entertained with very gracious welcome: and on the morrow, after they had
thanked their friendly host, as they rode together, Amadis thus communed with
Brandoyuas. Courteous Sir, I travail in search of a Knight, as here-tofore I
told ye, and imagining it will be little pleasure to you to follow me, it were
not amiss then if we parted. In sooth Sir, answered Brandoyuas, I gladly would
go to King Lisuarts court, notwithstanding, if you think it good, I will
keep ye company. Little need shall I have thereof, answered Amadis, I thank
ye, because I must be constrained to wander alone, so soon as I have brought
this Lady into such safety as she thinks meet. My Lord, quoth she, I will
accompany this Gentleman if you please, seeing he trauaileth to the Court of
King Lisuarts: and there I hope to find him for whom I was prisoner, who I am
assured will be glad of my deliverance. Now trust me, answered Amadis, very
well said, go then together, and God be your guide. Thus are they separated,
now remaining none with Amadis but Gandalin and the Dwarffe, of whom the Prince
likewise demanded what he meant to do. Mary be your trusty servant, said the
Dwarffe, if you like so well as I. I am well pleased, replied Amadis, and thou
shall do what thou will thy self. In sooth my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, seeing
you released me, I would gladly remain in your service, for I know not where I
may be half so well: the man and the master being both agreed: they took
their way as fortune liked to conduct them.

Not far had they travailed, but they met one of the Ladies, that rescued him
from enchantment at Arcalaus Castle, she weeping and mourning very grievously:
which moving Amadis to pity her complaints, made him demand the cause thereof.
A Knight who rides not far before, quoth she, has taken from me a little
casket, wherein is matter of great consequence, yet no way able to pleasure
him: for such things are therein, as within these three days one in my company
and my self, restored from death the best Knight in the world, and she
likewise of whom I tell ye, is violently carried away by another Knight, who is
ridden before intending to force her. Here you must observe, that the Damsel
now talking with Amadis, knew him not, by reason his helmet beuer covered his
face: but when he heard how her casket was taken from her, he never left
gallopping till he ouer-tooke him, to whom he thus spoke, Knight, you deal
not courteously, giving this Lady cause thus to complain of you, and
me-thinkes you should do a great deal better, to deliver the casket again you
took from her: but when the Knight heard him, he fell in a great laughter.
Why do ye thus laugh Sir? said Amadis. I laugh at you, answered the Knight,
whom I think scant wise in giving conncell to him that demands it not, the
less hope may you have in speeding in your suite. it may be, quoth Amadis, you
care not for my words, yet it were good to deliver the thing is none of yours.
Belike you threaten me the^? said the Knight. Not you Sir, answered Amadis,
but your overmuch boldness in using force where it ought not to be. Is it true,
quoth the Knight: with these words he set the casket aside in a tree, and
returning to Amadis, said. If your bravery be such in deeds as it seems in
words, come teach me know it and receive the law. So giving the spurs to
their horses, they encountered together in such sort, as the Knight being
dismou^ted, his horse fell so heavily on him, that he was not able to rise
again: in mean while Amadis fetched the cofer, and delivering it to the
Damsel, said. Take your own fair Lady, and tarry here till I bring your
companion. Presently he posted after the other Knight, ouer-taking him at a
thicket of trees, where he had tied both his horse and the Ladies, trayling her
by the hair of the head into the wood, there to commit his villainous desire,
but Amadis cried to him aloude in this manner. Of an evil death may thou dye
traitor, that wronest a Lady in this sort without offending thee. As the
Knight strougled with her to get her into the wood, he looked up and saw
Amadis, whereupon he left her, making speed to his weapons and mounted on
horseback, then approaching near the Prince, he said. By my hand Knight, in
hapless time for thee did thou hinder me of my will. Such a will, answered
Amadis, as dis^th honor; both men and beasts despise. If I take not revenge for
it, quoth the knight then let me never wear armor again. The world therein
shall sustain a great loss, replied Amadis, of one addicted to such villainy,
that seeks to force Ladies, who ought in all liberty and honor to be defended,
and so they be by all loyal Knights: With a brave course they met together,
when though the knight brake his lancs, yet was he hurled against the ground
so violently, as the weight of his armor and strength of his fall, made him
lie trembling in a trance. Which Amadis perceiving, to rid him out of his pain
altogether, he trampled on his belly with his horse feet, saying. Thus shall
thou loose thy desire of forcing Ladies. And as for you fair soul, I hope
hereafter you are rid from any danger of him. The more am I to thank you my
Lord, quoth she, would God my companion who has lost her casket, were as well
delivered as I am. She was the first, I met withal, answered Amadis, wherefore
first of all I succored her so well, as she has recovered what was taken from
her, and beaholde where my Squire conducteth her hither-ward.

Now because the heat was somewhat violent, Amadis put off his helmet to take
the air, when the Damsel immediately knew him: for it was she that at his
return from Gaul, conducted him to Vrgand the unknown, when by Chiualry he
delivered her friend at the Castle of Bradoyd, which made her remember him, and
so did Amadis her, when alighting they embraced each other, the like courtesy
be showed to the other Damsel. Alas! quoth they, had we but dreamed on such a
defender, no villain could have wronged us half so much. On my faith, said
Amadis, the help you gave me within these three days, may notbe compared with
this matter of no validity: for I was in greater extremity the^ you, but how
could you possibly understand thereof? My Lord, (quoth she that took him by
the hand when he was enchanted) mine Aunt Vrganda sent me to the Castle of
Arcalaus, by whose means we came thither, and you were recovered. Heaven
shield from evil that good Lady, answered Amadis, who has so many ways
bound me her obedient servant: and you fair Damsels, the messengers of this
favor, have you any thing else wherein to command me? No my Lord, said they,
take you the way you left, and we will return from whence we came. Fare well
sweet Virgins, replied Amadis, remember my humble duty to the health of your
Mistress, telling her, she knows right well I am her Knight. In this manner
rode the Damozels one way, and Amadis another: wherefore we must now tell what
happened to Arcalaus, since his departure from the Castle of Valderin.

CHAP. XXI.
How Arcalaus brought news to the Court of King Lisuart, that Amadis was dead,
which caused his friends to make manifold lamentations and regreets, especially
the Princess Oriana.

SVch speed made Arcalaus after his departure from Valderin, where he left
Amadis enchanted, he being (as I have said) clad in his armor, and mounted on
his horse: that the tenth day following, he arrived near the court of king
Lisuart, who was riding abroad in the fields to take the air, accompanied
with his Lords along the forest side. They seeing Arcalaus come a far off,
having on the armor of Amadis, imagining it was he indeed, diverse rode before
to welcome him: but when they came more near, they found themselves deceived,
by reason Arcalaus had his head and hands unarmed, wherefore without saluting
the Gentlemen, he stepped to the King with these words. Sir, I come to acquit
a promise wherein I stand bound, namely to let you understand, how I have
slain a Knight in battle, that some-time bare these arms. And albeit I must
be content to declare mine own praise, which were more honorable for me, being
reported by another in mine absence: yet am I constrained to do no less,
seeing the covenant was between me and him whom I have slain: viz. that the
conqueror should dispoyle the vanquished of his head, and present it before
you as this day. Full loath was I to be so cruel, because he told me he was
your Queens Knight, commonly called Amadis of Gaul, and so he named himself
whom I vanquished. As for me Sir, I told him in truth that I was Arcalaus,
whom fortune has graced with such singular favor: for I have slain the man,
some-time owner of this armor and horse, which as a testimony of my victory I
brought with me. Ah God, said the King, is then the most virtuous and
accomplished Knight in the world dead? you lowering heavens, why began ye so
brave to course in him, and now on such a sudden to cut it off? These
sorrowful news provoked sighs and tears, both in the King and his royal
company, which Arcalaus perceiving, not speaking any thing else, returned the
same way he came, feigning himself likewise very sad and grieved: but you must
think he went not without great store of curses, every one instantly desiring
God, to send him an evil and speedy death, which with their Swords they could
gladly have bestowed on him themselves, but that they heard how Amedis was
slain by an accorded battle.

The King being overcome with pensiveness and sorrow, returned to the Town,
where these news were so opened to every one, that at length the Queen and
her Ladies heard thereof, which presently converted their former pleasures in
to mourning. At this time was the Princess Oriana in her chamber with the
Damsel of Denmark, where hearing the sudden clamor and noise, she commanded
her to go understand the cause thereof. Alas good Lady, too soon was it
brought to her, for no sooner was she acquainted with the death of Amadis, but
her immoderate passions expressed the anguish of her heart: and more to afflict
this gentle Princess, the other Ladies came weeping into her chamber, saying.
Ah Madame, what tongue can deliver this wonderful mishap? yet durst she not
(good Lady) be too forward in enquiring the manner thereof, least the ^cinders
of her affection might be discovered: and as if she had beheld Amadis dead
before her, she said. Alas! he is dead, it can not be otherwise. It is true
madame, answered the Damsel, but what remedy? you must not likewise die for
company. These words made Oriana fall into a swoune, which the Damsel of
Denmark beholding, thought she had too indiscreetly brought her these bad
tidings, whereupon she called the Princess Mabila, saying. Help Madame, my
mistress dies. She being come, saw that she neither moved or breathed,
doubted least life had taken leave indeed, wherefore she commanded the Damsel
to shut the door, to the end her love all this while so well concealed, might
not break forth into open suspicion. Then unlacing her garments to give her
more liberty, as also bathing her temples and pulses with vinegar and cold
water, she recovered again, when deliring a faint sigh, with a feeble voise
she thus spoke. Ah sweet friends, hinder me not in the way of death, if you
desire my rest, and would have God find him another world, who knew not how to
live one day without me. Ah flower and mirror of chivalry, thy death is
insupportable not to me alone, but to the whole world, who is replet^ with
grief for thee, because they have lost him who in bounty, prudence, hardines,
and all other virtues, did honor them above the compass of all desire. And
were yet any feeling in thee, I am certain thou would not sorrow for thy
lost life, but for my love, enduring by thy miss maruailous afflictions: for
thou have left such honor in the world behind thee, conquering so incomparable
reputation in this short time of thy life, that (rekoning thy merits) thou
diedst possessed with many years. Thus live thou in place immortal, I
remaining here alone after thee, can give but wounding and unthankful
speeches. Ah cruel death, sufficed it not that mighty love murdered him with
his feathered steel, but thou must kill him outright with thy curelesse
stroke? well, in respect it is so, offend not thy self my love, for thou shall
soon see reason proceed from her that did thee wrong, who being the cause,
will bear thee company in death. And I may justly challenge him of wrong,
seeing equal love had united our wills to separate our persons in this sort:
where having affoorded our ending together, we likewise might have inioyed one
sepulcher. After these words she swounded again in Mabilaes arms, and in such
manner altered her countenance, as they reputed her verily dead, her fair and
golden locks being discheueled, her arms and legs deprived of vital
motion, even as when the soul has taken his flight, from the body. Mabila
desparing of any life left in her, was so surprised with grief, that she was
constrained to leave the Damsel alone with the Princess, and walking
somewhat aside by her self thus lamented. Incomprehensible wisdom, let me
not live to endure these travails, seeing thou have taken these two from me
whom I loved as my life. But when the Damsel of Denmark saw her self thus
alone between two extremes, she was maruailously abashed: yet as one wise
and well governed, she spoke in this manner to the Princess Mabila. Why
Madame? when were you wont to abuse your honorable virtues? is it now time to
forget your self? will you thus consent to the death of my Lady? you rather
ought to aid and comfort her, then thus to forsake her, and procure her
further danger if she revive again. Come I pray ye succor her, for now is
the time of greatest needs, and let these lamentations be referred till another
time. Mabila perceiving the Damsel said true, wherefore she came to Oriana,
and feeling by her warmenesse some hope of life to be expected, they lifted
her upon the bed, when soon after her spirits returned to their office: and to
qualify this agonit, they could devise no better means, then to busy her
ears with some or other speeches. Why Madame? quoth one, will ye leave us? at
least yet speak to us. Madame said the other, your Amadis is yet alive and
well. At the name of Amadis, she opened her eyes, turning her head here and
there as if she looked for him: which good humor Mabila desirous to continue,
proceeded thus. Amadis comes Madame, and shortly you shall see him. Oriana
giving a great sigh, started up, saying. Alas sweet friend, where is he? We
understand, quoth she, that he is in very good health, and how the Knight who
brought these bad tidings, is wont to vaunt of himself without cause, feeding
himself with false praise of deceruing Knights. Why? said Oriana, have I not
heard that he brought his horse and armor? A matter of nothing, answered
Mabila, they may as well be borrowed or stolen, or he (happily) sent with that
false alarm, to try our constancy: then finding us thus weakly disposed, he
should have had the thing he desired. I would not have you think so simply
Madam, that Amadis could be overcome by one and no better a knight then he, nor
were it reason to credit a commender of himself, bringing his own glory for
testimony and no other approbation: I am assured that Amadis will come ere
long, and if he find you not only dead in a manner, but thus given over to
grief: it will cost his life, so shall you deliver unhappy proof, what wicked
feigning by malice can do, and thus you both shall die one for another, When
Oriana remembered, how by this mean she might be the death of her friend, if by
good hap he yet enjoyed life, and imagined likewise that Mabila spoke the
truth^ she took courage, casting her eye on the window, where many times
Amadis and she had amorously conferred, when first he arrived at her fathers
Court, and intercepting a number of forced sighs, thus spoke. Ah window, the
witness of my aba^doned pleasures, how piercing is the doubt of him whom thou
causest me remember, and by whose gracious words both thou and I were made
happy? Of this I am certain, that never can thou endure so long as two so
loyal lovers might (by thee) enjoy such delight as he and I have done: which
failing me now, gives me strange and insupportable torments to be my
companions, and henceforth shall my sad spirit remain in bitter sadness,
until the coming of him or my death. Mabila perceiving the cheifest danger
was past, labored to confirm her opinion more strongly then she had done, in
this manner. Why Madam? think you if I held these babbling news for truth, I
could have the power to comfort you in this sort, the love I bear to my Cousin
is not so little, but rather I should incite all the world to weep, then want
consolation for you, who stand in such need thereof. But I see so slender
appearance of belief, as I will not before time require, repute you
unfortunate, because discomforting our selves without asurance: The evil
hereby may be amended, and the good made much more worse, especially it will be
the mean of disconering, what has so long time been shaddowed in secret.
Alas, quoth Oriana, if he be dead, I care not though our love were openly
known for all our mishaps in respect of it are nothing.

Thus debating and devising together, the two Ladies all that day kept their
chamber, not suffering any other to come in, for when the Damsel of Denmark
(who passed often in and out) was demanded for Oriana, she answered that she
accompanied Mabila, whom she would not suffer to part from her, by reason of
her grief for her Cousin Amadis. Thus was the princesses secret sadness
covered, all night she being unable to take any rest, such were her assaults
between doubt and despair, not forgetting any thing that past between her and
Amadis since their younger years. But on the morrow about dinner time,
Brandoyuas entered the palace, leading Grindaloya in his hand, which gave great
joy to such as knew them, for of long time they could not imagine what was
become of them: they falling on their knees before the king, were quickly
called ^oremembrance, his majesty thus speaking. Sir Brandoyuas, how chance
you have tarryed so long from us? Alas my Lord, quoth he, imprisonment has bin
the cause, whereout (had not the good Knight Amadis of Gaul, given liberty to
me, this Lady and many more, by such deeds of Arms as are unspeakable) we
could never have been delivered. Yet was he once in danger of tarying there
himself, by the villainous coniurations and sorceries of Arcalaus: but he was
succored by two Damsels, who delivered him from all the exorcismes. When the
King heard him name Amadis, whom he verily thought to be dead? What my friend?
quoth he, by the faith thou owe to God and me, is Amadis living? Yea my good
Lord, answered Brandoyuas, it is not ten days since I left him in good
disposition: but may it like you to tell me, why you demanded such a question?
Because, said the King, Arcalaus yesterday told us he had slain him:
heere-with he declared his speeches, and the manner how. What a traitorous
villain is that? replied Brandoyuas, but worse is befalne him then he weeneth
as yet: hereto he added what passed between Amadis and Arcalaus, as already
you have heard, whereby each one forsook the sorrow of the former false news,
the King presently commanding, that Grindaloya should be conducted to the
Queen, that she might understand these happy tidings.

Into the Queens chamber is she brought, and the Damsel of Denmark hearing
her report, ran with all speed to the Princess Oriana, who hearing by her
the truth of all, the passage of her speech was stopped for a long time, seeming
as one confounded with enchantment, thinking in these news she gave her the
bag, or that she dreamed them, but when she recovered the use of her tongue,
she thus answered the Damsel. Alas my friend, did I rave? or toldest thou me
that Grindaloya testified to the Queen, how Amadis is not dead? In good faith,
quoth the Damosel, I came but even now from her highness chamber, where
Grindaloya declared how Arcalaus had deceived the^. Happy be this hour, said
Oriana, but I pray thee go tell my mother, that Mabila entreates her to send
the Lady to comfort her: which she did, returning right soon with Grindaloya
to Oriana. I leave to imagine whether she were well entertained or no, with
all the modest courtesies so glad tidings deserved, likewise whether Oriana and
Mabila gave her audience, when she recounted Amadis deeds of arms at
Valderin, the misery of her and many other, the danger whereinto he fell
afterward by the enchantments of Arcalaus, from which he was delivered by two
strange Damsels. The discourse hereof so pleased and contented them, that I
think Grindaloya had an endless task in the reporting, for Oriana must hear
every thing often redoubled. But repeating the dangers of Amadis, and the
misery from which he delivered the poor captives, caused tears so thick as
winters hail to trill down her cheeks. Thus tarried Grindaloya all day wiih
the two Princesses, and had not so soon departed, but that she was
advertised, how that King Arban of Norwales, (who loved her dearly) expected
her return in the Queens chamber. Good reason had she to take leave of
Oriana, and seek him from whom she suffered such sorrow: But when these
loyal lovers met together, each one was delighted so substantially, as
Grindaloya thought her griefs well recompensed. Now because the Queen
understood, how she was daughter to King Ardroyd of Seralis, and all her
miseries had been for the love of king Arban: with instant entreaty she
procured her stay in the Court, doing her all the honor and favor could be
devised. Grindaloya was not curious in granting the Queens request, because
king Arban was partaker in the same suite: by this occasion the Queen was
advertised, that she had a maruailous fair sister named Aldena, who was
nourished in the Duke of Bristoyaes castle, which made her presently dispatch a
Gentleman thither, with request that the Duchess would send her to the Court.
This Aldena was the friend to Galaor, she for him suffered such injury by the
Dwarff as you have heard before discoursed. We have a long time continued with
Amadis, now let us return again to Galaor, leaving King Lisuart in hope to
see him soon in his Court, whom Arcalaus said he had slain in combat.

CHAP. XXII.
How Galaor came very sore wounded to a Monastery, where hesoiurned five days
attending his health, and at his departure thence, what happened to him shall
be declared in this Chapter.

Five days together aboade Galaor at the Monastery, whether he was conducted
by the Damozell he delivered from prison, attending there the recovery of his
wounds: but when he found himself able to wear his Armor, he took leave of
the sisters, and rode on his journey, even which way fortune pleased to guide,
for he had mind to no part more then another. About midday he arrived in a
valley, in the midst whereof stood a fair fountain, where he found a knight
armed having no horse: Galaor maruailing thereat, demanded if he came thither
on foot, the knight returning this answer. Believe me no, but riding through
this Forest to a Castle of mine, I met with certain thieves that slew my
Horse: thus am I brought into the flate you behold me, by reason my servants
hear not of my misfortune. Why? You shall have my Squires monture, answered
Galaor. I thank you fir, quoth the Knight, yet before we part hence, you
shall know the great virtue of this fountain, for there is no poison in the
world so strong, that has any force against this water, wherefore by reason of
so sovereign a benefit, often times enuenomed beasts do drink here-of, and
are presently healed: beside, diverse of this Country use to come hither, and
find redress for all their infirmities. In sooth you tell me meruailes,
replied Galaor, and seeing I am now so near it, I will alight to drink
thereof as others have done. Good r^ason you should answered the Knight,
because you are ignorant of coming this way again. Galaor leaped from his
Horse, bidding his Squire alight to drink as he did: but while they were
drinking, the knight clasped on his own head Galaors helmet, and taking his
Lance mounted on his Horse, when leaving the Prince drinking he rode away,
saying. Farewell Knight, I must be gone, tarry thou here to beguile another as
I have done thee. Galaor lifting his head from the water, and seeing the Knight
make such have away, thus called to him. Ah villain, never did thief such a
tteacherous pranck as thou have done: for thou have not alone deceived me, but
committed an act of great disloyalty, which thou shall well know, if ever I
meet with thee. Yea mary, answered the knight, rest your self there, till you
recover some other mean to combat with me.

Gone is the Knight so fast as he could gallop, leaving Galuor chafing like a
mad man, but seeing there was no remedy, he mounted on his Squires horse and
pursued him, til at length he came to a double way: when not knowing which of
them to take, because he had lost the sight of him, he stood still in great
pensiuenes, till at length he saw a Damosel come riding a pace toward him, of
whom he demanded, if she met not a knight mounted on a bay Courser, bearing in
a white sheeld a vermilion flower. What would you with him? replied the
Damsel. I would quoth he recover again my horse and Arms, for they be mine,
and by false villainies he has carried them from me. When happened this? said
the Damsel: wherewith Galaor told her all the discourse. Well, quoth the
Damsel, what can you do to him being thus unarmed? for I think he took
them not away to restore them again. I care for nothing else, said Galaor, but
to find him once more. Trust me, answered the Damsel, if you will grant me
one boon, soon shall I bring ye together again, Galaor being very desirous
hereof, agreed to any thing she would demand. Follow me then, quoth she, so
turning her horse, rode the same way she came, keeping company a while
together: but the Damsel being better mounted then he, left him behind with
his Squire, and rid before so fast, that they had lost the fight of her,
travailing the space of 3. miles without any news of her, but at last on a
great plain they saw her return again, here you must note, that the cause of
her riding thus before, was to advertise the other knight (being her dear
friend) of their coming, and he had expressly sent her to fetch Galaor, to
deceive him of the rest of his Armor: which he imagined easily to do without
danger, seeing he had gotten the chiefest thing of his defense, and afterward
he intended to kill him, or put him to some nororious shame. For this cause he
tarried in a Pauilion, erected by him on the plain, and no sooner came she to
Galaor, but thus she spoke. Gentleman, to the end I might not fail in my
promise, I forsook your company a while, only to see if the man you look for,
were in the place I left him or no: there have I found him little thinking on
your coming, and in yonder Pauilion may you speak with him at pleasure. As
thus they devised together, they came to the Tent, wherefore Galaor alighted to
euter, but the Knight meeting him at the door, said. Sir knight, what moves
thee to come in here without license, trust me it is but little for thy profit
because thou must here leave the rest of thine Armor, or die presently. Thou
may be therein deceived, answered Galaor, and the words of such a wretch as
thou art cannot fear me.

This reply very angerly incensed the Knight, lifting up his sword to smite the
Prince on the head, but Galaor cunningly escaped the blow, giving his enemy
such a stroke on the top of his helmet, as made him set one knee to the
ground: then quickly laying hold on him, got the helmet beside his head,
spurning him so strongly with his feet, that therewith he fell on his face to
the earth. When the Knight beheld himself in such danger, he called with a
loud voice to the Damsel for succor, where-upon she stepped to Galaor,
saying: that he should hold his hand, for this was the boon he promised to
give her. But he being in extreme choler, gave no care to her speeches,
bringing the Knight into such estate, as he left no vital motion in him:
whereat the Domosell being ready to despair, breathed forth many grievous
lamentations, saying. Alas wretch that I am, too long have I trifled time: for
in seeking to beguile another, my self am worthiely requited with deceit. And
thou traitor quoth she to Galaor, who have thus cruelly put him to death,
heaven send thee a more worse and hapless end, for by thee have I lost my only
felicity in this world: for which (be well assured) it shall cost thee thy
life, because thou have broken promise with me, and in such a place will I
demand revenge on thee, as nothing but thy death shall expiate my anger, were
thou a Knight of greater hardiness then thou art: if then thou make refusal
there, I shall have more then just occasion to publish in all places, the
pusillanimity of thy faint hearted courage.

Fair Damsel, answered Galaor, if I had thought his death would have been
so grieuons to you, I could have spared part of my displeasure, though justly
he deserned no less, but you spoke when it was too late. The worse for thee,
replied the Damsel, because thy death shall recompense his. Galaor seeing
she continued her threatening speeches, without any further answer left her,
lacing on his helmet, mounting on the horse the dead Knight took from him: and
having ridden a pretty while, he looked back to see if the Damsel followed
him, when perceiving her hard at his horse heels, demanded of her whither she
travailed. With thee, answered the Damsel, and never will I leave thee, till
I have found opportunity to request the boon thou did promise me, which shall
be the loss of thy head by some evil death. Me thinks it were better, said
Galaor, for you to take some other satisfaction of me, and happily might be
more pleasing to you. Not any thing else, quoth she, thy soul shall accompany
his whom thou have slain, else ne-uer shall thou accomplish what thou have
promised me. Well, well, answered Galaor, I must stand to the hazard of that
as I may: thus quarreling, they rode on three days together, and entered the
Forest of Angad^ze, an adventure there happening to them, whereof the Author
hereafter makes mention.

But now he returns again to Amadis, who taking his leave of Vrgandaes
Damsels, as you have heard before recited: rode on till about noone time, when
issuing forth of the Forest, he saw on a plain a very fair Castle,
whereout came a goodly Chariot, so bravely equiped as ever he beheld any, it
being drawn by two brave red steedes, which were covered with imbroydered
crimson satin, as it made a very dainty and seemly show. The Chariot was
guarded by eight armed Knights, yet Amadis being desirous to see who was in it,
drew somewhat near to lift up the rich covering, but one of the Knights came
to him with these rough words: Keep back Sir Knight, and be not so bold to
come thus near. What I do, answered Amadis, is for no harm. Whatsoever it
be replied the other, trouble your self no further, in respect you are not
worthy to see what is here covered: for if you enterprise the like again, it
will value your life, because thou must deal with all in this troop, and some
such one is amongst us, as is able alone to get the maistrie of thee, more
easily then may we altogther use thee as we list. I know not, said Amadis, the
Knights valor you speak of, but hap good or bad, I will see what is in the
Chariot. Herewith he took his Arms, which the two Knights seeing that rode
foremost, they ran both against him, the one breaking his Lance, and the other
missing: but Amadis sped otherwise, for the first very easily he cast from his
saddle, and the other he threw both horse and man to the ground. Then Amadis
went toward the Chariot, yet was he stayed by two other Knights, one of them
being likewise dismounted, and with his sword he gave the other such a welcome
on the pate, as he was glad to keep himself from falling by catching fast
hold about his horse neck, when the other four saw their companions so used
by one Knight, they maruailed not a little, and being willing to revenge their
injury, altogether fiercely charged Amadis. With this last assault he found
himself sore combred, for one of them tainted him in the shield, and another
in his armor, as he escaped hardly from being overthrown: notwithstanding
he held out valiantly, delivering such strokes to the first he met, as he
fell beside his horse in a swoune. The three that remained turned their faces,
seeking which way they might soonest hurt him: but he snatched a Lance from
one of them, which yet remained whole, and met one with such a full carriere,
that piercing quite thorough his throat, he fell to the ground and gave up
the Ghost.

After his death, he came to another of them, and with his sword smote the
helmet from his head: when seeing he was a very ancient knight, having his
head and beard so white as snow, moved with pity, he friendly thus spoke.
Father, henceforth it were good you left the use of arms to younger then your
self, seeing you have lived so long without gayning honor or commendation,
marry your age does now excuse ye. In good faith answered the Knight, your
speeches are very contrary, because if it be seemly for young men to seek
renown and fame by arms: it is more necessary that an ancient man should
do his endeavor, to maintain those affairs so long as he can. Believe me
Father, said Amadis, your reason is good. While thus they talked together,
Amadis saw him who was first unhorsed, make great have toward the Castle, and
so did the other which were wounded: wherefore he approached to the Chariot,
and lifting up the covering, beheld there a tomb of Marble, having a crowned
King figured thereon, clothed in his royal ornaments, yet was his Crown and
part of his head some what severed aloof from the rest. Hard by sat a very
ancient Lady, and near her a young Damsel of most excellent beauty, whom very
graciously he saluted, speaking to the ancient Lady in this manner. I pray ye
tell me Madam, what figure is this which you accompany so carefully? What Sir
Knight? quoth she, (not knowing her gardants were discomfited) who gave you
permission to see our secrets? None other, said Amadis, then my desire thus to
do. In good faith, quoth the Lady, this is in you a great part of presumption,
and I marvel that my Knights would suffer it: then putting her head forth of
the Chariot, she saw some of them slain, others flying to the Castle for
their safeti, and some ran after their Horses that were escaped, whereat she was
so amazed, as she thus cried out: Ah Knight, cursed be the hour of thy birth,
who have done me this cruel outrage. Madam, answered Amadis, your people
assailed me: but now may it please ye to satisfy my demand? Never shall thou,
quoth she, be resolved therein by me, having offered me such monstrous abuse:
so saying, she caused the horses to hie away with the Chariot. Amadit,
beholding her so agreeued, would trouble her no more but rode on his journey:
then were the dead bodies put into the Chariot, and presently conveyed into the
Castle.

Now had the dwarffe heard all that passed between Amadis and the Lady, but
he knew not what was within the Chariot, wherefore he desired to know of his
Master. I cannot tell thee, quoth he, for she would make no answer thereof to
me. In sooth, said the Dwarffe, it is strange that women have learned to hold
their peace. As thus they rode beguiling the time, on a sudden they espied the
old Knight now unarmed, gallop apace after them, crying so loud as he could to
Amadis, that he should stay, which he did, when he delivered him this message.
My Lord, I come to you by commandment of the Lady whom you saw in the Chariot,
and she being willing to make amends for the injury she did ye, desires you to
take a lodging this night in her Castle. Ah Father, replied Amadis, I found her
in such grief for the debate between me and your companions, that I think my
pre^^o^ will rather be hurtful then pleasing to her. Assure your self, said
the knight, your return will be very acceptable to her. Amadis thinking a
knight of such years would have told no leasing, was content to go with him,
seeing with what affection he colored his speeches and by the way he demanded
of him, why the pictures head was made in such sort, b^ would tell him nothing,
saying, the Lady would thoroughly resoule him in all. Being come to the Castle,
he faw the Lady and the Damsel awayting his coming on the bridge, who bad
him very heartly welcome. Ladies, quoth he, I would be glad to do you good,
but (...) ye. When he was entered, he faw a great many armed men, who
flocking about him, cried. Yield Knight else thou art but dead. Not shall you
said he, with my will, keept me your prisoner. So he laced his Helmet, but he
had no leisure as yet to take his shield, so sharply was he assailed by his
enemies: yet did he worthily defend himself, sending them to the Earth he met
withal, at length by the multitude of his assaylants, he was driven into a
corner of the Court, which he recovering, and keeping them therein all before
him, endomaged them much better then he did before. But while he was thus
combatting, he saw the Dwarffe and Gandalin carried into prison, whereat he
conceived such displeasure, as being exempt from fear of death, he laid such
load on his enemies, that no one durst come near him: albeit they were so
many, as often times he was in danger to fall on his knees, yet looking for no
mercy at such men's hands, would dearly buy his death among them, causing
diverse of them to fall dead at his feet. And the divine bounty regarding him
in pity, delivered him from this peril by the young beautiful Damsel, who
marking his brave behavior in Chivalry, intended to save him, calling one of
her women to whom she said. The gallant mind of this Knight moves me to
compassion, so that I had rather all mine should die, then he, therefore follow
me. Why Madam? answered the Gentle woman, what mean ye to do? Let loose my
Lions, answered the Lady, that they may be scattered, who offer wrong to the
best Knight in else world: and thou (being my vassaile) I comm and there
presently to go let them loose. Which she durst not deny, but immediately sent
them forth of the Cave: then the Lady to make them retire that combatted with
Amadis) cried to them: Look to your selves my friends, for the Lions are
gotten loose by some mischaunce. The men being all afraid, fled up and down
to shun the fury of the beasts, but the Lions made such speed after them, as
diverse they ouertooke and rent in pieces. When Amadis saw himself thus rid of
his enemies, seeing the wicket of the Castle was yet open, he went out and held
the door fast to him, while the Lions devoured the other in the Court.

In this manner Amadis escaped his bloody foes, yet was he so ouer-trauailed,
as he could hardly sustain himself: Wherefore he sat down on a stone,
holding his Sword still ready drawn, a great part whereof was broken, and the
Lions being yet so hungry, as they ran about the Court to seek way into the
fields: nor was there any man in the Castle so hardy, that durst come down to
shut them up again, no, not the Damsel who had the government of them, for
they were so chafed, as no obedience was looked for in them, nor the wisest of
them knew how to remedy it: Except the old Lady should entreat the strange
Knight to let them forth, imagining because she was a woman, he would grant
her request sooner then to the rest But she considering her false dealing
toward him, durst not adventure to move the suite: Yet when she beheld it was
her last refuge, she put her head forth of the window thus speaking to
Amadis. Although (Sir Knight) we have entreated ye very hardly, yet let your
courtesy excuse what is past: and to save our lives, open the ga^e that the
Lions may come soorth, to the end our present fear may be quallifyed, and they
raunge the fields as is their desire. This favorable kindness let us obtain at
your hands, whereby we shall yield amends for the wrong we have done ye: and
on my faith I swear to you, our intent was no otherwise the^ to gain you our
prisoner, until you consented to be our knight. Madame, answered Amadis, you
should have labored your determination by a more honest way: for without
constraint I would willingly have yielded my self, as I have to diverse Ladies,
who know full well my service. Will ye then Sir, quoth she, open the gate? No,
replied Amadis: wherewith she went from the window, and the young Lady
trembling showed her self, thus calling to Amadis. Ah gentle Sir, such are
within here, who could not suffer the injury done to you, the better they
deserve to find some favor. With such seemly modesty uttered the Lady these
words, as Amadis asked her, if she would have the gate opened? Yea mary Sir,
quoth she, I humbly desire ye. Presently he arose to obey her request, but she
willed him to stay awhile, till the old Lady warranted him assurance from the
rest of her servants: nor could he but commend her wit and discretion, who
getting him security from all the Castle, made promise likewise, that Gandalin
and the Dwarffe should be delivered from imprisonment. Then came the ancient
knight, of whom we spoke before, and calling to Amadis, he said. Because me
thinks (Sir) your Shield is greatly impared, and your sword in like manner
broken, take this shield and this mace, wherewith you may defend the Lions when
they come forth: so throwing the mace and the shield down, Amadis willingly
took them up, returning this answer. Let me never be in grateful to them
that succor me in need. By heaven, said the knight, seeing you use loyalty
to worse then beast, no doubt is to be made of your mercy to reasonable
creatures. Amadis opening the wicket, the Lions furiously ran forth, and he
entered the Castle, which they within perceiving, came with the Ladies to
entertain him, desiring pardon for their offenses committed, and presenting
him Gandalin and the Dwarffe. By my soul, said Amadis, never was I so misused
upon no occasion, but seeing all enmity is ouer-blowne, you must give me a
horse, for your servants (I thank them) have slain mine. Sir knight, answered
the old Lady, it is now somewhat late, if you please to unarm your self, and
rest here this night, to morrow you shall have a horse, or what else you need.
In hope you mean no worse then you say, quoth Amadis, I will not refuse your
offer, because the time does request no less.

Foorth-with was he unarmed in a sumptuous chamber, and a costly mantle brought
to wrap about him, then returning to the Ladies who attended his coming, they
were stricken into admiration of his excellent beauty, but much more at his
valor being so young: and casting his eye on her, at whose entreatance he let
forth the Lions, he reputed her one of the fairest that ever was seen, but he
spoke nothing to her as yet, by reason her proceeded in this manner with the
old Lady. I pray ye Madame let me understand, why the picture which I saw in
the Chariot, has his head so separated. Sir Knight, quoth she, if you will
promise to accomplish the covenants, before you be acquainted with the
accident: I will tell ye, if not, I pray ye hold me excused. It were no reason
Madame, replied Amadis, to promise any thing ouer-lightly, being ignorant to
what it may relate: but if you will let me hear the covenants, they seeming
reasonable, and in compass of a Knights power to execute, fear not to tell
me, for I will employ my uttermost therein. You have reason, answered the Lady:
then causing each one to withdraw, except the fair young virgin, she thus
began. Understand gentle Sir, that the figure of stone you beheld, was made in
the remembrance of this Ladies father, who lies entombed in the Chariot, being
in his time a crowned King, but on an especial festival day, as he held open
Court and royal, he was assailed by his brother the uncle to this maiden,
who came to tell him, that the Crown he wore was his, by as good right as he
could clame it, they being both issued from one root. Then drawing a sword,
which he had hid under his mantle, gave him such a stroke therewith on the
head, that it parted in such sort as you saw in the picture. Long time before
did the ^^aitour excogitate this treason, and to the end he might the better
execute it, he consederated himself secretly with certain of the Kings
servants, by whose means he waxed the stronger in his enterprise. But the King
being dead, this disloyal wretch was honored with the Crown, for the
murdered Prince had no other heir then this his fair daughter, whom the aged
Knight that brought you hither had in guard, he showing himself so faithful
to her, as he conuaied her thence ere her uncle could take her, and performed
such painful diligence, that he brought my orphaine Niece hither for her
better safety. After-ward finding the mean to recover the body of the King her
father, each day we put into our Chariot, riding therewith about the fields as
you saw us, we having all sollemnely sworn not to show it to any one, unless
by force of arms we should be compelled thereto: and though such a one
happened to see it, yet would we not reveal why we conducted it so, except he
would promise to revenge this horrible treason. Now if you be a noble Knight,
bound to prosecute virtue, and on so just occasion, you will employ the forces
God has lent ye in a matter of right: for my part, I will continue as I begun,
until I find two other Knights on this behalf that you three for us may
confou^d the traitor and his two sons, who will allow no combat, unless they
fight altogether, which they have often published abroad: how such as will
reprove their dealings, must come in this sort. In sooth Madame, answered
Amadis, great reason have you to seek means of revenge, for the most famous
injury that ever I heard of, and he who has done it, surely cannot long
endure without shame and misfortune, because heaven scorneth such monstrous
actions: but if you can bring it to pass, that one after another they will
come to, the combat, by the help of God I shall dispatch them. Ah sir, quoth
she, they will never consent hereto. What would you have me do then? (replied
Amadis.) Mary if it stand with your liking, said the Lady, a year (...) to
repair hither again, if you live so long, you shall find some other here,
for by that time I hope to get two knights more, and you the third to maintain
this quarrel, I promise ye, said A^^dis, not to fail in this request,
therefore never trouble your self to seek other twain, because I mean to
bring them with me, yea, such as shall well defend the right of this Lady, and
revenge the treason done the king her Father. These words he spoke in respect
he hoped ere then to find his brother Galaor, and intended to bring his Cousin
Agraies with him, by whose assistance he doubted not to finish the enterprise.
Right humbly the Ladies thanked him for his good will, and because, quoth they,
they whom you must deal withal are valiant, rough, and expert in Arms, as any
the circle of the world enjoys: we request your choice may be made of such
Knights, as shall be able to run through this work. Believe me Ladies,
answered Amadis, if I had found one I am in search of, I would not stand long
studying for the third, were our enemies Devils and no Men. Tell us then gentle
Sir, said the Lady, if you please, of what Country you are, and where we may
find you in time of our need? Madame, quoth he, I am of King Lisuarts Court,
Knight and servant to his Queen Brisana.

By this time was supper ready, and the tables covered, wherefore they brake
off talk and went into a very fair Hall, where such good cheer and honor
was made him, as might be devised, even until the hour of rest came. The good
night being given on all sides, by the Damsel that let loose the Lions, he
was conducted to his chamber, where she kep^ him company a^ indifferent while,
and among other speeches, she vtt^^^d this. You have her near you my Lord, who
succored you this day more then you imagine. Wherein fair Lady? answered
Amadis. My self, quoth she by commandment of the young Princess, she
pitying your peril and the wro^^ offered you: was charged to let loose the
Lions from their Deene. I never saw, replied Amadis, (...) more wise and
discreet Lady of her years. In sooth, said the Damosel, if she live, she shall
be endued with two extremities, the one in beauty, and the other in wisdom. I
desire ye, quoth Amadis, to thank her most humbly on my behalf, and how in
acknowledging the good she did me, henceforth I will remain her Knight. I am
well content my Lord, answered the Damsel, to carry her this message, because
I know it will be most wel-come to her: so bidding him good night, she
departed the chamber. Now was Gandalin and the Dwar^^ lodged in the next room
where they heard what had passed between Amadis and the Damsel, and because
the Dwarsse knew nothing as yet of his Masters love to Oriana, he imagined
some new affection was kindled between the young Princess and him, in respect
of the offer he made to be her Knight. And to such end did he retain this
opinion, as woeful Amadis after-ward had sm^ll joy thereof: for hereby he
thought to receive a cruel death, as in continuance of this History shall be
declared. The night being spent and bright day appearing. Amadis came to bid
the Ladies farewell, requesting to know their names against whom he should
combat. The Father, quoth the Lady, is named Abiseos, his eldest son,
Darrison, and the other Dramis, all 3. most valiant Gentlemen atarms, excelling
al other in that country: which like wise is commonly called Sabradis^,
consining on the Kingdom of Serolys. Very well replied Amadis, by Gods leave
we shall one day see what they can do. When he was armed, as he mounted on a
lusty courser, the ancient Lady had given him, the young Princess presented
him a goodly Sword, which sometime belonged to the King her Father, saying. Sir
Knight, I pray ye henceforth (for my sake) to wear this Sword so long as it
will last, and I shall pr^y it may be helpefull to you in all your affairs. I
assure ye fair Lady, answered Amadis, for your sake will I carefully keep
it, and thank you therefore with all my hear: here of like wise ye may be
persuaded, that I remain to obey you, and shall aid you in all things
concerning your estate and honor. Well might it be discerned in the Lady, how
these humble thanks and his former offer, pleased her not a little, wherefore
the Dwarffe, (who noted the gestures on either side) softly said to her,
Madame, you have this day made no small conquest, having so good a knight at
your commandment.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Amadis departed from the Ladies Castle, and of the matters which were
occurrent to him by the way.

AMadis being gone from the Ladies Castle, rode on without finding any
adventure, till he entered the Forest of Angaduze, and the Dwarffe riding
somewhat before, saw a far off, a Knight and a Damosel coming toward them.
When the Knight came right against the Dwarffe, he drew his sword to offer him
outrage: but he started aside, so that the blow lighted on his shoulders,
wherewith he was in such fear, as he fell down from his horse, crying out for
help to his Master, who seeing when he smote him, made have for his defense,
thus speaking to the Knight. What mooues you (Sir) to wrong my Dwarffe without
cause: now trust me it is but simple manhood, to lay hand on such an
excrement of nature as has no defense of himself, but being in my guard the
presumtion is great. I am sorry sir, answered the Knight, to give you any
displeasure, but I must needs take his head from his shoulders, because it is
my gift to this Damosel. Sooner said Amadis, shall thou loose thine own. So
encou^tred they together, with such force, as they were both cast beside their
horse^ yet ^y recovering thems^, they began a most sharp and cruel combat
with their Swords. Now were they in greater danger of their persons, then ever
they had been before, for their Shields being (...) in pieces, their ^ds
colored with their blood, their A^ broken, their helmet^ battered, and
themselves so ^ore labored: as they were constrained to draw back a while to
take breath, when the knight that conducted* be Damsel thus spoke to Amadis.
My friend you may judge the danger wherein we both may fall, if longer we
continue the Combat: therefore I pray ye let me have my will on the Dwarffe,
and I will amend the offense afterward, if it may be termed an offense to
you. What? said Amadis, do you think me of such slender stomach, as that I
will suffer any thing of mine to be wronged in my presence? not so, I must and
will defend him to the vtter-most. And I must needs have his head, answered
the Knight. By Heaven quoth Amadis, one of ours shall first acquit him and that
immediately. Here with they charged each other again, with such wonderful
courage appearing in either, as several desire to gain the honor of the
combat, made them show extreme violence one against another: so that the best
resolved of them both thought to die; by abundance of blood which issued from
infinite wounds on his body, especially the Damsels champion, who thought he
felt himself greatly impairing, yet made he no show thereof, but held out with
such brave viuacity of spirit, as his enemy found he had a hard task in hand.

At this instant an other knight chanced to pass by, who seeing the
combattants (...) (...) against each other, determined to ^^pect who should
depa^^ with vic^: and placing himself by the Damsel, demanded if she (...)
them, or the cause of their (...), I must needs know them answered the
Damsel, because I set them together as you see, and this good hap is not a
little pleasing to mee^ for it is impossible but one of them must die, nor do
I greatly (...) which of them, it be, but if both end together, my joys would
be the greater. Now trust me, said the Knight, full well do you manifest a
wicked disposition, practicing (for your pleasure) the death of two such brave
men, whose health and safety you rather ought to desire, then imagine such a
disloyal thought toward them: but tell (...) I pray ye, what reason you (...)
(...) hate them so? That can sufficiently, quoth she. He whose shield is most
defaced, is the only man of the world, to whom mine Uncle Arcalaus wishes
most harm, he being named Amadis. And the other that combats with him, is
Galaor, who not long since, slew the chiefest man I loved. It so fe^^ out, that
Galaor heretofore (...) me promise of any thing I would request, and because
this day I (...) most affectionate to his death: I have brought him to deal
with such a one, as will hardly permit him to escape with life. For I knew the
other to be one of the best Knights in the World, (...) whom this Dwarffe
(which you see) attends: I therefore desired Galaor to give the little
villains head, being persuaded Amadis would rather lie then suffer it. Thus
the one to deliver (...) my request, and the other for (...) Dwarffes defense,
are fallen into the extreamitie of their lives, which does me good at the heart
to behold. By my conscience Damsel, replied the Knight, I never thought such
malice had remained in a woman of your sort, and I believe assuredly (being yet
so young) if longer you live, you will accustom yourself to such vilainie as
this you begin withal: whereby you shall infect the air and the other
elements, to the disadvantage of the honest and virtuous Ladies living at this
day. But to shield them from such danger, and these two good Knights, whom
treacherously thou would should kill each other, I will make a Sacrifice of
thee according to thy deserts: then lifting up his Sword, he smote her head
quite from her shoulders, that it fell on the ground at her horse feet,
saying. Take the reward of thy merits, for the love I bear to thine Uncle
Arcalaus, who kept me his prisoner, till the virtuous Knight Amadis delivered
me: then running to the combatants, he cried out aloud: Hold Lord Amadis, hold
your hand, for the man you fight against is your brother Galaorr. When Amadis
heard these words, he threw down his Sword and Shield to the earth, and
embracing Galaor, said. Alas my friend, my brother, rightly may I be termed
the most unhappy Knight in the world, offering you such outrage as I have done.
Galaor amazed at this adventure, knew not what to say: but seeing how Amadis
humbled himself on his knee, he fell down likewise, defiring pardon, reputing
himself wonderful unfortunate, in wronging thus his Lord and brother: then
Amadis weeping with inward conceit of joy, thus answered. Noble brother, and
my friend, I esteem the passed peril well i^ployed, because is bears witness
of what we are able to do. So taking off their helmets to refresh themselves,
they hearrily thanked the Knight that thus caused their acquaintance: whereupon
he told them all what the Damsel said, and the execution he committed on
her. Now trust me, quoth Galaor, never was false strumpet more rightly served,
and now am I dischargd of the promise I made her. All the better for me, said
the Dwarffe, and thereby have I saved my head: yet I marvel why she should
hate me so much, in respect I never saw her till now to my knowledge. Then did
Galaor at large discourse, what happened between him, the Damsel, and her
friend, as you have heard already rehearsed: but the Knight that separated
them, seeing their Armor all covered with blood, thus spoke to them. My Lords,
your Armours deliver testimony enough, how discourteously your Swords have
entreated your bodies, wherefore me thinks long tarrying in this place, will
but endanger your wounds: let me request ye then to mount on horseback, and
accompany me to the Castle, whether you shall not only be welcome, but find
help for your hurts by one skillful therein. We will not refuse your gentle
offer, said Amadis. Let us set forward then answered the Knight, and happy
shall I think my self, in doing any service that may be liking to you: for
you Lord Amadis delivered me from the cruel imprisonment, as never poorknight
endured the like. Where was it I pray? replied Amadis. At the castle, quoth he,
of Arcalaus the enchanter, when you restored so many to liberty. How are you
named? said Amadis. Balays, answered the Knight, and because my Castle is
cleped Carsanta, I am often termed Balays of Carsanta, therefore my Lords use
me and mine as your own. Brother, said Galaor, seeing the Knight repureth
himself so much bounden to you, let us go with him.

In short time they arrived at the Castle of Balays, where they found Gentlemen
and Ladeies that courteously entertained them: by reason Balays had sent them
word before, how he brought with him the two best Knights in the world, Amadis
who delivered him from the strong prison of Arcalaus, and his noble brother
Galaor. For this cause were they welcomed much more honorably, and brought
into a goodly chamber to be unarmed, where likewise stood two costly beds, and
a table furnished with sovereign medicines for their wounds, the cure whereof,
two Ladies (being Neeces to Balays) undertook, for they were very learnedly
skilled in Surgery. Now did they employ their uttermost cunning, to
recompense Amadis for his worthy pains, in restoring their Uncle from the
slavery of Arcalaus: so that within few days, they felt themselves
indifferently amended, and almost able to bear their Armor as they did
before. Here-upon, Amadis coming with his brother Galaor, declared how to
seek him, he departed, from the Court of King Lisuart, promising not to
return without his company: wherefore he entreated him to yield no denial,
in respect no Princes Court was better frequented with Chivalry, nor could he
find more honor in any other place. My Lord, quoth Galaor, I intend to
accomplish what you please to command me, albeit I desire not as yet to be
known among men of account: first would I have my deeds give some witness,
how desirous I am to imitate your proceedings, or else to die in this religious
affection. Certes brother, answered Amadis, for this matter you need not
abandon the place, seeing your renown is already greater then mine, if so be I
have any at all: yea it is darkened by the illustrate splendor of your
Chivalry. Ah my Lord, replied Galaor, never disguise matters in this order
with me, seeing not in deeds, no, not so much as in thought, am I able to
reach the height of such honor. Leave we then this talk, said Amadis, for our
kingly father makes no difference of virtue between us: but will ye know what
I have presently devised? I see well we must stay here longer for our health,
then otherwise we would, for which cause I intend if you think good, to send
my Dwarff before to King Lisuarts Court, that he may advertise the Queen of
our stay, and so soon as we are able to travail, we mean not to tarry long
from her. Do as you please, answered Galaor. Presently was the Dwarffe
dispatched thence, who made such good speed in his journey, as within few days
he arrived at Windsore, where King Lisuart was then accompanied with many good
Knights.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How King Lisuart being in the chase, saw a far off three Knights armed
coming toward him, and what followed thereupon.

IT chanced on a certain day, that King Lisuart summoned a meeting in Windsore
Forest, which was well stored with red Dear, and all other game needful for
hunting. And as he was in chase of a Heart, he espied a good distance from him,
three armed Knights to cross the way: wherefore he sent a Squire to them, with
request that they would come unto him: upon this message they immediately
obeyed, returning with the Squire to the King, and when they drew near him, he
quickly knew Galuanes, because he had seen him many times before: when
embracing him, the King bad him heartily welcome, and the rest in his company
likewise, for he was a Prince, that most graciously entertained all Knights,
especially strangers: then he demanded what the other were. My Lord, quoth
Galuanes, this young Prince is my Nephew Agraies, son to the king of Scotts,
and one of the best Knights in the world I dare assure ye: the other is Oliuas,
whom your Majesty has well known heretofore. The King embraced them very
lovingly, saying to Agraies: Fair Cousin, I must needs take this gentleness
very kindly, that you would voutchsafe to see me. As for you sir Oliuas, I
thought you had forgotten us, considering the long time since you were here:
and in sooth it is a matter very displeasant to me, when so good a Knight as
you are would so absent himself. Dread Lord, answered Oliuas, my earnest
affairs kept me hence against my will, which has made me the more negligent
in your service: and yet I am not free from them, as (if you please) I shall
let ye understand. Then he reported, how Galuanes and Agraies came to his
Castle, by means of the Damsel that conducted them thither, whom they very
worthily delivered from death: likewise how the Duke of Bristoya treacherously
slew his Cousin, for which he humbly craved Justice, with free liberty to
combat before his Majesty, where he doubted not to make him confess his
treason. After the King had well pondered his discourse, and understood the
hard dealing of the Duke: he was highly discontented for he knew Oliuas Cousin
to be a good Knight, whereupon he thus answered. Believe me seeing the Duke
has committed such a fa^k, and you request justice of me, assure your self to
obtain it, and I will send for him to come justify it in person.

Presently the King gave over hunting, returning with the 3. knights to his
court, conferring on many matters by the way: among which the King demanded of
Galuanes, why the Duke of Bristoya would have burned the Damsel whom they
reskued. Because Sir, quoth he, she brought a knight named Galaor into his
palace, and (as we understand) it was in the night time, and no other reason
had he to allege. Why? said the king, Amadis is gone to seek Galaor, but
since his departure we were put in a terrible fear, by Arcala^s, who said he
had slain him. But are you certain sir, answered Agraies, that he lives? Yea
indeed, quoth the king, Brandoyuas and Grindaloya came hither since then, and
they gave us such credible testimony of his welfare, as I may full well assure
ye thereof: for loath am I to offend any other, because no one can desire his
good and honor more then I do. It is the argument af your good nature replied
Agraies, likewise in respect of his bounty and valor, he deserves to be
loved of you, even with like affection as good men wish to their like.

By this time are they come to the Court, where these news were quickly brought
to the Queen, which rejoiced very many, especially fair Oliuia, who loved
Agraies deerer then her self, and the Princess Mabila his sister was not
sorry: for as she came from the Queens chamber, she met Oliuia, who thus
spoke to het. You cannot choose (Madam) but be well pleased with your Brothers
coming. Very true, quoth Mabila, for I love him as mine own heart. Desire
then I pray ye the Queen, said Oliuia, to send for him to her chamber, to the
end we may have the mean to confer with him together, so shall the pleasure of
you both be fully satisfied. That shall I do, answered Mabila, so going to the
Queens chamber, she thus spoke to her Majesty. It were good (Madam) you should
see my brother and mine Uncle Galuanes, in respect they are come hither to
honor you with their service. Sweet friend, said the Queen, I take it very
gently that you have so well advised me, for I promise ye I am very desirous to
see them: wherewith she sent one of her Ladies to the King, desiring him that
they might come to her, which he liking very well, said. Gentlemen, my Queen
is desirous to see you all three, let me then request your consent herein. You
must judge if Agraies liked this motion, because he certainly knew to find
there, the princess Oliuia, the choice Lady and Mistress of his heart. But
when they came among the Ladies, their entertainment was good and gracious,
especially by the Queen her self, who caused them to sit down by her, as
meaning matter of more private conference. Many familiar speeches were
entercoursed between them, and practicing by all means to welcome them
honorably: for she was the only Queen of the world that soonest could win
the hearts of Gentlemen, and therein took no little pleasure, by means
where-of, she was loved of most and least, being reputed the most virtuous Lady
living.

Now had Oliuia made choice of her place next Mabila, thinking Agraies would
soonest come to his sister when he left the Queen: but while he beguiled the
time with her, his eye glanced on the object of his heart, which he being
unable to dissemble, was compelled to a sudden alteration of countenance, and
could not withdraw his looks from the Adamant of his thoughts: which the
Queen somewhat noted, yet imagined his Sister Mabila was the cause, and that he
was desirous to talk with her, wherefore she thus spoke to him. My Lord
Agraies, will ye not see your sister whom you love so deerly? Yes Madam, quoth
he, so it please you to give me leave? Here-with he arose and came to Mabila
who stepping forward to meet him you must think Oliuia was not one jot behind
her, but welco^med him both with semblable reverence. But Oliuia loving him as
you have heard, (ouermastring her will with reason, as a most wise and well
advised Princess) gave little in outward show: till after sundry amiable
speeches passing between them three, they had some leisure to stand a while
asunder from all the rest. Yet did Agraies keep near his Mistress, taking her
by the hand, and playing with her fingers often sent her a sweet kiss in
imagination: so that by entire regarding her, he was transported with such
singular delight, as he neither heard or made any answer to his sister. She
being ignorant as yet of his disease, knew not well what to think, for
notwithstanding all her courteous speeches, his mind was otherwise busied then
on her: yet in the end she discovered the cause of this sudden mutation,
perceiving that Oliuia and her brother were surprised with each others love.
Whereupon she thought it best to favor them with more libery, seigning a desire
to speak with her Uncle Galuanes, which she prettily colored in this manner.
Brother, quoth she, I pray ye entreat the Queen that my Uncle may come
hither, because it is long time since I saw him, and I have, somewhat to
acquaint him with all secretly. I hope to obtain so much of her, answered
Agraies: whereupon he went to the Queen and thus spoke. Madam, if you could,
spare mine uncle a little, you might do his Niece a very great pleasure, for
she is desirous to talk with him. And reason good, said the Queen: at which
words Galuanes went with him, which Mabila seeing, she humbly met him, making
great reverence, when Galuanes using the like to her, began in this manner.
Fair Niece, I am glad to see you in such good disposition: but tell me I pray
ye, do you like Scotland or this Country better? We shall confer, quoth she,
more conveniently at the window, because I have many things to tell ye, which
were needelesse for my brother to understand: nor shall he, they being of such
importance as they are. These words she uttered smiling, and with a marvelous
good grace: cheefely because her brother might court his friend alone. And well
said Niece, answered Galuanes, our secrets are so great, as they must needs
be kept from him. So taking her by the hand, they went aside to one of the
windows, by means whereof, Agraies and Oliuia were left alone: When the
Prince perceiving he had liberty to speak, trembling in abundance of
affection, he began thus. Madam, to accomplish your commandment when you
parted from me, as also to satisfy my heart which never enjoys rest, but in
the gracious contentment, conveyed thereto through mine eyes by your presence,
I am come hither to serve and obey you: assuring you on my Faith, that being
near your person, my spirits seek themselves viuified in such sort, as they
suffer with great strength the anguishes of continual affection, which makes
them dead in time of your absence. Therefore I desire ye (if it be your
pleasure) to limit me some better hap hereafter, in place where I may often
see and do you service: And as he would have proceeded further, Oliuia
interrupted him in this manner. Alas my Lord, I am so assured of the love you
bear me, and also of the grief you endure, we being absent one from another:
as no other proof is required, then what mine own heart does plainly
testify, smothering a displeasure worse then death it self: whereto
oftentimes I could very gladly submit my self, did not a cheerful hope
rebacke this despair, how one day our love shall meet together with happy
contentation. And persuade your self, that I daily travail in remembrance of
our mutual love: mean while (sweere friend) remporize and dismay not.
Mistress, said Agraies, you have already so bound me to you, as I must (in
duty) temporize till time you please, but I desire ye to consider, how I have
no forces, but such as you must fortify me withal: so that if you cou^y your
graces to me as you have beg^ I shall have strength to sorue according to your
deserts. While I live my Lord, quoth she, never will I fail ye, be you then
so well advised, as every one may love and esteem yet: whereby I may strive to
love you more then any other can, in respect you are none of theirs, or your
own, but mine only. And if it happen some to speak of you, you must think I
receive incomprehensible joy therein, for it cannot be without recital of your
haughty courage and chiualry: yet my heart dreading the dangerous occurrences,
which may ensue by over bold venturing, accompanies the former pleasure with
as great a pain. Agraies abashed to hear himself so praised, vayled his
looks, and she loath to offend him, altered her speech, demanding what he was
determined to do. On my faith, Madam, quoth he, I will do nothing but what you
please to command me I will then, said Oliuia that henceforth you keep company
with your Cosen Amadis, for I know he loves you entirely, and if he counsel
you to be one of this ^ou^^, deny it not. Believe me (Madam) answered Agrayes,
both you and such good counselling will I obey: for setting your divine self
aside, there is no man living whom I will more credit with mine affairs, then
my honorable Cosen Amadis.

At these words the Queen called him and Galuanes likewise, having hnowledge
of him in her fathers kingdom of Denmark, where he performed many brave
deeds of arms: and likewise in Norway, so that fame reported him a right good
Knight. They being with her, the Queen remembered Galuanes of her ancient
acquaintance, at which instant the Princess Oriana came to them, wherefore
Agraies arose to salute her, leaving Galuanes with the Queen, and settled
himself to confer with Oriana^ who entertained him maruailous kindly, as
well for Amadis sake whom he loved, as also the courtesy he showed her for
Scotland, when king Lisuart left her there at his return from Denmark, as you
have heard before declared: the Princess speaking to Agraies. Cosen, we have
daily desired your presence I here, (...) your sister, who nor many days
since was in great grief, by (...) news that came hither of Amadis death your
kinseman, as truly you would have wondered (...). Good reason had she Madam,
quoth Agraies; to be sorrowful, and nor she alone, but all the rest of his
^^^age were bound to no less: knowing when our Cosen dies, the chief and
most excellent of (...), y^^ the best (...) that (...) mour on his body, and
you must think, his death would have been avenged and accompanied with many
other. Ah, said she, the villain Arcalaus shrewdly affrighted us, and evil
death betide him, for troubling this royal Court in this sort.

By this time the King was ready to the table, wherefore he sent for the three
knights from the Queen, commanding them to sit down by him in company of many
great Lords and Barrons. And as the service came in, two Knights entered the
hall, who falling on their knees before the King, the first of the^ thus spoke.
God prospet your Majesty with increase of joy and honor, most humbly I desire
to know, if Amadis of Gaul be in this Court. Not at this present, answered the
King, but we could wish he were here. Right glad would I be, said the Knight,
to find him, because by his means I hope to recover what I am now far from.
Tell us my friend, quoth the King, if you please, who you are. My Lord, replied
the stranger, I am a sad Knight named Angrioted' Estranaus, and this other is
my brother, when King Arban of Norwales (who was there present) heard him
speak of Angriote, he started from the table, and stepping to the King,
said. Does not your Majesty know Sir Angriote? such as have dealt with him,
will say he is one of the best knights in your Kingdom. My friend, quoth the
king to Angriote, I pray you arise and pardon me, if I have not honored you
according to your deserts: for the fault was only committed through ignorance,
but be sure you are welcome and that with heart, but say I desire ye, how came
you acquainted with Amadis. My Lord, replied Angriote, I have known him no
long time, and my first acquaintance was very dearly bought, for I never
thought to dye till I was wounded: but he that did me the harm, promised
after-ward to give me help, which is very needful now to cure me: hereto he
added the whole accide^t as you heard it before. In sooth, said the king, I
would be glad these matters should have a good end, but now come sit down with
us to dinner, afterward we will consider thereon as we may. Next to king Arban
was Angriote placed, and as they were about to rise from the table, Dardan the
Dwarffe to Amadis entered the hall: whom Angriote knowing, called him, demanding
where he had left his Master, because he saw him last in his company. Sir,
quoth the Dwarffe, wheresoever I have left him, he makes good account of you:
then falling on his knee before the King, he thus began. Amadis my Lord humbly
saluteth your Majesty, and all the rest of his friends in this CCourt.
Dwarffe, said the king, where did thou leave him? In such a place my Lord,
quoth the dwarffe, where he is of good cheer: but if you would know any more;
it must be in the presence of the Queen. With right good will, answered the
King; and hereupon sent presently for the Queen, she quickly coming, being
attended on by diverse beautiful Ladies, the most part of them the amourous
friends to the knights then waiting on the king, whereby they purchased leave
(during the Dwarffes discourse) to devise with them, at better leisure, then
longtime before they could: but the Dwarffe beholding the Queen present, thus
proceeded. Madame, my Lord and master Amadis in all humble reverence saluteth
your excellency, commanding me to tell ye, that he has found Prince Galaor
his brother he sought for. Now trust me, said the Queen, I am heartily glad
thereof. But on my credit Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, never was heard of such a
perilous meeting of two brethren, for if God had not the better provided, both
the one and the other had never been seen again, so near were they both at
the point of death: but by hap a good Knight arrived there, who names himself
Balays, and he found the means to agree them. Then told he all the whole
accident, how Balays slew the Damosel that procured their quarrel, for which,
Balays was highly commended of them all. But where have thou left them replied
the Queen? At the Castle of Carsanta Madame, said the Dwarffe, where Balays
dwells, from whence I was dispatched hither with this message. But tell me
Dwarff, quoth the Queen, what think thou of Galaor? I think Madame
answered the Dwarffe, that he is one of the goodliest knights in the world,
carrying a resolution not one jot inferior to the best: and did you see him in
company of my Lord, you could make little difference between them.

I marvel said the Queen that they come not hither. Assure your sefle,
replied the Dwarffe, no sooner shall they recover health, but they will be here
with you, for so they expressly commanded me to tell ye. So joyful was the
King hereof, that he minded to keep open Court after they were come:
commanding his Lords and Barons not to depart his Court, whereto they all
willingly co^descended. He likewise desired the Queen, to send for all the
chief Ladies in the Realm: For the more honorably quoth he, you are attended
on by Ladies, the more Knights shall they find here to deserve their love, on
whom I will bestow many rich gifts and presents.

CHAP. XXV.
How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays determinea to travail to King Lisuart, and
what adventures happened by the Way betweeue them.

SO long soiourned Amadis and Galaor, at the Castle of Balays of Carsanta, as
their wounds being thoroughly healed: they intended to return to King Lisuarts
Court, before they would enterprise any other adventure. Balays who desired to
bear them company, for the familiar acquaintance he had now with them:
entreated them to afford him so much favor, wherewith they were very well
contented. Departing thence, they rid toward Windsor, and after they had
iournied sieve days, they came into a four corned way, in the midst whereof
stood a tree, and under it a dead Knight lay on a rich bed, with great wax
tapers standing burning at the boulster and feet; which notwithstanding any
great wind could not be extinguished. The dead knight was unarmed, and not
covered with any thing, wherefore easily might a great many wounds be deserned
on his head, and a trounchion of a Lance, peirced with the iron quite through
his neck and throat: beside, in such manner did the dead Knight hold up his
hands thereon, as if he would have pulled forth the Lance. Greatly was Amadis
and the rest amazed hereat, and feign they would know what the knight should
be, but they could see no body of whom they might enquire, nor any place near
that was inhabited, which moved Amadis thus to speak. Doubtless without some
great occasion, this knight was not brought into this place, being alone and
furnished in this strange manner: if we stay here a while, some adventure or
other must needs ensue thereon. And so think I, answered Galaor, whereupon he
thus spoke. Brother, this rash oath, somewhat displeases me, for I doubt it
will be an occasion of our long tarying in this place. What I have said,
answered Galaor, is done: with these words he alighted from his horse, and sat
down at the dead knights feet: which the other twain perceiving, concluded
not to leave him, but even to take such part as he did.

Now was it between noone and evening, when they being thus dismounted, might
at more ease visit the wounds of the dead man: and Amadis seeing his hands on
the trunchion in his throat, confounded with grief and marvel, he said.
Doubtless he yielded his spirit as he now holds his hands, because they
still remain in the place. And as they were thus communing together, they
heard a great noise of some coming toward them, when presently they espied a
knight and two Squires, the one bearing a shield and helmet, and the other
driving a Damsel before him, she giving many shreekes and outcries, because
the knight smote her often with the end of his Lance: and thus they passed by
the bed where the dead knight lay, when the Damsel saw the three knights by
the coatse, cried. Ah good knight who lies on the bed, were thou alive, I am
sure thou would not suffer me to be thus cruelly handled, if hazarding thy
body in a thousand perrils might defend me: would God the death of these
villains had excused thine. Say thou so? quoth the knight that used her so
hardly, and thou shall know the price of thy words: then smote her with his
Lance so cruelly over the head, as made the blood in great abundance to
trickle down her face, and so rode on still beating her: which Amadis grieuing
to behold, said to his companions. In sooth, never did I see such a bad minded
knight, to outrage a poor Damsel in such pitiful manner: but (if God be my
guide) he shall not long abuse her so. Therefore brother, quoth he to Galaor,
if I tarry too long, set forward I pray ye to Windsore with Balays, and I will
come thither with what speed I may: the^ mounting on horseback, he commanded
Gandalin to follow him, and gallopped after the knight, who by this time had
gained a great deal of ground.

Thus remained Galaor and Balays alone there till night, which being very
dark, they could not see, but heard a knight come riding the same way which
Amadis took, who complaning of grief in his leg, lay holding himself about
his horse neck, but when he espied Galaor and Balays, he demanded if they
knew the knight that rid so fast the same way he came. Why ask you? answered
Galaor. Because said the knight, I would he might break his neck, for he
tunneth so rudely, as if he followed some Devil. What rudeness has he
offered you? answered Galaor. He would not tell me, quoth the knight, neither
by entreatance or other courteous mean, why he made such haste: and I seeing
him so self willed, laid hold on his horse bridle, resolved to make him pay
for his boldness, and to satisfy me either by friendship or force. Well,
answered Balays, what did he there tell ye? Nothing to my demand replied the
knight, but peremtorily thus spoke. That he would tarry no longer to tell me,
except I first combated with him. Hereupon we charged each other, he giving me
such a shrewde push with his Lance, as I and my horse were tombled quite over,
and in the fall I brake my leg as you may behold. When Galaor and Balays
heard his report, knowing full well he spoke of Amadis, they fell into a
great laughter, saying. In good faith now are you taught against another time,
not to be over importunate to know any thing against a man's will. Belike you
mock me then, answered the knight, and trust me you may happen to repent it:
then coming near Galaors horse, he gave him such a blow on his nose, as
making him furiously to break his bridle, gave him liberty likewise to run
about the field, and thinking he was not revenged enough, sought how to serve
Balays horse in the same sort, but they both stepped between with their
Lances, and kept him off: which the knight perceiving, giving the spurs to his
horse, he rode away, saying. If I had sped the other knight so well, I would
have thought my self half reco^penced: learn you then to stay me another
time. Is it true, said Balays, and God never help me in my need, if I make thee
not leave thy horse for the other thou have stay raunging. Presently he leap
into his saddle, desiring Galaor to stay for him til morning, for then at the
uttermost he hoped to return.

By these accidents is Galaor left alone, attending news of the matter he
vowed: for he had sent his Squire to recover his horse, which by mishap took
his way into a thick wood. In mean while the greater part of the night is
spent, and Galaor could enjoy no rest, through extreme affection after his
enterprise: but about break of day he found his spirits so ouer-watched, as
(whether he would or no) he was complled to take off his (...) and shield, and
leaning on them forgot himself so much, that when he awaked, he neither saw
the candles burning, or the dead knight which lay on the bed, whereat he became
so sorrowful, as he (...) into these complaints. Well I perceive, that I am
unworthy so high an enterprise, seeing so fondly I have failed in such an easy
matter. Now see I how Fortune (through this my sioathfulnes) scorneth the
little ^auour she showed me at the beginning: and well may she do so, seeing I
would so carelessly fall asleep, at such a time as she commanded me to watch.
But seeing I have so wilfully offended, I will amend it by an answerable
pe^ance: for I will recover on foot with the travel of my body, the murdered
man carried from me in my sleep. Then followed he the track of their feet, whom
he imagined had conuayed thence the Knight, and walking on warily, as loath to
fail thereof, he heard the neighing of a horse: which made him shape his
course thither-ward, albeit he could diserne no body, yet passed he further,
because he heard the like noise of other horses. Not far had he gone, but he
espied two Knights armed, one of them being alighted from his horse, and
reading certain letters engraven on a stone, after-ward he said to his
companions. In vain did they make me come to this place, for I understand not
one word of them: wherewith he mounted again, and they rode away not seeing
Galaor, but he called to them, saying. Gentlemen, can ye tell me who has
carried away a dead knight, who not long since, lay under a tree in the four
cornered street behind? Verily, answered one of them, we know nothing
thereof, but about midnight we saw three Damsels pass by, and ten Squires
with them conducting a litter. Which way did they take? said Galaor. This on
the left hand, replied the knight: so giving them thanks, he went the same way
he was directed, and soon after saw a Damsel coming toward him, to whom he
said. It may be (Lady) you can tell me who has carried away the dead knight,
that lay under the tree not far hence. If you will promise me, quoth she, to
revenge his death, which is an exceeding great grief to many: I will resolve
you therein. I will not stick for that, answered Galaor, for it seems by your
words, it is an act of justice to do it. Very true, said the Damsel, mount up
before me on my Palfary, and I shall direct ye to your desire. When they had
ridden about two miles, she showed him a maruailous fair castle, and
alighting at the gate, she bad him enter: But remember, quoth she, what you
have promised. And because I have solicited, you heereto, I pray ye let me
understand your name. I am called Galaor, quoth he, and think you shall
hereafter find me in king Lisuarts Court, then any where else. I am
satisfied, said the Damsel, to God I commend ye: then she turned bridle and
rode away, but Galaor entered the castle, where he found the dead laid in the
midst of the Court, and by him stood many making great lamentation.
Nevertheless Galaor approaching near, and stepping to an anciant knight,
demanded of him what the dead knight was. Sir, answered the old man, while he
lived he was such a one, as all the world may bemone his misfortune. Do you
know his name? said Galaor. He is called Anthebon replied the other, one of
the most virtuous Gentlemen that ever lived in Gaul. When Galaor heard he was a
subject to king Perion his father, his heart began to storm, and as he
pitied him the more, so his desire increased to revenge his death: whereupon
he entreated the knight to acquaint him with the truth of this tragical
accident: Sir, quoth he, this unfortunate Gentleman which you see, was (in
respect of his bounty and virtue) married to a wife, who now lamenteth for him,
she being the Lady of this Castle. In time they had a very fair daughter, and
she growing in years, was beloved by a knight, our too near neighbor: but
the young Damsel ever hated him, and above all other could not abide him.
Where-of the getting intelligence, determined by some mean or other to steal
her hence, and being so resolved, (forgetting God, as also his own honor)
watched when this good knight, (as customely he used) should go to the
cornered street there to sucour such as often were distressed, because it is
the most dangerous place in this country.

Knowing him thus to be from home, the disloyal wretch entered this Castle,
and finding the maiden in company of her mother, with diverse Gentlewomen here
disporting: mauger them all, forcibly he took her away, before we could fall
the bridge to succor her. Hereupon (as we afterward understood) she did
nothing day and dight but grievously mourn, despising all the enticing
blandishments the knight used to her* which in the end displeased him so much,
as he began in this sort to reprove her. Lady you know that I love ye with
all my heart, desiring only to have the like of you, meaning no otherwise then
honorably to make you my wife: but you scornefully disdain me, albeit I am
descended of a more noble house then your father is, which makes me marvel
very much, what should move you thus to be mine enemy? In good faith I will
tell ye, quoth she. I heretofore made promise to my mother, and such is still
my deliberation: that I would never match with any husband, if he were not so
good a knight, and comparable with my father in chiualry, for which she made
choice of him among all other knights: to which words, he thus answered. By
heaven I see you love me now, for ere it be long I will make sufficient
proof, that I am a better man at arms then he. Within a while after, he left
his Castle, being well mounted and armed, placing himself under the tree
where you saw this knight dead, to what intent I cannot tell: but unhappily
the Lord of this Castle came that way, having left his horse and* Armor,
because be only intended to take the air: The cowardly wretch seeing what
advantage he had of him, and remembering the promise he made his Lady, thought
it place commodious to get him reputation; and no witnesses by to report the
contrary, so without giving him warning, or speaking one word to him, stealing
behind him, smote his Lance thorough his neck, as you he ere behold.

Thus, unprovided of defense, likewise suddenly and most villainously, was this
good knight slain: and yet the blody traitor not farisfied, alighting from his
horse, gave him many needless cruel wounds with his sword, and so
despitefully left him there. In good faith; answered Galaor, the deed is
monstrous, unable to pass without common reprehension: but seeing you have
vouchsafed me this favor, I pray ye tell me, why was he afterward laid on
such a costly bed under the tree? Because it being a continual pastage for
knights errant, said the old man, to try if any would be so honorably
provoked, as to revenge an act of such shame and tontempt, after we had
acquainted them with this sad discouse. I found him alone at the tree, replied
Galaor, what was the cause then you left him so? Your de^d is nor amiss, quoth
the old man, for four Squires were ever wont to guarde him: but because the
knight who did the murder came and threatened to kill them, we were
constrained to bring away the body hither. I marvel, said Galaor, that I
heard not the noise, it may well be said I slept soundly. Are you he, replied
the old man, whom we found leaning asleep on your helmet? The very same man,
answered Galaor. Why did you rest so homely there? quoth the old man. To
revenge his death, said Galaor, if by reason I might do so much. Ah worthy
Sir, answered the old man, heaven grant the finishing thereof to your honor:
then taking him by the hand, he brought him to the bed whereon the dead man
lay, thus speaking to the sorrowful Lady. Madame, this knight says (to his
power) he will revenge the death of your Lord. Alas gentle knight quoth she,
the God of heaven keep you in that good mind, for I can find no kindred or
friend in this country, who will do so much for me, because my Lord was a
stranger: yet whlie he liuid, every one showed great friendship in looks, but
now their kindness is cold enough. Lady, answered Galaor, in respect both he and
I were borne in one country, my desire is the greater to revenge his death.
Are you, said the Lady, the son to King Perion of Galaoe, whom my deceased
Lord often told me was in king Lisuarts Court? Never came I there Madame,
replied Galaor, in all my life: but tell me what he is that did this treason,
and in what place I may find him? Gentle Lord, quoth she, you shall be
conducted thither if you please: nevertheless I stand in doubt, (considering
the peril) you will mislike the enterprise, as many others have done, who were
heretofore accompanied thither. Herein Madame, said Galaor, is the difference
between good and bad, yet if you will allow me so much, as you did them that
made refusal, happily I may speed better then they did. The Lady noting his
honorable disposition, called two of her Damsels, commanding them to conduct
Galaor to the knight that held her daughter perforce. In sooth Madame, said the
Prince, little credit shall you have by sending me on foot, my own horse I
lost (not long since) in the wood by hard fortune: I pray ye then let me have
another on this condition, that if I revenge not your cause, I may stand bound
to deliver him again. You shall have one Sir, answered the Lady, for I hope by
your prowess: not only our possessions shall remain at your disposing, but
our selves likewise your obedient servants.

CHAP. XXVI.
How Galaor revenged the death of the Knight whom he found slain on the bed
under the tree.

THus departed Galaor ^n conduct of the two Damsels, who leading him the
noerest way through a Forest, at the further side thereof showed him a Castle,
being the place whither they were commanded to bring him, whereupon they thus
spoke to the Prince. Behold my Lord, at this Fortress you may revenge the
murdered Knights death. Tell me his name, replied Galaor. He is called
Palingues, answered the Damsels. Being now come hard by the Castle, they saw
the gate was fast, which made Galaor call out aloud, whereat an armed Knight
came on the battlements, demanding what he fought for. I would enter the Castle
answered Galaor. This gate, quoth he, is appointed to no other end, but for
the coming forth of such as remain here within. Which way shall I enter
then? said Galaor. I will show you, quoth the Knight: But I doubt I shall
travel in vain, and that you dare not come to us. Now trust me, replied
Galaor, I would feign have been within long since. We shall quickly see that,
said the Knight, if your hardiness be such as you make show of: alight from
your horse, and come near the Castle wall. Which laor did, giving his horse to
the Damsels, went to the place where he was appointed.

Then came the Knight again and another with him, seeming of greater stature
then his companion: they two winding a winche about, over the wall let down a
basket with a cord, saying to the Prince. If you will enter here, the passage
by the basket is this high way. But if I put my self therein, answered Galaor,
will ye promise to draw me up in safety? Yea truly, quoth they, albeit
afterward we will not warrant ye. Crediting their words, he entered the
basket, saying. Draw me up, for on your honest promise I adventure. Herewith
they began to wind up the basket, which the Damsels seeing, marueling not a
little at Galaors hardiness, said. Ah good, Knight God shield thee from
treason, for doubtless thou show a gentle and valiant heart.

By this time the Knights had drawn him up, taking him and the basket in at
the top, afterward the knights thus began with him. Gentleman, it is necessary
you swear to aid the Lord of this Castle, against such as would quarrel with
him for the death of Anthebon, otherwise you never shall depart hence. What?
said Galaor. Did one of you twain kill him? Why demand you? replied the other.
Because, quoth he, I am come to let the murderer know, how he has committed
a deed of horrible treason. Come ye for that intent? said they, now surely you
might have been a great deal better advised: Dare thou threaten us, and art
in our custody? alas, we must have another manner of account at thy hands, and
we must chastise the folly wherewith thy brain is troubled: then drawing their
swords, they laid upon him very furiously. When Galaor saw himself thus
wronged both in words and deeds, he entered into such choler, as quickly he
made them feel the edge of his sword, so that the Damsels might easily hear
the clanching of the strokes on the Armor: for the two knights were strong
and vigorous, and Galaor well moved with hot displeasure. Ah God, quoth one of
the Damsels, hark how the worthy knight deals with the traitors, let us not
depart hence till we see some end thereof. All this while Galaor so labored
his enemies with such sharp charges, as their hearts began somewhat to
despair, for to one of them he gave such a blow on the helmet, as his sword
entered three fingers deep intothis head: afterard he buffeted him with the
hilts of his sword, that he made him fall on his knees to the ground. In mean
space the other spared not Galaor, but laid load on him to revenge his
companion, whose head the Prince had now severed from his shoulders: and
coming to the other, the coward began to turn his back, running down the
stairs faster then ever he came up: but Galaor followed so nimbly, that
laying hold on him, he made him sure for ever letting down the basket
again, to draw up any more knights on the walls.

Now because the Prince knew not Palingues, and doubting one of these twain
to be he, he threw them over the battlements to the Ladies, bidding them to
look on them and afterward to resolve him: but they answered they were so
mangled as they could not judge of them, and they were persuaded that Palingues
was neither of these twain. Whereupon Galaor went down into the Castle, and
as he looked every where about him, he espied a fair young Lady, who cried
aloud: Palingues, Palingues, is this the great chiualry for which thou would
be renowned? now thou flyest like a cowardly and faint hearted knight, yet
say thou were a better man at arms then my murdered father, whom thou
killedst (as thou vauntest) in combat hand to hand. In sooth what ever I
doubted is now come to pass: why do thou not attend this Knight who looks
for thee? if there be any manly heart or spirit in thee, show it now in need
when thy life depends thereon. At these words Galaor looked more aside, and
espied Palingues well armed, who was opening the door of a Tower to save
himself, wherefore he stepped to him, saying. Believe me Knight, this flying
will little advantage thee, and less the strong hold thou would enter into:
for thou must answer the life of good Anthebon, whose death thou did
compass by monstrous villainy. Palingues seeing there was no other remedy,
turned and fiercely smote at Galaor, his sword entering so far into the
Princes shield, as he was not able to pull it out again: by means whereof
Galaor reached him such a blow, that therewith his right arm was cut quite
from his body, the grief whereof so pained him, as he ran into the chamber
where the Lady was, thinking by this poor shift to defend his life. But
Galaor getting hold on his legs, dragged him along on his back out again,
and with his sword smote his head from his shoulders. This is, quoth he, the
reward of thy treacheries done to Anthebon, and payment for thy treason in the
action of his death.

The daughter of Anthebon being present at this deed, having heard Galaor
often name her father, fell on her knees before him with these words. Alas my
Lord, you have bound me in such duty to you, as never shall I be able to
require your pains, my self being of such simple and slender ability: but the
good will I have to recompense this benefit, has imprinted daily prayers in my
heart to God for you, having so justly revenged the death of my father, and the
wrongful forcing of this traitor. Galaor courteously taking her up, embracing
her in his arms, thus answered. On my faith fair friend, he were a man of
little sense, that would offer displeasure to such a one as you are, seeing you
much bettet deserve to be loved and served, then with grief or favor to be
offended: but tell me, have you any more enemies in this Castle? No Sir,
replied the Damsel, those which remain, are to do you honor and obeisance.
Let us go then, quoth he, to let in two Damsels, who were my guides hither
from your Lady mother. So taking him by the hand, she commanded the gate to
be opened, and the two Damsels entered leading Galaors horse: but when they
saw their young Mistress, they humbly made her reverence, demanding if her
fathers death were revenged to her desire. Yea verily, quoth she, I thank God
and this knight, who has done that many other could not do.

It was now the vehement hot time of the day, wherefore Galaor took off his
helmet to refresh him self, when the Lady seeing him so young and beautiful,
as also so valiant in deeds of arms: began to be touched with love, and
setting aside both fear and bashfulnesse, she began to embrace and kiss him,
saying. My honorable Lord and friend, more cause have I to love you then any
other creature living. In good faith, quoth he, and I love you likewise, as
well in respect of your beauty and good grace, as also for your deceased
fathers sake, he and I being borne in one Country. May if it please ye Sir,
said she, to tell me your name? Such as are acquainted with me, answered
the Prince, term me Galaor. In sooth my Lord, quoth she, often have I heard
my father speak of Sir Amadis your brother, and of you likewise, saying you
were the sons to the King of Gaul, his liege Lord and Sovereign. At thus they
devised, they entered alone into a chamber, while the Damsels with the rest
were pouiding viands: wherefore Galaor seeing time and place so commodious, to
request the love of her that used him so kindly, she being a Lady, young,
fresh and fair, named Brandueta: himself likewise active and desirous of such
sweet baytes, thus spoke. Madame, if Palingues loved you as I have heard, he
had great reason for it, knowing you to be such a one as I see you are: for my
self, who have so little acquaintance with you, am already so deep in
devotion to your gracious nature, as I would repute my self happy, if you
granted me the favor I desire, accepting me as your friend and servant.

The Lady not one jot behind him in amorous affection, shaped him this
answer. I have told ye my Lord, that I love you more then any other living
creature, therefore you may be certainly assured, how my desire is to please
you in all things whatsoever. During these speeches, Galaor still held his love
in his arms, kissing and toying with her so pleasantly, as Diana soon after
lost her interest in the maiden, whereto Brandueta yielded with greater
contentment, then all her former resistances to Palingues: from whom she kept
her virginity so long, that she was now content to bestow it on the French
Prince, and he having a good stomach to such dainty diet, made her love him
the better for it while she lived. But see an unhappy inconvenience, after many
^mbracings and amorous conferences, as they would once more have besieged the
Fortress of love: the Damsels came to tell them that dinner was ready,
wherefore (though loath) they were forced to leave off, accompanying the
Damsels to the place where the tables were covered, which was under a Gallery
environed with trees.

As they sat at the table, and discoursed of many matters, among other things
Brandueta declared to him, how Palingues (standing in fear of him and his
brother Amadis) caused this Castle to be kept so strongly: considering that her
Father Anthebon was of Gaul, and king Perions subject, the sooner would they
assay to work revenge for his death. For this reason, quoth she, he allowed
no other entrance then by the basket into this Castle, where I have lived in
maruailous grief and sorrow, as never shall I desire to tarry here longer:
therefore right gentle Lord and friend, might it so like you, without any
longer stay I would gladly see my mother, who will not be a little glad of my
return, and yours likewise. Galaor was very well contented, and though it were
late, yet got they to horseback, departing from the Castle: but for all their
haste they were two hours benighted, which brake no square in respect of the
good news, the good Lady with all her family joyfully receiving them, with all
honorable means could be devised, beside, the comforted widow cast herself
at his feet, using these speeches. Worthy Lord, both I and mine are bound to
you for ever, referring to your disposition whatsoever we enjoy, because you
are the restorer and confirmer of all. I thank you Madame, answered Galaor, for
your friendly offers, but where no desert is, the requital must of force be
far more easy. Now the greater part of the night being spent, they brake
off talk and bequeathed themselves to rest, and Galaor being alone in his
chamber, remembered his lovely breakefast before dinner with his new friend: who
likewise was so deep in consideration thereof, that she could wish such
another ere supper, and whether she did or no, judge you. For no sooner knew
she every one to be in bed, but secretly she came to Galaors chamber, where
she had no churlish speeches to drive her away, but most dainty, sweet, and
gracious entertainment: what else they did I know not, but she tarryed there
till morning, and then returned unseen of any.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Amadis pursuing the Knight that misused the Damosel, met another Knight
with whom he combated, and what happened to him afterward.

YOu have heard what hasle Amadis made after the Damsel, whom the knight led
away perforce, beating and misusing her very cruelly: but he happened to meet
with another Knight, who demanded of him why he rid so fast. What have you to
do? answered Amadis, whether it be my pleasure to ride fast or soft. In good
faith, said the knight, Ispeake it as one willing to help you, if you be
offered wrong by any, that you may go in better asurance if you be afraid.
Truly you may spare this labor, replied Amadis, for at this time I have no
need of your help. When the other heard this answer, he imagined that Amadis
mocked him, which made him come and lay hold on the bridle of his horse,
saying. By God Sir, you shall answer my demand, otherwise, I mean to break
your pace. I know not what thou can do, quoth Amadis, but I will dispatch my
self of thee by combat, and that way resolve thee in thy request: for rash
minds must have rough medicines, and such as seek to know more then they
need, often feel more then they would. So fetching their carrire, the Knight
shiuering his Lance in pieces: but Amadis sent both horse and man to the
ground, and with such violence, as the Knights leg was broken in the fall,
and Amadis had leisure to follow his journey: this was the man you heard of
before, that made Galaors Squire go look his masters horse.

But now to proceed with Amadis, who tarryed not to help the Knight up
again, such speed made he after his intent, as at length he ouer-tooke him
that led away the Damsel, and coming near him, thus spoke. Forbear Sir I
pray ye, and wrong the Lady no more. What wrong have I done her? answered the
Knight. The most shamefullest, savde Amadis, could be devised. What? quoth the
Knight, you would then chastise me? No Sir, answered Amadis, but advise ye by
reason for your own benefit. I hear ye well enough, said the Knight, but you
may return as wife as you came. It is true, quoth Amadis, then stepping to the
Squire that led the Damsels Palfray; he stearnely said. Villain, let the
woman alone, or thou dyest the death. The Squire being afraid, fled away,
which the knight seeing, and being very angry thereat, he came to Amadis with
these words. Believe me Sir, you command very audatiously: but if I know not
how to charm such brauers, let armor never come on my back again. So
placing their Lances in their rests, they brake their staves in the encounter:
but the knight was cast headlong out of his faddle, and before he could recover
him self again, Amadis stood ready with his sword to take his life, which he
perceiving, and that he must be forced to beg his pardon, thus spoke. Good
Sir take pity on me, and look what offense I have committed by any hard
dealing, shall be amended by better usage. S^ then, said Amadis, never to wrong
Lady or Damsel against hes will. With all my heart, replied the Knight* and
as Amadis was coming to receive his oath, the (...) his sword into his horse
(...) which made him presently fall down dead, and Amadis underneath in very
great danger, so that before he could get up again, the knight delivered him
many cruel strokes, saying. By God Sir, now shall I decrely teach ye, how you
enterprise another time to correct your better. At length Amadis recovered
footing, and (...) my such a blow through the ^ight of his helmes, (...) cut
the (...) of his face clean away; wherewith he was so (...) the ground, wh^^
Amadis setting his foot on him, (...) ^ted his head from his shoulders. The
night enduring all this while, yet comfortably lightened by fair Cynthia,
whereby the Damsel saw the death of her adversary, which made her fall at
the princes feet with these words. Alas worthy knight, the God of heaven (not
I) must requite this honorable kindness, for without your help, much better
had death been to me then life: yet let me request this further courtesy, no
more but your company to a Castle not far hence, where I shall be in safety to
my own desire, and to travel alone thither will be dangerous for me. Nor
shall you fair Damsel, said Amadis, be in such fear, for I will not leave
ye till you be where you would: so he willed Gandalin to bring him the
knights horse, and to help the Damsel on her palfray, afterward they rode as
she conducted them. Of many matters they conferred by the way, she
acquainting him with the whole history of the dead knight, whose death you have
heard how Galaor revenged. And coming into a meddowe by a rivers side, they
alighted from their horses, betaking themselves to sleep a little, because it
was night, she lying on a mantle that Gandalin spread for her, and Amadis
leaning on his helmet as his best pillowe. But as they all thus slept, it
chanced a knight came riding by, who saw them, and without making any noise,
with the great and of his Lance, he i^gged the Damsel all she awaked. When
she (...) him on horseback, ^ging it was Amadis. that conducted her, she
started up as one half asleep, demanding if it pleased him to depart. Yea
marry, quoth the knight, and taking her by the hand mounted her up behind him.
Why do ye so? said the Damsel, your Squire might help me to mine own
horse, without troubling you in this manner. It were needless, answered the
knight, for seeing a booty is so well offered, I mean to have the carriage of
it my self. These words made the Damsel suspect her self deceived, and
looking back, she beheld where Amadis lay fast asleep, wherefore she cried
out so loud as she could. Ah help me Sir, quoth she, for here is one I know
not will forcibly carry me away. When the knight heard what a noise she made,
he gave the spurs to his horse, riding away in a maine gallop: but Amadis
awaking and not seeing the Damsel, was greatly displeased, hastily calling
Gandalin to bring him his horse, afterward he posted the same way the knight
had taken. At length he got a sight of them, marking their entrance into a
thicket of trees where he mistook his way in such sort, as he knew not which
side of the wood to take: when (though he was one of the most patient men in
the world) he conceived this grief marvelous unkindly, saying to himself.
Now may the Damosel well report, that I have done her as much shame as succor:
for if I defended her from one forcer, by my sloathfulnesse I have left her in
the power of one worse then he.

Thus riding in and out among the brambles, offering much injury to his horse,
at length he heard the winding of a horn, which made him follow the sound
thereof, imagining the knight did it for his pleasure. Soon after he espied
a strong Castle on the top of a mountain, and approaching near perceived it
was begirt with a high wall, whereon were many great Towers, and the gate made
sure with mighty bars. As he was seeking some place of entrance, the watch
discrying him, said. What man at so late an hour comes armed so near? I am
a strange knight, answered Amadis. What would you have? said the watch. I
seek for one, quoth Amadis, who not long since took a Damsel from me. We
saw none such, answered the watch. Hereupon Amadis passed further, and
discerned a little door open, and the Damsel with the knight to enter
thereat on foot, because they could not come near it on horseback: then
Amadis calling to the knight, thus spoke. Stay a while I pray you Sir, and tell
me before you shut the gate, if you be the man that took a Damofell from me?
If I took her from you, answered the knight, you had the less care of her
keeping. And the less manhood, said Amadis, was in you, to steal her from
me while I slept, being assured you could no otherwise have carried her from
me so lightly. My friend, quoth the knight, I have her indeed, and of her own
good will she came with me, without any manner of soliciting or forcing. In
good faith, answered Amadis, if you show her me, and she affirm as much, I
shall rest contented. It is not long to morning, said the knight, and then I
will let ye see her here, if you will enter upon the custom of the Castle?
What is the custom? replied Amadis. You shall be told it, quoth the knight,
and I think you will find it too hard for your enterprising. If I would
presently agree thereto? said Amadis, might I now enter* Not as yet, answered
the knigh: but if you tarry till day light, we shall behold what you can do.
So going in, he clapped too the door, wherefore Amadis was contented to awaire
the break of day, under a tuft of trees hard by the Castle, and when the Sun
began no appear, he heard the gate open, which made him quickly mount on
horseback: then coming forward, he saw a knight armed at all points, and
under him a lusty courser, whereupon the Porter called Amadis, demanding if he
would enter. Why have I tatryed here else, answered Amadis, all this while?
But first, quoth the Porter, you must understand our custom, to the end you
may not say after-warde that you were deceived. I therefore thus advise ye, how
when you shall be entered here, you must enter combat with this knight, and if
he get the victory, you must swear to do the commandment of a Lady here
within, or else be committed to a miserable prison. If he chance to be
vanquished, it is nothing in respect, for you must be commanded to another
gate, and there enter combat with two other, whom if your fortune likewise be
so good as to over come: you have then to deal with three other, they being
right valiant and tried men at arms, and all these you must fight against
under the first condition: but if you bear away the honor in each of these
attempts, right shall be done in whatsoever you demand. On these conditions,
replied Amadis, I am well content to enter, and the rather because I would see
the man, who took the Damsel from me this night past.

So soon as he was entered, the first Knight and he ento untred together: but
Amadis ouertbrew his enemy so suriously, as his right arm was broken in the
fall, which made him glad to yield for safety of his life. At the second gate
he found the other two ready tarrying for him, threatening him with prison, if
he did not well defend himself: I must buy my liberty, quoth Amadis, with
your dearest blood, keep it therefore from me so well as you can. Then
covering themselves with their shields, he met one of them so directly that
he fell to the ground, and his horse upon him, very sore shaken and bruised with
his fall, then coming to the other with his sword drawn, he smote the helmet
quite beside his head, when being loath to proceed any further with him, he
said. Now trust me knight, it is the greatest folly in the world to fight, thy
head being bare. Care not you for that, answered the knight, I will keep as
safe as you shall do yours. And I will try your cunning, quoth Amadis: then
striking a full blow at him, which the knight shifting his body aside to
escape, lost his stirrops and fell beside his horse, when Amadis quickly
stepping to him, got hold of him by the neck, saying. See knight how well
thou defendest thy head, art thou not well worthy to loose it for thy words?
When the knight saw what danger he was in, he fell on his knee, and thus spoke
to the Prince. Ah worthy Sir, for Gods sake mercy, and seeing you have so well
advised me, never will I hereafter be so rash in folly, therefore I yield my
self to your mercy.

Amadis being thus pacified, took a fresh Lance and mounted on horseback
again, riding now to the last gate, where he espied Ladies and Gentlewomen on
the wales, who said to each other: If he pass the bridge in despite of our
guardants, he shall perform a most rare deed of Chivalry? While thus they
communed, the three knights came forth to assail Amadis, the first of them
using these words. Knight yield thy self, or swear to do the commandment of
this Lady. These are but words, answered Amadis, from which I can defend my
self well enough: I cannot put on the mind to yield my self, or accomplish
the Ladies will you speak of, because I know not what she is. Here-upon a
fierce combat began between the Prince and the three, who showing themselves
to be right hardy knights, and Amadis full loath to receive the foil, made a
long doubtful judgment of victory: till at length by many wounds and great
loss of blood, the knights were able to hold out no longer, flying into the
castle for safety of themselves, yet one of them fell down by the way, whom
Amadis swear should die if he yielded not presently. Alas my Lord, quoth he,
with all my heart I submit my self, and so ought all other to do that combat
against you, considering your happy fortune since you came to this Castle. With
these words he delivered his sword to the Prince, who gave it him again, and
followed the other twain into the Palace, where he met diverse Ladies and
Damsels, when the choice of them all in beauty, thus spoke to him. Stay awhile
Sit knight if you please, for already you have done so much, as you shall
obtain what you demand. Lady, quoth Amadis, command then your Champions to
yield themselves vanquished. And what shall you be the better for that? said
she. When I accepted the conditions of entrance here, answered Amadis, it was
said, that I must either be killed, or vanquish hi^ that I combated withal:
otherwise I have not the right was promised. You misunderstood it replied the
Lady, for it was told ye, that if perforce you entered thus far, you should
have reason in what you demanded: say now therefore what is your pleasure? I
demand a Damsel, quoth he, which a Knight took from me this last night
past, while I slept by the rivers side not far hence, and hither he brought
her against her will. I pray ye Sir, said the Lady to sit down and rest ye: in
mean while I will send for the Knight who shall answer ye. Then sat they
down together, and she proceeded on this manner. I entreat ye Sir to resolve
me, if you know a Knight that is named Amadis? Why ask ye Lady? quoth he.
Because, replied she, all the guard you found in this Castle was appointed for
him, and assure your self if he entered here, he never should depart hence
again, if first he denied not a promise that he made. What was it? answered
Amadis. I will tell ye Sir, said she on this condition, that with your uttermost
indeauor you will cause him to acquit it, either by Arms or otherwise, by
reason he has not done it justly. In sooth Madame, quoth he, if Amadis, has
promised any thing wherein he is to be touched, I will (if I can) cause him
to discharge it. She who understood not to what end he thus spoke, answered
as follows. I heartily thank ye Sir, wherefore understand that Amadis
promised Angriote a Estra^a^s, how he would procure his Ladies liking to him,
and yet she never could love him in all her life: this is a matter against all
right, seeing forced affection is no love, but dolor and misery, then
according to your promise, you must labor to cause Amadis revoke this
unreasonable offer.

Now trust me Madame, replied the Prince, you say right well I will endeavor
to make him acquit you. These words proeured many thanks from her, she not
comprehending his meaning herein: for he hoped to accomplish his promise both
to Angriote and her, without derogating either to one or other, as you
hereafter shall understand. But Madame. said he, are you she whom Angriote
loves so? Yea truly, quoth she. I know him very well answered Amadis, that
he is one of the best Knights in the world, and one thinks there is no Lady
or Gentlewoman so rich or fair, but might think herself happy and fortunate
to have such a Knight as he. Nevertheless, what I say, is (...) to exempt my
self from the promise I made ye, for I will perform it if I can, because he
is a much better Knight then Amadis, albeit he made him that gentle offer.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Amadis combated with. the Knight, that did steal the Damsel from him
when he slept, and vanquished him.

WHile thus they were devising together, there entered another Knight of large
proportion and strong, all armed except with his helmet and gauntlets, who thus
spoke to Amadis. It is told me Sir knight, that you demand a Damsel which I
brought hither yester night, and how I did it against her will: but assure your
self, she would more willingly go with me then stay with you, therefore you
may be ashamed thus to quarrel, nor have I any reason to deliver her again to
you. I would feign see her, answered Amadis. It must be then, said the
Knight, whether I will or no: but if you will maintain that I have wronged
her, and she ought not to be mine, I presently will approve the contrary on
your person by combat. Thou can not please me better, quoth Amadis, and in
this cause will I stand not only against thee, but resolutely against all
other: that by right she appertains not to thee, if willingly she gave not
her consent. Let us see then, said the Knight, which of us shall have her.
This man of whom we speak, was Uncle german to Angriotes Lady, named
Gasinan, she loving and honoring him above all her other kindred: for he was
the best Knight of his race, wise and discreet, so that she was altogether
governed by his counsel. A goodly horse being brought forth for him, he
laced on his helmet, and stood provided to enter the combat: which Grouenesa
the Lady perceiving, she came to her Uncle with these words. Certes my Lord,
it were better you should forbear this difference, because I would be sorry
any harm should come to either of you, in respect you Uncle are the only man
of the world, whom I am most bound to love: and this knight I have greatest
hope in, for he has promised to deal with Amadis, as he shall acquit the
offer made to Angriote. What Niece? answered Gasinan, think you that he or
any his like, can dissuade the most gentle Knight on the earth from
accomplishing his promise? I know not quoth she, what you imagine of him, but
I repute him one of the best in the world: otherwise he could not have
entered here by strength of Arms as he did. Say you so? replied Gasinan, you
praise him over much, for passing the defended gates, when men of such mean
account had them in charge. I say not this, but that he may be a gentle
Knight, yet I hope to take him forth a new lessen, and a better then he if he
were here: in witness of my words, your self shall presently be judge, seeing
him vanquished, and my self peaceably possessed of the Damosel we quarrel
for. Herewith the Lady left them, and they giving the spurs to their horses,
brake their Lances gallantly in the encounter, and with such fury met their
bodies, that Gasinan was dismounted, having a shrewd fall against the ground:
yet he arose quickly, and drawing his sword, stood by a Marble pillar in the
midst of the Court, thinking Amadis could there little endomge him being on
horseback, and he on foot. When Amadis saw how his enemy dallied with him,
he waxed very angry, and striking fiercely at him, by mishap his sword lighted
short on the pillar, and so was broken in three pieces: now grew he into
greater choler, and seeing in what danger he was, unprovided of a weapon to
desend himself withal, he leaped from his horse so quickly as he could,
when Gasinan thus spoke to him. Knight, thou see thy death at hand, if thou
grant not the Damsel to be mine. Nor will I yield thereto, said Amadis,
unless herself do first consent. Thou shall see, quoth Gasinan, how dear
this foolish humor will cost thee With these words he delivered him many
sharp strokes, but Amadis awarded them very cunningly, so that the most of
them were bestowed in vain rather wearying his enemy, then doing him any
harm. And so long endured the combat, as the beholders were not a little
amazed thereat, wondering that Gasinan got not the victory all the while,
considering what advantage he had of the Prince: but Amadis concluded with
himself (being thus extremely handled) to hazard rather a speedy conquest,
then a liugring shame, and therefore ran violently upon Gasinan, getting fast
hold about his body so suddenly, as he had scant leisure to lift his arms for
resistance, but was constrained to let fall his sword and struggle with
Amadis, who griped him terribly, so strove they to overthrow each other. But
Amadis threw him with such might against the Marble pillar, that he was not
able to stir hand or foot; and afterward tab^g up Gasinans sword, brake the
buckles of his helmet, then catching him by the head, he said. Knight thou
have offered me great wrong since my sword brake, ^ow shall I be revenged on
the^ then made he a proffer to smite^ off his head, which Groueges^ seeing,
cried Ah gentle Knight, have pity on him and me together. With abundance of
tears trickling down her cheeks, she came and fell at the feet of Amadis,
showing the affection of her request, and her inward grief to behold her
Uncles death: all which Amadis well noting, feigned himself more willing to
kill him then before, saying. If your suite were reasonable, I would consent
thereto: but he has so wronged me and without occasion, as I cannot be
satisfied but with the loss of his head. Alas my Lord, quoth she, for Gods
sake demand some other satisfaction, for I will do whatsoever you please, to
redeem his life. Lady, answered Amadis, there be but two things which may save
his life: first the deliverance of the D^ofell again to me secondly, that you
swear to me as a loyal Lady, to meet me at the first (...) (...) held by king
Lisuart, (...) grant a boon I shall (...) (...) of you Gasinan beholding
(...) danger of his life, said to (...) (...) Niece, suffer me not thorough
your default to die, but take compassion on me, and promise the knight
faithfully what be shall demand, which she presently did, wherefore Amadis
permitted him to arise, and said to the Lady. I assure ye Madame, the suite I
must obtain of you, gaine-saith nothing of my promise concerning Amadis for I
will accomplish it to my uttermost, see then no default be made on your
behalf. In sooth my Lord, quoth she, I will perform my duty effectually,
knowing well, such men ought to be honored for virtue, in whom so singular
prowess is apparent: much less then need any doubt be made, of any thing
prejudicial to my unstained report. Be bold thereof said Amadis: then was the
Damsel sent for, and she being come, Amadis demanded if she would accompany
him any further? Worthy Sir, answered the Damsel, I will do what you please
to command me, in respect I have been so painful to you, as while I live I
am yours in all obedience. But were it your liking, considering the affection
Gasinan bears me, as he would rather hazard the combat, then deliver me,
albeit by treachery he carried me away: I gladly could afford to stay with
him. By heaven fair Damsel, replied Gasinan, most true and sincere is my
affection toward you, and as I request ye not to forsake me, so do I desire
your good opinion. You have chosen (Damsel) one of the best knights in the
world, said Amadis, and seeing you like each other so well, with all my heart
I leave ye together. They both thanked him very humbly, entreating he would
rest himself there certain days: but he would return to his brother
Galaor, whom he left under the tree by the dead knight, by means whereof he
excused his departure, and mounting on horseback, commanded Gandalin to carry
the broken pieces of his sword with him. By hap Gasinan ouer-heard him,
wherefore he presented him with his sword, which he accepted, and a Lance
that ^nesa gave him: then leaving the Castle, he took the way again toward
the tree, where he hoped to find Galaor and Balays.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Balays believed himself in his enterprise, pursuing the Knight that made
Galaor lose his horse.

BAlays of Carsanta offended as you have heard, with the Knights injurious
pranckes to Galaors horse, followed him so fast as possibly he could: but the
other had gotten so far before, as Balays heard no tidings of him,
nevertheless he rode on till about midnight, when he heard a voice a long
by a Rivers side. And shaping his course thither, he found there fine thieves
well armed with Crossets and Hatchets, who villainously would force a Damsel:
one of them dradging her by the hair of the head in a strait way on the
mountain, and the other beating her forward with great staves, Balays seeing
them vilely abuse her, entered among them saying: Traiterous murderers, dare you
so boldly lay hold on a Damsel? let her alone, else shall you die according
to your deserts. Then running fiercely at one of them, his Lance passed quite
through his body, so that he fell down dead without any moving. Whereupon the
other four would revenge then companions death, and altogether environed
Balays with such sharp assaults, as one of them smote down his horse under
him: yet Balays dismayed nothing thereat, but being courageously resolved,
quickly reco^ed footing, and drawing his sword, laid so fiercely about him,
that an other of them fell down headless at his feet. In brief, two more of
them accompanied their fellows in like fortune, when the last seeing he could
not prevent like doom, fell on his knees before Balays, saying. Good my Lord
have compassion on me, for if I die in this wicked life I have so long used,
undoubtedly both body and soul will perish together. Since thou do,
answered Balays, so willingly acknowledge thy fault, thy life I give thee, to
the end thy rep^^tance hereafter may make amend for all and faithfully he
kept promise with Balays, for soon after he became a religious Hermit,
spending the rest of his days in great devotion.

But now returns Balays to the Damsel, who being not a little glad she was
so happily delivered, gave him thanks for the succor she found in such
necessity, and he requesting to know how she happened into this danger, she
thus begun. Having occasion (Sir) to travel in these parts, in the narrow way
on the mountain they stayed me, it being the common place for their theeuish
assaults: and after they had slain my servants, they brought me into this
place, all of them swearing to force me one after another, but God and you have
graciously delivered me. Her modest behavior in speech and comely beauty, made
Balays to wax somewhat enamoured, which made him thus (...) corrupt he. In
sooth faite Domosell, I p^ dine they have dealt with ye^^gently; for they were
very loath to parts with ye but seeing ^n (...) allowed such a co^ent ^ting,
even where we may lay a foundation of love, (...) request this favorable
^esse, that we may not lose so good (...) opertunitie. I know not Sir, quoth
^ee, how you are minded, but had they compelled me do their lasci^ desires,
both God and the world might hold me excused (...) contrariwise, if I should
willingly grant you such an v^on o^ (...) request, what excuse might them some
either you or me? Hither^^ you have showed your self a well disposed knight,
see me in^ ye to accompany chivalry, with continence and virtue, as by duty
you are bound. When Balays heard her answer so foberly, her repented that he
had offered her such under ^^t words, saying. With reason (fair virgen) you
have fully satisfied me, yet pardon me for attempting so bad a suite: in
respect it is no less seemly for knights to move Ladies with love, then for
them modestly to deny as you have done. And albeit (...) first we imagine it a
great conquest, to obtain of them what we most desire: yet when wisely and
discreetely they resist our inordinate appetites, keeping the thing (without
which) they are worthy no praise: they he even of our selves more reverenced
and commended. This is the cause, quoth she, why I more esteem your succor to
mine honor then my life, because the difference between the^ is far
incomparable. Well, said Balays, what will you now I shall do for you? Let us
leave these dead carcasses, replied the Demosell, and go where we may stay
till day light. I like your counsel, answered Balays, if I had another horse,
but being now destitute, I know not what to do. We will ride on my horse,
said the Damsel, till we find further remedy: so he mounting up before the
Damsel, they rode till they came to a pleasant meddow, where they rested
themselves till Sun rising, and then they went to horse back again. Now
because Balays, intended to seek the knight, who caused Galaors horse to
escape away from him, he asked the Damsel what should become of her. My
Lord, quoth she, not far hence is a house, whither when you have brought
me, you may depart to what place you please.

As thus they rode communing together, he saw a knight come toward him,
carrying his leg on his horses neck, but drawing nearer, he put foot in
stirrup, couching his Lance against Balays, and running at him, threw him and
the Damsel both from the horse, afterward he used these speeches. In sooth
Lady, I am sorry for your fall, but to amend the wrong I have done ye, I will
bring ye where you shall be contented, because he that has the charge of you,
is unworthy to have so fair a creature in his custody. Ere this had Balays
recovered himself, and knowing him to be the knight he sought for, he drew
his sword saying. By thee villain have I lost my horse, and my companion thou
have in like sort abused, now finding me unprovided, thou take delight in
offering me wrong: but both for him and my self will I be revenged on thee,
else let me be thought unworthy of my order. What? quoth the knight, art thou
one of them that mocked me as I rid in the dark? I hope now I have put the
mockery on thee. Hereupon they presently fell to combat, and many sharp
blows were given on either side, till Balays at length fastening hold on his
enemy, got him under foot, when renting his helmet from his head, he took his
life as ransom for his villainy: and breaking his sword in pieces, laid them by
him, then mounting on his horse, and the Damsel on her own, they took their
way toward the tree where he left Galaor.

But because their stomachs well served them to meat, they alighted at a little
Lodge, where dwelt two women of austere and holy life, who bestowed on them
such cheer as they had the Damsel acquainting them with all her mishap, and
how Balays delivered her from the thieves, at what time they intended to
dishonor her having slain her servants, and she destitute of help, whereof
the holy women were very glad, by reason those thieves did much harm in that
country. After they had refreshed themselves, Balays and the Damsel took
their leave, and coming to the tree, met Amadis there newly returned from his
enterprise: wherefore they concluded no more to sunder themselves, until they
arrived at King Lisuarts Court. By this time the night drew on apace, whereupon
the Damsel earnestly entreated them, to lodge that night at her Fathers which
was not far off: they liking well of her friendly offer, went with her,
being there entertained and used very honorably. Early in the morning arming
themselves, they thanked their gentle host and his daughter, framing their
course toward Windsore, but by the way you must note, how Balays (according to
his promise) presented his horse to Galaor which he won from the knight, and he
refused it because he had another, so that Balays saved his oath thereby.

CHAP. XXX.
How King Lisuart held open Court most royally, and of that which happened in
the mean time.

I Have heretofore declared, the joy and content of good king Lisuart, for the
news brought by the Dwarffe, concerning the health of Amadis and Galaor: but
the more to show his princely mind, he concluded at their coming to keep a
most royal and magnificient Court, as all his ancestors in Great Britain
never did the like. Which Oliuas perceiving, who came (as you have heard) to
make his complaint on the wrong done him by the duke of Bristoya, in putting to
death traitorously his Cosen german: fell on his knee again before the King,
desiring he might have instice in the cause.

When the King had considered thereon with them of his blood, as also diverse
other knights and ancient Gentlemen: he decreed that within one month (all
excuses set apart) the Duke should come in person to answer Oliuas, and if
with two knights more beside himself he would justify his cause, Oliuas
should likewise prepare two other knights. Warning hereof was presently sent to
the Duke, and open Proclaymation made the same day: that all Gentlemen
following Arms, should be ready at the City of London, on the day of our
Lady following in September. Like summons was sent abroad by the Queen, to
advertise the Ladies and Gentlewomen of the country, by which means great
resort came to the Court, where all kinds of pastimes and sportes were
invented: without respect of fortunes malice any way, who commonly in great
assembly of states, when least they think of her variable changings, often
tell leth them, that men purpose, but she will dispose.

All this royal company being in joy and pleasure, a Damsel strangely
attryred entered the Palace, and a Gentleman that bare her company, demanding
where the King was: whereof being resolved by his Majesty himself, the
Damsel thus spoke In sooth (my Lord) well do you so^ a King by your port and
countenance, yet may it be doubted what your heart is. Damsel, quoth the
King, you must judge of what you see, and hereafter know the rest when you
have occasion to prove. Me thinks my Lord, answered the Damsel, you speak
according to the magnanimity of your mind, and even as I my self do desire:
remember therefore what you have spoken before so many great persons, for
seeing, you make me such a liberal offer, I hope one day to try the matter I
doubted. Nevertheless I will defer it till the feast of September, because I
hear you will then keep Court at London, where must be assembled many
valiant men, who shll know by the promise you have made me, how worthy you are
to govern such a noble Realm, and how highly Chiualry is honored by you.
Damsel, said the King, so much as effects may better my words, so much the
more will it glad me, to see good store of hardy knights there present. My
Lord, quoth she, if effects answer your words, I shall have great reason to
be contented. So took she leave of him, returning the same way she came,
whereat every one was much abashed, and displeased with the Kings rash promise,
not knowing any reason for it: and now they began to misdoubt, that the
enterprise of this woman would bring the Kings person into some danger. But his
heart was so addicted to magnanimity, as (whatsoever happened) he would not be
reproved with cowardice: and so dearly did his subjects love him, that they
rather desired a thousand deaths, then to see him suffer any mishap or injury.
Whereupon the Lords and Barons persuaded him, (greatly fearing some threatened
inconuerience) to alter the promise, he had so lightly made: showing it was
not beseeming his Majesty, to deal with faires of knights and Gentlemen, he
being placed in authority over them.

While they stood on these t^mes, there entered three knights, two of them being
very well armed, and the third having on no Armor as all, for he was a man of
ancient years, as seemed by his white head: yet in his countenance appeared a
more cheerful color, then commonly has been noted in a man of age, who
likewise was of tall and comely stature. This knight carried in his arms a
very costly Cofer, and demanding for the King, the Gentlemen showed where he
sat, making him way to his Majesty, before whom he fell on his knees, thus
speaking. God bless so good a Prince as is king Lisuart, for within these few
days, he has made the most worthy promise, that ever King did, if he intend
to keep it. Believe me knight, answered the King, I never promised ought, but
it was in my power, and and therefore the easier to be performed: but I would
feign know your meaning herein. I understand Sir, quoth the knight, that you
intend to maintain chivalry in the very highest honor, a matter wherein (now
a days) few Princes delight, therefore are you to be commended above all
other.

Herein you were told truth, said the King, and you may be well assured,
that I will do my uttermost to advance the cause of virtue, while I live. Long
may you continue in this mind replied the knight, and because I have likewise
heard, how you have summoned the Princes and Lords of your country, to be
ready at your Court the next feast of September: I have brought you here a
thing with me, which such a king as you are ought most royally to receive.
Then opening the Cofer, he took forth a Crown of gold, so sum^^ously
embelished with Oriental Pearls, and precious stones, as never was seen a
more costlier Jewel: every one being of the mind, that it was to impale the
head of some especially mighty Lord.

When the king had long and earnestly beheld it, he was very desirous to have
it, at what price soever, which the knight perceiving, said. This Crown my
Lord is of such workmanship, as no ieweller in the world can make the like,
and beside, the invaluable riches thereof, it has a virtue highly to be
esteemed: for the king that keeps it in his power, shall increase in all
felicity and honor. So will it happen to the king who must enjoy it while he
lives, and long time have I kept it, no king but you that ever saw it: but if
you like it so well, I will make ye a present thereof, provided, you help to
save my head, which I am in some danger to lose. All this while was the Queen
in place, earnestly wishing that the king her husband might have it, where-upon
she said to the king. Me-thinkes (my Lord) it would full well become your
Majesty, if you may have it at so easy a rate as he demands. Madame, quoth
the knight, I have a better thing for you if you please to buy it, it is this
mantle, the richest and fairest that ever was seen: for beside, the precious
stones wherewith it is beautified, it is imbroydred with all sorts of beasts
and birds, which nature has given life to. On my faith, answered the Queen,
it is a most rate and eurious piece of work, not wrought (as I think) by
human capacity. You say true, Madame, replied the knight, for the like hereof
is not to be found, yet may not the riches compare with the property, and
great virtue of this mantle, which is such, as it rather belongs to married
Ladies, then any other: because she that wears it, shall never be offended
with her husband. A virtue of cheef regard, answered the Queen, if it have any
such indeed? I have told ye true, Madame, quoth the knight, if you will buy
it, you may prove. Now grew she marvelous desirous of it, what-soeuer price
should be paid for it, especially to conserve peace and love between the king
and her, wherefore she said to the knight: Say Sir, how do you estimate this
mantle and the Crown? My Lord, quoth he, and you good Madame, I beseech you to
understand my fortune. I am but lately escaped the hands of him, who long time
kept me prisoner on a strange condition, which is no little cause of grief to
me, for I am out of all hope to find remedy while I live: and because I know
not well the value of these jewels, I will (...) them in your costody, until
the day you hold open Court at London, where you shall deliver them again to
me, or give so much for them as I then demand. In mean while you may make
trial of them if you please, for having experimented what I have said, you may
the more willingly pay well for them. Now trust me, said the king, seeing you
repose such confidence in me, assure your self to have whatsoever you
request, or else they shall be restored again. It suffiseth, quoth the
knight, the ^ning to the Lords, he thus proceeded. Worthy Lords, you have all
heard what the king has promised me, that he will restore the mantle and the
crown, which I leave in your presence; or give me whatsoever I shall dem^d. So
much his Majesty has said, replied the Lords, and we are witnesses thereof.
Adieu then, answered the ancient Knight, for perforce I must return to the
most cruel prison, that ever poor Knight was enclosed in. But here you must
note, how during the time of this conference, the two armed Knights, which
conducted the old man, was still in presence, the one of them having the beuer
of his helmet open, and seemed a young man, the other held down his head as
loath to be known, being of so tall and mighty stature, at no Knight in the
Kings Court might be equalled with him. So departed they again all three
together, leaving the Mantle and the Crown in the Kings custody.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays arrived at the Court of King Lisuart, and what
happened to them afterward.

AMadis, Galaor, and Balays, being all happily met together, rode on without
any occasion to trouble them, until they came to the Court of King Lisuart,
where they were wel-commed with exceeding my, because Galaor was never there
before, nor known but by renown of his famous Chiualry. Beside, echone
rejoiced to see Amadis; who by the false report of Ar^s was thought to bedead:
and graciously did the King encertain them all, conducting them to a chamber
where they were unarmed, blaming she vilanous invention of Arcalaus and the
Damofell that caused their Combat together, practicing the death of two so
noble Princes, who were but even now in the prime and flower of their youth.
Right soon did the King advertise the Queen of their arrival, when
accompanied with Agraies, Gal^er and King Arban, he went with them among the
Ladies: but Amadis casting his eye on Oriana, and she on hi; I leave their
joyful passions to your judgment, remembering that when long absent lovers
meet, looks, sighs, and tears are familiarly entercoursed, being the only
means to content each others heart. Yet Amadis thought it not best to stand
still thus musing, lest every eye should grow cunning in coniecturing the
cause: which to avoid, he sell on his knee before the Queen, saying. Madam,
according to your charge at my departure from the Court, I have brought this
Knight, whom I present as only yours. I thank ye Sir Amadis, quoth the
Queen, both he and you are welcome to our presence. In good faith Maddam, said
the King, you do me wrong if you take them both: Amadis already is yours, me
thinks you should be content with him, and leave Lord Galaor for me. You ask
no small matter, answered the Queen, but if he be so pleased, I am not against
it, albert such a present was never given in great Britain: Notwith-standing,
seeing you are the b^ King that ever reigned here, so good a Knight is well
bestowed on you. But what say you Lord Galaor? the King is desirous to have
you, will yet then be his? Madame, quoth Galator, me thinks that any thing so
great a prince demands, should be granted if it were possible: here am I to
obey you in every respect, so please my Lord and brother to like thereof,
because he has greatest authority over me. It contents me very well, said the
Queen, that you should do as your brother commands,, for through him shall
I have title in you, by reason he is mine. I am yours indeed Madame, answered
Amadis, and brother you must be my fellow servant to the Queen. With all my
heart replied Galaor, I am content, and seeing you have given me to her
service, for ever I shall remain at her disposition. I thank you sir, quoth
the Queen* now may I boldly give you to the King, for I see he would be glad
of so good a friend: then stepping to the King, she said. My Lord you are
desirous of this knight, I give him you; on this condition, that you love and
entreat him according to his deserts, which may not be valued at any mean
rate. Believe me Madam, answered the King, I take this gift most kindly at
your hand, assuring you, he shall soon perceive how I love and esteem him:
nor can I be so affectionate to him, as he has noble virtues whereby to induce
me, which none can value or compare withal. But if Amadis durst have spoken,
he gladly would have maintained the contrary, for he persuaded himself, that
he loved his Oriana, beyond his brothers desert, or any other whatsoever. So
remained Galaor in the Kings service, from which he could not be separated, for
any quarrel concerning Amadis, as we shall have occasion to declare hereafter.

All this while Oriana Mabila; and Oliuia, had withdrawn themselves from the
other Ladies, likewise Agraies and Amadis were talking together, when Galaor
was thus graciously entertained by the King and Queen wherefore. Mabila called
her brother, saying. I pray ye cause the knight to come hither that stands
with you consenting; because we are desirous to see him. Agraies returned where
he left Amadis, who dissembled as if he thought not, on the Ladies, till the
Prince thus spoke: My Lord, these Gentlemen would saine speak with you, and
desire you to come a little more near the (...) which he presently did But
Mabila being wise and discreet,, not ignorant what medicines should be applied
to passion are mind after they all three had saluted them, Mabila took Amadis
by the hand, desiring him to sit between Oriana and how, leaving Agraies to
court him Oliuia: they being set, she merrily (...) began. Although I am now
among those four friends, whom I have most cause to love and regard: yet have
I such present business else where, as I must of necessity leave you a while.
Thus devised she bring the lovers together and by a pretty wile gave them
opportunity, to content their thoughts with secret communication.

Now begins Amadis to conser with his Lady, and thinking to declare the
great affection, which under good hope gave him life and essence: extreme love
took him from the faculty of speech, yet his eyes not unmindful of their
office, supplied the defect of the tongue, delivering testimony to their divine
object, how far the sad and languishing heart was transported by ease and
pleasure. Which Oriana perceiving, she secretly took his hand under her
mantle, and wringing him by the fingers sighing thus spoke. My lord and friend,
what dolor and grief did the traitor procure in me, who brought hither
tidings of your death? never was poor maiden in greater peril, and not
without cause: for never did woman sustain such a loss, as I should have done
in loosing you. And as I am better loved then any other, so has my fortune
graciously favored me, that it should be by him who is of higher desert then
any other. Here-with Amadis cast down his looks as hashfull to hear himself
so praised, by her to whom all commendation was due: and feeling his spirits
altered, strove to make answer, but the words died in his mouth, which caused
Oriana thus to proceed. How can it be otherwise my Lord, but I must needs
love you above all other, when they that never saw you, do highly love, honor,
and esteem you? and I being she whom you affect most decrely, have I not
great reason to love you better then my self? On my faith Madam, answered
Amadis, your sweet and gentle words, are sufficient to make me die a thousand
deaths, and as many times to revive me again: but how? I pray you at this time
only to excuse my extremity with pity, enduring worse then death by loving
you too vehemently: for if I had died as Arcalaus reported, even then had begun
my rest and quier, if I had not known you before. And albeit the hour of your
acquaintance is my entire felicity, yet am I assaulted with such violent
passions, as my heart would altogether consume in griese, without the pleasure
it receives in doing you service, and the good it sustaineth by your
remembrance of me. But necessity constrains me, to crave the mercy as yet
undeserved, by such intreatance as no desert may value, only to increase my
hability in serving you, which if you grant me not, a sudden and cruel death
will take hold on me. These words were accompanied with such abundance of
tears, as was no small grief to her to behold. Alas my Lord, quoth she,
forbear these often repetitions of your death, the thought there of is
insupportable to me, for should you die, I were unable to live one hour
after: considering all the pleasure I have in this world, is in the joy of your
health and welfare. Nor can I but be assured of your words, by reason mine own
case is sufficient therein, being copartner with you in every torment: but if
yours seem more violent, this is the reason, my will being equal with yours,
wants the strength you have in suffering, and cannot effect the desire of our
hearts, which urges love and griese more in you then me, albeit my share is
not one jot the less. But this I promise you on my faith, if fortune or our
own endeavor, can compass no mean to yield us content, my self will
search some way whatsoever happen, be it hate of Father, Mother, Kindred, and
Friends: for we may not thus procrastinate our joy, and groan under the
weighty burden of desire the flame whereof climeth so high, as the martyrdom
of our hearts may easily be discovered. No doubt these words were pleasing to
Amadis, and gave such cheerful life to his hope, that he was ravished with
inward conceit thereof: when she seeing him mute, trod upon his foot,
saying. Diseomfort not your self my Lord, for I will not fail what I have
promised, nor shall you depart till you perceive it: and shortly will the King
hold open Court, when both he and the Queen must depend on your assistance,
knowing well that your presence shall honor the company.

As they would have continued in longer talk, the Queen called Amadis,
causing him to sit down by Galaor, for the King was gone to his chamber. Then
began the Ladies to censure on the brethren, but they resembled each other so
like, as little difference could be discerned between them: every one being
of the opinion, that these twain were the most perfect amongst all Knights,
both in beauty, nobleness, bounty, and good grace: but Galaor was somewhat
whiter in complexiion; and Amadis of bigger bone, his locks more crispt and
fair, and having a little more red in his face then Galaor had. Soon after,
the Queen willed Galaor to go see her daughter and the other Ladies, when he
regarding the excellent beauty of Oriana, imagined such another was not to be
found in the world, and by her often sighing with alteration of color, he
suspected her to be the only cause, that his brother liked so well to stay in
King Lisuarts Court. Right courteously was he welcomed among the Ladies, and
diverse familiar speeches passed between them: till the King being set to
meat, sent for Amadis and Galaor to bear him company, as also Agraies and his
uncle Galuanes.

CHAP. XXXII.
How King Lisuart departed from Windsore to the City of London, there to hold
open and royal Court.

IN the beginning of this book it has been declared, how the divine bounty
calling Lisuart to the Realm of great Britain, soon after of a disinherited
Prince, made him the peaceable King of such a Monarchy, by the death of his
elder brother Falaugris, who dyed without any heir of his body begotten.
Likewise how he was reputed such a great Lord through the world, as many
Knights came from strange Countries to serve him, not thinking themselves
happy, except they might be named Knights of his Court. But within a while
after, whether this fortunate king forgot the author of his good, or else it
happened by divine permission: this happy Realm fell into persecution, and the
illustrous state of King Lisuart was troubled and obscured, that all men might
know: how he only is Lord and King of all living creatures, who exalts and
abaseth when him pleases, according as you shall here understand. For King
Lisuart having concluded, to hold the most royal and stately Court, that ever
king did in the Realm of great Brittayne, commanded that on the 5. day
following, all the Lords of his Kingdom should appear personally at London,
there to determine on matters of chivalry, which he intended to maintain with
all honor might be devised. But in the self same place, where he thought the
greater part of the world should yield him obeisance, began the first
mutabilities of Fortune, bringing his estate and person in danger of utter
ruin, according as you shall understand at large.

King Lisuart departing with all his train from Windsore, to keep his Court
at the famous City of London, it was wonderful to behold the Lords, Ladies,
and Gentlewomen that gave their attendance, especially so many young
Gentlewomen being there present: some to regard the magnificeuce of the Court,
other to do service to their lovely mistresses, and nothing now generally
minded but pastime and pleasure. The King likewist (for greater majesty of his
Court) ordained that none of this assembly should lodge in the City, but to
erect their Pauillions in the fields and meddowes, along the banckes that
hemmed in the fair river of Thames, least the extreme heat might be hurtful
to them: all which being done according to appointment, the fields seemed as a
most royal Camp, or as if the greater part of the world were there assembled.
But because the king arrived there two or three days before the feast, he went
to his Palace, accompanied only with his Queen, Amadis, Galaor, Agraies, Don
Galuanes, and certain other his most favored: the rest kept themselves in
their tents, according as the herbingers had in quarters limited them. With
sundry sorts of pastimes was the King entertained, which continued till fortune
(envying his felicity) changed them into grief and tears: by the means of a
Lord, no subject to the King, but his nearer neighbor then friend, named
Barsinan, a man opulent in riches, and endued with few virtues, as may be
gathered by the matter ensuing.

This Barsinan was Lord of a Country, called Sansuegua, and very familiar with
Arcalans the enchanter, who not long before came to him, and conferred with him
in this manner. My Lord, quoth he, the great desire I have to do you service,
has made me invent the mean (if you like thereof) to deliver in short time
the Realm of great Britain quietly into your hands, without much hazarding
your person, or any great expense. When Barsinan (who was a very ambitious man)
heard the words of Arcalaus, who promised to make him King if he would: he
thus replied. In good faith, my dear friend Arcalaus, if thou can perform
the thing thou vauntest of, no fear shall hinder me to hazard my person, much
less will I reckon of expense, if I see any likelihood in the compassing. It
is a thing, said Arealaus, very easy to be done, and presently shall you
understand by what means: provided, that you swear to me, after you are
seated in the regiment, to make me super-intendent and chief master of your
house-holde. That will I, answered Barsiinan, with any thing else thou shall
desire. Mark then the platform, quoth Arcalaus. You know how King Lisnart
has openly published, this feast of september to hold open Court, whether you
must go well accompained with knights, then shall I order the matter in such
sort, that I will carry away the King prisoner, no man alive being able to
succor him: in like manner will I carry thence his Daughter, whom you shall
take to wife, and afterward will I send ye the Kings head. Thus in respect the
Princess is right heir to the Crown, and you enjoying her in Marriage, being
well accompanied with Knights as I told ye: easily may you make seizure on the
Realm, nor shall you find any to speak against it. In sooth, answered
Barsinan, if such an enterprise might sort to effect, I would make thee more
rich and mighty then ever were any of thy lineage, as also the chief co^mander
my house. It suffices said Arcalaus, your self shall soon perceive that
seldom I enterprise any thing but it comes to pass: then fail not to be
present in the assembly at London. So came the traitor Barsinan to King
Lisuart, seighning his intent to do him honor, wherefore the King sent many of
his knights, entertaining him as a most noble friend, appointing his lodging,
and all things else necessary for him, and being with the King in his palace,
he entered into these speeches. My Lord, understanding what royal magnificence
you mean to keep in your Court, as also the good Knights and brave men were
here to be seen, this day I intended to honor you with my person: not as your
vassaile or subject, holding my Country of God and by the Sword, but as your
good neighbor and friend, if you please. Trust me, quoth the King, you do me
very great pleasure and honor, and I thank you for this gentle pains, that
you would be seen in so good company: assuring you Lord Barsinan and my
friend, this courtesy shall be remembered in what I may, for I make very
especial account of you. Your Majesty deals very kindly with me, replied
Barsinan, and I protest on my faith, to be ready in councelling your affairs
for the best, according as I have a long time desired. See how the traitor lied
in every word, but the good king misdoubting nothing, requited his offer with
many thanks, and to do him the greater honor, appointed his lodging in his
own Palace, himself and his Queen going forth of the City with their Tents
and Pauilions, immagining he could not do too much for the traitor. And first
he acquainted him with the whole enterprise, and wherefore he caused this great
assembly, declaring the names and Sir names of the best commended Knights,
their haughty prowess and resolutions, among whom he forgot not Amadis and
Galaor, whose hardines was impossible to be equalled, they two being
accomplished with all the virtues required in Chivalry. When the king was
withdrawn to his Tents, and Barsinan to the Palace, he began to consider on
the strength of his Majesty, as also the love and obeisance so many great
Princes showed him: which made him unable to enjoy and rest, and often times he
repented his foolish enterprise, seeing how hard is would prove in execution.

Now he minded to alter his determination, when suddenly another opinion
entered his brain, so that wavering up and down in his thoughts, he could not
resolve one any certainety. On the next morning he came to the King, who was
now clothed in his royal ornaments, because it was the first day of open
Court: and he commended one to go to the Queen, willing her to send him the
Crown he had of the Knight, and she to clothe her self in the sumptuous
mantle. Hereupon she presently sent for the Cofer, and opening it, found
nothing therein, whereat she was greatly amazed, considering she trusted no
body with the key thereof, but her own self, and evermore carried it about
her. But knowing not how to remedy this mishap, she acquainted the King
therewith, who in great displeasure came to her, saying. I marvel Madam you
have kept so badly, the Jewel which would have so greatly honored this time,
considering under what condition it was left with us. On my faith my Lord,
quoth she, I know not what to say, I found the Cofer fast locked, and none but
my self has kept the key of it. But in a dream this last night, me thought a
Damsel willed me to show it her, which I did: afterward she demanded the
key, and I gave it her, when opening the Coffer, she took forth the Mantle
and the Crown, locking it again, and laying the key where I took it. This
done, she put the Mantle about her, and the Crown on her head, they beseeming
her so well, as I received great pleasure in beholding her, and thus she spoke.
That her self, or she from whom she came, before five days, should rule in
the Country of a mighty King, who at this time labored to defend it, and to
conquer it from other. Hereupon I demanded what she was, and she answered: You
shall know at the time I have spoken of. So she vanished from me with the
Crown and the Mantle: but on my faith I know not if this vision came to me
sleeping, or whether it be of truth. The King was now in greater marvel then
before, willing her to dissemble the matter, and not to reveal it to any body:
then taking her by the hand, they left the chamber, coming among the knights
and Ladies in the place appointed for the ceremonies of the Day, where sitting
down in the 2. chayres of state, the King called his Knights about him, and the
Queen her Ladies, with whom she communed. Now had his Majesty given order,
that nearest his person should be Amadis, Galaor, Agraies and Don Galuanes, and
at his back King Arban of Norwales, well armed, holding his Sword ready drawn,
and two hundred Knights for his guard, then by a Herald he commanded silence.
But as the King began to speak, there entered a most beautiful Lady vere
richly attired, and with her twelve other Damosells in like bravery: for in
those days, the great Lords and Ladies were wont to bring their people to such
assemblies, clothed according to their own persons, without any difference at
all between them: this fair Lady adressed her speeches to the King,
delivering them in form following. My Lord, most humbly I beseech you to grant
me audience, and give me reason in a matter of difference, which I have
against the Knight that stands by your Majesty, meaning Amadis. Longtime have
I been requested by Angriot d'Estrauaus to be his wife, who I am assured is in
this royal presence: hereto she added how every thing happened, the cause why
he kept the vale of the Pines, and how Amadis travailing that way, made him
perforce to abandon Arms. Never thelesse, quoth she, they departed friends,
and Amadis sollemnely promised Angriote, that he should enjoy me as his Wife:
whereof when I attained knowledge, I withdrew my self to a Castle of mine, where
I kept such a strong guarde and custom, as it was thought impossible for any
strange knight to enter there, without license: but that knight coming
thither, vanquished my guardants, and has utterly abolished the drift I
intended. Yet afterward of his own good will he promised me, to cause Amadis
recall his offer to Angriote: then chanced an unhappy combat between him and
this knight mine Uncle, who being at the latest extremity of his life, at my
request he was spared, on this condition: that on the first day your Majesty
held open Court, I should here present my self, to grant a request he must
demand of me. To satisfy my promise I am come hither, and desire to know what
he will command me: At which words Amadis stepped forward, saying. My Lord, the
Lady has told ye nothing but truth, concerning the several promises at the
Combats: therefore am I ready here to accomplish, that Amadis shall call back
his word to Angriote, provided, she perform her own promise. On my
conscience, quoth she, if you effect what you have said, you pleasure me more
then you can imagine: and to let you know I am ready to fulfill my offer,
demand what you please, for if it be in my power you shall prevail. I request
nothing else answered Amadis, but that you would accept Angriote as your
husband, he loving you so dearly as he does. Out alas, cried the Lady, what
manner of demand is this? I wish Madame said Amadis, that you would marry with
such a one, as is well worthy to have so fair a Lady. In sooth knight, quoth
she, this is not according to the promise you made me. I promised nothing
replied Amadis but I will perform it: for if I stand bound to you, to cause
Amadis discharge his word to Angriote, herein I accomplish it. I am Amadis, and
I revoke the promise I made him, wherein you must needs confess your self
satisfied: he gladly would enjoy you as his Wife, and I join with him in the
same request, thus stand I free discharged to you both. May it be possible?
quoth she, that you are the man so highly renouned? Credit me Lady, answered
the King, this is Amadis. Ah wretch that I am, said she, now do I well perceive,
that art nor cuning can prevent what God has appointed, for I have done my
uttermost to escape Angriote, not only for the evil I wish him, disdaining
his good and virtuous deserts: but carrying this resolution, that keeping my
self chaste and single, I would not bring my liberty into subjection: and now
when I thought to be furthest from him, I am come nearer then ever I intended.

Lady, quoth the King, you have great occasion to rejoice, for you being fair
and rich, he is a young and brave disposed knight; as you are rich in goods and
possessions, even so is he in bounty and virtue, not only in deeds of Arms,
but in all other good qualities beseeming a knight, therefore your marriage
together is very requisite, and I think all in this presence are of mine
opinion: hereupon, she stepped to the Queen, saying. Madam, you are esteemed
one of the most virtuous Princesses in the world, most humbly I desire your
council what I shall do.

Fair friend, answered the Queen, according to the reputation Angriote had
gotten among the good, he well deserves, not only to be abundant in riches,
but to be loved of any Lady he shall choose.

Why Lady? said Amadis, think you not that by accident or affection, my promise
was made to Angriote, for had he compelled me to one of these twain, then
might you well have condemned me of folly: but making trial of his valor and
hardiness, yea, to mine own cost I dare assure ye, and knowing likewise his
earnest love to you: me thinks the justice of the cause commands, that not
only my self, but all such as are acquainted with him, ought to (...) in
seeking remedy for you both: in him, the extreme passions he endures through
your love, in you, by making his restless griefs known to you.

Now trust me Sir, quoth she, such praise have I heard of your usage to every
one, as I imagine you would not say (before such an assembly) otherwise then
truth, wherefore following your counsel, as also the pleasure of the King and
Queen, I will forget my former stubborn opinion, and am ready to accomplish
what you shall command me. Then Amadis taking her by the hand, called
Angriote, and presenting him his love, said: Sir Angriote, I promised to do my
uttermost in this matter, say now, is this the Lady you would have? Even she
quoth Angriote, is the life and essence of my Soul, and I am devoted to none
but her. Then here I give her you, replied Amadis, on this condition, that you
shall be forth with married together, and continue in honorable love to her as
she deserves.

I thank you my Lord, quoth he with all my heart, and will observe your gentle
commandment. Presently the King called for the Bishop of Salerne, who
conducted them to the Church, where they were espoused in the presence of many
great Lords. Afterward they returned to the City, and there the wedding was
solemnized with great joy and Triumphs: wherefore we may well say, that hot
men, but God appoynteth marriage, who perceived the honest and continent love,
which Angriote euer-more bare to this selfe-willed Lady. For albeit he had her
in his custody, never did he mean dishonorablie against her, but by virtuous
cogitations bridled unlawful desire: only to express how entirely he loved
her, and by obeying her seueere charge, lost his life wel-neare when he
combatted with Amadis.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How King Lisuart would have the advice of his Princes and Lords, as concerning
his former determination, for the high exalting and entertayning of Chivalry.

AFter the end of this marriage, which by diversity of opinions caused much
talk, as commonly it happens in such cases: the King commanded silence
again by his Herald, when every one being attentive to hear what he would
say, he thus began. My friends, no one of you is ignorant of the heavenly
favor toward me, by appointing me the greatest earthly Lord, that lives this
day in the Isles of the Ocean: Wherefore I think it convenient, that as we in
this country are the chief, so should we be second to no other Prince, in
rendering immortal thanks by good and virtuous works, whereof we are now
minded to determine. In this respect I entreat and command albeit Kings are
the heads of their Monarchies, and you the members, that you would altogether
take advise, and give me counsel even from your consciences, what you think
most expedient for me to do, as well for the benefit of my Subjects, as also
for our estate. And I assure ye, I am minded to believe your opinions, as
proceeding from loyal and saithfull subjects: wherefore again I desire ye,
that without fear, each one would in particular and generally advise, what we
ought to do as matter most commendable. Herewith he held his peace, and
Barsinan Lord of Sansuegua was entreated by all the assistants to speak his
opinion, which they did for no other reason but because the King would have
every one honor him: whereupon, after many excuses on his own behalf, he
arose from his seat, and making humble reuorence, thus spoke: seeing it likes
you, I should first declare my censure, I desire the King and this company to
pardon my ignorance, being unworthy of this honorable and gracious favor. But
me thinks (under submission to his pleasure, and better advise of al you my
Lords) that we should withdraw our selves a while from the presence of his
Majesty, where we may more freely conceive our several humors. This answer was
generally well liked wherefore the King and Queen left them together, walking
into another of their Pauillions: then Saroloys the Fleming, County of Clear,
began in this manner. You have all heard my Lords, the good zeal the King has
to the government, not only of the common wealth in his Realm, but
particularly to the honorable increase of Chiualry, which he desires to
continue in greater preeminenco then ever it has been. And therefore my Lords
humbling my self to better opinion, I think it good (to supply the intent of
our King,) that we all ought to counsel him, to strengthen himself with men
and money: for they are the sinnews of war and peace, whereby, all Kings on
the earth are maintained in their puissant authority. For it is most certain,
that treasure is for Soldiers and men at arms, by whom Kings reign, nor
ought it for any cause to be elsewhere dispended, without committing of true
sacrilidge: for these affairts are termed holy, causing the state to live in
tranquillity, and win glorious conquests of such as seek to invade them.
Beside, to attain the better thereto, his Majesty must seek means to get
all the knigh is he can hear of, as well strangers as other: entreating them
with liberality, to send his renown on wings through the world, which will
fetch from the furthest parts men to his service, in hope of condign
recompense to their labor. By their aid he may easily make himself Monarch of
all the Princes by Eeast and West, for it has never been read or heard, that
any Prince could make himself great, except by the assistance of valiant and
hardy Knights, having bought their vallotr in breue attempts. I term it
bought, by favoring honoring, and distributing their treasure among them: that
they may receive no occasion of dislike, but with unconquerable resolution to
pursue victory. As he would have proceeded in further persuasion, the greater
part of the Lords seemed to allow of his opinion, afferssing that better
conncell could not be given: which when Barsinan heard, he requested audience
for himself, and having grant thereof, he intended to reuerse this first
advise, because he might very hardly else go forward with his secret purpose:
the silence being made, Barsinan thus begins. It seems by your countenance my
Lords, that the County of Clares opinion is a grounded truth, for I see the
most part of you auerre the same, not having heard any thing to the contrary:
notwithstanding, I hope to make it known to you all, and to the king himself
hereafter, how much I desire to be friend him, you and the whole Realm. The
county of Clare has laid before you. that the King your master ought to
strengthen himself, by the multitude and force of strange knights, whom he
would have called from all parts of the world: in sooth if his opinion were to
be credited, and you your selves bound to follow it, I am certain in short
time their number would be such, as your king, who is a good Prince and
liberal: would not only congratulate them with what he was wont to bestow on
you, but likewise take your own from you, and give to them, for naturaly,
matter of nouelty and never seen before, is most pleasing. Hereupon it
follows, that whatsoever service you perform, be it of never so high
esteemation, yet shall you fall into his disdain and oblinion, and strangers
life you from the seats, which now do promise your securest quiet. Therefore my
Lords, before you conclude, this matter is of so great importance, as you all
ought to be advised, by good and descreete deliberation in your grave
judgments. I hope there is no one in all this assembly, that will presume I
speak otherwise, then reason and the good love I bear ye does admonish me,
for I thank God I am such a one, as need to regard the greatest Prince my
neighbor, no more then he does me: but considering I am in so noble compay, and
hare here received such favor and honor, I rather desire (God is my witness)
I had never been borne, then to flatter men with vain persuasions. You must
therefore (my Lords) diligently foresee, least afterward you repent with too
much leisure. And here he paused, for the murmour was so great among them, as
they hardly gave him time to conclude, because the most part of them that
accorded to the first opinion, were now changed and held with Barsinan, by
means whereof, they could determine nothing, but it was appointed how the king
should be acquainted with this controversy, that he might set down some
better order: and after it had again been debated in his presence, he thus
spoke unto them all.

My honorable friends, I am sure that the love you bear me, and your forward
desire in doing me service, has brought you into these intricate
difficulties: and I think there is no one of you all, but has spoken so near
to truth as is possible, whereby your judgments are so sound and good, as
better cannot be heard from any. Notwithstanding, it is a thing most sure and
certain, that the Kings of the earth are not esteemed great, by the number of
places in their possession, but by the quantity and multitude of their people,
over whom they rule and command. For what can one king alone do? it may be much
less the^ the simplest of his subjects: and befide, it shall seem a matter
above his power, to govern and maintain his estate without people, let him
abound in never so much wealth: nor can these transitory gifts of fortune be
better employed, then distributed among such as well deserve them. Whereby I
gather, how every man of good judgment will say, that good counsel and
strength of men, is the very treasure indeed. If yet you will have better
instance hereof, look on the lives of great Alexander, strong Julius Caesar,
gentle Hannibel, and many other, whose names bear the title of immortality
they by the treasure of men, and not money, were made Kings, Emperors and
Monarchs, for they could bountifully distribute their coin, to such as they
well knew had best deserved it; and likewise would use them with gracious
behavior, as they might be termed Lords both in heart and hand, the only mean
that made them be served with fedelity. Therefore my good friends, I desire you
all, even in the most entire affection I can use, that you assist me to your
uttermost, in recovery of good Knights, either of our own or strangers:
promising you by the faith and word of a king, so honorably to entreat and
esteem of them, as both they and you shall remain contented. Nor are you
ignorant my noble friends, that the better we be accompanied, the more we
shall be feared of our enemies, our state in greater safety, and your selves
more securely defended and loved. If then any virtue at all abide in us, you
may easily judge, how new friends cannot make us forgetful of our old: let
none then differ from the request I have made, but rather yield and consent
thereto. Again I entreat ye, and expressly command, that each of you
presently name such to me as you know, happily they being yet unknown to me:
to the end if any be in this Court, they may receive such favor of us, as the
absent may be the better affected to our service; likewise we entreat them,
not to depart our company, without giving us some advertisement. All which was
presently done, many openly called, and their names set down but because the
tables were covered for dinner, the King arose from his chair, withdrawing
himself into the appointed Hal^, where many Tables were provided, which he
commanded to be well furnished with Knights. You may easily conjecture, that
during the service, they diversely communed together, some on the kings
deliberation, and other, of his magnificence, until the Tables were
with-drawne again: when the King caused them all to be called, and thus spoke.
You see my good friends, how earnestly I love and desire your company,
wherefore you must grant me one request, not to depart this Court without my
leave: for I would particularly know the service you have done me, and you taste
such reward of my treasure, as may continue your love to me. Hereupon they were
severally called by name again, and every one confirmed the kings request,
except Amadis, because he was the Queens knight: and all this while was she
present at these matters, wherefore after the noise was somewhat appeased, she
framed her speeches to the King in this manner. My Lord, seeing it has pleased
you so to favor and honor your Knights, me thinks it were reasonable that I
should do the like to the Ladies and Gentle-women, of what part soever they
be. Wherefore I humbly desire one boon, with assurance likewise if you
consent, these Gentlemen after you shall not deny me: considering that in
semblable company, good things deserve to be demanded and granted. Then the
King looked on all the assistants, saying: What answer (my friends) shall we
make the Queen? shall we agree to her demand? Yea Sir, if it be your pleasure,
answered they. What? said Galaor, were it possible to deny a princess so
virtuous? Seeing you are all so well content, quoth the King, she shall obtain
whatsoever she asks. At these words the Queen arose, and thanking her Lord,
said. Seeing it pleases you to give place and favor to my request, I desire
henceforth you would do such honor to Ladies and Gentlewomen, as to take
them into your protection and defense: maintayning their quarrels against all
such as would molest them any manner of way. Beside, if you have made promise
of some suite to a man, and the like to any Lady or Gentlewoman: you first
shall accomplish the woman's request, as being the weakest person, and who has
most need to be helped. This granted, hereafter they shall be better favored
and defended then ever they were: for villaynes that are wont to do them
injury, meeting them in the fields, and knowing they have such knights as you
are for their protectours, dare no way wrong them. In sooth Madame, said the
King, your request is reasonable, and I think none will gainsay it: we will
have it therefore registered and set down as a law inviolable.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How while this great and joyful assembly endured, a Damofell came to the
Court cloa: head in mourning, requesting aid of King Lisuort, in a cause
whereby she bad been wronged.

Mean while this honorable company thus continued, free from all danger and
mis-hap, thinking on nothing but pleasure and delights: there entered a Damsel
clad in mourning, who falling on her knees before the King, thus spoke. My
Lord, each one is merry but my poor self, who am so crossed with grief and
sorrow, as death were the best friend could come to me: yet would your Majesty
take compassion on me, I easily might recover my joy again. These words were
dipped in such abundance of tears, as the King being moved therewith to pity,
thus answered. Lady, I would be very glad to relieve your sadness, but tell me
who is the cause thereof? Dread Lord, quoth she, my Father and Uncle are
detained prisoners, by a Lady who has vowed never to release them until they
deliver her two so good knights as one was whom they killed in fight. On what
occasion did they kill him? said the King. Because he vanted, replied the
Damosel, that he alone would combat with them, and so proud he grew in
speeches, as at length he defied them. Not long after they meeting one day
together, the knight used such reproouing terms of cowardice, as my Father
and uncle could not endure the injury: but falling to the combat, the knight
was slain in the presence of a Lady, named Galdenda, who, as she said,
procured his coming to maintain a difference, which she had with a neighbor
of hers, being her great enemy: wherefore seeing him dead, she caused the
conquerors to be taken, and put them into the most miserable prison in the
world: albeit my father, and uncle often told her, that they would perform for
her what the knight should have done. But she answered, how she well knew they
were not sufficient for the cause, and therefore should never be released,
until they delivered her two knights of like account, each of them valuing him
in strength who^ they had slain, to finish the attempt himself was able to
do. Know you not Damsel, said the King, against whom they should combat, or
the place where it is appointed? No truly Sir, answered the Damsel, but I
have seen my father and uncle eruelly put in prison, where their friends ca^
compass no means to see them. Herewith she began again to weep, that every one
pitied to behold her, which made the king ask her, if the place were far off:
In five days my Lord, quoth she, it may easily be gone and returned. Now trust
me, said the king, you shall not want your joy for two knights, wherefore look
among al these gallants, and choose such as you best fancy. My Lord, replied the
Damsel, I am a stranger, and know not any (...) this Court: But if you
please, I will inintreate the Queen to do me so much grace, (...) to appoint
me (...) and falling at the Queens feet, proceeded thus. Madame, you are
said to be one of the wisest and most virtuous dames in the world, you
understand the cause of my mourning, and the gracious offer the King has made
me: most humbly I beseech ye the^, for the honor of God, to take compassion on
a poor Gentlewoman, and counsel me which two knights I shall choose, that are
best able to support my want. Believe me Damsel, answered the Queen, you
demand a matter of great importance, yet in such sort do I pity your cause,
as I am the more willing to give you advise: albeit I would be loath to forgo
them twain, whom I could name in this company. The^ she showed her Amadis,
saying: This is my knight. And pointing to Galaor, said. This other is the
Kings, yet be they both brethren, and the best Knights (as I have heard) this
day living. I desire your Majesty, quoth the Damsel, to tell me their names.
The one, said the Queen, is called Amadis, and the other Galaor. But by your
favor, replied the Damsel, is this Amadis, the knight so much renowned? I am
very certain, Madame, so soon as he and his brother shall arrive where I can
bring them, my cause will be sufficiently executed, therefore I desire you to
obtain me their company. Hereupon the Queen called them, saying: I beseech
ye both to succor this woman, who stands in need of your assistance.
Amadis was somewhat flow in answering, for he cast his eye on the Princess
Oriana, to note if she would like of his departure: and she who likewise
pitied the woman's cause, let fall her gloves, which was an appointed signal
between them, and thereby he was certified of her consent, wherefore he thus
spoke to the Queen. I am at your disposition, Madame, to do whatsoever you
shall command me. Go then, in Gods name, quoth she, and return again with all
possible speed, without tarying for any thing that may happen. Hereto they
willingly condescended, and taking leave of her, Amadis fained he would speak
to Mabila, when coming neure her and Oriana, he said to his Goddess.
Madame, well may I say that the fairest Lady in the world, sends me to succor
the most woeful woman I ever did behold. Sweet friend, quoth Oriana, I repent
that I gave you so much liberty, because my mind tells me, this attempt
will prove somewhat dangerous to you, which I hope the heavens will powerfully
defend. I am persuaded Madame, answered Amadis, that as the worderfull
worke-man of the world, has enriched you with beauty beyond all other women,
he will nor suffer you to feel displeasure, by any misfortune happening to
me: for being yours as I am, I imagine my self so happy, as I think no evil
can chance to me, if I continue in your gracious favor. If it lay in my
power, replied Oriana, I would revoke your license of departure: but seeing it
may not be, I will remain in prayer for your prosperous success. So taking
leave of her, he and Galaor went to arm them-selue, then doing their humble
duty to the king, they rode away in company of the Damsel. As thus they
travailed, about midday they entered the forrrest, which commonly was called
the unfortunate Ferrest, because never any knight errant entered into it, that
could escape without some michiefe: and so these two brethren dearly
experimented, for such mishap befell them, as they verily thought to lose their
lives. Still rode they on without any adventure, till the Mo one began to grace
the evening, yet would not the Damsel show any sign of stay, which made
Amadis ask this question: Gentlewoman, shall we rest out selves here a while?
Yea mary, quoth she, here before we shall find tents ready provided, and
people in them who expect your coming: make then a little have I pray you,
because I will go before to advertise them. They were very well content
therewith, and so the Damsel left them, till soon after they espied the
tents, where they saw her among other Ladies and knights, who bad the^ welcome
at their arrival: and being alighted from their horses, they were conducted
into a Pauillion, having servants standing ready to take their armor, which
they had no sooner put off, but was carried by them into another room,
where-upon Amadis demanded why they did so. Because, replied the Damsel, you
must lodge where they have carried your armor. He imagining she said true,
made no further inquiry, but sat down with his brother on stools that stood
ready for them, attending the hour of supper. Not long had they sitten there,
but five knights well armed entered furiously upon them, saying: Yield your
selves, else you are slain. When Amadis heard and saw their bad behavior, he
knew right well they were betrayed, and starting up, said to Galaor. By God
brother, we are treacherously deceived. Then finding no remedy but present
death, after they had strugled with the knights, who easily might have taken
their lives, Amadis thus spoke. Ah villains, you have us now at too much
advantage, deliver us our arms, and this quarrel shall be otherwise decided.
These words will little profit ye, answered the Knights, yield your selves
our prisoners, or we will kill ye. So may you do, said Galaor, like traitors
as you are, and I will maintain my words against two or three of you, if you
dare deliver me mine arms. We need no such proof, replied the knights, but if
you contend in further speeches, you shall dearly buy them with the loss of
your lives. Now trust me, quoth Amades, we rather will dye, then be prisoners
to such villains as you are. Herewith one of the knights went forth, and
coming to a Lady, he said. Madam, they will not yield, shall we kill them*
Stay a while, quoth she, and if they grant not my will, deal as you please
with the^. Then came the Lady (who was mauaileous beautiful) into the tent and
showing the countenance of a very angry woman, thus spoke to Amadis and Galaor:
Knights yield your selves my prisoners, otherwise you must die. Brother,
answered Galaor, it may be she will pirtie us, let us yield our selves to
her. And Madame, quoth he, we befeech ye deliver our horses and armor, when
if all your feruants can conquer us, we will be content to submit our selves:
but if you deny us this reasonable request, we must esteem the less of you,
and they that dealewith us so discourteously. I willgiue no credence to you at
this time, replied the Lady, but would counsel ye to yield your selves to me.
Whereto at length they accorded, seeing they could no way else save their
lives: yet knew she not their names, for the Damsel that conducted them
thither, would not tell her, because if her Mistress understood what they
were, she knew they might not escape the death. Wherefore she was content to
conceal them, in respect of the offense she should commit, by causing the
death of two so good knights: beside, she repented her vnhonorable journey,
which now she could no way remedy, but only by keeping their names unknown.
They being thus prisoners to the Lady, she entered into these speeches. Knights,
you may see in what estate I hold ye, and there is no mean but one for
deliverance, which I will acquaint ye withal: ^ary if you do not fulfill it,
in steed of giving you liberty, I will cause you to be enclosed in such a
dolorous prison, as shall be worse to you then death it self. Lady, answered
Amadis, the matter may be such, that we shall easily consent thereto: and in
some sort again, we will rather die then obey you. I know not (quoth the Lady)
how you may conceive thereof, but I can assure ye, that if you promise me not
to forsake the service of King Lisuart, and to go tell him at your departure
hence, how you do it by commandment of Madasima Lady of (...), who enuies his
welfare, because he keeps one in his court, thee slew the most renowned
Knight Dardan: you ne-uer shall escape this merciless captivity. Madame, said
Galaor, if you do this, thinking thereby to offend king Lisuart, you much abuse
your self: for we are two poor knights, who have no other riches then our
Armor and Horse, and he has such store of redoubted Servants, as he will
little care whether you imprison us or no: yet shall it be such a shame to us,
as you can ne-uer imagine the like, because we are unable to do it. What?
quoth she, love you better to spend your life time in a most miserable prison
then to forsake the service of the most disloyal king living? Now trust me
Madame, answered Galaor, but ill beseems you these bad speeches: for he is one
of the best Princes in the World, and against any knight I will maintain, that
never was disloyalty found in him. In lucklesse time for thee, said Madasima,
have thou uttered thy love: wherewith she commanded their hands to be bound.
That shall I do, replied a knight, and cut off their heads, if you please.
Hereupon he laid hold on Amadis, who was so offended thereat, as he lifted his
fist to give him a blow on the care: but the knight escaping, Amadis caught him
about the middle, throwing him so violently against the ground, that he thought
his heart was broken, for he lay still and moved not. Now grew the Lady and her
knights into such anger with Amadis, as presently they would have slain him,
and he had not escaped, but that an ancient knight stepped before him with his
Sword drawn, using such threatenings and other behavior, as he caused them all
to go forth of the Pauillion: yet could he not defend him so well, but Amadis
was wounded on the right shoulder. Then stepped the ancient knight to
Madasima, with these words. By God Madame you deal like a very unreasonable
Woman, causing your people in your presence to murder two knights, after they
have yielded themselves your prisoners. Why Sir? quoth she, did you not see
their presumptuous boldness? especially this varlet, who before my face has
so used this Man, as he is not able to rise again? Madame, replied Galaor, we
rather choose to die, then any other but your self shall bind us: for you by
nature are gentle and courteous, and we as prisoners will show obeisance to you.
Seeing you say so, answered Madasima, I will bind you my self: hereupon she
bound their hands with strong cords, and presently taking down the Tents, they
departed thence, Amadis and Galaor being set on horses without Saddles, and led
along by two Sergeants: as for Gandalin and Galaors Squire, they followed on
foot, having their hands bound behind them, in manner as if they had gone to
hanging, and thus were they constrained to travail al night through the
Forest.

But Amadis was weary of his life, not so much for his hard usage, in respect
he could govern himself with wonderful patience: but for the matter Madasima
would enforce them to, the refusal whereof, gave hope of no better usage at
her hand, but for ever to be deprived of his fair Oriana. And contrariwise, if
he consented, he should in like manner be banished from her presence, being
compelled to serve king Lisuart no longer: these two extremitys troubled his
thoughts, which the ancient knight well perceived that saved their lives, yet
he imagined the cause to proceed from his hurt, and was moved to pity him,
for the Damsel had told him, that he was one of the best knights in the world.

Here you must observe, how the Damsel was the ancient knights Daught^r, and
repented her tr^^son in deceiving them, seeing how discourteously they were
(...) which made her earnestly to persuade her father, to practice some mean
for their safety: for, quoth she, if they be put to death, perpetual shame
will attend on my life. Have pity then (good Father) on them and me, in
respect the one is famous Amadis of Gaul, and the other his brother Galaor,
who flew the Giant at the Rock of Galteres. Full well knew the knight the cause
why his Daughter brought them, and therefore pitied their usage the more,
devising how he might compass the means to shield them from death, which was
^re at hand, so coming to Amadis he thus spoke. Be of good chie^^, Sir Knight,
for I hope by (the help of God) ^re long (...) deliver you from this cruel,
Lady: and if your wound offend ye, I will persuade her to let you have some
cure. When Amadis heard him speak so friendly, knowing likewise it was the
Man, who delivered him from them that would have slain him, he thus answered.
Father, I have no Wound which greatly annoyeth me, but I have more cause to
complain of the Damsel, she has brought us hither by the falsest treach^ in
the World. I know very well, said the Knight, you have been deceived, and can
tell what you are better then you ween, which makes me the more ca^efull in
seeking your good, Therefore I shall give you profitable counsel if you will
accept it. But did the Lady know you, you should die without any rem^ because
nothing might serve (...) to expiate her wrath: believe then what I say, and
put it in practice. You are fair, young, and of gallant stature, beside,
Madasima has been told, how you are one of the best Knights in the World,
whereby she conceiueth good opinion of you: now must you cunningly close with
her, requesting she would accept you as her husband or perpetual friend: for
she is a woman not to refuse you, if you can never so little dissemble with
her. But what you do, do quickly, because at that place whither we are now
going, she intends to send one of her servants to King Lisuarts Court, whose
errand is only to enquire your names: for she that conducted you hither,
(perceiving you should assuredly die, if her mistress knew the names of you
both) disguised the matter so with her, as she said, she forgot to ask your
names: only thus persuading her, that you were two of the very best Knights in
the World. The danger thoroughly considered, I swear to you by the faith of a
Christian, that I can devise no better mean for your deliverance, then this I
have told ye: and shall I say more? If you do it not, worse will come to you
then you suspect. But Amadis loved the Princess Oriana so dearly as he rather
desired death, then to hazard himself in such a composition, whereupon he thus
replied. I thank you Sir heartily for your great kindness, but I have no such
authority over my self, as will permit me to proceed so far: though your
Lady her self entreated never so deeply, yet liberty nor life can persuade
me. Alas Sir, answered the Knight, I wonder you ^ll not consider how ^^ere your
death is? It is all one to me, quoth Amadis, but if you will deal herein with
my brother, he is a knight more brave and beautiful then I am: happily he will
consent to follow your devise. Presently he left Amadis, and coming to Galaor,
delivered the whole discourse he did to his brother: Which he liking very well,
made this reply. Good Father, if you could bring it to pass, that the Lady
would accept me as her friend, my companion and I were for ever at your
command. Refer the matter to me, quoth the Knight, immediately will I go to
her, and hope to strike it dead on her behalf. So departing from Galaor, he
went to Madasima, who rode foremost, and thus began to break with her.

Madame, you carry two prisoners with you, but you do not know what they are.
Why ask you me such a question? answered Madasima. Because the one of them,
quoth the knight, is esteemed the best knight that ever bare Arms, and the
most accomplished in all other good gifts. Is he not then named Amadis? said
she, whose death I have so long desired? No Madame, answered the Knight, I
speak of him which rides next us, whose youth and beauty had you well
regarded, your self would say you have been too outrageous in injury. What
though he be your prisoner, it is not for any offense committed against you,
but only through the hatred you bear to another: all which you may yet
redress in much better sort then you began, considering if he conceived liking
of you, you may thereby easily induce him to love, and under that ceremony,
draw him to do what your self shall desire. In sooth, plied Madasima, I will
assay, to know if he be such a one as you report him to be. Do Madame, quoth
he, and you shall find him one of the fairest Knights that ever you beheld.

Here you must note, that the Knight no sooner left Galaor when he went to the
Lady, but he took occasion thus to talk with his brother. You see (my Lord)
the estate wherein we are, which requires some notable dissimulation at our
hands: I beseech ye therefore moderate their anger, because already it
endangereth our lives, and for a while follow my direction. By Heaven, brother,
answered Amadis, death had been very welcome to me: but since you wish me to
be governed by you, I am content, desiring the conservation of our honors,
which being lost, we are unworthy to live. Further they could not proceed,
because Madasima came and interrupted them, when calling him aside, and fair
day was displayed on the earth: his beauty and good grace so especially
contented her, as she became surprised with his love, which she shaddowed under
demanding how he fared. Madame, said Galaor, I fare worse then you should, were
you in my power as I am in yours, for I would do you what service and pleasure
possible I could, and you use the contrary to me, I having given no occasion
of offense: reason wills I should rather be your knight, to love and honor
you, then your prisoner thus vnkindelie bound as I am.

And surely I cannot but marvel hereat, considering the simple conquest you
have thereby: use the^ such rigor to us, as women so diuinelie adorned are wont
to do. Madasima hearing his gentle language, was more and more enflamed with
his love, yet striving to dissemble it, she merrily said. Tell me fair Sir,
if I choose you as my friend, and deliver you from prison, will you (for my
sake) leave the service of King Lisuart, and afterward tell him how you did it
by my means? With all my heart Lady, answered Galaor, and to perform it, you
shall have what oath you please, both of ^ee and my companion, for he will do
no more then I request him. Credit me, quoth Madasima, if before this company
you will promise to obey me, presently you shall enjoy your liberty.

Behold me ready, replied Galaor. Yet is not this enough, answered Madasima,
for you shall swear it in the presence of a Lady where I am intended to lodge
this night: In mean while you must assure me, not to depart my company. We
will not on my faith Madame, quoth Galaor: and ^ling Amadis, caused him to
affirm as much, whereupon they were unbound and set at liberty, their Squires
likewise as friendly vse^, and mounting on their own ^ses, rode at their ease
as they did before.

But Madasima and Galaor still continued their amorous discourses, till they
arrived at a Castle named Albies, the Lady where-of received them very
honorably, in respect of great friendship between Madasima and her.
Needelesse were it to tell you of their good cheer, it could not but be
answerable to the time and company, but after supper Madasima demanded of
Galaor, if he meant to keep his promise he made her by the way. What else
Madame? quoth he, provided you be so good as your word to me. Make no doubt
thereof, replied Madasima: then framing her speeches to the Lady of the Castle,
and also to two knights that were her Sons, she proceeded in this manner, My
good friends, I pray you hear a covenant between me and these two Gentlemen,
because hereafter you may be my witnesses. They are my prisoners, and under
these conditions I have released them, that one of them shall continue my
friend, and both of them forsake the service of King Lisuart, telling him: how
for my sake, and in despite of him they have done it. Hereupon I entreat this
favor at your hands, as to meet me at the Court of that wretched King, on the
day they must declare this message, to see how contentedly he will take it: But
if they fulfill not their promise, henceforth you shall publish in all places
the heinous offense by them committed, and ten days I give them to execute
this charge. I am well pleased, said the Lady of the Castle, to do a greater
matter for you then this, if they as willingly consent thereto. We pray you,
quoth Galaor, not to fail herein, for we have promised and will perform it.
Receive then your liberty, answered Madasima, yet must you not depart this
night: These words she spoke, because she intended to scale the bargain with
Galaor.

When the time came that summoned them to rest, Amadis was conducted to one
chamber, and Galaor to another, whither soon after Madasima repaired, she
being young, beautiful, and aduenturously given: Galaor likewise, a man
forward to such fortunes, when Love had erected his scaling-ladders to the
walls, quickly got possession of the Forte. And so well liked she these
amorous skirmishes, as afterward she reported in many places, how she ne-uer
tasted a more pleasant night, and had she not promised him departure, hardly
would she have let him go so soon, nor did she but in hope of his speedy
return.

Thus was she inclined to voluptuous desire, as without care of her honor, she
often fell in this sort. By these means escaped Amadis, and Galaor, under the
conditions you have heard, which they hoped to prevent without impeach, as
hereafter shall be declared unto you. All that day they rode, not hindered by
any thing, and at night were friendly entertained in an hermitage, setting
forward the next morning to the Court of King Lisuart.

CHAP. XXXV.
How King Lisuart was in danger of his person and his state, by the unlawful
promises he made too rashly and vnadaisedly.

Four days after Amadis and Galaor departed from the Court, the ancient
Knight came to the City of London, who left the Crown and the mantle with
the Queen, as you have heard: when falling on his knee before the King, he
began in this manner. I marvel my Lord, that in a time of such honor, you
wear not the Crown I left with you. And you Madame, quoth he to the Queen,
is it possible you should make so slender account of the sumptuous mantle I
gave you in charge, not deigning a^yet to prove it, or how it will become ye?
When the King heard his words, knowing they were lost, he sat a good while
without any answer, which made the knight thus begin again. On my faith I am
glad you like the^ not, for had you pleased to keep them, you must likewise
have granted my demand, and happily it would prove greater then you expect:
otherwise, in falsifying your promise, you might procure the loss of my head.
Most humbly therefore I beseech ye my Lord, to will them be delivered me
again, because I may tarry no longer here.

At which words the King seemed much offended, and not being able any longer
time to conceal his hidden anger; earnestly fixing his eyes upon him (which
were then over clouded with a discontented brow) he brake forth into these
following speeches, Know knight, that whatsoever promises, I have made to thee,
are (like those decrees, which stand registered in the book of Fate) immutable,
and thou shall find that I will keep them inviolable: Although I must
confess, (for the which I am heartily sorry; not so much for my self; who am
a partner with thee in the loss: as for thy sake who committed them to my
trust) that both the Crown and Mantle are utterly lost, how, or by what means
I cannot relate, would heavens would please to be so propitious as to bring to
light this deed of darkness; then should my now troubled heart, find
comfort, and you, your wished desire: Which till then cannot rest contented, my
much perplexed mind would then be at peace, which now is at civil Wars,
and intestine contention within me. At which words, not being able any further
by his tongue (the hearts best interpreter both for joy and grief) to express
himself, he abruptly paused, partly moved thereunto by the knight who gave a
loud shrike, saying.

Ah wretched and miserable old man, now comes the time I so much feared,
bringing with it, my latest and unlucky exigent: have I not long enough
endured torments, but now must after all those miseries, finish mine old age
in the most sore, cruel death was ever heard of, having by no offense deserved
it? While thus he complained, the tears abundantly trickled down his white
beard, which moved the most constant to pity his grief, and the King himself
ouercom with compassion, returned this answer. Fear not (Knight) to speed
any thing the worse for my loss, you must be satisfied whatsoever it cost me,
according as I faithfuly promised. At these words the Knight would have kissed
his feet, but the King restrained him, saying: Demand what thou will, for thou
shall have it. I know my Lord, quoth the Knight, you remember your promise to
deliver my Crown and Mantle, or whatsoever I requested for them: God is my
witness, I intended not to desire what now I must needs, by reason I have no
other mean whereby to be delivered, if I had, I would acquit you of the
grief I know you will endure, granting me the thing I must of necessity
demand: but now it may not be otherwise, except you infringe your faith and
loyalty. Rather will I lose my Kingdom, replied the King, then make apromise
and not fulfill it, say boldly therefore thy mind. I thank your Majesty,
quoth the knight, there now remains nothing, but to have assurance from the
Lords of your Court, that they seek not to take from me the gift you must
deliver: otherwise your promise cannot be performed, or I satisfied, having a
reward now, and taken from me anon. Great reason, said the King, my word shall
stand for their warrant. Seeing my Lord, quoth the knight, Fortune has so
permitted, that you have lost my Mantle and the Crown, it is impossible to
save my head, except you give me Madame Oriana your Daughte. Be therefore now
advised, either restore my Jewels, or give me her, albeit I love the one
better then the other: for never can I have so much good by her, (...) sustain
harm by your unhappy loss. Now began all the Lords and Barons to murmur
against the knight, persuading the king to deny his word; but he rather (...)
death, he was such a good and loyal Prince, and this answer he made them. Be
not offended, my good friends, the loss of my Daughter will not be so
prei^diciall to me, as the breach of my promise: for if the one be envious, the
other is injurious, and to be ^ned every way. The proof is ready, if Subjects
find not their Prince faithful, and his word inviolable, what care will they
have of the love and fidelity they owe to him? much better unborn then any
such blemish: this knight therefore must have my daughter, and I will deliver
her according to my promise. Hereupon he sent for her but the Queen being
present all this while, little thought the king would so forget his fatherly
love: and when she heard this rigorous sentence pronounced against her
Daughter, she good Lady fell at the kings feet, when weeping (as a Mother for
the loss of her Child) she said. What will ye do my My Lord? will ye be
more inhumane to your own blood, then the brute Beasts are to their
contraries? Notwithstanding all their brutish qualities, yet be they never so
unnatural to show any violence to their young ones. May it then be thought
reasonable under shadow of an accorded promise (without knowledge thereof) to
commit so great wrong, not only against your self impitious father, or me a
woeful and unfortunate mother, but likewise against the whole common weal of
this Realm? Alas Sir, let my incessant tears persuade you, to bethink some
other mean for your discharge, and also to content the knight. Madame, quoth
the King, my word is past, I pray you talk no more thereof to me. Thus
speaking, the tears streamed down his cheeks, whereat the Lords were not a
little agrieued, and that which most troubled him, was the acclamations of the
Ladies, wherefore the King commanded them to their chambers. The Queen seeing
she might not prevail, fell in a swoune, but by her Ladies she was conueighed
thence, the King giving charge on pain of death, that no one should seek to
alter his promise. My daughter, quoth he, I commit to the pleasure of God, but
my promise shall not be broken if I can help it.

By this time the news came to Oriana, how her Father had consented to her
departure, whereat she fell down in such a trance, as they never expected
life in her again: when Mabila and the Ladies reputing her dead indeed,
thought best to acquaint the King therewith, yet by forced remedies she
revived again, breathing forth many dolorous sighs. Now the most of the women
severed themselves, some near, and some further from her, because she should
not hear their complaining: and such compassion took they on her, as would
have converted a stony heart into tears, especially, when the Princess
recovered the power of speech, and faintly uttered these regreets. Full well,
quoth she, do I well behold mine own ruin. Ah sweet friend, were thou
here, easily would thou deliver me from this pain: but thus much my heart
foretold me, even at the very hour of thy departure. Ah cursed be that
hour, because I consented to it. When thou shall hear of these tidings, I
fear (being unable to endure them) thou will die immediately: yet this is the
best hope, we shall not be long one after another. Ah death, the only refuge
to the unfortunate, see thou not me foremost in this rank? why stayest thou?
Fortune will triumph over thee, in dealing so extremely as she can with me,
albeit I know thou art able to revenge thy self: make haste therefore, and
let her not get such preeminence on me, in despite (as it were) of thy
authority. Adieu then sweet friend, for never shall we see each other more in
this life: at these words she fell in a swoune again. When the King saw she
tarryed so long, he sent to command her make more speed: but the messenger
found her in the deadly agony, and staying till she was recovered again, as
she began to renew her moanes, he thus spoke to her. Madame, the King is
offended because you come not to him.

When she heard this message, she arose, having her hear so sealed up with
grief, as it seemed, to enable her vital forces, and being followed by none
of her women, but the Damsel of Denmark, she came before the King, and
casting her self at his feet, said. My Lord and Father, what is your
pleasure with me? Fair Daughter, quoth her, I must accomplish my promise.
These speeches provoked her (...) (...), when the King grieuing to behold the
sight thereof, turned his head aside, saying to the knight. See my friend, here
is the gift you demand, and the only thing in the world I most love: but
intend you to carry her hence alone? My Lord, said the knight, she shall be
accompanied with two Gentlemen and their Squires, which were in my company when
you made me this promise at Windsore: and more may I not allow, until he
have her, unto whom I am constrained to deliver her. Yet let her have the
company of this Damsel, said the King, for it were unseemly, she should be
alone among so many men. Well, quoth the knight, for one woman it matters not.
So taking the Princess in his arms, she being scant revived from her swoune,
he set her up on horseback, and caused a Squire to sit behind her on the
horse, who might hold her fast lest she should fall: and a very sad countenance
showed the knight, saying, there was none in the Court more sorrowful then
himself. After the Damsel of Denmark was mounted, the King entreated her
not to leave his daughter whatsoever happened. And while they were thus
preparing, the Princess looking woefully about her: a tall knight well armed
came among them, who not taking off his helmet, or saluting the company, took
Orianaes horse by the bridle. This was Arcalaus the enchanter, and came in this
sort lest he should be known: soon after he commanded the Squire to ride
away with her, which the Princess perceiving, and seeing there was no other
remedy, delivering a sigh as if her heart would have split, she said. Ah my
dear friend, in a happlesse hour for you was the boon granted, because it
will be both your death and mine. Herein she meant Amadis, whom she gave
leave to depart with the Damsel, yet the standers by understood it of her
father and her self.

Thus departed Oriana with them that conducted her, who rode apace till they
were entered the Forest near at hand: and the King himself was mounted on
horseback, to conduct his daughter somewhat on the way, as also to forbid any
rescue from following, according to his former promise. But the Princess
Mabila standing at a window, to see this sad and pensive separation, could
come no nearer to Oriana, her heart was so surprised with grief: yet by hap
she espied Dardan the Dwarffe that served Amadis, making speed after the
Princess on horseback, when calling him to her, she said. Dardan, if thou
love thy Master, stay not any where till thou acquaint him with this mishappe:
if now thou fail him, it may return to thine own danger, for this is the
time of greatest necessity. By God Madame, answered the Dwarffe, I will with
all diligence perform my duty. So giving the spurs to his horse, he
galloped the same way his Master rode with the Damsel.

But leave we him posting, and tell what now happened to King Lisuart, who
accompanied his Daughter to the entrance of the Forest, causing all such to
return as followed him. Even in the hour of his trouble, a Damsel came to
him mounted on a swift Palfray, with a sword hanging about her neck, and a
Lance richly painted, having the point gilded over: after she had saluted
him, she thus spoke. My Lord, God increase your joy, and make you willing to
perform what you have promised me at Windsore, in the presence of all your
worthy knights. At these words the King knew her, remembering it was she that
said, how she would prove the virtue of his heart, whereupon he thus
answered. In good faith Damosel, I have now more need of joy then ever I had:
notwithstanding, I am ready to accomplish any thing I promised you. It is the
only thing my Lord, quoth she, of my return to you, being the most loyal King
in the world, wherefore humbly I entreat ye, presently to revenge my cause on
a knight that passed through this Forest, who not long since slew my father,
by the most horrible treason that ever was heard of: yet not content
therewith, the villain violently took me away, and perforce made me yield
to his unlawful will. But in such sort is he enchanted, as he cannot be
done to death, except the most virtuous man in the Realm of Great Britain,
give him a wound with this Lance, and another with this sword: both which he
gave in keeping to a Lady, of whom he had good hope to be loved, yet therein
he was deceived, for she hates him above all others, for which cause she gave
me this sword and Lance, whereby we might both be revenged on him. Nor can it
be done but by you only, who are the chief and most virtuous man in this
country: wherefore as you promised me before so valiant men, may it please ye
to execute this just action of vengeance. And because I have often told him,
that by this day I would be provided of a knight to combat with him, he is
come alone into this Forest, attending only for my Champion. It is likewise
ordered; how you must have no company but my self, for he little thinks
that I have the Sword and Lance so hurtful to him: and this is our agreement
together, if he remain conqueror, I must pardon him mine injury, but if he
be vanquished, he must do what I command him. Presently the King sent a
Gentleman for his Armor, which when he had put on, he mounted on a brave
Courser, girding the Damsels sword about him, leaving his own that was one
of the best in the world: then without any other company he rode on with her,
she carrying his helmet. Not far had they ridden, but she caused him to
forsake the high beaten way, conducting him by a little path among the shrubs,
where not long before they had past that led away Oriana: then the Damsel
showed him a huge knight armed, mounted on a black Courser, whereupon she
said. My Lord, take your helmet, for this is he you must deal withal: which
the King quickly did, and approaching near the knight, said. Proud Traitor,
defend thy self, and thy lawless Just. So couching their Lances, they
encountered together, where the King perceived how his painted Lance brake like
a stalk of hemp, having no strength at all in it: which made him draw his
sword to charge the knight, but at the first strok, the blade broke close to
the hilt, whereby he imagined himself betrayed, for the knight did what he
pleased to him. But as he would have killed his horse, the King being quick
and nimble caught hold by his gorget, and in such ^ore they strugled together,
as they both fell to the ground, the knight underneath, and the King upon him,
by means whereof, he got his sword from him, and unlacing his helmet to smite
off his head, the Damsel cried out so loud as she could: Sir Arcalaus,
help your Cosen quickly, or else he dies. When the King heard her name
Arcalaus, he looked up, and saw ten brave knights come running unto him, the
one of them using these words: King Lisuart, spare the knight, otherwise thou
shall not reign one hour. If I die, answered the King, so shall you all for
me, like traitors as you are. Then one of them gave him such a blow with his
Lance, as not only sore hurt him, but made him fall on his face to the
ground: yet did he recover himself very quickly, like one resolved to defend
his life, albeit he saw death present before his eyes. But being unable to
resist so many, at length they got sure hold on him, when renting off his
helmet and his shield, they bound him fast with a double chain. Afterward they
set him on a simple horse, two knights still holding the ends of the chain, and
so leading him along, sought where they might find Arcalaus, Oriana, and the
Damsel of Denmark: but the knight against whom the King first fought, rode
before apace, and wauing his gauntlet aloft to Arcalaus, said, Behold Cosen,
kin Lisuart is ours. A very good pri^e, answered* Arcalaus, henceforth shall
his enemies have no cause to dread him. Villain, quoth the King, well know I
thou wast never other then a traitor, and though I am wounded, yet will I
maintain my words if thou dare combat with me. By God, said Arcalaus,
never should I make reckoning of my self, to vanquish such a Lord as thou art.

Thus contending as they rode, they came to a double way, where Arcalaus
stayed, thus speaking to his Page. Sir, ride with all speed to London, and
say to Lord Barsinan, that he must execute what I willed him, for I have
begun indifferently, if he can make an end as well. Gone is the Page toward
the City, in mean while Arcalaus devised, to send the King one way, and
Oriana another, wherefore he said to his Cosen. Take ten knights with you,
and conduct Lisuart to my prison at Daguanell: these other four shall keep
me company, for I will lead Oriana to mount Al^i^, where I will show her
strange and wonderful things. This mount Aldin was the place of his most
usual aboade, being one of the strongest and fairest in the world: thus the
ten knights carried away the King, and Arcalaus with the rest had charge of the
Princess. But certainly, if here we consider the properties of fortune, we
may easily repute her as mutable, or rather more, toward great Princes and
Lords, then the meaner sort: as well she witnessed by king Lisuart, even in
the time when he intended most honorably, to be twharted with such a
contrary chance. For at one instant, he saw himself in the hands of his
greatest enemies, his Daughter (and heir to his kingdom) taken from him, and
all his estate in danger of ruin. He that was wont to be honored of all, was
now injuriously despised, bound and led as a thief, by a villainous enchanter,
a mean Gentleman, and out of any other hope then death. Is not this then a
fair example for such, as at this day are called to the greatest honors in
the world? wherewith oftentimes they are so blinded, that they forget both God
and themselves. King Lisuart was a right good, virtuous, and wife Prince, yet
the divine ordenance suffered him to fall in these dangers: to the end ho^ might
remember, how al creatures remain at his heavenly disposition. This lesson he
taught him, for in short time he was brought so low as might be, and
afterward restored again, as you shall presently understand.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How Amadis and Galaor understood, that King Lisuart and his Daughter were
carried away prisoners, wherefore they made haste to give them succor.

WE have before declared, by what means Amadis and Galaor escaped from
Madasima the Lady of Gantasi, who would have put them to death if she had
known their names: likewise how they took their way toward London, as men
right joyful of their good success. But by the way, they met Dardan the
Dwarffe, so fast as horse could gallop, whereupon Amadis thus spoke to Galaor.
Brother, me thinks my servant Dardan comes toward us, and doubtless about
some matter of importance, for do you not see what speed he makes? By this
time Dardan brake off their talk, rehearsing every thing that happened since
their departure* but when he told how the Princess Oriana was carried from
the Court against her will, and what sorrowful lamentations she mad^* Amadis
entered into (...) despairing fury, demanding which (...) they went that had
her in charged (...) sooth my Lord, answered Dardan* they rode thorough the
Forest; which lies on the otherside of the City. Without more words Amadis
gave the spurs to his horse, galloping amain toward London* so confounded
with the terror of these news, as he could not speak to his brother Galaor,
who left h^ not but followed at hand. Through the City they ride not making any
stay, enquiring which way they took that led away the Princess* and every one
showed it him very readily. As Gandalin came posting after his Lord, it was his
hap to pass by the Queens lodging, where she standing at a window, overcome
with grief: espied Gandalin* whom she called to her, and asked where he left
his Master. Madame* quoth he, he is gone after the th^^ have away the
Princess. Stay a little, I pray thee, said the Queen: the^ sent she for the
Kings sword, which was accounted one of the best in the world, saying. I desire
thee carry this sword to Amadis, and tell him the King forsook it this
morning, he being gone with a Damsel to combat for her, and she has given
him another sword: as yet we hear no tidings of him, either when he will
return, (...) whither he is gone. Gandalin having received the sword, (...)
away with speed after his master, whose impatience urging him to more have,
then care of his journey, made him ride so far into a foul slough, as he was
feign to alight ere he could get forth again. And leading his horse by the
bridle to escape the mire, Galaor and Gandalin ouer-took him, acquainting him
with the Queens message, and delivering the sword she sent him. When he heard
how the King was likewise gone, his desire of speed increased to give him
succor, but his horse was so wearied with striving in the bogge, as he was
constrained to take Gandalins: which travailed much worse then his own, yet
with the help of his spurs he made him go. At length they found the tracke
of horses, and by good hap met with certain poor laboring men, whom they
asked if they met not any by the way. Yes my Lord, quoth one of them, we met
certain men leading a knight and two Ladies, albeit we durst not show our
selves, but kept us hidden in the thickest of the wood, for doubtless they be
some bad people: hereto they added such a description of the prisoners, as they
easily gathered them to be the King and Oriana betrayed. But tell me good
friends, said Amadis, know you none of the other? for the prisoners are the
King and his daughter. In sooth, replied the poor man, we are altogether
ignorant what they are, yet we heard one that led the horse of the fairer Lady,
oftentimes name Arcalaus, Now trust (...), quoth Amadis to his brother, it is
the villain that enchanted me: Oh that it might be my hap to find him.
Gentlemen, said the man, ten of them went this way on the right hand, with the
Knight prisoner, and five more this way on the left hand, with the Ladies.
Brother, quoth Amadis to Galaor* I beseech ye to follow the King, least worse
be fall him then we can remedy, and I will after the Princess Oriana. So
shaking hands in equal resolution, they parted the several ways: but Amadis
found his horse so over labored, as he was able to hold out no longer. Being
thus hindered, by chance he looked aside, and saw where a Knight lay slain,
with a Squire standing by holding his horse: whereupon Amadis stepped to him,
demanding who committed that murder. A traitor has done it, answered the
Squire, who is not yet gone very far, and leads with him the fairest Lady
in the world: no other reason had he for my masters death, but because he
asked what the Lady was. What will thou do, said Amadis, tarrying here? I stay
Sir, quoth he, till some one come, who may help me with my masters body to
some burial, and afterward I intend to seek my fortune. If thou, ans^red
Amadis, wilt give me the horse thou hold, I will leave thee mine, and my
Squire to help thee, and one day will I give thee two better beside. The
squire was content, when Amadis mounting on the horse, commanded Gandalin to
help him bury his masters body, and after-ward to follow him the same way he
rode.

Thus Amadis hies so fast as horse can run, and espying an hermitage, went to
see if any body were within: at his call, the hermit ca^ ^f of whom he asked,
if he (...) not (...) Knights pass by, leading two Ladies. No verily, answered
the old father: but do you not enquire for a Castle, which is not far from
this place? Why ask yet such a question? quoth Amadis. Because a Nephew of
mine told me, said the Hermit, how Arcalaus the enchanter is going thither,
and two Ladies with him, whom he carries perforce. Ah Father, replied Amadis,
you name the traitor I look for. Trust me Sir, quoth the Hermit, he has
done many mischieues in this country, would God we were either rid of him, or
else his life amended: but have you no body to help you? No body, but God and
my self, answered Amadis. Why Sir? said the Hermit, you tell me they be five
in company, and you but one: beside, Arcalans is counted one of the best
knights in the world, and with whom few or none dare meddle. Whatsoever he
be, quoth Amadis, I am certain he is a disloyal traitor, and they no less
that keep him company: what less cause then have I to fear him? for God is
just, in whom is only my confidence. I pray you Sir, replied the Hermit,
know you of whence the Ladies be? One of them, said Amadis, is the Princess
Oriana, daughter and heir to the virtuous king Lisuart: the other is a Lady
attending on her. The God of heaven, answered the Hermit, further your intent,
that so good a Princess may not be long in such a wretches custody. If you
have any prouender Father, quoth Amadis, I desire you give my horse a little.
The Hermit brought forth such as he he had, and while the horse fed, Amadis
demanded, to whom the Castle belonged. To a knight called Grumen, said the
Hermit, Coson german to proud Dardan, who was slain at the Court of king
Lisuart* which makes me the rather conjecture, that he will lodge such as are
enemies to so good a Prince. Good father, replied Amadis, I beseech you have
mind of me in your prayers, and now show me the nearest way to the Castle.
Which the Hermit did, when Amadis mounting on horseback, took his leave,
following the way he was directed. Not long after he got a sight of the
Castle, which was compassed with strong Towers and high walls, wherefore so
closely as he could he approached near it; where he heard what joy they
made for the arrival of Arcalaus: when marking how many gates of issue it had,
he found there was no more but one, wherefore tying his horse, where he might
not be seen, he hid himself so conveniently, as none could pass in and out
but he m^ needs see them: thus was he glad to watch there all that night* At
the break of day, doubting le^t the watch of the Castle should des^^y him, he
entered a little thicket, where long he had not stayed, but he saw a knight
come forth on a little hill before the Castle, looking all about if he could
discern any ambush: which done, he went in again, and very soon after,
Arcalaus with his fou^^ companions issued forth well armed; conducting the two
Ladies, whom Amadis well knew so soon as he saw them. Hereupon he (...)
down on his knee and prayed, that God would strengthen him in this enterprise,
then looking to the well guiding of his horse, and that every part of his
Armor were as it ought to be, taking his Lance, he mounted, tarrying till
they passed by him. But because this place was unfit for the combat, he
intended to suffer them enter on the plain near at hand, still keeping
himself in the thicket: and so near did Arcalaus with his company pass by
Amadis, as he heard the Princess Oriana thus complain. Alas sweet friend,
quoth she, great reason have you to bid me adieu, when I would permit you to
go succor her, that seemed the most woeful woman in the world: for I fear
this shall be our last conge, and never may you see me again, because death
gives such due attendance, as it is impossible for me to escape. These words
were of such virtue, that albeit Amadis could not refrain from tears, yet did
they so lively inflame his heart, as ouer-reaching them ere they knew any
thing, he thus spoke to them. You lie false traitors, for these Ladies shall
pass no further. The voice of Amadis was quickly known by Oriana and the
Damsel of Denmark, when imagining themselves already reskewed, their minds
were joyfully cheered, especially to see their conductours so suddenly amated.
But Arcalaus perceiving how Amadis out-raged his friends, approached more near
him, and Amadis well knowing him from the rest, met him so bravely, as he sent
him headlong to the ground: the^ entering among the other four, he gave such a
charge to Grumen, the Lord of the Castle where they lodged, that his Lance
passed quite through his body, and breaking therein, he fell down dead from
his horse. Now drew he the sword the Queen sent him, wherewith he laid so
valiantly about him, as his enemies were clean dismayed in their hope, when
they beheld Arcalaus not yet recovered, whose power they reputed able to
ouer-throw an army. As he continued the combat with them, the Damsel of
Denmark seeing the friends of Arcalaus ^ight so timorously, and himself lie
still as one in a trance, she said to Oriana. Madame, behold how your Amadis
honors your love, see you not how he has used Arcalaus and our host? in
sooth we are already succored, for these other villains can hold out no
longer. Ah happy Amadis, quoth Oriana, the mirror of all virtue and chivalry,
heaven give thee grace to finish our deliverance, with victory over these
malicious traitors. When the Squire who had the charge of Oriana, as you
heard, understood that she named Amadis, he was in such fear, as presently
he leaped from the horse, saying. By my faith I might full well be reputed a
fool, to tarry for such blows as my companions h^ and with these words he run
away so fast, that he never looked behind if any pursued him. In this time
Amadis had dispatched the of the knights, and the fourth misdoubting like lot
would fall to him, trusted to his horse legs for safety of himself: but as
Amadis followed him, he heard the Princess give a loud cry, when looking
back, he saw that Arcalaus had got her with him on horse back, and gallopped
away so fast as he could. Hereupon he let go the knight, to help Oriana,
ouer-taking Arcalaus ^re he got much ground, and lifting his sword ^o strike
at him, he doubted least he should hurt the Princess: but turning to the
other side, he gave him such a wound on the shoulder, as he was glad to let
fall Oriana, that himself might escape more lightly: for he knew if Amadis
laid hold on him, all the treasure in the world could not save his life. When
Amadis saw himself sure of his Lady, he still pursued the cowardly runaway,
saying: Tarry Arcalaus, tarry, and thou shall see if Amadis be dead, according
as thou lyedst not long ago. But Arcalaus had no leisure to answer, he
rather took his shield from his neck and threw it to the ground, because
nothing might hinder his horse in running. At length as Amadis struck at him,
the blow fell short on the horse buttock, and the beast feeling himself
wounded, made greater haste away then he did before, leaving Amadis very far
behind, who earnestly desired the death of Arcalaus: but seeing all his labor
was in vain, and doubting least some harm might happen to his Mistress, to
lose her again by negligence, having by hardy valor so well recovered her: he
turned back again, and attayning the place where she stayed for him, he
alighted from his horse, then falling on his knee humbly kissed her hand,
saying* Madame, heaven has affoorded me more grace, in strengthening me to
succor you, then ever it did to any other knight, for I was out of hope to see
you again. But she good Lady remained still so passionate, in respect of her
ungentle usage, as also affrighted with fear when Arcalaus let her fall: that
she could return no answer, but gave him thanks by many kind embracings. By
this time, the Damsel of Denmark came to them, and by the way found the
sword of Arcalaus, which she bringing to Amadis, thus spoke. See here (my
Lord) a very fair sword. Right soon did Amadis know it, to be the same was
found with him on the Sea, which Arcalaus took from him when he lay enchanted,
being not a little glad he had recovered it.

While many ^ffable (...) passed between them, (...) still comforting his di^
Mistress, and she rejoicing in (...) lovely friend: Gandalin arrived* (...) had
sought his Master all t^ (...), and happily found him there with his Lady. Now
minded they to tarry no longer in this place* wherefore making choice of the
knights horses to their own liking, they all mounted, Amadis leading Orianaes
Palfray by the bridle, and she rehearsing to him by the way, what injury the
dead knights had done her, as in her life time she ne-uer endured the like:
Madame, answered Amadis, much greater grief have I suffered by a living
creature, yet less to be feared then the dead, who can do no harm^ but beauty
only has hazarded my life. Albeit Oriana well knew his meaning, yet she
demanded who was the cause thereof. Even you Madame, quoth he, who hold me in
a life more irksome then death. My Lord, said the Princess, never with my
consent did you sustain any harm, and very (...) would I be you should think
me so unkind: for rather could I afford to ease your grief, were it in my
power to compass the mean. Ah Madame, replied Amadis, as by you only I took
my hurt, so from you only must I have my help, and reason reputes it a matter
of great inconvenience, that such rare perfections should cause so rough
passions. But if you be endued with such pity, as the rest of your
excellencies do plainly promise, you will not behold that in me, which you
grieve to see in your chiefest enemies: even death, gentle Princess, who in my
torments awaiteth on me, forbearing to strike, being conquered with this hope,
that did opportunity and place serve, your passed promi^^ should case your
thoughts, and deliver me from this weighty oppression. But see how sweet
occasion favors us, and fortune stands aloose from hindering our content:
do not you then (good Madame) let slip this gracious offer, when time and
place challenge it at your hand, considering the argument is urgent, and being
now loytered, may hardly be again so well recovered. Oriana (not so much for
these reasons, as because her pain was equal with his, and had not he begun
the motion, her self would have solicited the same) thus answered. Great is
the force of your perswasio^s, but greater the unfeigned love I bear you, which
has such authority over me: as when you shall have least occasion to demand, I
am content and constrained to obey, yea, to repose such a thing in your trust,
as very hardly can I hold fast in my thoughts. Yet I desire you, albeit you
see me not stored with providence, that you will carefully manage our
enterprise, by wary keeping it from knowledge or suspect: rather submitting
our selves to the highest displeasure, then common reproof, which is containd
within no limits. Sufficient protestation made Amdais hereof, but little
battery needed when the hole was won, and riding through a very thick wood,
the Princess became desirous of sleep, because the night before she enjoyed
no rest: whereupon she acquainted Amadis therewith, saying, she must needs
sleep ere she went any further. He being no unprofitable counselor, and
seeing a dainty plot by a rivers side, shaddowed with boughs from the heat
of the sun: advised her to rest there awhile, and dismounting from their
horses, he thus spoke. (...) please you Madame, in this place we may stay till
the heat be gone, and you rest in tarying for the cold evening: in mean space
I will (...) Gandalin to the Town, to bring some viands to refresh us withal.
Your reason is good, said Oriana, but how shall he come by meat? He shall
leave his horse in pawn, answered Amadis, and return on foot. Yet I (quoth
Oriana) have a better help then that: he shall sell this ring, which can do
us no better service then now in our need. So pulling the ring from her
finger, she gave it to Gandalin, who taking his leave, as he came by his
Master, said* So good time lost, will never be had again. Amadis knew his
meaning well enough, yet made he no show thereof, but unarmed himself, and
Oriana spreading the Damsels mantle on the grass, laid her down upon it:
the Damsel likewise went aside into the wood, where she fell soundly
asleep, by reason she watched all the night before. Thus remained Amadis alone
with his mistress, so glad of her gentle grant, and the favorable hour at
hand: as he could not withdraw his eyes from comfort, which made him delay
time in needelesse gazing. In the end, though his hands had been flow in
vnarming him, all his other members were in better state, for not one of them
but did his duty. The heart was ravished in thoughts, the eye, in contemplatio^
of excellent beauty, the mouth, with sweet kisses, the arms, with kind
embracings: and no one (...) content in any point, excep^ ^e eyes, which wished
themselves in number like the stars in heaven, for their better ability in
function, thinking they could not sufficiently behold so divine an object. In
great pain were they likewise, because they were hindered from the pride of
beauty, for the Princess held her eyes closed, as well to disguise her desire
of sleep, as also for the discreet shame conceived by this pleasure, so that
she durst not boldly look on him she most loved. Hereupon, carelessly
spreading her arms abroad, as though she slept in deed, and by reason of the
exceeding heat, leaving her gorget open, two little alablaster bowls lively
showed themselves in her bosom, so fair and sweetly respiring, as Nature
never showed more curious workmanshippe. Now Amadis forgetting his former
bashfulnesse, seeing Fortune allowed him so quaint a favor, let loose the
reins of amorous desire with such advantage, as notwithstanding some weak
resistance of the Princess, she was enforced to prove the good and bad
together, which makes friendly maidens become fair women. Dainty was the good
grace and subtlety of Oriana, in shadowing her surpassing pleasure, with a
feminine complaint of Amadis boldness, showing in countenance such a gracious
choler and contented displeasure: as in stead of consuming time in excuses,
Amadis resaluted her with sundry sweet kisses, as also another cause to chide
if she would. But she being loath to mix angry speeches with amiable sollace, or
with frowning looks to cross an equal content, thought it better to commend
the control of so kind a lover, and therefore continued this pleasing
recreation, as neither party received occasion of mislike^ rather with kisses
(which are counted the (...) of love) they chose to confirm their unanimity,
then otherwise to offend a resolved patien^^. Ah, how many repetitions made
Oriana, of the pains she suffered in expectation of this day? confessing those
private particularities, which none but she and her desire were acquainted
withal. How many matters likewise alleged Amadis, expressing thereby his
singular contentment, and credible assurance of his perpetual faith? now
reckoning all his travels well employed, and more then sufficiently
recompensed. In these discourses and pleasures they spent most part of the day,
carried so far from remembrance of any thing else, as they thought not on the
time, how day wasted, and night ensued, whether Gandalin were returned, or the
Damsel awake, all these things were now cast into oblivion. They imagin^^ to
have viands good store, being th^^ delighted the one with the other, which
seemed more delicious to them, then all the Nectar or Ambrasia of Jupiter. Yet
at length they remembered themselves somewhat better, when hearing the Damsel
and Gandalin so near them, their pastime ended, and taking each other by the
hand, walked among the trees to take the ayre^ in the mean while Gandalin and
the Damsel spread a cloth on the grass, and set thereon such victuals as
they had. Now though there wanted rich cup-boords of pla^^, (...) were in the
houses of King Lisuart and Perion, as also the solemnity of great services: yet
the fortunate entertaynement at this time, was held by them of higher
estimation.

During their repast, as they ^garded the woods and fountains, they began to
esteem it no strange matter, why the Gods sometime forsook the heavens, to
dwell in groves and delightful Forests. Jupiter they imagined wise, when he
followed Europa, (...), and his other friends. Beside, Apollo had reason to
become a Shepherd, for the love of Daphne, and the daughter of Admetus. They
being willing to imitate their example, wished continually to tarry there,
without returning to the Palace and roya^ pomp: reputing the Nymphs of the
woods most happy Goddesses, excelling such as remained in the walled Cities.
Pity were it to trouble these lovers in their amorous devises, wherefore we
will leave them, and see what happened to Galaor, following the search of King
Lisuart.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How Galaor rescued King Lisuart from the ten Knights that led him to prison.

GAlaor parting from his brother Amadis, in such sort as you heard, followed
the way whereby the King was led prisoner, and making great haste, in respect
of his earnest desire to ouer-take him, had mind of nothing else he met by
the way. As thus he continued gallopping, he saw a Knight well armed come
riding toward him, who maruelling why the Prince used such extreme diligence,
when he came near him, said. Stay a while knight, and tell me what affairs
cause you make such speed. Forbear Sir I pray ye, answered Galaor, for by my
tarrying may happen too great an inconvenience. By God, said the knight, you
must not so escape, for you shall tell me whether you will or no. I may not
trifle the time, quoth Galaor, and so rode on still without any tariance. Nay
Gallant, replied the knight, I will be resolved in my demand, though to your
cost. Hereupon he posted after Galaor, still exclaiming on him with hard
words, weening he fled away for fear of him, and oftentimes he thought to
smite him with his Lance, but the Prince evermore e^caped his attempt: yet his
horse being ^ore wearied, hindered him very much, when the knight ouer-taking
him, thus spoke. Infamous palliard, and without heart, of these three things
choose the best, either to combat, return or answer my demand. Now trust me,
said Galaor, the easiest of these three is hard to me, wherein you make no
show of courtesy* for return I may not, and if I combat, it must be against
my will. But if you desire to know the cause of my haste, follow me and you
shall see: for I should ^arry too long in telling it, and happily you would
scant believe me, so horrible and disloyal is the deed which compels me to
this impatience. Believe me, quoth the knight, and I will follow thee three
whole days, only to see whether thou ly^st or no.

Thus Galaos held on his way, and the knight hasting after, till having ridden
the space of a mile, when they espied two other knights, the one being on foot
running to catch his horse, and the other gallopping away so fast as he could.
He on foot was Cosen german to the knight that followed Galaor, who in
iousting with the other knight, had been dismounted: and knowing his kinsman,
acquainted him with the whole accident, requesting his assistance in revenge of
his wrong. It may not be now, answered the other, till I have followed the
knight you see before, three days together: hereto he added all the speeches
between Galaor and him. In sooth, replied his Cosen, he should seem (by your
words) the greatest coward in the world, else minds he some enterprise of
higher consequence: therefore I will adiourne the revenge of mine injury, and
bear you company, to the end I may behold the sum of your attempt. While
thus they talked, Galaor had gotten very far before, which caused them make
the more haste after him: till at length the Prince espied the ten knights that
conducted the King, they riding up a narrow strait, ^iue before him, and
fiu^hinde. Now did he fully resolve to die, or purchase his deliverance, for
he was so offended to see the King bound with chains, as he imagined
himself able to conquer them all, and as many more if they had been there,
whereupon he thus cried to them: Traitors, durst you irreverently lay hand on
the best King in the world? With these words he met one of them so directly,
as his Lance passing through his body, he fell down dead beside his horse.
When the other four saw their companion slain, they willed the for most five
to guard the King, for they would revenge his death sufficiently: but they
found themselves very much deceived, for though the Princes horse (by reason of
his sore travel) often stumbled, and thereby put him in danger of falling, yet
laid he such load upon his enemies, as two more of them accompanied the
first, and the other twain were brought into hard extremity. Then came the
other five with a fresh charge upon him, when Galaor perceiving his own
danger, intended to revenge his death and the Kings together, entering
courageously among the thickest, showing most rare and haughty chiualry. When
the two Cosens that followed him beheld his behavior, confounded with marvel,
the one said to the other. By God we did him wrong to term him a coward, for
he is the most hardy knight that ever I saw: except the world shall twit us
with shame, let us not see him die in this extremity, lest the beauty of
chiualry be gone for ever. Resolved thus to succor him, they valiantly thrust
themselves into the skirmish, delivering such friendly blows on every side,
that Galaor soon felt himself well assisted: because his enemies were
somewhat more dispersed, and he had leisure to take a little breathing, but
wondering whence this aid should proceed, he fell to work again, giving
them good cause to misdoubt their lives. When the Cosen to Arcalaus saw how
his side decayed, and his knights dishartened, slain and sore wounded: he
purposed to kill the King: who by this time found the means to unbind
himself, and alighting from his horse, got one of the slain knights swords,
wherewith he resisted his enemies bravely. As the cousin to Arcalaus followed
his intent, the king gave his horse such a blow over the face, as by rearing
up, he fell down back-ward; yet the Knight recovered himself, and Galaor
seeing one fight with the king, came to assist him, when snatching off his
helmet, he would have smitten his head from his shoulders: but the king would
not suffer him, saying, he should live and dye a thief. The two cosins, who
were named Don Guilan and Ladasin, pursued another knight, whom they slew, and
returning back again, they knew the king, which stroke them into no little
marvel, because they heard nothing of his misfortune: then alighting from
their horses, they took off their helmets and did him reverence, when he
knowing them right well, embraced them in his arms, saying. My friends, you
have succored me in a needful time, for which I may live to requite you with
thanks: yet have you wronged me by your absence from the Court, and for your
love to each other I lost you both, especially, you Lord Guilan, your mind
being elsewhere, made you forget me. These words caused a modest blush in Don
Guilan, beause the king disciphered his love, which was the Duchess of
Bristoya, who was not one jot behind him in affection: as well witnessed the
good entertainment she gave him, tasting together the fruit of their
contentment. Which the Duke so doubted, and daily conceived such strange
suspicion thereof, as it procured the injury was done to Galaor, when the
Dwarffe espied him in the garden, at his return from fair Aldena; whereby the
Damsel was in danger of burning, as the history here-tofore has declared to
you.

But while the king thus communed with Don Guilan, Galaor had got the Nephew of
Arcalaus beside his horse, and tied the chain about his neck, the king was
bound withal: then taking the best horses belonged to the dead knights, they
rode toward London. And by the way, Ladasin recounted to the king, how he
contended with Galaor for riding so fast, offering him the combat, which he
refused, because he would delay no time for his succor: which caused the king
to requite him with many thanks, that he could so well forbear in a case of
such necessity. But my Lord, quoth Don Guilan, my hap was more hard, for by
thinking on her, who oftentimes makes me to forget my self, a knight
encountered with me, and by force of his Lance, cast me from my saddle. In
sooth, answered the king, I have heard talk of many lovers, and what they
enterprise for their Ladies, yet never of any folly comparable to yours: which
gives me good cause to conjecture, that* you were not in vain named Guilan
the pensive, for you are the greatest muser I ever heard o^ As thus they
beguiled the time, they arrived at the house of Ladasin, which was not far
thence, whither soon after came Galaors squire and Dardan the Dwarffe, who
thought his master had taken that way. Then did Galaor tell the king, how his
brother Amadis was gone to reskew his daughter, and in what manner they heard
of their separation by the poor laborers, wherefore he advised him to send
speedily to London, least his mis-hap being published in the City, might
raise some co^motion among the people. Credit me, quoth the king, seeing Amadis
undertook to follow my daughter, I will not as yet account her lost, if the
traitor Arcalaus work no new villainy by his enchantments* but as concerning my
happy deliverance, I like well that my Queen should understand thereof.
Whereupon Ladasin called a Squire, whom the king presently sent to the Court as
Galaor advised. After they had well refreshed themselves, they were conducted
to their chambers, and on the morrow set forward on their journey, the king
co^muning with the Nephew of Arcalaus* as concerning the enterprise of his
kinsman* which made him reveal the whole determination and how Barsinan was in
hope to be king of Great Britain. Hereupon the king concluded to make the more
hast^ thinking to find Barsinan as yet as London, and to punish him for his
audacious presumption.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How news came to the Queen that the King was taken: And how Barsinan
labored to usurp the City of London.

I If you have well noted the former discourse, you may easily remember, how
the poor laboring men* (not knowing the king and Oriana) seeing how
injuriously they were entreated by Arcalaus and his accomplices, were glad to
hide themselves in the wood: in like manner, how afterward they understood by
Amadis and Galaor, that the prisoners were king Lisuarts and his daughters.
Whereupon, so soon as the two knights were parted from them, they hasted to
report these news in London: which caused such a murmuring through the City,
especially among the knights, as they presently armed themselves, and mounted
on horse back in such troops, as the fields were quickly covered with men and
horses. At this time was king Arban of Norwales talking with the Queen, little
thinking on any misfortune: when one of his Squires bringing his Armor, said
My Lord, you tarry here trifling too long, arm your self quickly and
follow the rest, who by this time have gotten so far as the Forest.

What is the matter, answered King Arban. Ah my Lord, quoth the Squire, news
is brought to the City, how certain villains have carried the King away
prisoner. Prisoner? replied king Arban, may it be possible? Too true my Lord,
answered the Squire. When the Queen heard these unhappy tidings, not able to
undergo so great an oppression, she fell down in a swoune: but king Arban
having more mind on the King, left her in her Ladies arms, hasting with all
speed he could to horseback. When he was setting foot in stirrup, he heard
the alarm sounded, and the assault which Barsinan gave to the Castle, whereby
he gathered they were betrayed: wherefore he caused the Queens lodging to
be guarded, and returning to the City, saw every one ready in Arms, when
choosing so many as he pleased, as also two hundred well approved knights, he
sent two of the cheifest to the Tower of London, to understand the cause of the
alarm. To them it was reported, how Barsinan had forcibly entered with his
train, killing and casting over the walls all that he met. Herein he followed
the message of the Page from Arcalaus, finding very slender resistance: for
most part of the knights and men of account, were gone to succor the king.
Highly displeased was king Arban at these news, persuading himself the king
had been betrayed, wherefore to prevent such other inconveniences that might
happen, he ordained his men in battle, placing good watch about the Queens
lodging. And thither Barsinan now prepared, hoping to take the Queen as he had
done the tower: but he met with stronger resist the^ he expected, and the
skirmishes proceeding on either side, Barsinan took a prisoner, by who^ he was
advertised, how king Arba^ would with-stand him even to the death. Now began he
to devise, how by fair speech and falsehood he might take the king, craving a
parle with him, whereto king Arban willingly agreed, and silence being made on
both sides, Barsinan began in this manner.

I ever thought til now, my Lord, that you were one of the best advised knights
in the world, but by proof I perceive a man may find the contrary: yet this I
think withal, that what you do, is for the safety of your honor. Herein you
appear of simple judgment, considering in the end, it will be but the loss
of you and your men: in respect king Lisuart your late Lord is dead, for proof
whereof, even he that slew him will ere long send me his head. Since fortune
then has dealt so hardly with him, and I at this instant am the greatest Lord
in this country: dare you deny to make me king? Alas, you abuse your self!
the best will be for you, to yield your self lovingly, and I shall entreat
you so well as any Prince in my Realm: suffering you still to enjoy the
country of Norwales, and particularly beside will so honor you, as you shall
have great reason to be content. Auaunt villain, answered king Arban, full well
do thou manifest thy horrible treason: for beside thy treachery in
compacting the death of my Lord, thou would have me become a traitor to
his friends, as thou thy self have proved. Thou art deceived, do the worst
thou can: thy villainie only will t^^e vengeance on thee according to
desert, with such good help as we will put thereto. What? said Barsinan,
think thou to hinder me from sitting as king in London? Never shall
traitor, replied Arban, be king of London, by Gods lea^e, while the most
honorable king of the world lives. I called for thee, quoth Barsinan, in
respect of thine own good, because I favored thee more then any other,
imagining thou were of sound discretion: but (as I have said) I find my self
deceived, wherefore reason requires, that thy ouer-weening should fall, and
(in despite of thee) I will reign king in great Britain. Assure thy self,
answered Arban, I will keep thee from such climbing, as if the king my master
were here personally present. Then began the assault afresh, king Arban
withdrawing himself to harden his men, being maruailously offended at
Barsinans words. Now though he were very sharply assailed, yet stood he
bravely on his defense, many being slain and sore wounded: nevertheless, he
was euer-more foremost in the fight, and last in the retreits which was caused
by the night ensuing. Nor need we doubt, considering the puissance of
Barsinan, and they few on the contrary side, but king Arban would take his
advantage in resistance, by compelling them to narrow streets, where four on a
side could hardly deal together, which turned to the great disadvantage of
Barsinan, because Arban well fortified every place in good order, and with
fresh supply still encouraged his men.

The retreit being founded, and either side with-drawne, King Arban seeing his
soldiers sore wearied, by the hot skirmishes they had endured: as is the
office of a good Captain indeed he came and comforted them in this manner.
My loving companions and friends, this day have you worthily fought, as none of
you but deserves estimation, among the most forward men in the world, and
having begun so well, I hope you will proceed better and better. Remember the
cause of your fight, not only to maintain your good king, but your own
liberty: against a tirant, traitor, and what worse? who would buy his usurping
in this Kingdom, with the blood of you, your wives and children. Saw you not
how he used them he took in the Tower? Behold you not the end of his
purpose? which is to ruinate this noble Realm, that has (by divine
providence) been so long time preserved, and euer-more continued in
reputation, flourishing with loyal subjects to their Prince? Heard you not the
flattering persuasions, which the Rebel used before the assault, thinking to
co^quervs by his golden tongue? In vain is his labor, I am right well
assured, that no one of you but will die a thousand deaths, before he shall
conceive any other mind in you, I see by your resolved countenances, if I
should think or say otherwise, I were a monstrous offender: for if he have
more men then we, we have more hearts of courage then he, which forbids
all accasions of dismaying, setting before your eyes, the famous account you
shall live in hereafter. By their looks you might diserne at their retire, how
unwillingly they will be to try you again: and respect not the traitorous
words of Barsinan, our king lives, and will right speedily come to succor us.
In mean while I entreat as my friendly companions, let nothing dismay your
hope, but continue as you have begun: with famous resolution, that is more
honorable to die for liberty, then to enjoy a life by thraldom and slavery,
under a wicked, iniurous, and traitorous Prince. When the king had ended his
oration, there was no one in the company, how sore hurt soever he was, but
would courageously encounter Barsinans power, and bid him bravely good morrow
next day in the Tower: wherewith the king not a little contented, returned to
the Queens lodging his face covered with sweat, and his armor all bloody, by
reason of five wounds he received in fight. The Ladies seeing him in such
pittious plight, were maruailously abashed, especially the Queen, who well
near dead with grief and fear together then as a woman in midst of
despair, she said: Alas deer Nephew, what shall we do? we are all but dead.
Madame, answered king Arban, all will go well if God be pleased, in vain do
you thus discomfort your self, for I hope to hear good tidings of the King:
and his traitors that seek to usurp the kingdom, by your good and loyal
subjects shall receive deserved punishment. God grant it, quoth she, but you
are so wounded, as I think it impossible for you to be at the battle, if
Barsinan come tomorrow again, nor can our men do any thing without you. Be
not you troubled therewith Madame, replied king Arban, for while my soul sucks
her spirit from the air, I will not forsake my charge. So bidding her good
night, he went to have his wounds dressed, and afterward turned to his
soldiers, merrily passing the night among them.

Barsinan on the other side, got into the Tower of London which he had won,
and numbering his men, found that his power was greatly weakened: yet would he
make no show thereof for dismaying the rest, but showing a dissembling
countenance, thus spoke to them. My friends, it suffices that I have shown
mine enemies what you are, and they (if I think good) to stand at my mercy:
wherefore I am determined (without any further loss of you) to rest our selves
five or six days, till Arcalaus send me the head of king Lisuart, and then
the sight thereof, will make the^ not dare to resist me any longer, but in hope
of favor, will yield themselves. Each of you therefore rejoice and be of good
cheer, for when I am King, right richly will I reward you all. So went they to
rest till the next, morning, when Barsinan (being armed) mounted on
horseback, with twenty knights in his company, and came to a Port which one
of king Arbans knights kept, who seeing this troop, presently sounded an
alarm. But Barsinan sent him word how he came to parle only, and desired
truce beside for six hours: whereof king Arban was immediately advertised, who
granted the truce Barsinan requited, and likewise for five days.
Conditionally, that he should offer no violence to any house in the City, or
practice any entrance during the limited time: beside, if the King returned in
that space, the difference should be left to his disposition. Barsinan was
contented with these conditions, because he accounted king Lisuarts death
certain, whereupon he said to Arban. I hope this little truce, will be an
entrance into a perpetual peace between us: for I dare assure ye, king
Lisuart is dead, and his daughter must be my wife, as within these five days
ensuing you shall evidently see. What? quoth king Arban, thou have then put him
to death: and could thou deal so treaterously with him, that gave the such
honorable entertainment in his Court? rather will I presently die, then
continue one hour of peace with thee, get thee gone therefore quickly, or I
will send thee hence in pieces. Is it true? quoth Barsinan, well may thou
threaten me, but it is in me to make thee repent it. Thus returned he to his
soldiers, acquainting them with his honest offers to king Arban, and the
audacious answer he returned for them.

CHAP. XXXIX.
How Amadis came to the succor of the City of London, when it was in this
distress.

NOt long ago we left Amadis in the wood, familiarly devising with the
Princess Oriana, thinking on nothing but their sweet contentation: and among
other discourse, Amadis entreated her to tell him, what speeches Arcalaus had
with her by the way. On my faith Sir, quoth she, he confounded my senses with
persuading me to rejoice, saying. Before five days were expired, I should
reign as Queen in Great Britain, enjoying Barsinan to my husband: himself
likewise should be chief Governor and Master of his house, in recompense of
the services he did for him, in giving him my fathers head, and me to be his
wife. Ah heavens, said Amadis, what treason is this in Barsinan, who showed
himself such a friend to the king? God shield he do no wrong to the Queen.
In sooth, I greatly doubt it, replied Oriana, it were good therefore we hasted
to see. With all my heart, quoth Amadis: so mounting on horseback, they rode
toward London, meeting many knights by the way that followed the King, whom
still he directed in their course, certifying them that Galaor was gone
likewise in his search. Within a while after, Oriana espied Don Grumedan an
ancient knight of honor to the Queen, and twenty knights more with him, who
all that night had searched the Forest for the king: but when he saw her,
the tears stood in his eyes with joy, desiring to hear some news of the
King her father. Credit me Sir, quoth she, not far from the City were we
sundered, when God ordained so well for me, that Amadis delivered me from the
villains, and ransomed me with the price of their lives. They were unwise to
resist, said Grumedan, when you had so good a Champion: but I pray you my
Lord, what is become of your brother? Even in the same place, answered Amadis,
where they separated the father from the daughter: we severed our selves, he
posting after the King, and I followed Arcalaus, who led away Madame Oriana.
The better hope have I of his succor, quoth Grumedan, seeing so good a knight
has taken it in hand.

Hereupon, Amadis told him the horrible treason of Arcalaus and Barsinan: Let
me therefore entreat ye, quoth he, to conduct the Princess leasurably
after, while I make haste before least the Queen be distressed, because I doubt
the traitor will her offer injury. I think it likewise expedient, that you
cause all the knights to return you meet withal: for if the King should be
reskewed by multitude of men, there is enough before already, and more then
needs. So leaving his Lady with Don Grumedan, he made all the haste he could
toward London, ^uer^aking the Squire by the way that came from the king, who
told him all the news of his deliverance, which was no little joy to Amadis,
hearing the fortunate success of his brother Galaor. There met he with
another likewise, who made report of Barsinans dealings at London, wherefore
entering the City so covertly as he might, the first he met withal was king
Arban, of whom he was lovingly embraced and welcomed, with request of what
news he brought. None but good, answered Amadis, and such as you are desirous
to hear: but because I doubt the Queen is scant merry, let us go see her,
for happily she will be glad of our coming. So rode they to the Court
together, Amadis still keeping the Squire with him that came from the king, and
when they entered the Queens presence, Amadis falling on his knee, began in
this manner. Madame, this Gentleman left the King well this morning, and at
liberty, whereof his Majesty certifieth you by him: my self likewise (not long
since) left your daughter with Don Grumedan, and very shortly they will be with
you. But because I understand that Barsinan molesteth you with treachery, suffer
us I pray you to go see what he can do. When the Queen heard these joyful
tidings, her inward content took away the liberty of of her speech, nor could
she do any thing but lift her hands and eyes to heaven, applauding his name
from whence this good proceeded, and by gestures delivering some sign of
thanks to Amadis. At length having overcome this delightful passion, and
intending to question further concerning these news: the alarm was sounded,
wherefore king Arban and Amadis hyed to the bars, where they found Barsinans
men giving an eager charge, as hoping to conquer the contrary part. But Amadis
thrusting himself for-most, caused the bars to be taken down, and accompanied
with king Arban, brake in courageously upon the enemy, a noble president to
their soldiers, who being cheered by this onset, took heart and followed.
Now wexed the skirmish to be hot indeed, so that on both sides very many were
slain, which Barsinan perceiving, and trusting in his multitude to suppress
the weaker part, came foremost himself in person, thinking (now he saw the
bars open) to drive his adversaries back again into the City. When Amadis
noted his forwardness he stepped back, and changed his Creast and Shield with
a simple mercinary soldier: yet reserving his Lance, which with a strong
carreer pierced thorough his Armor, and wounding Barsinan, brake in pieces in
his flesh. Then drawing his sword, he gave him such a stroke on the helmet, as
he was astonished therewith, and redoubling his blow, cut his right arm quite
from his shoulder: when Barsinan (feeling himself so wounded) would have
retired back, to save himself by the speed of his horse, but he fell to the
ground as deprived of his senses. Wherefore Amadis left him, and set upon the
rest, who being unable to endure these hot assaults, likewise beholding
their Lord dismounted: took themselves to flight for safety of their lives, yet
were they so closely followed, as the most part of them were slain in the
field, and some few of them escaped into the Tower, causing the bridge to be
quickly drawn up after them.

Hereupon Amadis returned where he left Barsinan and because he was not yet
dead, commanded he should be carried to the Queens lodging, there to be kept
till the Kings return: and as he would have put up his sword, he saw it
soyled with blood, wherefore in wiping it, he said: Thou trusty sword, in a
happy hour was the knight born to whom thou belongest: and as thou art one of
the best in the world, so is thy Master the most virtuous Prince living. He
used these words, because it appertained to King Lisuart, and was sent him from
the Queen by Gandalin, as you heard before: but now returns he with king
Arban to the Queens lodging, to comfort her with news of happy victory.

All this while the King is hasting toward London, giving order to return all
the knights he met by the way, among whom were Agraies, Galuanes, Soliua^,
Galdan, Dinada^s, and Bernas: all which were highly in the Kings favor, as men
of virtue and no small deserving: and his Majesty having embraced them, said.
My noble good friends, you had almost lost me, but God be thanked, you have
recovered me again, by the help of these three worthy knights Galaor,
Guilan, and Ladasin. In sooth my Lord, answered Dinadans, so soon as your
mishap was known in the City, each one prepared to bring you succor. I know
my good Nephew, quoth the king, that I am greatly beholding to you all: but I
pray you take good store of these knights, and post with speed to assist the
Queen, for I doubt she is in no little danger. This Dinadans was one of the
best knights of the kings lineage, and well esteemed among men of account, as
well in respect of his virtues, as also his brave behavior in chiualry: so
according to the kings command, he rode away presently very bravely accompanied.

The king likewise followed an indifferent pace, lest his Nephew should stand
in need of help, and by the way he ouertooke D^^ Grumedan with his daughter
Oriuna. How joyful this meeting was, you may easily conceive, that the
separation was not so grievous, but this was as gladsome. Grumedan told his
Majesty, how Amadis left the Princess with him, while he rode before to
assist the Queen: thus with repetition of many matters, they beguiled the time
till they atriued as London, where he understood the success of Barsinans
enterprise, and how valiantly King Arban had resisted him, not forgetting the
worthy behavior of Amadis, in taking him prisoner and discomfiting his men,
except a few that saved themselves in the Tower.

Here would i^ (...) a world of time, to report the joy, pleasure, and conte^
between the King and Queen at their meeting, likewise the (...) comfort having
re^ed her daughter again: but as your judgments can better conceive then I
set down, matter above the reach of common capacity, so do I lean it to you,
and proceed to the King. Who to terrify the traytoure thus gotten into hold,
besieged them severally, and to dishearten them the more, brought Barsinan and
Arcalaus Nephew before the walls, where before all the people they confessed
their treason. Which being done, a great fire was made, wherein they were alive
consumed, but when they in the Tower beheld this spectacle, and that they were
in great want of victals, they yielded themselves to the Kings mercy, the most
part of the^ being (for examples sake) hanged on the battlements, and the rest
set at liberty upon humble submission. Yet this matter bred very great trouble
afterward, between them of Great Britain and Sansuegua: for the son of
Barsinan being a good knight, vexed king Lisuart with contagious war, as in
the History hereafter at large is mentioned.

After the King had escaped these misfortunes, the former joys and pastimes
began again: during which time, the Lady and her two sons (the messengers
of Madasima, who were witnesses when Galaor and Amadis promised to forsake king
Lisuarts service) arrived at the Court. When the two Princes were advertised
thereof, they went and friendly entertained her, she saying: Gentlemen you
know the cause of my coming, are you determined to keep your promise? We are,
quoth they, and will not break our covenant with Madasima, but presently will
perform it before the King. Entering the great Hall, the Lady fell on her knees
before his Majesty, delivering these speeches. My Lord, I am come to your
Court, to see if these two knights will observe a covenant, which in my
presence they made to a Lady. What was it? answered the King. A matter that
will s^ant like you, quoth the Lady, or any such as bear you affection: and
thereto she added the whole circumstance. Whereat the King waxing somewhat
offended, told Galaor that he had very much wronged him. My Lord, replied
Galaor, it was better to do so, then be trecherously slain, for had we been a
known, neither you, nor all the world could have faued our lives: but let not
your Majesty be offended, for the remedy shall be more ready then you expect.
In accomplishing my promise to Madasima of Gantasi, my Lord I take my leave of
you, departing altogether from your service: certifying you that it is her will
to do you this displeasure, and worse if she should compass it, for the
extreme malice she bears to you. Amadis affirmed what his brother had done,
then Galaor turning to the Lady and her two sons, said. Have we not now
accomplish our promise? Yes truly, quoth the Lady, we must needs avouch so
much. You may then return when you please, answered Galaor, but tell Madasima,
she did not so much as she weened, as you may perceive by the present effect.
Now my Lord, quoth he to the King, we have fulfilled our promise to Madasima,
and because in granting her earnest desire, the time was not limited how long
we should leave your service: we may enter thereinto again when you please to
command, so that we are yours as faithful as before. When the King and all
that were present heard what had past, they rejoiced exceedingly, esteeming
Galaor and Amadis well advised herein: where-upon the King thus spoke to the
Lady. According to her great treason under shaddowe of good meaning, they are
bound to no more then they have accomplished: for to deceive the deceiuer is no
deceit. And say to Madasima, seeing she hates me so unreasonably, she once had
the^ in her power, who might have grieved me all my life time: but God having
in other places delivered me from many perils will not suffer me to perish by so
bad woman as she is. I desire ye my Lord, quoth she, to tell me their names.
The one is Amadis, answered the King, and the other his brother Galaor. May it
be possible, say de the Lady, that Madasima had Amadis in her power? Credit me,
quoth the King, I have told ye truth. Their fortune was good, replied the
Lady, for they might not have escaped if she had known them: and in sooth the
deed might be reckoned ominous, if two such worthy persons had perished. Yet
when she shall know hereof, said the King, I think she will forbear to wrong
me any further. With that the Lady took her leave, shaping her course the same
way she came.

CHAP. XL.
How King Lisuart held open Court in the City of London many days, in which
time sundry great personages were there feasted, the greater part whereof
remained there long time afterward.

Twelve days together (after these mishaps) did King Lisuart continue his
Court in all magnificence, many noble personages being there assembled, as well
strangers as others, hoping now to make little stay but to return home to their
own houses: yet the greater part of them abode with the King, in like manner
did sundry worthy Ladies accompany the Queen. Among other knights attending on
the King, were Don Guilan the pensive, and his Cosen Ladasin, who (as I have
said) were very good knights: but Guilan was the better of the twain, for
very few were found in the Realm of Great Britain, that carried more
account for deeds of Arms, and all other graces beseeming a knight, setting
aside his musing and melancholy. By means whereof, few or none could be
pleasant with him, or have any words from him in company: but love procured
these extremes, busying his thoughts in such sort with his Lady, as he had
mind of none but her. And she of whom we speak, was endued with singular
beauty, being named Brandalisia, sister to the Kings wife of Sobradisa, and
joined in marriage with the Duke of Bristoya: who now was arrived at the Court,
to answer the accusation Oliuas laid against him. The King gave him very
gentle welcome, and being in the presence of many great Lords, the Duke
began in this manner. Sir, you have commanded my appearance here this day, to
justify my self before your Majesty, concerning a crime Oliuas charge me
withal: whereof I hope sufficiently to clear my self, by the rightful
judgment your self shall give, and he rest condemned like a varlet as he
is: for here am I ready to approve against him, or any other he shall bring,
that I never committed treason or so foul a deed.

At these words Oliuas arose, and with him a great number of knights errant,
all resolved to maintain this quarrel against the Duke: when the King beheld
them in such a mutiny, he marvelled whence the cause should proceed, when
Grumedan speaking for all the rest, said. My Lord, because the Duke of Bristoia
has threatened and defied all knights errant, we are ready to answer his
challenge. In good faith, answered the King, if it be so, he has attempted
an over fond war, for I think there is no knight in the world so puissant,
that will be induced to such an enterprise. But forbear at this time, and
offer him no injury, because he is here to receive justice: which shall be
done, according to the counsel of the Princes and Lords present, without
favoring any one. Then Oliuas falling on his knee before the King, began in
this manner. My Lord, the Duke who stands before your Majesty, has slain a
Cosen german of mine, he never giving him occasion of offense: wherefore I
will justify him to be a villain and a traitor, and will make him confess
it with his own mouth, else shall I kill him and cast him forth of the field.
The Duke told him he lied, and he was ready to accomplish what the King and
his Court should ordain: whereupon it was determined, that this emulation
should be decided by combat, which the Duke accepted, desiring the King to
permit him and his two Nephews in this cause, against Oliuas and two other
knights. This being granted, the Duke was very glad thereof, for he made such
account of his kinsmen, as he thought Oliuas could not bring the like:
notwithstanding, all was deferred till the morrow following.

In mean while, Don Galuanes asked his Nephew Agraies, if he would assist
Oliuas against the Duke, and he consenting thereto, Galuanes came to Oliuas,
saying. Sir Oliuas, seeing the Duke is desirous to fight three against three,
my nephew and I are determined to take your part: which when the Duke heard,
he remembered that he had defied them in his own house, when Agraies combated
with the Dwarffes champion, at what time the Damsel should have been burned:
wherefore he became very pensive, in respect though he esteemed his Nephews
approved good knights, yet he repented his wilful offer, and gladly would have
excused the matter if he could, being so well acquainted with the behavior of
Galuanes and Agraies. But considering his promise past before the King, and so
many noble personages there present, he must of necessity stand thereto:
wherefore the next morning he entered the Listes with his Nephews, and Oliuas
on the contrary with his copartners. Now were the Ladies standing at the
windows, to behold the issue of this quarrel, and among the rest stood
Oliuia the fair friend to Agraies, who seeing him ready to enter such peril,
was so dismayed, as she could scant tell what countenance to use. By her stood
Mabila, she being in no less grief for her Uncle and brother together:
likewise the Princess Oriana, loving them both, in respect of the reasons
heretofore declared, accompanied the two Ladies in sorrow, fearing their
danger: but the knights being ready to the combat, the King by a Herald
commanded the Champions to do their deuoyre. Hereupon with a brave carreer
they encountered together, Agraies and Galuanes vnhorsing the two Nephews, and
albeit Oliuas received a wound on the stomach, yet had not the Duke caught
hold about his horse neck, his fortune had proved as had as his Nephews. The^
drawing their swords, they smote so violently against each other, as the
standers by wondered at their fiercenes: beholding their shields defaced, their
armor battred and coullered with their blood, that the victory hung a long
time in suspense. For Agraies horse being slain under him, brought his life in
maruailous hazard, because the Duke and one of his Nephews strove to keep him
down, seeking to thrust their swords into his belly, or else to smite his head
from his shoulders: but he was so well armed, and of such courage withal, as
he held them both play, though with exceeding peril. Well may you think,
that his friends grieved to see him in this distress, especially the three
Ladies, of whom we spoke so lately, whose cheeks were bedewed with whole
fountains of tears, and woeful Oliuia seemed rather dead then living. But had
he long continued in this extremity, her latest houer must needs have ensued,
yet at length he recovered himself, charging the Duke and his Nephews with
such puissant strokes, as well declared his hardy courage. Oliuas all this
while was in such case, by reason of the sore wound the Duke gave him, that he
could hardly defend himself: which the Duke perceiving, he left his Nephew
with Agraies, and assailing Oliuas very roughly, made him fall down in a great
astonishment. But as he would have slain him, Agraies stepped between the^
(having dispatched his enemy of his head) and hindered the Duke from his
determination, wounding him in many places on his body, that he could scant tell
which way to turn him. Don Galuanes, likewise having slain the other Nephew,
came to assist Agraies against the Duke, who seeing his life at the latest
exigent, turned his horse to escape away: but Agraies gave him such a stroke on
the helmet, as he fell beside his saddle, with one of his feet hanging in the
stirrup, when the horse being at liberty, feeling his burden hang on the one
side, ran flinging up and down, none being able to reskew the Duke, till his
neck was broken with dragging along. Hereupon Agraies left him, returning to
his vncleto know how he fared. Very well I thank God, answered Galuanes, but
it grieueth me that Oliuas is dead, for he lies still and moves not. Right
sorry likewise was Agraies to hear these words, wherefore commanding the Duke
and his Nephews bodies to be thrown forth of the field, they came both to
Oliuas, and finding him alive, as also his wounds not to be mortal, they bound
them up so well as they could, saying. Friend Oliuas, be of good chee^e, for
though you have lost very much blood, yet doubt we not of your health, because
we find little danger in your hurts, Alas my Lords, quoth Oliuas, my heart
faints, and albeit I have been heere^ofore wounded, yet never was I in such
debilitie. Then the King desired to know whether he were dead or no, and when
it was told him, how he wanted nothing but speedy cure: he commanded him to
be honorably carried into the City, and his own cirurgions to attend on his
health, even as it were his own person: which he did, promising, to deliver
him well again within few days.

Thus every one returned, disputing diversely on the end of the Combat, and
according to their particular affections, so that soon after, the Queeene (who
was one of the best Ladies in the world) was advised to send for the wife to
the deceased Duke, that in the Court she might wear away the cause of her
melancholy, and to dispatch this business, she sent Don Grumedan to her
requesting she would bring her, Niece Aldena with her, whereof Galuanes was not
a little glad, especially Don Guilan, who was the friend and beloved of the
Duchess. Not long after, she and her Niece arrived at the Court, where they
were right nobly feasted and entertained. Thus the King spent the time in the
City of London, accompanied with many great Lords, knights and Ladies, because
the fame was blazed throught the world, of his honorable courtesy to strange
Knights: which drew an exceeding number to his court, whom he rewarded very
bountifully, hoping (by their means) not only to confirm his Realm in
peace, but likewise to conquer other, which some-time had been subject and
tributary to his Crown, yet through the pusillanimity and negligence of the
Kings his predecessors, were lost and discontinued their former obedience.

CHAP. XLI.
How Amadis determined to go combat with Abiseos and his two Sons, to
revenge the Kings death, who was Father to the fair Briolania, and of that
which followed.

HEretofore it has been declared, how Amadis, being with Briolania, promised
to revenge the King her Fathers death, against Abiseos, and his two Sons,
which in one year after he should perform, being accompanied with two other
Knights. Also how when he took his leave of her, she gave him a Sword,
because his own was broken, desiring him to wear it for her sake: which Sword
was afterward broken at the Ladies Castle, who was the beloved of Angriote
d'Estranans, when he combatted with Gasinan, and commanded Gandalin to bring
away the pieces thereof: which occasioned great harm not long after, not by
any fault of him, but by the indiscretion of Dardan the Dwarffe, who imagined
his master loved the fair Briolania, in respect he offered himself to be her
Knight.

One day therefore, Amadis being with King Lisuart, evermore delighting with
his Lady Oriana, to the no little contentation of the^ both: Love, who
oftentimes provoke his Subjects, would no longer continue them in so great
ease, but raise some cinders of division, whereby they might receive
coffeehouse. For this cause he made Amadis remember his promise to
Briolania, that he should combat Abiseos within one year the end whereof was
now at hand: and being loath to fail therein, he sought all convenient means
to take his leave of the Princess Oriana, determining to acquaint her with the
whole cause, in what sort Briolania was disinherited of her fathers kingdom:
such were his discourses on her behalf, that although Oriana was loath to grant
what he demanded, or to permit his absence from her: yet being overcome with
compassion, she restrained her will, and in midst of her sorrow, said: Dear
friend, I know well that your speeches are reasonable, but the wrong you do me;
aloweth no excuse: Yet in respect I love ye, as you are well assured, it is
convenient I should prefer your honor before mine own pleasure. You have
promised (as you tell me) to succor a disinherited Lady, I am content, seeing
there is no other remedy, though my consent be with greater grief then you
ween: for my mind is persuaded, some mischief will happen to me by this
voyage. Madam, answered Amadis, unwilling am I to give you any occasion of
dislike or to attempt any thing against your mind, rather could I wish never
to have been borne: Let Briolania then pardon my tarrying, for I hold my self
sufficiently excused, seeing my departure is not agreeable to you. Not so
sweet friend, replied Oriana, I am willing you shall go: but make a speedy
return I pray you. With twenty kisses was this separation sealed, and she
desired him to acquaint the Queen there with, that this journey might be
shaddowed under her commandment: which he did, and on the morrow departed with
G^la^r and Agraies, when they had not ridden past half a Mile, but he asked
Gandalin, if he had brought with him the pieces of the Sword that Briolania
gave him when he left her. No my Lord, answered Gandalin. Return then quoth
Amadis to the Dwarffe, and when thou have them, make what speed thou can to
overtake us. Alas, had he but misdoubted the mishap followed hereon, he never
would have sent such a messenger: For by his rechlesse speeches, he endaungered
the lives of Amadis and Oriana together, as shall hereafter be largely
described.

Gone is the Dwarffe to his Masters lodging, and finding the pieces of the
Sword, in the pla^e where Gandalin had directed him, returned hastily toward
his Master but passing by the Queens lodging, he heard one call him, when
looking about, he espied the Princesses Oriana and Mabila, who demanded
wherefore he had l^ft Amadis. Madame, quoth he, I have not been so long from
him, but I can quickly overtake him: for this which I carry, will let him make
no great have till I come. What is it said Oriana. What? answered the Dwarffe,
I can assure ye Madame, he prizeth them more then they be worth, for her sake
that gave him the Sword. What is she? quoth Oriana. The Lady, replied the
Dwarffe, for whom he now undertakes the combat. And though you be daughter to
the best King in the World, as also fayrer (in mind opinion) then any other:
yet rather should you have gained he^ conquest, then all the wealth in this
kingdom.

I know not what thou meanest said Oriana, unless thy master have given
himself to her? You have guessed right Madam, answered the Dwarffe, he is
altogther at her commandment, thinking himself happy to be her Knight. So
taking his leave, he posted to ouer-take his Master, who little thought on
these slanderous reports: But Oriana entered into such a Jealousy, as without
regard of any thing whatsoever, she would have cast her self forth at the
window, had not Mabila and the Damsel of Denmark stayed her. Now rises
frowning anger in her brows, and she to misconceiue of the man, whose only
desire was to do her service, With often wringing her hands, she calls to
remembrance, in what earnest affection he desired leave for this voyage, which
augmented her suspicion of the Dwarffes words: and in such sort was her heart
shut up, as no tear might fall from her eyes, because those vapors were
withdrawn to the most worthy places in her. Hereupon her torments redoubled
in extremes, as Dido for the the tromperie of AEneas, or sad Medea, seeing her
self forsaken of her friend Jason, never felt such anguish: and in fatal
fortune she would have succeeded them, but that she was hindered by them about
her, who found the means to defend her from such mishap.

By this time the Dwarffe ouer-tooke Amadis and the rest, when they began to
ride somewhat faster, Amadis not requiring any thing of him, nor he reciting
what he told the Princess, but showed him the pieces of the Sword he
brought. Not far had they ridden, but they met a Damsel, who after she had
saluted them, demanded whither they travailed, saying, she would advise them
to forsake that way. Wherefore? answered Amadis. Because, quoth she, for the
space of fifteen days, no Knight errant passed this way, but he has been
either wounded or slain. And who has done them such displeasure? said Amadis.
A Knight, answered the Damsel, the most valiant man at Arms that ever was
seen. I pray ye Damsel, quoth Agraies, bring us where we may see him. You
cannot ride far in this Forest, said she, but he will quickly show himself.
So trauail they on with the Damsel, and long time they neither heard not saw
any one, which made them think she spoke these words to fear them: yet soon
after, Amadis espied the Knight, who seemed a man of goodly stature, and ready
prepared for the combat. As he and his companions stood beholding him, they
heard him speak to a squire, who reared four Lances against a Tree, and
afterward came to them, saying. Gentlemen, my Master gives you to understand,
how during the space of fifteen days, he has undertaken the guard of this
Forest, in all which time his fortune has been, not to be vanquished by any
one: And though it be a day and a half since his intended term is expired,
yet stays he here till now for the pleasure he has in Iousting. And as he
was departing hence, he espied you coming: wherefore he lets you know,
that if each of you will break a Lance, he cares not to try his fortune with
you, provided, that the combat at the Sword be spared, because he sildome
proceeds so far without doing more harm then willingly he would.

When Agraies heard this message, he took his Arms, returning this answer:
Friend, go tell thy Master I am content to try the Ioust with him. Hereupon,
he gave the spurs to his horse, and the knight seeing him coming, gave forth
to meet him, their Lances being broken in the encounter: But Agraies was
easily cast from his Horse, of which foil he could not but be ashamed. Galaor
beholding his Cousin dismounted, determined to revenge his wrong, bidding the
knight to prepare himself, who taking another Lance, ran against Galaor with
such fury, as after their staves were broken, their bodies met together so
vehemently, that Galaors horse being more feeble then the other, fell down
with his Master on bis back, but the Prince not recovering himself, was left
on the ground, when the horse arose, and ran about the field, as the other of
Agrates did. Amadis abashed at these accidents, preparing himself, said to the
Knight. I know not what thou art, but thou may vant, that thou have
dismounted two approved good Knights. So coutching his Lance, proceeded
forward, but Galaor stayed him, calling the Knight to the combat, which made
Amadis thus to answer. Brother, find not your self agrieued with him,
because he sent us word before the Ioust, that he would not combat with the
Sword: but I hope to take revenge for all.

Herewith they encountered valiantly together, breaking their Lances so
courageously, and meeting with their bodies so violently, as Amadis was thrown
to the earth his horses shoulder being broken in the fall: in like manSpan^ was
the Knight dismounted, but keeping the ^^ynes of his bridle in his hand, he
quickly mounted on horse back again, when Amadis, thus spoke to him. We must
t^ie one course more, if thou will have t^ ^onor, for as yet it is not won,
because we both were unhorsed, I will not now Ioust any more, answered the
Knight. Then you do me wrong, replied Amadis, Redress, it if you can said the
Knight: for according to my order before the Ioust, I am bound to no more then
what I have done. After these words, he gallopped away through the Forest so
fast as he could: which when Amadis, and his companions saw, they being all on
foot, they stood as men ashamed, for they could not imagine what he was that
thus entreated them, whereupon Amadis mounted on Gandalins horse, saying to his
friends: Follow me if you please, for it would grieve me not to know the name
of this Knight. In sooth, answered the Damsel, it were the greatest folly in
you, above all the knights belonging unto King Lisuart, to think you can find
him in one whole year, unless, you be directly guided. Fair Damsel, said
Galaor, it may be you know what he is, and the place where he abides. On my
faith, quoth she, if I know any thing thereof, I mean not to tell it you: for
never will I injury so good a Knight. Damsel, replied Galaor, by the
affection you bear to the thing you most love in the World, tell us I pray ye
what you know in this matter. You conjure me in vain, quoth she, for never
will I discover his affairs, except you deliver me some good present.

Demand what you will answered Amadis, and you shall have it, on condition you
help us (...) find the knight. I am co^ten^, replied the Damsel, if first
you will tell me your names, and afterward each of you grant me a boo^e, at
what time I shall demand the^ of you: With all our hearts, quo^^, Amadis, a^
for our names, the one is Gal^ the other Agraies, and my self (...) ^dis. When
the Damsel (...) this, she was very gl^, saying: Certes my Lord, my journey
is shortened, for I seek you. Then you have now found me, answered Amadis, what
is your will with me? That you shall know, quoth she, when time serves: but
do you not remember the combat, which you promised to perform for the king of
Sobradisaes daughter, when she succored you by means of the Lions? Yes that
I do, said Amadis, and now am I riding toward her. Would you then, quoth the
Damsel, follow a knight so hard to be found, and the time for the combat
being nearer then you ween? She says very well my Lord, answered Galaor, do
you therefore and Agraies proceed on your journey, and I will seek the knight
with this Damsel: for ne-uer shall I rest til I have found him: and if it be
possible, I will be with you before you deal with Abis^^s. Be it so, replied
Amadis, but she promised us to tell his name, and whole we may find him. His
name, quoth the Damsel, I cannot tell ye, for I know it not my self, and yet
I have been a month with him, in which time I have seen him do such deeds
of arms, as without sight thereof I would never have credited: but where he is
now, I can conduct him thither that will go with me. It is all I request,
answered Galaor. Follow me then, quoth she: so taking their leave, they
separated themselves.

Thus Amadis and Agraies hold on their way, arriving within few days after at
the Castle of T^, where they sound the fair Briolania, with the a^e^e^t Lady:
but when Amadis behold her, he found her ^y changed, for if she were fair
when he first fawe her, she now seemed of such excellent perfection, as
(except Oriana) he reputed her the most beautiful creature in the world,
whereupon he said to Agraies. If nature was desirous to express her cunning
in a creature, in this Lady she has most sufficiently accomplished it. My
Lord, quoth she, full long have we expected your coming, for in you consists
our only hope. Madame, answered Amadis, by the help of God, I trust you shall
recover your loss, and we will do our uttermost therein. As thus they
devised, they entered a fair chamber, where mantles were brought to wrap about
them, and Briolania holp to unarm Amadis, for she could not be satisfied with
beholding him, because she counted him the fairest knight that ever was seen,
being now but twenty years of age. And so piercingly did he regard her, as
long time after she waved amourous, so that when she had recovered her
Kingdom, she wished him sole Lord of her and her country together, as shall
hereafter be declared. But Amadis was elsewhere addicted, and gave sufficient
proof to her, that the extreme anguishes he endured for his Oriana, were
manifest examples of his steadfast loyalty. Ne-uerthelesse, the young Lord of
Portugal pitying far Briolania, would disguise this history in another
mannerl, dise^ibing far otherwise the love of her and Amadis, which report is
worthy of no credit. For he says, that Briolania is being restored into her
Kingdom providing for the health of Amadis and Agraies, who were wounded she
continuing evermore amorous of Amadis, seeing by no means she could win him
to be her friend, took aside the Damsel, to whom Amadis, Galaor and
Agraies made the several promises, at what time she conducted Galaor to the
knight that iousted with them in the Forest, and discovering the chiefest
secrets of her Heart to her, with abundance of tears and affectionate sighs,
requested her counsel and remedy in these amorous passions. The Damsel
compassionate on her Ladies sickness, promised to give her redress for it,
whereupon she said to Amadis, that the boon she would desire of him, was his
entrance into the Tower, from whence he should not depart, until he had
begotten of Briolania a Son or a Daughter. Amadis willing to keep promise
with the Damosel, yielded thereto, yet without any will to touch Briolania:
whereby he grew into such melancholy, as he refused all bodily sustenance, and
fell into such danger of his person, as every hour he expected death. Which
being heard in the Court of king Lisuart, as also his deadly dangerous
extreamitie: Oriana (loath to lose him) sent him word and license, that he
should do what the Lady requested. Whereupon Amadis considering he might no
way else escape, and his gracious Mistress pittyed him so much, he be gat a
Son and a daughter of Briolania, whereof she was delivered of at one labor:
but this History is altogether false and feigned. It might be that Amadis was
prisoner in the Tower, and Briolania beheld his daily pining away: but she
desired the Damsel to remit him this boon, on condition he should not depart
till his brother Galaor returned, as willing to comfort her self with the
sight of him, while she attended his brothers ariuall: for Galaor espoused her
afterward, as you shall read in the fourth book of this History. Let it then
suffice at this time, that Amadis and Agraies foiourne certain days in the
Castle, while all needful things were ready for their combat.

CHAP. XLII.
How Galaor went with the Damsel after the Knight that dismounted him and his
companions in the Forest, whom when he found, they combated together, and
afterward in the sharpest point of their combat, they knew each other.

FOur days together, rode Galaor with the Damsel, seeking the Knight that
unhorsed him in the Forest, for which he was so overcome with anger, as every
knight he me withal dearly felt it, because in combat many received their
death. Then espying a fair Castle on the top of a high mountain, the Damsel
told him, there was no other place near where they might lodge that night:
wherefore he being glad to accept thereof, they came to the Castle, finding
many Gentlemen and Ladies sporting together, among whom was a Knight aged about
threescore years, who taking Galaor by the hand, did him all the honor might
be devised. My Lord, quoth, Galaor, your courtesy to us is so great, that
albeit we were determined to pass further on our way, yet for your sake we are
content to stay with you this night. Then the knight conducted Galaor, into a
fair Chamber, leaving the Damsel among the other Ladies; and after the
Prince was unarmed, the knight spoke to him in this manner. Here Sir may you
rest and take your ease, calling for any thing you stand in need of: for God
knows I have used such entertainment not only to you, but to all knights
errant that passed this way, because some time I have been as now you are. Yet
has nature given me two Sons, whose only delight is in search of
adventures, but now they lie sick in their beds, being cruelly wounded by a
Knight, who with one Lance cast them both from their Saddles. But they were so
ashamed at this foil, as they mounted again and purfued the knight,
ouertaking him as he entered a Barque to pass the water, where my Sons said
to him, that in respect he had iousted so well, they would try his fortune in
combat with the Sword: but the knight made answer he could not now intend it,
yet would they needs press him so far, as to hinder his entrance into the
Barque. Where-upon a Lady being in his company said, they wronged her overmuch
to stay her Knight: but they were not to depart, til he had combated with them
at the Sword. Seeing it will be no otherwise replied the Lady, he shall enter
fight with the better of you both, on condition, that if he be conqueror, the
other do forbear the Combat. They answered, if the one were vanquished, the
other would revenge his foil, which when the Knight heard, he was so angry, as
he bad them both come together, in respect they were importunate and would not
rest contented. In the trial, one of my sons sustained the worst, wherefore
his brother seeing him in such peril, strove to reskue him from death: yet all
was in vain, for the knight handled them so roughly, as he left them like dead
men in the field, and afterward passed away in the Barque. No sooner heard I of
this mishap, but I sent for my Sons, and home were they brought in this
dangerous plight: but that you may give credit to my words, behold here their
Armor cut and mangled, as I think the like strokes never came from any man's
hand. Galaor maruailing at this discourse, demanded what Arms the conquering
knight bare: when he was answered, his Shield to be of vermilion color, with
two black Lions figured therein: By these tokens Galaor knew him, that it was
the same man he travailed to find, which made him demand of his friendly host,
if he had no further knowledge of the Knight. No verily Sir, quoth the ancient
Gentleman. For this night, answered Galaor, let us take our rest, and to morrow
I intend to seek the man you talk of. For already I have trauiled four days
in his search: but if I meet with him, I hope to revenge the injuries of your
Sons, and o^ like^ whom he has offended, or else (...) will cost the price
of my life (...) could rather wish said the Knight, that leaving this perilous
enter prise, you would take some other course, seeing my two Sons have been
so hardly entreated, their own wilful folly being cause thereof. So breaking
off talk, Galaor took her rest till the next morning, when taking leave of the
ancient knight, he rode away with the Damsel, who brought him to the place of
passage in the Barque: where crossing the water to the other side, they came to
a very beautiful Castle, whither the Damosel rode before, aduising the Prince
to stay her return. She tarried not long, but coming back again, brought
another Damosel with her of excellent beauty, and ten men beside all on
horseback: after the fair Gentlewoman had saluted Galaor, she said. Sir, this
Damsel that came in your company, tells me, how you seek a knight, who
bears two black Lions in a vermillion shield, and are desirous to know his
name: this is very certain, that you nor any other can find him for three
years space, but only by force of arms, a matter not so easy to be
accomplished by you, for persuade your self, his like is not to be found in
all the Isles of great Britain. Lady, quoth Galaor, yet will I not give over
his search, although he conceal him self in this sort: and if I meet with
him, it shall like me better to combat with him, then to know my demand by
any other way. Seeing then, answered the Damsel, your desire is such, I will
show you him within three days ensuing, for this Gentlewomans sake, being my
cousin, who according to her promise has earnestly entreated me. Galaor
requited her with many thanks, and so they travailed on, arriving in the
evening at an arm of the Sea, where they found a Barque ready for passage to a
liule Island, and certain mariners in it, who made them all swear, if they
had any more then one knight in their company. No, credit me, replied the
Damsel: hereupon they set sail and away. Then Galaor demanded of the
Damsel, the reason why they took such an oath. Because, quoth she, the Lady
of the Isle whither we go, has so ordained it, that they shall let pass but
one knight at one time: and no other must they bring till his return, or
credible intelligence of his death. What is he, said Galaor, that vanquisheth
or kills them? The self same knight you seek, answered the Damsel, whom
the Lady has kept with her more then half a year, entirely loving him: and
the cause of this affection proceeds from a Tourney, which not long since he
maintained in this country, for the love of her and another fair Lady, whom
the knight (being a stanger here) conquered, defending her cause with whom he
now is, and ever since she bare him such affection, as without grant of his
love she would have dyed. Sometime he is desirous to seek after strange
adventures, but then the Lady to detain him still in this place, causes such
knights as come hither to pass one after another against whom he combateth,
and not one has yet returned unvanquished: such as die in fight are there
interred, and the foiled sent back again, despoyled of their horse and arms,
which the knight presents to his Lady, she being one of the fairest
creatures in the world, named Corisanda, and the Isle Brauisande. Know you not
the cause, said Galaor, wherefore the knight went not many days since, to a
Forest where I found him, and kept the passage there fifteen days together,
against all such as travailed that way? Yes mary, quoth the Damosel, he
promised a boon to a Lady before he came hither, wherefore she entreated him to
keep the Forest for the space of fifteen days: yet hardly he got license of
his fair Mistress, who allowed him but a month to stay and return.

By this time they were landed, and come before a goodly Castle, where stood a
pillar of Marble, with a horn hanging on it, which the Damsel bad him wind,
and the Knight would come forth at the sound thereof. After he had given a good
blast, certain Pages came forth of the Castle, who set up a Pauilion in the
midst of the field, and six Ladies (soon after) came walking forth one of
them seeming by her gesture and countenance, to be commander of the rest,
taking her place accordingly in the Tent. I marvel, said Galaor, the knight
tarryeth so long, I desire one of you to will the Lady send for him, because
business elsewhere of great importance, forbids me to trifle time here in
vain. One of the Damosells fulfilled his request. What? answered Corisanda,
makes he so small account of our Knight? thinks he so easily to escape from
him? has he such mind of other affairs before he see the end of this
attempt? indeed I think he shall return sooner then he expects, but with
slender advantage for him to brag of: then calling a Page, she said. Go and
bid the strange Knight come forth. The Page quickly did his message, and soon
after, the Knight came forth on foot, being all armed except with his Helmet,
which was brought after him with his Lance, and another Page leading his
Courser: when he came before his Lady, she said. Behold Sir, here is a brave
Knight, who thinks lightly to overcome you, and accounts himself assured
of the victory: I pray you let him know the price of his folly. After these
words she kissed and embraced him, but Galaor noting all these mysteries,
thought he tarried too long from the combat: at length the Knight being
mounted, they prepared themselus to the cariere, and breaking their Lances in
the encounter, were both wounded. Galaor presently drew his Sword, but the
knight entreated him to loust once more. With all my heart, replied Galaor, yet
I am sorry my horse is not so good as yours, for if it were: I could be content
not to give over till one of us lay along on the ground, or all these Lances
broken in pieces. The Knight made him no answer, but commanded a squire to
bring them other staves, and meeting together, Galaors horse was almost down:
the knight likewise lost his stirrops, being glad to catch hold by the mane of
his horse, whereat (...) one somewhat a shamed, he said to Galaor. You are
desirous to combat with the Sword, which I have deferred, not for any doubt of
my self, but only to spare you, notwithstanding, we must needs now try the
issu thereof.

Do what you can answered Galaor, I mean to be revenged for your kindness in
the Forest: these words made the Knight soon to remember him, saying: You
must do no more then you can, and happily before you depart hence, you may
sustain a foil worse then the first. Hereupon they fell to the combat, which
began and continued with such fury, as the Ladies, were driven into wonderful
amazement, yea, themselves were abashed that they held out so long, having
their Armor mangled, their Shields defaced, their Bodies sore wounded, and the
blood streming down upon their horses: Galaor never being in such danger of
his life, but when he fought with his brother Amadis, which made him carry
better opinion of the Knight, and both of them being glad to breath a while,
Galaor entered into these speeches. You see Sir I have the better of the combat,
let me therefore know your name, and why you conceal your self so closely:
wherein you shall do me very great pleasure, and we may continue friends,
else worse will ensue then you imagine. Be well assured answered the knight our
strife shall not be ended so easily, nor am I to be overcome so lightly as you
ween, beside, I was never more desirous to prolong a combat, then I am at this
instant, because I never met with the knight that tried me so well: but to you
nor any other will I be known, except one Knight who has power to command
me. Be not so opinitiue, replied Galaor, for I swear to you by the faith I owe
to God, never to leave you till I know whar you are, and why you conceal your
self so secretly. And I swear to you, quoth the knight, while breath is in my
body you shall not know it by me, and rather would I presently die, then any
but two should understand what I am: yet I know not them, but they may and
shall have knowledge of me. And what are they, said Galaor, you esteem so
much? Neither will I disclose them to you, answered the knight. Both them and
my former demand, quoth Galaor, I will know, else one of us shall die, or both
together. I am well pleased therewith, replied the Knight.

So began they to charge each other a fresh, as if they had not fought together
before at all: but the strange knight received many cruel wounds, which made
his strength more and more to fail: and the Lady seeing the great danger of
his life, would suffer him to endure no longer peril, but coming to Galaor,
said. Forbear sir Knight, would God the Barque and Mariners had sunk, before
they brought you hither. Lady, quoth Galaor, you ought not to blame me in doing
my deuoire against this knight, who has outraged me, and many beside, for
which I mean to be revenged this day. Forbear, said the Lady, to wrong him
any more, otherwise you may fall into an extremity without any mercy.

It matters not what may happen answered Galiaor: but nothing shall make me
give over, until he have satisfied my demand. And what is that? quoth she. He
must tell me his name, replied Galaor, and why so closely he concealeth
himself, likewise what the two Knights are of whom he told me but even now.
Proceed no further in combat said the Lady, and I will satisfy your demand.
This Gentleman is named Don Florestan, concealing himself in this secret
manner to find his two brethren, who are in this country accounted such men at
Arms, that albeit he has well tried himself with you, yet will he not be
commonly known, till he have accomplished such deeds in chivalry, as ma
deserve to equal him with them, who are at this time in King Lisuarts Court,
one of them being named Amadis, the other Galaor, and all three the Sons to
King Perion of Gaul. Alas, what have I done? quoth Galaor, here brother take
my Sword, and therewithal the honor of the fight, for I have offended over
much. What? said the knight am I then your brother? According to this Ladies
speeches, answered Galaor, you are, and I am your brother Galaor. Florestan
amazed at this accident, fell on his knee, saying. My Lord, I desire you to
pardon me, for this offense in combatting unknown with you, was caused by no
other reason: but that I durst not name my self your brother, till I had made
some immitations of your noble virtues, Galaor courteously embraced him in his
arms, the tears streaming from his eyes with joy, and gree^ing to see him so
sore wounded, doubting least his life was in great danger: but when the Lady
saw them so good friends, and the enmity converted into such Humility, as one
right glad thereof, she said to Galaor. Worthy Sir, though first you gave me
occasion of great heaviness, yet now with sufficient joy you have recompe^^ed
me. So taking each of them by the hand, she walked with them into the Castle,
where they being lodged in two sumptuous beds, her self (skillful in
Chirurgerie) cured their wounds. Thus remained the two brethren with the rich
and beautiful Lady Corisanda, who desired their health as her own welfare.

CHAP. XLIII.
How Don Florestan was begotten by King Perion, on the fair Daughter to the
County of Zealand.

AT what time King Perion sought after strange Adventures, he arrived in the
country of Almaigne, where he soiourned the space of two years, accomplishing
many brave deeds of Arms, the renown whereof continues to this day. And as
he returned toward Gaul he lodged in the Counties house of Zealand, where he
was entertained very royally, as well in respect of his own reputation, as
also because the County himself had sometime been a Knight errant, which made
him love all such as followed Arms. After supper, the King was conducted to
his Chamber, where being in bed, and somewhat weary with travail, he fell a
sleep soundly: but to shake off this heaviness, he felt himself embraced and
kissed he knew not by whom, when starting up to arise, he was so held down that
he could not. Why Sir? quoth she that thus mastred him, take you no pleasure in
me who am alone with you? the king looking on her, by means of the light which
still burned in his Chamber, he discerned her to be a most beautiful Lady,
wherefore he thus answered. I pray you fair friend, tell me what you are. What
soever I am, quoth she, I love you exceedingly, as one that freely gives her
self to you. In sooth, replied the King, I very gladly would know your name.
You trouble me, said the Lady, with this importunity, yet can I use no other
continence the^ you see: but it were necessary quoth the king, I should know
your name, if you mean to be my friend. Seeing you constrain me thereto,
answered the Lady, know that I am the Counties Daughter, who has so friendly
entertained you. Now trust me Madam, replied the King, you must hold me
excused, for I had rather die, then abuse the man I am so much beholding to.
Will you then refuse me? quoth she, well may you be termed the worst nurtured
Prince in the world, in denying the conquest, which all your life time you
might have failed of. You may speak your pleasure, answered the King, but I
will do what is convenient for your honor and mine, and not offend in so foul
a manner. I shall, quoth she, cause my Father to think himself more iniuried
by you, then if you grant what I desire. So starting from the bed, she took
the Kings Sword (even the same which was afterward found with Amadis, when he
was taken up on the Sea) and drawing it forth, she set the point against her
heart, saying. Now shall my Fathers life be shortened by my death, whereof you
are the only cause. As she uttered these words, she offered to stab her self
with the Sword: when the king suddenly staying her hand and meruailing at her
impatient love, thus replied. Hurt not your self Madam, for I am content to
satisfy your will. Hereupon he kindly embraced and kissed her, passing the
night with her in such sort, as her hot desire was quallified, and at that
instant she conceived with child: the King little thinking thereon, for the
next morning he took his leave of her, and the County, returning with all
speed he could into Gaul. But the time of deliverance drawing on, and she
(desirous to cover her of fence) determined to go visit an Aunt of hers, whose
dwelling was not past two or three miles off, and many times she resorted
thithe^ for her pleasure. So taking no other company with her but a Damsel,
as she rode through the Forest, the pain of travail made her alight from
her Palfrey she being soon after delivered of a goodly Son. The Damsel that
was with her, seeing what had happened, bringing the child to the mother,
said. Madam, as your heart served you to commit the offense, so must it now
practice some prepresent remedy, while I return from your Aunt again. Then
getting on horseback, she rode apace to her Ladies Aunt, and acquainted her
with the whole matter: which caused the old woman to be very sorrowful, yet
she provided succor for her Niece, sending a Litter with all convenient
speed, wherein the Lady and her child were brought to her Castle secretly,
every thing being so cunningly handled, as the County never knew his Daughters
fault. After such time as these matters require, the Lady returned home to her
Father, leaving her Son in her Aunts custody, where he was nourished till the
age of eighteen years, having Squires and Gentlemen attending on him, who
daily instructed him in managing Arms, and all brave qualities beseeming a man
of value. He being grown of goodly stature, the old Lady brought him one day
to the County his Grandfather, who gave him his knighthood, not knowing what
he was: and returning again with his motherly Nurse, by the way she brake with
him in this manner. My Son, I am certain you are ignorant of your parenatge,
but credit my words, you are the son to King Perion of Gaul, begotten on his
daughtr that gave you your order of knighthood: endeavor your self therefore
to follow your fathers steps, who is one of the most renowned knights in the
world. Madam, quoth Florestan, oftentimes have I heard great same of King
Perion, but never imagined my self to be his son: wherefore I vow to you,
being my long and careful nurse, that I will travail to fiude my father, and
not make my self known to any one, till my deeds declare me worthy to be his
son. Not long after, he departed from the old Lady, and accompanied with two
squires, iournied to Constantinople, which at that time was greatly vexed with
war, where he remained the space of four years, performing such haughty
deeds of Chivalry, as he was counted the best knight in all those parts. When
he perceived himself in some account, he intended to visit Gaul, and make
himself known to the king his father: but coming into great Britain, he
heard the fame of Amadis to be maruailous, which was the cause of his stay
there, to win some report by arms, as his brethren had done, whom he longed
to acquaint himself withal. At length he met with them both in the forest,
as you heard, and afterward combated with his brother Galaor, which caused
their abode at the Castle of Corisanda, until such time as their wounds were
healed.

But now let us return to Amadis and Agraies, who stayed with fair Briolania
five days together, preparing their armor and every thing in order: which
being done, they set forward on their way, accompanied with Briolania, her
Aunt, certain waiting Gentlewomen, and squires to do them service by the way.
When they drew near the Realm of Sobradisa, they came to the Castle of an
ancient Lady named Galumba, who sometime lived in Briolanias fathers Court, and
there they were welcomed very honouarbly: yet whether Briolania travailed thus
accompanied, the old Lady Galumba could not choose but marvel, which made her
request tobe satisfied therein. Briolanias Aunt told her, how Amadis was one
of the best knights in the world, and had promised to revenge the murdered
kings death: likewise how he discomfited them that guarded the Chariot, and
after-ward overcame the rest in the Castle, at what time the Lions escaped, as
you have heard. Galumba wondering at such singular prowess, answered. If he be
such a one as you make report, his companion must needs be of some estimation,
and well may they bring your enterprise to end, considering the truth and
justice of the cause: but take heed least the traitorous king work some
treason against them. That is the chcefest point of my fear, i answered
Briolania, wherefore we came to crave your advise herein. Hereupon she wrote
a letter, and sealed it with the Princesses seal at Arms, then caling a
Damsel, after she had given her instructions, she bad her make have in
delivering the letter. Presently went the Damsel to horseback, and travailed
so speedily that she arrived at the great City of Sobradisa, which the whole
Realm took this name by. There was Abiseos and his Sons, Darison and
Dramis, and these three must the Combat be waged withal: for Abiseos slew the
Father of Briolania, by covetous desire he had to the Crown, which he ever
since usurped and held, more by tyranny then any consent in the Subjects. The
Damsel entered the Palace on hors-back, when diverse knights came to her,
requesting her to alight: but she made answer she would not, til she saw the
king, and that he commanded her to leave her Palfrey. Soon after came the
king; accompanied with his two Sons and many great Lords, and after she had
saluted him, he boldly bad her say what she would. My Lord, quoth she, I shall
fulfill your command, on condition I may abide in your protection, and receive
no injury for any thing I say. By my Crown, said the king, I warrant your
safety: whereupon the Damsel thus began. Sir, my Lady and Mistress
Briolania, disinherited by you, greetes you with this letter, which may openly
be read before this royal company, and I afterward receive answer for my
discharge: when the king heard openly the name of Briolania, remorse of
conscience touched him with the wrong he did her: yet was the letter openly
read, which was to give credit to the Damosells words. The most of the Lords
there present, who sometime were subjects to the slaughtered king, seeing the
messenger of their lawful Queen indeed: pittyed she was so unjustly
disinherited, and in their hearts desired of God, to plague the treason done to
her Father: Proceed Damsel, quoth the king, and let us hear your message.
My Lord, said she, by treason you murdered my Ladies Father, and unjustly keep
her from her inheritance: wherefore according to your former promise, which you
have not once but often times made, that you with your two Sons would maintain
by Arms, the right you pretend to have in this Realm: she sends you word by
me, if still you stand upon such trial, she will bring two knights hither,
who shall in combat maintain her cause, making you know your disloyalty and
treason committed. Darison eldest Son to the king, hearing his Father menaced
in this sort, grew into great choler, and as one moved with despite, he
arose, when (without the kings consent) he thus spoke. Damsel, if your
Mistress Briolania have two knights with her, men resolved to fight on her
behalf: here do I accept the combat for my father and Brother, and if I fail,
I promise in the presence of all these Lords, to send he my head in requital
of her fathers, whose death was not accomplished without great reason. In sooth
Sir Darison, answered the Damsel, you speak as a knight of haughty mind,
yet may I doubt these words to proceed from choler, because I discern an
alteration in your countenance: but if you will request the king to confirm
your speeches, I shall think your proffer came from a heart of courage.

This answer Damsel, quoth he, may you boldly make her that sent you hither.
Cause then his Majesty, said the Damsel, to give my Ladies knights assurance,
that for any mishap you may receive in the Combat, they shall sustain no
injury, nor be meddled withal but by you three: And if you purchase them such
a safe conduct, they shall be here within three days at the uttermost,
Darison falling on his knee before the King, said. You hear (my Lord) the
Damosells demand, and the promise I have made before your Maiesly, in the
presence of all these great Princes and Lords: humbly therefore I beseech you,
seeing my honor is yours, that both you and all the rest will confirm her
request, otherwise, to our great disadvantage, the presuming knights, who dare
adventure in the cause of foolish Briolania, will imagine themselves
conquerors, and us dismaide faint-hearted Cowards: having openly published,
that if any one will touch your illustrious renown for matters past, by the
combat of us three you intend to be purged. And albeit you would make them no
such promise, yet ought not we to refuse them, for as I understand, they be
some foolish knights of King Lisuarts Court, who by their ouer-weening and
aspiring thoughts, make high acompt of their own deeds in the contempt of
others. The King who loved Darison as himself, though the death of his brother
condemned him culpable, and thereby made him fear the combat: granted them
safe conduit, according as the Damsel requested for the two knights, and such
as came in their company. Here is to be considered, that the period of this
traitors Fortune was now limited, and the iustauenger of all wrongs, pointed
out reward for the treason of him and his Sons, as in this discourse may be
evidently seen.

The Damosel seeing her message had taken such effect as she desired, said
unto them: Make your selves ready, for to morrow without fail shall this
difference be desided. So mounting on her Palfrey, she returned to the Castle
of Galumba, where being arrived, before the knights and Ladies, she reported
her answer: but when she told them, that Darison reputed them foolish knights
of king Lisuarts Court, they were so offended, as Amadis entered into these
speeches. By God, there are such in company of that good king, as can easily
abate the pride of Darison, and humble his head so low as they list: but I
think his choler ouer-mastred him, when he uttered words of such great
indiscretion. Trust me my Lord, answered Briolania, you cannot say or do so
much against these traitors, as they justly deserve. You know what vilanie
they did to the king my Father, and how long time they have disinherited me
(...) let pity then prevail on my behalf, seeing in God and you I have
reposed my self, with assured hope of sufficient revenge. Amadis whose heart
was submisse to virtue and all gentleness, moved with compassion, said.

Madam, if God be so pleased, ere to morrow at night, your sorrow and sadness,
shall be converted into pleasure and content: herupon they concluded, to set
forward very early the next morning, which made them depart to their chambers,
except Briolania, who sat conferring with Amadis on many matters, when often
times she thought to motion marriage between him and her: but suspecting by his
continual sighs, as also the tears streaming from his eyes, that some other
Lady was cause of these passions, she kept silence, and taking her leave bad
him good uight. On the morrow they go all to horseback, and coming to the
City of Sobradisa, their arrival was very welcome to many, who seeing the
Daughter of their late sovereign Lord, and knowing the monstrous treachery of
his brother, they instantly desired her prosperous success, because they bare
her singular affection, Abiseos remembering the wrong he had done her, and his
bloody treason so unnaturally committed, seemed terrified in countenance,
because the worm of conscience revived his heinous offense: yet having been
so long abstinate and indurate in his sin, thought fortune would now assure
his quietness, and confirm his estate to continue in tranquillity. But when he
saw how the people flocked about her, not showing any reverence to him and his
sons, albeit they were royally accompained with Lords, he exclamed on them
in this manner. Ah wretched and bad minded people, I see what comfort you take
by the presence of this Girl, and how your senses are carried away with her:
now may I well judge, you rather could except her as your sovereign, she
being a woman not capable of such an office, then I that am a hardy knight.
Her weakness you may note, because she has in so long time gotten but two
knights, who are come to receive an ignominious death, which in sooth I cannot
choose but pity. When Amadis heard these taunting words, he was so enraged, as
if the blood would have gushed from his eyes, and raising himself on his
stirrops, that every one might hear him, he thus answered. Abiseos, it may
be easily discerned, that the arrival of the Princess is scant pleasing to
thee, in respect of thy horrible treason committed, murdering her father thy
eldest brother: but if thou have any feeling of virtue, and art repentant for
thy foul mis-deed, yield to her what thou have unjustly usurped, so shall I
discharge thee of the combat: provided, thou ask God forgiuensse, and use
such repentance as be seems a sin so heinous, that by losing honor in this
world, thou may seek the salvation of thy soul hereafter. Darison provoked
to anger by these speeches, advanced himself, and before his father had
leisure to reply, he prevented him in this manner. Thou foolish Knight of King
Lisuarts Court, hardly can I endure thy iniurous words to my father in my
presence: but I am content to defer them, till we proceed to the effect of thy
demand, then shall I take such vengeance for them as I desire, for when thy
heart shall faint in time of need, weening to save thy life by flight: if thou
make not good have I will so chastise thee, as each one shall pity thy
miserable estate. This is too long a process, said Agraies, to defend thy
fathers treason withal, go arm thy self, and come to the combat as thou
did promise, then shall thou see if fortune be so favorable, to give thee
the victory which thou reckonest assured: if she do otherwise, persuade thy
self, both thou and thine shall have the meed of your wicked derseruing. Say
what thou will, answered Darison, ere long thy injurious tongue pulled from thy
head, shall be sent to the court of thy master king Lisuart, that such as
behold thy worthy punishment, may be afraid to hazard the like by their
liberal language. So calling for their armor, the king and his two sons were
quickly armed, then mounting on horseback, they went to the place appointed
for Combats. Where-upon, Amadis and Agraies lacing their Helmets, took their
Shields and Lances, and afterward entered the field. Then Dramis (who was the
youngest brother, yet a Knight so valiant, as two of the best in that Country
durst not deal with him in Combat) said to his Father. My Lord, where your
Majesty and my brother are present, well may I be excused from speech, but now
effects must show it otherwise, by such strength as Heaven has enabled me
withal: therefore I desire to try my Fortune with the Knight who has so
wronged you, and if I kill him not at the first taint of the Lance, never
shall Armor come on my back again: but if I meet him not so right as I
desire, he shall have but little respite of life, for at the first stroke of
my Sword, I will dispatch him. Many heard the words of young Dramis, and
esteemed highly of his enterprise, nor did they greatly doubt the performance,
considering what deeds of Arms they had seen him accomplish. Now place they
their Lances in their rests, and Dramis prepared himself against Amadis, who
met him so full in the cariere, as his heart brake in his belly, and he fell to
the ground so waightily, as if it had been the fall of an Ox. Get thee to all
the Devils, said Dardan the Dwarffe, my master is very well rid of thee: but me
thinks his threatening has lighted on himself, which commonly falls out so
with such great crackers. Agraies and Darison brake their Lances in the
encounter, but no other harm happened between them as yet.

When Abiseos saw his Son Dramis was dead, he was meruailously displeased, and
intended to revenge his death on Amadis, where-upon he gave forth to meet him,
and piercing his Lance through the Princes shield, gave him a fore hurt on the
Arm, which made the beholders doubt, that Amadis could hold out no longer. If
then the young Princess Briolania was dismaide, it were in vain to demand the
question: for now her heart dreaded further mishap: but he who could not be
daunted with common wounds, drew the sword which he recovered from Arcala^s,
giving Abiseos such a sound greeting therewith on the head, as made him coutch
his neck to his shoulders, and the Sword sliding down upon his right arm,
gave him a wound to the very bone, by means whereof Abiseos found himself so
distressed and amazed, that he fell down from his horse as it were in a
Trance. Now did the people marvel not a little, to see Amadis at two strokes
overthrow two such puissant Knights, esteemed amongst them the best in the
World: but Amadis beholding no other resistance, returned to Darison who fought
with Agraies, they behauing themselves so manfully against each other, as the
people thought they never saw a brauer combat.

At length Abiseos recovered again, and seeing his Son Darison in danger of
his life, came to assist him, giving Agraies such a wound in the throat, as
his Cousin thought he had been slain outright: But soon did he requite
Abiseos for it, by seperating his wounded Arm from his body, even the same
Arm wherewith he killed the King his Brother, which made him fall down dead
to the ground, whereupon Amadis called to him, saying. Abiseos, this is
punishment in member, whereby thou did thrust thy self into the Crown, and
now have received death according to thy desert. Then he turned about to help
Agraies, but he met him with the head of Darison in his hand: whereat all the
people gave a great shoute, and humbled themselves to Briolania as their
lawful Queen. This was the end of the wretched Father and his Sons, serving
at this day for an example to such as shamefully usurp the right of others:
which though they enjoy for a small season, yet when the God of power lets
loose his arrows against them, they fall into open and detested ruin. Let
every man therefore set before his eyes that no evil remains unpunished, and
the end concludes these two principles, the eternal beatitude of the
celestial Souls, and the merciless excruciaments of miserable damned
creatures.

Thus see you what lot fell to Abiseos and his children, usurping the kingdom
by homicide and tyrany, even by the death of his own natural brother:
therefore heaven repayed him with a miserable end, by the conquering Sword of
Amadis and Agraies, who dragged them along out of the field, demanding if any
other would withstand the right of Briolania. By one of the chiefest Lords in
the Country named Goman, they were answered, she had no more enemies to
gainsay her, which he testified with an hundred knights of his own kindred:
All the people being there ready to receive their Queen Briolania, and do her
homage as beseemed faithful Subjects. Here-upon Amadis and Agraies conducted
the new Queen to the PalaSpan^ Royal, where they were presently unarmed, and
Surgeons commanded to attend their wounds: in mean while Briolania was
confirmed in the regiment, by a general oath of the Subjects taken to their
Sovereign, with such joy, as ne-uer was the like in Sobradisa. But because the
two knights were very sore wounded, and their hurts found to be somewhat
dangerous, all sports and pastims accustomed at such solemnity, were referred
til the time of their recovery: which to compass the sooner, their lodgings
were appointed in several chambers, that none might trouble them with tedious
talking, lest a continual fever should come upon them. Notwithstanding,
Briolania, as one not ungrateful for the good she received by them, would not
depart from them either day or night, but only at the time of repast: so that
by her kind and diligent attendance, the danger of their sickness was
expelled the sooner. See here the true and certain history, for what is said
more concerning the love of Amadis and this Princess, has been invented and
falsely feigned, according as I have said before: therefore we will cease,
seeing here it goes no further, until the contrary may apparently be known,
as in the History following is declared.

CHAP. XLIIII.
How Galaor and Florestan riding toward the Realm of Sobradisa, met with three
Damsels at the Fountain of Olives.

GAlaor and Florestan being at the Castle of Corisanda, as you have heard, they
soiourned there til their wounds were healed: afterward they concluded on their
departure, to seek Amadis in the realm of Sobradisa, desiring they might come
thither before the beginning of the co^bat, to have part of the peril in
fight, and glory in conquest. But when Florestan should take leave of his Lady,
her grief and tears unspeakable, able to move ruth in a heart of flint,
although Florestan assured her of his speedy return. Notwithstanding all these
mones, forward they set to the Realm of Sobradisa: Florestan craving a boon of
his brother by the way, to wit: that he would not combat on the way for any
thing which might happen, until he were able to hold out no longer. With much
a do he obtained his request, and so rode they on four days together, not
meeting with any adventure worthy the rehearsal: but toward Sun setting they
met a knight hard by a Tower, who entreated them earnestly to lodge there that
night, which gentle offer they accepted, and entering with the knight, they
conferred on many matters till supper was ready. The knight was of comely
stature, and well spoken, but his countenance was so sad and melancholy, as
Galaor began thus to question with him. Me thinks Sir you are not so merry as
you should be, but if we may any way help your pensiveness, tell us, and you
shall find us willing to perform it. I believe assuredly, quoth their host,
that like good knights you would do as you say, but my sadness is caused
through extreme love, a matter not to be revealed, and therefore the rather to
be pardoned. So sat they down to supper, which being ended, Galaor, and his
brother were condcted to their chamber, where they reposed themselves till the
next morning: when mounting on horseback, their host would accompany them a
little on the way, and calling for his Iennet, but putting on no Armor, he
rides with them: this did he to see what should happen to them, because in
the way he guided them, he hoped to see some proof of their manhood, when if
they were vanquished or slain, he might the more easily escape from them.

Not far had they traveled, but they came to a place called the fountain of
Olives, because in the midst of the water grew three high Olive trees. Hereby
they espied three beautiful Damsels, and a Dwarffe sitting aloft in one of
the trees: whereupon Florestan saluted them very courteously, as one not to
learn his behauior toward Ladies, then one of the Damsels requiting his
salutation, said. Sir knight, if heaven have endued you with as great bounty as
comely perfection, no doubt but you are sufficiently enriched. Fair Damsel
answered Florestan, if my outward appearance does please you, my inward virtue
you may try if you have any need. You speak so kindly, quoth she, that I will
presently make proof of your valor, to see if you can carry me hence from
this place. In sooth Lady, replied Florestan, if of your self you be willing
to go, I know no reason to the contrary why you should not. Herewith he
commanded the squire to set her on a palfray, which was tied (ready furnished)
at one of the olive trees: but when the dwarf beheld it, he cried out
aloude. Come forth sir knight, come forth, for here is one will carry away your
friend. Presently came out of a valley a knight bravely prauncing, and well
armed, who said to Florestan. What moves you sir to touch my Lady? I cannot
think she is yours, answered Florestan, seeing she entreats me to carry her
hence away. Albeit she would, quoth the knight, yet I think it not at this
time so convenient, because I have defended her from better then you are. I
know not how well you have defended, replied Florestan, but she shall go with
me if I can help it. By God sir, answered the other, you must first talk with
the knights of this valley, and feel how safely they can keep such as they
love. So placing their Lances in their rests, they ran courageously against
each other, the knight breaking his staff: but Florestan smot his shield so
strongly against his helmet, as the lace brake, and his head was bare, but
worst of all, he fell so heavily upon his sword, that with his weight brake in
two pieces. Florestan finished his carrire, having his Lance whole and sound,
when turning again to the knight, he saw that he moved neither hand or foot,
wherefore punching him with his Lance upon the stomach, said: Pillard, thou art
dead, if thou yield not. The knight being recovered from his trance, and
beholding the present danger of his life, desired mercy: which Florestan
granted, so he would freely resign the Damsel. She is at your pleasure,
replied the knight, but cursed be the hour when first I saw her. For by her
folleys she has oftentimes endangered my life, Florestan leaving him, came to
the Domosell, saying: Fair Lady, now you are mine. You have so nobly won me,
quoth she, as I remain at your disposition. As they were departing thence, one
of the other Damsels thus spoke: Alas sir, will you separate so good company?
it is a year and more since we have lived together, and we would be loath now
to depart in this manner. If you please to accompany her, answered Florestan, I
can be content to conduct you together: and more I hope you will not request,
because I mean not to leave my conquest. I think not my self so foul,
replithe other damosel, but some good knight may enterprise as great an
adventure for me: mary it is to be doubted, whether such hardiness remain in
you or no. Why Lady^ quoth Florestan, think you that fear can make me leave
yet I promise you on my faith, but that I would not forcibly carry you away, you
should presently go with me: but if your will be so good, let my squire help
you up on your hackney. Which she did, and the dwarf cried again as he did
for the first, whereupon another knight came immediately forth, and after him a
squire bearing two Lances, the knight using these words to Florestan. You have
(sir) already won one Lady, and (not content with her) you seek for another:
but now in one instant you must loose them both, and your head I doubt to keep
them company, because you being of no better race, are unworthy a Lady of so
high calling. Thou vauntest very much, answered Florestan, yet have I two
knights of my lineage, whom thou, nor three such as thou art, may be thought
worthy to serve. Thy co^mendations extend very far, said the knight, yet am I
to meddle with none but thee, who have got a Lady from him that could not
defend her: but she must be mine if I conquer thee, else by vanquishing me,
thou shall be master of them both together. Now thou speak reason, quoth
Florestan: defend thy Lady well, or without doubt she will fall to my share.
So giving the spurs to their horses, they committed this controversy to be
tried by the Lance, when though the Prince failed in the race, and the other
brake his staff very manfully: yet (being angry at his mis-hap) at the second
course he sent the knight so violently to the ground, as he thought every bone
of him was broken in pieces. Thus was he safely possessed of the second
Damsel, and very loath he was to leave the third there alone, but she
beholding their host that conducted them thither, spoke to him in this manner.
My friend, I would advise ye to be gone, because you know these two knights
cannot resist him will presently come: then if you be taken, you are sure to die
the death. Believe me Lady, quoth he, I mean now to see the end of all, for
my horse is quick of pace, and my tower strong enough to defend me from him.
Well, look to your selves, said the Damsel, you be but three, and one of
you unarmed, but if he were, it might not avail him. When Florestan heard how
she praised him that was to come, he was more desirous to carry her away then
before, only because he would have a sight of him, and therefore bad his
Squire to set her on horseback as he did the other, when the Dwarffe in the
olive tree delivered these words. Believe me Sir knight, in an evil hour
came this boldness on you, for presently comes one who will revenge his
companions. Forth of the valley came a knight in gilt armor, mounted on a
lusty bay courser, the man resembling a Giant in proportion, and reputed to be
of incredible strength. After him followed two Squires armed, each of them
carrying a hatchet in his hand, and so soon as he came near Florestan, he thus
spoke. Stay knight and fly not, for by flight thou art not able to save thy
life, better is it for thee to dye like a good knight then a coward, especially
when by cowardice thou can not escape. Florestan hearing such menaces of
death, contemning likewise a man of no value, incenced with anger, he returned
this answer. Monster, Beast, Devil, or whatsoever thou art, reason I see thou
want: so little do I esteem thy prodigal words, that I think thou have no
better weapons to fight withal. I grieve, said the Knight, that I cannot have
my ^ill in revenge on thee, but I would four of the best of thy lineage were
here with thee, for me to slice off their heads as I will do thine. Look to
thine own thou were best, answered Florestan, for I hope I am sufficient to
excuse them, and be their Lieutenant in this matter on thee. Thus sundring
themselves, in rage and fury they met together, that the beating of their
horses hoous made the earth to groan and the breach of their Lances made a
terrible noise: but the great knight lost his stirrops, and had fallen to the
ground, if by catching hold about his horse neck he had not escaped. As
Florestan held on his course, he caught a hatchet from one of the squires,
where with he smote him quite beside his horse: and by time he returned; the
Knight had recovered his seat again, and the hatchet which the other Squire
held. Now begins a dreadful combat between them, such eruell strokes being
given at each other with their hatchets, as though their helmets were of right
trusty steel, yet they cut and mangled them very pitifully. Many times was
Florestan enforced to staggering, by the mighty blows of his monstrous enemy,
yet at length the Prince smote at him so furiously as he was feign to lie along
upon his horse neck, when redoubling his stroke between the helmet and the
brigandine he parted his head from his shoulders. Being thus co^queror of all
the Damofells, and they not a little meruailing at this strange victory, the
Knight who had been their host the night before, spoke to Florestan. My Lord,
this Damsel have I long time loved, and she me with like affection, but for
the space of this year and more, the great knight (whom last you slew) has
forcibly detained her yet being now recovered by your worthy prowess, I
beseech ye Sir, I may enjoy her again. If it be so as you say, answered
Florestan, my pains have stood you in some steed at this time, but against her
will, neither you or any other can get her from me. Alas my Lord, quoth the
Damsel, no one but he has right to my love, then sunder not them that should
live together. Nor will I said Florestan, you are, Lady at your own liberty,
and may depart with your friend when you please. They both required him with
manifold thanks then taking leave of Galaor and Florestan, the knight rides
home joyfully with his new conquered Lady. The other two Damosells desired the
Princes to accompany the^ to their Ants house which was not far off, Galaor
questioning with the^ by the way, why they were kept in such sort at the
Fountain, where-to one of the Damosells thus replied. Understand my Lord, that
the great Knight who was shine in the combat, loved the Lady which your host
carried away with him, but she despised him above all other, fancying no other
then him who now enioys her. But in respect this knight was so puissant, as
none in this country durst contend with him, he kept her violently whether she
would or no, yet offering her no injury, because he loved her decrely, and one
day among other he thus spoke to her: fair Mistress, to the end I may
compass your gentle affection, and be esteemed of you the only knight in the
world listen what I will do for your sake. There is a Knight named Amadis of
Gaul, accounted the only man for valor this day living, who slew a Cousin of
mine in the Court of king Lisuart, a knight of great fame called Dardan the
proud: him (for your sake) will I seek, and by cutting off his head, convert
all his glory to mine own commendation. But till I compass what I have said,
these two Ladies (meaning us) and these two knights of my lineage shall attend
on you, and each day conduct you to the fountain of Olives, which is the only
passage for knights errant through this Country: if any dare be so bold to
carry you thence, there shall you see many brave combats, and what the honor of
your love can make me do, to cause the like opinion in you toward me, as your
divine prfections, have wrought in me to you. Thus were we taken and given to
the two Knights who were first dismounted, and with them we have abode the
space of one whole year, in which time many combats they fought for us, yet
never conquered till this present. In sooth Lady, answered Galaor, the knights
intent was too high for him to accomplish, because he could not deal with
Amadis, and escape the Fortune now fallen upon him: but how was he named? He
called himself Alimias, quoth she, and had not ouer-weening ptide too much
ruled him, he was a most gentle and courteous Knight. By this time were they
come to their Aunts Castle, where Galaor and Florestan found gracious
entertainment, the old Lady being very glad to see her Neeces, as also to
understand the death of Alimias. After they had taken leave of the friendly
Ladies, they journey toward the Realm of Sobradisa, where they heard before
they entered the City, how Amadis and Agraies had slain Abiseos and his
Sons, by means whereof, Briolania ruled as a peaceable Queen, which news
highly contented them, and made them rejoice for their happy fortune. To the
palace they come unknown of any, till they were brought to Amadis and Agraies,
whose wounds were already indifferently recured, and they devising with the
Queen at her arrival. Here you must note, how the Damsel that conducted
Galaor to find Florestan, left them after the combat, and coming before to
her Mistress, told her and Amadis, how Galaor and Florestan knew each other,
and what issue their combat had: which made Amadis very kindly to embrace them
both, and Florestan offered on his knee to kiss his hand, which Amadis would
not permit, but causing him to arise, sat down and communed of their
adventures past. But one day among other, the new enstalled Queen Briolania,
after many honerable feastings she had made the^, seeing these four knights
determined to depart, considering the good she had received by Amadis and
Agraies, and that she (being before a disinherited Princess) was by their
means restored to her Kingdom: beholding likewise the wheel of fortune
turned, and how such personages were not alone to aid and defend her Country,
but puissant enough of themselves to be Kings and mighty Lords: falling on her
knees before them, first rendering thanks to God, who had done her such grace
as to regard her in pity, continuing her discourse, she said. Think my Lords,
these mutations are the meruailes of the Almighty, which are admirable to us
and held of great account, but to him they are (in manner) nothing. Let us see
if it be good then to shun Signories and riches, which to obtain we take such
pain and travail, and to keep, endure innumerable anguishes and distress:
as superfluous therefore utterly to deiect them, because they are torments of
body and soul, uncertain and have no permanence. As for my self, I say no,
but affirm, that they being lawfully begotten, modestly used, and according to
Gods appointment: they are in this world, rest, pleasure and joy, and the way
to bring us to eternal glory.

The End of the first Book.
A Table for the ready finding of the Chapters Contained in this Book,
directing by the Number to every several Leaf.
CHAPTER 1. OF whence the Kings Garinter and Perion were, and the Combat
between Perion and two Knights, as also how he fought with a Lion that
devoured a Heart in their presence: with the success following thereon. Fol. 1.
Chap. 2. How the Princess Elisena, and her Damsel Darioletta, went to the
chamber where King Perion was lodged. Fol. 6. Chap. 3. How King Perion parting
from little Britain, travailed on his journey, having his heart filled with
grief and melancholy. Fol. 12. Chap. 4. How King Languines carried away with
him the Gentleman of the Sea, and Gandalin the Son of Gandales. Fol. 19.
Chap. 5. How King Lisuart sailing by the Sea, landed in Scotland, where he was
greatly honored, and well entertained. Fol. 24. Chap. 6. How Vrganda the
Unknown, brought a Lance to the Gentleman of the Sea. Fol. 33. Chap. 7. How
the Gentleman of the Sea, combatted with the guarders of Galpans Castle, and
after-ward with his Brethren, and in the end with Galpan himself. Fol. 39.
Chap. 8. How the third day after the Gentleman of the Sea departed from King
Languines, the three Knights came to the court, bringing with them the wounded
Knight in a Litter, and his disloyal wife. Fol. 43. Chap. 9. How King Lisuart
sent for his Daughter the Princess Oriana, for that long before he had left
her in the Court of King Languines: who sent her accompanied with the Princess
Mabila his only daughter, as also a noble train of Knights, Ladies and
Gentlewomen Fol. 46. Chap. 10. How the Gentleman of the Sea fought the combat
with King Abies, on difference of the war he made in Gaul Fol. 55. Chap. 11.
How the Gentleman of the Sea was known by King Perion his Father, and by the
Queen Elisona his Mother. Fol. 60. Chap. 12. How the Giant bringing Galaor to
King Lisuart, that he might dub him knight: met with his brother Ama. by whose
hand he would be knighted and by no other. Fol. 66. Chap. 13. How Galaor
vanquished the Giant at the Rock of Galteres. Fol. 76. Chap. 14. How after
Amadis departed from Vrganda the Unknown, he arrived at a Castle, where it
chanced to him as you shall read in the discourse. Fol. 81. Chap. 15. How King
Lisuart caused asepulchre to be made for Dardan and his friend, with an Epitaph
in remembrance of their death: and the honor he did to Amadis, after he was
found and known. Fol. 91. Chap. 16. How Amadis made himself known to King
Lisuart, as also the Princes and Lords of his Court, of whom he was honorably
received and feasted. Fol. 100. Chap, 17. What were the adventures of the
Prince Agraies, since his return from Gaul, where he left Amadis. Fol. 108
Chap. 18. How Amadis tarrying with his good will in the Court of King Lisuart,
heard tidings of his brother Galaor. Fol. 206. Chap. 19. How Amadis combatted
against Angriote and his brother, who guarded the passage of the valley,
against such as would not confess, that their Ladies were inferior in beauty
to Angriotes choice. F. 122 Chap. 20. How Amadis, was enchanted by Arcalaus,
when he would have delivered the Lady Grindaloya and other from prison: and how
after-ward he escaped the inchauntments by the aid of Vrganda. Fol. 131 Chap.
21. How Arcalaus brought news to the Court of King Lisuart, that Amadis was
dead, which caused his friends to make manifold lamentations and regrets,
especially the Princess Oriana. Fol. 136. Chap. 22. How Galaor came very sore
wounded to a Monastery, where he soiourned five days attending his health, and
at his departure thence, what happened to him. F. 141 Chap. 23. How Amadis
departed from the Ladies Castle, and of the matters which were occurrent to him
by the way. Fol. 150. Chap. 24. How King Lisuart being in the chase, saw a
far off three knights armed coming toward him and what followed thereupon.
F. 154. Chap. 25 How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays determined to travail to King
Lisuart, and what adventures happened by the way between them. Fol. 159. Chap.
26. How Galaor revenged the death of the Knight, whom he found slain on the
bed under the Tree. Fol. 164. Chap. 27 How Amadis pursuing the Knight that
misused the Damsel, met another knight with whom he combatted, and what
happened to him afterward. Fol. 168 Chap. 28. How Amadis combatted with the
Knight that did steal the Damsel from him when he slept, and vanquished him.
Fol. 174. Chap. 29. How Balays behaved himself in his enterprise, pursuing the
Knight that made Galaor loose his Horse. Fol. 176. Chap. 30. How King Lisuart
held open Court most royally, and of that which happened in the mean time.
Fol. 179. Chap. 31. How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays arrived at the Court of King
Lisuart, and what happened to them afterward. Fol. 182 Chap. 32. How King
Lisuart departed from Windsore to the good City of London, there to hold open
and royal Court. Fol. 185. Chap. 33. How King Lisuart would have the advice of
his Princes and Lords, as concerning his former determination, for the high
exalting and entertaining of Chivalry. F. 191 Chap. 34. How while this great
and joyful assembly endured, a Damsel came to Court, clothed in mourning,
requesting aid of King Lisuart, in a cause whereby she had been wronged.
Fol. 195. Chap. 35. How King Lisuart was in danger of his person and his state,
by the unlawful promises he made too rash and unadvisedly. Fol. 201. Chap. 36.
How Amadis and Galaor understood, that King Lisuart and his Daughter were
carried away prisoners, wherefore they made have to give them succor. Fol.
209. Chap. 37. How Galaor rescued King Lisuart from the ten Knights that led
him to prison. Fol. 216. Chap. 38. How news came to the Queen that the King
was taken: and how Barsinan labored to usurp the City of London many days,
in which time sundry great personages were there feasted, the greater part
whereof remained long time after-ward. Fol. 227. Chapter 41. How Amadis determined
to go combat with Abiseos and his two Sons, to revenge the kings death, who
was father to the fair Briolania, and of that which followed. Fol. 230. Chap.
42. How Galaor went with the Damsel after the Knight that dismounted him and
his companions in the Forest, whom when he found they combatted together, and
afterward in the sharpest point of their combat, they knew each other. Fol. 235
Chap. 43. How Don Florestan was begotten by King Petion, on the fair Daughter
to the County of Zealand. Fol. 240. Chap. 44. How Galaor and Florestan, riding
toward the Realm of Sobradisa, met with three Damsels at the Fountain of
Olives. Fol. 248.
FINIS.
THE SECOND BOOK Of Amadis de Gaul. CONTAINING THE DESCRIPtion, Wonders and
Conquests of the Enclosed or Firme-Island: As also the triumphs and troubles
of Amadis, in the pursuit of his fairest Fortunes. Moreover the manifold
Victories he obtained, and admirable services by him performed for King
Lisuart: And his notorious ingratitude toward him, which was the first
occasion of the broils and fatal wars that (no small time) continued
between him and Amadis.

Translated out of French, by A. M.

TAM ROBVR TAM ROBOR NI-COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610.


LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, dwelling in Foster-lane. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORAble, Sir Phillip Herbert, Earl of Mountgomerie; And Knight
of the most noble Order of the Garter.
AMadis, in his first Book kissing your noble hand, the second follows to
find the like favor, encouraged thereto by your ever known most honorable
nature, and affable graces affoorded to the very meanest deseruers. The third
and fourth Books successively ensue, to make up the first volume of so famous
an history; till four more may in the like manner be finished, to present
themselves to you their gracious Patron.

Your Honors ever to be commanded. A. M.

THE SECOND BOOK OF AMADIS DE GAVLE.
CHAP. I.
The Description of the firm Island. Who made the enchantments, and placed
those great riches which were found in the same.

THere was a King in Greece, who was married unto the Emperors daughter of
Constantinople, by whom he had two sons, excelli^ in all perfection, both of
body and mind. Especially the eldest (named Apolidon) who was so well brought
up and conditioned, that he found not his equal in any virtuous quality
wherein he exercised himself. This Apolidon studied all sciences, wherein he
profited so much, that he was not only counted one of the best knights in the
world, but also surpassed all men of his time for wisdom: excelling them in
learning, as far as the moon exceeds the stars in light, and chiefly in
the art of Nigromancy, by the which he brought to pass many great matters,
which seemed beyond the capacity of men. Now was the King (father of these two
young Princes) most mighty in lands, and wealthy in treasure: but very weak in
body by reason of his age. Wherefore knowing the end of his days to approach,
he would before his death, make partition of all his goods unto his children,
because no contention or debate should happen between them after his decease.
And for that end he appointed the kingdom to Apolidon, being his eldest son
and heir, the other he invested with all his riches, and moneable goods, among
which there was many excellent books, of inestimable value. Yet the youngest
nothing liking this partition, beway led his estate unto the King, beseeching
him most humbly to consider, that his patrimony being so small, he was not
only left poor, but in a manner disinherited. Then the aged father perceiving
the coffeehouse of his son (being the thing he most feared) was exceeding
sorrowful, but yet would he not alter that which he had done, without the
consent of Apolidon: who being aduertifed thereof, came unto him, and in the
presence of his brother said thus. It may please your Majesty, I heard within
these few days that my brother is not content with that portion, which it has
pleased you to appoint unto him: and therefore because I know how grievous the
same is unto you, seeing the brotherly love betwixt him and me likely to be
broken: I most humbly beseech your highness, to take all that again which it
has pleased you to give unto me, and dispose thereof as it shall seem best to
your own mind, for I shall think my self thrice fortunate, to do any thing
that may breed your souls felicity, and very well apaid, with that which to
him was appointed.

When the King beheld the bounty of his son Apolidon, and the obedience he
showed unto him, he was therewithal so pleased and exceeding joyful, that
his soul (knowing it, could not leave his body in greater contentment) fled up
into heaven: leaving his two sons in such friendship as he desired.
Notwithstanding, after the body was buried, and all accustomed funeral rights
ended, Apolidon caused certain ships to he rigged and furnished for the sea,
wherein being embarked, with diverse Gentlemen of his friends, seeing the wind
and weather favor them, he commanded the ankers to be waied, and the sails
to be let fall; the which were incontinently filled with so stiff a gale, as
in less then one hour they were past the country of Greece. And yet Apolidon
had not dertermined to bond his course unto any certain coast: but following
his fortune, driven by the wind, he discovered the Country of Italy,
whereunto approaching, he landed in a certain port thereof. The Emperor Sindan
being ^sed of his landing, sent many great Lords unto him, to request him to
come to Rome: where he should be as royally entertained as might be devised.
To which request Apolidon willingly condiscended, and being there already
arrived, the Emperor received him with honor, yet although at his coming he
determined to soiou^^e no more then eight days with him, he changed his
purpose, and remained there a longer season: in which time he accomplished such
haughty deeds of arms, and behaved himself so worthily, that amongst the
Romans he gained the reputation of the best knight in the world: and obtained
the love of a young Princess, the one^^e sister to the Emperor, named
Grim^^sa, the fairest Lady then li^ing. And although that their love was alike,
yet was this fair Lady so straightly looked unto, that neither could her
affection be satisfied, nor the common desire of them both be performed.
Wherefore one day consulting more privately, then they ever yet before had done,
love wrought such a consent in them, as they agreede to depart unto such a
place, where they might without control, enjoy the fullness of their content*
so as what they secretly intended, they as suddenly executed. For even as they
had appointed it, so the fair Grimanesa came forth one night to meet her love
Apolidon, who stayed for her at the waterside, having prepared ships ready
for their flight, and wherein they presently embarked themselves. Then by
force of the wind, they were in few days driven to arrive at the foot of the
Firme-Island, which was then inhabited by a mighty Giant, whereof Apolidon and
those in the ship were ignorant. Where-upon thinking they were in a place of
safety, came on shore, and ^ents and Pauilions were set up, wherein they might
refresh them: for Grimanesa (who was not used to travail by sea) was as weary
as might be. But at that instant when they thought themselves most secure, the
Giant which had discovered them, took them so suddenly, that Apolidon had
scant so much leisure, as to arm himself: wherewith Grimanesa was so amazed,
that she was ready to die for fear: for the Giant taking her by the hand, said
unto Apolidon. Base slave, although I am not accustomed to be kind unto any,
yet am I content for this once, to suffer thee to fight against me alone, on
this condition, that if thou be overcome, this fair Lady shall be mine, and
then afterward I shall cause thee to be hanged upon the pole of this tent.
When Apolidon heard that by fighting with such a monster, he might both save
himself and his mistress: his heart was so great, as he thought it a very
easy matter to overcome him: and esteemed himself happy, that fortune had
offered him so fit an occasion, as to make known unto Grima^esa how much was
his courage, and how great was his Knighthood. Wherefore without longer delay
the combat began between them, the which lasted but a while, for the Giant
was pursued so valiantly, as he fell down back-ward. Then Apolidon straight
stepped over him and cut off his head. Which the inhabitants of the Isle
understanding, they all came and offered themselves unto him; becheeching him
to remain with them, and to be their Lord and protector. Unto this their
request he condiscended: wherefore they conducted him with great triumph to the
chief Fortresses of the Country, all which he found so well fortified, and
furnished, as from that time forward he nothing feared the power of the
Emperor, if he should attempt war against him for the taking away of his sister.
Afterward by the persuasion of Grimanesa he caused to be builded in that
place, one of the fairest places that was to be found in all the Isles of the
Ocian: the which he beautified so gorgeously, and furnished so righly, that the
greatest monarch of the earth would have found it a very difficult matter to
have builded the like. But it chanced that fifteen days after his there
arrival, the Emperor of Constantinople (his uncle) died without heirs of his
body; by means whereof, they of the Country dispatched Ambassadors unto
Apolidon to beseech him to take upon him the Empire, the which he willingly
accepted, being (as most men are) never contented with their estate, but still
desirous of change, especially of a petty Island, for an Empire. Yet Grimanesa
sorry to leave so pleasant an Island, did most instantly entreat her Lord,
that before their departure, (in remembrance of the pleasure which they had
enjoyed in this Palace, the first witness of the full fruition of their loves)
he would work such a means by his Art and great knowledge, that from thence
forth, none might be Lord thereof, except he were as good a Knight as he, and
as true in love as he was. Truly, Madame, answered Apolidon, I will do more
for your love then so: for not only no man shall enter into this Palace
except he be such a one as you have said, but further, no Lady, nor
Ge^tlewoman shall set her foot therein, unless she be as fair, and excellent
in all perfections as your self. Then at the entry of an Orchard (planted
with diverse sorts of trees) he caused a vault to be made: over the which he
placed the image of a man made of copper, holding a horn, as though he would
wind it: and upon the gate of this Palace he set up his own and Grimanesa
her picture, so artificially wrought that they seemed very lively: right over
against which, he planted an high stone of Jasper, and about half a bow shoot
off, toward the garden he set a pillar of iron five cubits high.

These things being in this sort framed, he asked Grimanesa if she knew what
he had done. No surely, answered she. I will tell you then presently said
Apolidon: assure your self Madame, that no man nor woman which has falsified
their first love, shall pass under this vault: for if they adventure to enter
the same, the image which you see, shall blow such a terrible blast, and shall
cast through this horn, such a flame, and stench, that it shall be impossible
for them to pass on further: moreover, they shall be cast forth with such
force, that they shall be thrown down and remain in a swound before the
vault. But if it chance that any loyal lover, man, or woman, do assay this
adventure, the image shall sound a tune so melodious, as it shall greatly
delight the hearers: and there may such faithful lovers pass, without any
impechment. Furthermore, they may behold our portraytures, and their own names
written in this Jasper, yet shall they not know by whom they were in graven.
For trial whereof if it please you, we will prove the same forthwith. Then
he took Grimanesa by the hand, and passing under the arch, the Image of
copper began to sound marvelous sweetly, but when they came to the Jasper
stone, they beheld their names newly engraven therein, which greatly pleased
Grimanesa. And to behold what would be the success of such as followed them,
they called certain Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen to make trial of the
adventure: but as they thought to have passed thorough the vault, the Image
blew such a hideous blast, and cast forth fire, smoke and flame so horrible,
that they all fell down in a swound, and were thrown forth most rudely.
Wherewith Grimanesa began to laugh, knowing that they were in more dread then
danger, than king Apolidon most heartily for that which he had done for her
sake. But yet my Lord, said she, what shall become of this rich chamber, in
which you and I have enjoyed such great co^tentment? You shall know by and by,
said he. Then caused he two other pillars to be brought: one was of Marble,
which he had placed within five paces of the chamber: and the other of Brass,
was set five paces before that. Afterward he said to Grimanesa: Madame,
henceforth there shall neither man nor woman enter into this chamber, until
that he who shall surpass me in prowess, and knighthood, or she which
shall excel you in beauty be first entered into the same: but when fortune
shall bring hither those which shall be worthy of a place so excellent, all men
after-wards, without any let may therein enter. Then he wrote upon the pillar
of Brass, these words: Every knight which shall make proof of this adventure,
shall pass some further then other, according as they excel each other in
chivalry and courage. Upon the Marble pillar thus: Let no man adventure to
pass this pillar to enter the chamber, except he pass Apolidon in
knighthood. And over the entry of the chamber: He which shall enter herein,
shall exceed Apolidon in arms, and shall succeed him as Lord of this country.

Before any man could come near the chamber, he must of force touch the two
pillars, and there try his manhood. He likewise ordained that they should be
disarmed which hereafter should adventure to pass under the arch of faithful
lovers, if they received the repulse: and that all such should be driven forth
of the Island, as false and disloyal men: but such as were faithful, should
be entertertayned with all honor and service that might be devised. Such as
adventured to pass the pillars to enter the forbidden chamber, if they did not
pass the Brazen pillar, they should be used neither better nor worse then
those which were false in love. If by chance they went beyond it, because there
should be a difference between them and the others, their swords only
should be taken from them. And if there came any better knight which attained
not unto the Marble pillar, he should lose but his shield: yet if he passed
on further, and entered not the chamber, his spurs only should be taken from
his heels.

And touching the Ladies and Gentlewomen, married or unmarried, which should
prove the adventure of constant lovers, if they were repulsed, he willed that
they should be constrained to tell their names, that they might be written up
at the entry of ^^e vault, with the just number of paces that each of them had
entered forward in the same.

When the time is come (said Apolidon) that this Isle shall recover such a Lord
as is promised unto it, these enchantments shall no more be hurtful unto any,
and the place shall be free for all men: but yet it shall not be so for women,
until the fairest Lady shall first be entered into it, who shall free the
passage for all others. Then did he establish a Governor to receive the
revenue of the country, until he should come that deserved it. And shortly
after, having taken order for all his affairs, his ships being ready, they
imbarqued, and had so fair a wind, that within few days they arrived in
Constantinople, where they were most royally received.

But because my meaning at this present is only to continue the deeds of
Amadis, I will leave Apolidon to govern his Empire, to declare unto you what
happened unto the same Amadis, and unto them which followed him at his
departure from the Ci^^y of Sobradisa.

CHAP. II.
How Amadis, Galaor, Florestan, and Agraies, having taken leave of the fair
Briolania, to return unto King Lisuart, were carried into the Firme-Island to
prove the arch of Loyal lovers, and the other adventures in the same.

IN the end of the first Book you have heard how Amadis and Agraies remained a
while in the great City of Sobradisa, until their wounds were healed that
they received in the battle against Abiseos and his two sons: moreover how
Galaor and Don Florestan came thither afterward, and with what entertainme^t
they were received. Now to continue our History you must know, That not all the
hurts which Amadis had, nor any dangers which he doubted, no nor all the kind
entertainements of Briolania, were once able to expel the continual
remembrance of the beautiful Princess Oriana forth of his mind: but as her
rare perfections seemed continually to shine before his eyes, so did his desire
to behold her again, daily increase. Thus he endured an exceeding torment
which the more he thought to hide, the more it appeared: yet was the cause
thereof unknown, for every one judged diversely thereof, as a passion finely
dissembled, proceeding from some excellent thing, the which he could well
sustain but better conceal. In the end not being able to supporte this long
absence, which deprived him from the sight of her, that wrought this his happy
torment, he with his friends took leave of the Queen of Sobradisa, with an
intent to return to the Court of King Lisuart. Notwithstanding they had no^
rode far on their way, but fortune offered them an occasion of longer stay,
as you shall hear. It happened that by chance coming near unto an
Hermitage, they perceived a Gentlewoman (accompanied with other women, and
four Esquires) coming forth of a Church. Wherefore Amadis and his fellows
being desirous to know what she was, rode before and saluted her most
courteously: and she which was the chiefest resoluted them, and demanded
whither they were going, Gentlewoman said Amadis, we are going to the Court of
King Lisuart, whither (if it please you, so that it be not out of your way) we
will bear you company. I thank you heartily said the Gentlewoman, my journey
is another way. But because I think you be wandering knight, who commoly search
for great adventures, I desire to know if any of you will go to the
Firme-Island, to behold such strange and maruailous things as there are to be
seen. For I am the daughter of him that is Governor thereof, unto whom I am
presently going. Fair Lady, answered Amadis, I have oftentimes heard of the
wonders of this Island, and I should account my self happy if I might prove
them as I desire, but I repent that I adventured them no sooner. By my faith
said she, you need not be so sorry for your slacknesse: for there has been
a number such as you, who have had the like desire to adventure themselves, yet
did they not think their coming thither so sweet, as they found their
departure thence sour. I make no doubt thereof replied Amadis, because I have
heard so much: but tell me, shall we go out of our way any thing far, if
we follow you? Two days journey at the most, answered the Gentlewoman. I
beleeuee said Amadis, that he which will see the arch of loyal lovers, must
turn upon the left hand and keep along the Sea side: under which arch no man
that has falsified his first love, may pass. You say true said she, and you
may also there behold many other sights more strange.

Then Agraies enflamed with desire to see such rare things, said unto his
fellows: My masters I know not what you mean to do, but sure I intend to
accompany this Gentlewoman, if it please her, and I will prove the wonders
which she has told us of. If you be so loyal said she, that you may
pass under the enchanted arch, you shall find beyond the same, both many
novelties which will greatly please you, and also you shall behold the Images
of Apolidon and Grimanesa, who built that wonderful place: and that (which
more is) you shall see your own name written upon a Jasper stone, without
perceiving by whom it is done. All the better said Agraies, I will if I can
make the third that there has entered.

When Amadis understood the determination of his Cosen, he was desirous to
follow him, for he knew his loyalty to be firm both in deed and thought,
which by all likelihood did promise him the maistry of the adueneure, before
all others. But yet he dissembled his intention, and said unto his brethren,
My friends although we are not amourous, as is my Lord Agraies, yet me thinks
we should for this once do as he does, and keep him company. Let us go
said Galaor, and I hope that all will fall out as we desire, to our glory and
our honor: hereupon they followed the Gentlewoman. Then Florestan, who had
never before heard what the Firme-Island was, being alone with Amadis, said
unto him. My Lord, I perceive you know all the wonders of this place, whereunto
we are going, whereof I never heard any speech, although I have travailed many
far countries. Truly answered Amadis, that which I know, I learned of a
young Prince, my very good friend, named Arban of Norwales, who has proved
many strange adventures, and chiefly these of the Firme-Island, which he could
not atchieue, but was constrained to return with some disgrace. This
Gentlewoman dwells in the place, of whom you may understand as much as you
desire to know. Wherefore Don Florestan came unto her, and entreated her very
earnestly, that seeing the lenght of their way ministered the^ occasion of
conference together, she would be pleased to recite unto him, all that which
she knew of the Island. I will very willingly declare unto you (said she)
that which I have learned of such, as by their own reports were well
acquainted with the place, and the wonders thereof. Then she rehearsed the
particularities of all that which has been before declared: whereat the more
they admired, the more were they encouraged to adventure the enterprise of
those strange things, wherein so many valiant men had received the foil. Thus
together they rode so long, that night coming, they were in doubt to go
astray, until the moon began to shine: and then they knew that they were in a
great meddow, in which they beheld many Pauillions set up, and people sporting
all about them. Then said the Gentlewoman unto Amadis, Sir, because I see my
father, you may if it please you, come fair and softly, and I will go before
to advertise him of your coming, that he may do you that honor as you
deserve. So saying, she gallopped her horse, until she came unto the ^ents,
where she alighted. Then she told her father, how these four knights had
followed her, having a desire to try the adventures of the FirmeIsland, which
he understanding, came to meet them, and received them very courteously:
afterward he led them unto one of the Pauillions, where they rested until
their supper was ready. When they were set down, the gouerner of the Isle
discoursed unto them the adventures of such Knights and Ladies, which had
proved the arch of loyal lovers, and the other novelties thereof, until it
was time to go to rest. Whereupon they all withdrew themselves, and when day
appeared, they mounting all on horseback, rode so long, that they came to a
place which was in breadth no more then a bow shoot of firm ground, and all
the rest was water. And they went on in this straight, until they came into
the entry of the Island, the which was only five leagues in breadth, and
seven in length. There might they see the sumptuous Palace of Apolidon, whose
gates were open: and as they drew nearer, they perceived more then an hundred
^a^gets or shields, placed in three ranks, the most part leaning against two
posts, and ten other nailed a little over them. But there were three which
were very high above the rest, fastened upon another post which stood forwarder
then the first, yet did they likewise differ in height, for the highest was a
faddom above the middle-most, and the middlemost was a cubit over the lowest.
Then Amadis demanded, why they were thus ranked. Truly, answered the
governor, according to the valor and knighthood of those which would have
entered the forbidden chamber, their shields are honored: and these which you
see nearest the ground, belonged to such Knights which could not come near the
brazen pillar; but these ten that are higher came unto it, and they which
ought these two other shields, which you see separated and placed above the
rest, have done more: for they have passed the pillar, yet could they not come
near the other of marble, as the other has done, whose shield is therefore
placed above these two, which are so much esteemed. Then Amadis approached more
near to see if he might know any of them, for there was none of them, but had
written upon them the names of such as heretofore did owe the^: and he cast his
eye upon the lowermost of the three, which hung by themselves over the other
ten: which had in a field Sables a Lion Or, fanged and a^med Argent, with a
Chief Gules: this he knew to be the shield of Arcalaus. Then he beheld the
two uppermost, the lower bearing in a field Azure, a knight Argent, cutting off
the head of a Giant, the which he remembered to be the shield of king Abies of
Ireland, who proved this adventure, two years before that Amadis did kill him
in Gaul. The third which was above all the rest, had a field Azure, three
Flowers, or which he could not know without reading the superscription, which
said, This is the shield of Don Quedragant brother to king Abies of Ireland,
the which was set over all the others within these twelve days. For Quedragant
behaved himself so valiantly, that he came unto the Marble pillar, whereunto
none other had before approached. He by chance passed by the Firme-Island, in
seeking for Amadis, with an intent to fight with him, and to revenge the death
of King Abies his brother.

Much amazed was Amadis seeing the shields of so many good Knights, which had
all failed in their purposed enterprise, and he greatly feared least he might
perform as little as they. For this cause, he and his company withdrew
themselves, to go toward the arch of loyal lovers, the which was showed unto
them. Agraies suddenly alighted, and approaching near the forbidden place, he
with an indifferent high voice thus spoke, Love if ever I have been constant,
let me now be remembered. This said, he passed on, and entered under the arch.
Then the copper Image began to sound so sweetly, as it greatly rejoiced the
hearers: and Agraies stayed not, but went on until he came unto the Palace
where the pictures of Apolidon and Grimanesa were, which seemed unto him, as if
they had been alive. And he came near unto the Jasper pillar, wherein he beheld
two lines written. The first contained Madanil son to the Duke of Bargoine,
has passed under the arch of loyal lovers, and ended that adventure. The
other was the name of Don Bruneo de bonne mer, or of the lucky Sea, son to
Vaillades, Marquis of Troques. Scant had he read the last line, but he beheld a
third, which contained: This is the name of Agraies son to Languines King of
Scotland. This Madanil loved Aquinda Countess of Flanders: and Don Bruneo,
Melicia daughter to King Perion of G^^le. When Amadis did see that his Cosen
was entered without any let at all, he said unto his brethren. Will not you
prove the adventure as he has done? No, answered they, for we are not so much
subject unto this passion, that we deserve to make trial of our loyalty.
Seeing then that you be twain, keep you one another company, and I will
accompany Lord Agraies if I can. Then he boldly entered under the arch, and as
he passed, the copper Image sounded upon his horn another sound, far more
melodious then he yet before had done. Moreover, in stead of fire and stinking
flame, that it cast forth against the disloyal lovers, flowers and sweet
leaves came forth of his horn, in such abundance, that the place were all
covered therewith. But for all this Amadis, stayed not, but passed on even hard
unto the Images of Apolidon and Grimanesa, the which seemed unto him so well
formed, as they wanted nothing but speech. When Agraies which was entered
before, perceived him, he came to him and said, My Lord and Cosen, me thinks
we should not henceforth hide our loves from one another. But Amadis without
any answer, took him by the hand, and walking together, they began to
discourse of the excellency of the place. In the mean season Galaor and
Florestan displeased with staying so long for them, did entreat Isania (the
Governor of the Isle) to show them unto the forbidden chamber: the which he
did.

Whereupon Florestan said unto Galaor, my Lord, are you determined to try your
self? No, answered he, for I never desired to prove such enchantments. I
pray you then said Florestan, to sport you whilst I have tried this
adventure. Then commending himself to God, with his shield upon his arm, and
his sword in his hand, he marched right toward the forbidden place. But he
went not far forward, when he felt himself laid at so sore, and so often
ouercharged with the strokes of Lances and swords, as he verily believed
that no man was able long to suffer them: notwithstanding bearing his head low
(mauger all the resistance) he marched forward, laying about him here and
there, but knew not upon whom. Yet he thought that which he did hit, were so
well armed, as his sword could in no sort hurt them, and he passed the pillar
of Brass, even hard unto the other of Marble, against the which he fell
down, not being any longer able to stand up: for he felt himself so weary,
and bruised with the forcible blows which he had suffered, that he thought he
should die. And in the same instant he was so rudely lifted forth of the place,
that he lost all his understanding: wherewith Galaor was so displeased, that
he thought himself worthy of blame if he did not revenge his wrong. And
therefore he betook him to his arms, and ran right unto the forbidden
chamber: yet his haste was not so great, but that he was as suddenly resisted
and smitten, and so violently laid a^, as very hardly he came unto the Marble
pillar, against the which he leaned, thinking to take breath. Notwithstanding
the strokes which on all parts lighted upon him, were so many and so weighty,
that he was inflamed with rage in such sort as he went on somewhat further,
hoping yet to withstand them. Then did he imagine his enemies to be so many,
that for every one blow he had before, he now thought that he received
twain, so as his strength quite failed him, and he fell down on the ground a
great deal more weak then Florestan was.

All this while Amadis and Agaies beholding the pleasantness of the place
wherein they were entered, perceived a new writing in the Jasper pillar, which
contained: This is Amadis of Gaul, the constant lover, son to King Perion.
At the same instant was Galaor thrown forth from the pillars, wherewith the
Dwarffe began to cry: Out alas, my Lord Galaor is dead. This voice was heard of
Amadis and Agraies, who presently came forth to see what the matter was, and
they asked the Dwarffe what moved him to cry so loud. My Lord answered he, I
believe your two brethren are dead, in proving the adventure of the forbidden
chamber: for they have been so rudely repulsed, as see where they lie without
moving hand or foot.

Trust me said Amadis worse could not have happened to thee. Then he went
unto them, and he found them so sorely bruised, that they lay speechless. But
Agraies (thinking because fortune had favored him under the arch of loyal
lovers, that she would be as favorable unto him against the peril of the
chamber) without staying to behold his Cosens any longer, having his shield
upon his arm, and his sword naked in his hand, bearing his head low, he ran
right to the brazen pillar, yet had he not marched far beyond it, when he
felt so many blows, that hardly could he resist them. But his heart was so
great, as mauger all lets, he passed even unto the marble pillar, and there was
he constrained to stay, having no power at all to stand any longer upon his
feet, being so astonished that he lost his remembrance, and he was as rudely
cast out as his Cosens had been before, the which Amadis perceiving, being
much displeased, he began to curse the hour of that their fond enterprise:
and approaching unto Galaor, who was now come to himself, he said. In troth
brother I perceive I must of force follow, though I should die therein. Ah my
Lord, answered Galaor, it should suffice you to take warning by our example, I
beseech you fly such devilish forceries, for nothing but mischief can come
from them. Come what will, said Amadis, accursed may I be, if I faint in the
matter. Then drawing his sword, he well covered him with his shield, and
having first made his devout prayers unto God, he cried, O my dear Lady
Oriana, from you only proceeds all the strength and courage that ever I had:
I beseech you now not to forget him, who so constantly craves your aid and
good assistance. Which said, he ran so lightly toward the chamber as in
spite of all impeachments he came without taking breath, even unto the first
pillar, althought he felt so many strokes light upon him, that he did think
he fought with more then a thousand knights together: yet his courage so much
increased with the only remembrance of Oriana, that there were never any
knight before which could come near him. Then was there heard the voices of an
infinite number, saying: If this knight do not end this adventure, never may
any knight perform the same. But for all these things he left not to pursue
his fortune, for the further he went, the more increased his desire to approach
the chamber: so as notwithstanding the force of the Devils, or invisible
company which gave him many sore and heavy strokes, he gained the entry of the
chamber, from whence he beheld a hand and an arm covered with green wosted to
come forth, which drew him in. And presently there was heard another voice,
which said: Welcome is the gentle knight that exceeds him in arms, which
established so many maruailes in this place, who in his time was second to
none, but this surpasses him, and therefore the signiory of this Island of
right belongs to him, having above all other deserved it. He which had seen
this hand, would have judged it to have been the hand of a very ancient man,
it was so withered: the which vanquished away so soon as Amadis was entered into
the chamber, where he felt himself so fresh, and in so good estate, as if he
had received neither blow nor travel in coming thither. Wherefore he took
his shield from his neck, sheathed his sword, and to Oriana he ascribed the
glory, for the great honor which he had gotten: for he imagined that all his
strength proceeded only from her, and no other. The most part of the
Inhabitants in the Isle, with many other strangers had seen the prowess he
had shown, and how the hand brought him into the chamber: especially having
heard by the words of the voice, the sovereignty of the country was attributed
to him, for which cause they all rejoiced very greatly. But none were so
joyful as Galaor and his fellows, who in stead of emulation, (wherewith they
might wrongfully have been suspected) they were all so glad of the good and
honor of Amadis, as if the like had chanced particularly to every one of them:
and they caused themselves to be carried to him in the chamber, where they
were thoroughly and presently healed by the virtue of the place. Thither
likewise came Isania Governor of the country, accompanied with many of the
inhabitants, who all did their duty unto Amadis, as to their new Lord, under
whom they hoped not only to live in peace and rest, but also hereafter to
stretch their Dominions even over their bordering neighbors and further. Then
every one might view the rare devises of this palace: amongst which there was a
wardrobe (whether Apolidon and his Lady did most commonly withdraw themselves)
so beautiful and sumptuous, as it was not only impossible to make the like,
but also it was thought very strange and wonderful, how any man might imagine
that he could build so rare a piece of work? ^ing that they which were
within, might see what any man did without very easily, but they which were
without could not perceive any thing that was within the same. Thus was the
firm Island conquered by Amadis, which had been (...) thousand years and
more without a Lord, since Apolidon had there set up his enchantments: and the
next day the people came from all parts of the Island to offer their duty and
homage unto their new Lord, who received them courteously. I leave you then to
imagine whether Amadis had occasion to be glad and content or no. They which
have oftentimes bin crossed with adversity may better indge thereof the^ any
others can: for they know how to bear, and when to bewail their misfortunes,
more orderly then such who are accustomed with all prosperity and happiness.
Nevertheless I know not whether of these two extreamities are more
commendable: for the one commonly draws unto it an intolerable vain glory,
and pride most damnable: the other a continual care fraught with desperation,
very dangerous. Therefore every wise man (considering there is nothing
parmanent) will neither ^ee proud with the prosperity that favors him, nor
appaled for any adversity that befalls him: but he will swim uprightly as in
a calm Sea between them both, without abusing the one, or affrighted with the
other. The which (...) could not do, when inconstant fortune made him taste
these persons, which for him she prepared, even in the midst (as he thought)
of all his prosperities. And (...) as she beyond all measure (...) red him,
(holding him up by the chinne) in all chances that happened to him, without
crossing him in any thing whatsoever: in like sort did she turn her face from
him, and brought him into such perplexity and sorrow, that neither force of
arms, the continual remembrance of his Lady, nor the magnanimity of his
heart were once sufficient to procure him remedy: but only the grace, and merry
of our Lord God (who in pity regarded him) after he had sometime remained in
the rock of adversity in sorrow and tribulatiou, as you may understand: from
the which he delivered him, and placed him in greater ease, and contentment
then before, as by the sequel of this history you shall perceive.

You have heard in the first book of Amadis, in what anguish the Princess
Oriana was, for the false report of Ardan the Dwarffe, at such time as he
returned back from his master, to fetch the pieces of the sword, which
Gandalin had forgotten behind him at his departure from the Court: and how she
sostered up in her mind the hate, which she had conceived against Amadis, not
being able to accept any council either from Mabila or the Damsel of
Denmark, wrongfully suspected him of falsehood, who thought on nothing but only
how he might serve and honor her with all faithfulness. Now it rests to
show unto you what happened thereof. Know you then that from the day, wherein
this jealousy was first imprinted in her, it increased in such sort, as it
wholly made her forget her accustomed manner of life, thinking thence forth on
nothing so much, as how she might sufficiently revenge her on Amadis, who had
(as she thought) so grievously offended her. And hereupon seeing he was
absent, and that she could not declare unto him by word of mouth, the anguish
of her soul, she determined to let him understand it by writing. So as one
day amongst others, being alone in her chamber, she took pen in hand and
writ this letter which ensues.

The letter of the Princess Oriana to Amadis.
MY intolerable passions proceeding from so many causes, compels my weak
hand to declare by this letter, that, which my sorrowful heart can no longer
hide from thee Amadis of Gaul, most disloyal, and perjured louer-For sieing
the disloyalty and inconstancy wherewith thou have abused me (who am
unfortunate, and frustrate of all good hap, only in loving thee ab^ne all
things in the world) which is now very apparent, cheefely in that sowrongfully
thou for sookest us to go with her, who (considering her young years and
indiscretion) cannot have that kindness in her either to favor or entertain
thee: I have also determined for ever, to banish from me, this exceeding love
which I did bare unto thee, seeing my sorrowful heart can find no other
revenge. And although I would take in good part the wrong which thou proferest
me, yet should it be a great folly for me to desire the welfare of such an
unthankful man, for the faithful loving of whom, I hate both my self and all
other things. Alas I now perceive very well (but it is too late) that most
vnluckely I enthraled my liberty, to a person so ungrateful, seeing that in
recompense of my continual sighs and passions. I find my self deceived, and
shamefully abused. Wherefore I charge thee ne-uer to come in my presence, nor
unto any place where I do remain: and be thou assured that I never loved thee
so exceedingly, but now by thy ill deserts I hate thee far more extremely.
Pack thee henceforth else where, and try if thou can with thy falsified
faith and honey speech, abuse others as unhappy as my self: and never hope that
hereafter any of thy excuses shall prevail with me: but without further
desire to behold thee, I will bewail the rest of my sorrowful life, with
abundance of tears, the which shall never cease but by the end of

Her who forces not to die, but only because thou art her murderer.


This Letter being sealed, Oriana called a young Esquire brother to the
Damsel of Denmark, in whom she greatly trusted, and commanded him very
expressly, without staying one only hour, that he should go find out
Amadis in the Realm of Sobradisa, and then presently deliver this Letter which
she had written to him: but chiefly that he should mark his countenance
whilst he read the same, and that he should bring back no answer, though
Amadis would give i^ him.

CHAP. III.
How Durin departed to go toward Amadis, unto whom he delivered the Letters
from Oriana, and what hurt happened thereby.

WHen Durin had at large understood the will of the Princess, he mounted on
horse back, and hasted him so well that the tenth day following, he arrived
in the great City of Sobradisa, where he found the new Queen Briolania, whom
he thought to be the fairest Lady that ever he had seen, except the Princess
Oriana. Then did he tell her how he was come to seek Amadis, but she told
him, that now two whole days were passed since he and his fellows were
departed toward Great Britain, since which time, she heard that they had
taken their way unto the Firme-Island. Whereupon Durin without any longer stay,
took leave of her, and rode so long, that he arrived in the Island the same
hour that Amadis entered under the arch of Loyal lovers, where he beheld how
the Image had done more for him, then for any other knight that ever entered
the same before, as it was told him. Now as Amadis together with Agraies
returned to the succor of his brethren, Durin thought to have spoken with him,
but Gandalin entreated him to stay until he had tred the peril of the
forbiden chamber, being assured that he brought Letters to him from Oriana,
the which perchance might have been a mean (as he thought) to cause him either
to forslow or to fail in the achieuing of so great an enterprise: for Amadis
was so subject to the Princess, as he would not only have left off conquest
of the Firme-Island, but also of the whole world beside, if she had commanded.
Wherefore after he had finished all the strange adventures, and the inhabitants
of the Isle had received him for their Lord, Durin came before him. Then Amadis
demanded of him, what news was in the Court of King Lisuart. My Lord, answered
Durin, I left it even in the same estate that it was in at your departure. And
as he would have proceeded in his speech, Amadis took him by the hand, and
went with him alone into a very pleasant Orchard, where they walked together:
then he demanded how he came to the Firme-Island. My Lord, said he, my Lady
Oriana sent me unto you, for such affairs as in this letter you shall
understand, the which he gave unto him. Amadis took it, and without changing
his cheer, he turned his face from Durin, because he should not behold his
color alter, for his heart began to leap with great joy, so as he knew not well
how to set his coutenance. But this sudden mutation was as soon changed into a
great despare, because, that reading these rigorous lines, which pronounced his
banishment, it stroke so great sorrow to his heart, as he was no longer able
to dissemble his grief, but burst out into such vehement weeping, that he was
all drowned in tears. Then Durin repented that ever he was the bringer of
such heavy letters, for although the conte^ts thereof were unknown unto him,
yet because he knew not how to remedy it, he durst not come near Amadis, who
was so confounded, as he fell prostrate on the ground, and in falling, the
letters which he held, did fall forth of his hand. Notwithstanding, he
presently took them up, and began to read them again: for the beginning had
so greatly troubled him, that he had not yet seen the end. But casting his eye
upon the superscriptio^, which contained these words. She who forces not to
die, but only because thou art her murderer. He then fetched so deep a
sigh, as if his soul had parted from his body, and there withal fell down
back-ward. Wherewith Durin was greatly amazed, and ran speedily to help him,
but he found him to move no more then a dead man. Wherefore fearing some
great inconvenience, he thought to have called Galaor, or some other, yet
fearing that thereby he might be blamed, he staed, and coming unto Amadis,
lifted him up, who cried. Oh heavens, why do you thus suffer me to die, and
have not deserved it? Alas Loyalty, what recompense do thou offer those
that never offended thee, now I see my self forsaken of her, for whose sake I
would rather suffer a thousand deaths, then one of her commandments by me
should be disobeied. Then pitifully looking upon the letter, which he had in
his hand, he said: Ah happy letter, because thou were written by the
excellen^est personage this day living, and yet most unhappy, in that thou
procurest the cruel death of the truest lover that ever served Lady, which
death that it may be the sooner, I will never forsake thee, but will place
thee in the nearest and dearest place that I have. So he put it in his bosom,
and asked Durin if he had ought else to say? No, answered he. Well then, said
Amadis, thou shall presently return with my answer. In good sooth my Lord,
answered Durin, she has expressly forbidden me to receive any. And what, did
not Mabila nor thy sister will thee to say any thing to me? No my Lord, answered
he, for they knew not of my departure, because my Lady strictly charged me to
acquaint no body therewith. Ah God, said Amadis, I see well now, that my misery
is void of remedy. Then he rose up and went to a river which passed along by
the garden, where he washed his eyes, which done, he willed Durin to call
Gandalin, and that he should come back again with him alone, which he did:
but at their return they found him in a swound again, yet recovering
incontinent, and seeing Gandalin, he said. Friend I am undone, therefore go
seek out Isania the Governor of this Isle and bring him hither alone. Then
Gandalin ran for him and stayed not long until they returned together: who
being come, Amadis said unto him, Isania you know the oath you have sworn unto
me, and the duty wherein you are unto me bound, notwithstanding, I pray you
yet to promise me as you are true knight, to keep secret whatsoever you shall
see me do, until to morrow morning after my brethren have heard divine
service, and then secretly go thou and cause the gate of this Castle to be
opened, which being done, let Ga^dalin bring thither my horse and armor, but
take heed that none perceive it, and I will follow straight after thee: they
were no sooner departed from him, but he began to remember a dream which he had
the night before, wherein he thought that being armed, and set upon his horse
he was on the highest part of a piece of land environed with diverse sorts of
trees, and that round about him were many persons making the greatest joy in
the world, then one of them presented him with a box, saying. Sir taste of that
which is herein: which he did, and he thought he did eat of a most bitter
meat. And as he cast it from him, the raines of his horse did break,
whereupon the horse ran up and down so that he was not in any sort able for to
stay him. When he saw he was so far from this merry company, he looked back,
and he thought that he beheld their great mirth changed into such exceeding
moan, as it greatly pitttied him, and willingly would he have returned back to
assawage their sorrow, if he could have mastered his horse, who at that
instant entered into a tuft of trees, where he found a rock environed with
water, against the which the horse stayed. Then he alighted for the great
desire he had to rest him, and unarmed himself: herewithall he beheld a very
aged man clothed with a religious habit, who took him by the hand as if he had
pitied his travail, and spoke to him certain words in a strange language
which he did not understand: and being in this trouble he awaked. Upon this
dream Amadis mused a great while, thinking that oftentimes they foreshow some
thing that follows, because he did see part of that which he had dreamed to
fall out. Thus he came to the gate where Gandalin and Isania stayed his with
furniture, and there armed himself: afterward he mounted upon his horse,
keeping neither way nor path until he came near vnt an Hermitage, then he
demanded of Isania what place that was: My Lord answered he, this Chapel is
dedicated to the Virgin Marie, wherein oftentimes are diverse strange miracles
wrought. For which cause Amadis allighted from his horse, entered into the
Church, and kneeling down with great devotion, he made his prayers to God.
The which being ended, he rose up, and called Gandalin to him, whom he held a
long time embraced in his arms, not being able to speak one word, yet in the
end he thus said unto him. My dear Gandalin, thou and I have been fostered up
with one milk, and always brought up together, and I never felt any pain or
sorrow, wherein thou have not had thy part: Thy father tok me up in the sea,
when I was yet but a small thing, being but newly borne the very night before,
afterward he caused thy mother to cherish me as tenderly as if I had their
deeriest child. Now have I oftentimes tried thy loyalty, knowing very well what
service thou have done for me, the which I did hope in time with the favor of
God to have recompensed, but this great misfortune is fallen upon me, the
which I feel more sharp and cruel then death it self, especially seeing I
am constrained to forsake thee, having no other thing to bestow upon thee, but
the Isle which I have newly conquered, which I do give thee, commanding Isania,
with my other subjects (upon that faith and homage which they have sworn unto
me) to receive thee as their Lord, so soon as they shall be assured of my
death. Yet is it my will that thy father and mother shall enjoy the same, during
their lives, and afterward it shall remain unto thee: which is in recompense
of the good I have received of the^, whom I thought to have better rewarded,
according to their deserts and my desire. And as for you, Lord Isania, I pray
you that of the fruits and revenues of this Isle, which of long time you have
had in your keeping, you should build here in this place a Monestarie, in the
honor of the virgin Mary, and to endow it with so much living, as thirty
religious men may henceforth live upon the same. Ah my Lord, said Gandalin, I
never forsook you for any travail or peril which hitherto you have suffered,
neither yet will I leave you if God be pleased, and if you dye, I will not live
after you, neither for all the world will I lose you. Therefore you may (if it
please you) bestow this gift upon my Lords your brethren, seeing I will not
have it, neither do I desire it in any sort. Hold thy peace, said Amadis, let
me hear these words no more, unless thou desire to displease me: but do as
I would have thee: for my brethren may provide far greater livings for the^
and their friends, then this small thing which I do give unto thee. But
touching you, my deer^ friend Isania, it very greatly grieueth me that I have
not the means to gratulate you according to your deserts: notwithstanding, I
leave you amongst so many of my good friends, as they shall supply that which I
cannot. I pray you my Lord, answered he, suffer me only to accompany you,
that I may be partaker of any wealth or woe that shall happen to you: Wherein
you shall fully show me your love, and I rest satisfied to my liking. My dear
friend, said Amadis, I doubt not but that you would follow with a good will,
notwithstanding my misery is so excessive, as besides my maker, none can ease
it: whom only I humbly beseech to be my conductour, for I will have no other
companion. And therefore Gandalin if thou desire Knighthood, hold take it
presently with my armor, which I do give thee, for since thou have
heretofore so well kept them, it is reason they should now serve thee,
considering how little I shall hereafter need them: if not, thou may receive
this honor of my brother Galaor, unto whom my Lord Isania here, shall in my
behalf make request to the same end: and I entreat thee to serve him, even
as faithfully as thou have served me. For my love unto him is so great, as
amongst all my most afflictions I shall bewail his absence, because I have
evermore found him an humble obedient and a loving brother. You shall further
request him, to take into his service Ardan my Dwarffe whom I recommend unto
him, and to the Dwarffe say, that I will him to serve my brother dilligently.
This said, both he and those to whom he spoke burst forth into abundance of
tears, and coming unto them he embraced them, saying: Now my friends, seeing
I ne-uer hope to see you any more, I entreat you to pray to God for me, and
upon your lives, I charge you that none of you do follow me. Then he got
upon his horse, set spurs to his sides, and galloped from them, remembering
not at his departure to take either Lance, shield, or helmet with him. Thus he
entered into a desert place at the foot of a mountain, taking no other way but
whither his horse would carry him, and so long he rode until the most part
of the night was now spent, when the horse entered into a little brook environed
with many trees, where he would have drunken. But as he passed on further,
Amadis was stricken on the face with certain branches of trees, so rudely as
it wakened him out of his study, and therewithal looking up, he perceived
that he was in a covert and solitary place, beset with store of thick bushes,
which greatly rejoiced him, because he thought he should very hardly be
found out in this thicket. There he alighted, tied his horse, and sat him
down upon the grass, the better to meditate upon his melancholy: but he had
wept so long, and his brains were so light, that at the last he fell asleep.

CHAP. IIII.
How Gandalin and Durin followed the same way that Amadis had taken, brought
the rest of his armor which he had left behind, then found him sleeping, and
how he fought against a Knight whom he did overcome.

AMadis being departed, Gandalin who remained in the Hermitage with Isania and
Durin, as you have heard, began to make the greatest lamentation in the world,
and said. Although he has forbidden me to follow him, yet will I not stay for
any thing behind him, at least I will carry him his armor. I will gladly
bear you company for this night, said Durin. I would to God we might find
him in better cafe then he was at his departure. Then they took their leave
of Isania, and getting to horseback, they followed the same way that Amadis
had took, coasting here and there about the wood, so long till fortune
brought them where he lay. When his horse sented their horses, he began to
neigh, whereby Gandalin knew his Master was not far off, wherefore the more
secretly to behold his countenance, he allighted, coming so near unto him as
he might easily behold where he slept hard by the river side: whereupon he
stood close, watching when he should awake, and he had not stained long before
his slumber left him. Then he suddenly started up as if he had been frighted.
At that instant was the Moon withdrawn by the days approach, yet sat he
still on the grass, beginning his moan in a most strange and pitiful
manner, and bitterly weaping, he burst out into these words. Alas fortune too
inconstant and fickle, why have thou first advanced me, and afterward
overthrown me. Now I well perceive, thou can do more hurt in one hour,
then thou will do good in a thousand years, for if heretofore thou haste given
me any pleasure or joy, thou have now in a moment cruelly robbed me of all,
leaving me in bitter torments far worse then death: and seeing thou wast minded
so to serve me, why have thou not at the least made the one equal with the
other? because thou know that if heretofore thou did bestow upon me any
contentment, yet was it evermore mingled with great sorrow. In like sort
should thou reserve for me some spark of hope, with this cruelty wherewith
thou now tormentest me, executing upon me an incomprehensible thing, in the
thought of those whom thou fauourest: who because they feel not this
mischief, do think those riches, glories, and honors which unto them thou
lendest, to be everlasting. But they forget, that besides the troublesome
travels which their bodies do suffer for the keeping thereof, how their souls
are in danger to perish therefore. For by thy flatteries and wanton
intiseme^ts, thou utterly ouerthrowest them, and in the end compellest them to
enter into the labytinth of all desolation, from whence they are never able to
depart. And quite contrary are thy adversities, for so much as if a man do
resist the^ patiently, flying greedy covetousness, and disordinate ambition, he
is lifted out of this vilde place into perpetual glory. Notwithstanding I
being most unfortunate, could not choose this good, seeing that if all the
world were mine, and should be taken from me by thee, yet having only the good
grace of my Mistress, it should be sufficient to make me as mighty as the
greatest monark, the which I also lacking, how is it possible for me in any
sort to live? Therefore in favor and recompense of my loyalty, I beseech thee
not to give me a languishing death: but if thou art appointed to end my
days, do it without delay, taking compassion of him, whose longer life thou
art ignorant how irksome it is. This said, he fell down backward upon the
grass, and was as silent as if he had been in a swound. Then within a while
after he cried, Ah lovely Oriana, you have wounded me deadly, in banishing me
discurteously, for I will never transgress your commandments, what danger
soever may happen me, seeing that if therein I failed, my life also were
thereby finished: notwithstanding for as much as I wrongfully receive my death,
the more extreme is my dolor. But seeing that with my end you shall rest
satisfied, I never esteemed my life at so high a price, but I would, if it were
possible, change it into a thousand deaths; to afford you never so little
pleasure. In like sort since it likes you to execute your anger against me, I
am very well content, if for my affliction you may henceforth live at your
ease, for whether soever my Soul flies, it shall receive most quiet when it
shall know that you remain contented. And until mine innocence shall be
known unto you, I will endeavor to finish the rest of my sorrowful days in
all bitterness and displeasure, and being dead, my spirit shall lament the
grief which will happen unto you for the wrong which you have done to me,
specialy wanting power to succor you. O king Perion my Lord and father, how
little occasion shall you have to bewail my death, when you shall neither know
the same nor the cause thereof? But because that knowing the same, it would be
to you a grief intolerable, and yet it could be no mittigation of my torment,
I pray, that my misfortune may to you never be manifest, least the same should
abridge the remainder of your days, which yet are not determined. Then after a
small pause he cried, O my second father Galuanes, truly I do greatly grieve
that my adverse Fortune does not permit me to discharge that great bond in
which to you I am bound, for if my father gave me life, you preserved the same,
in delivering me from the danger of the Sea, being launched forth into his
merciless waves, even when I had but newly left my mothers womb, and
afterward I was by you as carefully cherished, as if I had been your dearest
child. I am assured good King Arban that you will greatly bewail my
sorrowful end, yet valiant Angriotta d Estrauaux, Guillan, and a number of my
other friends, shall assist you to bemone his death, who ever loved and held
you dear. Ah good cousin Mabila, what have I deserved of you, or of the Damosel
of Denmark, that by you I am abandoned when I have most need of your aid?
Have you so many times preserved my life, and do you now (without desert) make
me pay tribute for my received pleasure, in consenting to my miserable death?
Believe me, if need were, dear friends, for your sakes would I be
sacrificed: and yet you make no conscience to forsake me, which makes me
verily to believe, that you have denied me your comfort, heaven and earth have
desired my confusion, which shall the less grieve me in that I see no remedy.
Gandalin and Durin hearing these lamentations of Amadis, they were so much
agrieued therewith, that they wept as bitterly as he, yet durst they not show
themselves, because he had so straightly charged them not to follow him. But
Amadis ceased not his moan until he heard a knight who passed hard by him
singing this song:

Love, sacred Love, most bounden I remain
To thee, for thy exceeding bounteous grace:
On earth what Gentleman may vaunt like gain?
Beloved thou make me in every place.
Happy such hap, when love does so respect me,
Never served I Lady, but she did affect me.
To witness this, a Princess word I have,
Sweet Sardamira, she I know will vow it:
Whom I in heart a supream^ honor gave,
And for the date, her beauty did allow it.
My hap was good, good hap enclind to gayning,
Till past the full, turned loves decrease a waning
For now a Goddess guides my back retire,
Fair Oriana, Prize of lovers war:
The peerlesse daughter of a kingly fire,
Whom Venus yields for her brighter star.
My luck is great her praises to recount,
But to enjoy her love, my ioys surmount.
Having ended his song he alighted under a tusted tree planted by the high way
side, thinking there to pass the rest of the night: but worse happened to him
then he hoped, for Gandalin which had heard what he said of Oriana, (doubting
that Amadis had not marked it, because his mind was otherwise occupied) said
unto Durin, It were best for me to go to my Master to know what he intends
to do. Then came he forth of the bush where he was hidden, and beheld Amadis
that sought for his horse to depart from thence, who as he looked here and
there he espied Gandalin: When not knowing him at the first, he cried. Who art
thou that come to surprise me? speak and hide thy self no longer. My Lord,
answered he, I an Gandalin, who will help you to find your horse, if so it
please you. When Amadis heard this, Ah said he, how drust you persume to
follow me, having so expressly forbidyou? believe me thou have greatly
displeased me, let me see thee no more but depart, or else be sure thou shall
die. My Lord, answered Gandalin, me thinks you should forget this manner of
behavior, and bethink you how to revenge the foolish speeches which even now
were uttered by a knight, who is not yet far from you, for they are greatly to
your disadvantage. This said Gandalin to pacify his displeasure toward him,
that he might be the more incensed against the other. I did hear him as well
as you (said he) and therefore am I content to seek rest elsewhere, and to
depart from hence where all misfortune does follow me. What said Gandalin, is
this all that you are determined to do? What would thou more? said he. That
you fight with him answered Gandalin, to make him confess his presumption. I
believe said he thou would say otherwise, seeing thou know very well
that I neither have spirit, heart, not any force, having lost all in losing her
who gave me life, so as now I am no better then a dead man, neither is there in
Great Britain any knight so cowardly, that could not easily overcome me if I
should combat with him, so hapless and hopeless am I. Trust me answered
Gandalin, you are in a great error thus to suffer your heart to faint and to
let your courage fail, even when it should most serve you to advance the
honor of her, who so nearly touches you. What report will Durin make hereof
think you, who has heard and seen all, and is greatly abshed, that now you
behave your self no better. How (said Amadis) is Durin here? I truly said
Gandalin, we came both together: and I believe he follows you thus, to
declare your manner of behavior unto her that sent him unto you. Get thee gone
said Amadis, thou vrgest me too much. Yet when he thought that Durin should
return to Oriana, his heart was so inflamed, that he called for his arms,
and mounting on his horse he went toward the knight, whom he found laid under
the tree, holding his horse by the bridle. Then Amadis, in a great rage said
unto him, Sir knight who so greatly extollest thy fortune in love, I believe
that against all right thou have receined that good that love has dove for
thee (if good it may be termed) and that thou never deseruedst it, the which I
will prove with the loss of thy head. What art thou answered the other, that
speak so audaciously? do thou think that I am favored of the fairest Lady
in the world for any other cause but only for my valor and high knighthood?
wherewith I will make thee presently confess that love has reason to favor
me, and that it is not for thee to speak thereof. It is but thy opinion said
Amadis: but thou must know that in despite of thee, I am he who has least
occasion to praise love, because he has so vildely deceived me, that I will
ne-uer days in my life put any trust in him, knowing how falsely and
treacherously he commonly uses those that most faithfully do serve him. And
because I have sufficiently proved it, I will maintain that he can never be
so faithful, as I have found him false. That it is so, let us see whether he
has gained more in thee then he has lost in me. Then the knight mounted on
his horse, and being ready to fight, he answered, Unhappy knight deprived of
all good, and banished justly from love, being unworthy of his favor, get thee
from my presence, for I should commit a most horrible fact, to lay my hands
upon such a vild and miserable fellow. So saying, he turned his horse to have
fled away, if Amadis had not stayed him in calling him. Villain, will thou
then defend thy love which so highly thou prisest only with thy countenance,
and so get thee gone because thou would fly the combat. Trust me answered
the other thou art in a right opinion, for it is true that I have no desire to
prove my self against a person of so small desert, but seeing thou would
that I should break thy head, I am content, and if thy heart will serve,
defend it if thou can. Herewithall they ran one against the other with such
force, as their Lances flew to shiuers, pearcing their shields quite thorough,
nevertheless their armor being good and strong stayed the stroke, yet the
knight fell to the ground carrying the raines of his horse with him, wherefore
he rose again lightly. The which Amadis beholding, he said unto him, Truly
knight if the right which you pretend in so fair a friend be not better
maintained with your sword then it has been with your staff, Love has made
but a bad choice of you for a valiant champion, and your Lady a far worser
match in lighting upon such a carpet knight. He made no account at all of these
reproaches, but boldly drew out his sword, and coming near to Amadis laid at
him so lustily, that he had been wounded if with his shield he had not well
warded himself, wherein his sword was so far entered, that he could not pull
it forth again, but was forced to let go his hold, leaving it sticking fast in
the shield of Amadis. Who lifted himself up in his stirrops hitting him so
sound a blow upon his head-peece, that it pierced even unto the quick: and the
blow gliding down, it lighted upon his horse neck, wounded him to the death,
falling down in the place and his master under him all astonished. But Amadis
seeing him arise said unto him, Gentle lover, I am of the mind that Cupid
henceforth should erect a trophie for the high prowess which you have showed
in his service: and that as long as you live you should not cease to sing his
praise^* and declare those benefits which upon you he has bestowed: As for
me I will go seek my fortune else where. So he set spurs to his horse, and
as he departed, he beheld Gandalin and Durin, when coming near them, he took
Durin by the hand, and said unto him: Friend Durin, I see my misfortune so
strange, and my sorrow so intolerable, as of force I must die, which God grant
it may be without delay: for death only will give rest and ease to this
torture which vexes me. Salute from me the Princess Mabila, and thy good
sister, the Damsel of Denmark, unto whom thou may declare my cruel death,
which I suffer with as great wrong as ever any knight suffered. Before the
which, I would to God I had the means to do them any service, in recompense
of the duty I do owe them for all the good they have done, and the favors
they have purchased for me. Then he began his moan, weeping so bitterly as
Durin therewith had his heart so stopped with woe, that he was not able to
answer one word: Wherefore Amadis embraced him and committed him to God. At that
instant began the day to appear, when Amadis perceiving that Gandalin followed
him, he said unto him: if thou determinest to come with me, take heed upon
thy life that thou turn me not from any thing which I shall say or do,
otherwise I pray thee forthwith to turn another way that I may see thee no
more. Believe me Sir, said Gandalin, I will do whatso ever shall please you. Then
Amadis delivered him his armor to bear, commanding him to pull the sword forth
of his shield and to carry it to the amorous knight.

CHAP. V.
Who was the Knight vanquished by Amadis, and what happened unto him, before he
fought with him.

SEeing that it falls out so fit, I will declare unto you (before I pass any
further) the estate of the amorous Knight, of whom we spoke even now. You must
know that he was called Patin, brother to Don Sidon the Emperor of Rome, and
he was the best knight that was to be found in all Romania. By means whereof
he was feared and famous through all the Empire, chiefly because he was to
succeed in his brothers dignity, for there was none more near the same then
he, and the Emperor was already so old, that he never hoped to have any
heir. Now this Patin was one day talking with the Queen of Sardinia, named
Sardamira, one of the fairest Ladies in the world, whom he loved extremely.
And as he gave her to understand what feruency and torment he endured in
ouer-louing her, she answered him: My Lord, I assuredly believe that which you
tell me, and the better to witness the same, I let you know that there is no
prince living for who^ I would do more then for you, nor whom I would more
willingly take for husband: because I know your good parts, and the high
knighthood wherewithal you are so famoused. These speeches bred so great
presumption in the heart of Pa^in, as besides that he was by nature one of the
proudest Gentlemen in the world, he entered into such glory, that he answered
h^^: Madame, I hane heard that King Lisuart has a daughter esteemed the
fairest Princess in the world, but for the love of you I will go into Great
Britain, there to maintain against all men, that her beauty is not
co^parable to yours: the which I alone will prove in combat against two of
the best knights that dare say the contrary: whom if I cannot overcome, I will
that King Lisuart do cause my head to be cut off. In good faith my Lord,
answered the Queen, I am of a contrary opinion: for if the Princess have any
beauty in her, it nothing impaireth that which God has bestowed upon me, if
any beauty there be: and me thinks that you have other means more fit to make
known your prowess in all places. Hap what may hap answered he, I will do it
for your love, to the end that every one may know that as you are the fairest
Lady in the world, so you are beloved of the valiantest Knight alive. Hereupon
continuing in this mind, within a while after he took leave of the Queen,
and passed into Great Britain accompanied only with two Esquires. Then he
enquired where he might find King Lisuart, unto whose Court he shortly after
came: and because he was more richly armed then wandering knights were
accustomed to be, the King thought him to be some great personage: For this
cause he received him most honorably, appointing him into a chamber to shift
himself. When he was unarmed he returned to the King who stayed for him,
marching with such gravity, as those that beheld (seeing his comely stature)
judged him to be of great courage. But the King took him by the hand, and
conferring together he said unto him, gentle friend, I pray you think it not
strange, if I desire to know who you are, because I may the more honor you in
my Court. It may please your Majesty, answered Patin, I am not come into this
country, to hide me, but rather to make my self known as well unto your
Highness as unto all others: I am that Patin brother to the Emperor which
humbly beseeches you to enquire no further of my affairs, until I have seen
my Lady Oriana your daughter. When the King heard that, he embraced him, and in
excusing his ignorance he said to him. My good Cosen, I am maruailous glad of
the honor that you have done me, In coming thus to visit me in my own
country, assuring you that since you are desirous to see my daughter, she
shall not only be showed unto you, but likewise the Queen, and all her
train. And so long they continued their talk, until they had covered for
supper. Then the King caused him to sit next unto him, where he found himself
compassed with so great a number of knights, as he much marualled thereat: and
began to despise the Court of the Emperor his brother, as also of all other
Princes in respect of this which he saw. After the tables were taken up, it
being time to go to rest, the King commanded Don Grumedan to bring Patin to
his lodging and to show him all the honor and good entertainment he could. So
for that night they departed, until the next morning that he came and found
the King hearing divine service, after the which he was conducted to the
Ladies, who received him courteously: for at his coming the Queen took him by
the hand, praying him to sit between her, and her daughter Oriana, whom at
that instant he beheld with such an eye, as the love which before he did bear
unto the Queen Sardamira, was wholly changed unto her, being captiuated with
her excellent beauty and goodly grace. You may judge then how he would have
esteemed her if he had seen her in the time of her perfect health, which was
now much decayed by reason of this new jealousy which she had conceived
against Amadis which made her look lean, pale, and wan: but these defaults
could nothing quench the heat of the fire already kindled in the heart of
Patin, who was so far beside himself, that he determined to beseech the king
to bestow her upon him in marriage: making account that it would be easily
granted, considering his birth and high estate. Hereupon he took leave of the
Ladies, and returned toward the King, who was ready to sit down to dinner,
the which being ended he went aside toward a window, and calling Patin unto
him, they talked long together. Afterward falling from one matter to another,
Patin said unto him. It may please your majesty, yesterday I promised to tell
you^ so soon as I had seen my Lady Oriana your daughter) what moved me to
come from Rome into Great-Brittaine, I beseech you not to be offended if I
have taken so far a journey, to come in person to require her of you in
marriage. I have chosen her as well to have your alliance as also for the beauty
and good grace which remains in her. I am sure you are not ignorant
(considering the place from whence I am descended, and the great means which
cannot fail me, as one day to be Emperor of Rome) that if I would else where
set my liking, there is no Prince this day living, which would not be very glad
to receive me for his son in law. Good cousin, answered the king, I thank
you for the kindness and honor you do offer me, but the Queen has always
promised Oriana that she shall never be married against her will, wherefore
before we grant you any thing, we must know of her how she will be content
therewith: this the King said because he would not discontent Patin, for he was
not minded to bestow his daughter upon any Prince or Lord that should carry
her forth of the land. Patin was satisfied with these words, and expecting
some other answer of the King, he stayed five days at the Court, yet the
king never spoke to Oriana thereof, although he assured him that he had done
as much as he could, to cause her consent thereto, but he could in no sort
prevail with her. Therefore win her your self if you can, said he, and pray
her to do that which I shall command her. Then Patin came unto her and said.
Madame I am to desire a request of you, that shall be both honorable and
profitable for you, the which I pray you not to deny me. My Lord (answered the
princess) there is no reason to refuse the grant, being such a reasonable
request as you assure me it is, therefore if it please you, defer not to
declare it unto me. I beseech you, said Patin, to obey whatsoever the king your
Father shall command you. Oriand (who understood not his meaning) answered him.
You may be assured Sir, that I should be very sorry to do otherwise. This
answer wonderfully contented Patin, for he now assuredly thought Oriana to be
his, and said unto her, Madam I have determined to go thorough this country to
seek strange adventures, and I hope to perform so high deeds of Arms, as you
shall shortly hear news of my prowes, so much to mine advantage, as very
easily you will co^discend unto that which the king will command you for the
love of me. Herewithall he took leave of her, manifesting at this time his
intention unto her no farther, and returned unto the king unto whom he declared
the answer of Oriana, together with the desire he had to prove himself against
al wandering Knights. Do as it please you, answered the king, notwith-standing I
would advise you to desist from such an enterprise: for you shall find many
strange and very dangerous adventures, with a great number of knights well
exercised in arms, who may happily in some sort displease you. If they be
valiant and hardy, said he, I hope they shall not find any faintnes or
cowardlines in me, as my deeds hereafter may witness. Well, answered the king.
Do what you shall think best. Thus Patin departed in the hope which he had to
enjoy Oriana, for the love of whom he had framed this song, which he sung when
fortune brought him near the place where Amadis made his moan, who used him as
you have heard. But now we will leave him, and recount unto you what happened to
Durin, who having left Amadis, returned the next way passing by the place where
Patin lay wounded, who had taken off his Helmet for the grief of his wou^d,
having already lost such store of blood, that his face and armor was all
stained and covered therewith. He beholding Durin, said to him, Gentleman, my
friend, tell me where I may find a place to cure my wounds. Truly answered
he, I know no place but one, and those whom you shall find there, are so
sorrowful, that I believe they cannot look unto you. Wherefore? said Patin.
For a Knight (quoth Durin) who newly has won the place that I tell you of,
and seen the images of Apolidon and his Lady, which till then no other might
behold: since when he is departed thence secretly in such melancholy, as his
death is greatly feared Belike said Patin, you speak of the Firm Island. True
(quoth Durin.) What said Patin, is it conquered already? certes, I am heartily
sorry, for I was going thither, with intention to prove my self, hoping to
have won the same. Durin smiled, and answered him, Truly knight if there be no
more prowess hidden within you, then that which you have now manifested, I
think in stead of honor, you might there have gotten shame and infamy. Patin
thinking himself iniuried rose up, and thought to have taken hold of ^he
raines of Durins horse: but Durin turned from him: herefore Patin seeing he
was far enough from him, he called him again and said. I pray you fair
sir, tell what he is that has gotten this famous conquest. Then tell me first
what you are, answered Durin. I will not stick for that, said Patin, I am sir
Patin, brother to the Emperor of Rome.

God be praised, answered Durin: Yet so far as I see you are of higher birth
then bounty, and your courage is as slender as your Courtesy is small:
Witness the speech which of late you had with the Knight that you enquire
after, who is the very same that even now went from you, whom I believe
(considering how he has handled you) you will grant that he is worthy of such
a victory, and not Patin whom he has vanquished. This said, he set spurs to
his horse, taking the right way unto London, in full purpose to recite unto the
Princess Oriana all that he had seen and heard of Amadis.

CHAP. VI.
How Don Galaor, Florestan and Agraies, undertook the search of Amadis: who
having left his Armor, changed his name, and withdrew himself to an
hermitage, in the company of a very old hermit, there to live solitarily.

I Have of late told you that when Amadis departed from the firm Island, it
was so secretly, that Galaor, Florestan, Agraies and others, never perceived
any thing thereof: you have also heard the oath which he had taken of Isania
the governor, that he should not declare any thing which he had seen, until
the next morning when maffe was ended: the which Isania performed. For the day
following, when the Lords were ready to sit down at the Table, they perceived
that Amadis was absent: and enquiring for him, Isania told them that they
should know after dinner where he was become. Thereupon they sat down thinking
that he was gone somwhether for his pleasure. After the Tables were taken up,
Isania said unto the^. My lords the misfortune of my Lord Amadis is far worse
then you think it is, as I shall presently declare unto you. Then he recited
in what order he deparded from the^, the great sorrow wherein he was, and what
he had commanded him to say unto them, especially how he had disposed of the
Island, and he earnestly entreated the^ not to follow him, seeing that he hoped
for no remedy of his misery: For his death was not to be prevented. When they
heard these pitiful news, there was not any of them whose eyes were not
filled with tears, and they began to make a most sorrowful lamentation. But
Galaor made the greatest moan of all, saying. If I may relieve him from
distress, the best knight in the world shall not in this sort die. Although he
has commanded us to stay, yet shall he not be obeyed for me at this time: but
I will seek until I shall have found him, and will know who has wronged him,
that I may either revenge it, or die in the quarrel. Believe me answered
Agraies, we will not be far behind you: and if we cannot remedy his misfortune
by force of courage, or counsel, yet at the least we will altogether die with
him for company. Moreover said Isania, he desires you my Lord Galaor to make
Gandalin a knight, and take Ardan his dwarff into your service, whom he
recommendeth unto you. Then Galaor called the Dwarff, and said unto him: Ardan,
thy master has forsaken us, and willed that thou should be mine, assure thee
that so long as I live, I will not leave thee for his sake. How? answered the
Dwarffe, is my Lord dead then? So saying, he fell down where he stood, and began
to tear his hairs, making so great sorrow as it was wonderful, and said: I
might well be counted a traitor to live after my Master, wherwithal he had
slain himself if they had not taken heed unto him. Florestan his heart was so
ouercharged with grief that he could neither weep, nor speak, but sit leuing
as if he had been in a trance. And when he recovered his speech, he said unto
his fellows: my Lords, it is no time for us to weep nor lament when we should
rather endeavor to succor my Lord Amadis: let women wail, but let manly
minds conioyne together, and devise how we may provide a remedy for so great a
mischief. As for me, I think that without longer delay we should all to
horseback, making as great speed as we may to find him, then we may know if
there be any means to cure his malady: for the time passes, his sorrow
increases, and he still goes farther from us. The Lord Isania (as he says)
has brought him some part of his way, he may show us then which path he has
taken, but if we shall longer tarry, we may lose him, without hope ever to see
him again. Therefore my Lords I pray you let us make have to follow him. Unto
the which they all agreed, and caused their horses to be presently brought.
Then Isania conducted them to the place where Amadis had left him, and from
thence they rode till they came whereas Patin lay wounded, whom they beheld
lying upon the ground, whilst his two esquires did cut down boughs and poles,
to make him a litter: for he was so feeble with the loss of his blood, that he
could not sit on horseback, nor answer one only word unto the knights who
saluted him, and enquired of him, what he was that had done him such outrage:
but he made a sign that his Squires should tell them. Where-upon Galaor came,
and demanded the matter of them, they answered him that he had iousted against
a knight which came from the Firm Island, by whom he was ouer-throwne at the
first encounter, and how that afterward thinking to revenge him with his
Sword, he sped so illas they might perceiu by his hurt. What is become of the
knight, said Galaor. By our faith answered the squires, we know not, for we
were not present at the co^bat. Notwithstauding we do think that we did meet
him in our coming hither, and he did ride over the forest so fast as his
horse could run, having none following him but one Squire, who wept bitterly
carrying after him his Armor and shield, upon the which were 2. Lions sables,
in a field Ore. In faith said Florestan it is he whom we do seek. Show us
therefore what way he took, the which they did. Then the knights went after
him, and so long they rode, until they came to a cross way, where they staid
to advise what was best to be done: for there was not any body that might tell
them any news of that which they sought: and therefore they determined to
separate themselves, promising one unto another to meet at the Court of king
Lisuart, upon S. John's day next ensuing: but if by that time they heard no news
of Amadis, then they would determine further what to do in the matter, thus
taking leave of each other, they departed with weeping: and afterward they did
what they might, but it was all in vain, although they had ridden through many
strange countries in which they found many great accidents and perilous
adventures. But you must know, that so soon as Amadis had sent Durin away, he
set spurs unto his horse, neither caring, nor determining what way he should
take, and he went even as fortune guided him: in the end he came to the bottom
of an obscure valley, full of underwood and bushes which place he thought most
commodious to hide himself from being found out of any that might follow him.
Here did he alight, letting his horse go where he would, but unbridled him
not: then he sat down by the side of a brook, which descended from the
mountain, and took a little water to refresh him withal. By this time
Gandalin had overtaken him, who had stayed behind to deliver Patin his Sword,
who finding Amadis laid all along upon the grass, so still that he heard not
one word to proceed from him: he durst not say any thing to him, but sat
down hard by him, and within a while after Amadis rose up, and beholding
Gandalin laid upon the ground by him, he pushed him with his foot saying,
sleep thou Gandalin? By my faith sir no, answered he, for in stead of
sleeping, I thought upon two things which concern you greatly, the which (if
it please you) I will declare, if not, I will hold my peace. Go to rise said
Amadis, and take our horses, for I will get me gone, because I should be very
sorry to be found of those (who it may be) do follow me. Truly answered
Gandalin, me thinks you are far enough out of the way: besides your horse is
so weary, as if you let him not rest a little, it is impossible for him to
bear you any longer. I pray thee said he, (in weeping) do what thou shall
think best, for whether I stay or go, my sorrows are remediles. Eat then a
little of this bread which I have brought for your sustenance, answered
Gandalin, but he refused it. What will you then do said he, shall I tell you
whereupon I studied even now? It is all one to me answered Amadis, I think on
nothing so much as my death. Then hearken unto me if it please you, said
Gandalin, I have long time mused upon the letter which Oriana sent unto you, as
also upon the words which the knight uttered against whom you did fight, and so
consequently upon the lightness and inconstancy wherewith women are endued:
for seeing she has changed her love and your self for a stranger, she
witnesses very well what trust a man should repose in such as she is: and on
the other side, when I consider her virtues, I think it in a manner
impossible, that she should so far forget her self. But it may be that in
your absence, some false report of you, has been made unto her, whereby she
has conceived this displeasure against you, the concealing whereof so much the
more increased her grief. Notwithstanding, seeing you are assured that you
never offended her, although she have been too credulous, yet in the end the
truth will be known, and thereby your innocence the more apparent, it seems
unto me that you should not thus despair, seeing that she may repent her
folly, and acknowledge the wrong which she has done unto you, in such sort as
requiring pardon for her misconceit, she may make you amends with more joy and
contentment then you ever yet enjoyed together: and therefore enforce your self
to eat, that you may be able hereafter to preserve your life, but if you do
wilfully suffer the same thus to be lost, you shall also loose all the good and
honor that ever you may or can hope for in this world. Hold thy peace said
Amadis, for thou have so shamefully and wickedly lied, as I know no man which
would not be displeased to hear thee thus to accuse her, because that so wise
a Princess never did amiss at any time: and if I die, I have well deserved
it, seeing that she shall be obeyed and satisfied even until my death. And be
thou assured, if I did not think that thou speak this, only with intent
thereby to assuage my sorrow: I would presently strike thy head from thy
shoulders, for the offense which thou have done unto me, and take heed that
henceforth you commit not the like fault.

When he had so said, he arose up in a great rage, and walked up along the
river, so pensive that he knew not what way he should take. Which Gandalin
perceiving, (fearing his anger, and thinking also that he would not go far)
he let him alone and laid him down to sleep, his eyes being very heavy with
watching. When Amadis was returned unto him, and perceived him so sound
asleep, he would not wake him, but took his own horse and sadled him, then
did he hide the bridle and harness of Gandalins horse in the bushes, to the
end when he awaked he might not follow him. Then he armed himself and mounted
on horseback, coasting over the top of the mountain. Thus without any stay
at all, he rode till it was within four hours of the sun setting, discending
then into a great plain, where there were two high trees, and under them a
fair fountain, commonly called, The fountain of the plain field: to which
he went to water his horse. And as he approached near the fountain, he beheld
a religious man clothed poorly in a garment made of gotes hair, having his
beard and head all white, who was watering his Ass. Amadis saluted him, asking
him if he were a Priest. Truly, said the old man, it is more then forty
years since I first said Mass. The gladder am I thereof, said Amadis. Then he
alighted and took his saddle and bridle from his horse, who finding himself at
liberty, began to run toward the Forest, Amadis minding not to follow him,
but threw off all his armor, which done, he kneeled at the old man's feet,
who taking him up by the hand, made him sit down by him: and beholding him
well, he thought him to be the fairest Gentleman that ever he saw, although
he was pale and wan, having his face all bedewed with tears: whereat the
Hermit was moved with so great compassion, that he said unto him. Knight, you
seem to be full of sorrow, and if your grief proceed from the repentance of
any sin that you have committed, In truth my son you are very happy: and if
it be for any temporal loss, then I think (seeing your youth, and the
estate wherein you have lived unto this present, you should not thus vex your
self, but pray for forgiveness. Then he gave him his blessing, saying. Go
too, now confess your sins. Here-upon Amadis began to tell the whole discourse
of his life, without letting any thing pass. Truly, said the holy man,
seeing that you are descended of so high a birth, you ought to be the more
virtuous: yet you must not despair for any tribulation that may happen unto
you, cheefely, for this that proceeds from the occasion of a woman, who is as
easily won as she is lightly lost. Wherefore my son, I council you to forget
such vanities, and henceforth to banish the thought of such a miserable manner
of life from you, for it will not only be yrkesome unto you, but also every
virtuous person will condemn you for it. Ah father, answered Amadis, I am now
in such extreamitie, that it is impossible I should live any long time,
wherefore I humbly pray you to receive me into your company, and to comfort my
poor soul, for that little time which it has to remain in this unhappy body.
When the good oldeman heard him speak with such affection, he said unto him,
I promise you my friend, it is ill done of you, who are a knight, yet young and
of a comely stature, to fall into such desparie, seeing that women cannot
continue their love, but by presence of those whom they love: for by nature
they are quickly forgetful, and light of belief, especially where any thing
is reported unto them of such as have fondly yielded themselves to them, who
when they think to have nothing but joy and contentment, do find themselves
plunged in all sorrow and tribulation, as you now feel by experience.
Wherefore I pray you henceforth to be more virtuous and constant: and seeing
you are borne a Kings son, and likely to govern a Kingdom, return to the
world, for it should be a great hurt to loose you in this sort: and I cannot
presume what she might be that brought you into this extreamitie, seeing that
although she were a woman so requisite as she could not be equalled, yet for
her such a man as you are to be cast away. Father, answered Amadis, I ask not
your counsel herein, for I now need it not, but for my souls sake I desire
you henceforth to receive me into your company, which if you refuse to do, I
see no other remedy for me, but to die amongst the beasts of this forest. The
old man seeing him so resolute, had such compassion of him, as the tears fell
down his long white beard, and answered him: Alas my son, my abiding in a
desert place, and I live a life too strickt for you, my Hermitage is at the
least seven leagues within the sea, upon the top of a poor Rock: unto the
which no living creature can come unless it be at the beginning of the spring
time. Notwithstanding, I have already remained thirty years there, exempted
from all worldly pleasure, living only upon such small alms, which some
people of this Country do bestow upon me. I promise you father, said Amadis,
it is the life which I desire, and I once entreat you, that you would give me
leave to go with you. The which the Hermit at the last granted,
notwithstanding, that he had a long time denied him. Heere-withall Amadis
kissed his feet, saying: father command whatsoever you shall please, for to my
power I will ever obey you. Then the Hermit said his evening service, after
the which (because he had eaten nothing all day) he took out of his wallet a
little bread, and fish dried in the sun, which was given unto him: and willed
Amadis to eat with him, but he refused it, although he had been three days
without tasting any sustenance. Wherefore the hermit said unto him: My son
you have promised to obey me, do this then which I command you, and eat, for
if you should die in this obstinacy, your soul should be in very great
danger. For this cause Amadis durst not deny him, but did eat a very little,
for he fighed continually, not being able to forget the great sorrow wherein
he remained. After he had taken this small refrection, the good old man spread
his cloak abroad and laid him down thereon, and Amadis at his feet, who was
a great while before he could take any rest, tumbling and tossing himself as
a person ill at ease, nevertheless in the end, being heavy with long
watching, he fell asleep: and he dreamed that he was locked in a chamber so
dark, that he could see no light at all, neither could he find any way to
come out thereof, wherewith he greatly lamented: moreover he thought that his
Cousin Mabila and the Damsel of Denmark came unto him, having before them a
became of the Sun, which gave a great light in so dark a place: they taking
him by the hand said unto him, My Lord, come forth from hence, if it please
you, and follow us into the palace, the which he did. But at his coming forth,
he thought that he did see Oriana environed with a great slame of fire, which
made him so afraid, that he cried out help, help, my Lady Oriana burns:
and therewithal he leaped into the fire to save her. Then he took her in his
arms, coming through the flame again without any hurt at all: afterward he
carried her into a garden, the greenest and pleasantest that he had seen. At
the loud cry which Amadis did make, the good Hermit awaked, and taking him by
the hand, he asked him, what he ailed? Father, answered he, I have even now in
my sleep felt such exceeding pain, that I marvel I am not dead. Your cry
has witnessed the same, said he, but let us rise, for it is time to depart.
Then he got upon his Ass, and took the way toward the Hermitage, and Amadis
followed him a foot, talking together of many things, at the last he prayed
him to give him one gift, which should not be hurtful unto him, the which the
old man granted, I pray you then said Amadis, that so long as we are together,
you would not tell any man who I am: and henceforth to give me another name,
such as it shall please you: then after my death you may tell my brethren of
me, that they may come fetch my body, and carry it into Gaul. Your life and
death, answered the hermit, are in the hands of God, therefore speak no more
thereof, for therein you offend him very grievously: and therefore seeing you
know him, love him, and serve him as you are bound to do, he will succor and
help you: notwithstanding what other name will you have? Such as it shall
please you to give me, said Amadis. And as they talked together, the old man
had his eye continually upon him, and the more he looked on him, the fayrer he
thought him to be: but he did see him so full of grief as he determined to
give him a name conformable to his excellency, and agreeable to his melancholy.
Whereupon he said unto him: my Son you are young and of a fair complexion,
notwith-standing your life is obscure, by reason of your sorrow, therefore my
will is that you be called the Fair F^rlorne. Wherewith Amadis was contented,
liking very well of the Hermet his devise, who not without great occasion had
imposed that name upon him. And even as they were overtaken with the night,
they came unto the Sea side, where they found a little boa^ which the day
before was come to seek the Hermet at his hermitage, wherein they embarked,
and within a small time after took landing at the poor Rock, so called
because of the barrenness of the place, as the old man had declared to him.
Who continuing his discourse, said, Son I have heretofore followed the world
as you have done, and my name was Andahod, assuring you that during my young
years, I studied many vain sciences: but in the end being weary thereof, I
withdrew my self into this poor place, where I have already remained thirty
years and more, and never departed thence until yeesterday, that I was at the
burial of my sister, who died within these few days. When the Fair Forlorn
came into this Solitary place, he was exceeding glad: hoping that in a very
short time his sadness and his life would both end at once. Thus he remained
in the company of the hermit, consuming his youth with weeping and continual
lamentations, seting at naught all worldly honors, especially the glory which
he had gotten in fighting with Galpan, Abies King of Ireland, Dardan the proud,
and many others whom he had overcome, and he began to despise in himself all
vanities, considering the variableness of Fortune. who not long before had so
highly advanced him, that he had entered into the forbidden Chamber of
Apolidon, as in the beginning of the History has been mentioned. But if he
had been demanded what moved him so to do, what would he (think you) have
answered? no other thing (as I guess) but that the displeasure of a weak
woman, had brought him to this extremity: he would have tried to color his
fault by the examples of the strong and valiant Hercules, Sampson, the wise
Solomon, Virgill, and an infinite number of other great and virtuous personages
which have all fallen into the like misery, being no more able to resist the same
then he. And Amadis would have thought their misfortunes sufficient to shadow
his misery, and yet it is quite contrary: for their example might have warned
him to have shunned the like folly. Was it likely then that Fortune would bring
him out of his calamity, he being thus overcome for so small a cause, and to
bestow upon him afterward more favors and victories then ever she had done
before? me thinks that she should not: neither yet had she done it, if those
things by her executed against him, had not turned to the profit of the persons
whom she would favor, whose lives depended upon Amadis his safety, whom she
tormented in such sort, as it seemed she had more compassion upon them, then
care of him, as your self may judge. Because that Amadis being as it were
brought unto the period of his life, (when he least hoped of remedy) even then
was he restored unto his former estate by such means, as shall be hereafter
recited unto you. But to the end that we stray not too far from the order of
our history, you must first understand that which happened to Gandalin after he
awaked and found neither Amadis nor his horse: who rising up in a fright,
misdonbted that which was happened, and looked in all places thereabout,
notwith-standing he could see nothing but Trees and Bushes. By means whereof
he began to cry and call, yet no body answered him but the Echo which
resounded through the valley: whereby he knew well that Amadis was departed. For
this cause he began to make a most sorrowful lamentations, determining to
follow him, and to do what he could to find him again, which that he might
the better accomplish; he returned where he had left his horse, the which he
found, having neither saddle nor bridle upon him, which made him almost beside
himself. But as he fretted and sought from one place to another, in the
midst of the bushes he espied the harness of his horse, which he sought,
wherefore incontinently he sadled him, and mounted upon him, gallopping through
the forest not knowing which way to take: and in this frenzy he rode five
days together without any stay at all, but at the side of the villages, where
he only tarried to enquire after Amadis. Notwithstanding, he could hear no
news of him till the sixth day, that he entered into a meddow wherein was a
fountain, hard by the which Amadis had left his armor. There he beheld a
Pauillion set up, and two Gentlewomen, unto whom he came, asking them if they
had seen a knight pass by, bearing in his shield two Lions sables, in a field
Or. We have not seen the knight which you demand after, answered they, but we
did find his shield and the rest of his armor upon the brinke of this
fountain. When Gandalin heard this, he cried out mainely, and ^earing his
hair, he said weeping; Ay me, is he dead. Alas what misfortune is happened, the
best knight in the world, is he lost? heerewithall did he increase his laments
so strangely, as both the Gentlewomen had great compassion upon his misery:
Alas my Lord, said he, how badly have I kept you: truly I am worthy to be
accounted the most wicked esquire that lives on the earth, having so lewdly
forsaken you, and you who were wont to be the defense and refuge of all
distressed persons, have now nor counsel nor comfort of any living wight, no
not of me caitife as I am, that through my great fault and sluggishnesse, have
left you in your greatest need, even when I ought best to have served you. No
sooner had he said these words, but that he fell down in a swound: which when
the Gentlewomen beheld, they cried: Alas this esquire is dead, and
therewithal they ran unto him, but he moved not in any sort. Nevertheless,
they bestirred them so well, as they brought him again to himself, and
afterward they said unto him: my friend, you are to blame thus to despair for
a thing whereof you are yet uncertain. It were more convenient for you to go
seek your master, seeing that the virtuous (as you ought to be) do increase
their strength, even when adversity most assaileth them. Gandalin knew that
they said true, and for the same cause he determined (following their
counsel) to travail so long from place to place, until he had news of
Amadis. But I pray you Gentlewomen, answered he, tell me where you have found
his armor? That will we willingly, said they: We were of late in the company
of Don Guillan the peasiue, who within these few days past, delivered us from
the prison of Gandinas the malicious, with more then twenty other Ladies and
Gentlewomen, behauing himself so valliantly, that he has broken the wicked
custom of the Castle, and constrained the Lord thereof to swear, never more
to maintain the same. And because every one had liberty to go whether they
would, my fellow and I have followed him unto this place, and we have already
stayed here this four days, because that when we came hither first, Guillan
kn^w the armor of him whom you enquire after, which were left upon the side of
the fountain. And I promise you that never knight was more sorrowful then he,
for as soon as he beheld them, he alighted from his horse saying. Believe me
this place is far unworthy to hold the shield of the best Knight in the
world. Then did he take it up from the ground, and hanged it upon this Tree.
Which done he mounted again upon his horse, commanding us expressly that we
should keep it until he had found the Knight to whom it appertained: And to
that end we did set up these Pauilions which you see. Notwithstanding after we
had kept the same three whole days, he returned, and arrived but yesterday
very late having no news of him at all, and very early this morning he
commanded his Esquires to take the rest of his Armor which were here found,
and he took off his own shield, to hang about his neck, the other which we
did keep. In the doing whereof he wept bitterly and said. Truly shield thou
make a bad exchange of thy Master, for me: afterward he told us that he went
to the Court of king Lisuart to present those spoils unto Queen Brisena,
being assured that she would be no less sorrowful then he, for the sad
mischance, and we likewise do follow after him, to thank the Queen for the
good which Guillan has done for us, for her sake, as he has commanded us to
do. Then Gandalin bid them farewell, assuring them, that he would find him,
upon whom his death or life depended, or else he would end his days in the
seeking of him.

CHAP. VII.
How Durin returned unto the Princess Oriana, unto whom he declared the
sorrowful news of Amadis: and of the great sorrow which she made, after she
understood of his despair.

DVrin having left Patin in the forest (as you have heard) made such great
have to return unto Oriana, to let her know what he had seen of Amadis, as the
tenth day following he arrived in the City of London. But so soon as Oriana
perceived him, her heart throbbed in such sort, as she was feign to go into
her chamber, and lay her down upon her bed before she would speak unto Durin:
and shortly after she commanded the Damsel of Denmark to cause him to come
in, and to see that while she talked with him no other should come where she
was.

Then Durin being on his knees before her, she said unto him: Durin my
friend, by the faith thou owe unto me, tell me in what estate thou did
find Amadis, what was his countenance whilst he red my Letter, and what thou
think of the Queen Briolania? Madam answered he, by my faith I will tell you
the very truth, although I am sure that unto you and others it will seem in a
manner incredible. At my departure from hence (as it pleased you to command
me) I went without any stay, unto the City of Sobradisa, where I found the
Queen Briolania, who (in my opinion) next unto you, is the fairest princess
of the world, and of the best grace. There I heard news that my Lord Amadis and
his fellows were departed to return unto this Court, but upon the way they did
meet with a Gentlewoman, who carried them unto the firme-Island to prove the
strange adventures thereof: whereupon incontinently I took my way thither, and
there I arrived even as my Lord Amadis passed the Arch of Loyall-Louers, under
the which none might pass that had in any sort falsified his first Love. How?
said she, has he so rashly enterprised such an adventure, having his
disloyalty so fresh before his eyes? I know not Madam answered Durin, how you
believe it, but sure I am that it happened better unto him then you think for,
seeing that he has gotten more honor then ever any loyal Knight received, as
many can witness by the signs which then appeared. And although at that
instant Oriana would have seemed for to dissemble the pleasure which she
conceived of these news, yet could she not so cunningly do the same, but that
with extreme joy her sudden blushing did increase her beauty, for the
assurance she had in the loyalty of Amadis. But Durin continuing his
discourse, said unto her Madam, he has yet done greater things, for after he
had finished this so strange adventure, he heard news that my Lords Galaor,
Florestan and Agraies thinking to win the forbidden Chamber, were so rudely
repulsed from the marble Pillar, that their lives were in great peril, by
means whereof my Lord Amadis desirous to revenge their wrongs, with an
invincible courage he passed through all the g^^ded places, and maugre all the
enchantments, he entered into the Chamber, yet was it not without great danger
and travail. Thus did he win the Signory of the firm Island, and all the
inhabitants thereof have already sworn unto him homage, and fealty, according
to the custom of the Country, which is one of the fairest and strongest places
in the world. And I assure you Madame, that it is more then an hundred years
since any living creature has passed the pillars, but only my Lord Amadis: by
whose force and strength we have seen all the singular things and riches of
the palace of Apolidon, and the aduentrous Chamber, which is renowned through
all the parts of the Earth. During this discourse of his, Oriana was almost
ravished with the great ease, and pleasure that she conceived in the hope that
one day she should be Lady and owner of such singular things, to her own and
her lovers contentment, and said unto Durin. Truly Durin fortune has been
very favorable unto him. Ah Madame answered he, nay rather too rigorous, so as
I would to God some other had carried him that unhappy Letter which you writ,
and I delivered: how said Oriana, I pray thee tell me, what countenance he
showed in reading it? Madame I will tell you since it pleases you, answered he,
although I am sure that you will be very sort when you shall understand what
consequence it turned unto, and the mischief it brought unto the best and
faithfullest knight in the world. In what sort, said she. You are the cause of
his death, answered Durin. Out Alas, said Oriana, what is it thou tellest me?
You have forged the sword that has wounded him to death, and I carried it to
him, so as we are both his murderers. Then declared he the whole circumstance
and manner how he delivered the letter, and the despair he entered into after
he had read it: so as, said Durin, he did shortly after that, secretly depart
from the Palace of Apolidon, with Gandalin, Isania the Governor of the Isle,
and me, and we brought him unto an hermitage, where he charged us steightly to
follow him no further: then he mounted on horseback, and taking with him
neither Helmet, Shield, nor Lance, he fled over a mountain like unto a mad
man. Afterward he rehearsed unto her all the talk which particularly he had
used unto them, in taking his leave of them, and Durin made this discourse with
so many tears, as it was very hard to judge whether he or Oriana had the more
sorrowful heart. And know you Madame, said he, that after his departure
(notwithstanding his command to the contrary) Gandalin and I followed him, and
found him asleep by the side of a fountain, yet his sleep was not long: for
suddenly he awaked, and raising himself up, he began to make the greatest
lamentation in the world, bewaling King Perion his father, then Mabila, and
others his friends. All this while Gandalin and I hid our selves for fear of
his fury, by means whereof without any impeachment of us, he passed the most
part of the night in the like lamentations, until about the break of day,
that there chanced a knight to come singing a song, which he had made for the
love of you, the which Durin recited unto her, as also that which happened unto
Patin, which so ouer-charged the heart of Oriana, that she remained in a
swound, looking like one that were dead. The which Durin fearing, he called the
Princess Mabila, and the Damsel of D^nmarke, unto whom he said. Go help
my Lady, who is in a great perplexity for a thing which is now too late to be
remedied: and if she has mis-done, the punishment is of due unto her.
Herewithall he departed, leaving the women much amazed, for they knew not the
cause of this inconvenience, much less how they might re^ the same:
nevertheless, they used her in such sort, that she came again unto her
self, and casting forth a sigh, she said with a feeble and low voice: Ah
wicked woman that I am, when with so great wrong I have deprived him of life,
whom in this world I most loved. And seeing it is out of my power now to revoke
that mischief, wher^of I am the repentant causer, I beseech you (friend) to
take my lament in satisfaction of the hurt which I have purchased unto you,
with the sacrifice which I shall make of mine own life to follow you unto the
death: so the ingratitude which I have committed against your loyalty, shall
be manifested, your self revenged; and I punished. And as she thought to
have proceeded further, her speech failed her again, wherewith Mabila and the
Gentlewoman were more abashed then before, so that they called Durin to know
what heavy news he had brought unto Oriana, who wholly declared it unto
them. Let me alone the^ said Mabila, for I know well how to remedy this matter.
Hereupon they unlaced her, and bestirreth them so well, that she brought her to
life again: then Mabila demanded of her how she did. Gentle friend (answered
she) far better then I desire: So as I rather desire death then life, for now
I do naught else but languish. Wherefore Madame, said Mabila: do you think my
Cousin so inconstant, that he will not willingly excuse the injury that you
have done unto him, knowing that extreme love rather then any other thing
constrained you thereunto? And if he be gone, as Durin has told you, it is
but to pass away part of his melancholy, tarrying until his innocence be
known unto you: But I am certain, if it pleased you to call him back again,
that he is as ready to obey you as ever he was And behold what you shall do:
entreat him by a Letter, that he take no regard unto that which you did
command him by Durin, and that which you did, was suddenly after a false report
made unto you of him: and therefore will him to come unto you to Mirefl^re,
where you stay for him to amend your fault at his discretion. Ah my Cousin,
answered Oriana, do you think that he will ever vouchsafe, either to respect
me, or make one step for me? But do you think, said Mabila, that the love
he bears to you, is of so little force, that he will not be far more glad
to recover your good favor, then he has been sorry to be by you forsaken? I
am verily assured, that to die he will not displease you. And to accomplish
this matter well, it behooves the Damsel of Denmark to undertake the charge
to find him out, because he knows her, and puts his trust in her. Well,
answered Oriana, I am content to be advised by you. So she took paper and
ink, and as they had determined she did write unto Amadis, afterward the
Letter was given to the Damosel of Denmark, with express commandment to pass
first into Scotland, thinking that he might be there with Gandales, rather the^
in any other place. And the better to color their enterprise, they advised the
Damsel to tell the Queen, that Mabila sent her toward the Queen of
Scotland her Mother, to understand some news from her: With the which the Queen
was well pleased, and gave her a Letter and tokens to present unto her. Thus
was the Gentlewoman dispatched, who departed with Durin her brother, and Enil
the Cousin of Gandales. And so long they rode till they came unto a port town
called Vegill, which separateth great Britain from the Realm of Scotland.
There they took shipping, and they had the wind so fair, that the sixth day
following they landed in the City of Poligez. Then took they their way toward
the Knight Gandales, whom they met a hunting: but when he beheld the Damsel
of Denmark (knowing that she was a stranger) he stayed, enquiring of her what
she did seek in that Country. Your self answered she, toward whom, two
Princesses your friends have commanded me to come, to present from them certain
presents, which I carry unto the Queen of Scotland. Gentlewoma^ said he, may
it please you to tell me their names: yea willingly sir said she, the one is my
Lady Oriana daughter to the mighty king Lisuart, and the other the Princess
Mabila whom you know well enough. Ha said Gandales, you are most luckily here
arrived: and they have reason to account me their most humble servant, for so I
am, and I pray you most heartily to come and alight at my house, then to morrow
we will go together to see the Queen: in the mean while do me this
pleasure, as to tell me how Amadis does. The Gentlewoman was herewith much
astonished, seeing that she had missed of her purpose: notwithstanding
dissembling her sorrow, she answered Gandales: that he was not returned to the
Court since he departed thence to revenge Briolania: and it is thought that he
is come into these parts with his cousin Agraies, to see the Scottish Queen his
Aunt, and you also: for this cause the Queen and other Ladies of his kindred
and dear friends, gave me in charge to deliver him a Letter, which will be
very welcome unto him I am sure. And the Gentlewoman said thus much, because
she knew certainly, that although Amadis would hide him from (knowing that she
brought him news from Oriana) others, yet he would change his mind to speak
with her. I would said Gandales that he were here, for I have a long time
greatly desired to see him. Thus talking together at the last they arrived at
the Castle of Gandales, where he feasted the Gentlewoman three days: and the
fourth day following, he conducted her unto the Court, where she delivered to
the Scottish Queen the Letters and presents which the Queen Brisena had sent
unto her.

CHAP. VIII.
How Don Guillan the Pensive did bring unto the Court of King Lisuart, the
Shield, Armor, and Sword of Amadis, which he had found lying by the Fountain
of the plain field.

AFter that Don Guillan the Pensis was departed from the Fountain where he
found Amadis his Armor, he rode six days before he arrived in the Court of
King Lisuart. And he ordinarily carried the shield of Amadis about his neck,
and never took it off, except when he was constrained to fight: then he took
his own, fearing to deface the other. And as he rode he met with two knights,
Cosins to Arcalaus, who incontinently knew the shield of Amadis, and they
thought Guillan to be he. Wherefore they (who hated him to the death)
determined to assail him, and said one to another: even now will we carry the
head of this villain unto our uncle Arcalaus. This they spoke so loud that
Guillan heard it, wherewith being thoroughly chafed he answered them. Palliards
you reckon without your host, for never did traitor affright me, no more shall
you, seeing I know you for kinsemen to Arcalaus, and as wicked as himself: then
pulled he down the visor of his Helmet, couched his lance and ran upon them.
Now they were young and strong, so that they defended themselves stoutly:
notwithstanding at the last they could not long resist him that had charged
them. Who after he had some small time fought with them, thrust his sword in
the throat of the eldest, and the other fled up toward the top of the
mountain, who was not long pursued by Guillan, because he was a little
wounded, whereupon he let him go and followed on his way, along the which he
rode so far, until he arrived at a Castle, belonging unto a knight of his
acquaintance, where he lodged for that night, being then very late. But the
next day (as he would have departed from his lodging) his host seeing him
without a Lance gave him one, from thence he rode so long, that he came
near a river named Guinon, over the which there was a bridge no brother then
for two horses to pass over afront. And approaching more near thereunto, he
beheld a knight entering upon the same, whose shield was vert, a bent Argent.
This he knew to be his cousin Ladasin; and on the other side he saw another
knight ready to fight, who forbad Ladasin from passing over, except he would
break a Lance with him, but Ladasin answered him, that he would not stay for
so small a thing, and herewithall covering him with his shield, he set spurs
unto his horse. As much did he that kept the passage, who was mounted upon a
great bay courser, and did bear in his shield Argent a Lion Sables, and his
helmet all black. Their encounter was so strong, that Ladasin fell into the
water, where without doubt he had been drowned (as well for the weight of his
armor, as also for the high of the place from whence he fell) if he had not
taken hold of certain willowes, by means whereof he got unto the banck
side. In the mean season he that had ouer-throwne him returned fair and
softly from whence he was departed. Then Guillan seeing his cousin in such
danger, ran speedily to help him, and caused him to be pulled up by his
squires, and afterward he said unto him: trust me cousin without the help of
these boughs you had been in great danger, and therefore all strange knights
should fear to just upon such bridges: for those which do keep such passages
have their horses no small time experimenced for the purpose, with whom (more
then by their own prowess) they gain the honor and reputation over a number
of better knights then themselves are. And as for me, I would rather turn out
of the way a days journey, then put my self in such hazard, were it not to
revenge you if I can. Now the horse of Ladasin had not followed his master,
but was passed over to the other side of the river, and the knight of the
bridge his esquires were there ready to take him, who carried him into a
pleasant and strong tower, seated in the midst of the water. Wherefore
Guillan took his shield, and couched his Lance, he called unto the knight of
the bridge, that he should take heed of him, who ran against him, and they met
together with a most strong encounter: nevertheless it fell out so well for
Guillan, that he overthrew his enemy together with his horse into the river,
and himself had sped little better, for he was unhorsed as well as the other,
if in falling his horse had not slipped by the one side of him, and he taken
hold of certain stakes, by the which he got upon the bridge again, from whence
he might perceive the knight in the river, who having cought hold by the tail
of the horse of (...), was brought to shore on the one side, and his horse
came to the otherside, where the Squires of L^dasin were ready to take hold of
him. Thus against their wills the two knights made exchange of their horses,
and therefore Guillan sent unto the knight to tell him, that if he would restore
his horse and his fellows, that they would send over his which their Esquires
had taken, and then they would depart. What answered the knight unto him that
brought the message, think they to escape so lightly from my hands^ yea truly
said the other, for they have done as much as the custom of the passage
requires. Not yet answered the knight, because we were both overthrown: and
therefore they must win the bridge by the sword, if they will pass over. Will
you then said the other, compel them to fight? I think you should be
satisfied with this injury which already you have done unto them, seeing that
all bridges ought to be free for every passenger. I care not answered the
knight, go tell them, they must feel (will they nil they) how my sword
cutteth: then he leaped upon his horse most lightly without any help of his
stirrup, afterward coming near unto Guilla^, he said unto him very fiercely
and boldly: knight your ambassador has been over tedious in delivering his
message, but before you escape me, you must of force tell me, whether you be
any of the subjects to a king called Lisuart, or any of his household.
Wherefore? answered Guillan, I would it were my luck, said the other, to have
him now in your ^^eede, for by my head he should not reign one day longer.
When Guillan heard him say so, none could be more angry then he was, (...)
therefore (...) (...) in good faith knight, if king (...) my Lord were in (...)
I (...) very sure, that he would easily (...) thee acknowledge (...) thy (...)
gr^ (...) to fig^ them (...) I had ag^ knight^ And if I (...) (...) ^i^^t, and
(...) knight of his (...) (...)* will cha^ti (...) so good (...) not believe
that (...) the (...) before it be no one, I will (...) glad ^o ^^^ry a message
^o him, notwithstanding (...) shall know both (...) I am, (...) what pr^s^ I
will (...) by thee, Guillan (...) very much stiff pleased* wi^h the knights
words* (...) hardly would he have defer^^ the combat so long, (...) is ^o^
(...) that had promised (...) (...) him his name, wherefore he stayed a while
to hear what he would say. Know thou tho^ said the Knight, that I am Gan^
son to Barson, had Lord of ^^^s^ega, whom King (...) (...) most trea^y did
(...) d^^th in the Ci^^y of ^^ndon. That presents which I will send unto him by
thee, shall be the heads of four knights of his C^ I (...) pisoners (and one
of them i^ (...) (...) his nephew) together with thy right hand also, which I
will hang about thy neck, after I have sep^rated it from thy (...) ^ild (...)
answered Guillan, if thou (...) ^forme that thou ^^^ggest of, it were a great
deal, but I bele^^^ thou shall prove thy self a li^^, and so saying h^^ (...)
at (...). Then there began (...) on them (...) sharp and cruel Co^ (...)
without any breathing, they, laid at each other so fiercely, that Lad^sin and
his esquire^ who were present, did not think that any of them could escape the
death. Nevertheless, they behaved themselves so valiantly, that one could not
judge who had the best: for they were expert knights, hardy, and exercised in
arms, so that knowing how to defend themselves, few blows could hurt them to
the quick. Now when their battle was at the hottest, they heard the winding
of a horn from the top of the tower, where withal Guillan was abashed.
thinking it to be some new supply come to his enemy, and on the other side,
G^ndalod suspected it to be some revolt of the captives which he had in his
prisons. And therefore either of them did their best to vanquish his enemy,
before the succors should come: so that suddainnly G^ndalod rushed upon
Guillan thinking to unhorse him, but Guillan embraced him so hard, that they
both fell to the ground tumbling one over another, yet holding their swords
fast in their hands, but it happened so well for Guillan, that he had his enemy
under him. By means whereof, before the other could rise, he gave him five or
six great blows with his sword, which in such sort amazed him, that from
thenceforth he waxed more feeble. Notwith-standing, getting up upon his feet,
he both well defended himself, and better assailed his adversary, giving
sufficient knowledge of the little good will he wished unto his enemy: who so
sorely oppressed upon him, that he was constrained to recoile and turn his
back. Therefore Guillan marking where he was worst armed, did hit him such a
blow with his sword upon the ^e, that ^oe quite parted it from his shoulder. So
(...) with the extreme grie^e thereof he cast for a loud cry, ^^lyin^
toward the tower: but Guill^^ ouertooke him, and laid so fast hold upon his
helmet, that he pulled it from his head. Then s^^ting his sword to his throat,
he said unto him. Believe me Sir, you shall now go to the king to present
him with other heads then you determined, but if you will not obey me, your
own shall satisfy me. Alas, answered Gandalod, I had rather yield my self
to the mercy of the King, then to die presently. Where upon after he had given
his faith unto Guillan, they mounted on horseback, and Ladasin with them. At
that instant, they heard a great tumult within the tower, and beheld one of the
warders running away, who^^ they stayed to know what the ^ter was: who told
them that the prisoners had found the means to unbind themselves, and to come
forth of the dungeon wherein they were kept, afterward ho^ they were armed,
and had already slain the most part of his fellows. He had no sooner ended
his speech, when he beheld some of those, which he spoke of, over the gate of
the tower, and three or four others which pursued a knight, and seven
halberders, that fled toward a wood hard by, and when those which had gained
their liberty, perceined Guillan and Ladasin, they cried unto them, that they
should kill those tratours that had escaped from them, Wherefore Guillan and his
cousin ran before and slew sour of them: the rest ^aued themselves with their
lightness, excepting only the knight who was taken. Then came the prisoners to
salute Guillan, whom they all knew, and after some talk which they had
together, Guillan said unto them: my Lords, I cannot tarry long with you, for I
am constrained to go forthwith to King Lisuart, but my cousin Ladasin shall bea^
you company until you have refreshed you, and afterward I pray you to come
unto the Court, and to bring with you these two knights, whom I deliver into
your keeping, until king Lisuart have taken such order for them, as to his
Majesty shall seem best: and let one of you remain here for the guard of
this place, until I have otherwise provided for it. The which they promised him
to perform, thus taking leave of them he took his shield from his neck, and
gave it unto his esquires, and taking the shield of Amadis (as he was
accustomed) the tears stood in his eyes. Where-withal the others being much
a^ashed, demanded of him, what moved him thus to take his shield from his
neck, and place another in steed thereof with so great sorrow. Ah, answered he,
this shield belongs to the best knight in the world, the^ he rehearsed unto
them the manner how he had found it, with the rest of the armor of Amadis,
whom he had since searched for through all the country, without hearing any
news of him: wherewithal every one of them were very sorry, seating least
some great misfortune had happened him. Thus Guillan followed on his way, and
rode so long that (without any further trouble) he arrived in the Court of king
Lisuart: where it was already known how Amadis had ended the adventures of the
Firme-Island, and gained the signorie thereof: in like sort how he was
departed from thence secretly, in great anguish. Nevertheless they knew
nothing of the cause thereof, except thos^ whom I before have told you of:
Thus Guillan entered into the hall, having about his neck the shield of Amadis,
who was presently known of all the assembly, wherefore they flocked about him
to hear what he would say, but the king was for most, who demanded what newe^
he had of Amadis. It may please your majesty, answered Guillan, I know none:
nevertheless, if it please you I will before the Queen recite how I did find
his armor, sword, and his shield which hee^ you may see. Truly said the king.
I am very well pleased, for since (...) was her knight, it is reason that (...)
first know what is become of h^ Saying so he took Guillan by t^ hand, and led
him where the Queen was. Then Guillan kneeling dow^, said unto her weeping.
Madame, not many days since I found all the armor of Amadis, with his shield
left all alone hard by a fountain, which is called the fountain of the plain
field: wherewithal I was so sorrowful, that even at the same instant I
fastened the shield upon (...) tr^e, leaving in it the keeping of two
Gentlewomen, that were in my company, vnt^l that I had gone through the
country, to enquire where he was become. But I was neither so fortunate to
find him, nor so happy to hear any (...) of him, wherefore knowing the disert
of so good a knight, who had never any desire, but to employ himself to do
you service, I determined seeing I could no^ bring him to you, to bring you his
arms, as witness of the duty which I do owe both to your Majesty, and also
to him: the which you may command (if you please) to ^ee set in an open place,
where every one may see them, as well to hear news of him, by such strangers
as ordinarily repair unto his Court, as also to encourage all such as follow
arms, to take example by him that was owner of them: who by his high
knighthood, has gained the chiefest reputation amongst all those that ever
buckled cuirasse on their backs. When the Queen understood such news of
Amadis, never was any Lady more sorrowful, and answered Guillan: It is great
pity for the loss of so good a Knight: for I am sure that many at this day do
live, which will be sorry for his loss: and I give you most hearty thanks for
that which you have done for him and me together: assuring you, that those
which will put themselue forward to find him shall give me and all other Ladies
cause to wish them well for his sake, which was so much at their commandment.
But if the Queen for these news was any whit sorry, the king and those of his
company were no less sad: yet was it nothing to the grief which Oriana
sustained. For if before she was vexed for the great fault which she had
committed, at that instant her pain redoubled with so great a melancholy, that
it was impossible for her to stay there any longer, but she withdrew her self
into her chamber. And casting her down upon her bed she began to cry: Ah
wicked woman that I am, I may now well say, that all the felicity that ever I
had is but a plain dream, and my torment is a very certain truth, seeing
that if I receive any contentment, It is only by the dreams which do nightly
solicit me, for when I awake all ^roward Fortune afflicts my poor spirit, so
as if the day be unto me a grie^ martyrd on^, the darkness only brings me
p^ sure and comfort, because sleep I think that I am before my sweet friend,
but being awak^ quite deprived of that great joy, makes me too much to ^eele
(...) a^sence. Ah my eyes, no more e^es but floods of tears, you are much
abused, seeing that being shut you only behold him that co^ you: and no sooner
opened, but all the ^orment in the world comes at once to blind them: at the
^east this death which I feel so near at hand shall deliver me from this
care: and you sweet friend (...) be revenged of the most ungrateful woman
that ever was borne. Then like a furious woman (...) rose up, determining to
throw her self headlong from the window down to the ground but (...) who had
followed her preventing such an inconvenience stayed her, setting before her
the in^amy which she might get, if it were but known that she were so minded:
and more-ouer she did assure her that Amadis would shortly return, ^aying unto
her: How now Madam? where is the constancy of a Kings daughter, and that
wisdom for which you are so much renowned? Have you already forgotten the
mischief that was likely to have happened unto you, by means of the false
news that Arcalaus brought unto the Court this last year? And now because
Guillan has found my Cosins arms, is it therefore likely that he should be
dead? Believe me, you shall see him again shortly, and he will come unto you so
soon as he has seen your Letters.

This Counsel was authorized with such perswasine reasons, that Oriana ap^^sed
part of her ^orme^ But yet these news so greatly troubled her mind, that had
it not been for the wisdom of Mabila (who often times persuaded her to be
quiet) there had happened a merueilous inco^nenience: but in the end she knew
so well how to prevail with her, that she resolved upon this, that the
Gentlewoman of Denmark would bring him again. And as they were in these
terms, one came to tell them that the knights and Gentle-women which Guillan
had delivered from prison were arrived, wherefore Mabila seeking to withdraw
Oriana from fancies, brought her where the Queen was, unto whom the two
Gentlewomen (that had kept the shield of Amadis) recited the lamentation which
they had seen an Esquire make, when he knew the Armor and Shield that
Guillan had found upon the side of the Fountain of the plain field. The King
was likewise present in whose eyes stood a flood of Tears, thinking assuredly
that Amadis was dead. Then Ladasin and his fellows were seen to come in, who
brought with them Gandalod prisoner, together with the other knight, whom they
presented unto the king on the behalf of Guillan, declaring unto him both the
manner of the Combat, the talk that passed between Gandalod and Guillan, and
also how that during their encounter, the knights that were in the deep
dungeon of his tower had found the means to deliver themselves. Is this true
said he to Gandalod, I caused not long since thy father to be burned in this
city, for his great treason, and thou shall likewise be there hanged with thy
companion, because thou had conspired my death. Then forthwith he commanded
them to be hanged over the City wales right over against the place where
Barsinan was burned as it has been recited unto you.

CHAP. IX.
How the Fair Forlorn being in the poor Rock with the Hermit, there arrived
a ship, in the which was Corisanda, who sought for her friend Florestan, and of
that which happened unto them.

ONe day the Fair Forlorn being set hard by the Hermit, near unto the door
of their little house, the old man said unto him: I pray you my son, tell me
the dream that you had, when you awaked on a sudden sleeping hard by me near
unto the Fountain of the plain field. Truly father answered he, I will
willingly tell it you, and I most humbly beseech you likewise to let me
understand, be it for good, or bad, what you think thereof. After-wards he
recited the dream in such sort as you have heard, keeping only the names of
the Gentlewomen secret.

Then the Hermet remained a good while pensive, when he beholding the Fair
Forlorn, he began to smile, and said unto him: My child, I assure you, that
you have now more cause to rejoice then ever you had: but yet I would have you
know how I understand it. The dark chamber in the which you thought your self
to be, out of which you were not able to com forth, signifies this great
tribulation wherein you now are. The Gentlewomen which afterward opened the
door unto you, are some of your friends that continually solicit your cause
unto the Lady whom you so ^eruently love, with whom they have so much
prevailed, that they shall withdraw you from this place. The Sunnebeame which
went before them, are Letters of reconciliation that she sends unto you: by
means whereof you shall leave me. The fire that environed this lady, shows
the great love, together with the sad laments that she makes for your absence,
as well as you do for hers. And by the fair garden whereunto you did bear
her, drawing her forth of the flame, signifies the great pleasure which you
shall both have at your meeting. Truly my Son, I know that seeing the habit
and estate whereunto I am called, such speeches as these become me not at all:
nevertheless knowing that it is for your good, I am sure that I do not amiss
in this counselling a person so comfortless as you are. Here-with all the
Fair Forlorn fell upon the ground to kiss his feet, rejoicing that he had
happened into the company of a person so holy, that knew how to comfort him so
well in his adversity, desiring very heartily, that whatsoever the holy man had
told him, might so come to pass, and he said unto the Hermit, my Father seeing
it has pleased you to do me so much good, as to expound this dream, I pray
you likewise to tell me the meaning of one other, which I dreamed the night
before I came from the firm-Island.

Then did he recite it word by word unto him. Whereupon the aged man answered
him. My son, by this you may plainly see that which already is happened unto
you, for I assure you that the place over shaddowed with trees, where you
thought that you were, and the great number of people which at the first made
such great joy about you, signifies the firm Island which you have conquered,
to the great pleasure of all the inhabitants thereof. But the man which came
unto you with a box full of bitterness, is the messenger of the Lady that gave
you the letter: and your self does know better then any other, whether he
brought you bitterness or no, by the discourse which he had with you. The
sorrow which afterward you did behold in the persons which before were so
joyful, are they of the Isle, who at this present are very heavy for your
absence. The apparel which you threw off, are the tears which you have shed.
The stony place wherein you entered environed with water, this rock witnesses to
you what it is. The riligious man that did speak unto you in an unknown
language, is my self, who do instruct you in holy writ, which you neither
understand, nor can comprehend. Father answered the Fair-Forlorn. I know verily
that you say the truth which gives me great hope of that which you have
declared of the other: but the continual grief and melancholy wherein I
live, has already ouer-mastered me, that I believe if the good which you
promise unto me do not the soon^^ ease my care, death will first seize upon my
sorrowful corpse.

Notwithstanding the Hermit knew how to persuade him so well, that from
thenceforth he showed a little merrier countenance then before he had done, and
began to turn his sorrow to some solace, using to angle for fish with two
Nephwes of the old man, that kept him company. Nevertheless, the most part of
the time he withdrew himself into a secret place hard by the sea side, which
was ouer-shadowed with diverse sorts of trees: and there oftentimes he cast his
sight unto the Firme-Island, which put him in remembrance of those favors
whereunto fortune had called him, and the wrong that Oriana did unto him, he
having never offended. Alas, said he, have I deserved this entertainment to be
banished, without having offended so much as in thought? Truly dear friend,
if my death were agrieable unto you, you have mean enough to give it me more
speedily, without making me thus to live in languishing. The only denial of
your good grace, the very first day that you accepted me for your knight, had
been sufficient at that time to have made me die a thousand deaths. Many
other lamentations did the Fair Forlorn every day make, in this solitary
place, wherein he took so great pleasure, that oftentimes he there passed
away both the day and the night: so as one time finding himself more frollick
in his mind, then of a long time he had been, he made this song following.

Since that the victory of right deserved,
By wrong they do withhold for which I served;
Now ^ith my glory thus has had a fall,
Glorious it is, to end my life withal.
By this my death likewise my woes release,
My hope, my joy, m'inflamed love does cease.
But ever will I mind my during pain:
For they to end my glory, and my gain,
My self have murdered, and my glory slain.
Thus the Fair Forlorn passed away the time, waiting until fate or better
fortune should bring him forth of this misery. But it happened that one night
lying under the trees (as he was accustomed) about the break of day he heard
very nigh him the sound of a most sweet instrument, wherein he took so great
pleasure, that he gave attentive ear thereunto a good while, amazed
notwithstanding from whence it might proceed. Knowing the place to be
solitary that no other there remained but the hermit, his two Nephews, and
himself: wherefore he rose up, without making any noise at all, and approached
more near to see what it might be. Then he beheld two young Gentlewomen
sitting by a fountain, who (tuning their voyses to the sound of a lute) did
sing a most pleasant song: nevertheless fearing to trouble their mirth, he
stood still a great while without being by them perceived. Afterward he came
forth and disclosed himself, saying unto them: Truly Gentlewomen your music
has made me this day to loose Matins, for the which I am very sorry. When
these women heard him speak (having not seen him at all until that time) they
were much afraid. Norwithstanding, one of them more bold then her fellow,
answered him: My friend, we did not think to offend you with this our mirth,
but seeing we have so luckily found you, tell us (if it please you) who you
are, and how this desert place is called. In truth fair Gentlewomen, said the
Fair Forlorn, this place is called the poor Rock: wherein there lives an
Hermit, upon the top thereof in his little hermitage. As for me, I am a poor
man that keep him company, doing great and hard penance for the sin and
wickedness which I have committed. Gentle friend, answered they, may we find
in this place (for two or three days only) any house wherein we may place at
ease a Lady both rich and mighty, so tormented with love, that she is even at
deaths door therewith. Trust me said he, there is no other lodging in this
Rock, but the little cabinet wherein the Hermit does lie, and one other that I
do sleep in some-time: but if the Hermit will lend you mine, I am content (to
do you a pleasure) to lie in the mean time abroad in the fields, as I commonly
use to do. The Gentlewoman gave him hearty thanks, and bidding him good morrow
they departed toward a Pauilion: within the which the Fair Forlorn beheld a
most beautiful Lady upon a bed. Whereupon he knew that the same was she of
whom they told him. But looking farther off, he did see four armed men walking
by the Sea side, who scouted abroad, whilst five others did take their rest,
and he also perceived a ship at Anchor well appointed. The Sun was already
up, when he heard the Hermitage bell to ring, which made him go up thither.
Where he found the Hermit making him ready to go to service: unto whom he
told that there were people newly arrived in the Rock, and that if it were his
pleasure, he would willingly go call them to hear Mattins. Go then answered
the Hermit, and I will stay for them. And as he went down the Rock, he met
the Lady, whom the knights carried toward the hermitage: wherefore he returned,
to help to make ready the Hermit, who seeing the Lady was come, began service.
Then the Fair Forlorn being amongst the women, began to remember the time
when he was in the Court of king Lisuart, and of the pleasure he was won to
have with the Princess Oriana, and there-withall he began to weep so
bitterly, that the Gentlewomen perceived it, and did very much wonder thereat.
Notwithstanding they thought that it was for the contrition of his sins, and
seeing him young, fair, and comely, they could not think what to presume
thereof. When the Hermit had made an end of service, they came to salute him,
praying him for Gods sake, to lend them some little chamber for their Lady (who
was weary of the Sea, and extremely sick) wherein she might take her rest,
for a day or twain. In truth fair Ladies, answered he, there are here no more
then two small Cabinets, in one of them I remain (and if I can so long as I
live, never woman shall come therein) and the other is for this poor man, which
does such great penance, wherein sometimes he sleeps, and I would be very
sorry that he should be put out thereof against his will. Father said the Fare
Forlorn, do not let for me to do them a pleasure, for I am very well content
for this time to have no other lodging then under the Trees. Well said the
hermit, let it be so a Gods name. Then the Fair Forlorn conducted them unto
his Cabinet, where the Gentlewomen set up a rich bed for their Mistress, who
was forthwith carried thither. And because it was told the Fair Forlorn that
her sickness proceeded of extreme love, he took more heed to her behavior
then to any of the rest: and he perceived that her eyes were still full of
Tears, and her ^ighs were at commandment: Wherefore he drew the two
Gentlewomen apart, whom in the morning he had found playing on the Lute, and
earnestly entreated them to tell the occasion of the great sickness that their
Mistress sustained. Friend answered they, if you mark her well you shall find
that she is very fair, although that now her disease has abated a great part
of her beauty: for she has neither comfort nor joy by reason of the absence
of a knight that she goes to seek in the house of King Lisuart, whom she so
fervently loves, that if short time do not grant some ease to her passion,
it is impossible that her life should continue long. When the Fair Forlorn
heard king Lisuart named, he could not refrain from tears, and he had a
greater desire then before, to know the name of the knight that she loved:
therefore he requested them very earnestly to tell him his name, in good sooth
answered the Gentlewoman, hardly may you know him: for he is not of this
country: yet is he esteemed the best knight in the world, next unto two other
of his kin. Alas my fair gentlewoman said he, for Gods sake name him unto me,
and the two other whom you so much ex^oll. Truly answered they, we are
contented, upon this condition, that first when we have done, you do tell us
whether you be a knight or not, and afterward your name. I am content
therewith, said the Fair Forlorn, so great is my desire to know that which
I demand of you. Then one of them said unto him: the knight which this Lady
loves, is called Don Florestan, brother to the good Knight Amadis of Gaul,
and to Don Galaor, and he is the son of King Perion of Gaul, and of the
Countess of Salandria. You say true answered he, and I verily believe that
you cannot say so much good of him as he deserves. What? said the
Gentlewomen, do you know him then? It is not long said he, since I did see him
in the house of Queen Briolanie, for whom his brother Amadis, and his Cosen
Agraies did fight against Abise^s and his two sons, and thither he with his
brother Galaor arrived some few days after the combat: and I think him to
be one of the fairest knights in the world. As cou^^rning his prowess, I have
many times heard Don Galaor himself speak thereof, who fought a combat with
him as he said. This combat said she, was the cause that he left my Lady
in the self same place, where they first knew one another. I think then
answered the Fair Forlorn, that she is called Corisanda. You say true said
the Gentlewomen. In truth answered he, I am no less sorry for her sickness
then before, for I know Florestan to be so wise, and of so good behavior,
that I am sure he will do all that which she shall command him. God grant it
said she, but seeing we have satisfied you, acquire you of your promise and
tell us who you are. Gentlewoman answered the Fair Forlorn, I am a knight who
have heretofore had more pleasure in the vanities of the world then now I
have, for the which I here abide sharp penance, my name is the Fair
Forlorn. By my truth said one of them, you have taken a good course, if you
are able therein to continue. And because there is no reason now to leave our
Mistress all alone in this her great melancholy, we bid you farewell, and do
go unto her to pass away the time with such music as you did hear this
morning.

Then the Fair Forlorn departed, but he was presently called back again,
for as soon as the gentlewomen had played two or three songs, they rehearsed
unto Corisanda all that he had said of Florestan, and that the poor man
which did penance, had seen him not many days before. Wherefore she sent to
pray him to come unto her, and in the mean while she said unto her women:
assure you this Hermit that knows Florestan, must needs be some great
personage disguised. At the same instant the Fair Forlorn was come, and she
said unto him: my friend, my women tell me that you know Don Florestan, and
that you do very well love him, I pray you (by the holy order that you
profess) to tell me what acquaintance you have had with him, and where you did
last see him. Then the Fair Forlorn told her more of him then he had told
unto the Gentlewomen, and how he knew very well, that he and his brethren,
with their Cosen Agraies, had been in the Firme-Island: for he had there left
them, and never since had seen them. Ah said she, I believe that you are
something a kin unto him, seeing the great good you report of him. Madame,
answered the Fair Forlorn, I love him entirely, as well for his valor, as
also for that his father made me knight, which makes me the more bounden unto
his children: and I am very sorry for the news that I have hard of Amadis
before I did come unto this desert. What are they said Corisanda. Truly
answered he, coming hither I met with a Gentlewoman at the entry of a Forest
which sung a pleasant song for the tune, but very pitiful by reason of the
matter that it contained. Then I enquired of her who made it, and she answered
me, that it was a knight, unto who^ God (if it be his pleasure) send more joy
then he had when he made it, for his song does very well witness, that his
grief proceeded from too extreme love. And because I liked it well, I remained
with the Gentlewoman so long until I had learned it: moreover she did assure
me that Amadis did make it, and that he did show her the song at that time when
by his melancholy he was most maistered. I pray you said Corisanda, teach it
unto these two Gentlewomen, for by that which you say, love held him then in as
great bondage as he now holds me. I will do it answered he, both for the
honor of him and also of you, althought it be a thing far unseemly for me
to do. Herewithall he withdrew the Gentlewomen a part, and taught them the song
with the tune thereof, wherein they took great pleasure, because the Fair
Forlorn did sing it with a lamentable and soft voice, which yielded more
harmony and aptness, both to the tune and the matter, then he could if he had
been at more liberty in body and mind: and the Gentle-women learned it so
cunningly, that many times after they did sing it before their Mistress, who
tarried four days in the poor Rock, and the fifth she embarked. But before
she departed, she demanded of the Fair forlorn, whether he would remain
any long time in that place. Madame, answered he, nothing but my death shall
draw me from hence. I do much marvel said Corisanda, what moves you to
do so: yet seeing that you are in such a mind, I will in no sort dissuade
yon from it: so saying, she entered into her ship with her company, bidding the
Hermit farewell. Then setting sail, the wind was so favorable, that in few
days after they landed in Great Britain, and arrived in the City of London,
where at that time King Lisuart remained. Who knowing of her arrival, he
together with his Queen received her royally. The King to honor her the more,
caused her to be lodged in his own Palace. And some few days after, as they
were discoursing together, the Queen said unto her, Good Cosen, the King
charged me to tell you, that he takes your coming hither to fee him so
thankefully, that if you have any thing to do with him, he will employ his
best means to pleasure you. Madame, answered Corisanda, I give the King most
humble thanks, and your grace also: there is nothing that importuneth me
more, then the absence of Don Florestan, whom I thought to have found in this
Court. Cosen said the Queen, we have at this time no other news, of him,
but that he is gone in search of his brother Amadis, who of late is lost, we
not knowing the cause thereof. Then she told her how he had won the
Firme-Island, and that after-wardes he departed secretly from his fellows:
especially the manner how Don Guillan did find his armor, and what diligence
he had used to understand what was become of him. When Corisanda did see that
she was frustrate of her intention, and understood the loss of Amadis, the
tears stood in her eyes, saying: Alas what will become of my Lord and friend
Florestan, I am sure (considering the love that he bears unto his brother)
that if he cannot find him, he will lose himself, so that I shall never
while I live see him any more: the Queen comforted her so well, that she
received some hope to hear news from him very shortly. Now Oriana was by, who
had heard all this talk, and the love that Corisanda did bear unto Don
Florestan, brother to Amadis: for which cause she had the more desire to do
her honor, so as she and Mabila did ordinarily keep her company, taking great
pleasure to hear her recite the love that passed betwixt her and her friend,
the cause of their parting, and the travel which afterward she had endured
in hope to find him. And as she made this discourse, she remembered her of the
time when she remained in the poor Rock, where she found a knight doing
penance, who during her abode there, taught a song unto her women: which Amadis
had made being in great melancholy, as the companion of the Hermit had assured
her. Madame answered Mabila, I pray you seeing your Gentlewomen have learned
it, command them to sing it before my Lady Oriana: for I shall be very glad
to hear it, seeing it is made by Amadis, who is mine own Cosen. Believe me
said Corisanda, I am very well content, assuring you that it cannot better
please you then it will delight me, because of the neernesse of the lineage that
is betwixt my Lord Florestan and him. Then she sent for the Gentlewomens
Lutes, who played and did sing the song of Amadis so sweetly, that it
ministered both mirth and moan unto the Ladies which unto them listened: joy to
the ear, content for the melody, and grief to the mind, in feeling his
passion, that was so grievously pained. But Oriana whom it most of all touched,
took more heed unto the matter then the music, knowing the mischief
whereof she was cause, and the great reason that Amadis had to complain.
Where-upon she was suddenly stricken with so great sorrow, that she went into
a wardroabe, ashamed for the tears that had issued from her eyes in so good a
company, from which she could not abstain. Notwithstanding as she withdrew her
self, Mabila (to cover this fault) said unto Corisanda: So far as I
perceive, Oriana is not well, wherefore I am constrained to leave your company
at this time, and to go help her: nevertheless, if it pleased you, I would
willingly know what was the behauior of him that taught your Gentlewomen the
song, and wherefore he remained in the poor Rock: for no doubt he did then
know what was become of Amadis. Then Corisanda rehearsed unto her in what
sort they did find him, and the talk he had with her: but said she, I did
never see a man more pensive, nor more fair, considering the miseries he
endured. Mabila very suddenly began to suspect that it was Amadis himself, who
being so far from all hope, had chosen such a solitary place, because he would
not be seen of any living wight, and at the same instant she departed
toward Oriana, whom she found weeping bitterly. Unto who^ (with a smiling
countenance) she said. Madame, in seeking after news, sometimes one learneth
more then he thinks upon, witness this which I have understood of
Corisanda. The knight so sad, that is named the Fair Forlorn, in the poor
Rock, is Amadis and no other, who desirous to obey your commandment has in
such sort withdrawn himself, because he would neither be seen of you, not
of any other person: therefore I pray you rejoice, for you shall shortly draw
him hither again. Alas answered Oriana, may it be possible? I would I might
be so fortunate to embrace him in my arms before I die, and believe me Cosen
(said she to Mabila) that if I may once again have him, I will give him such
an occasion to pardon me, that he shall forget all the wrong which I have done
unto him. But then very suddenly like a person doubtful and fearful to lose
that which she loved, she began to make a greater lamentation then before,
crying: Ah my Cosen, have pity upon me, I am in worse case then if I were
dead, unfortunate woman as I am: I have justly lost by my folly, him upon whom
my good, my joy, and my life does wholly depend. How now Madame, said Mabila,
even when most hope is presented unto you, do you then most torment your
self? Assute you upon my faith, if the Gentlewoman of Denmark do not bring
you news of him, that I will find the means to supply her want: being sure,
that it is he which names himself the Fair Forlorn, and no other, and
repose you upon me herein.

CHAP. X.
How the Gentlewoman of Denmark going in search of Amadis, after long travel,
costing along many strange Islands, by chance she arrived in the poor Rock,
where Amadis was, who was called the Fair Forlorn, whom she knew, and how
they returned together toward Oriana.

TEn whole days did the Damsel of Denmark remain with the Queen of
Scotland, not so much for her pleasure, nor for to rest herself from the
storms of the Sea, as for the desire she had to learn some news of Amadis,
in the country wherein she thought assuredly to find him: being assured that
if she should return unto her Mistress, without bringing her some news, that
she could not afterward live one hour, knowing in what anguish she had left
her. Nevertheless, not being able at that instant to take any better course in
her affairs, after she had used all the diligence therein that possibly she
could, she determined to return into Great Britain, so sorrowful as might
be. Then she caused a ship to be ready, wherein she embarked: but the
destinies pitying these two persons, would in this matter make manifest how
much they could perform, in giving worldlings to understand, that no man (how
valiant or discreet soever) can help themselves without their divine aid. For
as soon as the Mariners had weighed their anchors and hoysed their sails,
hoping to set their course for London, the wind and tempest raised such a
storm, that without any sterage at all, the ship was tossed with so great
rage, that the Mariners and all the rest despairing of health, expected no
other burial but in the fishes bellies. And thus they remained two days and
two nights, not knowing where they were, much less what they should do. In
the end, the Sea being appeased, and the storm past, about the break of day
they discovered the poor Rock, where they took landing: and because some of
the Mariners (who knew the place) did tell the Damsel of Denmark, that
Andahod the devout Hermit had there his residence, she determined to go hear
divine service, and to give God thanks for the good that he had done for them
in delivering them from such peril: and without longer stay she began to go
up the Rock, accompanied with Durin and Evil. At the same time the Fair
Forlorn (who by chance had passed that night under the trees, as he was
accustomed) perceived them, and seeing that they came toward him, because he
would not be seen he turned another way, and got to the Hermitage before
them, where he found the Hermit ready to say service. But he told him that
there were people newly arrived, who were coming up the Rock, and therefore
it were good to stay, if he pleased, unto the which the Hermit willingly
agreed. At the same time was the Fair Forlorn so lean, wanne, and so tanned
with the heat of the Sun, that he could hardly be known for Amadis, for his
continual weeping made such furrows in his face, that there was nothing to
be discerned but skin and bone. And as the Gentlewoman and her company entered
into the Chapel, he was upon his knees lifting up his eyes to the heavens
and praying that either by his speedy death his care might be ended, or in
prolonging his days some present comfort might be afforded unto him. Whilst
he was thus praying, the Hermit began his service, during which time the
Fair Forlorn did not once look up, to behold any of them arrived until it
was ended, who casting his eyes upon them, he knew the Damsel of Denmark
and the rest. Therewithal he felt such a motion that (both by reason of his
great weakness, as also by seeing of her that put him in mind of all his
martyrdom) he fell down all along upon the ground, wherefore the Hermit
thinking that he had been dead, cried out: Ay me is he gone? then God have
mercy upon his soul. Saying so, a flood of tears fell from his eyes down
upon his long hoary beard. Then he said unto the Damsel of Denmark: I pray
you Gentlewoman for charity sake, command your Esquires that they may help me
to bear my fellow into his chamber, for so far as I see it shall be the
last good that we can do for him. Whereupon Enil and Durin took him up,
neither of them knowing him. But the Damosel of Denmark demanded of the Hermit
what he was. Truly answered he, it is a knight which lives here in penance.
Trust me said the Damsel, he has chosen a very austere life, and in a very
desert place. He has done it, answered the Hermit, to separate himself from
the vanities of the world. Verily said the Gentlewoman, seeing you assure me
that he is a knight, I will see him before I depart: and if there be any thing
within the ship, which may serve his turn, I will cause it to be left for
him. It shall be well done answered he, but so far as I see, he is so near
his end, that I believe he will ease you of that labor. Herewithall the
Damsel entered into the little chamber where the Fair Forlorn was laid, who
seeing her so near unto him, knew not what he should do: for he thought that
making himself to be known, he should transgress the commandment of his
Oriana, and also if she departed, and he not discovered, he should remain
void of all hope. In the end he concluded that it were less hurtful for him
to die, then his Lady should be displeased, therefore he determined for
resolution not to manifest himself in any sort unto the Damsel of Denmark,
who said unto him. My friend I have been informed by the Hermit that you are a
knight, and because all Gentlewomen are greatly bound unto good knights, for
the benefits and pleasures that they commonly receive at their hands in
defending them, and delivering them from many and great dangers, I had a great
desire before I departed to see you, to give unto you such provisions as are in
my ship, that shall be necessary for your health. Notwithstanding, he answered
her nothing, neither did he any other thing but lament and sigh: and because
that in that little Cell wherein he remained, there was little light, the
Gentlewoman did not know whether he were a dying or no. Whereupon she was ware
of a window, which she opened, by the light whereof she might behold him more
at ease: but all the while that she beheld him, he never cast his eyes off
from her, nevertheless he spoke not one word, but sighed without ceasing,
like unto a wight, whose heart was ouercharged with woe, which moved the
Damosel to exceeding pity. And comforting him in the best sort she could, by
chance she espied a scarre which he had upon his face, with a blow that
Arcalaus the Enchanter had given him, when he rescued Oriana, as has been
recited in the first Book. Wherefore she thought in her mind that without
doubt this was Amadis whom she sought, and at the instant she did know that
he was even the same, and for the same cause she being grealy amassed, cried
out, Alas what do I see? My Lord you are he that has made me have many a weary
journey to find you: this said, she embraced him. Alas my Lord said she, it is
now high time to extend both pity and pardon unto her, who (procured thereunto
by some sinister report, has brought you to this great extreamitie) believe
me, does now justly endure a life worse then death: then did she deliver him
the Letter that Oriana had written unto him. Hold said she, your Lady sends
you this, and commands you by me, that if you be the same Amadis that you
were wont to be, and he who^ she so much loves, that (forgetting all passed
faults) you come unto her to the Castle of Mirefleur, where a full satisfaction
shall be made unto you, for the sorrows and anguishes which you have suffered
for your over fervent love. Herewithall was the Fair Forlorn so greatly
ravished, that it was a long time before he could answer one word, but he
took the Letter which he kissed without ceasing, and afterward put it next
unto his heart, saying* O poor heart so long time passioned, that hardly have
thou been able to resist such a tempest, notwithstanding the abundance of
tears, which thou so continually have distilled, that it has almost brought
thee even to the point of death, receive now this medicine, the which only is
convenient for thy health, and come forth of this darkness, which so long has
blinded thee, taking thy strength again unto thee, to serve her that of her
own free grace causes thee to revive. Then opened he the Letter which
contained

The Letter of Oriana to Amadis.
IF great faults committed by enmity (acknowledged afterward by humility) are
worthy of pardon, what ought those to be which are caused by too much
abundance of love? Nevertheless my loyal friend I will not deny but that I
have deserved exceeding punishment: for I ought to have considered that at such
times when any are in the greatest prosperity and mirth, then forture comes
and overthrows them into sorrow and misery: furthermore I ought to have
remembered me, of your exceeding virtue and honesty, which was never yet found
faulty, and most of all though I had died, yet should I not have forgotten the
great servitude of my pensive heart, which proceeds from no other cause, but
only from the same wherein your own is tied: being certain that so soon as
any flame had been therein quenched, mine had as suddenly been there-withall
acquainted: in such sort as the care which it has had to aswage the mortal
desires thereof, has been the only cause to increase the same. But I have
done amiss, like unto them who being in the top of their felicity, and most
assured of the love of those, by whom they are beloved (not being able to
comprehend in them so much good) become jealous and suspicions, more by their
own imagination, then by any reason, ouershadowing this bright happiness with
tha cloud of impatience, believing the report of some men (it may be wicked
slanderers) of small credit, and vicious, sooner then the witness of their
own conscience, and certain experience. Therefore my constant friend, I
beseech you bartely to receive this Damsel (as being sent from her, who
acknowledges in all humility, the great fault which she has committed against
you) who shall (better then my letter) acquaint you with the extremity of my
life, whereof you ought to have pity, not for any of mine own desert, but for
your own reputation, who are neither accounted cruel, nor desirous of
revenge, where you find repentance and submition, especially seeing that no
penance may proceed from you more rigorous, then that which I my self have
ordained for me, and the which I do bare patiently, hoping that you will
release it, restoring unto me your good favor and my life together, which
thereupon depends.


Herewithall a new joy possessed the mind of the Fair Forlorn, and he quite
banished the continual melancholy which had so long tormented him:
nevertheless, the perplexity wherein Oriana remained, in expecting news from
him, withheld part of pleasure: wherefore he prayed the Damsel of Denmark,
to advise her self what she had to do, for I feel my self, said he, so far
beside my self, that I can think upon no other thing, but upon the new
restitution of my life, which I have received by your means. I am of the
opinion, answered the Damsel, seeing that these in my company do not know
you, to tell them that for pity sake, I will carry you to the Firm Island,
only to see if by changing the air, you may also change your malady: the which
was accordingly performed. Notwith-standing, the Fair Forlorn before his
departure, declared unto the Hermit, how the Gentlewoman had so long sought for
him, that now they were here casually met together, only by mere chance, and
the storm which had brought her unto the poor Rock. And for this cause my
father, said he, I am constrained to leave you and to follow her, assuring you
that so long as I live, I shall never forget the good which you have done for
me, for without your good help, I had perished both body and soul. And seeing
that by your devout praires (as I believe) I have been preserved hitherto, I
most humbly beseech you to have your poor guest still in remembrance. And
moreover to do so much for me, that hereafter you would do your best to
reform the Monestary which I have caused to be builded in the Firme-Island, as
heretofore I have told you: the which the holy man promised to accomplish,
and with the tears in his eyes, blessed the Fair Forlorn, who without longer
stay, went aboard with the Damsel of Denmark. The sails were no sooner
hoised, and the ship lanched out into the main, but they had so stiff a gale
in their poupe, that within a few days after they arrived in a port of great
Britain, he not being as yet known by any other but the Damsel. Then came
they on shore and took their ready way toward Mirefleur, where Oriana
stayed their coming, being well advised to amend the fault that she had made.
And the Damsel in riding together with the Fair Forlorn, said. What joy
will my Lady receive when she shall behold you? believe me that never woman
was in a more desperate case then she, when she understood by Durin, the
sorrow that you had in receiving her Letter: I assure you that she was like
to have died, I do greatly wonder how she has been able until this time to
support the passion, which she yet possesses. And you need not to doubt but
that Mabila and I were greatly troubled, for none of us did know that my
brother was sent unto you, and my Lady had expressly charged him that in no sort
he should tell us thereof, which had likely to have been the cause of worse
mischief then is yet happened. Believe me said the Fair Forlorn, I was never
in greater danger of death, and I do marvel where-upon she framed this
imagination that she has conceived against me, seeing that I never thought to
do any thing which might displease her: and although I should have so far
forgotten my self, yet did I not deserve such a cruel Letter as she did
write unto me. For although I make not those bragges and hipocrisies that a
number can do, yet do not I forget to measure the favors and graces which I
have received at her hands: and were not this thought sown in bad ground, I am
sure she would not be suspicious of the fruit thereof, seeing that both the one
and the other, are wholly dedicated to serve and obey her. Alas when Corisanda
arrived in our Hermitage* I did then verily think that my end was come: the
good Lady bewailed her passion which she endured in loving my brother
Florestan, too vehemently, and I died with displeasure, to be so wrongfully
banished by Oriana. How many pains, what travails, what intolerable
torments, have I suffered in the poor Rock, without receiving consolation
from any living creature, but the good Hermit, who persuaded me to patience?
Alas what hard penance have I endured for her whom I ne-uer offended? believe
me Damsel, I was so exceedingly troubled, that every hour I desired death,
and as often did I fear to lose my life. But I pray you imagine, the despair
wheren I remained, when I showed unto the Gentlewomen of Corisanda, the song
that I made in my greatest tribulation. And as he would have proceeded in
discoursing his ^^lour^, the Damsel of Denmark said unto him, in good ^aith,
so far as I perceive you have both endured much sorrow, one for another: and
therefore you must forget what is past, and amend what is to come.

With these and such like discourses thy arrived near unto a Nunnery, which
was in the midst of the forest, four days journey from London. Do you know
said the Damsel, what I have thought upon: I think it for the best you do
tarry here to rest your self, and I will go unto my Lady, to tell her of your
arrival, which done I will send Durin back again, to let you know what you
are to do. Notwithstanding I think it best that Enil should not yet know who
you are no more then he now does, and that he should tarry here with you to
serve you: but Durin already understands somewhat of the affairs betwixt
Oriana and you, wherefore you need not fear to disclose your self unto him.
Here-upon they called him, and the Damsel of Denmark said unto him. Brother,
you were partly cause of the loss of Amadis, by the Letter which you carried
to him, and yet so far as I perceive you have not hitherto known him, but
do you think it possible that this Hermit may be my Lord Amadis? and
ne-uerthelesse it is he without doubt, but take heed upon your life that he be
not disclosed by you neither to Evil, nor any other: when Durin knew that his
sister said true, ne-uer was man more amazed then he: in the mean while they
entered into the Nunnery, where the Damsel called Enil and said unto him,
Enil I pray thee tarry with this knight until he have a little recovered his
strength, and in the mean season my brother and I will depart about certain
business that we have to do. By Saint Mary answered Enil, I will obey
whatsoever you shall command me. Then they departed, and the Fair Forlorn
remained in the Nunnerie for the occasion above rehearsed.

CHAP. XI.
How Galaor, Florestan, and Agraies departed from the Firme-Island, to go
seek Amadia, of whom they could hear no tidings at all, where-upon they all
returned unto the Court of King Lisuart.

IT has been heretofore told you that Galaor, Florestan, and Agraies
departed from the Firme-Iland, to being the search of Amadis, who was secretly
departed from them. You must now understand that after they had trauayled
thorough many strange countries (wherein they performed many worthy deeds of
arms and perilous adventures, without hearing any news of Amadis) seeiug
that their time approached wherein they promised one another to meet in the
Court of King Lisuart, they determined to return thither: and they all did
meet even upon Saint John's day carely in the morning at an Hermitage hard by
London, according as they had appointed. And the first that came thither, was
Galaor, Agraies next, and shortly after Florestan, accompanied with Gandalin.
Glad were they (...) to see each other in health, but ^orrowfull for the little
good that they had done in this enterprise, as the tears fell from their eyes.
Where-upon Gandalin showing the duty of a good and faithful servant, said
unto them. Believe me Lords, all your tears cannot bring him who^ you desire
to find, except it be by another diligent search, which you may a fresh
undertake. And allthough that you have already done your best endeavor, yet
ought you not to think much of your labor, but seek him better then ever you
did, seeing that you are assured thoroughly what he would have done for every
one of you particularly, if fortune had offered any occasion. Now then if
behooves you to do the like for him, for if you do lose him in this sort, it
shall not only be the loss of the most gentle knight in the world, but of
the neorest kinsman that you have, and over and besides, it will be unto you a
great blemish. Therefore my Lords I beseech you, in performing the duty of a
brother, a friend, and a companion, to begin his search a fresh, without
sparing therein at all either time or toil. This persuasion did Gandalin make,
in weeping so extremely, that it greatly pitied the three knights to behold
him, so as they concluded, after they had been in the Court (if they heard not
news of Amadis) to begin a new pursuit, and to compass the whole world about
till they had found him: and upon this determination (after they had heard
divine service) they departed from the hermitage, and took the way toward
London. But as they approached nere unto the City, they were ware of the King,
who was already in the fields accompanied with many noble men, and valiant
knights: for he celebrated that day with all magnificence, because that upon
the same he was crowned peaceable king of great Britain, which was the
principal occasion that many knights came to serve him. Who beholding Galaor,
and his fellows coming toward them, showed the king thereof, and they in the
mean season were hard at hand. But because Florestan had never before seen
such an assembly, Galaor said unto him. Brother behold the king. Now had they
all three their headpieces off, wherefore some in the company did know them all
forthwith except Flotestan, the King embraced them, demanding how they fared.
Then Florestan alighted to kiss his hands, the which he refused. And because
he was the Gentleman that did most of all resemble Amadis, and that heretofore
he had heard speaking of him, he began to suspect that it was his brother, and
therefore he said unto Galaor, I believe that this is your brother Florestan.
It is he indeed; if it please your Majesty, who has a great desire to do
you service. Ah, said the king, I would Amadis were now here that I might see
you all three together, what, said Galaor, has your grace heard (...) news
of him? No, said the king: but what have you heard? It may please your
Majesty, answered he, we have all three sought him a whole year, yet have we
done no good, but lost our labor, and we did think to have found him here in
your Court: wherefore seeing your grace has certified me to the contrary, I am
in worse hope of his recovery then before. So am not I, said the king, for I
am persuaded the heavens have not endued him with such perfections, to forsake
him after this manner, which makes me to believe, that we shall very shortly
hear some tidings of him. Who^ they had ended their talk, they entered into
the City, where the Queen and the other Ladies were incontinently advertised
of their arrival, wherewith they were as glad as might be, especially Olinda,
the friend to Agraies, who very lately was advertised, that he had passed under
the arch of faithful lovers, and she expected his coming with as great
devotion, as Corisanda did the arrival of Florestan. Then Mahila imagining to
do Oriana a pleasure, ran to advertise her: but she found her withdrawn into
her chamber, where she saw her leaning her head upon one of her hands, and
reading in a book, to whom she said: Madame, will you please to come down to
see Galaor, Agraies and Florestan, who are now newely here arrived? When she
heard her speak nothing of Amadis, a new fear struck at her heart, so that
she knew not what to do, and the tears distilled from her eyes in such
abundance, that her speech failed. Nevertheless, in the end, not being able
to dissemble her grief, she answered Mabila: my cousin and sweet friend, how
would you have me to go see them? in good sooth, I have not my mind so well
settled that I may dissemble or hide that, which in their presence I ought to
do. Moreover mine eyes are ouerswollen with much weeping, and (that which
worse is) it is impossible for to behold those, whom I did never see but in the
company of your cousin, whom I have so highly offended. Heerewithall her heart
was likely to have left her sorrowful body, and she cried. My God how do you
permit me wretched woman to live, being so worthy of death? Ah my dear love,
I do now feel a double grief for your absence, seeing Galaor and the rest to
return without you, whom you loved as dear as your self, who knowing the
injury and wicked act that I have committed against you, shall have just cause
to procure my ruin, whereunto I consent with a good will, seeing that so
unadvisedly I have been the means of your loss. Herewithall she had fallen
down all along, if Mabila who straight espied it, had not stayed her up,
saying unto her: Madame, will you always continue these strange passions? I
know well that in the end, you will publish that to your shame, which we do
most desire should be kept secret. Is this the constancy which you ought to
have, especially seeing that day by day we expect to here good news by the
Damsel of Denmark? Alas, answered she, you speak at your pleasure, is it
possible that she may find him, having the charge but to seek him only in
Scotland, seeing that his brethren have in a manner compassed all the West
without hearing any news at all of him? You abuse your self, said Mabila, it
may be that they had found him, but that he kept himself secret from them,
the which he will never do from your Gentlewoman, knowing that she is privy to
both your loves. And therefore be of good cheer until her return, and then
do as you shall think good: and for this time, let us go if it please you
toward the Queen who demands for you. Well, answered Oriana, I am content
to do what you will. Then she dried her eyes, and went in the Queens
chamber, into the which the three knights were already entered: who seeing her
coming did their duty unto her: at the same time the King held Galaor by the
hand, unto whom he said: behold I pray you, how your good friend Oriana is
impaired, since you did last see her. In good faith, answered Galaor, your
Majesty says true, and I would with all my heart, that I might do her any
pleasure, that might purchase her former health. Herewithall Oriana smiled,
saying unto Galaor. God is the only comforter of all men, so that when his
pleasure is, my health shall be restored, and your losses recovered which no
doubt are great, for so dear a brother Amadis was unto you. And I would that
the travel which you have taken to seek him in far countries, had brought
some fruit, as well for the good of you and yours, as also for the service of
the King my father, unto the which he was wholly adicted. Madame answered
Galaor, I trust that we shall very shortly hear some news of him, because he
is the knight that I have evermore seen most valiantly to resist all
extremities. God grant it said Oriana, but I pray you cause Don Florestan to
come near unto us, that I may more plainly behold him, for I have been
told that he is the knight that does most resemble your brother Amadis.
Whereupon Galaor called him, and he came and saluted Oriana, who rooke him by
the hand, and they three sat down together. Then the Princess imagined that
she did verily behold him, who being absent from her, she had day and night
before her eyes, and therefore she began to blush and change her color. Now
had Mabila in like sort withdrawn her self, together with Olinda, to give a
better occasion unto her brother Agraies more privately to speak unto her: and
therewithal he seeing them in a place so convenient, came and saluted them,
then at their request he sat down between them, in taking Olinda secretly by
the hand. And she who did languish for his love, was the gladdest that might
be, being sure of his constancy, by the proof which he had made passing under
the arch of loyal lovers in the Firme-Island, in recompense whereof she would
willingly have given him better intertainement, if she durst. But the presence
of so many witnesses, took from them not only the familiarity, which otherwise
they would have given the one to the other, but also the facility and liberty
of speech; so that their eyes only served to supply this default, which they
employed therein according to the affections of their passioned hearts. And as
they were in these pleasant terms there was heard from the chamber as if it
had been the voice of some oppressed with grief, wherefore the king would needs
know who it was? It may please your Majesty answered an Esquire it is Gandalin
and the Dwarffe, who no sooner beheld the shield and armor of Amadis, but they
made and yet continue the strangest lamentation that possibly may be. What
said the King, is Gandalin here? He is if it like your Majesty answered
Florestan. It is very near two months since I did find him at the foot of
the hill of Sanguin, as he was seeking his Master, and because I did tell him
that I had already sought him in every place, he was content to come with me.
In good faith said the King, I have always esteemed Gandalin for such a one,
as now he shows himself to be, for I did never see any Esquire to love his
Master better then he does.

When Oriana heard these words, especially how that Gandalin was returned
without Amadis, she was in such a perplexity, that she was likely to have
swouned between Florestan his arms, who not knowing the cause of her sudden
passion, and fearing to affright the King and the company, called Mabila, who
forthwith doubted such a mischance. Wherefore leaving Agraies alone with
Olinda, she came unto Oriana, and caused her secretly to depart into her
chamber, and to lie down upon her bed, where she remained not long, but that
rising up as it were almost beside her self, she said unto Mabila: Cosen, you
know that since our coming to this City, there has passed never a day
wherein we have not received ^ore displeasure. Therefore I am determined to
withdraw my self for a certain time unto my Castle of Mirefleur, for my
heart tells me that in changing the air, I shall also change my afflictions,
and that my troubled spirit shall there find rest. Madame, answered Mabila, I
am of the same opinion, to the end that when the Damsel of Denmark does
return, you may more privately speak with her, and pleasure him that she (I
hope) shall bring with her, the which would be very hard, yea almost impossible
to do in this place. As you love me then said Oriana, let us not carry any
longer: for I am sure the King and Queen will very willingly give us leave.

Now you must understand, that this place of Mirefleur, was a little Castle
most pleasantly seated two leagues from London, built upon the side of a hill,
and compassed upon the one side with the Forest, and upon the other with many
Orchards, full of all sorts of trees and pleasant flowers: moreover it was
environed with many great Fountains, which watered it on all parts. And
because that once the King (being there on hunting with the Queen) seeing that
his daughter took great pleasure in the place, he bestowed it upon her, and
afterward she caused a Nunne^ie to be builded within a bow shot thereof,
whereunto she sometimes went to recreate her self. But that I may not
degresse over far from my first discourse, Oriana according as she had
determined, came and demanded leave of the King and Queen for her departure,
the which was easily granted unto her: and therefore she purposed to depart
the next day very early in the morning. And because that Galaor and his
co^sorrs would in like sort return to make a new search for Amadis, finding
the King at leisure, they said unto him: If it please your Majesty, we were
greatly to be blamed if we should any longer defer the seeking of Amadis,
because my fellows and I have sworn never to rest in any place, before we
have heard of him, therefore it may please your grace to give us leave to
depart to morrow, to do our endeauours. My friends answered the King, I pray
you defer your departure yet a few days longer, in the mean season I will
cause thirty knights to depart from hence, who shall go and begin this voyage:
for I have great need of such knights as you are, for an enterprise which is
happened unto me, the which imports me greatly both in goods and honor, it
is a battle which I have appointed against King Cild^d^^ of Ireland, who is a
strong and mighty Prince. And to let you understand the cause of this war,
Cildadan has married one of the daughters of King Abies, whom Amadis slew in
Gaul. And although time our of mind, the realm of Ireland has ever been
tributarie unto the King of Great Britain: nevertheless to have an occasion
of quarrel this Cildadan refuses the payment thereof, and sends me word
that he will put one hundred of his knights in battle against the like number
of mine, upon this condition, that if he be overcome he will redouble the
tribute which I do demand of him, otherwise he will henceforth remain free
and acquitted, the which I have condiscended unto. So my friends, I do most
earnestly entreat you, even as you love me, not to forsake me in this my
greatest need, knowing assuredly, that my enemies are strong, and determined
to work my displeasure, but by your good help and the right that we have, we
shall easily overcome them, then shall you go seek out Amadis, as you have
determined, and you shall take as many of my knights with you as you please.
When they heard this request which the King did make unto them, there was not
any amongst the^, that was not content to obey him, seeing his necessity so
great, although that thereby the quest of Amadis was delaied: and at the same
instant they promised not to forsake him. During this conference, Mabila sent
to seek Gandalin, for she would speak with him before she went to
Mirefleur, who came unto her: and as soon as he did see her, he could not
possibly refrain from weeping, nor she likewise. After-wards having somewhat
eased their hearts with their exceeding tears, Gandalin spoke first, saying
unto Mabila: Alas Madame, what wrong has Oriana offered, not only to you, ^ut
unto all your lignage together, causing you to lose the best Knight in the
world. Ah, how ungrateful has she showed her self unto you for the service
which you have done unto her? and that which is yet worst of all, she has
wronged him that ne-uer offended her either in word or thought: wherefore I may
well say, that God has very ill bestowed upon her that great beauty and other
excellent gifts wherewith he has endued her, seeing they are governed and
ouer-ruled with so great treason: and yet I am well assured that none has lost
more then she. Gandalin my friend answered Mabila, I pray thee put that thought
forth of thy mind, for thou art overmuch deceived, seeing that all which my
Lady Oriana has done, has been for the grief and displeasure that she
Conceived for one word which was ouer-lightly reported unto her, through which
she has conceived some occasion of i^lou^ie, imagining, that thy master had
forgotten her, and that the affection which he did Bear unto her, was turned
and bestowed upon another. Notwithstanding, she did ne-Uer imagine, that her
letter (written in choler) should have been of such consequence, nor that so
much hurt should have proceeded thereof: but she committed this fault as one
that was carried away with too extreme love, which fault is the more pardonable
in her, for the repentance which she has endured ever since. Ay m^^, said
Gandalin, how was the discreet understanding of my Lady, and you abused at
that time, imagining that my master could only but think to commit so ha^^ous
a fault against her, whom before he should have offended, he would have
suffered himself to be buried quick under the ground? and I pray you Madam,
tell me if it please you, the root of this mischief, and what was that unhappy
word, which so troubled the virtue and spirit of you both, to cause the death
of the most perfect Knight that ever was borne. Ard^^ the Dwarffe, answered
Mabila, (thinking to speak for the advantage of Amadis) was the occasion of
all this mischief. Then she recited unto him at large, the whole discourse of
the three pieces of the sword, as you have heard in the first book. And assure
thee Gandalin, said she, that neither the Damsel of Denmark nor I, were ever
able to drive it from the fantasy of Oriana, but that she was forsaken by him,
so as she still perceiving that she was co^traried by the Damsel of
Denmark and me, did hide her self from us, and unawares to us both she wrote
unto him, that unhappy letter which Durin did bring him, by the which is sprung
the whole sourse of this mischief. Whereof she has since that time, often
enough repented her: for from the first hour that she did hear of Amadis his
loss, she has received so great sorrow and grief, that it is impossible to
receive any more: and nevertheless, we have been in a manner very glad of her
punishment, seeing that she has not yet feared to procure his displeasure,
that of her has so well deserved. All this discourse did Oriana hear, who was
in her wardrobe: and perceiving that they had changed their talk, she came
forth as if she had heard nothing at all. And as she would have spoken unto
Gandalin, the tears distilled from her eyes, and she began to tremble so
extremely, that she fell down all along upon the floor, crying. Gentle
Gandalin, if thou art the same that thou should be unto thy master, revenge
upon me forthwith, the great misery which unjustly he endures. Madam,
answered he, what would you have me to do? I pray thee, said she kill me: and
since I have most injuriously caused his death, thou ought not in reason to
defer the revenge thereof, for I am sure he would have done more for thee.
Saying so her speech failed, and she swouned as though she had bin departed.
But Mabila accustomed to such qualms, did relieve her with a present and fit
remedy, that when she came to her self again, she cried wringing her hands.
Ah Gandalin, thou do ^ee great wrong, thus long to defer my end: I would to
God that thy father were in thy place, I am sure that he would bestir himself
better the^ thou do^ Madame, answered Gandalin, God defend me from such
disloyalty, I should truly play the part of the notablest villain in the
world, if I should but only think such a thought, much more if I should
commit two so great treasons, one against you, and the other against my Lord,
who cannot live one only hour after you. And I would never have thought that
so wicked counsel should have had any place within your spirit, for the
incertainty that you have of my master his death, who could have hardly
endured this wrong which you now in these words have offered him, without
endangering his life, for death comes not but at the will and pleasure of
God: who has not bestowed these favors upon him ever since his life, that for
any injury that you have done unto him, he will permit that he should yet die.
Many other reasons and persuasions did Gandalin use to Oriana which gave great
ease to her ma^irdom, by means where-of she said unto him: Gandalin my friend,
I am determined to morrow morning to depart unto Mirefleur, to expect either
lifn or death, according to the news which the Damsel of Denmark shall
bring unto me. And because I shall remain there some long time, I pray thee
under the color of seeing Mabila, to come and visit us oftentimes, for me
thinks my sorrow decreaseth when I do see thee. Madame, answered Gandalin, I
am ready to obey you in whatsoever it shall please you to command me. This
said, he took his leave of her, and as he departed from thence, he passed by
where the Queen was, who caused him to be called, and then she said unto
him. Gandalin my friend, wherefore did thou forsake thy master? Madame,
answered he, it was sore against my will, and to my great grief. Then he
rehearsed the manner how he departed from the hermitage, and the complaints and
lamentations that he made, especially he declared what his manner and behavior
was, when he found him in the bottom of the valley, which moved the Queen unto
such pity, that she shed luke warm tears thereat. Whereunto Gandalin
taking good heed, said unto her. Madam, your highness has reason to lament
the loss of my Lord, for he was your graces most humble servant. Nay rather
my good friend and protector, answered she, and I would it were the Lords
pleasure, that we might hear such speedy news from him, as might give us
cause to rejoice. And as they talked together, Gandalin cast his eye upon
Florestan, who was talking with Corisanda, whom Gandalin knew no^: but he
thought her to be one of the fairest Ladies that ever he had seen, therefore
he beseeched the Queen to tell him who she was, the which she did, and the
occasion wherefore she was come into great Britain, as also the love which
she did bear unto Florestan; for whose sake she stayed at the Court: if she
do love him, said Gandalin, she may well ^aune that her love is impl^ upon
him, in whom all ^oun^^ remains, and he is such a one, that hardly ^ay his
equal be found in all the world* and moreover Madame, I assure you, that if
your grace did know him so well as ^^ you would not e^^^e ^e any knight more
then he, for he is of a most valiant heart and high resolution. He seems to
be such a one answered the Queen, further-more he is of so good a grace, and
alied ^o so many good knights, that it is impossible but that he should be
such a gentle knight as thou have reported him to be. In tho mean season
Florestan entertained his Lady and Mistress, whom he loved most ^eruently, and
not without a cause (...) for she was passing fair, a rich Lady, and alied to
the noblest houses in all great Britain. Who having remained yet some few
days in the Court after his return; she determined to depart, and taking her
leave of the king and Queen, she took her journey toward her own country. Two
whole days together did Florestan accompany her, who promised her that so
soon as he heard any news of Amadis, and that (...) ba^^aile was past betwixt
the two Kings, Lisuart and Cildadan, (if he remained alive) he would come unto
her to ^arry with her a long time: then taking his leave of her, he returned
unto the Court. But you must understand, that Oriana who had not forgotten her
determination of going to Mir^, departed the next morning with her train,
where she had not long remained, but that she perceived the amendment of her
health, and with the some, her hope increased to see him, whom she so greatly
desired. And because that the king had appointed, that d^g her aboade in that
place of Mire^^eur, the ga^e should continually be kept, and that no body
should enter therei^^: Oriana foreseeing (for the great desire she had that it
should be so) the coming of Amadis, she sent to tell the Abbess, that she
should send unto her the keys of the Nunnerie gardens, to walk thither
sometimes for her recreation, the which she accomplished, which were hard
adjoining to the Castle, but yet enclosed with very high walls. And one day as
Oriana walked there, accompanied only with Mabila, seeing the place favorable
and fit for her purpose, as if Amadis were returned, she began to think of him
in such sort, and upon the pleasure she should receive by his presence, that in
speaking to herself she said: Ah my only hope, my sollace and my entire
refuge, wherefore art thou not beer with me, seeing at this present I have
the means both to give unto thee, and also to receive of thee, such ease and
contentment as we have so oftentimes desired to receive one of another? At the
least I will not depart from hence until I have wholly satisfied the hurt which
by my ouer-great folly I have procured unto you, but I will here attend your
coming. And if Fates or fortune do permit me to behold you here shortly, I
promise you, sweet love, to give you the sure contentment that your fervent
love has promised unto you a long time: but if my misfortune shall be an
hinderance unto your speedy return, your only absence shall be the means to
hasten my end: wherefore I beseech you to take pity on this my weakness, and
to succor me, for I live and yet languish in extreme bitterness. And seeing
that ever hitherto you have been obedient unto me, without contradicting me
in any sort, now the necessity being such, I pray you by that power which you
have given me over you, that you would come to deliver me from death (which I
feel to approach) and ^arry not: otherwise your delay will cause you over late
to repent my unhappy end. In this sort did she speak as if Amadis had been
present, when Mabila brake off her thought, and Oriana changing her talk, said
to her: Cosen, seeing that we have the keys of this place, it were (...) that
Gandalin should make some other like unto them, to the code that your Cosen
being returned, may go and come hither when and as often as he shall please.
It is well advised answered Mabila. And as they were consulting, there was one
of the Porters said to Mabila Madam, Gandalin is without, who desires to
speak with you. (...) him come in, answered Oriana, for he has been brought
up with us a long time: and also he is foster brother unto Amadis, whom God
preserve. God so do said the Porter, it were a great damage that so good and
virtuous a knight should sustain any hurt. Then went he forth to go seek
Gandalin, and in the mean time Oriana said unto Mabila, I pray you see how
your Cosen is beloved and esteemed of all men, yea even of the basest sort of
people, that are in a manner, void of all virtue, it is true answered Mabila.
Then Oriana said, what would you have me do but die? having been the only
cause of the ruin of him who is more worth, then all the men in the world, and
who did better love me, then his own self? Ah accursed be the hour wherein I
was borne, seeing that by my folly and light suspicion, I have done unto him so
great and so much wrong: Madame, answered Mabila, I pray you forget these
imaginations, and only arm you with hope, for all this which you both say and
do, serves in no sort to ease your dolor. Here with all Gandalin entered in,
whom Oriana caused to sit down by her: and after some conference which they
had together, she recited how she had sent the Damsel of Denmark to seek
Amadis: unto whom she had written a Letter containing that which you have
heard, and what words also she had given her in charge to say unto him,
therefore said the Princess, in thy opinion do thou think that he will
pardon me? Madame, answered Gandalin, Me thinks you are little acquainted with
his heart, for I am sure for the least word that is in the letter, he will
tear himself into an hundredth pieces for you, if you do but only command
him: by more likelihood may you imagine whether he will be glad to come see you,
yea or no. And be you assured that seeing the Damosel of Denmark, has
undertaken the charge to find him, that she will sooner accomplish the same,
then all the persons in the world beside: for I do not think (seeing he did
hide himself from me) that it is ever possible for any other but she to find
him out. For this cause Madam, you ought hence forth to live in good hope, and
to rejoice more then ever you did, to the end, that when he returns he may
not find your beauty in such sort decayed. What say thou Gandalin? answered
she laughing, do thou think me now so ugly? Nay rather Madame, what do you
think of your self, that in this sort you do bide you from the sight of all
men. I do it to this end said Oriana, that when thy Master comes if he would
^^ie me for my deformity, I might in this plate stay him as my prisoner. I
would said he, (...) he were here already, and free from that other prison,
wherein heeremaineth for your love. Well said Oriana, we have now other matters
in hand, his Cousin and I have done so much, that we have gotten the keys of
these gardens, by the which at his return, he may come in hither to so us, at
al times and as often as he will, and thou must do so much, to cause two other
keys like these to be made, the which he shall keep. In good faith, said
Gandalin, it is well and wisely advised. Then the Princess delivered him the
keys, and without any longer staying in Mirefleur he returned to London, where
he executed his commission so diligently, that the next morning he came unto
Mabila, unto whom he delivered the counterfeit keys, who showed them straight
unto Oriana, saying unto her: behold already a good beginning, for the
recompencing of the hurt which you procured unto your Amadis. Mine? answered
Oriana, I would to God he were here. I then might well call him mine, whether
he would or no, Go to, go to, let us not come out of Gods blessing into a
warm Sun, said Mabila, but let us see this night if Gandalin have performed
his task well, and whether the keys will open the doors or not. I pray you
let us, said Oriana. And for that present they made an end of their talk,
waiting a convenient time to finish their enterprise: and according to their
appointment, about midnight (when every one were sound asleep) they secretly
rose up, and came down into the Court, it was then in the time of the moons
waining, and for that cause the darkness did bear the more sway: wherefore
Oriana began to be afraid, and said unto Mabila: I pray thee hold me by the
hand, for I am almost dead with fear. No, no, I will defend you well enough,
answered she, am not (...) consin to the most valiant knight in the world? But
although Oriana did tremble, yet could she not refrain from laughter, and
said unto her. Let us go then guarded: for I will hence forth think me safe
being to be guarded by you, who are so valiant in deeds of arms. Seeing that
you know me so well, answered Mabila, let us march on boldly, and you shall
see how I will finish this adventure: wherein if I fail, I swear that for one
whole year, I will neither hang shield about my neck, nor strike one stroke
with the Lance. Here with all they began to laugh so loud, that they might
have bin heard very easily, and at the same instant they came unto the door,
where they tried the first key, which they found maruailous fit, and the second
also, wherefore they opened them without any difficulty, and entered into the
Orchard. Then said Oriana unto Mabila: Cousin all that we have done is to no
end, except somewhat more be done: how may your cousin return when we once
have brought him into the place, considering the height of the walls? I have
already thought upon that, answered she, it shall be very easy for him by the
corner of this wall, against the which we will set by this piece of timber,
and with the same and our help together, he may easily mount up to the top
thereof: but it behooves that the chiefest help come from you, for you only
reap the commodity thereof. We shall see what will happen, said Oriana, and
therefore for this time let us depart, and go to sleep, the which they did.
And as they laid them down in their bed, Mabila embracing Oriana, said unto
her. Madame, I would that the knight for whom you attempt so many fair
enterprises, were now in my place, upon this condition, that I did go to
sleep elsewhere, because I would hear none of your complaints, for the harm
that he might do unto you. Gentle cousin, answered she, if he were here, I
would endure very much before I would complain of it. And so long they
continued this pleasant discourse, that love stinged them so vehemently, as
every amorous Reader may easily imagine what they wanted, to cause them sleep
till the next morning that they went to hear divine service: and at their
return they found that Gandalin was already come from London, whom they led
with them into the garden, where they told him how they had tried the keys,
and what words Mabila had used in the prooning of them. By my faith Madame,
answered he, you do now put me in mind of some injurious speech that I used of
you unto my Lord, thinking thereby to have comforted him, but there with all he
had thought to have taken my head from my shoulders, and shortly after I did
abide sore penance for thus leasing, because that I fell asleep, and when I
awaked, I neither found my bridle nor saddle, for my Master rode away, and had
hidden them of purpose to stay me from following of him. Wherefore seeing that
he was lost, and that he had left me, for the words that I had spoken of you,
I was driven into such a Melancholy, that I had slain my self if I had had a
sword to do it: friend, Gandalin, answered Oriana, thou need not to excuse
him, I know that he loves me without dissimulation, therefore I pray thee put
me no more in remembrance of that mischief, whereof I am the chief cause,
except thou will force my Soul and body to part asunder, for thou know that
I stand between life and death, according to the news that the Damsel of
Denmark shall report unto me.

CHAP. XII.
Hon King Lisuart being set at the Table, there came before him a strange
knight armed at all points, who defied him: the conference that Florestan had
with him, and how Oriana was comforted with the good news that she received
from Amadis.

KIng Lisuart being ready to rise from dinner as Galaor, and Don Florestan were
taking their leave of him, to conduct Corisanda onward of her journey, there
entered into the hall a strange knight armd at al points, except only his
head-peece, and gauntlets. Who kneeled before the King, and delivered unto him
a Letter sealed with five seals, he said unto him. It may please your Majesty
to command this Letter to be read that you may understand the cause of my
coming unto you. Then the king took the Letter and read it, and because it
referred to the knights report, he answered him thus. Friend you may perform
your charge when it shall please you. Hereupon the knight rose up, and said
aloude, King Lesuart I defi^ thee, and all thy allies in the behalf of the
mighty Princes, Famangomad Giant of the burning Lake, Cartadaque his Nephew,
Giant of the invincible Mountain, Mandafabull his brother in Law, Gaint of the
vermillian Tower, Don Quedragant brother to the late deceassed King of Abies of
Ireland, and Arcalaus the enchaunter: who do all send thee word by me, that
they have sworn the death of thee and thine. And the better to accomplish this
their enterprise, they will all come in the aid of king Cildadan, and be of the
number of his hundred knights who will assuredly destory thee. Notwithstanding
if thou will give thy daughter and heir Oriana, unto the fair Madasima,
daughter to the most redoubted Pama^gomad, to serve her for her Gentlewoman,
they will let thee live in peace, and be thy friends, for they will marry her
with the Prince Bafigant, who does well deserve to be Lord, both of thy Land
and Daughter also. Therefore King Lisuart choose thee of these two conditions
the best, either peace, which I advise thee to except, or the most cruel war
that may happen unto thee, having to do with such mighty and redoubted
Princes. When the King had long given ear unto him (to show that he made small
account of such threats) he smiling thereat, answered him. Trust me Knight,
they that gave thee this commission, do think far amiss of me, for I have
all my life time thought a dangerous war, better then a shameful peace,
because I were worthy of great reprehension, both of God and man, being King
over such a mighty nation, if I should now through base cowardice, suffer them
to be afflicted with cruelty. Wherefore return and tell them, that I had
rather desire all the days of my life, that war which they do threaten me
withal, and in the end to die in battle, then to accord unto a peace so much
to my dishonor. And because that I desire to know their mind at large, I will
send a Knight of mine own with you, who shall in like sort declare unto them
my whole intention, and yet I know not if by their laws all Ambassadors or
messengers are as free from danger with them, as they are with Christian
Princes. If it please your Majesty, said the knight, that he shall go with me,
I will be his warrant, and will conduct him unto the burning lake, which is in
the Isle of Mongaza, where they are assembled with the rest of the hundred, to
come and meet with you: assuring you that wheresoever Don Quedragant abides,
he will never suffer wrong to be done unto any. Truly answered the King, he
shows himself therein to be a noble Prince: but tell me, if it please you,
what your name is. Sir, answered he, I am called Landin, Nephew to Don
Quedragant, who am come with him to revenge the death of King Abies of Ireland
mine uncle, nevertheless we could never yet meet with him that did slay
him, and further we do not well know whether he be dead or not. I believe
you well, answered the king, and I would you did certainly know him to be
living, and that he were here, for all the rest would go forward well enough. I
know well, said Landin, wherefore your grace says so, you esteem him to be
the best knight in the world, neuethelesse, I hope to be in the battle which
is prepared for you, and there to perform such worthy deeds of arms, to your
disadvantage, that it may be you will change your opinion. By our Lady,
answered the King, I am sorry for that, I had a great deal rather, that you
had a desire to remain in my service, notwithstanding, this much I tell you,
that there you shall find those that can tell how to answer you well enough.
And you (said the Knight) many other that will pursue you even unto shameful
death. When Florestan heard him speak so boldly, and to the preuidence of
Amadis, his collar was moved therewithal, and he said unto Landin. Knight,
I am a stranger in this Country, and none of the Kings subjects, so that for
any thing which you have said unto him, I have no occasion to answer you,
chiefly because that here are present, so many Knights my betters, over whom
I will not in any sort insult. Nevertheless, seeing that you cannot find
Amadis, which is (as I think) for your great profit, I am ready to fight with
you, and will in his stead defend the quarrel that you have against him. And to
the end that you may the better know me, I am his brother Florestan, who do
offer unto you the combat upon this condition, that if I can overcome, you
shall be bound to give over the quarrel that you have against him, and if you
overcome me, revenge part of your anger on more. Yet thus much by the way, you
must not think it strange that I have been so forward in the matter, for I
have no less cause to sustain his quarrel against you (he being absent) then
you have to maintain that of King Abies, whose nephew you are, being very well
assured that my Lord Amadis is of power sufficient to revenge me, if Fortune
permit you to have the advantage over me. My Lord Florestan answered Landin, so
far as I perceive, you have a desire to fight, but I cannot satisfy you at
this time, being in no sort at mine own disposition, as well for the affairs
which by another I am appointed to discharge, as also for that I did promise
before my departure from those Lords tha^ have called me into their company,
not to enterprise any matter before the Battle, that might hinder me to
assist and do my best endeavor therein: and therefore at this present hold me
excused, until the battle be ended, then I promise you to accept the combat
which you demand, and sooner I cannot intend it. Believe me said Florestan, you
speak like a worthy Knight: for those that have the like charge that you now
have, ought to forget and deny the fulfilling of their own will, to satisfy
those from whom they are sent, otherwise they might be blamed, seeing that
although you should get the victory of this combat, to your honor, yet it
might be, that their be foreslowed through your stay and hinderance, because
they do all repose themselves upon your charge, therefore I am content to
defer it until the time that you require, and because you shall not afterward
fail, behold here is my gage. At the same instant he threw down his glove,
and Landin his Gauntler. Wherefore by their own consen^all was remitted until
the thirtieth day after the battle. Then Landin took his leave of the king,
who delivered unto him a Knight that was called Filipinel to go with him to
desie the Giants as Landin had done him, and because that the Court was
troubled for these unhappy news, the king desiring to make the company m^^^y,
said unto Gal^^r, it is come into my remembrance fair knight to do one thing
princely for you, that will greatly delight you. Then he caused his youngest
daughter L^^nor, with all her Gentlewomen to be called, who were all aparrelled
in one liuerie, each of them having chaplets of ^^ou^^^ upon their heads: Whom
he commanded to dance and sing, as they were accustomed to do oftentimes.
And you my darling (said he to Leonor) begin with the same song that Amadis,
made for the love of you being your Knight, Herewithall the young princess did
sing.

The Song.
Leonor (sweet Rose, all other flowers excelling,
For thee I feel strange thoughts in me rebelling,
I lost my liberty when I did gase,
Upon those lights which set me in a mase,
And of one free, ^m now become a thrall,
Put to such pain, then ser^s^ thy friends withal.
And yet (...) I (...) this pain a pleasure,
(...) for (...) whom I love (...) of (...).
(...) sweet rose, etc.
For thee I feel, etc.
^ little joy in any others ^ight
My heart is thine, thy self my chief delight.
But yet I see the more that I doc love,
More smart I feel, more pain, more grief I prove.
Well let love rage, though he be angry ever,
(...) take my loss for gain, though I gain never.
Leonor sweet rose, etc.
And though to you I manifest my woes,
My martyrdom, my smart another knows:
One unto whom, I secretly inuoke,
Who is the cause, of this my fire, my smoke.
She has a salve to cure my endless grief,
And only she may yield me some relief.
Leonor sweet rose, all other flowers excelling,
For thee I feel strange thoughts in ^e rebelling.
And seeing that it happens out so conveniently, I will tell you upon what
occasion Amadis made this song. One day the Queen being talking with Oaiana,
Mabila and Olinda (Amadis coming into her chamber) she called her daughter
Leonor, and said unto her: that she should Princely go, and request Amadis to
be her knight, and that from thenceforth he should serve her, without bearing
affection to any other but to her. The little Princess thinking that her
mother did speak in good earnest, did rise up, and with a good grace came and
made this request unto Amadis, whereupon all the Ladies and Gentlewomen began
to laugh. But Amadis taking her up in his arms, said unto her. My little Lady,
if you will have me to be your Knight, bestow some pretty favor upon me in
token that you are my Mistress, and that I am your servant. I have nothing,
answered she, but this carquent of gold that I were upon my head. The which
she suddenly untied and gave it unto him, wherewithal every one again began
to laugh, seeing how ^^rely she believed the words of Amadis, who for her sake
did make this song. And the same did Leonor and her playfellowes sing, as you
have heard, the which did greatly delight all the company: which being ended,
they made a lowly obeisance, and returned unto the place where the Queen sat.
Then the king took Galaor, Florestan and Agraies apart, who were desiring
leave of his Mastistie to accompany Corisanda some part of her way, and he said
unto them: My friends you are the three persons of the world, upon whom I do
chiefly rely. You know the battle that I have agreed unto with King Cildadan,
which is to be performed in the first week of the month of August: wherein
we shall find against us many strong Giants, who are bloody people, and full
of cruelty. Wherefore I pray you not ^o undertake henceforth any matter or
adventure, that may let you from keeping of me company: otherwise you shall
do mea most great displeasure, because that by your aid I trust in God, that
the pride and presumption of mine enemies shall be abated, and we shall
remain conquerours, and they quite overthrown and discomfited.

Most royal King, answered Galaor, there is no need to use either prayer or
commandment unto us, to persuade us to be in a place so famous: for although
we had not at all any such intention as we have to serve your Majesty, yet
the desire to fight against such personages, should nevertheless not be
diminished in us, seeing that it is the only duty of all good Knights, to
hazard themselves in such enterprises, where they may gain honor and
reputation. Therefore your Majesty may be assured that our return hither shall
be very shortly, and in the mean season you may communicate this matter unto
the rest of your knights, to encourage and to confirm them in the same good
will that now they have to serve your Majesty, the which counsel the King
liked well of, and there-withall he gave them leave to depart. Thus they went
together in the conduct of Corisanda, as I have already recited. Now had
Gandalin heard all this talk that had passed, and seen how the three knights
were departed, whereupon he went to Mirefluer, to declare the same unto
Oriana and Mabila, who were very much disquieted with this new defiance that
the Giants had sent unto the King. Nevertheless Oriana said unto Gandalin: In
good sooth, seeing that Corisanda now has Florestan so much at her
commandment, considering the vehement love that she does bear unto him, me
thinks she should be very glad thereof, and long may she so continue, for
she is a most sober, and wise, and virtuous Lady, and such a one that deserves
it well. Saying so she began to weep, and with a deep sigh, she said. Ah
fortune why do thou not yet permit me to behold my Lord Amadis, one only
day? I beseech thee either to grant me this good, or to spare my life no
longer, because my soul does loath it. Herewithall she became so sad, that it
greatly pitied Gandalin to behold her, who notwithstanding dissembling his
grief, faigning not to be content with this talk, answered her: Madame you
must not be offended if henceforth I come no more in your presence: for I did
always hope that my Lord Amadis would have returned hither again very
shortly, and now hearing you in these terms. I am quite deprived of this
benefit. I pray thee good friend Gandalin said she, be not angry. I swear to
thee by my faith, that if I could look with a merrier countenance, I would
willingly dot it but I cannot otherwise do: for my heart yet remaining in
continual heaviness, will in no sort permit me, and were it not for the
consolation which thou have given me, I assure thee that I should not have the
power to stand upon my feet, so much do I feel my self grieved with this
war that my father has undertaken, the success whereof I do exceedingly
fear, by reason of thy Master his absence. Madame answered Gandalin, (...)
shall not now be any where so secret, but that he shall have news thereof;
and I am very sure that notwithstanding all the disgraces and disfavors that
you have done unto him, by discharging him from your presence, yet will he not
fail to be there, knowing that it is a thing of great importance both unto the
King and you: not that he will presume to come before you, but he will make
himself known in place where he may do you service, in hope that you will
pardon him for the fault that he never did, nor ever thought to do. God grant
said Oriana, that thy words prove true. And as they were in these discourses,
there came a Gentlewoman who told Oriana that the Damosel of Denmark was
arrived, and she has brought unto you many fair presents. Then fear and hope
seized upon the Princess heart, in such sort, that without power to answer one
word, she began to tremble, the which Mabila perceiving, she answered the
Gentlewoman: friend will her to come in hither all alone. The gentlewoman
returned to perform her charge, but in the mean time believe me, neither
Mabila nor Gandalin knew how to behave themselves, being either hopeless of
the good, or fearful of the bad news that the Damsel of Denmark might
bring. Who shortly after entered in with the countenance of a person more
pleasant then pensive: and after her duty done unto Oriana, she presented her
with a Letter from Amadis, saying unto her: Madame, my Lord Amadis recommendeth
him must humbly unto your good grace, whom I have found, as this Letter
(written with his own hand) will assure you. Oriana received the Letter, and
as she thought to have opened it, her spirit was so ravished with exceeding
joy, as all the parts of her body remained without any power, or ability once
to move or stir, because they would supply no other office, but to
participate in this most happy news: so that Oriana therewithal fell down in
the place where she stood. But very suddenly she was raised up again, and she
opened the Letter, wherein she found the ring that she sent unto Amadis by
Gandalin, at the same time that he fought with Dardan at Winsore, which she
presently knew. Wherefore in kissing it she said so loud that she might easily
be heard: O ring divinely kept, blessed be he, that ever did make thee so
fortunate, giving from hand to hand all the pleasure that may be desired, then
put she it upon her finger, and began to read the Letter. And when she
beheld the sweet words that Amadis used, and the the thanks that he did yield
unto her, for the careful remembrance that she had of him, by the which he was
raised from death to life, there was never any woman more joyful, and casting
her eyes up to heaven, she said: O God of heaven and earth, creator of all
things, praised be thy holy name, because thou have vouchsafed in mercy to
look upon me, by the diligence of this Gentlewoman. Herewithall she
withdrew her self apart and took the Damsel of Denmark by the hand, saying
unto her: I pray you fair Lady tell me how you did find him, how long you have
bin together, and the place where you have left him. By my faith Madam answered
the Damsel, after my departure from you, I arrived in Scotland, where I
remained certain days without hearing any news of him, by means whereof
(being as it were void of hope to satisfy your desire) I took shipping
intending to return unto you: but we had so sore a tempest upon the Sea, that
mauger all our Mariners, the ship was driven unto the poor Rock, where my
Lord Amadis the^ remained. Whom at the first fight we did not know, for he was
changed in name, habit, and countenance, and he was likely to have died in
our presence, when in a manner he was not succored by any of us.
Notwithstanding in the end I was ware of a wound that he had upon the face, the
which was heretofore given unto him by Arcalaus, whereby I still suspected that
it should be he, and in the end he manifested himself unto me. And continuing
her discourse, she recited wholly all that which you have heard in the
beginning of this History. Then love and pity assailed the heart of the
Princess, in so strange a manner, that she entreared the Gentlewoman to speak
no more of the troubles of Amadis: but only to tell her how he did at that
present. Madame, answered she, I have left him in the Forest, staying to
hear some news from you. And how may we secretly send unto him, said
Oriana: for if you return unto him so suddenly, there might some matter be
suspected. For the same occasion, answered the damosel, I have brought with me
Durin, whom I will send back when it shall please you, faining that I have
forgot part of the presents that I brought unto Mabila. It is very well
advised, said the Princess. Afterward she declared unto her, how Corisanda
gave unto them the first hope that Amadis was not dead, and that he it was
that named himself the Fair Forlorn. It is true, answered the Damsel, and
he is yet so called, neither is he determined to change his name, until he
have first seen you, except you command him the contrary. That shall then be
very shortly, said Oriana, for his cousin and I have taken such order, that he
may come hither when it shall please him and not be perceived by any body. We
have the key of this garden (by the which the way shall be easy and secret for
him) the which we will send unto him by Durin, therefore call him unto us, to
tell him what Amadis must do at his hither arrival. Hereupon Durin came unto
them, and Oriana showing him the garden, said unto him. Durin do thou see
this orchard, Amadis must enter into it over the corner of this wall, and when
he is once in, here are the keys of the door through which he must come unto
us, the which thou shall carry unto him, and shall further advertise him,
whatsoever thy sister shall tell thee in my behalf. Which said, she departed
leaving them together, and as soon as she was entered into a great Hall, she
forthwith sent unto the Damsel, willing her to bring those presents which the
Scottish Queen had sent unto her and Mabila, the which she did. But as she
unfolded the cloh wherein they were wrapped, (as if she had suddenly
bethought her self) she cried. Alas Madam, I have left the tokens that were
sent unto Mabila, there as we did lie the last night, and if Durin do not
speedily return, they may be in dangar to be lost: now Durin knew the matter
well enough, and therefore he made as though he were unwilling, and on the
other side, Mabila faining to be very angry, said unto him: Durin my good
friend, will you do me this pleasure, to return and fetch that which your
sister has forgotten? Madam, answered he, I will do whatsoever you shall
please, but by my faith, I could be very well content, that it would please
you to appoint some other to do it, because of the toil that we have endured
in our wearisome journey. My friend, said she, I pray thee do so much for me,
and be thou sure that I will reward thee: in good sooth, said Oriana, it were
great reason so to do, I understand you well enough, answered Durin, although
you mock me. At this word they all began to laugh, seeing the counterfeit
disco^tentment that he made to return back. Well go to, said he, seeing that
I must bear this ^^out with me, I will tomorrow morning depart. The^ they all
retired, and Durin went to London to see Gandalin, unto whom he declared all
that you have heard: afterward he departed to return unto the Abbie where
Amadis remained expecting news from Oriana. Nevertheless before he departed,
Gandalin willed him to tell Evil his Cosen, that he should endeavor himself
to serve the fair Forlorn diligently, and that whilst he remained with him,
he should likewise enquire after some news of Amadis: and this message did
Gandalin send unto him, to cause him the less to suspect him in whose service
he remained, that Amadis might the more secretly bring his matter to pass.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Fair Forlorn sent Enil his Esquire unto London to cause a new armor
to be made for him, and what adventure chanced unto him in going to Mirefleur.

But because we will not too much digress from that which happened unto the
Fair Forlorn, you shall understand, that after he had made some small stay in
the Monestarie where he was left to wait for news from Oriana, he found
himself very able to put on armor: and therefore he sent Enil to buy him
horse and armor with a shield of Sinople, set full of golden Lions. Who
returned unto him the self same day that Durin arrived at the Abbie, where he
was well entertained by the Fair Forlorn, who in the presence of Enil
demanded of him, where he had left the Damosel of Denmark his sister: my Lord
answered he, at her departure from you she forgot behind her certain
presents, that the Queen of Scotland did send unto my Lady Mabila, the which I
do come to seek. Then turning unto Enil he said, Enil your Cosen Gandalin
recommendeth him very heartily unto you. Which Gandalin answered the Fair
Forlorn. My Lord said Enil, he is a Cosen of mine, that long time has served
a Knight called Amadis of Gaul.

Then the Fair Forlorn without further enquiring took Durin apart, who did
wholly recite unto him all that which he was commanded to tell him on the
behalf of Oriana, and how she stayed for him at Mirefleur, being very well
determined to give him kind entertainment: likewise what order was taken for
his secret coming and going, when and as often as he pleased, and also how
his brethren Galaor, Florestan, and Agraies his Cosen, remained at the Court,
expecting the battle that is to be performed very shortly, between King
Lisuart, and Cildadan of Ireland, especially the challenge of a combat that
Famongomad and the other Giants and knights had sent unto the King, if he
would not give Oriana to be a waiting maid unto Madasima, and to be married
shortly after to Basigant the eldest son to the said Famongomad. When the
Fair Forlorn heard this discourse, his heart was ready to break with extreme
rage: purposing with himself, that the first enterprise that he would
undertake (after he had seen his Lady) should be to find out Famongomad, and
to fight with him, for the injury that he would do unto Oriana. After that
Durin had thoroughly advertised him of all that he had in charge, he took
leave of him to return unto Mirefleur, leaving him in the Abbie, fully
determined from thenceforth to abate the pride of these Giants: being glad
notwithstanding in that he had recovered the good favor and grace of Oriana,
on whom his life and honor did wholly depend. Then the next morning before the
break of day, he armed him with the same Armor that Enil had brought, and
mounting on horseback, he took the way toward Mirefleur: but he had not
ridden far, (thinking upon the pleasure that was promised unto him, and
knowing how near he was unto it) when making a carreer he began to curuet
and manage his horse so gallantly, that Enil was greatly amazed thereat,
thinking that he had never been other then an Hermit, and he said unto him:
my Lord, until I may judge of the effect and force of your courage, I may very
well say that I did never see a more expert knight, nor one that can do more
with a horse then you. Enil, answered the Fair Forlorn, it is the valiant
hearts of men, not their outward show, that does accomplish haughty deeds and
hardy enterprises, therefore thou having said thy mind by my countenance,
may judge hereafter of my courage according as I shall deserve, thou and
discern.

Thus rode the Fair Forlorn all the day long discoursing with Enil of diverse
pleasant matters, for those gloomy clouds which in times past had
ouer-shadowed his thoughts, were now ouer-blowne, and the desire to behold her
by whom he lived, shined only in his mind. But when it grew to be somewhat
late, he lodged in the house of an ancient knight, that both gave him kind
entertaynement and great cheer: ne-uerthelesse the next morning he departed.
And because he would not be known at any time, at his departure from his
lodging he put his helmet upon his head, ne-uer putting it off but when he
took his rest, and he did ride from that time forth seven days together
without finding any adventure, until upon the eight day following, he arrived
at the foot of a mountain, and he did see coming toward him along a path,
a knight mounted upon a mighty courser, who seemed so great and so strongly
made that he was almost like a Giant. Who coming somewhat near, he called
unto the Fair Forlorn: knight I forbid you to pass this way, except you do
first tell me that which I desire to know. There-withall the Fair Forlorn
did presently know him (although he had never seen him before) for the
shield which he did bear had in a field Azure three flowers Or, the like
whereof he remembered that he had seen in the Firme-Island, and that he was Don
Quedragant. For the which he was very much displeased, as well because he had
not determined to fight, until he had first found out Famongomad, as also
because he would not in any sort disobey the commandment that Oriana had sent
unto him by Durin: and he greatly feared such a let, knowing that Quedragant
was one of the best knights in the world: nevertheless he made himself ready
for the Ioust. The which Enil perceiving, he said unto him: my Lord I believe
that you will combat this Devil. He is no Devil, answered the Fair
Forlorn, but one of the strongest knights I know, of whom I have heretofore
heard great commendation. Then Quedragant drew near and said unto him:
Knight, you must tell me whether you belong unto King Lisuart or not. Why so
said the Fair Forlorn. Because said he, that I am mortal enemy to him and
all his, and when I shall either know or meet with any of the^, I will cause
them to die an evil death if I may.

The Fair Forlorn was so greatly enflamed with rage to hear him thus to
menace, especially the King and all his Knights, that he answered Quedragant:
You then are one of them that have defied that good King? I am even the same
said he, that will do all the injury that possibly may be done both to him
and his. And how are you called? answered the Fair Forlorn. Don Quedragant
said he. Trust me Don Quedragant answered the Fair Forlorn, although you are
a valiant Knight and descended of a Royal linnage, yet have you enterprised an
exceeding great folly, in defying thus the most mighty and best King in the
world: for every discreet knight ought to attempt no more then he may well
effect, seeing that they who do once pass the bonds of their ability, and
power, are to be accounted more haire-braind then hardy, and more
vainglorious then valiant, the which is no better then folly. As for me I am
no subject but rather a stranger unto the King against whom your quarrel is:
yet have I always had a desire to do him what service I could, and therefore
you may account me of the number of those whom you do defy, and combat with
me if you list, otherwise follow on your way. Believe me said Quedragant, I
think the little experience you have of me, makes you to utter these braues:
notwithstanding I would very willingly know your name. I am called answered
he, the Fair Forlorn: but I think for the small renown that yet is blased
abroad of me, you do now know me as well as you did before. And although I
am a stranger, yet have I heard that you do seek Amadis of Gaul:
nevertheless I believe it were most for your profit, not to meet with him,
considering but what I have heard reported of him. What said Quedragant, do
thou think better of him (unto whom I do wish so much hurt) then of me?
Trust me thou shall repent it, therefore defend thee if thy heart will suffer
thee. Although (answered the Fair Forlorn) that against another I would have
bin content for this time to have excused me from the combat, yet will I very
gladly undertake it against you, for the threatenings and presumptions that you
do offer unto me.

This said, they ran one against the other with so great force that the horse
of the Fair Forlorn was likely to have kissed the ground with his nose, and
himself was wounded in the right breast with the shiuer of a Lance, and Don
Quedragant unhorsed and wounded between the ribs. Yet he rose up again
lightly, and drew his sword running against the Fair Forlorn, whom he took
upon a sudden whilst that he was busy in mending and setting his helmet
right: and before that he was aware, Quedragant slew his horse under him, but
the Fair Forlorn feeling him to founder, alighted down. Then he being
exceedingly vexed for so vilde a part, he said unto Quedragant: knight, it
seems that you have never done any valiant deeds of arms, in that you have
so villainously slain my horse, it might have sufficed you to have wreaked
your anger on me, and not upon a poor beast. Nevertheless I am in good hope
that the wrong which you have done both to him and me shall redound upon your
own head. Don Quedragant answered him not one word, but covering him with his
shield, he came and laid at the Fair Forlorn, who in a short time made him
feel how well he could repay whatsoever was lent unto him: and to hear them
fight, one would have judged that more then ten knights had been fighting
together. Then joined they so close that they left their weapons, and fell to
wrestling, endeavoring to throw one another down, but that was impossible for
them: wherefore they let go their hold, and without any breathing, they
betook them again to their blades, and laid load one upon the other so
courageously, that their Esquires beholding that cruel combat, did think it
impossible but that they should both twain die by the hands of each other.

And thus they continued from three of the clock in the afternoon until it
grew toward night, without either resting them or speaking together: but
even at the same instant Don Quedragant was so weary and faint, that his heart
failed him, and he fell down in this place. By means where-of the Fair
Forlorn stepped unto him, and as he pulled off his helm to strike off his
head, Quedragant taking air began to breath: the which the Fair Forlorn
perceiving (although he was ready to perform with his arm, the revenge that
he meant to take of his enemy) he stayed his blow, the sword being ready to
lop off any limme upon the which falling down it might chance to light: and
he said unto Quedragant, it is hight time for thee to think upon the health
of thy soul, for thou art but a dead man. When Quedragant perceived that he
was in such danger, he was so astonished that he answered unto the Fair
Forlorn, Alas if I must die, yet at the least let me first be confessed.

If thou will live any longer said the Fair Forlorn, yield thy self
vanquished, and promise to perform all that I shall command thee. I will
willingly fulfill what-soeuer shall please you, answered Don Quedragant,
although I am not vanquished: for he is not overcome that without showing one
jot of cowardice, has defended his quarrel even with the loss of his breath,
and until that he did fall at his enemies feet: but he only is overcome, that
for want of heart, fears to do what he may. Truly said the Fair Forlorn
you speak the very truth, and I am very glad that I have learned so much of
you. Go to, swear to me the^ to obey my commandment. The which Quedragant
did. But the Fair Forlorn called his Esquires to witness, and then said: I
will that at your departure from hence, you go unto the Court of king Lisuart,
from whence you shall not depart, until the same Amadis (that you seek be
there arrived. Then you shall yield your self unto his mercy, pardoning him
for the death of your brother King Abies of Ireland, for that as I have heard,
they both of their own free will challenged each other, and had Combat
together, so as this revenge ought not to be pursued. Moreover I will that you
give over the challenge that you have made against the King, and those that
serve him, without bearing arms hereafter against any one of them. All which
conditions Quedragant promised to perform, although it was to his great
grief. Then he commanded his Esquires to prepare a litter for him, to carry
him unto London, according to his promise. In like sort the Fair Forlorn
having seized upon the horse of Quedragant, in stead of his own that was dead,
delivered his shield unto Enil, and followed on his way: upon the which he
beheld four young Gentlewomen that were flying with a Marlin, who had both
seen the Combat, and heard all the talk of the two Knights: and for the same
cause, they spoke unto the Fair Forlorn, earnestly entreating to come and
lodge in their Castle, where he should be entertained with all the honor that
might be devised, for King Lisuart his sake, unto whose service he had showed
himself so affectionate. The which offer of theirs he refused not, for he
was weary with the great trauail he had sustained all the day. And as soon as he
was come into his lodging, they themselves unarmed him, to see if he were in
any sort dangerously wounded: but he had no other hurt than that upon his
breast, which was a matter of nothing. Three whole days together did the Fair
Forlorn tarry there, and then departed, riding all day long without finding
any adventure: and the night following he lodged in a little Inn that stood on
the way, from whence he departed the next morning very early, and about midday
he came unto the top of a small hill, from whence he might behold the city of
London, and the castle of Mireflear, where his Lady Oriana remained.

Heerewithall he was surprised with exceeding joy: nevertheless, he fained as
though he knew not the Country where he remained, and demanded of Enil if he
did know it. Yea very well, my Lord, answered Enil, behold yonder is the city
of London where King Lisuart at this present remains. In faith, said the
Fair Forlorn, I would be very sorty that either he or any other should know
me, until my deeds deserve it, and that by my deeds of Arms I might be
thought worthy to be in such an assembly. Therefore go thou to see the Esquire
Gandalin, from whom Durin did of late bring the commendations: and see that
thou do wisely enquire what every one says of me, as lso when the battle
of King Cildadan shall be performed. What? answered Enil, shall I leave you all
alone? Care not thou for that, said he, I have been many times accustomed to
go in that sort: yet before that thou do depart, let us espy together a fit
place where thou may find me at thy return. Then they rode on a little
further, when upon a sudden they beheld close by the fide of a river two
pauillions armed, and in the midst of them a most fair tent. Before the which
were many knights and Ladies sporting, and ten other knights armed for their
guard: and there was ne-uer a pauillion that had not five shields hanged up,
and as many Lances standing before it. Here-withall the Fair Forlorn fearing
to be disturbed of his enterprise, would avoid the combat and took his way
upon the left hand. The which the knights perceiving, called unto him, saying,
that he must needs give one stroke with the Lance for the love of the Ladies.
But he answered them that at that instant he had no desire the reunto. For
said he, you are fresh and many, and I alone, and very weary. Believe me said
one of them, I think rather that you fear to lose your horse. And why should
I lose him said the Fair Forlorn. Because said the knight, he must have him
that does throw you down, and I am sure that your loss were more certain
then the gain that you should get upon us. Seeing it is so, answered he, I
had rather depart, then come into any such danger, which said, he passed on.
Truly said the knights, in our judgments your arms are defended more with
fair words then valiant deeds, so that they may ever be sound enough to
place over your Tomb when you are dead, yea although you should live one
hundred years and more. You may think of me what you please answered the
Fair Forlorn, yet cannot that in any sort deminish my reputation. I would it
were your pleasure, said one that stepped somewhat before his fellows, that
you would break only one staff with me, I would be accounted a traitor, or
not in one whole year to mount upon a horse, if you departed not by and by to
seek your lodging without yours. Sir answered he, it is that which I do
fear, and which caused me to turue out of the highway. At this they all began
to laugh, and to scoff him saying, behold the valiant champion, that spares
himself against a battle: yet for all this the Fair Forlorn made no
account, but followed on his way until he came unto a river side, but as he
would have passed over, he heard a voice that cried: stay knight, stay. Then he
turned his head and looked back to see who it was, and perceived a
Gentlewoman, in very good order mounted upon a Palfrey coming toward him,
who at her arrival said unto him, Leonor daughter to King Lisuart, together
with her Gentlewomen, do all desire you to maintain the Iousts against these
knights, and to show that you will do somethign for the Jove of Ladies. How?
answered he, the daughter of the King, is she there? I truly answered the
Gentlewoman. Believe me said the Fair Forlorn, I should be very sorry to have
a quarrel with any of her knights, for sooner would I do them service for the
honor of so fair a Lady. Notwithstanding seeing that it is her pleasure that
I should otherwise do, I am content: upon this condition, that they require no
more then the Ioust only. Hereupon he took his shield, and Lance, and rode
straight unto the pauillions, and the Gentlewoman rode before to advertise the
knights thereof. Wherefore it was not long before that he who first of all had
threatened the Fair Forlorn that he would make him to lose his horse, offered
himself to run the first course, whom he presently did know, for he did very
well marked him, when he gybed at him, and he was very glad that he had so good
an occasion to be revenged. Therefore they couched one against the other,
setting spurs unto their horses, meeting with so great an encounter that the
knight broke his staff to shiuers, and the Fair Forlorn hit him so rudely,
that he ouerthrewe him to the ground, and he brake one of his thighs with
three of his ribs, with the grief whereof he remained quite astonished. In
the mean season Enil ran to take his horse, and the Fair Forlorn turned unto
him that he had ouerthrown to whom he said, Knight if you keep your word you
must not in one whole year come upon any horseback, the which you did promise
if you could not win mine. So saying, he heard that another knight cried unto
him: knight keep thee from me. Wherefore he left the other, and putting his
Lance in the rest, he clapped his spurs to his horse, and ran on so rightly
against him that had challenged him, that he unhorsed him even as he had done
the first, and as much did he unto the third and fourth, before his Lance did
break: whose horses he caused to be taken, and tied unto a tree. Then he would
have bin gone, when Enil (who had seen that another knight did make him ready)
said unto him, Sir you have not yet done, behold the fifth which which is
coming toward you. Then the Fair Forlorn turned his head, and did see a
knight coming unto him who brought four Lances, who being come said unto
him. Sir knight my Lady Leonor having very well perceived the valor that you
have showed against her knights, and knowing that your Lance is broken, she
sends you these four, and she prays you that so long as they will last,
not to spare them against the rest that may come to revenge their companions. I
most humbly thank that good Kings daughter answered he, and I pray you to tell
her grace, that for the honor of her, I will so long as I live do what she
shall be pleased to command me: but I would neither stay, nor come one step
forwards for any of these knights that remain, so over proud have I found them
in constrayning me to fight against my will, when I would have passed along on
my way.

Herewithall he took one of the Lances when very suddenly he beheld the fifth
knight ready to make his course against him: werefore he presently pulled
down his visor and couching his staff he ran against him, and he did hit
him with so great force that he unhorsed him, as also all the rest, not
breaking his Lance, but only upon the last who behaved himself better then
any of the others, for before the Fair Forlor^ could overthrow him, he made
two Lances fly to shiuers, but at the third time he made him to lose his
stirrops, and he fell to the earth. And because he kept his seat better then
any of his fellows, I will tell you who it was: his name was Nicoran de Pont
Craintif, who in those days was one of the best runners with a Lance in all
the Realm of great Britain. After that the Fair Forlorn had thus
overthrown them all, he sent their horses unto the Princess Leonor, praying
her to advertise her knights that hereafter they should be more courteous unto
those that pass by the way, or else that they should learn to sit faster on
horbacke then they had done: for they might chance to meet with such a knight
that would make them go on foot as they deserved. This message did make the
knights so much ashamed, that they answered not one word: but they were greatly
abashed that they were all unhorsed by him, whom they so little esteemed,
neither could they once imagine what he should be: for his arms were yet
unknown. And Nicoran said, believe me if Amadis were living, I would judge
that it was he, and I know not any other that would so have parted from us. It
is not he answered Galasa, for he would never have run against us that are
his friends. Did you not see said the other, how he also refused the ioust?
Assure you it is he and no other. I would it were said Giontes, King Lisuart
his Nephew, our shame should then be the less: but whosoever he be, God
shield him from harm. The devil go with him answered Lasamor, he has broken
my thigh, and my ribs: yet was I the cause thereof, being the only procurer
of mine own hurt, and the first that began the combare. In this sort did the
Fair forlorn escape from them, and went forward on his way, very joyful for
his good fortune, having yet one of the four Lances whole in his hand. Now
was it exceeding hot, and he was very dry: and therefore beholding an Hermitage
a far off, he took his way thither, as well to give God thanks for his
victory, as also to drink, if there were any to be had: and when he came
unto the gate thereof he found three Gentlewomens Palfrayes sadled and bridled,
the which two Squires did hold. Then he alighted and entered in, where he
did see no body. Wherefore after that he had ended his prayers he came forth
again, and he did see the three Gentlewomen, who were refreshing themselves
by the side of a very shady fountain, toward whom he went, and coming unto
them he saluted them. They demanded if he were any of the knights of King
Lisuart. Gentlewoman answered he, I would I were worthy to deserve so good
company: but I pray you tell me which way are you going at your departure from
hence. The right way to Mirefleur said the Gentlewomen, where we shall find
our Aunt (who is Abbess of the Monestary there) and my Lady Oriana King
Lisuart his daughter. And because the weather is hot as you see, we are
constrained to stay here in the cool, and it were not amiss if you did as we
do. Seeing you are so pleased answered he, I am content to bear you company:
for me thinks this fountain is a very fit place for one to rest in, but do
you know how it is called? No said they: nevertheless there is another yet
more fair in the bottom of this valley, which is called the fountain of
three channels. Herewithall they showed him the place, although that he did
know it better then they, for many times he had there been a hunting, and he
had already determined that the same should be the place where Enil should
find him at his return from London. And as they were in this sort
discoursing together, they perceived upon the same way a cart which was drawn
with twelve horses and guided by two Dwarffes, within the which were many armed
knights inchained, their shields were hanged all along the sides thereof, and
amongst them were Ladies and Gentlewomen that cried out, and wept most
pitifully: before whom mar^hed a Giant armed with plates of fine steel, having
upon his head a maruelious bright shining helm. But he seemed to be so
great, that it would have feared any man to behold him, and he rode upon a
mighty black horse, holding in his right hand a Bore-speare, the head whereof
was more then a cubit in length, and there followed (behind the cart) another
Giant far more monstrous then the first, of whom the Damsels of the
fountain were so much afraid, as they fled to hide them amongst the bushes. At
the same instant the Giant which marched before (seeing how the Ladies that
were in the cart did tear the hairs from their heads, for it seemed by their
furious behauiours, that they very willingly would have procured their own
death) said unto the Dwarffes, If you cause not these girls to hold their
peace, by Jove you villains, I will make a thousand pieces of your entrails,
for I would have them charily kept, to sacrifice them unto the God that I
adore. When the Fair Forlorn heard him, he presently knew that it was
Famongomad, who was wont to cut off the heads of all those that he might take,
and to shed their blood before an Idol that he had in the burning lake, by
whose counsel he was governed in all his affairs, and although he then had
no desire to fight, as well because he would not fail to be at Mirefleur
(according as Oriana had willed him) as also because he was weary, and tired
with the encounter that he had had against the ten knights, yet knowing the
persons that were in the cart, amongst whom was Leo^or the Kings daughter, her
Gentlewomen, and the ten knights that he had overthrown, he determined
either to die or deliver the^, knowing what grief the loss of her sister would
be unto Oriana, whom Famongomad and his son did take at unawares, and all the
rest of her train, in a manner as soon as the Fair Forlorn had left them,
and in this sort they had bound and f^ered them in the cart, that they might
afterward most curelly put them to death. For this cause he willed Enil to
give him his arms. My Lord said he, do you not see these devils that are
coming toward us? For Gods sake let us begone and hide us from them, then may
you arm your self at ease, for I would not tarry their coming for all the
wealth in London. I will do better if I may, said the Fair Forlorn, I will
first try my fortune, and although thou do think them devils) thou shall
see them slain by one only knight: for their life is so odious before God,
that he will give me the strength to revenge (as I hope) all those miserable
cruelties which they from day to day do commit.

Alas my Lord said Enil, you will wilfully lose your self: seeing that if
twenty of King ^uart his best Knights had undertaken that which you alone
think to do, yet might they hardly escape with honor. Care not thou for that,
answered he, if I should let such an adventure pass before mine eyes, and not
be an actor therein, I were unworthy ever to come into the company of good and
virtuous men, and therefore whatsoever may chance thereof, I care not. This
said, he left Evil weeping, and went unto that side where he might easily
behold Mirefleur: because the remembrance of Oaiana, was still present before
him, and he bagan to say. O my Lady and only hope, never did I enterprise
adventure, adventure, the which I have not by your means atchiued: and now that
I know you are so near unto me, and that it is for a thing that so much
imports you, forsake me not I pray you, in this extremity. Herewithall he
imagined that his strength was redoubbled, and seeting apart all fear, he
went toward the cart, and said unto the Dwarffes: stay you base slaves, for you
shall all die, and your masters also. When the Giant heard these threats, he
entered into such fury, that the smoke proceeded from his eyes, in such sort, as
it seemed they had been on a fire, and he did shake his bore-speare with such
force, that he almost doubled both ends together. Then he answered the Fair
Forlorn. Unhappy and unfortunate wretch, how durst thou be so bold to come
before me? Yet he made as though he heard him not, but couched his Lance, and
setting spurs to his horse, he smote the Giant a little beneth the wast, with
such strength, as pearcing the joints of his harness, the Lance entered into
his tripes with such exceeding force, that passing quite through, it hit
against the hinder part of the saddle, and broke the girts of the horse,
overthrowing both man andsaddle even in a moment. Ne-uerthelesse before the
Giants fall, he couched his bore spear, thinking to have hit the Fair
Forlorn, but it missed him and stroke through his horses flanks: wherefore he
feeling that he was wounded to death, did very nimbly alight down. and
although that Famongomad was in like sort deadly wounded, with the great rage
that he felt, he rose up, and with both his hands he pulled forth the
trounchon of the Lance that stuck in his body, and threw it at the
Faire-Forlorne with such extreme fury, that he thought to have ouer-throwne
him, and so greatly did he strain himself to hurl the same, that the tripes
came out of his belly, and he tumbled over and over. Therewithal he cried.
Basigant my decre fon revenge the death of thy sorrowful Father if thou can.
At this cry Basigant approached, holding a weighty bill, wherewithal he
thought to have strooken the Fair Forlorn, but he stepped aside, and the blow
passed by so forcibly, that if it had hit him it had cloven him quite asunder.
Then the Fair Forlorn being very ready, and expert, stretched forth his arm,
and stroke the Giant so great a blow, that he cut the one half of his leg
away, although that with the great fury wherein he remained, he could not as
then feel it, but lifted up his bill, the which turned in his fist, which was
a happy chance for the Fair Forlorn, who received the blow upon his Shield,
within the which it entered so far, that the Giant could not pull it forth
And as he struied to get it out, he raised him upon his stirrops to have the
more strength. By the means where of, the sinues of his leg, which were cut
a sunder failed him, wherewithal he felt such great grief, that (not being
able to keep his sadle) he kissed the ground with his nose: and in falling, the
Fair Forlorn stroke him another blow upon his right arm, so that he was
forced to forsake his bill, and leave it in the power of his enemy.
Notwithstanding his heart was so great, that he rose up again and drew forth
his sword, that was maruailous long, with the which he laid at the Fair
Forlorn with all his strength, and he strained himself so much, that the
blood issued from his wounds, in such great abundance, that all his strength
failed him, and he fell down together with his blow, which lighted upon the
stones, wherewith the sword brake in two pieces. The which the Fair Forlorn
perceiving, he stepped aside, and set his hands unto the bill in such sort,
that by force he pulled it out of his shield, wherewith he stroke so great a
blow upon the Giants helmet, that he made it fly from his head: but the Giant
with that little remainder of his sword, that he yet held, pared away the top
of his helmet, together with a little of the skin and hair of his head, the
which blow if he had stricken somewhat lower, he had cut his head off.
Therewithal they that were in the cart, thought that the Faier Forlorn had
been wounded to death, and himself was so astonished, that he thought his
days to be ended, wherefore desiring to be revenged, he gave him such
another great blow with the bill, that he cut off his ear, with half of his
face, with the which he yielded up the ghost. During all this combat, the
Princess Leonor and all her company, were d^ly praying for the good success
of the Fair Forlorn: who seeing that he was dispatched of Basiga^t, turned
unto Fam^ngomad, who had beheld the death of his son, for whom he made so
great mo^e, that he was likely to have gone mad. And although that he was
likewise at the point of death, yet notwithstanding he had thrown his helmet
from his head, holding both his hands before his wound, to keep in his blood,
that thereby he might prolong his life, the more to blaspheme God and his
saints: not being sorry for his death (as he said) but because that he had not
in his life time, destroyed all the churches wherein he had never entered. And he
cried as loud as he could: Ah thou God of the christians, it is th^n alone that
have wrought the means, that both I and my son (who were mighty enough to
ouer-throwe one hundred of the best knights in the world) are slain by the
hand of a most wretched and feeble villain. And as he would have proceeded in
his his blasphemy, the Fair Forlorn stroke off his head from his shoulders,
saying: Receive thy reward for all thy cr^elties which thou have committed
against a number of people. And spurning him upon the belly with his foot, he
said: Now get thee unto all the Devils, who have long expected thy coming.
Then he took up Basigant his Helmet, and threw down his own which was
broken. Enil in like sort brought unto him Famongomad his horse, upon the which
he mounted, and came both to unbind the prisoners, and to do his duty unto
the Princess Leon^r, who gave him great thanks for his good help. In like
sort so did all the rest of the company. Now had the Giants tied all their
horses at the tail of the Cart: wherefore the fair Forlorn went to seek out
the Princess her Palfrey, the which he brought, and mounted her upon the same,
commanding all the rest to take every one their own horse, and to get them to
London, and to carry unto king Lisuart the bodies of the two Giants, and
Basigant his horse, which will serve him well in the battle against king
Cildadan. But the Knights answered him, sir who shall we say has done this
good for us? you shall tell the king said he, that it is a strange knight, who
is called the fair Forlorn: and you may both declare unto him at large the
cause of the combat that I had with the Giants, as also the great desire that I
have to do his Majesty all the service I may, whether it be against king
Cildadan or any other, herewithall they laid both the bodies in the Cart: but
they were so great, that their legs trayled along upon the ground more then
sixfoore, and taking leave of the fair Forlorn, they went toward London,
praising God, and the good knight that preferued them from death. But by the
way Leonor and the young Gentlewomen that were with her (forgeting their passed
peril) made them garlands of flours which they set upon their heads in entering
into the City: the^ the people wondering to see the Giants, followed the Cart
even unto the castle, to understand who had done such vallant deede^ of arms.
The ^ing did already know that his daughter was arrived, and how she brought
with her two dead Giants, whereford he went down into the Court with the
Queen, and many knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen with them, to see what the
matter was: the which the Princess Leonor recited unto him, together with all
that you have already heard, whereat every one wondered. And even as she had
ended her discourse, in came Don Quedragant, who yielded him prisoner into the
kings hands, as being sent thither by the fair Forlorn, the which increased
in all the assistants, farther desire to know him, that larely had done so many
knightly deeds. And the king said, in good faith, I do greatly marvel what
he may be: but is there none of you that do know him. And it was answered him
no: saying that Corisanda Lady and friend to Don Florestan had found in the
poor Rock (as heretofore she had declared unto many) a sick knight that was
named the fair Forlorn. I would said the king, that he were in this company,
believe me that he should not depart from us, for any thing that he would
demand of me.

CHAP. XIIII.
How that after the Fair Forlorn had ended his adututure he went (...) the
Fountain of the three Channels: from thence he took his way to Mirefleur,
where he found Oriana, with whom be remained eight days together: and at the
same time there arriurd in the Court of King Lisuart, as ancient Gentleman
bringing with him two lewels of singular vertur, whereby the faithful lover,
from the feigned might be tried, the which Amadis and Oriana determined to make
proof of, in such secret manner, that they would neither be known of the king
nor any other.

AFter that the Princess Leouor and her train, had taken their leave of the
Fair Forlorn, he returned toward the Gentlewomen whom he had found hard by
the fountain, who having seen the victory which he had achieved, had
already forsaken the bushes, and came to meet him. Then he commanded Evil to
get him to London unto Gandalin, and that during his abode there, he should
cause such another armor as that of his own was, to be made for him, because
they were all to broken and battered with the blows that he had received in
the former combats: moteouer that he should not fail to return unto the
fountain of the three channels upon the eight day following. Thus Enil departed
from him, and on the other side the Fair Forlorn (having taken his leave of
the Gentlewome^) rode through the Forest, and they took their right way to
Mireflure, where being arrived, they declared to Oriana and Mabila, the
dangerous combat, and glorious victory that was performed in their presence by
a knight called the Fair Forlorn, When Oriana knew for truth that he was so
near unto her castle, joy and extreme pleasure, accompanied with a most
fervent desire, entered into her immagination, in such sort that until she had
him in her arms, she ne-uer lost fight of the high way that led from the
Forest, by the which he was to come. By this time was the Fair Forlorn
alighted from his horse, hard by a little River, staying until it were night:
for he would not be seen by any, at his entering into Mireflure. Then (...) put
off his Helmet, and laid him down upon the grass: and there-withall he
began to think upon the instabilitie of Fortune, and upon the miserable
despair wherein (not long before) he remained when with his own hands, he
(...) ready to have effected his death and also how he was not only (...)
restored to his former felicity, but also advanced to greater honor glory and
contentment then before, knowing that he was so near that joy which he should
receu^ with his Lady Oriana. In this ^gitation remained the Fair Forlorn
until after sun set, when he mounted on horseback, and came unto the place
that Durin had assigned him, where he found him together with Gandalin, who
stayed there for him to take his horse. The^ he alighted down, and demanded of
them, what the ladies were doing, my Lord, answered Gandalin, they are on the
other side, in the garden, where they have already stayed for you more then
four hours. Help me then to get up. The which they did: and he being upon
the wall, beholding Ortana and Mibila, on the other side (having not so much
patience as to stay for their help) he leaped from the top of the wall down
to the ground, and as he would have kneeled to have done his duty, the
Princess ran to embrace him, and in kissing him she was like to have fallen in
a swound between his arms. But who could imagine the pleasure that they
yielded the one unto the other? Amadis he trembled like a leaf not being able
to speak one Word, holding his mouth close unto Orianaes: who as it were in an
ecstasy did behold him with such an eye, that it made them both twain to live
and die together. In this sort they remained more then a good quarter of an
hour, and even until that Mabila smiling, said unto Oriana: Madam, I pray you
at the least before my cousin do die, let us have a sight of him if it please
you. Soft and fair, answered Oriana, let me a while alone with him, and then
you shall after-wards have him at your pleasure. Herewithall Amadis saluting
Mabila, said unto her. My good Cofin, this is not the first day that you have
known how much I am yours. I believe you well sir, but my Lady would have you
wholly to her self. Alas, said she have I not reason, seeing that I alone was
likely by my fault, to have been the causer of his loss? Believe me dear
friend, the grief which you felt and the teeres that you have shed (by the
fault that I committed) shall be now both acknowledged, and thoroughly
recompensed. Madam, said Amadis, you have ne-uer been at any time, but the
procurer of all my happiness and favor, and if I have felt any tribulation, I,
and not you, have been the causer there of: therefore have I justly sustained,
whatsoever sorrow I have suffered. Alas sweet lone, answered Oriana, when I
think upon the estate wherein: Corisanda and the Damsel of Denmark did
find you, and the abundance of tears and lamentations that continually
distilled from your eyes (as they have told me) I assure you that yet my mind
is troubled therewith. Madam, said he, the tears whereof you speak, were no
tears: for long before the coming of Corisanda to the poor Rock, the spring
whereof was dried up: but it was an humor proceeding from my heart, the which
did so continually burn in your love, that being constrained by the force of
the flame, it did draw up to the eyes that moisture, which nature had placed
about the heart to preserve it, and to give it life and I beeleue that if the
Damsel of Denmark had stayed from bringing me that relief which I received
of her, in steed of tears which distilled from mine eyes, the (soul is self
had departed. Sweet love, said the Princess, I know well that I committed a
great error in writing that letter which Durin did bring to you, but you
should then have remembered how that all women are weak, and very light of
belief, especially in things wherein they are affectioned, and wherein by too
extreme love they are often times carried away, and made suspicious, even as I
have been against you, wherefore the greater that mine offense is, the greater
praise shall you win in pardoning me: the which I beseech you to do, being
ready to receive such punishment therefore, as it shall please you to give unto
me, and to satisfy you at your own discretion. Alas Madam, said Amadis, it is
I that should demand pardon of you: for if I should die for your love, most
pleasant would that death be unto me. But this much I assure you, that I had
never been able to have resisted this great sorrow that I have suffered, had
it not been that my martiredome was eased (knowing the pleasure which you
would receive in the same) that it took such force unto it, as death was not
of sufficient power in any sort to bring it to an end. Let us leave off this
talk for this time said Mabila, you have both suffered wrong, determine
therefore henceforth how it may be recompensed: and now to eschew the vapors
of the night (which may be unto you somewhat hurtful) let us retire unto some
covert. I like your counsel well answered Oriana. Therewithal Amadis was
brought into her chamber, and presently Mabila and the Damosel of Denmark
(knowing that they should do them a pleasure to leave them alone) went forth,
faining to go about some other affairs. Then the princess requested Amadis
to sit down in a chair covered with velvet, which stood in a corner of the
chamber, and she stood leaning upon him, that she might at more ease kiss
him, and hang about his neck: whereupon he being overcome with an extreme
amorous passion, left off his wonted modesty, thrusting one of his hands into
Oriana her pretty breasts, and the other toward the place by him most
affected: Wherewith Oriana half ashamed in stretching her self along.
because she would not look in his face, said unto him, My dear love, I
believe that the hermit of the poor Rock, taught you not this lesson, Madame
answered he, I beseech you to pardon my rashness, taking pity of me, and
seeing that both time and place is so favorable unto us, be not you more
contrary unto me then they, but suffer me to continue that favor, whereof by
your good grace I have taken possession, when I delivered you from the hands
of Arcalans. My joy, answered Oriana, you know that I am so wholly yours, that
you cannot dispose of your self more then of me, nevertheless how may I
possibly at this time satisfy your desire, seeing that your Cousin, and the
Damosel of Denmark are so near unto us? Alas said he, they have hitherto been
the cause of my life, and now since they have farther assisted me do you think
that they will desire my death? Assure you Madam that they are already so well
acquainted with our affections (especially the Damsel of Denmark) that
although they have not seen that effected, yet it mny be they have presumed as
much and more: therefore I beseech you (in acquiting you of your promise) to
succor me. Which said, he gave such large scope unto his passions, that
notwithstanding all the faint resistance that Oriana could make against him,
he had that of her which he most desired, tasting together of the sweet
fruit, which they did first sow in the Forest, at such time as Gandalin was
gone to seek for some victuals for them: as you have heard in the first book.
And although that Oriana made refusal thereof at the first, yet Amadis used her
so courteously that before they departed from the place, they determined to
continue their sport, whilst they had so good opportunity, and from thenceforth
not to be in any doubt either of Mabila or the Damsel of Denmark. Eight
whole days did Amadis remain at Mirefleur with Oriana, leading ^fe as
pleasantly as they could with, during all the which time he was not seen of
any, except of those that were the means of his bringing thither, as it has
been told you, for all the day long he was close with the Ladies in the
chamber, and when the evening approached they came forth into the garden, where
often times after many amorous discourses, Amadis alayed the heat of his fire
(by the sweet embracings of Oriana) at the music of the birds, who chanting
out their pleasant notes, were witnesses of the pleasure that these two lovers
received, under the shade of the little young Trees, where with this place was
sufficiently stored. Now did Gandalin every day go and come from London to
Mireflure, to bring news, from the Court: so that one time amongst others, he
told Amadis that the Armou: which by Enil he had caused to be made for him,
would be very shortly finished. Moreover he told him, that the King was in
great doubt for the battle which he had enterprised against king Cildadan:
for the most part of those that he had to deal withal, were cruel Giants,
and without reason, and therefore he had stayed Galaor, Florestan, Agraies,
and Don Galuanes, to assist him in that encounter. Who (said Gandalin) are so
angry for the famous report that is spread abroad, of the Fair Forlorn to the
disprayse of Amadis, as if they had not already passed their promise to the
king, seeking not to enterprise any combat or voyage before the battle, they
had been already upon their way to have sought him out to fight with him, and
they secretly give it out, that if they do escape alive, they will not rest
until they have both found him, and fought with him. In good faith answered
Amadis, they shall see me the sooner if God please, but it shall be after
another manner then they hope for: wherefore do thou return to the Court, and
learn if any thing has since happened. Herewithall Gandalin departed, who
went directly to London, where he found the king ready to sit down to dinner,
and even as they were taking up the Table, there entered in a very ancient
Gentleman, attended upon with two Esquires, apparrelled both in one livery.
This old man's beard was shaven, and the hair of his head was white with age,
who came and knceled before the king, and saluting him in the Greek tongue (in
which country he was borne) he said unto him. It may please your Majesty, the
high renown that is spread in all parts of the world, of the knights, Ladies
and Gentle-women that are in your Court, has been the only cause that
enforced me to address my journey hither, to see if in the same I may find
that which this threescore years I have sought in diverse countries far and
near, to small purpose. Therefore most renowned Prince. I beserch your Majesty
to be pleased, that to finish my travail, I may make a proof of the knights,
Ladies and Gentle-women in this assembly, the which (as I think) will neither
be hurtful nor displeasing either to your Majesty, or to any other. Then all
the Lords that were present, desired to see a thing so rare, entreating the
king to grant his request, the which he easily condiscended unto, therewithal
the ancient Gentleman took from one of his Esquires, a little cofer of Jasper,
which he did carry, which was in length about three cubits, and in breadth a
shaftmont, and it was garnished with Gold, and the most curious damask work
in the World: this little cofer he opened, afterward he took out of it a
Sword, so strange, as the like was never seen, the scabberd thereof was made of
two bright shining bones, and as green as any fine Emeraud, so as the blade
was to be seen through it, not after the manner of other blades, for the one
half of it showed marvelous bright, and the other seemed, as if it burned,
being as red as fire, and it hanged in a Belt of the same stuff as the
scabberd was of, so cunningly made, that any man might easily gird it about
him. This Sword the Gentleman did hang about his neck, that he might likewise
take out of the cofer a kercheif, the one half where-of, was be set with
flowers as fresh and green, as if they had been even then newly gathered: and
the other half was covered with other violets, as withered and dry, as if they
had been ten years in the Sun, nevertheless both the one and the other
seemed to spring from one and the self same root: wherewithal the king being
abashed, demanded of him how these things might be. If it like your majesty
answered the old man, this sword cannot be drawn forth of the scabbard, but
only by that knight that amongst all lovers, is the most constant, and that
does best love his Lady: and as soon as he shall have it in his hands, that
part which burns shall become as clear and bright as the rest, so as the
blade shall be all of one color. In like sort if this k^efe bestrewed with so
many flowers, be set upon the head of such a Lady or Gentlewoman that does
love her husband or friend with the likePunc^ constantnesse, the withered and
dry flowers shall appear again, of a most fresh and lively color: and your
Majesty may be pleased to know, that I cannot be made a Knight, but by the
hands of this perfect lover that shall draw forth this Sword, neither may I
take arms but of her that shall deserve this precious kercheife. For this
cause have I these threescore years conuinually sought in many strange
Countries for those by whom I ought to receive knighthood, but yet hitherto I
have travailed in vain, and now prosecuting my voyage (in a manner for my last
refuge) I am come into your Court: imagining that even as it far exceeds
the Courts of all other Emperors and kings, so I might in like sort in the same
find that which in all others I have failed of. I pray you said the king, let
me know the reason why the fire that remains in the one half of this blade,
does not burn the scabbard. It may please your Majesty, answered the old man,
betwixt Tartaria and India, there is an arm of the Sea which is soohot, that
the water thereof (being marvelous green) boiles as if it were upon the
fire, and in the same there is brought forth a kind of Serpents more great
then Crocodiles, the which do fly very lightly, by reason of their long
wings, but they are so infectious, that every one shun them so much as they
possible may. Notwith-standing when a man finds any one of them he esteems
of him as a thing much worth, because they are profitable for diverse
medicines, and these Serpents have a bone that reaches from the neck to the
tail, the which is so great, that upon the same is formed all the whole body
which is green, as you see by this scabberd, and furniture, for as much as
they are bred up (as I have said) in this burning sea, no heat of any other
fire may hurt them. Thus has your Majesty heard the strangeness of this
sword, and of the scabberd, now I will tell you of the flowers of this
kertchiefe. In the same Country of Tartarie, there is also an Island environed
with the most strange and dangerous gulf that is in any part of all the Sea.
By means whereof (although the flowers of these two branches are rare and
precious) yet there is (...) man so valiant that dare go to gather them: but
if it so chance, that any one be so mad as to adventure himself therein, and
if he may bring them away, assure your Majesty, he sells them at as great a
price as he pleases: for amongst other singular virtues that they have, this
is one, that whosoever does charily keep them, they do never leave their
greenenesse, and lively color, as you may behold in this kertchiefe. And
seeing that I have declared unto you the excellency of these Jewels, it may
please your Majesty likewise to understand who I am, and after what sort I came
by these things. I beleeu that you have many times heard speaking of Apolldon,
who in his time, was one of the best Princes of the Earth, he it was that did
beautify the firm Island, with many rare and singular things, as every one
knows, my Father was his Brother, and king of Gan^^ who being in love with
the daughter of the king of Canonia, did beget me of her. And when I was of
sufficient age to be made knight, my father commanded me, seeing I had been
conceived with far more perfect and loyal love, then ever was any other
prince, that I would not in like sort receive knighthood, but by the hand of
the most faithful lover that might be found in all the World, neither to take
arms, but from that Lady, or Damsel who should love her husband or friend,
with the like constancy as the knight does. The which I both promised and swore
unto him to perform, thinking to accomplish his will very easily, only in
going to mine Uncle Apol^don and Grimanesa his wife, toward whom I went:
nevertheless, my misfortune was such, thar I found Grimanesa dead, wherefore
Apolidon (knowing the cause of my coming) was very sorrowful. For Grimanesa
being deceassed, else where very hardly might I find (as he told me) that
which I had promised unto my Father, the succession of whose Crown was denied
unto me except I were a knight, as by the statute and ordinance of his Realm
was appointed, and therefore mine Uncle willed me to return unto Ganor, and
that within one year following, I should come again unto him: during which
time he would endeavor to find some remedy for the foolish enterprise which
I have undertaken: and according to his appointment Pre^ Then he gave me this
Sword, and kerchief, by the which I might know those whom I was to find,
telling me that seeing had been so rash in my promise, / therefore I should
from thenceforth travail so long until that I finding such a constant knight
and Lady, had accomplished whatsoever my Father was commanded. And thus your
Majesty may see the reason of my long travail and search, therefore if it like
your Highness, you may try the Sword first, and your knights afterward. And
in like sort the Queen and her Ladies, may prove what shall be the event of
the kerchiefe, and he or she that shall finish these adventures, shall possess
the Jewels as their own, I gain rest thereby, where-of I shall reap the
profit, and your Majesty honor and renown amongst all other Kings and
Princes, having found that in your Court, of the which I have failed in all
other Countries. Thus the old man having ended his discourse, there was not any
that were present, who did not generally desire to see the matter in proof,
and although the king was as desirous to see the trial thereof as any other,
yet did he defer it off until the fifth day following, upon the which day, was
the feast of Saint James to be celebrated, and the more to make it manifest, he
sent for a great number of his knights. For the more full my Court is (said the
king) the more is the likelihood to have this adventure thoroughly tried. Unto
the which determination every one agreed: all this discourse did Gandalin
hear, who by good fortu^e was not 1. hour before arrived at Lon. But so soon
as the Conclusion was agreed upon, he got again to horseback and rode
forthwith (...) Mireflure, where he found the f^ Forlorn playing at Chests
with ^riana, who seeing him return so suddenly, she demanded of hi^ what new
event was chanced (...) Court. Madam, answered he, I am sure that you will be
wonderful glad to understand what it is. And what is it said Oriana? then
Gandalin recited all the whole discourse of the old Gentleman, with the
strangeness of the sword and kerchiefe: as also how the king had put off the
proof thereof until the feast day of Saint James next ensuing. During all
this long discourse, the Fair Forlorn became more pensive then he was
accustomed to be, which Oriana straight perceived, nevertheless she made no
show thereof, (...) Gandalin and the company writ departed, and that she came
and sat down upon the knees of the fair Forlorn. Then she kissing him and
hanging about his neck, said unto him: My love I pray you tell me whereupon
you (...), whilst Gandalin declared unto us the news at London. In faith
Madam, answered the fair Forlorn, if my will were to my wish, you and I
should all our life time after live in more rest and contentment then hitherto
we have done, for the kerchiefe should be yours, and the sword mine, and so all
su^on and jealousy should never more reign betwixt us. What sweet love said
she, do you doubt that I would not gain the Kerchiefe if it were by firm love
to be gained? No Madame, answered he, but I did fear, because the trial is to
be made in the king your Father his Court, that you would make it difficult to
enterprise the same, and yet I know that I am able both to carry you thither,
and bring you back again (if it please you) so that none that do see us,
shall know who we are, My Lord said she, you know that I will obey you all my
life long, and that you may dispose of me at your pleasure so as I do more
fear the danger whereinto these Gentlewomen may fall, if we should be
discovered, then any of our own, and me thinks it were good to hear what
their opinion is, before we undertake any thing. Whatsoever shall please you
Madam, answered the fair Forlorn, that do. Then she called Mabila and the
Damosel of Denmark, who were talking with Gandalin, unto whom they declared
all that you have heard. And although that undoubtedly the danger was very
great, nevertheless the gentlewomen seeing that they whom it did nearest
touch, were (as they thought) most forward therein, they would not speak that
which they thought thereof, and answered Oriana that in ^oth she should never
in all her life, have the like occasion to win the most pretions Jewel in the
world. Well said the Princess, unto the fair Forlorn, do then what you
think best. I will tell you answered he, how we may go I will answered Enil
(who as yet does not know what I am) to tell the King, that a strange Knight
with his Lady will make trial of those Jewels, if it so please his Majesty to
give them safe conduct, that nothing shall be said nor done unto them against
their will, which granted I will conduct my Lady disguised in strange apparel,
having a very fine laune or cipresse before her face, through the which she may
see every one, and yet shall not she be known of any, and I being wholly armed
with my beuer down, will lead her. By my faith, said Mabila, your enterprise
is great: but I have a garment that my mother did lately send unto me by the
Damsel of Denmark, of the rarest fashion in the world, which will be fit for
this purpose, and if it please my Lady, we will presently try it upon her,
herewithall they went for it, which being brought, she and the Damsel of
Denmark apparelled her therewith, after so strange a manner, that they all
began to laugh, seeing the Princess so disguised, and whatsoever the faira
Forlorn had before determined to do, they thought might now be very easily
performed. Whereupon they forthwith commanded Gandalin to go buy some fair
Palfrey for Oriana: and that he should not fail to bring him to the end of
the Castle wall of Mirefle^r, the night before the trial of these Jewels was to
be performed, and further that he should advertise Durin to bring his horse the
same evening into that place where he first alighted when he entered into the
garden. For I will depart, said he, this night to go unto the Fountain of the
three channels, where Enil is to meet me, whom I will forthwith send unto
the King, to purchase out safe conduct. Thus Gandalin departed, who did
effectually perform whatsoever was committed to his charge. Therefore so soon
as the evening was come, the fair Forlorn took his leave of the Ladies, who
brought him unto the foot of the garden wall, and sliding down on the other
side, he found where Durin held his horse, upon the which he mounred, taking
his way toward the Eorrest, and about the break of day he artiued at the
fountain, where within a while after Enil came bringing with him the Armor
which he had caused to be made, with the which he armed himself, and then
demanded of him what news there was in the Court. My Lord, answered he, every
man there speaks of your prowess: and there is not any one but is very
desirous to be acquainted with you. Then falling from one speech to another,
he began to tell him the news of the old Gentleman, who had brought the
Sword, and the Kerchiefe, Trust me, said the fair Foolorne, it is now four
days ago, since a Gentlewoman advertised me thereof upon this condition, that
I should carry her to the court, to make trial of this adventure, therefore I
am constrained to go thither, nevertheless thou know how much I desire, not
to be yet known of the King, nor of any other, until my deeds do give them
further testimony of my valor then yet they have. For this cause thou must
return unto London to tell the King, that if it please him, to give security
unto a Gentlewoman and me, that nothing shall be either said or done unto us
against our wills, we will come to make trial of the stranger his request: but
fail not in like sort to advertise the Queen and her Ladies how the
Gentlewoman constrayneth me to conduct her thither, according to the promise
that I have made unto her, and that otherwise I would not have come there, and
after thou had fulfilled my commandment, fail not in any case to return
hither the night before these Jewels must be showed. In the mean season, I
will go seek the Gentlewoman who is somewhat far from hence: and according to
the answer that thou shall bring unto us, we will either go forward, or
return back again. Then Enil departed, and the fair Forlorn took the way to
Miresleur, where he arrived as soon as day was shut in, and there he found
Durin ready to receive his horse. By whose help he got over the wall, and
entered into the garden where Oriana, and the other gentlewomen were, of whom he
was most courteously entertained: but when Mabila espied him coming, she said
unto him what is the cause my good Cousin, that you are more brave now, then you
were this last morning? Have you met with any good booty of (...)? You know not
the meaning there. of, answered Oriana, he went of purpose for this fair A^
thinking to escape by force from this prison wherein we kept him. Is it true?
said Mabila, if you determine to fight with us, see that you be well advised
first, for you have somewhat to do, And in this (...) jesting together, they
came unto the Princess her chamber, when his supper was brought unto him: for
all that day he neither had eaten nor drunken, fearing least her should have
been discovered.

CHAP. XV.
How the Damsel of Denmark was sent unto London as know what answer Enil
had received from the King, touching the safe conduct which was demanded by the
fair Forlorn, who did after words bring Oriana thither to prone the strange
Jewels.

AS soon as the fair Forlorn was returned to Mirefleur, he told Oriana how
Enil was gone to the Court according to their determination concluded the day
before. Whereupon the Princess desirous to know an answer, and also to provide
all things necessary for their safety before hand, she sent the Damsel of
Denmark unto the Queen to certify her Majesty, that because she found her
self somewhat ill at case, it would please her grace to hold her excused, if
she could not as yet come and do her duty unto her Highness. So the Damsel
departed, and returned not until it was very late, for she stayed the
arrival of the Queen Briolania, to meet with whom the king himself did go,
and she came into the court with one hundred knights, ready to begin the search
of Amadis, according to the appointment of Galdor and Florestan, and therefore
she was determined not to depart from Queen Brisena, until they were returned
again, neither would she nor her women be apparrelled with other Garments then
of black cloth, until he were found, for such weeds did she wear at such time
as he did make her Queen, and now would she never change her manner of life,
if he were lost. In your rudgment said Oriana, is she so fair as the report
goes of her? So help me God, answered the Damsel, except your grace, she is
the fairest woman, and of the best behauiuor that ever I did see, she was very
sorry when she heard of your sickness, and she sen death you word by me, that
she will come and do her duty unto you so soon as you shall think
convenient. Truly, said Oriana, I am more desirous to see her then any other
that I due know. Madam, answered the fair Forlorn, beleeume she well
deserves that you should show nor all the honor you may, although hererofore
you have wrongfully sustained some grief for hersake: gentle low, said the
Princess, for Gods sake, let us speak no more of passed melanoholies, for I
am assured that I did think (...). You shall yet be better assured, answered
he, by the ^ony that you shall receive, of those ^ewels which we shall gain,
the which will henceforth (...) extinguish all those unhappy (...) that you
have concerned against me, if they should chance to (...) against into your
(...), increasing in you the opinion of that (...) and duty which I (...) and
bear unto you. My Lord, said (...), I am well assured that the (...) shall
make you believe, that what wrong soever you received of me, proceeded of no
other cause, but by the extreme love which I did bear unto you: we shall see
shorely said the Damsel of (...), what will happen. For the king has granted
your request by Enil. In this sort did Oriana, and the test of her company
pass away the time, until the day came wherein they must depart, to make
trial of that which you have heard, which caused her to rise about midnight,
attiring her as the fair Forlorn had devised, and he likewise was armed at
all points, that done they passed through the garden, and came to the place
where Gandalin held their horses in readiness. Then mounted they upon them,
taking their way toward the Forest, right unto the Fountain of the three
channels. But there Oriana thinking upon the enterprise which she went about,
foreseeing the inconvenience and danger thereof, not only if she were
disclosed, but also how if she failed in gaining the kerchiefe, Amadis might
have just cause to suspect her, and by that means she might loose that good
reputation which she had gotten with him. Herewithall she began to repent her
forwardness, and to tremble so extremely, that the fair For (...) perceived
it, who said unto her. Madam, had I thought you would have been so ill at ease
with this voyage, I sweat unto you that I would rather have died then have
brought you out of doors, therefore if it please you, let us return again to
Miresteur, So saying, he turned his horse head ne-uerthelesse Oriana
considering that by her an adventure so recommendable should be deferred,
changed her mind and answered him. I beseech you sweet love not to take any
heed unto the fear that a timorous woman may have in the midst of this
great wood, but unto the virtue and valor that remains in you. Very sorry was
the fair Forlorn because he had spoken in such sort unto her, doubting lest
he had offended her, and he said unto her. Madam, seeing that your discretion
has surmouted my folly, I beseech you to pardon me: for I assure you, my
meaning was not to speak any thing that should be offensive unto you. As they
had ended their conference, they came unto the fountain being yet an hour
from day, where they had not long stayed before Enil came unto them, whereat
they were very joyful. Then the fair Forlorn said unto Oriana: Madame,
behold the Esquire which I promised you to send unto king Lisuart, by whose
answer we may determine what to do. In faith my Lord, answered Enil, he sends
you by me all the assurance that you demand, and further he aduertiseth you
that the trial of the adventure beg^ this day after his Majesty's coming from
the Chapel. All the better said the fair Forlorn, we shall then have no
great cause of stay. Hereupon he gave him his shield and lance, and without
putting off his Helmet at all, they took the right way to London: the people
had already heard that the knight which did overcome the Giants should come
unto the kings lodging, they said one to another: Heavens shield the fair
Forlorn from all mischief, for he is worthy of great praise, and most happy
may that Lady thinks her self, to whom he remains a servant. These words
might Oriana understand very well, wherewith she was not a little joyful,
knowing that she was Lady and Mistress of him, whom so many people did both love
and honor: afterward they came and alighted at the Palace: where they found the
king, Queen Ladies, and a great number of knights already assembled all
together in a great hal, to make trial who should gain the old man's Jewels.
And as soon as they knew of the arrival of the Fair Forlorn, the King rose
up with his train to receive them: wherefore the Fair Forlorn kneeling down
would have kissed his hands: but the K. lifted him up, saying unto him: My good
friend, you are most heartily welcome hither, where you shall be as free as you
would wish, for you have done as much service for me, in so small a time, as
ever any knight persormed either for King or Prince. The Fair Forlorn
answered not one word, but only bowed himself to his majesty in sign of
thanks: and without stepping one foot from Oriana, (whom he held by the hand)
they came toward the Ladies, who did all salute them very courteously. You may
imagine if the young Princess were not now in some fear to be discovered,
being in such an assembly, for the Queen her mother stepped unto her, looking
her steadfastly in the face, although it was covered with alaune, and she faid
unto her. Gentlewoman, I do not know who you are, for to my knowledge I did
ne-uer see you, nevertheless, for the love of this knight (in whose custody
you are) that has done the king so great sernice, assure you that in this
place shall be showed unto you, all the honor and service that possibly may
be. For the which the Fair Forlorn humbly thanked her Majesty, but Oriana
without speaking one word held her head down continually. Therewithal the king
and all his knights withdrew them to one side, and the Queen and her Laides to
the other. And in the mean time the Fair Forlorn leading Oriana by the hand,
came and beseeched the King, that he and his Lady might remain in the midst of
the hall, for they were not determined to touch the Jewels, except that all the
asistance did first miss the gaining of them. The which the king did grant
unto him, who did first of all take up the sword, which was laid upon the table
by the old Gentleman named Macandon: and the King did draw it out one
shastmont and no more. Wherefore Macandon said. It may please your Majesty, if
there be not found in your Court any, more amorous then you are, I shall not
depart from hence so contented as I hoped to do. There-withall he took the
sword and laid it again upon the table, for so must he do after every trial.
Then Galaor took it up, but yet he performed less then the King did. The
which Florestan, Galnanes, Gramedan, Brandoinas and Landin seeing, they all one
after another tried what they could do, and yet none of them could un sheath
it so much as Florestan did, who drew it sorth a foot and more: but then
Guillan the pensive took it, and he passed Florestan about half a foot, so
that he came unto the midst thereof. Trust me then, said Macandon, if you
did love but as much again as you do, the sword should be yours. After him
there came more then a hundred Knights, who did little or nothing therein,
where-upon Macandon jesting with them, called them heretics in love. Then
Agraies who had stayed to be the last, being sure (as he thonght,
considering the firm love which he did bare unto his Lady Olinda) that the
adventure was ordained for him and on other, stepped forth, and beholding his
Mistress he took the sword and drew it forth of the scabbard within 3.
fingers breadth and as he strained himself to pull it quite forth, the fire
issued from the blade so hot, that it burned part of his apparel, so that he
was constrained to leave it there, being very joyful nevertheless, that he
had performed more then any of the rest. Truly said Macandon you are a loyal
knight, and you have almost had occasion to be content, and I satisfied.
Lastly Palomir and Dragonis approached, who were but the day before arrived at
the court, and they gained no more then did Galaor: which caused Macandon to
laugh, saying unto them. My advise is, that you should put both of your parts
in the sword together, and it may be that you shall have sufficient to defend
you hereafter. You say true answered Dragonis: but if you be this day made
knight, you shall not be of so young years but that you may very well remember
it hereafter. At that word every one began to laugh, in the mean season there
was never a knight remaining in the Court who did not put himself forward to
gain the sword, and yet it was all in vain. Wherefore the fair Forlorn
holding Oriana by the hand, came to take it up: when Macandon said unto him:
knight this sword will fit you better (if you may gain it) then that which you
have, and yet it cannot be gotten by force of Arms without constancy in love.
It must then be mine answered the fair Forlorn, who there-withall did draw it
forth of the scabbard as easily as if it had been his own, and that part of
it, which seemed to be burning, became like unto the other, and was as bright
as ever was seen.

There withal Macandon (exceeding joyful) cast himself at the seete of the
fair Forlorn, saying, unto him, O noble knight, God increase thy honor: for
in ending my long travail you have greatly honored this Court. And truly that
Lady who is served of you, has cause to love you well, except she be the most
mischievous and dissoyalst woman in the world. Now therefore do me this favor
(if it please you) as to give me the order of knighthood, for by no other then
you, may I obtain it, nor yet enjoy the fignory which of right belongs unto
me over many great personages. Cause first a trial of the Kerebiefe to be
made, answered the fair Forlorn, and afterward I will perform whatsoever I
ought to do unto you. Then grided he the sword unto his side, leaving his own
for him that would take it up, and returned to the place from whence he
departed. Great was the praise that all me^ gave unto him: but more great was
the emulation of Galaor and Florestan toward him, concluding in their minds
that so soon as the battle against king Cildadan was finished (if they thence
escaped with life) they would presently seek him out, and challenge him to the
combat, wherein they would die, or else make it known, unto every one that
their brother Amadis was a far better knight then he, who (as they thought) did
eclipse his honor, by the reputation whch he had gotten in gaining the
strangers sword. At that instant the Ladies approached to prove which of them
might obtain the Kerchiefe, and first of all the Queen began, putting it upon
her head: notwithstanding the flowers did not any whit change their color for
her: Whereupon Macandon said, Madam if the king your husband have showed the
little loyalty that remains in him, in his trial of the sword, me thinks
you do now well enough requite him for it. The Queen blushed and being half
ashamed she returned to her place: then came the fair Queen Briolania, who
therein performed as much as the first. Unto whom Macandon likewise said:
believe me Madam, confidering the great beauty wherewith you are endued, you
are more beloved the^ loving, as we may plainly see by this kerchief. After
her came four kings daughters, marvelous fair Elndia, Estreletta, Aldena,
and the sage Olinda, upon whose heads the kerchiefe being placed, the withered
flowers began a little to flourish, so that there was not any one of them which
did not imagine that she should be the owner thereof, wherewith Oriana was in a
great perplexity. Yet in the end the flowers retutned to their withered color.
And for the same cause the Gentlewomen set them down again in their places:
nevertheless it was not without receiving some little frumpe from the old
Gentleman, who for one of his age could very fitly apply them. In the end
Oriana perceiving that every one had failed, she was very glad thereof, and
therefore she made a sign unto the fair Forlorn that he should lead her to
the Table, where the trial was to be made, but so soon as the kerchiefe was
set upon her head the blasted flowers were as green and as fair as those that
were most fresh, so that there was no difference at all to be perceived.
Wherefore Macandon cried out: Ah Madam, you are she whom I have sought for
forty years before you were borne, now said he to the fair Forlorn, I pray
you sir defer not the honor which is by you two due unto me: but if you
please (as already I have entreated you) make me knight, then of this fair
Lady (according as I am bound) I will receive my Arms. Let it be then
presently said the fair Forlorn, for I am not to tarry long here. Therefore
Macandon caused forthwith his Armor to be brought, wherewith he was presently
armd putting it upon his white coat according as new knights are wont to do,
then the fair Forlorn, laying his sword upon his shoulder, and fastening on
his right spur, gave him his order, Oriana girded on his Sword which was in
like sort brought by his Esquires. Which ceremony being finished, the
Gentlewomen beholding him in that order, would in some sort be revenged for
the flouts which he had given them, and therefore they all burst into a
laughter, especially Al^, who spoke so loud that all might hear her.

Behold the countenance of this fair Lad how like a young knight he looks:
Surely we ought all to rejoice, because he shall all his life long seem as
fresh and lusty as now he is. How know you that, answered Estreletta? By his
apparel said she, which shall even last as long as he. Fair Gentlewomen
said Macandon, I would not change my pleasure for the best of your favors: and
if I am not so youthful as you say, yet am I not therefore to be termed
less discreet, but as for you who are yet young and foolish, it were good that
you learn to be more advised and modest then you are. This answer of his
pleased the King very well, who in he sort liked of the gentlewomens speeches.
Whilst these things were in doing, the fair Forlorn was ready to depart,
when the Queen who knew not her own daughter, said unto her, Gentlewoman
although you are not desirous to be known in this company, yet bethink you
what it will please you to command either of the king or me. By my faith,
Madam, answered the fair Forlorn, I am as little acquainted with her as you,
although she has been seven days together in my company, but for that
little that I have perceived by her, I can assure you that she is most
excellent fair. Trust me fair Lady, said Briolonia (speaking unto Oriana) I
know not your name, but considering the loyalty wherewith you are endued, if
your friend do, affect you with the like constancy as you do love him, you
may well be termed the fairest couple that ever love united together. (...)
Oriana smiled at the words of Briolania, when the fair Forlorn took his
leave, who seeing that the King would lead her toward her horse he said unto
him. Your Majesty has reason to honor her, by whom your Court has this day
been more highly exalted, then ever heretofore by any other Lady it has
been. In good sooth answered the king, you say true, and therefore I will my
self conduct her forth of the City, in the which I could willingly desire
that it would please her, (and you also) to make some longer abode. Saying so,
they all mounted on horseback, and the king held the raines of his daughters
horse, speaking all the way unto her, who answered him not one word again,
fearing to be known. Galaor in like sort entertained the fair Forlorn. But
he so much hated him for the reasons before rehearsed, that he could not
speak one courteous word unto him, whereat the Fair Forlorn laughed seeing
his brothers countenance, and thus they rode together a good way from the
city, until the fair Forlorn said unto the King: I beseech your Majesty (if
it please you) to pass no further, otherwise you may chance to displease this
Gentlewoman, believe me said the King, I will rather return. Therewithal he
embraced him, and said, I would sir knight that it liked you, to be one of my
knights. If it please your Majesty, answered he, I will willingly be one of
the hundred that shall accompany you against king Cildadan. If you do me that
favor said the king, I hope that thereby our enemies would be no less
discouraged then those on our part would be encouraged, and therefore I
entreat you so to be. Thus they departed, the king taking his way back to the
city, and the fair Forlorn with Oriana toward the Forest, being very
joyful that they had so well finished that dangerous adventure. But they were
no sooner arrived at the Fountain of the three channels, when they beheld an
esquire coming toward them mounted upon a strong horse, who at his arrival
said unto the fair Forlorn: knight, Arcalaus commands thee that thou bring
this Gentlewoman unto him, which if thou deniest to accomplish, he says that
he will himself come take thy head from thy shoulders. And where is Arcalaus?
Answered the fair Forlorn. The Esquire showed him where he sat under a tuft
of Trees, together with another knight, both twain armed and ready to mount on
horseback. When Oriana heard this message, the poor soul was in such extreme
fear, that she was likely to have fallen from her horse, wherefore the fair
Forlorn said unto her. How now sweet Lady, are you afraid of Arcalaus being
in my keeping? no, no, he threatens to have my head, and yet he shall quit
himself well if he can save his own. Then he betook him to his arms, and
said unto the esquire, go, return unto thy master and tell him, that I am a
strange knight that knows him not, and therefore I will not do that. The
esquire returned to Arcalaus who was so mad angry therewith, that he said
unto the other knight which was with him, good nephew Lindoraque go take the
kerchief from that Damsel, for I do give it to Madasima your love, and if he
that conducteth her will co^tradict it, cut off his head forthwith, and
afterward hang it up by the hair upon the next tree. Therewithal Lindoraq
went toward the fair Forlorn, who had heard all the words of Arcalaus,
whereupon he came to meet him. And although he seemed to be very great, as
he which was the son of Cartadaque, the giant of the invincible mountain,
begotten upon one of the sisters of Arcalaus, yet did the Fair Forlorn make
so little account of him, that he said unto him, knight pass no further:
wherefore? answered Lindoraq. Because said the fair Forlorn, it pleases me
not. Thou will be far more displeased when thou must lose thy head. Indeed
said the fair Forlorn, so I would, but thou art more like to lose thine own,
if thou keep it not the better. And without any longer debating, he clapped
the spurs to his horse, couching his staff against Lindoraque and Lindoraq in
like sort against him, so that they met one another with such force, that their
lances (hitting in the midst of their shields) flew in shiuers.
Nevertheless the fair Forlorn finding Lindoraq at advantage, unhorsed him,
and the truncheon of the stasse remained in his body, yet did he rise up again
speedily, for he was a knight of a stout heart, and beholding that his enemy
turned to charge him again, thinking to recoile back to avoid his blow, he
fell down over and over, so that the truncheon in his body passed further into
him, with the extreme pain whereof, he gave up the Ghost, Arcalaus who had
seen his Nephew thrown down, did suddenly put his staff in his rest to
revenge him, and running against the fair Forlorn he had surely hit him, if
he had not turned somewhat out of the way, but he stepped on the one side,
letting Arcalaus pass by, and in his passing, he struck him such a blow over
the left hand, that he cut off four of his fingers, leaving him no more then
his thumb to hold his shield which he was forced to let fall, the great pain
whereof enforced him to fly as fast as his horse could run, without so much as
once looking behind him, and the fair Forlorn after him, who made all the
have he could to overtake him. Notwith-standing Arcalaus was so well mounted,
that in less then an hour he had so far gotten the start, that the Fair
Forlorn wishing all the devils in hell to follow him, returned again to
Oriana, and therewithal he forthwith commanded Enil to carry the head of
Lindoraque and the piece of Arcalaus his hand unto the king, and that he should
recite unto him at large upon what occasion he was in such sort assailed. So
Enil departed leaving Amadis and Oriana together, who shortly after arrived at
Mirefleur, where they found Gandalin and Durin staying without the garden
walls, to take their horses when they should come: they came to help the
Princess down, and they told her that Mabila and the Damsel of Denmark were
on the other side of the wall in the Orchard. Here-upon they raised up a
Lather, and Oriana mounted upon it, whom the fair Forlorn led by the hand,
when they were at the top of the wall they beheld Mibila and the Damsel of
Denmark lying fast asleep upon the grass, very heavy with the fear that
they had endured all the day, least matters should not sort to so good effect
as they wished. Then Oriana called them showing unto them the Kerchief which
she had gotten, which so soon as they beheld they presently ran to help her
down: and when she was come into the Orchard, Mabila said unto her, Madame, I
never had greater dsire to see you return, then I have had ever since your
departure from hence. For if you had been discovered, the Damsel and I had
been but in a bad taking: nevertheless we determined to arm us withpatience.
My good Cousin answered she, thanks be to God, all goes well, I have the
kerchiefe, and your Cousin has the sword. I, but thank our Tears (said
Mabila) by the which they were chiefly gotten. My Cousin said the fair
Forlorn, I will not stick to shed for you as much blood, as you have for me
done tears, whenever you have need of me, but I pray if you have any thing
to eat, bring it into my Ladies chamber, for we have gotten us good stomachs.
Herewithal he led Oriana by the hand into the castle. Now because we will not
digress over far from that which happened to king Lisuart, we will leave
Oriana and her company at Mirefleur, to tell you what happened unto his Majesty
and Galaor, as they returned from the fair Forlorn, before they came back
unto the city. For a young Damsel did meet them, who delivered unto each one
of them a letter, sent from Vrganda the Unknown, and without saying any other
thing unto them, she turned her horse toward that way from whence she came.
Wherefore the king opened his Letter which contained this that ensues. Unto
you Lisuart king of great Britain, such health and happiness as beseems
your Royal Majesty. I Vrganda the Unknown, your humble servant, do certify
you, that the battle which is appointed betwixt you and king Cildadan shall be
one of the most dangerous and cruellest that ever was seen, in the which the
fair Forlorn, who has newly given such great hope unto your Majesty shall
lose his name, and by one blow that he shall give, all his valiant deeds shall
be quite forgotten, and then shall you be in the greatest extremity that ever
you were: for many good knigts shall lose their lives, and you your self shall
fall into the like danger, at that same instant when the fair Forlorn shall
draw blood from you, nevertheless by three blows which he shall give, those
on his side shall remain conquerors.

And be your Majesty assured that without doubt all this shall happen therefore
provide for all your affairs with good advise. After that the king had read this
letter, although that he was a stout prince, valiant, and of a courageous
heart, yet (knowing Vrganda worthy to be believed in all her prophesies) he
was afraid, doubting least the fair Forlorn in whom he most trusted, would
revolt unto the side of the Ireland king, and knowing also what danger was
likely to ensue, he nevertheless dissembled the matter whatsoever he though
thereof. And after he had a long while mused thereupon, he declared the whole
circumstance of it unto Galaor, saying unto him. My faithful friend, I do
wholly determine to impart this secret unto you, and to none other, that I may
understand what is your advise therein. Believe me, if it like your Majesty
answered he, considering what Vrganda has written unto me, I have more need
of counsel my self, then to counsel another, and if it were possible to
conclude a peace betwixt you and the king of Ireland (provided that your honor
were not thereby to be impared) me thinks it should be for the best, or at
least if that cannot be, it were good that you should not be present in the
battle. For I do see in this Letter two strange accidents likely to fall out,
the one is that the fair Forlorn, shall wound you so cruelly, that he shall
shed your blood upon the ground, and the other that by three blows which he
shall give, those on his side shall remain conquerors, and by this
advertisement it seems that he shall be against you. Truly said the king I
am so thoroughly assured of your good will that I know you do faithfully and
lovingly advise me, so as if my trust were not in God (who hitherto has
bestowed innumerable favors upon me, as in choosing me king over his people)
or if I did not steadfastly believe that no living man is able to with-stand his
divine determination, I should have great reason to be in doubt, but you know
that the hearts and discretion of kings ought to be answerable unto the
greatness of their estate and calling, endeavoring as well to preserve their
subjects in safety, as to provide for their own security. And therefore I
determine to remit all into the hands of my God, and patiently to endure
whatsoever danger he shall lay upon me, for in him only remains the
disposition of things to come, for which cause my good friend, I assure you,
that I will be present in this battle, for because I would be partaker of
all the good, honor, or hurt that may happen unto those which shall accompany
me. Greatly did Galaor like of the kings magnanimous determinations and
answered him, believe me it is not for nothing that your Majesty is esteemed the
most virtuous and valiantest Prince of the world, and if all kings could as
well repress the counsel of those who dissuade them from their haughty
enterprises, none durst be once so bold as to say any thing unto them, but that
which should be for their honor and glory, but now your Majesty may be
pleased to see what Vrganda has written unto me. Herewithall he began to read
his Letter, wherein was contained this which ensues.

Unto you Don Galaor of Gaul, most valiant and hardy Knight, I Vrganda the
Unknown, do send all hearty salutations, as she who both loves and esteems
you, and I will that you should understand that which must happen unto you, in
this cruel battle between the two kings, Lisuart and Cildadan. If you be
there be you sure that in the end thereof, your large and strong members, shall
want power to assist your invincible heart, and at the departure from the
Combat your head shall be in his power, who with the three blows that he
shall strike shall remain conqueror. In faith said the king, if the contents
of the Letter be true, and that you be in this conflict, you see your death
prepared, which should be a great loss considering your valiant beginning in
deeds of arms, therefore I shall so order the matter, as at this time you
shall be excused from thence. It may please your Majesty, answered Galaor, I
now do very well perceive, that the counsel which even now I delivered unto
you, has displeased your Majesty, when seeing me sound and able of body, you
would persuade me to a matter so greatly to my dishonor, God forbid that I
should herein obey you. Gentle friend said the king, you speak both
virtuously, and valiantly, for the which I thank you: and for this time, let
us leave off this talk, and my advice is, that none do see our Letters, for
(it may be) they may cause some fear and astonishment even in the hearts of
those that do think themselves to be most hardy and valiant. By this time
they were come so near unto the City, that they entered under the gate
thereof, and as the king looked behind, he beheld two knights armed at all
points, whose horses were ouer-trauelled and weary, and their armor all to
broken, in such sort that it was very easy to be perceived that they had been
at some bickering. One was Brunco de Bon'Mer, and the other Branfil his
brother, who came of purpose unto king Lisuart, to be of the number of those
hundred knights which should be in the battle, if it pleased him to accept
of them. But by the way Brunco had been advertised, how the adventure of the
Sword was achieved, wherewith he was marvelous displeased that he came no
sooner, because he would have tried his fortune therein, as he had done under
the Arch of loyal lovers, the which he had passed, and for the firm and
constant love that he did bear unto Melicia sister unto Amadis, he did verily
believe that no such like adventure might escape him: these two knights being
come near, did their duty unto the king, who received the very courteously.
Then said Brunco, it may please your Majesty we have been advertised of a
battle which you have agreed to be executed by a few knights, and so much the
rather ought they to be selected and chosen men. For this cause if it would
please your highness to do us this honor that we might be of the same number
your Majesty may be assured that we would be very desirous to serve you. The
King who had many times been advertised of the prowess of these twain,
especially of the valor of Don Brunco (who for a young knight, was as much
esteemed as any other that might be found) accepted of them very willingly, and
thanked them for their good will.

Now did not Brunco as yet know Galaor, but at the same instant they entered
into such acquaintance and familiarity together, that until the Battle was
finished, they parted not asunder.

And as the king entered into his lodging, Enil came before him, with the head
of Lindoraq which did hang by the hair at the paitrill of his horse, and he
had in his hand the shield and fingers of Arcalaus the Enchanter, by means
whereof before he was come near the Palace, a great number of people did follow
him, to know what news he did bring. Afterward being come into the kings
presence, he declared unto him the message that the fair Forlorn had sent by
him, wherewith he was no less glad, then amassed at so many good and blessed
chanses that every day happened and proceeded from this strange knight, and he
remained a great while praising and extolling him without ceasing. In like sort
Filipinel who had been to give defiance unto the Giants, at the same instant
approached, and he recited the names and sirnames of those which were appointed
to be in the battle of king Cildadan, amongst whom there were found many
strong Giants, and other knights of great worth, who were all embarked already,
and how before that four days were past, they would all take landing in the
bay of Vega, where the battle was to be foughten, then he told the king how
he had found at the burning Lake (which stands in the Isle of Mongasa) king
Arban of North wales, and Angriotta d'Estrauaux prisoners unto Grumadaca wise
unto Famongomad: who caused them to suffer infinite miseries and calamities,
whipping them every day most cruelly so that their bodies were wounded all
over, and they wrote a letter unto the king, which Filipinel delivered unto
him, the tenure whereof ensues. Unto the most high and mighty Prince Lisuart
king of great Britain, and to all our Friends and Allies within his
Dominions. We Arban once king of North wales, and Angriotta d'Estrauaux, now
detained in dolorous prison, do let you know that our misfortune, more cruel
then death it self, has brought us into the power of the most pitiless
Grumadaca wife to Famongomad, who in revenge of the death of her Husband and
Son, does daily cause us to be tortured with so many and strange torments,
that it is impossible to be imagined, so as every hour we desire the
abridging of our days, that thereby we might be released of our dolors. But
this mischievous woman, the more to lengthen our pain, deferreth our death as
much as she may, the which with our own hands we had effected, but that the
fear of the loss of our souls withheld us.

And for as much as we are at this present so extremely wounded, that we are
no longer able to resist our deaths, we send you this Letter, written with our
blood, by the which we beseech God both to grant you the victory against these
traitors, that have in such inhumane sort tormented us, and also that he will
be pleased to have mercy upon our souls. Great sorrow and compassion had the
King for the loss of these 2. knights, ne-uerthelesse seeing that for the
present he could in no sort remedy their misfortun, he dissembled his grief,
showing as good a countenance as he could, and because he would in no sort
discourage the other Gentlemen there present, he set before their eyes the
accidents whereinto many others had fallen, for the maintenance of their Honor
of Knighthood, from the which many times they have with great glory and honor
escaped. But assure you my friends, said the King, that if we do gain the
Battle, I will take such revenge hereof, that the rumor thereof shall fill
the ears of all the people in the World. Therefore they who are appointed to
go w^ me, let them be ready to (...) row, for I will depart to go meet
mine enemies. And according as it was appointed so was all performed.

CHAP. XVI.
How that after the Fair Forlorn had brought Oriana back again to Mirefleur
he departed, that he might be in the battle with King Lifuart, and what
happened unto him.

THree days did the fair Forlorn remain with Oriana after the gayning of the
sword and Kerchiefe, and the fourth day following about midnight he took his
leave of her, and being armed at all points, he rode all the might long. Now
had he commanded Enil to go and stay for him at a Castle situated at the
foot of a Hill, near unto the which the Battle was to be foughten, and it
belonged unto an ancient knight named Abradan: for in his house were all
aduentrous knights oftentimes honored and served, when they came thither to
lodge. And the same night did the fair Forlorn pass hard by king Lisuart his
Camp not being perceived at all, afterward he rode so long that upon the 5.
day following he came unto Abradan his house, where he found Enil which was
there arrived but a little before: greatly was the fair Forlorn feasted by his
Host, and as they were talking together, there entered in two of his nepheus
that were returned from the place where the combat should be: who assured them
that already King Cildadan and his troop, were there arrived, and had set up
their Ten^ and Pauillions hard by the sea side. In like sort Don Grameda and
Gi^tes Nephew to king Lisuart were there come, with whom a Truce was concluded
upon either part, to be holden until the day of the battle, and that
neither of the two Princes should enter into the Combat with any more then one
hundred knights in his company, according as it was promised and sworn by
them. Nephews, said the host, what do you think of the Irish-men, whom God
confound Uncle answered one of them, they have with them so many Giants, that
if God do not miraculously assist our good king, believe me it is impossible
for him to withstand them. Herewithall the tears sell from their Uncles eyes,
and he said, I hope that God will protect the best and iustest king in the
world, from falling into the hands of such wicked people. Mine host, answered
the fair Forlorn, be not afraid as yet, for it happens out very often that
courage and equity overthrows the pride and presumption of the strongest. But
I pray you go unto the king, and tell him that there is lodged in your house a
knight called the Fair Forlorn, and that he desires his Majesty to send
word by you, when the day of the battle shall be. What said the old man, are
you he that of late did send Don Quedragant unto his Court, and slew
Famongomad and his son, when they had taken my Lady Lenor and her knights?
believe me Sir, if ever I did any pleasure unto aduenturous knights, I do
enen at this present acknowledge me thoroughly to be recompensed, my house
being now honored with your presence, and I will not fail to accomplish that
which it has pleased you to command me. Then he mounted upon his horse, and
took with him his two Nephews, and rode until he came where king Lisuart
was encamped, within half a lengue of his enemies, unto whom he declared the
message of the Fair Forlorn, at the which all the company did greatly
rejoice. And the King answered: seeing that we have the Fair Forlorn on our
side, I do also hope that we shall have the honor of the our enterprise. And
now see the number of one hundred knights very well furnished, had we but one
knight more. It may please your Majesty said Grumedan, you now have the
advantage, for the Fair Forlorn is well worth five. This speech did nothing
at all please Galaor, Florestan, not Agraies, for they hated the Fair Forlorn
unto death, for the wrong which they thought he did unto Amadis, nevertheless
they held their peace, and Abradan having received his answer of the King,
returned to his guest, unto whom he recited the pleasure that every one
received at the news that he brought from him, and of the hundred knights
there was no more then one missing, but that they were all assembled. The which
being understood by Enil, he did so much that he found his Master apart and
falling down upon his knees, he said unto him: My Lord, although my service
unto you has not been such as it should, and therefore have I nothing at all
deserved, yet am I so bold at this time to request one gift of you, which I
beseech you most humbly to grant unto me. Demand it said he, and rise up. My
Lord said Enil, I pray you the make me knight, to the end that I may go unto
the King to entreat his Majesty that he will be pleased to accept of me for
the last knight of his number. Friend Enil said the Fair Forlorn, me thinks
that thou should begin to try thy prowess in a place less dangerous then
this battle will be, not because I would defer to make thee knight, but in
that I know it is too weighty a charge for thee. My Lord said Enil, I know
that in all my life I cannot have a better means to gain honor: for if I die
amongst so many men of worth, my reputation shall be there by increased, and
if I may escape, my renown shall be perpetual, having been one in number with
a hundred of the best knights in the world. The Fair Forlorn hearing Enil
speak so virtuously, with a kind pity that he had of him, he ruminated these
words to himself. Thou do well show thy self to be a kinsman unto the good
knight Gandales my second father. Then he answered Enil, if thou have so great
a desire to prove thy self snch a one as thou say, I will no longer dissuade
thee. And therewithal he presently went unto his host, and entreated him to
give him an armor for his Esquire, who desired to be made a knight, the which
he granted, wherefore Enil according to the custom, watched all night in the
Chapel, and the next morning about the break of day, after service was
ended, he received the order of knighthood by the Fair Forlorn, which done
they all mounted on horseback, in the company of Abradan and his two
Nephews, who served them for their Esquires. In the end they arrived where
king Lisuart had already ordered his battle, being ready to go meet his
enemies, who stayed his coming in a plain field, but when the King beheld the
Fair Forlorn, he was exceeding joyful, and there was not any in the
company, whose courage was not increased at his coming. Then he approached
near unto the king, unto whom he said, it may please your Majesty, I am come to
accomplish my promise, and also I do bring another knight with me, for I was
advertised that your number was not full, where-withall the king gave him most
hearty thanks, and although there was not any one of the hundred knights, who
were not all approomen, and esteemed amongst the best, yet king Lisuart (after
he had ordered his battallion, seeing his enemies aproached) began to make
this Oration unto his army. My fellows, loving friends and countriemen, I am
sure there is not any one amongst you, who knows not very well, how we have
undertaken this battle with great right, especially for the defense of the
honor and reputation of the Realm of Great Britain, which king Cildadan and
those of Ireland would abase, in denying unto us the tribute which they have
time out of mind paid unto our predecessors, for the acknowledgement of the
fa^ that in times past they have received at their hands. Moreover I am
thoroughly assured that there is not any of you all, whose heart is not both
valiant and invincible for which cause there is no need the you should be
further an^, or encouraged, against those with whom you are to encounter,
having your honor before your eyes, which I know you do more esteem then an
hundred lives, (if it were possible that so many you might have) one after
another. Therefore then my dear friends let us boldly march on, not respecting
a small number of cruel and bloody minded Gy^, that are in their troop, for a
man is not to be esteemed the vali^ by the outward appearance of his great,
strong, and huge members, but by the magnanimious and courageous heart that
remains within him: you do oftentimes behold the dog to master the bull,
and the sparrow hawke or hobbie to beat the kite. Our enemies trust in the
force of these monsters, without having any respect unto the wrong that they
maintain, and we only put our (...) in God, who being the righter of all
injuries, will give unto us suffcient strength to vanquish them, by the
dexterity of our persons and our own endeauours. Let us boldly then march on
my friends, every one bearing this mind, th^^ he is able both to combat and
conquer the proudest of their troop, assuring you it this day we gain the
honor of the battle, that besides the honor and glory that shall be spread of
us through the whole world, never enemy to great Britain dare once hereafter
be so bold as to lift up his head to do us the least injury that may be. Thus
did king Lisuart encourage his knights: and king Cildadan on the other side did
the like unto his, for he went from rank to rank to animate them, saying unto
them: Gentle knights of Ireland, if you understand upon what occasion you go
to fight, there is not one of you that will not blame his predecessor, for
being so slack in the undertaking of so glorious an enterprise. The kings of
Great Britain, Usurpers and Tyrants (not only toward their subjects, but
also upon their neighbors) have heretofore without any right, exacted upon
their ancestors such a tribute, as is very well known has often been paid,
and for this cause we have made this assembly, and are come unto this place to
defend our liberty, which cannot be paid by any treasure. It is your cause, it
is your right, and not yours only but your childrens, who until this present
time have been held, and reputed by those whom you see determined likewise to
make you servants and slaves. Will you then always live in this sort? Will you
continue this yoke unto your successors? are you of less courage, or of less
substance then your neighbors? Ah if we are conquerours they shall restore
that which they have had of us. I am very sure that Fortune does favor us, for
you see what men of worth are come unto our aid, knowing our great right. Let
us resist them, let us resist them valiant knights. I see King Lisuart and his
troop now in fear and ready to turn their backs unto us. They are as they
say, accustomed to vanquish, but we will reach them to accustom themselves to
be vanquished. One thing I would advise you, that every one help his fellow,
keeping you as close together as possibly you may. And longer would he have
continued his Oration, if he had not seen King Lisuart prepared to join with
him. Wherefore he retired into the midst of his squadron, and said very loud,
Now have at them, since they will eat, give them cold iron enough.

At this cry every man prepared to receive his enemy, showing by their
countenance that they were men most hardy, and courageous. And foremost of all
did march the Fair Forlarne, accompanied with Enil, as, also Galaor,
Florestan, Agraies, Gandalac the Giant (who stole Galaor away ^en he was bu^
two years old) and his two sons Bramandill, and Gainus, whom Galaor had newly
made knights. After them Nicoran de Pont Craintif, Dragonis, Palomir, Viuorant,
Giontes (Nephew to the King) the most renowned Brunni^ de Bonne Mer, his
brother Branfill, and Guillan the Penfif, who all marched after old Grumedan,
(a knight of honor belonging to the Queen) who carried King Lisuart his
standard.

On King Cildadan his side the Giants made the front of the battle, with
twenty knights all near a kin unto the King, who (like a provident General)
appointed that Mandafabull the Giant of the Isle of the Vermillio^ Tower,
should remain upon the top of a little hill, with ten of the best knights in
their troop, commanding them not to stir from thence, until they should
perceive assuredly toward the end of the battle that the most valiant knights
of Knig Lisuarte side should be scattered and weary, and that then they should
rush in upon them, without spearing any man, saving the Kings person. Whom they
should take prisoner, and if they should perceive any great resistance to be
made, they should kill him if they could not carry him unto their ships. Thus
the two battles approached so near one to another, that they came to the
ioining together: there might you have seen Lances broken, armor clattering,
arms stricken off, some crying, others breaking the ranks of their enemies, so
that this day might be well called a sorrowful and dismal day, for those that
were in this conflict, the which continued so long, until the most part of the
day was past, yet none of them ^^ad so much time as once to breath, and yet it
was so hot, that there was neither horse nor Knight that was not weary and
exrteamly travailed: for somelay upon the ground, and the most part of the rest
(in little better case) were so weak, that they could scant sit upon their
horses. At the same time the Fair Forlorn fearing least the loss should fall
upon their fide, began to show al his force and strength, and he lighted upon
never an Irishman nor giant, but that he drew the blood from his body. Close
by his side did King Lisuart ride, who did well show the great prowess that
remained in him, and he was not ignorant of what consequence the end of this
battle was, for loosing the victory thereof, he lost his dignity, his life
and honor, by means whereof without sparing his person, he was entered in
amongst his enemies, having his right arm all dyed with the blood of those,
whose lives had passed by the edgt of his sword. On the other side, Agraies,
Galaor, Florestan, haning from the beginning seen the great force and high
Knighthood that the Fair Forlorn had executed upon his enemies, they who of
long time did malign him, determined either to dye, or to make known unto
every one, that they could also fight as well or better then he, so that this
emulation was partly the cause of the animating of them so far, that they all
had likely to have lost their lives, for Galaor chafed like a Lion that is
pursued, came rushing in among the Giants, and encountered Cartadaque of the
invincible mountain, who already with his battle are, had ouerthrown at his
feet fi^ of king Lisuarts knights, although that he was wounded upon the
shoulder, with a blow that Florestan had given him, whereby he lost much of
his blood, then Galaor came unto him, and with all his strength, he gave him
so great a blow upon the head, that he cleft his helmet, and the sword
passing down along cut of his ear, and the helue of his axe close unto his
fist.

Wherefore the Giant finding himself disfurnished of his weapon, ran upon
Galaor, and lifted him up with such force, that he took him up from his
horse, crushing him between his arms so straightly, that one might easily
have heard his bones crack. Ne-uerthelesse, the Giant could not sit so sure in
his saddle, but that he was forced to fall to the ground with his burden,
wherefore Galaor (which yet held his sword in his hand) found the means to
thrust him in the beuer of his helmet, and it entered so far into his head,
that he there withal yielded up the Ghost. But Galaor was so tired, that
after he was gotten up from under Cartadaque he had not power to pull his
sword from the place wherein he had thrusted it, and (that which was worst) he
was so crowded with the press of people, that he was likely to have died
under the horses feet, for many good knights both of the one and of the other
side, (having seen the encounter between him and the Giant, and the peril of
them both) were approached, of purpose to succor them, by means whereof the
battle was then very great and maruailous hot, for King Cildadan suddenly
came to that place, who overthrew all those he found in his way, and had not
the Fair Forlorn been (who with one blow of his sword stroke him off his
horse) Galaor had there surely died or been taken, but when he beheld King
Cildadan on foot beside him, he princely seized his sword which he held, and
began to defend himself, and that so valiantly as mauger all his enemies, he
made them give him room. Notwithstanding he had ouerchafed himself so much
in this last bickering, that he was quite out of breath, and he fell down
flat upon the earth. There was the Giant Gandalac, who had fostered him up in
his infancy, he seeing him fall, was so angry that with great rage he buckled
with Albadanor another Giant, and so many strokes they gave unto each other
with their clubs, that they and their horses were overthrown, wherewith
Albadanor had his arm broken and Gandalac his leg. But they were not alone
that were thus (...) entreated, for one might have seen more then six score
knights lying upon the ground, and yet was not half the day spent. Then
Mandafabull the Giant of the Isle of the ^ed To^^r; who had been appointed ^or
to depart from the little hill wh^ remained ^till the (...), of the (...),
seeing so many knights dead, ^tered and ^ounded though (...) he might well end
this enterprise, and that it were very easy for them to defeat the rest^ by
means whereof he began to run right unto that place where was (...)
greatest press, crying unto his knights: Take h^^d that none escape away
alive, let all pass by the edge of the sword, as for me, I have vowed to take
King Lisuart in hand, for he is mine dead or alive. This cry was heard of
every one, especially of the Fair Forlorn, who returned from taking of a
fresh horse, which one of the nephews unto his host had resetued for him, and
fearing that the Giant would do as he said, he came and stepped before the
King, with Agraies, Florestan, Branco de Bonne Mer, Branfil, Guillan the P^if
and Enil, who had all day long behaved himself so valiantly, that he was had
in very great reputation. Now was M^ndafabull better seconded then he thought,
for as he approached near unto the esquadron of King Lisuart, Sar^dan the
Leonnois, Uncle to King Cildadan, one of the best knights of his stock, came
forth of the troop, and running against the Fair Forlorn, he hit him so
right a blow through his shield, that he wounded him, yet not very much, and in
passing by, the Fair Forlorn did hit him such a thwart blow with his sword
upon the beuer of his helm, that he cut both his eyes and the half of his
visage off, throwing him down stark dead upon the ground.

Herewithall Mandafabull and those that were with him being (...) angry,
entered pell mell among King Lisuart his knights with such fury, that manger
their resistance, Mandafabull took hold of the King by the collar, and lifted
him from his horse, carrying him under his arms right unto his ships. But
the fair Forlorn was ware of it, who ran after him and ouertooke the Giant,
hitting him so forcibly with his sword upon the arm, that he cut it off hard
by the elbow, and the blow sliding down, wounded the King in such sort, that
the blood fell down upon the ground. Then Mandafabull with the great grief
that he felt, gave a loud cry, and without going any further, he fell down
dead in the place, where-upon the Fair Forlorn seeing that his blow had so
well profited, as that therewithal he had slain such a Giant, and delivered
the King in like sort, he began to cry aloud Gaul, Gaul, here is Amadis who
is yet alive. So saying he entered amongst the thickest of his enemies, who had
in a manner lost their hearts, by seeing two of the principallest of their army
in that sort to be slain, especially knowing that Amadis (whom they long
before thought to be dead) was present to their confusion. And had not
Gandaturiell one of the strongest Giants in their troop encouraged them
again, they had then surely turned their backs, but he valiantly made head
against his enemies, which being perceived by Amadis, who was desirous to
revenge his brother Galaor, whom he imagined to be dead, he thrust himself
amongst his enemies, and entered into the thickest of the press, so far that
there he had remained, without the aid which King Lisuart brought unto him, who
had recovered his horse, and there were in his company Brunco, Florestan,
Guillan, L^, Galuaues, Olinas, and Don Gr^da^, who carried his standard, which
was cut asunder between his arms. All those seeing Amadis in so great danger
(although the most part of them were very sorely wounded) had such exceeding
joy when they knew that it was he, that they bestirred them in such sort, as
notwithstanding all the resistance that these Ir^ could make, they gave aid
unto Amadis, and passing on further they found Agraies, Palo^fil and Dragonis,
manfully fighting on foot against those that had thrown them down. Yet they
were so nearly driven, that they could not any longer withstand the force of
their enemies, although they had already slain more then six, as well Giants
as Irishmen which would have ouerrunne them, and without doubt they had been
so handled had not these succors come unto them. So that they which would have
forced them, had enough to do to defend themselves, because that Amadis (in
spite of them) made them to recoyle back, and that in such sort as with the
aid of his troop he was the mean that his Cosen Agraies and his fellows
did remount their horses. Then the forces of King Lisuart increased, and the
Irish troops decreased, who dispairing of all help, had recourse unto their
vessels which were a^^oate hard by (...) shore to save their boo^y i^ tune had
not contradicted them but Amadis pursuing the victory, chased them with such
fury, that the most part of the vanquished, desired rather to be buried amidst
the waves of the Sea, then on the shore, which was so died and watered with
their blood. The which Gandaturiell perceiving (being esteemed amongst all the
Giants one of the stoutest) without any fear at all of his death, which he
saw ready prepated for him, desiring before the end of his days to be
revenged, bearing his head somewhat low, and holding his sharp sword in his
hand, he would have stricken at king Lisuart, but Florestan stepped before him,
who hit him so sound a knock with his sword upon the Helmet, that he made it
fly from his head, and the King who was hard at hand, seeing him bare, divided
his pa^e into two parts. Then was there a great slaughter of the Irishmen, for
they were all now overthrown by Amadis, Florestan, and Agraies: who persued
them even into the Sea, where they were swallowed up with waves, wherewith king
Lisuart and his people retired. And because that Amadis had marked the place
where he had seen Galaor stricken down, he prayed his Cosen Agraies and
others that they would help him to find him amongst the dead. Nevertheless
they had not found him without the help of Florestan: who knew him by a green
sleeue which he did wear, wrought full of white flowers, but he was so
covered with blood and dust, that they could scant know him. And I do not
know so hard a heart which had then seen the moon that Amadis did make for
him, that would not have burst forth into tears, for he beholding him in this
estate, fell down all along upon him. Whereby his (...) did open, against which
the congealed blood was already settled, and I think that Amadis had died upon
him if twelve Damsels had not by chance come thither suddenly, who were very
richly attyred, and had c^sed a rich bed to be brought by their Esquires,
these finding Amadis so desperate, say do unto him* My Lord we are come hither
to seek your brother Galaor, and if you will ever see him alive, suffer us to
carry him presently away, other wise there is no Chyrurgion in all Great
Britain that is able to heal him.

Herewithall Amadis was greatly ashamed, because the Damsels had found him in
that order, and although that he knew them not, yet hearing them speak of his
brothers health, he determined (seeing the extreme peril wherein he was) not
to refuse their request, though it was to his extreme grief. And therefore he
answered them, my fair gentlewomen, may in please you to tell us whither you
will carry him. Not now said they, but if you will desire to have him live,
give him unto us without any longer delay, otherwise we will be gone. Alas
answered he, I pray let me follow you. You may not, and yet for your sake we
are content that Ardan the Dwarffe and his Esquire shall accompany him. Then
they laid him upon the bed (all armed as he was) and they caused him forthwith
to be carried into the ship from whence they were come, which was yet close to
the shore. Afterward they returned again unto king Lisuart, to entreat him
that he would give them king Cildadan, who lay among the dead, and to induce
him thereunto, they showed unto him that although Fortune (...) favored him in
this exployt, yet he should not exte^d his cruelty upon his enemy. The which
the King considering, permitted them to carry him away dead or alive, wherefore
the Damsels took him up and carried him away with Galaor, and so soon as they
came into the ship they set sail, having the wind so fair, that suddenly
they were out of all men's sight.

Thus king Lisuart remained co^querour over his enemies, going quite through
the field to find out as well such of his own people as those of his enemies,
that were not yet thoroughly dead, to cause them carefully to be looked unto
by skillful Surgeons. And as he went from one place to another, he met with
Amadis, whose face was all to be blubbered with tears, unto whom he had not as
yet spoken since his return, and seeing him so heavy, after he had known the
cause of his moan, he showed an evident sign of the sorrow that he sustained
for Galaors sake, who^ he loved as dearly as himself, and not without cause,
for from the first day that he received him for one of his knights, he always
served him faithfully, never forsaking him for any war or debate that
happened between his majesty and Amadis, as hereafter shall be rehearsed unto
you. But the King desirous to manifest the force of his virtue, the better to
comfort his knights, all wounded as he was, lighted from his horse to embrace
Amadis, who kneeled down to show his duty unto his Majesty. My dear friend
said king Lisuart, you are most happily met, I know now very well, that without
your aid the realm of Great Britain had been in no small danger, and I
pray you be not so heavy for the loss of your brother, seeing that the
Damsels have assured you of his health.

In this sort want king (...) comforting of Amadis, whom he caused to mount
on horseback, and afterward he brought him into his tent where there was
brought somewhat for them to eat, and because he would depart the next day, he
appointed over night that the dead should be buried in a Monestarie hard by
the place where the battle was given, upon the which place he had bestowed
great riches, to cause them to pray for him. In like sort he dispatched a
knight to go in haste to advertise the Queen of the victory that he had
gotten over his enemies, and the next morning he took his way toward the C^^y
of Gonata (which was about four leagues off) where he remained until he and
his people were ^ealed. While these things were i^ doing, the Queen Brial^ got
leave of Queen Brisena, that she might go to Mirefleur to visit Oriana,
having a great desire to see her, because she was renowned through all the
world for her most excellent beauty. Of whose coming Oriana being advertised,
she caused the place to be decked up as well as possibly it might be, and she
received her most honorably, but when she beheld her to be^^^ fair, the
suspicion that she had conceived against Amadis, was not so thoroughly
mortified but that it somewhat revived again in her, notwithstanding all the
proof that she had had of him, either by his passing thorough the Arch of
loyal lovers, or by his winning of the old man's sword, believing assuredly
that it was a thing impossible that any man could be so constant as he might
forbe are from loving a creature so beautiful as Briolania was. On the other
side Briolania verily thought that the often sighs of Amadis in her presence,
proceeded of no other cause, but the affection which he did bear unto Oriana:
for she was the most rare Princess and of the sweetest grace that ever she
had seen. Thus were these two Ladies suspicious one of another, and they
remained together discoursing of diverse matters agreeable to their affections,
especially of the virtues and perfections of Amadis. But Oriana (the better to
diue into the thought of Briolania) said unto her, I do much marvel gentle
Cosen, considering the bond wherein you are tied unto Amadis, (as also seeing
that he is decsended from Emperors, and the son unto the king of Gaul)
that you have not chosen him for your husband. Madame answered Briolania,
believe me I should have thought my self most happy if the same might have
been brought to pass, but yet of one thing I can assure you, the which I pray
you to keep as secret as it deserves. Many times did I motion such a matter
unto him, but his continual sighs did presently yield me an answer in his
behalf, yet could I never understand in what place his love was so settled, so
covert and secret is he in all his affections: nevertheless let him be
whatsoever he will be, he shall dispose of me, and all that mine is for ever,
as he shall think good. Exceeding glad was Oriana to understand these news,
by the which she appeased her new conceived jealousy against Amadis, and said
unto Briolania, I do greatly marvel what she is whom he loves as you say,
and there is no doubt but that he is (...) of the number of these lovers, by
the testimony which the image of the enchanted Arch has declared of him, for
according unto that which has been recited unto me, it showed more for him
then ever it did for any that there before had passed. He loves without doubt
answered Briolania, but it is so secret that non may know what, or where she
is.

In this sort did the two Princesses pass away their time, still talking of
Amadis during their abode in the Castle of Mirefleur, from whence within a few
days after they departed to go toward Fenusa to see the Queen Brifena, where
she stayed for King Lisuart, who was very glad to see her daugter return in so
good health. There they had news of the victory that the King had against the
Prince of Ireland, where with their joy redoubled, and God was highly praised:
but when Queen Briolania knew that he which was called the Fair Forlorn was
Amadis of Gaul never was there woman more joyful then she. And although that
Oriana and Mabila knew the cause thereof very well (as you have heard) yet did
they dissemble the matter, and seemed to wonder thereat no less then the rest,
by means whereof Briolania did often times say thus unto them: would you ever
have suspected that Amadis would have thus disguised himself, and taken a
strange name amongst his dearest friends, desiring thereby to extinguish his
own renown by the great prowess that he performed under the title of a
stranger? By my faith, answered Oriana, if he return with the King, we must
know of him wherefore he did it, and also what she was that gained the
kerchiefe with him. I assure you said Briolania that we will not ^^icke to
demand it of him, and I believe he will willingly tell us.

CHAP. XVII.
How King Cildadan and Galaor were unawares to themselves, carried away by
twelve Damsels, and one of them was put into a strong Tower environed with the
Sea, and the other in a garden enclosed with high walls, where they thought they
had been in prison, and of that which happened there unto them.

NOw we will rehearse unto you, the entertaynement that was made unto King
Cildadan and Galaor, whom the Gentlewomen had put into the ship, and they were
carried and so well looked unto, that the third day following they began to
amend, for until then they had lost all manner of feeling and remembrance. And
Galaor found himself to be laid in a chamber (within a garden) furnished in
the most sumptuous order that ever he had seen, the which was supported up
with four Marble pillars, environed notwithstanding with great gates of iron,
through the which he might easily see from his bed where he lay, all the
circuit of the garden, the which was closed about with high walls, not having
any entrance into it but one little door covered over with plates of iron,
whereby he thought that he was in prison. Then did he begin to feel such
great grief in his wounds, that he hoped for nothing but death. Then did he
remember that he had been in the battle, but he knew not who had either
brought him away, or laid him in a place so strange as this was. And no less
abashed was king Cildadan to see that he was locked up in a strong Tower,
compassed about with the maine Sea, although that the chamber wherein he
remained was most richly hanged, and he laid in a good bed. Nevertheless he
was alone, and he thought that he did hear some people talking right under the
vault, but he could neither perceive door, nor place where thorough any body
might enter into his chamber. Wherefore he rose up, and put his head forth at
the window, and he could see nothing but the Sea, whose waves did beat against
the place wherein he remained shut up, the which was built upon the top of a
most ^^eep and hard Rock, neither did he know how he was brought from the
place where he was smitten down among the press of people. Notwithstanding
he knew very vell seeing he was in such a place that he had lost the
battle, and that his knights were either all dead, or taken, but yet he
comforted himself as well as he could, and laid him down again upon his bed,
bewayling greatly the grief which he did feel in his wounds. Thus was Galaor
lying sick on the other side, as has been recited, who heard the little
door of the garden open: which caused him to rise from his bed, as well as he
could, and he perceived a fair Gentlewoman coming unto him, being very
richly attired, the which did bring with her a knight so old and crooked, that
it was wonder how he could be able to stand. These approaching nere unto
Galaor, said to him through the grates of iron, without opening the chamber
door. Knight, provide for your souls health, for we will not henceforth
warrant you. Then the Damsel took forth two little boxes, one of iron, and
the other of silver: and showing them unto Galaor, she said unto him. Knight,
the party which has caused you to come hither, will not that you should die,
before she do know whether you will accomplish her will or no, and in the
mean season she will cause your wounds to be cured. Gentlewoman, answered
Galaor, if she desire that I should do any thing contrary to mine honor, I
had rather die. You may do, said she, as you list, although it is your choice
either to live or die. Herewithall the old man opened the gate, and so soonas
they were entered into the chamber, the the Gentlewoman presently gave unto him
the iron box, willing him to step back, the which he did. Afterward she said
unto Galaor. My Lord, I am so sorry for your sickness, that for to save your
life, I will hazard mine own death, and I will declare that which I was put in
charge to do. Which is, that I should fill these two boxes, the one with
poison, and the other with ointment to make you sleep, to the end that when
you did awake, you might feel such extreme pain, that with the rage thereof
you might cruely end your life, but I have done clean contrary, for I have
filled them with such a salve, that if you use it bur seven days together, you
shall find your self whole, sound; and able to mount on horseback. Then she
rubbed his wounds with the ointment, the which was of such virtue, that at the
same instant his pain was appeased, and hoe felt such case, that he said unto
the Damsel. Fair Gentlewoman, you do bind me so greatly unto you, that if
ever I come forth from hence, you may be sure that never any Gentlewoman was
better recompensed by any knight, then you shall be by me, nevertheless, if
you have noth the means to deliver me, I beseech you at the least, do so
much that Vrganda the unknown may be advertised thereof, for I have euer-more
had a great confidence in her. The Gentlewoman began to laugh, and answered
him. What? do you make such account of Vrganda, seeing that hitherto she has
been so careless of your wealth or woe? I know well, said he, that as she
knows the secret thoughts of men, so is she not ignorant how much my desire
is to serve her. Ne-uer care you for any other Vrganda (answered she) then me,
and have only a good hope, endeavoring to hasten your health, taking unto you
the courage of a valiant man, such as you have always bin esteemed, seeing
that you know that manhood and valor, is not only requisite at combats and
dangerous encounters, but in other accidents that may suddenly happen, like as
at this present the cafe stands. And for the recompense of the peril that I
do undertake, to heal you and deliver you from hence, I pray you grant unto
me one gift, which shall neither be hurtful nor dishonurable unto you. Trust
me Damsel said he, you shall have of me even whatsoever you shall please,
if it may well and lawfully be performed. Go to, then answered she, let this
suffice you now, until it be time for me to return again to dress you, in
the mean season cover you, and feign as if you slept soundly, the which he
did. Then the Gentlewoman called the old man, and said unto him, see how the
knight sleeps, the poison does now work upon him. All the better, answered
the old man, he which has brought him hither, so far as I see shall be
sufficiently revenged upon him, and seeing that you have so well obeyed that
which you were commanded, I am content henceforth that you do come without any
guard at all to visit him. But use him after this manner fifteen days
together, for at that time they shall come hither, who (for the injury that
he has done unto them) shall take such satisfaction of him, as they please.
Galaor heard all their talk, and he knew very well that the old man was his
mortal enemy, nevertheless he had some hope in the Damsels promise, who
had assured him that he should be healed in seven days, hoping (if so she
did) that he might easily save himself from their hands. Hereupon the old
man and the Damsel departed: but she tarried not long before he did see her
return with two other young virgins, exceeding fair, who brought victuals
unto Galaor, and caused him to eat. This done the Damsel commanded the other
two to keep him company, and to read before him some pleasant Histories, to
keep him from sleeping in the day time, so that Gala^^ being greatly comforted
by the Damsels kind entertaynement, was thoroughly assured that she would
help him as she had promised, and so shutting the ga^^, she departed and left
the two young Gentlewomen discoursing with him. Far otherwise did it happen
unto king Cildadan, who being shut up within a Tower, and laid upon his bed,
did see a door of stone to open (the which was close fastened in the wall,
that it seemed as if it had been the wall it self) by the which there entered
in a gentlewoman of middle age, accompanied with two armed knights, the which
came close to his bed side. The King saluted them, but they answered not, the
gentlewoman lifted up the covering that he had upon, and looking upon his
wounds, she dressed the^, afterward she gave him somewhat to (...), and
returned both she and the knights the same way they came, not once speaking
unto him. When the king beheld their manner of behavior, he believed that he
was in the prison of such a one where his life was in no great safety,
nevertheless he took as good comfort unto him as he could, not being able
otherwise to remedy his mishap. But the gentlewoman that looked unto Galaor
seeing that it was time to dress him went unto him, and asked him how he
fared. Passing well answered Galaor, and I hope (seeing the good beginning of my
am^men) that I may be healed within the time that you have promised. There is
no doubt there of said she, therefore I will that you promise me as you are a
loyal knight, not to depart from hence without ^^y leave, otherwise your life
may be in peril of death. Galaor did sw^ unto her so to do, beseeching her
most instantly to tell him how she was called. But she answered him. How now
Galaor, do you not yet know my name? Truly now I am greatly deceived*
considering the services that heretofore I have done for you, when you are so
forgetful of me? I am called, The wise among the wisest: saying so, she went
forth of the chamber fayning to be very angry, and pulled the door rudely
after her. Wherewith Galaor remained more pensive then before, and he
remembered him of the fair sword that Vrgande had given unto him, when his
brother Amadis made him knight, whereby he suspected that it was she her
self, nevertheless, he was in some doubt, because that when he saw her
first, she seemed to be old and crooked, and this was young, fair, and in
good liking. And as he was in this study not being able to sleep, he turned
his head toward the place, where the young Gentlewomen were accustomed to sit
in keeping him company, but in stead of them he perceived Gasauel his esquire,
and (...) the Dwarffe of Amadis: at which he was no less abashed then joyful,
and he called them because that they slept. Who at their awaking, seeing their
Master, they became no less amassed then he, and they rose up doing their duty
unto him, and he demanded how they were come thither, who answered, that
Amadis, Flor^stan and Agraies, had commanded them to follow him. They further
declared unto him, in what estate the Damsels took him up, for which cause
Amadis seeing in what extremity you remained, permitted them to carry you away,
together with King Cildadan. What do you say* said Galaor, was Amadis in (...)
assembly? My Lord, said (...) (...) was he that was called (...) Forl^rne, by
whose streng^^ (...) courage the batt^ile was (...). Then he recited unto him
the ^ner how he delivered the King* and killed Man, and (...) ^^en he made
himself known, crying Gaul with a loud voice. Thou ^lest me wonders, said
Galaor, but by my faith, he was too blame to hide himself from me. This was
the estate wherein Galaor and Citd^dan remained, who in few days felt so great
ease of their woonds, that they began to walk about the chamber. Wherefore
^gande (in whose power they remained in her unknown Island) made her self
known unto them, saying ^to them. That the fear (...) she had put them, had
been the means to effect their health the sooner, otherwise they had (...)
(...) in danger of their lives. After^ she commanded her two (...) to be
fetched to keep them company, which were daughters unto King Fal^^gris, (...)
unto King Lis^art, who ha^otten upon them the sister of ^da, one of them was
called (...) (wh^ Galaor did shortly after beget with child of a son, that was
named Talanqua, and afterward proved a valiant Knight) and the other was
called Solisa, who also had by (...) Cildadan Man the (...). And these two
Knights (...) (...) these two Damose^^, till (...) set them at liberty, (...)
here^ (...) shall be declared unto you.

In the mean time King (...), Amadis, and the other Knights ^ed at Gonata, and
after they (...) healed of their w^^nds, they determined to go visit the (...)
which s^^ied for them in the (...) of F^^usa, of whom they were received with
great joy. But during their abode there, as Amadis talked with Queen Bri^ (in
the company of Oriana) she said unto him. My Lord, I assure you I was so
sorrowful when it was told me that you were lost, that I can in no sort
express unto you the displeasure that I received therewith, and at the last
seeing that you stayed so long before you returned, I determined to come unto
this Court, with a hundred of my Knights, to cause the search of you to begin,
according to the appointment of my Lords your brethren. Nevertheless by
means of the battle which the King had appointed with King Cildadan, my
enterprise was stayed and that in a good hour, seeing that it pleased God so
soon to bring you home again. Therefore advise you now (if it please you) what
you will that I shall do for you, for I will obey you all my life long.
Madame, answered Amadis, if you were in any perplexity for me, you had great
reason* for I am well assured, that there is ^ight in the world more ready to
do you service then is Amadis of Gaul. But seeing that it pleases you to refer
all your affairs upon me* I pray you to ^arry y^^ in this Court eight or ten
days longer, until we may hear some news from my brother ^ala^r, in the
mean time you shall have the pastime of a Combat, which my brother Fl^ must
perform against La^din, and afterward I will conduct you home into your
Country, and from thence I will take my way unto the Firme-Island, where I
must needs be* I will do, said Briola^ia what-soeuer it shall please you,
provided that you do tell unto us the wonde^^ and (...). And (...) have (...)
him, (...) him by the hand, and (...) him. My Lord (...) (...) somewhat to do,
(...) leave you in peace* bef^ (...) told us something. In (...) Ladies,
answered he, (...) take in hand to (...) of the whole, y^^ (...) it
impossible: neuerthel^ truly tell you that the (...) chamber is the most fair
(...) in all the world, and (...) (...) gained by one of you two* (...) believe
that so long as we (...) uer may any other (...) (...) therein. Bri^lania (...)
while without answering (...) the end she said unto Am^ I do not think that I
may (...) to finish such an adue^ notwithstanding (such as (...) were not to
be reputed (...) ^^e, I would willingly (...) thereof. Madame, answ^ is not to
be counted a (...) on, to ^^ie that wherein (...) have failed until this pre^
cause they were not fair (...) and you which are one of (...) excellent
creatures in (...) should do so much (...) far this singularity, (...) (...)
might turn you (...) (...) blame, in not performing (...) devour. Amadis did
(...) cei^e by her counte^ (...) ana was not greatly pl^ (...) this discourse,
and al^ (...) thought that he had said (...) but what might red^ (...) honor,
yet did it gready (...) that he had spoken so (...) had seen the old image
(...) nesa, and he knew very (...) olania was inno^ (...) her in beauty,
therefore (...) not attain unto that glory, the which he made no doubt at all
in Oriana. But Oriana judged far otherwise, for she imagined that there was
not any thing in the world that Briola^ia might not accomplish, if by beauty it
might be conquered, and dissembling before her the malice th^^ she now had
conceived against her, she prayed her that if she entered into the forbidden
chamber, that she would vouch^^fe to send her news thereof. Then she rose up,
and went to seek out Mabila, whom when she had found, she recited all the
conference that had passed betwixt Amadis and ^ia, (in her presence) saying
unto her. By my faith your Cousin does very often give me the like alarmes,
although he be assured that I take no pleasure at all in any thing, but only
in that wherein I may best please and obey him, without respect of mine honor,
fear of God, or obedience to my parents. But he knows that he has full
power over me, which causes him now to despise me, for the which I may only
blame that (...) familiarity which I have showed unto him, thinking that I had
done all for the best. In uttering these her supposed wrongs, abundance of
reares fell from her eyes, which Mabila perceiving (as being very discreet)
she bethought her of a present Antidote to expel this poison. And therefore
faining to be exceeding angry, with the injury that Oriana offered unto
Amadis, she answered her very sharply and shrewdly: Madame, I do greatly
wonder at you, and your manner of behavior, for so soon as one mischief has
forsaken you, another does presently follow you, and you ought (me^hinkes) to
take better regard unto that which you say of my to (...), and not to be
persuaded (...) he has spoken either one thing or another to anger you, seeing
that you may be assured that (...) (...) ^ed to offer you any offense, (...) in
word or deed. And (...) ^^fficient witness you have, in the proofs and
trial that he has made, as well in your presence as in your absence, but I
see well what your meaning is, you would have she know (being weary of my
company) that you would put me away under the coullour that my cofin is so
wholly yours, abusing your self with the bondage wherein he is subjected unto
you. Nevertheless, when you shall have for saken me, it will be no great
matter, so that your Amadis (for yours may I call him) be not worsse used. For
you know very well and I also, that the least displeasure he shall take at your
grief, will be sufficient to cause his death, therefore ^maruaile what
pleasure you take to torment him so often, he aduenturing himself for you as
much as is possible to be done for any other Lady li^ing. Do you not
consider, that Ap^ willed the proof of the forbidden chamber should be common
to all the world? What a great error should my Cousin then commit, to diswade
(...) that she should not do as much as others? Tuely I believe that neither
you nor she are yet fair enough to perform that, which all the fairest during
these hundred years could never obtain. Therefore I am thoroughly and, that
this new jealousy proceeds not from any fault which he has committed, whose
mind is wholly adicted to obey you. Moreover his misfortune has so much
(...) him, that to please you he has not only forgotten himself, (but also
regarded none but you) he has quite disdayned all his kindred, and has
accounted them as mere strangers, not knowing them at all, nor any other but
you whom he adoreth as his God, and yet you would by your folly procure his
ouer-throw. Ay me, the dangers and evident peril wherein he and his have,
oftentimes been brought unto for your sake, as well against Arcalaus as in
this last battle, are very ill acknowledged by you, seeing that now in
satisfaction thereof, you desire the destruction of the chief and
principallest of my kindred. Is this the favor and recompense for the services
that I have done unto you? Truly my hope is now greatly deceived, seeing
before mine eyes, a complot is laid for the ruin and fall of a wight whom I
do most love in the world, and he that is yours more then his own,
notwithstanding (if it please God) it shall not be so, nor shall such a
misfortune happen so near unto me. For I will entreat my brother Agraies and
my Uncle Galuanes to carry me into Scotland, whereby they shall do me a
great pleasure to take me away from your company who are so ungrateful.
Herewithall she wept so extremely, as though she would have drowned her
self with tears. Alas said she God grant that the cruelty which you commit
against your Amadis, light not upon your own head, to satisfy all his
kindred, who shall not lose so much (in his lack) as you alone shall do,
although it should be the greatest misfortune that could happen unto us. When
Oriana did hear Mabila speak in such choler, her heart was so ouercharged,
that her speech ^^iled until she had a little while rested her, when bursting
out into reares, she mainely cried (...), (...) me poor soul, above all
^late and sorrowful women, must wretched: who would ever (...) imagined this
which y^^^ h^e now made manifest unto me, could ever have proceeded (...) of
your heart? Alas I ^sed my secrets unto you (h^g about me no other worthy to
^derstand my sorrows) to have counsel and comfort at your (...), but you
discomfort me, and (...) me worse then I have deserved, reputing me, to be
far other^ then I am, or ever shall be so long as breath remains within my
sorrowful heart, which (...) me to presume that (...) my misfortune has
broug^ on me this unhappy usage, seeing that you have taken in (...) that
which I did tell yo^ the best. And let God never help me if I did think
days of my life upon that wherewith yo^ (...) blame and accuse me, for I
(...) so great confidence in your Cosen, that I study upon n^g so much, as how
to content him: yet thus much I must tell you, that I had rather die then any
other (...) my self, should gain the honor of the forbidden Chamber. Judge
you then what grief it would be to me if Briolania (who goes before to make
proof thereof) should accomplish it, notwith-standing my good Cosen and (...)
friend, I pray you to pardon (...), and (if it please you) def^ not to advise
me what you think is (...) for me to do. For your Cosen might be very angry
if he did know that which I have (...) of him. Madame, answered Mabila, seeing
you acknowledge your fault, you must be better advised hereafter. You have had
experience enough, by that which is past, what inconvenience may happen upon so
light occasions, take heed henceforth then, how you commit the like errors.
Thus were these two Ladies reconciled together as before, nevertheless shortly
after Mabila came unto Amadis, unto whom she declared all the talk that Oriana
had with her, reproouing him sharply for that which he had said to Briolania
before her, knowing that already she had been suspicious of them both.
Therefore my good Cosen said Mabila, endeavor henceforth not to give her any
farther occasion to use you ill, speaking hereafter more discreetely then you
have done, especially before my Lady, for it is a very hard matter wholly to
banish and extinguish jealousy from a woman after it is much rooted in her
mind, and had it not been for my sharp answer unto her, by my faith she had
passed the bounds of reason. Sweet Cosen answered Amadis, I do much marvel
at the fantasy of my Lady, but yet I do give you exceeding great thanks,
for the counsel that you give unto me, although I do swear unto you that
whatsoever I did speak, I thought was wholly for her advantage. And I will tell
you how every one knows that Briolania is reputed one of the faired Ladies in
the world, so as one would think her sufficient to enter into the forbidden
chamber, but this thought is false: for I have seen the Image of Grimanesa,
unto whose beauty Briolania in no sort comes near, wherefore it is most sure
that she shall never attain to this honor, the which my Lady shall obtain
without any difficulty. Nevertheless if it were first before Briolania had
made her try all therein, one might say after-ward, If she had begun before
Oriana, that then she had first achieved the adventure: by means whereof I
was so bold (in the presence of my Lady) to give her that counsel which you
have heard, Mabila liked well this excuse of Amadis, and told Oriana thereof,
who did greatly repent her that she had spoken so much, fearing least Amadis
would have been offended with her, and to make amend: for this fault which she
had committed, she sent him word by Mabila, that he should come to see her in
her lodging, where she and Briolania stayed for him, the which he did. At his
coming the Ladies took him by the hand, and made him fit between them, then
they prayed him to tell them the truth of that which they would demand of him,
whereunto he ^disco^ended. Tell us then said Oriana, what is the Lady that
gained the kerchief with the flowers, when you conquered the burning sword?
Amadis perceived well that he was not only overtaken, but also constrained to
tell the truth, for which cause he answered Oriana: In faith Madame I know no
more what she was then you do, although I remained in her company six days
together. But thus much did I see in her, that she had the fairest hair that
any Lady or Damsel could possibly have, and she is besides most beautiful,
and of a most excellent grace, for the rest you know as much as I do. By my
faith said Oriana, if she got the kerchiefe with great honor, it had bin like
afterward to have cost her very dear as it was told me, for without your
assistance Arcalaus the enchanter and his Nephew Lindoraq had taken it from
her, and also done her some villainy. It was not he answered Briolania (if he
be Amadis) but another who was called the Fair Forlorn, from whom we must
not derogate the honor to attribute it unto another. And although I am greatly
bound unto Amadis, yet will I not let to speak the truth of the Fair
Forlorn, because if the one have surmounted Apolidon in prowess by winning of
the Firme-Island, the same being unto him an exceeding great reputation, so in
like sort was the other worthy of no less praise, who in one only day
overthrew ten of the best knights in Great Britain, and slew the most
redoubted Giant Famongomad, and Basigant his son: if Amadis did pass under
the Arch of loyal lovers, in whose favor the Images of copper did sound a
more melodious tune, then it did for any other that ever proved the same
adventure, thereby manifesting his loyalty, it seems in like sort that the
Fair Forlorn had as great an advantage in gaining the the burning sword, the
which for the space of threescore years no other could draw forth of his
scabbard. Therefore Madame, it is not reason to take away the honor from the
Fair Forlorn, and without desert to give it unto Amadis, seeing that both in
prowess and loyalty they may (as I think) equal one another. And as they
were in these pleasant discourses, a Damsel came and told Amadis that the
King asked for him, because that Don Quedragant and Landin his Nephew were
before him to acquit them of the promise that they had made by the means
whereof Amadis was constrained to leave the Lady, and to go unto the Court. By
the way he met with Bruneo and Branfil, who followed him, and they found that
Quedragant had begun his speech unto the King, saying: It may please your
Majesty, I have stayed here for Amadis of Gaul, according to the covenant
that I made with the Fair Forlorn, and now that he is in the Court I will
discharge me of my promise. True it is that by force of arms, I was
constrained to grant unto the Fair Forlorn that I should not depart from your
company, until Amadis were returned, and then he being come before your
highness, I should cease all quarrels that I had enterprised against him, for
the death of king Abies of Ireland my brother, and never after to demand any
thing at his hands, therefore and in like sort that I should never hereafter
bear arms against your Majesty, or any of yours. Which matter has since
grieved me more then one would think, because I could not be present at the
battle, the which you had undertaken against king Cildadan and his followers,
of the number of whom I thought to have been, but fortune was so contrary
that my intent was turned far otherwise then I had purposed, for the hate
which I did bear unto Amadis, is converted into a most great amity, the which
I am determined to hold inviolable with him, if he think it good being assured
that I was overcome by him, under the name of the Fair Forlorn, the which he
had taken because he would not be known. So that I do manifestly perceive
that fortune is wholl^ determined to advance him, as the the force which he
did show in this last battle can sufficiently witness, the honor whereof
ought wholly to be yielded unto him and to no other. For this cause it may
please your Majesty, seeing my Lord Amadis is here present, that first you
will discharge me of that which I have promised unto him under a contrary
name, and as for him I remit all the evil will that I did bear unto him, for
the death of my late deceased brother king Abies, and I do further entreat
him to accept me for his companion and perpetual friend. Sir Quedragant
answered the King, you speak like a prudent and wise knight, for what prowess
or courage soever a Gentleman has, if he be not governed by counsel and
reason, he is not worthy that any man should make account of him. You are
sufficiently known for one of the best knights in the world, yet you may be
assured that the fellowship which you demand of Amadis shall in no sort deminish
your praise and renown, you two continuing in mutual amity together: and you
may believe that he will be very glad to accept of the offer which you do
make unto him. Is it not true gentle friend? said the King unto Amadis. If it
like your Majesty answered he, Quedragant is so worthy a knight that his fame
is spread abroad in many places, and seeing that it pleases him to choose me
for his consort, I do thankefully accept his kind offer. Herewithall they
embraced, and so long did their friendship thenceforth continue, that it was
never separated but by death. At the same time was Florestan and Landin before
the King, purchasing their leave to enter into the field, according to their
appointed agreement (a good while before) in maintenance of Amadis his quarrel
against Quedragant: but when they saw them friends their combat was finished,
and their hatred converted into amity, wherewith Landin was exceeding glad, for
he had already proved Florestan in the journey against king Cildadan, and
seen his valor and prowess.

Thus were these quarrels ended, and how much the Court had here-tofore been
troubled, by so much was the joy and pastime thereof increased, nevertheless
the King having not forgotten the misery wherein king Arban of Northwales and
Angriota de Estrauaux remained, (after he had some few days stayed with the
Ladies) he undertook their deliverance, and the better to effect the same, he
determined to pass into the Isle of Mongaza, to set them at liberty, wherewith
he made his knights acquainted. Then Amadis answered him, your Majesty does
know that my brother Galaor has been lost in your service, therefore I
beseech you to excuse me from accompaning your grace in this voyage, for if
God please my cosins and I will go seek him as it is reason, and so soon as
we have found him, I assure your Majesty that incontinently we will follow
unto that place where we shall hear your grace abides. Friend Amadis,
answered the King, I promise you of my faith, that I my self would willingly
accompany you, so sorry am I for Galaor: but you know the present affairs that
I have, whereby I am in truth to be excused, yet nevertheless I am well
pleased with your departure, both when you list, and with such company as you
like. Here-withall there rose up more then a hundred of the most approved
knights, who did all swear the search of Galaor. For said they, hardly may we
undertake a worthier or more strange adventure: and they prevailed with the
King so much that they got leave to depart the next morning.

CHAP. XVIII.
How the evening ensuing, the King being risen from the table, walking about
the galleries of his Palace, he beheld two great fires upon the Sea, that came
directly toward the City.

NOw it happened the same day after the King had supped, as he walked along a
gallerie, being almost bedtime, he beheld two strange fires upon the Sea,
which came with great swiftness directly toward the City. Wherewith he was
greatly amassed, because he thought it very difficult that water and fire
should continue together, especially when he beheld in the midst of these
fires, a galley, at the mast whereof were many great burning torches, so that
one would have judged the vessel had been all on fire. This wonder did
astonish the people so much that in a manner they came all forth of the City,
presuming that seeing the Sea was not able to quench this fire, it was
impossible to defend the City from being burnt to ashes, if the same once
took hold thereof, wherefore the King as fearful as the rest mounted upon his
horse, and came forth with them upon the sands. And as he came near the water
side, he did see that the most part of all the knights were already arrived,
and amongst the rest was Amadis, Evil, and Guillan, who were at that time so
near the galley, which was hard at shore, that he thought it impossible for
them to escape from the fire thereof. Hereupon he set spurs to his horse,
because he took on exceedingly with the noise that was made, and whether he
would or no he brought him close to the galley side: upon the which shortly
after he saw a cloth lifted up which covered it, and a Damsel appeared
clothed in white silk, that held a small Coser of gold in her hand, which she
opened, then she took out of it a burning taper which she cast into the Sea,
and presently the two great fires vanished away so suddenly, that it was not
perceived what was become of them. Wherewith all the people were maruailous
glad, seeing that they were out of danger, for there remained no more light
then that of the torches, which burned upon the mast of the galley, with the
brightness whereof all the shore received light. Then the galley was plainly
perceived which was decked with many garlands of flowers, and instruments began
to sound very sweetly. Herewithal there apeared upon the poupe twelve Damsels
richly apparelled, every one of the^ having a chaplet of roses upon their head,
and a rod of gold in their hands. And she marched forth first of all that had
thrown the raper into the Sea, who coming a shore did her duty unto the
King, and he received her very kindly, saying unto her: Madame in satisfaction
of the fear wherewith your fire affrighted us, tell us if y^ please who you
are, although we already surmise that we know you well enough. Your Majesty
answered she, is of such a valiant courage, that it is impossible to terrify
you with so small a thing, yet the fires which you have seen were ordained to
no other end but for the safety of my women and me when we are determined to
go by Sea. For the rest if you think me to be Vrganda the unknown, your
thought is true, and I am expressly come into these parts to visit you, as the
best Prince in the earth, and the Queen also, who is one of the wisest Ladies
that lives. Then she called Amadis saying unto him. My Lord Amadis come near
and I will tell you, (to ease you of the travail that you should have in
seeking of Galaor) that your brother is well, and so thoroughly healed, that you
shall see him here very shortly, therefore leave off your determined search of
him, for he is in such a place as all the men in the world can never find
him. Madame answered Amadis, when he was demanded of me by the Damsels that
carried him away, I imagined that he should be saved by you, and that no other
but Vrganda would have undertaken such an enterprise, which has ever since put
me in good hope, without the which I think I had been dead. For this one
thing I am sure of, that there is no knight in the world more bound to Lady or
gentle woman then I am to you, for the which I am not able to yield you such
co^gne thanks as I do owe, and you deserve, but you know very well, that
Amadis his life shall never be spared to ^o you service. Madame said the king,
will it please you to come an (...) you in my (...). Yo^^ Majesty answered
Vrganda shall pardon me, for I will (...) this night in my galley, and tomorrow
I will do whatsoever it shall please you, but Amadis, Agraies, Brunco, and
Guillan shall keep me company, because I know they are as amorous as my
self, and their company will be a means to dri^e away all melancholy. Do
what you will said the King, for you shall be obeyed. Then he caused the people
to return unto the C^y, and he himself (bidding Vrganda good night) departed,
lea^ng for (...) guard a number of archers upon the sands: the next morning the
Queen sent unto Vrganda twelve of her own hacknies richly trapped, upon the
which she and he women entered into the City, and Vrganda ^ode in the midst
of the four knights which she had ouernigh detained to keep her company. They
entertained her with diverse discourses by the way, wherein she took so great
pleasure that she said unto them, Believe me it would be a long time before
I should be weary of so good company as this of yours is: for I assure you
that I find you all four so agreeable to my nature, that you are particularly
even all one with my self, for (...) I be in love, you are no less, holding
Ladies in most great estimation. And this said Vrganda, because that she
languished with extreme love which she did be are unto the fair Knight, of
whom in our first book we have mentioned unto you. Their conference was no
sooner ended, when they approached near unto the Palace, but the King who
there had stayed, came forth to meet them, and as he embraced Vrganda
(bidding her heartily welcome) she looked round about her upon the company,
and beheld a great number of knights, in each place. Whereupon she said, me
thinks your Majesty is now royally accompanied, not only for the multitude of
great personages that are with you, but especially for the love which I am sure
they do bear unto you, for which you ought greatly to praise God. For the
Prince that is beloved of his subjects, may be sure to maintain his estate in
great safety, therefore your Majesty must endeavor to entertain and use them
Kingly, that your fortune (which hitherto has favored you) do not forsake you
if you do otherwise: and above all things take heed of false reports, seeing
that it is the very poison and ruin of such Princes as give credit unto them.
And as the King would have brought her to her chamber, she said unto him: may
it please your Majesty that I may first go and do my duty to the Queen? I
with all my heart gentle Lady answered he, I am sure that she will be most
glad to see you, as she that has greatly desired to honor and please you.
Herewithall he conducted her where the Ladies were, and so soon as the Queen
did see her, she rose up and kissed her, saying, that she was exceeding
welcome: then she made her sit down between Oriana and Briolania, whom
Vrganda had never yet seen: and she found that Briolania was the fairest Lady
in they world, if Oriana by her excellency had (...) blemished her beauty, and
to sp^ truth there was great diff^ between them two. Then Vr^da said unto the
Queen: Madame, I do now find th^^ (...) which I have ever heard (...) Which
is, that the King was (...) accompanied with worthy (...) then any other
Christian Prince, and you also attended upon by the fairest Ladies on the
earth, for he which conquered the Firm-Island (being a better knight then
Apolidon) and the famous victory which so lately has been obtay^^^ against
King Cildadan, by the effusion of the blood of so many Giants as there dyed,
are su^ witnesses of the one, and I am sure (to prove the other) it will easily
be granted unto me, the the firmament it is not po^ find fairer Ladies then
the here, pointing to Oriana and ^riolania: but if your Court has this
pre-eminence, it is yet ho^ for one thing and far more ^commendable, which is
the loyalty wherein love is there maintained, as well to be seen by the proof
of the burning sword, and the kerchiefe beset with flowers, which adventure was
perfor^^^ in your presence. When Ori^ heard her go so far in her (...), her
heart began to tremble, and she became sorry and pensi^^ ^ring least Vrganda
would spe^^^ more, in disclosing the secrefie between Amadis and her. B^^
Amadis who was present, knowing the wisdom of her that knew all things, and
the doubt of Ori^, he approached unto her, whispering thus in her care, I
aff^^^ (...) Madame, that Vrganda is ou^^ discreet to speak any thing ^ly or
unadvisedly. And therewithal he turned unto the Queen, saying unto her,
Madame, your grace may demand (if it please you) of Vrganda what she was that
gained the kerchiefe. I pray you said the Queen, tell us that. By my faith
answered Vrganda, there is great cause why Amadis should know better what she
was then I, for she followed him, and after-ward he delivered her from the
hands of Arcalaus the enchanter, and from Lindoraq his Nephew, not without
great danger of his person. Madame said Amadis, it was impossible that I
should either know her or my self, better then you did, seeing that you know
that she desiring to remain unknown would never uncover her face before me,
yet from you nothing may be so well concealed, that is not at your pleasure
revealed. Truly answered Vrganda, for your sake I will presently declare unto
you as much as I know. The Damsel (whose loyalty is so known) is no maid,
for she is a fair wife, above all others most excellent: and for the same
cause did she conquer the kerchiefe so renowned, especially through the
constant love which she did bear unto her Lord. She is by birth, of the Kings
country, by her Mother an Alien, and her continual abiding is in this Realm,
where she lives so abundantly, that if she wants any thing, it is only
because she can not (at all times when she pleases) enjoy him whom she
loves better then her (...), further shall you not know what she is by me.
Oriana who feeling herself touched by Vrganda, was not well cotented, (doubting
least she should have proceeded further) until she^ held her peace, and that
the Queen answered: truly gentle ^adie you (...) (...) c^nuingly deciphe^^d her
(...) (...), that there is (...) any (...), in (...) opinion, the (...) for
(...) ^^owledge, saving only that (...) did think her a maid, and yo^ us
that she is a wife. A (...) will come said she, that you shall know her better.
Here withal the King who was minded, to feast Vrg^, came to seek her, (...)
he might lead her to dinner: he made her sit close beside him, and afterward
they spent the rest of the day in sporting and making good (...), until it was
time to go to ^^st. Then Vrganda came unto the Queen, to (...) her that she
would be pleased to suffer her to lie in Oriana her chamber, the which she
willingly did grant unto (...). Nevertheless said the Queen, I fear that her
youthful be^ will somewhat (...) you. In ^aith Madame answered she, (...)
beauty shall be more hurtful (...) many good knighes, whose (...) esse cannot
be so great as th^^ (...) may defend them from sundry perils, which they are
likely (...) (...) into for her love, ^or that the^^ dea^^s will hardly be
eschewed, (...) they do not wisely pr^. The Queen could (...) refrai^^ (...)
laughter, and said unto Vrg^^da. Hitherto she may be p^do^^d (...) any such
danger that she has (...) yet brought those unto of (...) you speak: and
therefore for (...) time I bid you good ^ght. Here-upon the Queen departed,
(...) Vrganda was brought unto the Princess her lodging, where sh^^ found the
Q^ (...), (...) Mabila, that (...) ^er comp^, with whom (...) ^^sco ^ed so long
of diverse (...) overcome of ^^eep, they (...) strained to lay them down. Now
they were all four lodged in one chamber together, notwithstanding Vrganda
perceiving Briolania and Mabila to be fast asleep, and Oriana awake, she said
unto her, Madame, if you now do not take your rest for thinking upon him, that
day and night does wake for your love, your quiet and his are both alike. I
know not what you mean answered Oriana, but sure I am, that love never
hindered me from sleep. Vrganda knew very well that she made her this answer,
because she would not that Briolania should understand the love betwixt her
and Amadis, wherefore she said unto her: assure you that I am so careful that
your secrets be not disclosed, as I will not offend you with any thing that I
speak, for I know what is needful for you better then your self. Madame
answered Oriana, you may waken the Gentlewomen that are in this chamber. Let me
alone for that said Vrganda, I will rid you straight of this fear.
Therewithal she took forth a book which was so little one might have
covered it with his hand, and after she had read therein a little while, she
said unto Oriana, let this sufsice you, that now we may speak in safety, for
what noise soever we make, they shall not stir, until I awake them, and if
any do enter into this chamber, they shall fall down upon the flower in as
sound a sleep as they, and hark how they snort already. Heereat Oriana began
to laugh, and rising forth of her bed she came unto Mabila and Briolania,
whose arms she pulled very rudely, but for all that ever she could do, they
stirred no more then a stone, will you yet see said Vrganda the pastime of
those that shall com^ threshold of your (...) call the Damsel of (...) who is
in this war^ viana did. And as (...) had set her foot in the (...) she fell
down upon the (...) began to sleep and (...) soundly then either M^ (...)
olania. Wherefore Oriana laid her down by V^ and said unto her: Maadame,
(...) that you know so much (...) faires, I beseech you to (...) what must
happen unto (...) answered Vrga^da, do you (...) sooner to escape that which
(...) destined unto you by be^ tised thereof aforehand? (...) believe that it
is not in the (...) of any mortal man to (...) which God has app^ him, be it
good or (...) it be by his free will (...) uerthelesse since you (...) defy to
know your (...) content, afterward m^ profit thereof as you c^ now then, at
such time (...) uinesse shall be at the many good knights she for your love.
Then the (...) on accompanied with (...) shall come forth of his (...) with his
loud roaring (...) in such sort a^ shall have you in keep^ mauger all their
sorce (...) remain in the paws o^ all beast, who shall t^ your head the shall
no more be yours^ wards this fami^ your body in his power, (...) you into his
cave, wh^ feed in such sort, as (...) hunger shall be slaked. (...) my
daughter take (...) do, for this which I (...) you shall without doubt come to
pass. By my faith answered Oriana, I could have been well content to have
forborne this curiosity, for the sorrowful end that is prepared for me does
trouble all my spirits. Fair Lady, said Vrganda, another time be less
curious to understand that which is beyond your capasitie: nevertheless,
oftenrimes such things as are mystical and fearful, do for the most part
turn into joy, pleasure, and profit, therefore be not you discomforted in any
sort, seeing that you are daughter unto the best king, and most virtuous Queen
that lives upon the earth, being endued with such excellent beauty, that your
renown is spread over all countreies, and more-ouer you are beloved of him,
who is honored and esteemed more then any other Knight. You know as well as I
that he loves you, by the experience not only of that which has been told
you, and you have made known unto him, but also by the adventures which he
has brought to pass in your presence: therefore you ought to think your
self happy above all those that are best beloved, being mistress of him, that
deserves (by his chivalry) to be Lord of all the world. Now it is time to
wake the Ladies, and end our discourse. Here-withall she began to read again
in her book, and at that instant the Ladies that were asleep, began to breath
as if they had been ouerwearied, and shortly after they rose up, but when the
Damsel of Denmark perceived, that she was laid in such sort naked in the
midst of the chamber, there was ne-uer woman more amassed then she, the which
when Oriana perceived, she demanded (smiling to her self) if she were come
thither to seek fresh air. By my faith Madame, answered she, I know neither
who brought me hither, nor can I remember how I came hither. Whereat they all
began to laugh: and after they were ready they went unto the Kings lodging,
whom they found together with the Queen in the church: and so soon as service
was ended, the King came vato Vrganda, and bid her good morrow, and she after
her duty done unto his Majesty, said, that if it were his pleasure to cause
the Knights and Ladies in his Court to assemble together, that before her
departure (which should be very shortly) she would declare something before
them that should happen unto him, hereupon the King appointed a large hall to
be made ready, in the which the next morning a great number of Lords and
Ladies were come. Then Vrganda being in the midst of them all, addressing her
speech unto the King, she said unto him. Seeing that your Majesty has kept
the letters which I did write unto you and Galaor, presently after the Fair
Forlorn had obtained the burning sword, and the Damsel she kencheife with
flowers, it may please you now to cause them to be read, that every one may
plainly know that I am not ignorant of things before they happen. Hereupon
he sent for them, and they were read before all the assistance, whereby it
plainly appeared that she had wholly foretold the manner of the battle,
even as it happened out, and they all greatly wondered thereat, especially at
the stout heart of the King, that would be in a battle so dangerous, when he
was before hand threantned so rigorously by his letter. In like sort was it
certainly known that the Fair Forlorn had been the cause of the victory, by
the three blows that he gave. The first when he cast King Cildadan at Galaors
feet, the second in killing Sarmadan the Leonnois, and the third when he
succored the king, whom the stout Mandafabul of the virmillion tower did carry
unto his ships, whose arm he cut off close by the elbow, which was the cause
of his present death. And in like sort that which she had said of Galaor was
come to pass, for his head was certainly at the mercy of the Fair Forlorue,
at that time when the Damsels demanded to carry him away. But now, said
Vrganda, I will tell you in order that which must happen, great contention
shall arise between the mighty serpent and the strong Lion, which shall be
aided by many cruel beasts, they shall come with such fury, that a great
numder of them shall suffer most cruel death. The subtle Roman fox shall be
wounded with the claws of the strong Lion, and his skin shall be cruelly
torn, wherewith the mighty serpent shall be brought into wonderful
perplexity. In this time the me^ke sheep covered with black wool, shall
come into the midst of them, who by his great humility and pitiful
bleatings, shall pacify the pride and fierceness of their courages, causing
them to depart one from the other, but presently the starued wolves shall
descend from the steep mountains against the mighty serpent, who being by
them put to fight with a great part of his train, shall be closed up in one
of his dens. The tender licorne putting his mouth to the ear of the fierce
Lion, shall awake him out of his sound sleep with his loud cry, making him
afterward to take part of his beasts, with the which he shall speedily go to
the succor of the mighty serpent, whom they shall find so bitten and wounded
by these starued wolves, that his blood shall be abundantly shed upon the
earth, at the same time shall he be delivered from the teeth of the wolves, and
they be cut in pieces. Then the life of the mighty serpent being restored
(leaving within his den all the poison of his entrails) he shall be contented
to put himself between the claws of the strong Lion, and the white hind,
who in the dreadful Forest did lift up her greeues to Heaven, shall be taken
from thence and called home again. Wherefore noble King, may it please your
Majesty to cause this to be written, which before all this company I have
uttered, for there is no doubt but all this shall come to pass. I will so do,
answered he, seeing it pleases you, but I believe there is not any of us that
at the present understands this prophecy. Assure you, said she, that a time
will come when it shall be manifested unto all of you. So saying she cast her
eyes upon Amadis, whom she perceived to be maruailous pensive, and said unto
him. My Lord Amadis, you muse upon that which cannot avail you, wherefore
expel this fancy from your mind, and harken unto a match that you shall make,
wherein you shall get little gain. At such time as you shall be wounded to
death in the defense of another life, the smart being yours, and the profit
his, the recompense that you shall reap thereby, shall be a wonderful
discontent, and a banishnsent from that whereunto you shall most desire to
approach. Then shall your good rich and sharp Sword so bruise your bones, and
in so many places wound your flesh, that with the loss of your blood you shall
become very feeble, and moreover you shall be so sharply pursued, that if
half the world were yours, you would give it, that your sword were cast into
the bottom of some deep lake, from whence it could never be taken forth
again, therefore bethink you of your destiny, which shall be such as I have
foretold you. Amadis seeing that every one had their eyes fixed upon him,
looked up with a Imiling countenance and answered Vrganda, Madame, by the
things that are already come to pass whereof you foretold us, we may well credit
and believe that which now you tell us, and knowing that I am mortal, I am very
sure that my life shall not be prolonged one minute longer then it pleases
God, and therefore whilst I may, I will endeavor to gain some reputation,
rather then seek to conserve my life, Notwithstanding if any peril were to be
doubted, I should have more occasion to fear those that do hourly happen
unto me, then such as are hidden and yet to come. I know well said Vrganda
that it is more easy to draw the Sea dry, then afright your undaunted and
magnanimious courage with any further dread of danger. And because if it please
your Majesty (said she to the king) that I must presently take my leave of
you, remember I beseech you what I have advertised you of, before this great
and honorable company, as she that desires the honor and profit of your
Majesty, and stop your ears henceforth from those, whose words you shall know
to be unjust and perverse. Herewith all she arose from her place and all the
company in like fort, and shortly after she took leave of the King, and of the
rest of his court, which done she returned into her galley, accompanied only
with the four knights that had conducted her to the Court, who having seen
her embarked, returned back to the City, but they had no sooner turned their
backs, when a thick and great Cloud so ouershaddowed the ship, that presently
they lost the sight thereof.

CHAP. XIX.
How after the departure of Vrganda, the king being ready to mount on horse
back, to execute the enterprise which he had determiped to make upon the
burning lake, there came before him a Dauiosell Giantesse, to under stand
whether his Majesty would be pleased to refer the quarrel that he pretended
in this vorage, upon the combat betwixt Ardan Canila, and Amadis of Gaul, with
such conditions as shall be declared unto you.

SOme few days after ^he departure of Vrganda, king Lisuart walking upon the
sea sand consulting with his knights about the voyage which he determined to
make unto the sle of Mongaza, to set at liberty king Arban, and Angriotta, they
beheld a ship making toward the shore which cast anchor hard by them.
Whereupon they all approached to know who or what news it had brought, when
suddenly they perceived two Esquires waiting upon a Damsel, coming forth
thereof, who was no sooner landed but she demanded for the king. Those unto
whom she spoke, answered that he was there: but they did all wonder at her
greatness, for there was not a man in all the Court whom she exceeded not in
height a hand breadth: for the rest, she was indifferent fair, and well
apparrelled. Then she approached near unto the king, to whom she said, if it
please your Majesty, I am hither come to let you understand that which I am
commanded to declare unto you in the behalf of some great personages, but if
it pleased your highness, I would have the Queen present. Here-withall the
king took her by the hand, and brought her to the Palace, and afterward he
sent for the Queen and her Ladies, that they might hear what the Damsel
would say, they being all come, the Damsel enquired if Amadis of Gaul
(lately called the Fair Forlorn) were in this company or no. And Amadis (unto
whom by chance she spoke) answered her, that he was the man, ready to do her
any pleasure if she would employ him: notwithstanding, for all his courteous
speech, the Damsel looking upon him with a stern counrenance began to rail
at him, saying, the less do I esteem thee: for thou wast never ought worth,
nor never shall be, and by the effect of this my message all this company may
know whether there be any heart or courage at all in thee: then she took
forth two Letters of credit, sealed each of them with a seal of Gold, the one
of them she presented to the king, the other to the Queen. But so soon as the
king had red his letter, he commanded her to declare whatsoever she pleased.
Wherefore she spoke aloude and said, It may please your Majesty, Grumadaca the
giant of the burning lake, and the fair Madasima, with the most redoubted
Ardan Canila (who is at this present with them, to protect and defend them
against you) have known for certain, that you determine to pass into their
country to assail them, and because the same cannot be done without the loss
of many worthy men on either side, they have devised a means (if your majesty
think good to avoid the effusion of blood, and the loss of diverse valiant
knights, which is this, that the combat of two persons only shall determine
the quarrel between you and them, upon the victory of him that shall win the
field, the one is the valiant and famous Ardan Canila, the other Amadis of
Caul here present: upon this condition, that if Amadis be overcome, Ardan may
freely cut off his head and carry it with him, to the burning lake unto
Madasima, and also if fortune prove contrary to the said Ardan, and that Amadis
remain conqueror, the land and the country that you intend to conquer, shall
without contradiction be yielded up into your hands. And moreover my Lady shall
in like sort presently set at liberty king Arban of North Wales, and Angriotta
d'Estrauaux, who has been a long time her prisoners, as you know. Therefore
if Amadis do love them as they think and do imagaine he does, let him
presently condiseend unto this Combat for the liberty of two such great friends
of his otherwise he may be assured that Arden to despite him the more, will
send their heads unto him for a present, very shortly. Damsel answered
Amadis, if I agree to this combat, what security shall the king have for the
performance of this your promise? I will tell you said she, The fair Madasima
accompanied with twelve Gentlewomen of great birth, shall be sent as hostages
and become the Queens prisoners, under this condition, that if this which I
have said be not wholly accomplished, the king may cause them all to die in
what sort he pleases, and as touching you, I demand no other assurance, then
this, that if you be vanquished Madasima may afterward have your head without
contradiction. And to let you know that they from whom I bring this message,
will not gainsay that which I have promised, I will yet further cause
Andangel the old giant, with his two sons, and nine of the chiefest knights of
the country, to enter into the king his prison, as pledges for the performance
of the former couena^ts. Truly answered Amadis, if the king and Queen have
these persons which you speak of in their power, the security is sufficient,
but yet you shall have no answer of me, unless you first grant to dine with
me in my lodging, with these two Esquires that attend upon you. I do greatly
wonder said she, what moves thee so instantly to entreat and inuit me to
dine in thy company, seeing that I hate thee more then any man that I know. I
am sorry for that said he, for I love you, and will willingly do you all the
honor and service that I am able, but if you will have an answer, grant me
that which I demand of you. I do grant it, said the Damsel, more to take away
all occasion from thee to defer the combat, then for any desire that I have
to remain in thy company. I thank you answered Amadis, and because it is
reason that I aduentur my person, not only to save two of my best companions
and friends from death, but also do my best for the enlarging of the limits
and authority of the king (...) and his Realm, I accept the combat against
Ardan, and let the hostages come when it shall please you, because for my part,
so glorious an enterprise shall not be foreslowed. Certainly said the Damofell,
thou have greatly satisfied me, nevertheless I fear me thou have said this
either in choler, or to avoid the shame that otherwise thou might incur
before so many valiant men, and therefore it may please the king to assure me,
that if thou sly before the fight, he will not aid thee at any time against
the kindred of Famangomad. Damosel answered the king, I promise you I will not.
Now let us go to dinner said Amadis, for considering the journey which you
have made you must needs have a good appetite to your meat. Truly answered
she, I will go more contented then I hoped for, and seeing it has pleased the
king to grant me that which I requested, I assure you that without fail
Madasima and her Gentlewomen with the knights, shall yield themselves
prisoners unto his Majesty and the Queen, so that also he will be pleased to
warrant Ardan from all the rest of his Court, except Amadis, from whom I hope
he shall carry away the head. When Don Bruneo heard this, he answered the
Damsel, I have many times seen one make account of another man's head when
he has lost his own, and the like may happen unto Ardan, whom you so much
exalt. Gentle friend said Amadis, I pray you let this Gentlewoman speak at her
pleasure, for one like unto her self, for she and such as resemble her, have
liberty to say what they list, and oftentimes ^en they know. What are you^ered
the Gentlewoman (...), that so well can plead for Amadis? I am, said he, a
knight that would willingly bear a part in this enterprise, if Ardan Canila
had a companion with him. By my faith, answered she, I believe that if you did
think to be received you would not speak so proudly, but you have already
heard that Ardan and Amadis must be alone without any more, which makes you
to speak so haughtily, nevertheless if you be such a one as you say, I am
assured that the combat of them two, shall be no sooner ended, but that I will
bring before you a brother of mine that shall teach you to hold your peace, and
I assure you that he is as great an enemy unto Amadis as you profess to be
his friend. He shall be very welcome, and better entertained said he, and tell
him hardly that he forget none of his Armor behind him at his lodging, for be
he never so valiant it will be all little enough for him. Herewithall he threw
down his glove. See here said he my gage, take it up for your brother, if he
will allow you to do it, and will accept the combat that you have undertaken for
him. The Damsel took up the glove, and afterward untying from about her head
a carquener of Gold, she said unto the king, If it like your Majesty, I accept
the combat for my brother against this knight in his absence in witness where
of, your grace may keep (if it please you) (...) pledges, the which she gave
unto him, and the king^ them, although he would willingly (...) remitted this
quarrel, For (...) ready doubted the other, for that he had heard of the
valiant (...) of Ardan Canila, who reuer did meet (as it was said) with any
knight in four years before (...) durst combat him. When the Damsel
perceived that she had ^cuted her commission, according unto her desire, she
took leave of the Court, and went with Amadie, who brought her unto his
lodging but it had been better for him that he had been at that time a sleep,
for the courtesy which he did show unto her, turned him to so great
displeasure, that shortly after he was in great danger to have lost his life.
Because that he would the more honor this Damosel, he brought her into that
Chamber wherein Gandalin did bestow his Armor. But she had no sooner set her
foot in the same, but shet cast her eyes upon Amadis his good Sword, which
she thought was of so strange a fashion, that from that time forth, she
determined to steal it, if she might find the means, and to do the same
more cleanly, she walked so long about the chamber, that as Amadis and his
people had their backs toward her, she slily drew the sword forth of the
scabbard, and held it up close under her cloak. Afterward she presently went
forth of the chamber, and taking aside one of the Esquires (in whom she most
trusted) she gave it unto him, saying: do thou know what thou shall do? run
quickly into my ship, and hide me this Sword under the ballast in such sort
that none do see is upon thy life. The Esquire was diligent and departed. Then
Amadis entered into talk with the Damsel, demanding of her at what hour
Madasims would arrive in the Court. I believe answered she, that you may see
her, and speak with her before the king have dined: but what moves you fair
sir to enquire so much after her? Because said Amadis I would go meet her upon
the way to do her honor and service, to the end that if she have received
any displeasure by me, I may make her such mends as she shall demand of me. I
know answered she, that if thou run not away, Ardan Canila shall be he that
shall make thee answer the wrong that thou have done unto her, with the loss
of thy head, the which he shall present unto her, for other satisfaction she
desires not to accept. I will keep them both fasting without that (if God
please) said Amadis, nevertheless if she will have any other thing of me, I
swear unto thee, by my faith Damsel, that she shall have it, as she whose
good will and favor I do most desire. Then were the Tables covered, and
dinner was brought in, wherefore Amadis causing her to sit down, desirous to
leave her alone, said unto her, that the king had sent for him, and that she
in the mean time should make good cheer, for he would return presently
again. The Damsel showed by her countenance that this departure of his did
not a little please her and fearing least her theft should be perceived, she
made as short a dinner as she could. Which ended, she rose from the Table, and
said unto those that served her, you may tell Amadis that I give him no thanks
at al for the entertainment that he has showed me, thinking thereby to do me
(...), and assure him that I am she that will purchase (as long as the breath
remains in my Body) his death and utter destruction. So God me help,
answered (...) I believe (...) well, and according to that which you have
already manifested, (...) my opinion you are them ost in torious woman that I
have seen in all my life. Whatsoever I am, said she, I care not for thee, and
less for him, and if thou thinks (...) injurious, yet is it not (...) much
as I would be both toward him and thee, and for the pains that thou have
taken in serving me (...) at dinner, I would in (...) thereof, that I had
seen you both twain hanged. Saying to the departed and got into her ship,
(...) joyful of the Sword which she (...) stolen, which so soon as she was
returned back unto (...) she presented unto him, letting him know and Madasma
also, how Amadis had consented unto the combat which she had demanded of him.
Is it true answered Ardan, let me never be accounted a knight of any worth, if
I do not then bring back again my Lady to her honor and reputation,
delivering henceforth her country from the attempts of king Lisuart, and if I
take not the head of Amadii from off his shoulders in less time then the best
fooreman in the world may have run half a league, I am content (said he unto
Madasima) not to deserve your love so long as I live. But she hearing him
speak so rashly, held her peace: and although she greatly desired to be
revenged of him for the death of her Father, and brother whom Amadis had
slain, yet did she so extremely abhor Arden that she a great deal rather
wished his death then his life, because he pretended to marry her. For she was
exceeding fair, and he a deformed villain and void of all humanity, and this
combat was not practiced by her means, but by the persuasion of her Mother,
who had sent for him, for the defense of her Country upon this condition, that
if he revenged the death of her husband and son, she would give it unto him,
and her daughter Madasima in marriage, for he was so feared and had in such
reputation, that she thought she could not bestow her daughter better. And to
let you know his manners and perfections, he was descended from the race of
giants, borne in a Province called Canila, the which was in a manner wholly
inhabited by such kind of people, notwithstanding he was somewhat less of
body then they, but not in strength: his shoulders were narrow, his neck and
breast unreasonable thick, his hands and thighs large, his legs long and
crooked, his eyes holow, flat nosed like an Ape, his nostrels wide and
loathsome, his lips great, his hair red and thick bristelled in that sort, as
very hardly might it be curled. To conclude, he was so beset with freckles and
black spots, that his face seemed as though it had been of sundry sorts of
flesh, he was of the age of thirty years or thereabout, bold and expert in
arms, furious, spiteful, and as discourteous as might be. And yet since he
was twenty and five years of age, he never fought with any Giant or other
knight, either a foot, a horseback, or at wrestling, that was able to resist
him, and whom he did easily not overcome such was the beauty, fashion, and
gentle behavior of Arden Canila. When the injurious Damsel heard Ardan make
such large promises unto Madasima, and perceived that she made no account
thereof, she took upon her to speak in her behalf, me thinks my Lord that
you should thinks the victory very sure on your side, seeing that Fortune is so
faauourable unto you, and so contrary unto your enemy, as you may well
perceive, in that she has caused him to lose the best part of his arms. And
this she said in respect of the sword which she had stolen. By my Gods, said
Ardan, I am more glad of his displeasure for the want thereof, then for any
good that I hope to receive thereby, for although Amadis had the force of three
such as he is, yet were he not able to withstand the strength of my arm,
accustomed to came his betters. The next morning very early he departed,
accompanied with Madasima, and and the rest which should be delivered up as
hostages, according to the promise that the Damsel had made unto king Lisuart
before the Combat was agreed upon, and Canila did assuredly hope, that he
should easily obtain the victory. By means whereof he departed with great
joy, saying unto those that were with him, Amadis is famoused for one of the
best knights in the world, nevertheless I will have his head, if he dare enter
into the lists against me, and by that means my glory shall be the more
increased in the ouercomming of him, my Lady shall rest well revenged, and I
remain her husband and lover. And because he would know before he entered into
the court, whether Amadis had repented him or not, he sent the injurious
Damsel before, to advertise the King of their coming, and in the mean
season he caused his tents to be set up, somewhat near the City where King
Lisuart did remain. But you must know, that incontinently after the Damsel
was departed from Amadis his lodging, Enil told him thereof: therefore because
he would provide all things necessary for his enterprise, he withdrew him unto
his chamber, accompanied with some of his most private friends, and in like sort
there came at that instant unto him, Florestan, Agrates, Galuanes without land,
and Guillan the pensive, who were altogether ignorant of the enterprise of this
new combat. But when they were advertised thereof, thinking that it should
have been performed with a greater number of knights, there was not any of the^
who were not displeased with Amadis, in that he had not chose^ the^ to assist
him therein, especially Guillan who greatly desired to prove his manhood
against Arda^ Canila, for hehad heard that he was esteemed for one of the
strongest Knights in all the West. And as he was about to reprou Amadis in
forgetting him, Floresta^ prevented him, saying unto his brother. So God help
me, my Lord, I now do very well perceive, the little love and the small account
that you do make of me, in that you would not send for me to be with you in
this combat. In faith, answered Agraies, if he had thought me any thing
worth, he would not have left me behind, and what of me? said Galuanes. My
Lords, answered Amadis, I beseech you all to hold me excused, and not to be
displeased with me, assuring you that if it had been in my choice to have
elected a companion to assist me in this encounter (seeing the great prowess
wherewith you are all endued) I could not tell which of you to choose. But Ardan
desired to fight with me alone, for the hate he bears unto me, and the
love he has to Madasima, and seeing that he has so required it, I neither
could, nor ought to refuse it, without showing my self to be a recreant and a
coward, nor I could not make any other answer, then that which was agreeable
to his demand. And when he should have comprised any more Knights with him,
where do you think I would have sought for aid and succor but with you,
being my friends? seeing you know how my strength is redoubled when we are
together. In this sortdid Amadis excuse himself, praying the^ all to bear him
company the next day, to go meet Madasima, both to receive her, and show her
as much honor as they might devise. Whereunto they all agreed: so that the day
following (knowing that she was near at hand) Amadis accompanied with eight of
the best knights in King Lisuarts Court, mounted on Horseback in very good
order. But they had not long ridden when they did behold her a far off,
coming with Ardan Canila, who did lead her, and she was apparrelled all in
black, mourning as yet for the death of her father, who^ Amadis had slain. This
sad apparel did so much grace her, that although of her self (without any
other help) she was esteemed one of the fairest that might be seen, yet was
her beauty much more increased by this mourning weed, with the which the
lively whiteness of her face was the more manifested, by the grace which this
black color added thereunto, and her two cheeks seemed like two white roses,
beautified with a natural redness, so as even then those which had conceived
a mortal hate against her for the mischief which she procured unto Amadis,
were now forced to love her. Behind her marched the twelve gentlewomen,
apparrelled with the like attire. After them came the old giant, and his son
followed with nine knights, which all came as pledges. Great was the
entertainment that Amadis showed unto her and the rest of her train, and she
in like sort saluted them most courteously. Then Amadis approaching more near,
said unto her, I promise you Madame that if you be accounted fair and of good
behavior it is not without great cause, seeing that I am now my self an eye
witness of the truth thereof, and truly that man ought to think himself
happy, whose service it shall please you to like of, assuring you that I am
willing to do you any pleasure, and ready to obey your commandments: when
Ardan Canila heard him speak so courteously (although he was smally favored
by Madasima) he was overcome with jealousy, and answered Amadis, knight stand
back and speak not so privately unto her, whom you know not. Sir said Amadis,
the cause of my coming hither is not only to be acquainted with her, but also
to offer unto her my person and my goods. You are no doubt answered he some
good fellow, and worthy to be by her greatly employed, nevertheless fair sir,
get you gone from her, otherwise I will make you know that it is not for so
base a companion as you, to use so great familiarity with a woman of so high
worth as she is. Whatsoever I am answered Amadis, yet do I desire to serve her,
notwithstanding your threats, for although I am not of that worth as I would
be, yet shall nor the affection that I bear unto her, be abated by thy
malapert boldness. But sir, you that are so lusty, who would make me know my
duty and depart from her, for whom willingly I would employ my best means,
tell me what you are? Ardan Canila exceeding angry, beholding Amadis with a
stern and scornful countenance answered him, I am Ardan, who am better able
to increase her welfare and honor in one day, then thou can with the best
means thou have, do her service in all thy life. It may very well be said
Amadis, notwithstanding I know that this whereof thou vantest shall never by
thee be executed, so indiscreete and spightfull art thou.

And because that thou greatly desire to know whether I am a sufficient man
or nor, know thou that my name is Amadis of Gaul, against whom thou desire
to fight: and if this Lady be displeased with ought that I have said unto her,
I will make her such amends therefore as she shall please to command at my
hands. By my Gods, answered Ardan Canila, if thou tarriest the combat, the
satisfaction which she shall take shall be thy head. That would displease me
meruailously, said Amadis, but I will give her a head that shall be more
welcome to her (if she please) breaking the marriage of you two, being so far
unfit one for another: for she is fair, wise, and of courteous behavior, and
thou deformed foolish and churlish, Hereat Madasima and the Gentlewomen began
all to laugh, and Ardan to be extremely angry, that to behold his countenance
and the rage wherein he was, one might easily have judged the little good that
he wished to Amadis, unto whom he answered not one word more, yet he ceased
not grumbling and gnashing his teeth until he came before the king. Then very
indiscreetely he began to say, King Lisuart behold here the knights that must
now enter into your prison, according to the promise which yesterday a
gentlewoman made unto you, in my behalf. Wherefore if Amadis dare be so bold
to do as he has boasted, I am here ready to break his head. What will you do
answered Amadis? Think thou my heart so weak or my right so small that I
cannot abate the pride of a man so audacious as Ardan is? I assure thee that
although I had not undertaken it, yet would I combat thee only to hinder the
marriage between thee and Madasima. And therefore defer not to deliver up
these hostages which thou do brag off, for I verily hope to revenge the good
and valiant King Arban, and Angriotta, for the great wrong they have received,
during their impriso^ment, I have brought them along with me, said Ardan,
knowing that you would demand them, but I am in good hope to restore them
again into the power of the fair Madasima, and to give her therewithal the
mold of thy cap, to testify that it becomes not such a gallant as thou art
to use me with such proud and spightfull terms, and that (in the executing
thereof) she may receive the greater pleasure, it may please your king to
appoint that she may be set in a place hard at hand, to the end that she may
both plainly see the revenge that I shall take of thee, and also the cruel
death wherewith thou shall die. At the same instant the pledges were brought,
and the fair Madasima together, with her twelve Gentle-women came to do their
humble duties unto the Queen, and by her fide was the old Giant, his two sons,
and the nine knights, who all fell upon their knees before the King. At the
same time every one did attentively behold the fair Madasima, who showed such
an humble countenance, that she was greatly esteemed, yet could not Oriana cast
one good look upon her, thinking that she (of her own will) did procure the
ruin of Amadis, for the which none was more sorrowful then she. But Mabila
who was in like sort nearly touched with the matter, put her in hope that God
would aid him, and that her Cousin might at easily overthrow and vanquish Ardan
Canila, as he did the proud Dardan, and many other knights, both valiant and
stout. The pledges then being received as the custom was, both the knights
retired each of them to the place appointed for them, staying until the time
that they should enter into the field, the which the king had commanded to be
closed in with pales. Then Gandalin went to seek his masters Armor. And as he
would have taken it down he perceived that some one had stolen his good sword
forth of the scabberd, which had almost made him die for anger, seeing the
fault that he had done unto Amadis, toward whom he ran, and as one beside
himself, he cried. My Lord, I have so much and so grievously offended you, that
you have great reason to kill me forthwith. Why? answered Amadis, art thou
foolish or mad. My Lord said Gandalin, it had been better for you that I had
died ten year ago, so much I have deceived you in your need, for I have let
your good sword to be lost, the which some body has stolen since yesterday,
leaving only the scabbard where it did hang. Is this all thou make this great
stir for? answered Amadis, believe me I thought (in hearing thee rage in this
sort) that some body had been carrying thy Father to his grave. Go, go, never
care thou, for I care not so much for the goodness thereof, but only because
I did win it so honorably as every one knows, and by the means of my
constancy in love. Yet see thou tell no body thereof, but go unto the Queen
and tell her that I entreat her grace, if she have yet that sword which
Guillan found at the fountain with my armor, that she will be pleased to
send it unto me. And if thou meetest Oriana by chance, tell her also that I
desire her to set her self in such a place, where I may behold her at my ease,
when I shall be in fighting, for I shall receive by her sight more force by
far, the^ she being absent I should. So Gandalin departed, who did wisely
accomplish all that his master had commanded him. And as he returned unto him,
he met with the Queen Briolania together with Oliuda, who called him and said
unto him, friend Gandalin, what do thou think thy master will do against
this devil, that will fight with him? what answered he, my Ladies do you doubt
that he shall not do well enough with him? I am sure that I have seen him
escape far greater dangers then this which now he undertakes. God grant he
may said the Ladies. Here withal her came unto Amadis that sstayed for him,
who having the Sword that the Queen did send unto him and being thoroughly well
armed, he mounted on horseback. And as he would have entered into the field,
the king met him, and said unto him, how now my most deer friend, this day do
I hope to see some part of your courage, to the cost of Ardan Canila. In faith
if it like your Majesty answered her, there is a great mischance happened unto
me, some one has robbed me of the best sword that ever knight did wear. Is it
possible said the king? Who has done you this shrewd turn? I know not
answered Amadis, but whosoever has done it, sure I am he is not my friend.
Truly faid the king, that is likely, but take you no thought therefore, for
although that I have made an oath never to lend mine in any combat that is made
by two knights in my court, yet am I content for this time to stretch my
conscience so far as to give it you. Nay if it like your Majesty, God forbid
that the oath of the best king in the world, should be broaken for my sake.
What will you then do said the king? The Queen answered Amadis, has done so
much for me as to keep that sword which I left at the fountain of the plain
field, the which Guillan did bring with the rest of my Armor, when I became a
Hermit. And it is the very self same which I had, when I was cast into the
Sea, which is so fit for the scabbard of the other which is stolen, that it
seems to be the very same. By the faith that I owe unto God, answered the
king, I am very glad, for by the virtue of this scabbard that is left, you
shall be both defended from overmuch heat, or too great cold, nevertheless
the difference is great between the two blades, but God shall supply this
default if it be his pleasure. And because it is already very late, and that
the night approaches, it were better to defer the combat until to morrow
morning. I will said Amadis do whatsoever shall please your Majesty, so that
Ardan be content. I will go send unto him answered the King, whereunto Ardan
did easily agree, and returned unto his tents to unarm himself, afterward he
caused diverse sorts of instrumens of music to be brought, and all the night
long both he and his never ceased from dancing, feasting, and royalting. But
all that while was Amadis in the Church devoutly praying. After he had like a
Christian confessed his sins, he beseeched God to assist and succor him, in
such sort continued he until about day break, when he withdrew him to his
lodging, where shortly after the King came unto him with a great troop of
knights. Who after they had bidden him good morrow, they armed him, and brought
him with great triumph unto the Cathedral Church to hear service, and at his
return from thence Florestan presented him with an excellent fair courser,
which Corisanda had sent unto him not long before. Then every one got to
horseback to accompany him to the field. And Florestan carried Amadis his
Lance, Brunco his helmet, and Agraies his shield, before the^ did the King
ride with a white truncheon in his hand, he rode on a Spanish I^nnet, being as
fine a made horse and as proudly paced as any could be seen. The Inhabitants
of the City, and many strangers were already standing all along the barriers,
and the gentlewomen and Damsels placed in the windows. In this sort did
Amadis enter into the field, into the which he was no sooner come but that he
did his duty unto the Ladies, and amongst them all he spied out Oriana, who
the more toencrease his courage did put her head forth of the window. And
smiling kindly upon him, she made a sign unto him that he should somethings
do for her love, wherewith Amadis did imagine that all the force in the world
was at that instant placed round about his heart, and he thought that Ardan
Canila stayed too long before he came. In the mean time he buckled on his
helmet and retired to that part of the field where they appointed. Judges were
seated, which were Don Grumedan, Quedragant, and Brandoinas. And shortly after
came Ardan in richly armed, mounted upon a great strong horse, and he had
about his neck a shield of fine steel shining as bright as burning glass. At
his side did hang the good sword of Amadis, holding in his hand a great huge
Lance, the which he weelded so strongly, that notwithstanding the thickness
thereof, he shaked it with such force, that he made it double in his fist.
Whereat Oriana, Mabila, and the other Ladies beholding the stern countenance
of Ardan (as it often happens in those things which one fears to to lose)
they began to be in doubt of him whom they all favored, so as Oriana said:
Alas if God take not pity upon Amadis, this day will be his last. But Mabila
presently reproved her saying: Madam, if you show not a pleasant countenance
unto my Cosen, he shall be easily vanquished, although Ardan strike never a
stroke. Hereupon the trumpets sounded. Then Amadis beholding Oriana, set
spurs unto his horse, and they both met so rudely, that their Lances were
broken into shiuers, encountering together with their shieldes and bodies so
forcibly, that Ardan his horse fell down dead in the place, and the other of
Amadis had his shoulder broken, nevertheless Amadis with great lightness rose
up, although the truncheon of his enemies Lance remained sticking in his
vambraces, the which he presently pulled forth, and drawing out his sword, he
valiantly marched against Ardan Canila, who in like sort with great pain was
risen up. And as he stayed to mend his helmet which was somewhat shaken with
his fall, seeing his enemy approach, he made head against him, and there began
between them so cruel an encounter, as there was not any man present that did
not greatly wonder thereat, for with the sparkles of fire which preceeded by
their strokes from their helmets, they seemed to be all on fire, and by their
weighty blows which with great prowess were bestowed, they manifested the
hate which they did bear unto each other, for there was not one blow smitten
but the blood followed, nevertheless it seemed that Ardan had the advantage
over his enemy, as well because of the shield of steel which he had, as also
for the hurt which he did with the sword of Amadis, which the injurious
Damsel had given him. But yet Amadis followed him so near, as oftentimes he
brought him out of breath, wherewith Ardan was much abashed, and he verly
thought that in all his life he had not found a knight that handled him so
rudely, especially he imagined his enemies force to be redoubled when most of
all his impaired. Whereat as it were disdaining that he should so long
continue, covering him with his shield, he ran upon Amadis, who had all his
armor and shield in such sort hacked and broken, that he could not well tell
wherewith to defend him any more, because that Ardan never fastened blow upon
him but that his flesh felt it, whereby every one judged that he would carry
away the victory. Then was Madasima very sorry hereat, for she was a woman of
so stout a heart that she would rather have lost her land and herself then to
marry him, and so long these two knights maintained the combat, that every one
(...) marvel how they were able to continue. But Oriana seeing the pittious
estate of Amadis and the danger whereunto he was brought, by the reason that
his armor was so broken, she was likely to have sounded, and she became very
pale and out of heart, until Mabila perceiving it, said unto her. Madame it is
no time now to leave Amadis in this peril, seeing that if you turn your
back, you hasten his end, and deprive him of his victory, at the least if you
cannot behold him, turn your fate quite from him. At that time was Amadis so
sorely pressed by Ardan that Brandoinas one of the judges said unto Grumenan,
and Quedragant, Truly my Lord Amadis is in great necessity for want of good
armor, see how his shield is hacked, and his haubert so broken, that in a
manner he has nor where-withall to defend one blow. Trust me you say true
answered Grumedan, and I am very sorry for it. Of my faith said Quedragant, I
have proved Amadis when I sought with him, but the longer he fights, the
stronger and more invincible he waxes, so that it seems each hour his
force increases, the which is not so with Ardan, as by proof you may now see
by his vnweeldinesse, and more shall you see before the battle be ended. This
speech was heard by Oriana and Mabila, wherewith they were greatly comforted,
and because he had seen Oriana almost ready to depart from the window, not
daining any longer to behold him, he thought she was displeased, for that he
deferred so long to get the victory of his enemy. Whereat he was so grieved,
that griping his sword fast in his fist, he stroke so sound a blow upon the
helmet of Ardan, that he made him bow one knee to the ground, but by
mischance his sword broke in three pieces, the least whereof remained in his
hand. Then did he think his life in very great danger, and there was not any
of the beholders that did not suppose him vanquished, and Ardan victor: who
began to lift up his arm, saying so loud that every one did hear: behold
Amadis the good sword which with wrong thou gottest, by the which thou shall
receive a shameful death. See gentle Ladies see, look forth of your windows,
to behold my Lady Madasima revenged, and say whether I am not worthy of her
love. When Madasima heard Ardan make this brag, and seeing that without doubt
fortune favored him, so as according to the promise which her mother had made
unto him, she should be constrained to take him for her husband, she came and
cast herself at the feet of the Queen, beseeching her most humbly that it
would please her grace to hinder this marriage, the which she might justly do,
because that Ardan had said unto her that if he got not the victory of Amadis
in less space then the best lackie in the world could run half a league, that
he was content that she should never love him so long as she lived, and that
now it was more then four hours since the combat began. Gentle Lady answered
the Queen, I will do that which shall be reasonable. In the mean time Amadis
was much astonished, and seeing that he had no means to defend himself, he
began to remember that which Vrganda had foretold him, which was that if he
were Lord of half the world, he would give it upon condition that his sword
were in the bottom of some deep lake. Moreover looking up toward Oriana, he
perceived that to encourage him she was come again to the window, whom when
he had beheld, he thought that he had recovered new force and help. By
means whereof, he either determined to die speedily, or to be revenged upon
his enemy suddenly, and the better to execute his determination, he leaped
unto his enemy so lightly, that before Ardan could strike him, he pulled the
shield from his neck, and then stepping alittle aside, he took up a truncheon
of a Lance, that lay in the field, and he thought to have thrust it thorough
the sight of Ardan his helmet: but he went back, and lifting up his sword
he stroke so streat a blow within the shield which Amadis did hold, that
although it was of fine steel, yet did it enter therein more then a great hand
breadth. And as he striued to pull it forth, Amadis thrust the head of the
truncheon through his arm, wherewith he felt such extreme grief, that he
forsook the sword which he held, on the which Amadis presently fastened his
hand, and pulled it forth, thanking God for ayding him in his greatest need.
When Mabila beheld the case thus altered, she called Oriana, who having seen
her friend in such extremity, was newly laid down upon a bed, studying with
her self what death she might choose for the speediest, if Amadis were
vanquished. And Mabila said unto her, Madame, come see how God has helped us,
Ardan (without doubt) is overcome. The great joy which Oriana received at
these news made her suddenly to start up, and looking out of the window, she
perceived how Amadis had stricken his enemy so mighty a blow upon the shoulder,
that he separated it from his neck, wherewith he felt such anguish, that he
turned his back, but he ran not far before Amadis stroke him again, and he
pursued him so sharply, as that he made him recoyle back even to the top of
a Rock, against the which the Sea did beat, so that he could go no farther.
Then was Arda^ Canila brought between two extreamities, for on the one side the
deep and unmerciful waves set before his eyes his unhappy end, on the other
side he perceived the sharp sword of his enemy which did no less terrify
him Who pursued him so close, that he pulled his helmet from his head, and
lifting up his arm he wounded him most cruelly, so that he fell from the top
of the Rock down into the Sea, and was ne-uer after seen. For the which many
praised God, especial king Arban of Northwales, and Angriotta de Estrauaux,
because they had seen Amadis in such danger that they greatly stood in fear
of his safety. Heerewithall Amadis wiping his sword did put it up into his
scabbard, and came whereas the King and the other knights were, who in great
triumph brought him into his lodging, and the more to honor him, he was led
between those whom he had delivered from cruel prison, that is to say, by
Arban King of Northwales, and Angriotta de Estrauaux. And because they were
lean, pale, and almost spent, as well with the evil usage which they had
received during their imprisonment, as also with the grief and melancholy
that they had taken, Amadis was desirous that they should lodge in his chamber,
where they were so well tended and dyeted, by the aid of expert Physicians and
cunning Surgeons, that they did shortly after recover their health, as by the
sequel of our History you may understand.

CHAP. XX.
How Brunco de Bonne Mer did fight with Madamaine the ambitions, brother to the
Damsel injurious, and of the accusations that were made by some of the
enemies of Amadis unto the King, for which cause he and many others (that were
desirous to follow him) departed from the Court.

THe next day after the combat was ended between Amadis and Ardan (as has
been related heretofore) the injurious Damsel came and presented herself
before the king, beseeching his Majesty to send him that should fight with her
brother, whom according unto promise she had caused to come thither. For (said
the Damsel) although my brother be conqueror and cannot take that revenge of
his enemies as the friends of Ardan may rest satisfied for his death, yet will
it be some small comforth unto them notwithstanding. Now Brunco: was there
present, who (without making stay, answered to the rash speeches of the foolish
woman) said unto the the King. If it like your Majesty, I am the man she
speaks of, and seeing that her brother is come hither as she says, if it be
your pleasure and his will, we shall quickly know if he be such a gallant as
he vaunteth. Unto the which the King condiscended. Wherefore they both went
immediately to arm them, and anon after they entered into the field, whither
they were accompanied with certain knights their friends. They being then in
the place assigned for that purpose, the Trumpets sounded to warn them to
begin the combat. Forthwith they charged their Lances, and setting spurs to
their horses, they ran the one against the other such force that their
Lances flew into shiuers, and encountering each other with their shieldes and
bodies, Madamain lost his stirrops, and was unhorsed, and Brunco wounded in the
left side. Notwithstanding so soon as he had finished his carreer, he turned
himself to his enemy, and saw that he had already recovered his feet, and held
his sword in his hand in a readiness to defend himself: but as Brunco drew
near to charge him, he said to him: Sir knight alight, or else assure you that
I will kill your horse. Truly said Brunco, at your choice be it, for it is
all one to me, to overcome you on foot or on horseback. When Madamain saw
that his wish came to a good end, being as he thouhgt stronger then his enemy,
who was but little, and himself in a manner a Giant, he was most glad thereof,
and said to Brunco, It were better for you to alight, and then you should soon
make proof whether you were able to effect that which you make brags of: well
quoth Brunco, and so withdrawing himself he alighted and left his horse, then
he took his shield and set hand to his sword, approaching unto Madamain, who
like a valiant and stout knight received him coragiously. They began to lay on
load the one at the other both of the^ pretending to get the victory, which was
the cause that neither shield nor armor of how good temper soever, was able to
withstand their blows, for they hacked them to pieces, so that the field in
many places was covered with pieces of their shields. Now if the knights did
assail one another with great hardiness, their horses did no less, for they
set upon one another, and with their feet and teeth fighting together, they
did join in such sort, that the most part of the lookers on, were more
intentive to the combat of the beasts, then the fight of the knights.
Notwithstanding Madamain his horse in the end had the worse, being constrained
to leap over the barriers, and to run away. This gave a great presumption to
every man to imagine that Brunco should obtain the victory, and so it fell
out, for he pursued Madamain so near, and brought him to that extremity,
that being almost out of breath, he said unto Brunco. I do believe considering
the rage thou art in, that thou imaginest the day will not be long enough to
end our quarrel. Howbeit, if thou do consider, that thy armor is almost
vnriuited, thou shall find that it were better for thee to rest thy self,
then to assail me so indiscreetly as thou do, and therefore I being
unwilling to use thee so rigourously as thou deseruest, I am content to give
thee leave to take breath, that we may afterward begin the fight more hotly
then before. Brunco answered, thou declarest in plain terms that which is
needful for thy self. Wherefore I pray thee as lusty as thou art, not to
spare me a whit. Art thou ignorant of the occasion of our combat? Know
thou not that either thy head or mine must cease this strife? I do assure thee
that I am no more determined to listen unto thy preaching: wherefore if thou
determine not to die presently, look to thine own defense, better then thou
have done here-tofore. Immediately without any further disputations he
assailed Madamain afresh, but he was already so weak (as not being able so
much as to defend Brunco his blows) he drew himself by little and little to
the top of a Rock, even to the place where Amadis had cast the body of Ardan
into the Sea. And there Brunco thrust him so rudely down, that he sent him to
be buried in the Sea, but before he came to the bottom, his body was torn in
twenty several pieces. Which the injurious Damsel perceiving, she entered
into such fury and despair, that as a mad woman she ran unto the place
where Ardan and Madamain were thrown down headlond, where finding Madamain
his sword, she set it to her breast, crying so loud that all the company heard
her, Seeing that Ardan the flower of chivalry, and my brother have chosen
their grave in this raging Sea, I will bear them company. And so casting
herself down headlong, she was immediately covered with the water. Then
Brunco (mounting on horseback again) was conducted by the King and many
other knights to the lodging of Amadis, where he desired to keep him company,
in whose honor he had undertaken the combat. And because that the Queen
Briolania perceived that Amadis was not like to be cured in a short space, nor
to accompany her as he had promised, she took her leave of him to go see the
singularities of the Firme-Island, wherefore Amadis commanded Enil to conduct
her, and to desire Isania the Governor thereof, to do her all the honor, and
give her the best entertainment he could devise. So Briolania departed,
bidding Oriana farewell, assuring her that she should be advertised what
happened unto her in trying the adventures of the Island, but she was no
sooner gone from the Court, when it seemed that Fortune endeavored the ruin
of the kingdom of great Britain, which bad so long time lived in happiness.
Yea even king Lisuart himself, who (forgetting not only the services he had
received of Amadis, of his kindred and friends, but especially the advice and
counsel of Vrganda) listened to flatterers, two ancient knights of his house,
to whom (under the color of the long education they had received, as well of
the King Falangris his eldest brother, as of himself) he gave credit,
believing their vntrothes which he ought not to have done, as you shall
presently understand. These two of whom I speak as well by reason of their
ancient age, as of a kind of hypocrisy, cloaked with wisdom, took more
pains to seem good and virtuous, then to be so in deed, by means whereof
they entered into great authority, and were oftentimes called and made privy
to the most secret affairs of their Lord, one of them was named Brocadan, and
the other Gandandell. This Gandandell had two sons, who before the coming of
Amadis and of his followers into great Britain, were esteemed two of the most
hardiest knights in all the country, notwithstanding the prowess and
dexterity of the other, did abate the renown* of those whom I speak of.
Whe^s* at their father was so displeased, that forgetting the fear of God, the
faith which he ought to his Prince, and the honor which all men of honesty
ought to be end^ed withal, determined not only to accuse Amadis, but likewise
all those whom he esteemed a^ his friends, and did converse withal, hoping to
build his treason in such sort, that by the ruin of so many good knights, he
would work his own and his friends profit. Wherefore finding the King on a
time at leisure, he used speeches of like substance unto him. It may please
your Majesty, I have all my life long desired to be faithful unto you, as to
my King and natural Lord, even as my duty binds me, and will yet continue,
if it please God, for besides the ^ath of fidelity which I have swerne unto
you, you have of your gracious favor heaped so many be^ upon me; that it I
should not counsel you, in that which did concerne^y our royal Majesty, I
should commit a great fault both toward God and men. In consideration whereof
if it like your Majesty, after I had long weighed with my self that which I
will declare unto you, I have often repented that I deferred the matter so
long, not for any malice I bear unto any man (as God is my witness) but only
for the damage which I see ready to ensue, if your Majesty do not speedily and
wisely seek remedy to prevent it. Your Majesty knows that of long time there
has been great controversy between the kingdoms of Gaul and great
Britain, because that the Kings your predecessors, have always pretended
title of sovereignty thereunto. And albeit that for some time this quarrel
has linedead, notwithstanding it is likely that those of that Country
(calling to mind the wars and domages they have endured by your subjects)
have secretly determined to take revenge thereof. And in my opinion, Amanis who
is chief and principal amongst them all, is not come into this Country, but
to practice and gain your people: who (joined with the forces which he may
easily land here) will so trouble you, that it will be hard for you to resist
them. And I beseech you to consider whither the likelihood thereof be not
already very apparent. Moreover your Majesty may be pleased to consider that
he of who^ I speak, and those of his aliance likewise, have done me so much
honor and pleasure, that both I and my children are greatly bounden unto them,
and were it not that you are my sovereign Lord. I would in no wise pleake
against Amadis, but in those things which concern your person, let me rather
receive death, then that I spare any man living were he mine own son. You
have received Amadis with so great number of his parents and other strangers
into your Court (like a good and liberal Prince as you are) that in the end,
their train will become greater then your own, wherefore if it like your
Majesty, it were good to foresee this matter before the fire be kindled any
further. When the King heard Gandandel speak in this sort, he became very
pensive, and afterward answered him: In faith loving friend, I believe that
you advertise me as a good and faithful subject, nevertheless seeing the
services that they of whom you speak have done unto me, I cannot be persuaded
in my mind, that they would procure or imagine any treason against me. May it
please your Majesty, answered he, that is it which deceives you, for if they
had heretofore offended you, you would have been ware of them as of your
enemies, but they can wisely cloak their pretended treason, coloring it with
an humble speech, accompanied with some small services, wherein they have
employed themselves, watching a time of more fit opertunity. The King turned
his head on the one side without answering any farther, because there came some
Gentlemen unto him, nevertheless Gandandel being as yet ignorant how the King
had taken his advertisement, he practiced with Brocadan, and drew him unto his
league, declaring unto him the whole discourse which he had with the King,
assuring him that if they might banish Amadis and his alies, that from
thenceforth they two alone should govern the king and his Realm peacebly.
Brocadan receiving this counsel for good, did afterward imprint in the King
his mind so great iealosie, and surpition against Amadis and his fellows, as
from that day he hated them in so strange a sort, that he could not in a
manner abide to see them, forgetting the great services performed by them, as
well when he and Oriana were delivered from the hands of Arcalaus, as
afterward in the battle against King Cildadan, and in many other places
heretofore recited. Truly if this King had well remembered the counsel and
advise which he had received of Vrganda, he had not so far digressed from
the bounds of reason, although that the like malady does often haunt al
Princes, when they take not heed of falling into the like accidents and danger
as King Lisuart did. Who giving credit to the deceitful words of these
traitors, did ne-uer afterward visit (as he was accustomed) Amadis and the
others that were wounded, whereat they were not a little abashed, but to do
them the more dispite he sent for Madasima and other pledges, unto whom he
said, that if within eight days the Isle of Mongaza were not yielded unto him
according to their promise, that then he would suddenly cause their heads to
be smitten off. When Madasima heard this rigorous constraint, never was woman
more afraid, considering, that in performing the will of the King, she should
remain poor and utterly dishereted, and on the other side, denying to
satisfy his behest, she did see her death prepared, so that she was in such
perplexity, as not being able to answer him, she had recourse unto her
tears. Wherefore Andangell the old Giant answered the King, saying. If it
please your Majesty, I will go with those whom you shall appoint to send, unto
the mother of Madasima, and I will deal with her in that sort, as she shall
accomplish your will, yielding the Country and places which you demand,
otherwise your Majesty may do your pleasure with us. This the King liked well
of, and even that day he sent him with the Earl Latin, and caused Madasima and
her women to be carried back to their accustomed prison, whether they were
brought by diverse Gentlemen. Whom she moved greatly to pity her estate, by
the complaints and sorrowful lamentation that she made unto them, praying
every one of them particularly to labor in her behalf unto the King, so that
there was not one amongst them all, who promised not to do for her as much as
possibly they could, especially Don Galuanes, who at that time held her by the
arm, beholding her with such an eye, as he became of her enamoured, and said
unto her: Madame, I am sure that if it would please you to accept me for your
husband, the King would freely bestow upon us all the right that he pretends
in your Country. I believe also that you are not ignorant of my nobility,
being brother to the King of Scotland, and that by me your authority shall not
be deminished. For the rest, assure your self that I will use you as you are
worthy. Now Madasima had known him of long time, and she was assured that he
was one of the best Knights in the world. Wherefore accepting the offers of
Galuanes, she fell down at his feet, most humbly thanking him for the good
and honor which he did offer unto her, and even then was the marriage between
them agreed upon, the which afterward Galuanes labored to effect to his
uttermost power. And the better to accomplish it, some few days after he came
unto Amadis and Agraies, making them acquainted with that which you have heard,
and Agraies said unto him: Uncle, I know very well that love has no respect of
persons, sparing neither young nor old, and seeing that you are become one of
his subjects, we will beseech the King so much in your behalf, that you shall
enjoy your desired love, therefore determine to behave your self like a lusty
champion for Madasima is a woman, not likely to be pleased with a kiss only
By my faith (answered Amadis) my Lord Galuanes, the King in my opinion, will
not refuse us, and I promise you that so soon as I am able to walk, your
Nephew and I will go unto his Majesty to entreat that which you demand. But
you must understand that whilst these things were in doing, Ga^dandell the
better to cover and dissemble the treason which he had conspired, did go
oftentimes to see and visit Amadis, so that one time amongst the rest he said
to him: my Lord, it is long since you saw the King. What is the cause thereof
answered Amadis? Because said Gandandel, by his countenance it seems he
bears you no great good will. I know not answered Amadis, yet to my knowledge
I never offended him. For this time they passed no farther, until at another
instant this traitor came again to see him, showing unto him a better
countenance then he was accustomed, saying: my Lord, I told you the other day,
that I thought by the speeches which I heard the King speak of you, that his
friendship was not so firm unto you as it was wont to be, and because that I
and mine are so greatly bound unto you, for the pleasures which you have done
unto us, I will truly let you understand how the King has a very bad opinion
of you, and therefore look unto it. So many times did he repeat this and the
like matter unto Amadis, that he began to suspect least he had laid some
snare to entrap him in, whereby the King might conceive some evil opinion of
him. And therefore one day when Gandandel perseuered in his aduertisements,
Amadis being very angry, answered him: My Lord Gandandel, I do greatly wonder
what moves you to use this speech so often unto me, seeing that I did never
think upon any thing but only wherein I might do the King service? And I
cannot believe that a Prince so virtuous as he is, would ever suspect me for
a thing which I never committed. Wherefore never break my head more with such
follies, for I take no pleasure therein. For this cause Gandandel durst never
after that speak any more thereof unto him, until that Amadis being healed,
went unto the Court, but so soon as the King beheld him he turned his head
from him and his fellows, not vouchsafing so much as once to look upon them.
Then Gandandel who was hard by them seeing the Kings countenance, came to
embrace Amadis, saying unto him, that he was glad of his recovery. But by my
faith said he, I am very sorry that the king uses you no better,
notwithstanding now you may know whether the aduertisements that I gave you
were false or nor. Amadis answered him not one word, but came unto Angriota and
Brunco, who thinking that he had not marked the countenance which the King
showed unto them, advertised him thereof. There is no cause answered Amadis,
that you should take it in ill part, seeing that very often a man is intentive
unto some thing whereon his mind is set, that he takes no heed unto that
which others do, it may be that the king mused upon some other matter when
we saluted him, therefore let us return and speak unto his Majesty for that
which Galuanes entreated us. Here withal they approached unto him, and Amadis
said unto the King. Although, if it please your Majesty, that I have not
here-tofore done you that service that I desire, yet have I presumed (trusting
in your good bounty) to request one gift of your highness, which can not but
turn greatly to your honor, moreover you shall bind those unto your
Majesty, whom you may pleasure with your gacious grant. At this time was
Gandandel present, who playing the hypocrite (as he was accustomed) very
malapertly took upon him to speak, and answered Amadis. Truly if it be so as
you say, the King ought not to deny your suit. If it like your highness,
said Amadis, the gift which I and my fellows here present, do beseech your
highto grant unto us, is, that it would please you to bestow upon the Lord
Galuanes the Isle of Mongaza, for the which he shall yield you fealty and
homage, in marying with Madasima, by the which favor your grace shall both
advance a poor Prince, and extend your pity unto one of the fairest
Gentle-women in the world. When Brocadan and Gandandel heard this demand, they
looked upon the King, making a sign unto him that he should not grant it to
them. Yet ne-uerthelesse it was a great while before he spoke, considering the
deserts of Don Galuanes, and the services which he had received of him in many
places, especially how that Amadis had conquered with the price of his blood,
the land which he required for another, ne-uerthelesse he gave no ear unto
him, although by verture he was bounden to condescend unto a request so
reasonable, yet he thus answered Amadis.

That man is ill advised who requesteth a thing that cannot be granted. I
speak this because of you my Lord Amadis, who do entreat me for that which
within these five days I have bestowed, as a gift upon my youngest daughter
Leonor. This excuse had the King feigned of set purpose to refuse Galuanes,
whereupon Amadis who was greatly discontented with the slender entertainment
that he showed unto them, knowing that this was but an excuse, he could not so
much command himself as to hold his peace, but that he said unto the King.
Your Majesty does very well manifest that the services which for you we have
done, have been little pleasing unto you, and less profitable for us. And
therefore (if these my companions will be ruled by me) we will henceforth
bethink us what to do. Believe me my Nephew, answered Galuanes, you say true,
and those services are very ill employed, which are done unto those that have
no desire to acknowledge them, and therefore every man of courage ought to
beware for whom he adventure himself. My Lords, answered Amadis, blame not
the King for nor granting that which he has promised unto another, and let us
only entreat him that he will be pleased to permit that Galuanes may marry
with Madasima. And if he grant this favor, I will give unto him the
Firme-Island. Madasima (answered the King) is my prisoner, and if she deliver
not unto me the land which she has promised me, she shall lose her head
before the month be past.

By my faith, said Amadis, had your Majesty answered us more kindly, you had
done us no wrong at all, if at the least you had a desire in any sort to think
well of us. If my entertainment like you not answered the King, the world is
large enough to find out some other, that may use you better. Truly this word
hardly digested, turned afterward into a greater consequence, then the King
thought it would, who perceived shortly after by Brocadan and his companion,
how hurtful a thing, hateful and discourteous speech is, as the forgetting of
good and his honor, is oftentimes the overthrow both of a king and realm
Amadis was so displeased with this farewell, that he said unto the king. If it
like your Majesty, I have hitherto thought that there was neither King nor
Prince in the world more endued with virtuous and honorable qualities then
you, ne-uerthelesse we now by proof perceive the contrary. Therefore seeing
you have changed your ancient good custom, by the advice of some latter bad
counsel, we will go seek out another manner of life. Do answered the king,
what you will, for you know my mind. Saying so, he rose up in a great rage,
and went unto the Queen, unto whom he imparted the whole discourse that he had
with Amadis and his companions, and how he was dispatched of them, wherewith
he was very glad. I am in great doubt said the Queen, least this your
pleasure do not hereafter turn you to displeasure, for you are not ignorant,
from the first day that Amadis and his confederats entered into your service,
how your affairs have always prospered better and better, so as if you
consider that which they have done for you, you shall find that they have
deserved no such answer as you have made unto them. Besides when it shall be
manifest unto others what they both have done and can do, and the little
account you do make of them for their deserts, they may hereafter hope for no
better at your hands, and therefore will they desist to employ themselves for
you, reputing them fools, that shall do but the least service for so
ungrateful a man. Tell me no more of it said the king, for it is done, but if
they make their complaint unto you, tell them that long since I have given that
land which they required of me to our daughter Leonor, as I did tell them. I
will do it answered the Queen, seeing it is your pleasure, and God grant that
all may turn to the best.

But you must understand, that after Amadis and those in his company had seen
in what sort the King had left them, they went forth of the Palace, and as they
went to their lodging they concluded to say nothing thereof unto their friends
until the next morning, against which time they would pray them all to meet
together, and that then they would take counsel what was best to be done. And
at the same instant Amadis sent Durin to tell the Princess Mabila that he
would (if it were possible) the night following speak with Oriana about some
matter of importance newly fallen out. In this sort the day passed, and the
night approached, being already apparrelled in his sable weed: wherefore at
such time as every one was in their soundest sleep, Amadis called Gandalin,
and came unto that place by the which he commonly entered into the chamber of
Oriana, who stayed for him according to the message which she had received by
Durin, where being arrived, without acquainting her at the first with any thing
that might displease her, after they had a little while discoursed pleasantly
together, Mabila and the Damsel of Denmark (who were desirous to sleep, or it
may be not being able to endure that heat wherewith love did prick them,
seeing the kissings and embracings wherewith these two lovers entertained one
another) said unto them, the bed is big enough for you two, and the darkness
fit for your desires, it is now late, lie you down if it please you, and
afterward talk together as much as you will. Madame said Amadis unto Oriana,
by my faith their counsel is very good. It is best for us then to believe them
answered she, and therewithal having nothing upon her but a cloak cast about
her, she had quickly gotten her in between a pair of sheets, and as she laid
her down close in her bed, he lent so near unto her over the beds side, that
after the curtains were drawn (not to increase his passion, but to redouble
his pleasure) a wax taper being only lighted up in the chamber, they began to
kiss and embrace each other so incessantly, that remaining in this great ease,
their spirits entertained a double delight, by the sweet sollace which their
metamorphosed souls did mutially receive from the outward parts of their
lips, being brought at the same instant into such an ecstasy, that they were
thereby unable to speak one word, until the Damsel of Denmark (thinking
that Amadis had been asleep) pulled him by the garment, saying. My Lord you
may lightly take cold, get you into the bed if it please you. With this waking
as it were forth of a sound sleep, he fetched a deep sigh. Alas dear love
said the Princess, should you not be as well at your ease if you were laid
down in the bed by me, as to take so much pain and hurt your self. Madame
(answered he) seeing it pleases you so to command me, I will not make it
dainty to strain a little courtesy with you.

No sooner had he said these words, but that he threw himself stark
naked between the Princess her arms, then begun they again their amorous
sports, performing with co^tentment that thing which every one in the like
delight does most desire: after-wardes they began to confer of diverse
matters, until that Oriana demanded of him wherefore he had sent her word by
Durin that he had somewhat of great importance to tell her. Madam answered he,
I will declare it unto you, seeing that you desire to know it, although I am sure
it will be both strange and grievous unto you, nevertheless I must of necessity
advertise you thereof, because it is of so great co^seque^ce. You must
understand therefore Madame, that the King your father yesterday did speak
unto Agraies, Galuanes, and me in such discurteous sort, that thereby we well
perceived little good he wishes us, afterward he recited unto her word by
word, of all that had happened, and how in the end the king rising up in a
great rage, told them that the world was large enough for them to go seek
some other place where they might be better requited then of him. And for this
cause Madame said Amadis, we must of force do what he has commanded,
otherwise we should greatly prejudice our honors, remaining against his will
in his service, seeing that he might presume that we had no other place to go
unto, where we might be entertained, therefore I beseech you not to be
offended, if in obeying him I am constrained to leave you for a season. You
know what power you have over me, and that I am as much yours as you can wish,
more-ouer I know very well that if I should gain any bad reputation, you are
she that would be most offended therewith, so much am I sure that you do love
and esteem me, which makes me again to entreat you to allow of my
departure, and to give me leave, using your accustomed constancy and virtue.
Alas, answered she, my dear love, what do you tell me? Madame, if it please
God the King hereafter will acknowledge the wrong that he has done unto us,
and I shall be as well wel-come unto him as ever I have bin. Gentle friend,
answered the Princess, you do much amiss to complain of my father, for if he
has received any good from you, it was for my love, and by the commandment
that I gave unto you, and not for his sake, for I alone did bring you hither,
and was the cause that you remained with him. And therefore it is not he that
must recompense you, but I, unto whom you belong. It is very true that he has
always thought otherwise, for which he is the more to be blamed for
answering you so indiscreetly. And although that your departure is the most
grievous thing that could happen to me (being a matter of constraint) I am
content to fortify my self, and to prefer reason before the delights and
pleasures which I receive by your presence. Therefore will I frame my will to
your liking, because I am sure that in what place soever you shall be, your
heart (which is mine) shall remain with me, as pledge of the power which you
have given me over your self, and yet moreover, my father in losing you shall
know by those few that he shall have left, what he has lost by you. Madame,
said Amadis, the favor which you show unto me is so great, that I esteem it
no less then the redemption of mine own life. For you know that every
virtuous man ought to have his honor in such estimation, that he ought to
prefer it before his own life. In like sort Madam, seeing that to conserve
it I must of force depart from you, do thus much if it please you for me, as
(during my abse^ce) to let me hear very often from you: And to hold me
always in your good favor, as he who was never borne but only to obey and
serve you. And truly whosoever had seen the Princess then, when Amadis took
this sorrowful farewell, he might easily have bin witness of the passion which
she endured. Nevertheless Amadis seeing the day constrained him to depart (in
kissing her sweetly) he rose up, leaving her so full of sorrow and heaviness,
that although she dissembled as well as she could, this her extreme grief,
yet had she not so much power over her self, but that she awaked Mabila and
the Damsel of Denmark with her loud sighs, who thinking her to be taken
with some new disease came hastily unto her, and found that Amadis was already
apparrelled. Then they demanded of him, what moved Oriana in such extreme sort
to complain. Amadis told them the whole discourse in what sort he was
constrained to forsake the court, and the service of the king, wherefore my
loving friends said he, I pray you to go and comfort my Lady. Which said, he
took his leave of them, and departed, leaving all the three Ladies accompanied
only with sorrow, and extreme passion. Now you must know that so soon as
Agraies and Galuanes were come unto Amadis his lodging, they sent unto all
their friends particularly, to entreat them to meet there the next morning,
the which they accordingly performed, then they went altogether to the Church
to hear service, at their return from whence, they all walking in a great
field, Amadis began to speak unto them in this manner: My Lords because that
some one may wrongfully blame my Lord Galuanes, Agraies, me, and some others
here present, for leaving the king his service (as we are determined to do)
they and I have thought good to let you understand what is the occasion
thereof. I believe that there is not any in this company that knows not
whether since our arrival in great Britain the authority of a Prince be
increased or diminished. Wherefore without spending the time in rehearsing the
services which we have done unto him, for the which we had great hope to have
received (besides his good will) a great reward, I will declare unto you
particularly, with what ingratitude he used us yesterday, and eue^ as, fortune
which is mutable and inconstant, does often times overthrow all things, so has
he changed his conditions, either by some bad counsel which he has
received, or for some slight occasion whereof we are ignorant. But this much I
am sure, that my Lord Galuanes did desire us to be a means for him unto his
Majesty not past eight or ten days since, that he would be pleased to permit
him to marry with Madasima, and in so doing, to suffer him likewise to enjoy
her lands, upon this condition that he should hold them of him, and of his
Crown, by fealty and homage, the which we promised to perform. By means
whereof, so soon as I was able to go, I and others in this company did make
this request unto him, but he without any regard either unto us that were
suitors, or unto him for whom we sued, who is (as every on knows) brother unto
the King of Scotland, as valiant and hardy a knight as possible may be, and
such a one as in the late battle against king Cildadan has not spared his
life, but has done as much as any other that was there, he has not only
refused our requests, but also given us such injurious words, as were far unfit
and unworthy such a king. And notwithstanding at the beginning we made small
account thereof, until he said unto us all (as we showed unto him some
reasons for our request) that we should go seek else where for such a one as
would acknowledge, and better esteem of us then he did, and that the world was
wide enough, without importuning him any further. Therefore my fellows and
friends since that being in his service, we have been ever dutiful unto him,
so for my part I am yet very well content in this case not to displease him and
to get me forth of his country.

But because it seems unto me that this his license to depart does not only
touch me, and those unto whom he spoke, but all others who are none of his
subjects, I thought it good to acquaint you therewith, to the end, that you
might bethink what to doc. Much were these Knights amassed at the words of
Amadis, considering that if the great seruises of him and his brethren were so
badly requited, that very hardly would that little which they had done be
recompensed. Wherefore they determined to forsake the King, and to go seek
their fortune elsewhere, especially Angriotta de Estranaux, who to draw the
rest unto his opinion and to follow Amadis, he began to say with a loud
voice. My Lords, it is yet no long time since I knew the King, and for that
little acquaintance that I have had with him, I did never see a Prince more
wise, virtuous and temperate, then he has bin in his affairs, wherefore I
doubt me greatly, that this which he has done unto Amadis, and to these
Lords present, proceeds nor of his own fancy: but he has bin incited
thereunto by some wicked malicious person, who has persuaded him to use the^
in that sort. And because that for these eighteen days, I have seen Gandandel
and Brocadan very often consulting with him, and that so he has been more
private with them then any other, I fear me that they are the men that have bin
the chief workers of this mischief, for I have known the^ of long time for
the most malicious persons in all the world. Therefore I am determined even
this day to demand the combat against them, and to maintain that fasly and
wickedly they have set discord between the king and Amadis, and if they will
make excuse because of their age, they have each of them a son which of long
time have borne Arms, against whom I alone will fight, if they dare be so
bold to maintain the reason of their wicked parents. Ah my Lord Angriotta,
answered Amadis, I should be very sorry that you should hazard your body in a
matter so uncertain. By my faith, answered Angriotta, I am very sure thereof,
and I have perceived it of long time, so that if the king would be pleased to
tell but what he knows, he would affirm them to be such as I say. I pray
you Gentle friend, said Amadis, defer it yet for this time, to the end, that
the king may have no cause to be discontented, for if those whom you speak of
(who have always showed to me a friendly countenance) have been so malicious
as to play false play behind my back, assure you that at length their
wickedness shall be discovered, and their desert recompensed, then shall you
have reason to accuse them. Well, answered Augriotta, although this is against
my will, yet I am content to defer it, but believe me that hereafter I
shall both complain, and be revenged of them well enough.

For the rest, my good friends, said Amadis, if it pleased the King and Queen
to vouchsase to see me, I am determined to go forthwith and take my leave of
them, and so to retire unto the Firme-Island, in hope that those which will
follow me, shall wholly be pertakers with me, in all the good and pleasure
which there I shall have. And as you doc know the Co^^trey is pleasant and
wealthy, full of fair women, store of forests, and many rivers fit for
hauking, furthermore, diverse as well of our acquaintance as of strangers, will
come and visit us: besides, in our need if we shall want any aid, and that
king Lisuart will attempt any enterprise against us we shall be supported by
my father, from the Country of little Britain and from Scotland, especially
from the Realm of Sobradisa, the which the Queen Briolania will wholly yield
into our hands, at all times when we shall please. Seeing that you are in
these terms answered Quedragant, now may you know those which do love your
company, from those which do not. By my faith said Amadis, I am of the opinion
if any love his own particular profit, that he should not forsake so good a
Master, yet those which will follow me shall neither fare better nor worse
then mine own self. And as they thus consulted in the meddow the king
happened to come by them, accompanied with Gandandell and many other knights,
and seeing them together he did pass on, making as though he saw them not.

Then caused he a cast of Iackes or Hobbies to be let fly at a Lark, and
after he had a while solaced himself with this pastime, he returned back
unto the City, without speaking either to Amadis or any other in his company.

CHAP. XXI.
How Amadis with many others his confederats for sooke the service of King
Lisuart, and went as well to prove the adventures of the Arch of loyal Lovers,
as also of the forbidden chamber.

WHen Amadis did see that the king perseucred still in the evil opinion which
he had conceived against him and his, according to his former determination at
his coming forth of the meddow, he went unto the court and he found the king
ready to sit down to dinner. Then approaching unto him he said, may it please
your Majesty if in any thing I have offended your grace, God and your self can
witness, assuring you, that although the services which I have done unto you
have been very small, yet the will which I have had to acknowledge the
benefits and honor which it has pleased you to bestow upon me has been
exceeding great. You tell me that I should seek abroad for one that would
better requite me then you, giving me thereby to understand the small desire you
have, that I should obey you, not that I will depart from you as my liege Lord
and Soueraign, for I was never subject to you, nor any other Prince (God only
excepted) but I take leave of you as of him who has done me great good and
honor, and unto whom I do bear affectionate love and desire of service.
Scant had he spoke this word when suddenly these in like sort did take their
leaves viz. Gal^anes, Agraies, Dragonis, Palomir, Brunco de Bon Mer, Branfill
his brother, Angriotta d'Estra^aux, Grindonan his brother, Pinores his Cousin,
and Don Quedragant who stepped before all the rest, saying unto the King.

Your Majesty knows that I never had come nor remained in your Court but at
the instance and request of Amadis, willing and desirous to be his friend for
ever, and seeing that by his occasion I became yours, by the like reason will I
now leave your service, and hereafter forsake you, for what hope may I have
that my small services shall be regarded, when his being so many and great,
are so badly requited, without remembrance how greatly you are indebted unto
him, in delivering you from the hands of Mandafabull, and for the victory also
which you have obtained of king ^ildadan, with the price of his blood and other
of his kindred. I could well remember you of the good turn which he did unto
you when he delivered you and your daughter Oriana (as I have many times heard
it said) from the hands of Arcalaus, and now of late my Lady Leonor, whom
Famangomad and Basigant his son the crullest giants in the world had taken
prisoner, with intent to put her to death, for which cause the ingratitude
which now you show unto him is so great, that it quite depriueth you from all
knowledge of the truth. And therefore he ought to make no less account of this
his short farewell then of the slow reward he has received for the services
past. As for me, I am determined to follow him and to forsake your court
together with him. Whereunto the king replied, Don Quedragant your tongue does
well declare the little love you bear unto me, yet notwithstanding me thinks
you are not so tied nor alied unto Amadis, as in accusing me you should excuse
him as you do: but your thought is otherwise, you say more then you think.
Your Majesty may speak what you please, said Quedragant, like a mighty Lord as
you are, nevertheless you much mistake me in thinking me to be a dissembler
or a counterfeiter of leasings, as a number of others about you are, by whom I
am sure that in the end you shall find your self but badly served. Moreover
before many days be past, you shall perceive who are the friends of Amadis.
Which said, he retired, and Landin stepped forth, saying to the king, may it
please your Majesty, I have not found one in all your court, that was able to
give any aid or comfort to my wrongs, but only my Lord Amadis, whom I now do
see ready to depart from your service, for the wrong that you have done unto
him, for which cause not desiring to forsake him, nor my Uncle Don Quedragant
also, I do take my leave of you. Truly Landin answered the king, so far as I
perceive we are assured that henceforth you have no desire to remain with us.
Believe me if it like your Majesty said he, look what they are so will I be,
for during my life will I obey them. At that instant there stood in a corner of
the hall (whispering together) Don Brian of Moniasta, a most renowned knight,
son to King Ladasan, and to one of the sisters to king Perion of Gaul,
Vrlandin, son to the Earl of Orlanda, Grandores, and Madansill of Pont
d'argent, Listoran of the white Tower, Leda^ of Fryarqua, Tantilies the
haughty, and Don Grauat de Val Craintif. All these came unto the king and said.
Your Majesty may be pleased to understand that the occasion of our coming
hither was to see Amadis and his brethren, and to be their friends, if it were
possible. And even as they were cause of the service that you have received of
us, they also shall be the means that we will forsake you, and we do take
leave of your grace to keep them company. When the king perceived that he was
so suddenely forsaken of such a great number of good knights, he was highly
displeasd, for very spite he would not permit Amadis to go take his leave of
the Queen, who (as much as in her lay) did wholly oppose her self against the
counsel of Gandandell and his companion. And therefore Amadis entreated the
ancient knight Don Grumedan to make his excuse unto her Majesty. Afterward
taking his leave of the king with great reverence, he retired unto his lodging
with his friends and companions, where they found their dinner ready, and as
soon as the Table was taken up, every one went to arm him, and they trouped
altogether in a place where Oriana might behold them, and their number was so
great, as they were thought to be flue hundred knights and more, the most part
of them being Sons unto kings, dukes or earls. After-wards in very good order
they all passed along hard by the Queens lodging. Then Mabila being in one of
the windows called Oriana who was laid upon her bed as melancholy as might be,
saying unto her, Madame, I pray you forget your heaviness, and come see how
many knights you have at your commandment. All the while my cousin was in the
service of the king your father, he was accounted but as a simple wandering
knight, but no sooner is he departed from him when he shows that he is a
Prince and mighty Lord, as you may now behold, and if you have power over him,
by greater reason have you power over all his troop, of whom he is the chief
and principal Leader. Oriana was so greatly comforted with this sight, that
ever after she was more merry and at better hearts case. In this sort did
Amadis and his followers pass through the City, and there accompanied them
king Arban of North wales, Grumedan, a knight of honor belonging to the
Queen, Brandoinas, Queuerant Giontes Nephew to the King, and Listoran the good
iouster. All these were very sorry for the departure of so many good knights,
especially for Amadis, who prayed them that in any matter wherein his honor
might be blemished, they would show themselves to be such friends for him, as
he esteemed them. And although the king (without any occasion) had conceived a
hate against him, yet they should not cease for all that to be his friends,
without forsaking the service of so good a prince, and they answered him that
excepting their service and loyalty in the which they were by duty bound unto
the king, they would be ready to pleasure him at all times and places, when
and where he would employ them, for the which he heartily thanked them.
After-wards he said unto them, If you find the king fit to be spoken unto,
you may advertise him that which Vrganda declared to me in his presence is now
accomplished, for she told me that the recompense which I should have in
gayning Dominions for another, should be hate, anger, and banishment from that
place where most I desired to remain. I have conquered as every one knows
with the edg of my sword, and the loss of my blood, the Isle of Monga^a,
thereby enlarging the limits of the realm of great Britain, and
no^withstanding all this, the king without cause at all, has requited me with
hate, but God is just, and will recompense every one according to his deserts.

By my faith, answered Grumedan, I will not fail to let the King know as much
as you have said. And cursed be Vrganda for prophesing so right, which said,
they embraced one another and took their leave, but Guillan the pensif whose
eyes were full of tears, said unto Amadis. My Lord, you know my occasion, and
how I cannot of my self do any thing, being subject so the will of another,
for whose sake I suffer and endure strange greefes and anguishes, which is the
cause that I cannot follow you, for which I am very sorry and ashamed, so great
a desire have I to acknowledge the favor and honor that I have received of
you, being in your company, beseeching you most humbly at this time to hold me
excused. Now did Amadis understand in what subjection love did hold him, and
he knew very well by himself what pain he might suffer, by means whereof
he answered him: My Lord Guillan, God forbid that by my occasion you should
commit any offense unto the Lady whom you love so constantly, but I rather
counsel you to be obedient unto her, and to serve her as hitherto you have
done, and the King likewise being sure that your honor saved, you will be unto
me in all places a faithful friend and loving companion. Heerewithall he
embraced him, and taking his leave, Guillan and his fellows returned unto the
City, and Amadis and his followed on their way to the Firme-Island, until at
the last they arrived along by a river, upon the side whereof Amadis had sent
before to cause his Tents and Pauillions to be armed and set up. There they
lodged for that night, praising God in that they had so happily been warned of
the Kings ingratitude, with whom if they had remained any longer, space, they
had but lost their time. But Amadis was so heavy for his banishment from
Oriana (ignorant when he should see her again) that he knew not in what sort to
dissemble his melancholy, and thus they passed away the night until the next
morning, that they had rode forward on their way. In the mean time King
Lisuart was in his Palace, who after the departure of so great a number of
Knights, perceived that he now was but meanly accompanied. Then he began to
acknowledge the fault which he had committed, and to repent him greatly for the
words which he said unto Amadis. At the very self same time, Gandandel and
Br^cada^ were advertised what Angriotta had said of them, whereat they were
maruailously abashed, fearing least the King and the rest should dislike of the
bad counsel, which they had giued unto him, nevertheless, since there was no
remedy: they determined to pass it over, and to work such means that ne-uer
any of those Knights who were departed should enter into the King his favor
again. And the better to bring it to pass, they both came unto him, saying.
Your Majesty ought greatly to praise God, that you are so honestly rid of
those men who might have wrought you much mischief, for your highness knows
there is nothing more dangerous then a secret enemy.

Wherefore you have now no other thing to trouble you, neither need you take
any care for your affairs, because that we two will take order, and warily
provide for any peril that may happen to this Realm. When the king heard them
speak so audaciously, he looked upon them with a sour countenance, and
answered them: I do much marvel how you dare be so presumptuous to persuade
me that I should leave unto you the government, not only of my house, but also
of my whole realm, knowing that you are nothing fit, nor sufficient for such a
charge. Do you imagine that the Princes and Lords of this monarchy will obey
you, knowing the place from whence you are descended? And if you think to play
the good husbands, desiring to enrich me by sparing of my treasure, upon whom
do you think that I may better employ it, then upon such Gentlemen and
knights as are in my service? Seeing that the Prince cannot be named a king,
but only because he has many at his commandment. And if in times past I have
showed my self liberal unto those whom at your instance I have driven away,
even by them was I maintained, feared, and redoubted, and therefore content you
with that you have done, without any farther dissembling and forging of
matters, otherwise you shall know that you nothing please me therewith.

Saying so he left them, much abashed at these words, and he mounted on
horseback to go chase a heart which his hunters told him was enclosed within
his toiles. As these things were in doing there arrived at the Court a D^mosell
that was sent from Queen Briolania unto Oriana, who after she had done her
duty, said unto her, Madame the Queen my Mistress has her commended to your
good Grace. And she (...) expressly sent me unto you, to declare unto you at
large how she has been in the firm Island, and what happened unto he in
proving the adventures which there she found.

God keep so good a Queen from mischief, answered Oriana, and you also that
have taken so much pain. Then all the Ladies and Gentlewomen desirous to hear
news, came round about her, and the Damsel began to rehearse that which
she had seen, saying. Madam, at the departing from this Court, the Queen my
Mistress and her company, arrived the fifth day following in the Firme-Island,
where so soon as she was come, she was demanded if it pleased her to prove
the forbidden Chamber or the Arch of loyal Lovers, but she answered that she
would first see the other maruailes of the place. And for that cause Isania
caused her to be conducted to a most fair house, s^ituated half a league or
thereabout, from the principal Palace of Apolidon, in the which after she had
a little while walked, beholding the excellent building thereof, she came
unto one of the corners of a Park which was very dark and deep, that none
durst approach unto the same, so fearful a thing was it. Afterward my Lady was
brought into a most fa^r Tower, well furnished with windows, from whence she
might see all the ways round about her, and there we were so well served and
entreated as might be. And as the second service was brought in, we did see
come forth of that deep ditch, a great serpent, which did cast fire and smoke
as well from her eyes and ears, as from her throat, who came and entered into
this Tower, showing a countenance so furious, that the stoutest in the company
trembled with great fear, after him there suddenly followed two Lions, who in
like sort came forth of this ditch, they came leaping in and assailed the
Serpent, herewithall there began a battle between them, the cruelest that
may possibly be seen between brute beasts, and it lasted half an hour and
more, and so long continued it, that the two Lions became so weary as they
fell down in the place as if they had been dead, and the Serpent likewise so
out of breath, that he remained a great while lying upon the ground. In the
end having rested a little, he rose up and swallowed one of the Lions down his
throat, and carried him into the ditch, and presently after he returned, and
did the like unto the second, and were no more seen all the day after. Those
of the Isle (accustomed to such wonders) beholding our fear laughed at us,
assuring us that all the day long we should see no other nouelty. Whereupon we
began to laugh at our folly, reproching one another, for the affright that had
happened unto us, and thus we passed all the afternoon until it was bed time,
that my Lady and we her women were brought into a chamber richly hanged, in
the which we were all laid. But about midnight, we did hear our chamber
door open with so great noise, that we awaked with great fear thereof, and
therewithal we saw entering in a Heart, one side of whom was as white as snow,
and the other side more black then a raven: having upon his head thirty
horns, upon every one of which there was a burning candle, which gave so great
a light, that one might have seen as plain within the chamber, as if it had
been broad day. The Heart entered in running with great force, for he was
pursued by a cry of swift hounds, that labored to overtake him, and encourage
them thereunto, there was heard an Iuory home sounding after the beast, who in
the end was so hardly pursued, that after he had long turned about the
chamber, he leaped upon our beds even thorough the midst of us. The fear
whereof made us to cry, and suddenly to rise up, all naked as we were, some of
us ran under the beds, others under the benches, but the more we thought to
save our selves, the more were we pursued by the Heart and hounds that followed
him, till at the last he ran toward the windows, afterward being a little
better assured, we took up our aparell which was fallen down upon the ground,
and we began to chat of the fear which we had. And as we were in these
terms, there came a Damsel, accompanied with two other women, who asked us
what moved us to rise so early. By my faith said my Lady, we have had such
an alarm, that my heart yet trembles with fear. This Damsel smyled and
said unto her, that she and we might sleep in safety, for we should have no
more stir all the night after. Whereupon we laid us down in our bed, and
there we remained until it was indifferent late the next morning, when my
Lady caused us to rise up, and after we had heard service, as she walked in a
great meddow watered with many pleasant brooks going through a pleasant and
delectable wood where we found at the end thereof many pleasant orchards, and a
house very round, set upon twelve pillars of Marble, so artificially wrought,
that in stead of stone and mortar, the walls thereof were of fine Crystal,
through the which they that were within, might easily see those without, and
there was never a door thereof which was not of Gold or Silver. And (that
which was most admirable) there was about it many Images of copper, made in the
likeness of Giants, each of them holding in their hands a bended bow, and an
arrow therein, the head whereof was of such a burning brightness, that it seemed
fire came out thereof. And it was told us that no sooner was any so hardy to
enter therein, but presently he should be slain by the arrows which by them
are shot, whereupon my Lady was desirous to make proof thereof, by a Horse and
two Apes, who being put into the Chamber were presently consumed by the fire,
proceeding from these Arrows that compassed them about. And there was graven
upon the portall these words. Let no man nor woman be so hardy as to set foot
within this Palace, except it be he or she that loves as constantly as
Grimanesa and Apolidon, that made this enchantment. And they must of necessity
enter in both together for the first time, otherwise let them be assured to die
most cruelly, and this enchauntment shall last, and all the rest of this
Island, until that the knight and Lady (who do surpass in loyalty those that
made the defenses of the forbidden Chamber) be entered in, and there have taken
their pleasure. Hereupon my Lady caused Isania to be called, and told him she
was glad that she had seen these wonders, but she would yet see the Arch of
loyal Lovers, and the chamber so renowned, and in the mean season, she
desired him to tell her what was meant by the Heart, Serpent, Dogs and Lions,
Madame answered Isania, I know no other thing thereof, but that every day at
those hours and places that you did see them, the combats of the beasts are
made, and the Heart does always leap down from the window, and the Dogs
after, who pursue him into a Lake not far from hence, where they are hidden and
seen no more until the next day and hour that the chase begins again, as
you have seen it this night past. But thus much you shall know, that if you
were one whole year in this Island, yet should you not have time enough to see
all the wonderful things which there are. For this cause my Lady and her
company mounted on horseback, and we came unto the Palace of Apolidon to see
the arch of loyal Lovers and the forbidden Chamber. Whereunto my Lady was no
sooner come but she alighted, and approached unto the Image of copper (as she
that had never falsified her love) and passing under, there was heard the most
sweet, and melodious tune in all the world, and the Queen passed through even
unto the place where the portraitures of Apolidon and Grimanesa were, which
seemed unto her as though they had been alive. And from thence she came unto
the pillar of Jasper, where she saw written these words. Briolania the
daughter to Tagadan king of Sobradisa, is the third Damsel that did ever
enter into this place. But as my Ladylooked round about her in all places she
was afraid, seeing that she was alone: therefore without long tarrying there,
she returned unto us that stayed for her, and for this time she would make no
farther proof until the 5. day following, that she did put on the richest,
and costliest apparel that in all her life she had ever worn, and letting her
hair hang down, which were the fairest that ever nature framed, she had upon
her head, no more then a border of Gold garnished with many precious stones,
the which did become her so well, and made her seem so saire, that as well her
own followers as strangers did plainly say, that without doubt she would
finish the adventures of the Isle: her eupon recommending her self unto God,
she entered upon the forbidden path, and passing the brass pillar, she came
close unto the other of Marble, where she red the Letters that were graven
thereupon, afterward she marched on farther, so that every one did then judge
that she would enter into the chamber without any difficulty. When Oriana
heard that Briolania had passed so far, she began to blush and change her
natural color, in such sort that one might easily have known the great
alteration of her mind, fearing that Briolania had passed no farther, thereby
ending the adventure of the forbidden chamber. But the Damsel proceeding
forward in her discourse, said, you must know that so soon as the Queen came
within three paces of the chamber she was taken so rudely by her fair and
golden hairs, that without all respect of pity, she was thrown out with
such force beyond the pillar that she remained in aswond a long time, as many
others had done before her: whereupon we suddenly took her up, and carried
her unto her chamber, where shortly after she recovered, and she determined the
next morning to depart from thence. The which she did, taking the way to
Sobradisa. Nevertheless she had before commanded me to come unto this Court,
to advertise you of that which I have declared. Truly Damsel said Oriana, the
Queen your Mistress has done much for me. Madam, said the Damsel, she has
expressly charged me to return unto her incontinently, wherefore it may
please you to give me leave to depart. Fair Damofel said Oriana, you shall see
the Queen, and then to morrow morning you shall depart. Well Madame said she,
I am content to obey you. Now about this time Amadis and his fellows arrived
at the Firme-Island, where they were most royally entertained and received by
all those of the country, who were exceeding glad for the recovery of their
new lord, whom they had thought to hauebeen lost. And after that these knights
(who had followed Amadis) had well viewed the Isle, and seen the fertility,
and the invincible situation thereof, they judged that king Lisuart nor any
other prince could be of power sufficient as once to dare come and assail
them. For besides the force of the country, it was furnished with many cities
and towns, and beautified with four Castles, the most sumptuous and
magnificent that were in all the world beside. In one of them might a man
behold the sport of the Heart chased by the Dogs, in the other, the Combat
between the Lions and the Serpent, then in the third, the tower which made the
turning pauillion, for four times a day it turned so fast, that those which
were therein did think that it would sink: Lastly in the sourth was the
pastime of the baited Bull: who coming forth of an old ditch, passed over the
people that stood in his way, and did come running with his horns against a
gate of iron with such force, that he overthrew it, and opened a Tower, from
whence there came forth an old Ape, so wrinkled that his skin hanged down on
all parts of him, the which held a whip, wherewith he nimbly chased the Bull
even unto the ditch, from whence he came forth. In all these four Castles did
Amadis and his fellows oftentimes take their pastime, for the strange sights
that there they saw. And in this sort did these knights pass the time away,
staying until fortune did offer them some new occasion to arm themselves, the
which shortly after she did: for Balais Carsanta (whom Amadis had heretofore
delivered from the prisons of Arcalaus) came unto him, from the Court of Kings
Lisuart, who after he had declared unto them many nouels, he told them how
king Lisuart was preparing an army to pass into the Isle of Mongaza, for
Grumedaca had made answer unto the Earl Latin (who was sent with the old
Giant and his sons, to take possession of the country) that she would
sooner consent unto the death of her self and all the world, before she would
yield up the Burning lake, and the three strong Castles which she held, and
that they should do with her Daughter Madasima and the other Damsels what
they would. I pray you said Agraics tell us what countenance the King showed,
hearing such an answer. By my faith answered Balais, he is determined to put
all to fire and sword if he be resisted, and within a month after, to cause
the heads of the pledges which he holds to be smitten off. Truly said
Amadis, he may do what he please, but if he used more courtesy, it were
perchance better for him.

When Galuanes whom (I have said) Cupid had deprived of all liberty, to make
him a lover, and servant unto this Madasima, understood the outrage that was
likely to be offered unto her, his courage increased in such sort, that in
great choler he said. My Lords, here is not any of you knows not that my
Lord Amadis and we are all departed from the Court of king Lisuart, especially
for the bad usage that he has offered unto Madasima, unto whom I bear such
love, as a husband should unto his wife, and therefore I beseech you very
earnestly to aid and assist me, for I have promised to stick to her and to
help her, though I should die in the quarrel. Then Florestan (understanding
the aid which Galuanes demanded) had not the patience to let any other answer
before him, but rose up saying. My Lord Galuanes if it were possible to make a
peace for her with the king that were the best course: but I assure you, if we
must make it with our swords, I am always ready to assist you, My Lord
answered Bria^ of Moniasta, we do al very well know, that you are both valiant
and hardy knights, nevertheless this enterprise which you determine, touches
you no more in particular, then it does all us in general, for we are departed
from the Kings service all upon one occasion: and therefore it is reason that
all of us should succor him that has most need of help. And although we had
no desire to aid Don Galuanes here present, yet are we bound to favor
Ladies in all that we can, and amongst other Madasima and hers, assuring you
that through my fault they shall neither have hurt nor displeasure. By my faith
said Quedragant, you speak virtuously, and according to good reason, for doing
otherwise we should be unworthy of the name of knights, and although I were my
self alone yet would I seek aid to execute that which you have determined:
knowing that the poor Madasima (forsaken of every one) has freely yielded her
self into the King his prisons, not by her own will, but by the dutiful
obedience which she desired to show unto her mother: For which cause if the
king pretend any right unto the lands of the Isle of Mongaza, I say he does
wrong. My Lords answered Amadis, those things which are debated by sound
deliberation, do assuredly come unto good end, and you need not doubt that
enterprising this which you determine, you shall perform it unto your honor,
yea although it were more dangerous and difficult then it is, nevertheless (if
it please you) I will declare what I think thereof. You do all conclude (so
far as I see) to set at liberty the twelve Damsels now prisoners with king
Lisuart. Therefore I am of the opinion that twelve of you without any more
should undertake this enterprise, so every one of you shall have one of them,
and the twelve gentlewomen shall be particularly bound unto twelve knights,
and the rest of this company shall spare themselves, and tarry here to prevent
such inconueniencies as may happen.

Me thinks that Galuanes unto whom this matter does chiefly appertain,
deserves well to be the first man that shall be named, next Agraies his
nephewe, Florestan my brother, Palomir, Dragonis, Brian, Nicoran, Orlandid,
Garnat, Imosil brother to the Duke of Burgoine, Madansil, and Eaderin. You
twelve are such valiant knights as you may answer twelve others whatsoever
they be, and King Lisuart cannot deny the combat although it should be
against the chiefest of his Realm, considering the houses from which you are
descended. This counsel was so well allowed of all, that about midnight
following, the twelve knights mounted on horseback, taking their way unto the
City of Thassillana, in the which the King soiourned.

CHAP. XXII.
How Oriana remained in great perplexity, not only for the departure of
Amadis, but also because she felt her self great with child: and of that
which happened to the twelve Knights that were departed from the Firme-Island,
to deliver Madasima and her Damsels.

A Little before it has been told unto you, how Amadis remained eight days
in Mirefleur with Oriana, contenting their affections and desires to the full:
in such sort as two months after, or there about, the Princess doubted that
she was with child, nevertheless for the little experince that she had in
such matters, she made no account thereof, until after the departure of
Amadis, when the lively color in her face began to fade and decay, and her
stomach waxed very bad, and weak, so that this doubt was turned into a
certainty, wherefore she determined to acquaint Mabila and the Damsel of
Denmark therewith, as unto those whom she esteemed the true treasurers of her
secrets. For which cause being one day withdrawn into her closet, having her
eyes full of tears, and her heart oppressed with grief, she said unto them:
Alas my dear friends and loving counselors, I do now well perceive that
Fortune will wholly work my ruin and overthrow: You have seen what in
conuenience has happened of late unto the person whom I do most love in the
world, and now (that which is worst of all) the thing which I have most feared
and doubted, is lighted upon me: For certainly I am with child, and I know
not what I shall do, that I be not discovered and undone. Much abashed were
these two Damsels at this: nevertheless (as those which were wise and well
advised) they dissembled that which they thought thereof. And Mabila answered
Oriana: Take no care Madame, God shall provide well enough for you, (if it
please him) but by my faith, (said she in smiling) I always doubted that unto
such a Saint such an offering would be brought. Oriana smiled to see with what
a pretty grace Mabila delivered this pleasant speech, and answered her: For
the honor of God do you both advise to give me some remedy, and then you
shall see if I cannot requite your frumps. As for me I think it best, that
we find the means to retire unto Mireflure, or elsewhere from the Court,
staying the time, until it shall please God to regard me in pity: for I feel
my belly to rise, and I see my face already waxen lean. Madame said the
Damsel of Denmark, it is an easy matter to prevent an inconvenience, when
it is foreseen before it happen: I will tell you answered the Princess)
whereupon I have bethought me: It is necessary that you (Damsel) do hazard
your life for the saving of my honor. You see that I do put more trust in
you, then in any other person that lives. Madame said she, you know (or at
the least you should know me so well) that I have neither life nor honor
which I hold so dear, that I would not adventure to do you service. I
believe it answered Oriana, and also you may be assured that if God do lend
me life and health, I will acknowledge and requite it to the full: wherefore
depart to morrow morning, and get you to Mirefleur, find the means to speak
with the Abbess, and tell her that you are with child, praying her earnestly
to keep your counsel as secret as she would do her own, and that she
would do you that good as to find out some woman, to nurse the fruit that
God shall send you, the which you shall cause to be laid within the entry of
her Church porch, as a thing found by chance. I am sure that she loves you as
much as any woman living, and she will willingly do this good turn for you:
By this means shall my honor be saved, and yours little or nothing the worse.
Repose your self upon me said the Damsel, I will play this part well
enough, and therefore be you merry: In the mean season do you purchase leave
for your departure, and follow me. These and such like were the consultations
of these three Damsels, whom we will for the present leave, to return unto
king Lisuart, who after that the Earl Latin was returned back again, and
that he had declared unto him how Grumadaca the old Gyantesse, was not
determined to yield the Castle of the burning Lake, nor the three strong
places whereof we have spoken: he (by the counsel of Broquadan and Gandandel)
sent for Madasima to come unto him, unto whom he said: Damosel, you know how
you and your women are entered into my prisons upon this condition, that if your
mother did nor yield into my hands the Isle of Mongaza, with the burning Lake,
and the other places thereunto belonging, your heads should answer me for it.
And because I have been of late certified by those which I sent thither, of
the refusal which she has made, I will make you an example of it, that every
one thereby may see what a matter of importance it is, not to keep promise
with a King: for you shall all die. When the poor Lady heard this conclusion
so rigorous, the fair vermilion color of her face was suddenly changed into
a pale and deadly hew, and falling at the king his feet she answered him, If
it like your Majesty, the death which you threaten unto me, does so much
trouble my spirits, that I have no means nor power to make you an answer. But
if there be any in this company that takes pity upon twelve poor
distressed Damsels, I do most humbly beseech him to take our quarrel in
hand: for if I have entered into your prison, I did it by the commandment of my
mother, and they by my persuasions did the like. And although that by reason
every Gentleman bearing arms, is bound to maintain the right of afflicted
women, if (by misfortune) we cannot find any that takes compassion of our
misery, yet it may please your Majesty (mittigating the rigor of your laws)
to extend your mercy, and to hear us in our iustifications, as reason and
equity wills. When Gandandel heard Madasima speak so boldly, he suddenly
answered, saying unto the King, if it please your Majesty, there is no reason
that these women should be suffered thus to plead, for if you cause them not
to die, every one will do as they do, never performing any thing that they do
promise unto you. They are come hither as pledges, nothing ignorant of the
conditions: wherefore then shall there be any wrong done unto them, to cut off
their heads, for not yielding that which they have promised? My Lord
Gandandell, answered the good knight Grumedan, if it please the King, his
Majesty shall not do as you counsel him: for mercy is more commendable in a
King then cruelty, which he may use when it pleases him. You know that these
women, more by the commandment of a mother, and the obedience of a child,
then by any their own wills, have been constrained to yield themselves
prisoners, as they are, and even as God loves those that are humble and
dutiful, so also the King who is his minister, ought not to despise them.
Moreover I have been advertised that certain knights are already departed
from the Firme-Island, to maintain their quarrel against you, and the right
which they have: and therefore my Lord Gandandel, if you or your sons dare
maintain this counsel which you do give unto the King for good, it may be
you may find, that you or they which shall have to do with them, shall not be
all at their best ease. Gandandel hearing Grumedan to speak so virtuously,
could willingly have wished the words unspoken, which he uttered so lightly:
but now it was too late to remedy that which was past help, wherefore to save
his honor, he answered. Dan Grumedan, you seek to purchase me displeasure,
and yet have I not any way deserved it of you. As touching my sons there is
not any in this company, who knows them not for valiant and bold knights,
and such as will maintain before all and against all men, that this which I
have said unto the King, is according to right and equity. We shall shortly
see what they will do said Grumedan: but upon mine honor, I speak not this
in that I wish you any hurt, but only because it seems unto me that you
counsel the King amiss. Now did the King certainly know that against all
right, and without any cause at all, he had banished Amadis, notwithstanding
his ancient virtue could not banish this new passion, but hearing Grumedan
speak so wisely, he willingly gave ear unto him: and after-ward demanded of
him who were the knights that came for Madasima. Grumedan named them all unto
him one after another. Truly said the King, for so small a number they are men
of worth, and valiant knights. Gandandel did now very well perceive, that his
affairs were like to prosper worse and worse: knowing his two sons to be no
such men as to match or compare with Don Florestan, Agraies, Brian, or Garnet
of the fearful valley. Wherefore so soon as the King had sent the Damsels
back again to prison, he went to seek out Brocadan, unto whom he wholly
recited all that which Grumedan had said unto the king in his presence, at
which he was no less amassed then he, whereupon they both retired into a
chamber, that they might more privately confer together. And as they were in
this consultation, and that Brocadan, reproved Gandandel, cursing the hour
that ever he was advised by him, to bring Amadis into these terms: a young
knight named Sarquiles, Cosen unto Angriotta de Estranaux (being in love with
one of the Neeces of Broquadan) was by chance hidden behind the* Tapestrie of
the same chamber, staying for some sign or watch word, which was to be given
unto him by his loving Mistress, he I say heard all their counsel, whereat
he was wonderful abashed. For which cause incontinently after the traitors
were departed, he came forth from his place, where he had almost all that
day been hidden: and the next morning he armed him, and as if he had been
come some far journey, he entered into the Palace where the king was, unto
whom he came and said: If it may please your Majesty, I am none of your subject
nor liege man, but in requital of the bringing up and education that I have
had in your Court, I am bound to preserve and defend the honor of your
Majesty. Wherefore your highness may be pleased, to be advertised that within
these three days, I was in such a place, where I heard that Broquadan and
Gandandel did not only then conspire (but already had committed against God and
your grace) the greatest treason that might be imagined. It is sure that they
determined to counsel and persuade you to put Madasima and her gentlewomen to
death, and for the rest I hope if it like your Majesty, before ten days be
past, that their wickedness shall be wholly laid open and proved unto you. And
because that in maintayning such traitors, you have of late banished my Lord
Amadis, and many other good knights from your company, I am not determined to
stay any longer with you, and therefore I take my leave of your grace, to go
seek out my Uncle Angriotta, whom (if God please) you shall see in these
parts, and I with him, determined to avouch by force of arms against these two
traitors, their unjust conspiracies. God be with you (answered the king) seeing
that you have so great haste. Herewithall Sarquiles rose up, leaving the king
alone very pensive for the words which he had said unto him, and some few
days after he arrived in the Firme-Island, as Amadis, Angriotta, Bruneo, and
others were walking by the Sea side, causing certain ships to be prepared and
rigged, to pass into Gaul: where king Perion had sent unto Amadis that he
should come for certain affairs which were lately happened unto him. When
Angriotta beheld his Nephew Sarquiles, he wondered thereat, inquiring of him why
he had left king Lisuart. My Lord, answered Sarquiles, it is for a matter
whereat you and all this company will greatly admire. Hereupon he recived unto
them the whole discourse of the practices and counsels that Broquadan and
Gandandel had held upon the accusation of Amadis and his companions. Well
answered Angriotta, I did always think so of them. And you my Lord, said he
unto Amadis, do now find that to be true which I have here-tofore told you:
But seeing it is so, I protest they shall repent their treachery: for I will
depart hence tomorrowe morning to go and fight with them, and make them
acknowledge their villainy. Gentle friend answered Amadis, the matter being so
certain as it is, you have no reason to defer the execution of your
enterprise: and if you had any sooner performed that which you now determine,
it had been (perchance) with less assurance then you now have. And after many
other discourses they went unto their lodging, until the next morning that
Angriotta took his leave of Amadis, and accompanied with his Nephew Sarquiles,
took the right way toward great Britain, where within few days after he
arrived. Now you must understand that ever since the departure of Amadis, king
Lisuart was so melancholy as no man could be more, and he spent all the day
long in studying with himself: whereof one time above all the rest, Broquadan
and Gandandel seeing him alone very pensive, came unto him and said. May it
please your Majesty, it seems unto us, that the over great care which you
take in these your affairs, depriueth you of your wonted manner of life, and
you take matters more to heart then you need. It may well be answered the king,
but what mean you to tell me so? Is it (if it like your Majesty) said they,
for doubt of those that come from the Firme-Island, in the defense of Madasima
and her Damsels? by the faith we owe unto God, if it please your grace to
credit our counsel, you and your estate shall be henceforth in greater
security then ever yet it has been. And to bring that to pass, command the
heads of those pledges which you have, this day to be smitten off: Then
afterward send unto Galuanes and the rest of his compapanie (your enemies)
that upon their lives they be not once so hardy as to enter into your
countries, and if by chance they be already arrived, command them foorth-with
to depart, or otherwise you will cause them to be cut in pieces. When the King
heard this wicked speech, and ungodly counsel of theirs, he remembered that
which Sarquiles had told unto him, and therwithall he knew that without doubt
these two traitors did with wrong procure the death of these Damsels:
notwithstanding because he would not at that time amase them, he only
answered this. You counsel me to things far unfitting my estate: the one
that I should without process or order of Justice, put Madasima and her
Damsels to death: and the other, that I should forbid from my Court those
knights that are minded to come thither. But if I should do this which you
say, I might be grievously reproved for it before God, who has by his great
bounty and mercy instituted me King, to administer Justice unto every one
alike: therefore the counsel which you do give unto me, is wicked and
unworthy to be received. Let it suffice you therefore that I have already
listened unto you in the accusation which you have contrived against Amadis,
whereof I do greatly repent me: for I ne-uer received of him, nor any of his,
but all honor, pleasure, and service, wherefore I charge you upon your lives,
that you move me no more thereof.

Saying so he rose up, showing by his countenance that he was very angry,
whereat Gandandel and Broquadan were greatly abashed, and they were constrained
to depart unto their lodging, to determine what was best for the^ to be done,
seeing that already fortune had maruailously crossed them, and they came not in
the King his presence all that day after until the next morning, when they
attended upon him as he rode into the fields. The King being half a league
from the City, he beheld coming toward him the knights of the Firme-Island,
for the delivery of Madasima and her Damsels, being come somewhat near they
all did their duties to his Majesty. Then Galuanes who marched for-most, took
upon him to speak for all his fellows, saying unto the King. If it like your
Majesty, we (being all of us well assured of your accustomed virtue) are come
to demand justice of your grace for Madasima and her Damsels, and to defend
their right if by force of arms it is defensible. My friends, answered he,
seeing that you have already set up your Tents in this place, if you think
good you may here abide for this day, and to morrow you may come unto me, to
advise upon that which shall be reasonable to be done. If it please your
highness, said Brian of Moniasta, we all are assured that accorto your,
ancient royal behavior, justice shall not be denied unto us, and if we
find it otherwise, it is rather by the counsel of some wicked traitors that
are about you, then any of your own motion. Brian, Brian, said the King, I am
well assured that if you had believed your father, you would neither have
departed from my service (as you have done) neither would you in this sort have
held argument against me. The argument which I do hold against your Majesty,
said Brian, is not for any il will, or that I would not perform any dutiful
service for your grace, for I know well that in time you will acknowledge that
which I say true. And where your Majesty does tell me that if I had believed
my father, I would not have forsaken you, saving thereuerence of your Majesty
I did ne-uer forsake you, for I never did belong unto you: but I only came
into your house to seek my cousin Amadis, who so long as he was yours, so long
had I a desire to serve you, and never did I whilst I there remained offend
you, Well, well, answered the King, we will debate of this another time more
at large. Which said, he bad them good night, and departed: for it was already
somewhat late. Heretofore you have heard how the King had the day before,
after dinner, taken up Gandandel and Broquadan, who being very heavy, did
consult a great while how they might with honor finish theyt wicked
enterprise, for the next morning the twelve Knights of the Firme-Island met the
King at Church, who after service was ended, called Broquadan and Gandandel,
unto whom he said. You have of long time counseled me to put Madasima and her
Damsels to death, being our prisoners, and that in their behalf I should
hear no justification whatsoever. Therefore you must now make answer unto
that which these 12 Knights will maintain. Then Imosell of Burgoine stepped
forth, saying unto the King. If it like your Majesty, I and my fellows are
come into your Court to beseech you most humble, that you would extend your
justice and mercy to Madasima and her Damsels. Whereupon Gandandel stepped
forth and answered: My Lord Imosel, you request that justice should be
extended to Madasima, and so far as I perceive, you twelve will maintain,
that they ought to be heard in their iustifications, but by the faith that I
owe unto the King, if he consent thereunto he does amiss, considering under
what condition they are entered into his prison.

Believe me Gandandel said Imosel, had you held your peace you had done but
your duty, for the king has not yet commanded you to speak, and also because
you know that by the custom of great Britain no woman ought to suffer death,
except it be in two cases, the one for Leze majesty, the other for treason.
But there is not any in this company, who knows not how these poor women
were brought into the king his hands, more by compulsion then their own
consent. Therefore we beseech your Majesty and you my Lords all to consider of
the matter, for reason and pity are most fit to be used therein. You are to
blame answered Gandandel, to request a thing so unreasonable, and seeing it
has pleased the king to hear us both, let him order the matter as to his
majesty shall seem most convenient. Then the king caused every one to depart,
and called some of the most principal of the realm unto him, and amongst
others his Uncle the Earl Argamont, an ancient and most virtuous Prince, unto
whom he said, Good Uncle, I pray you and all the rest also, to counsel me upon
this controversy. But there was not any that would speak their opinion,
before they had heard the king. Seeing it is so said the king, you shall
presently know mine opinion, It seems unto me Imosel of Burgondie has both
reasonable and wisely spoken, and that the Damsels ought to be heard, what
they they can say in their own defense. Truly if it like your Majesty, said
the old Earl, you speak like a virtuous king, and it is not possible to give a
righter judgment, of which opinion they were all. Wherefore he commanded
Gandandel and Broquadan to be sent for, and in the presence of the knights of
the Firme-Island, he gave the same sentence, for the which they humbly thanked
his majesty, beseeching him that Madastma and her women might be set at
liberty. For we hope said they, to have them acquitted either by reason or arms.
It is well said answered the king, who sent for the Damsels to come unto him,
and afterward said unto them, Look up Ladies, behold these Gentlemen which
will defend your right, will you be content to put your quarrel and adventure
your lives upon their force. Alas if it like your Majesty answered Madasima,
seeing it pleases them to afford us this good, we do put our lives into
their hands, and your good mercy. Trust me Madame said Imosel, If there be
any here which will gainesay that you are not delivered and set at liberty,
behold me ready to prove the contrary, and if there be twelve together of the
like opinion, we are twelve likewise that will hazard our lives for yours.
Therewithal the king did cast his eyes upon Ga^dandel and Broquadan, and he
perceived that they hanged down their heads, looking upon the ground, so much
amassed, that they were not able to answer one word, wherefore the king said
unto the knights of the Isle. My Lords, I pray you to withdraw your selves for
this day, and to morrow you shall have answer of those with whom you are to
deal. Where-upon they all departed, and presently after the king called apart
Broquadan and Gandandel, unto who^ he said, come hither, you know that many
times you have solicited me to put these poor Damsels to death, persuading
me that it was just and reason so to do, and that if need were you and your
sons would maintain this counsel unto the death. You have heard what Imosel
and his fellows have said unto me, which I do think to be good and right,
wherefore it is time that you determine what to do. For by the faith that I owe
unto God, I will not permit that any other of my knights shall fight with them,
and if you look not unto it, you shall be answerable for all, and the Damsels
delivered. If it please your Majesty, answered they, to morrow we will be ready
to maintain what-soeuer we have said. And for that time they departed to their
lodging, greatly troubled for that which they were to do. Nevertheless, seeing
that now there was no remedy, they determined to persevere in their daurned
opinion by argument of words only, without putting themselves or their
children in danger: knowing assuredly that they were not able to resist any of
those that were come from the Firme-Island. But it happened out so well for
them, as the very same night news came unto the King, that Grumedaca the old
Giantesse was dead, and that a little before her death, she had yielded up her
strong places into the hands of the kings people, beseeching him to have pity
upon her daughter Madasima.

Whereupon the next morning at their return from church, he caused the twelve
knights of the Firme-Island to be called, unto whom he said. My friends, you
may carry away with you the Damsels which you demand, when it shall please
you, for I set them at liberty, because that this night the Earl Latin has
written unto me, that he has the Isle of Mongaza in his hands, and that the
old Giantesse is deceased. If any were glad here-of, you may believe that the
two traitors Broquadan and Gandandel were nothing sorry, for as much as they
did perceive that if this had not happened, their treason had bid discovered.
The^ Imosel answered the king. If your Majesty do but Madasima right, she
must not remain poor nor disinherited, seeing your grace knows that children
are bound to obey their parents as she has done, more by fear then free
will. And so if it please your Majesty, using your accustomed liberality, you
should show her some grace and favor, showing thereby an example to all other
virtuous and courageous Princes to do the like. Imosel, said the king, let it
suffice you that the Damsels are at liberty, for I cannot revoke the gift
which I have made to my daughter Leonor, of the land which you demand. I most
humbly beseech your Majesty, answered Galuanes, to have pity upon her and
me, who at this present ought to hold the place descended from her ancestors,
of whom she is the lawful inheretrix, especially of the land which you do
take from her: and if it please your highness, in remembrance of the services
which I have done unto you, you may restore them unto us to hold them of your
grace by fealty and homage. I have said enough my Lord Galuanes, answered the
king, that which is done, cannot be undone. Trust me, answered he, seeing I can
neither have right nor reason of you, I will try if I may get it some other
way. Do what you can, said the king, I am in good hope seeing I have won if
from greater then you, to desend it against those that are less the^ they.
Sir, answered Galuanes, he which got it for you, has bin very badly
reco^pensed therefore. Care not you for that, said the King, if he of whom you
speak dare but adventure to aid you, I dare be so bold as to withstand him,
and to make him beshrew himself. Agraies hearing these threats, was exceeding
angry, and in great choler answered: Sir, although my Lord Amadis was never
other the^ a wa^dring knight, yet did he that good for you which as yet you
never recompensed, for he has many times defended you, and delivered you from
death. Florestan did well perceive that Agraies entered into farther terms
then was fit he should, for which cause he a little pulled him back, and said
unto the king. Sir, although you be a king and a great Lord, yet it may be you
shall find somewhat to do, to use my Lord Amadis in such sort as you threaten
him. By my faith, said Brian, Amadis has done you too many services to be thus
badly requited, especially he being son unto a Prince as worthy as your
self. Soft and fair Don Brian, said the king, we know well enough that you
are one of his friends. I am and so ought to be, said Brian, for every one
knows that I am his cousin german, and therefore it were a shame not to
succor him in his need. Truly, answered the King, for the same cause do I
hold you excused. And as they were in these terms, Angriotta de Estrauaux,
and Sarquiles his Nephew came before the King, who being armed at all points,
did their duty unto his Majesty: but when the knights of the Firme-Island did
behold them, they greatly wondered, for they knew nothing at al of this their
enterprise. Then Angriotta with a loud voice began his speech in this manner.
May it please your Majesty, my Nephew and I here present, do beseech your
grace to cause two traitors that are in your Court; Broquadan and Gandandel, to
appear before your Majesty, unto whom I will declare the treason which they
have done against you. Much affrighted was Broquadan and his companion, hearing
Angriotta speak after this manner; who continuing his speech said: If it like
your highness, these two wicked persons of whom I speak, without respect or
fear of God or men, have faisly accused my Lord Amadis and other of a matter
wherein they never so much as in thought offended. By means whereof I dare well
say, that you have banished from you the best Knights that ever entered, into
Great Britain, therefore if: those traitors dare maintain that they be not
such as I term the^^ I alone, by the help of God, and the edge of my sword
will make them confess it. And if they ought to be excused by reason of their
age, there is neither of them both which has not a son of long time bearing
arms, and well enough esteemed of amongst the Knights of your court, against
whom I will fight if they will maintain the quarrel of their wicked fathers.
Most mighty sovereign, answered Gandandel, does not your grace see the boldness
of this proud injurious fellow, who is come into this country to no other end,
but only to shame the Gentlemen of your court? By my faith if your Majesty
would have believed me long ago, so soon as he had entered into your Realm,
he should have bin hanged up, upon the first tree that he had come unto, but
seeing that your grace does suffer him, you must not hereafter be abashed if
Amadis in his own person do come even hither to injury your own self.
Notwithstanding, thus much I protest, that by the living God, if I were as
young now as when I began to enter into the service of the late deceased king
your brother, unto whom I have done many great services, I am well assured that
Angriotta durst not so much as have dreamed to utter half these injurious
words of me, as he has proferred now before your Majesty. But the gallant
does well know that I am old and erased, as well by the great number of my
aged years, as by the infinite wounds which I have received, in a manner in all
the parts of my body, in the wars of your predecessors, witness whereof are yet
these relikes. Saying so he (...) his breast, upon the which were many scarres
apparrantly to be ^ne. Villain, said Angriotta, (...) think to defend thee
with the cloquence of thy tongue. But by the faith of a Knight, if the King do
but justice unto us both, he shall apparrantly perceive thy great treason.
Therewith all Sarquiles stepped forth and kneeling down, he said unto the
King: It is long since I did advertise your Majesty, that so soon as my Lord
Angriotta here present, should come unto your Court, I would let you
understand that, which with my two ears I did hear spoken by the mouth of
these two traitors: hereupon he recited word by word, the whole consultations
which he had heard, whereat al they that were present did greatly wonder to
hear such conspiracies repeated. And for as much if it like your Majesty,
said Sarqailes, as they can in no sort excuse themselves, my Lord Angriotta
and I will combat with their three sons, if they dare maintain the contrary.
Now were they present of who^ they spoke, who seeing the injury that was done
unto their aged fathers, and that every one gave credit to the words of
Sarquiles, in a great rage they thrust through the prease, and falling on their
knees before the King, they said: May it please your Majesty, Angriotta and
Sarquiles have most falsely and wickedly lied in the words which they have said
before your Majesty, and wheresoever, or whenever they do say so they shall
lie, and therefore it may please you presently to grant unto us the combat
which they have demanded. Truly, answered the King, it is now very late, but I
am content that tomorrow after service you shall do that which you can, as well
on the one part as on the other. Then D^s one of the sons of Br^quadas by the
sister of Gandandel, a valiant and expert man at arms (but wholly adicted to
villainy) stepped forth saying unto the King. Saving the reverence of your
Majesty, Sarq^^les has unjustly and leaudly lied in all that he has said,
and I shall be one of them that will maintain it against him. By my faith,
answered Angriotta, if there were a fourth here too, he should be as well
handled as I hope thou shall. Go too then, said the King, depart you all for
this day, and to morrow think upon your business.

Afterward he called G^^medan and Giontes his Nephewe, and after he had
consulted with them a little while, he commanded Gandandel and Broquadas to
come before him, unto whom he said (...) Come ^hether, you have so many times
declared unto me, that Amadis and his associates had determined to betray me,
and to usurp upon me the land of Great Britain, yet nevertheless when it
is come to an issue, you excuse your selves from the combat, setting your sons
to maintain your wickedness, who cannot do therewithal, notwith-standing
God is just, and by all that I do owe unto him, it is very lewdly spoken of
you, never would I ever have thought you such as you are. May it please your
Majesty answered Gandandel, our children seeing us too slow in our
justification, put themselves forward to maintain the honor of their fathers.
They had reason said Grumedan, for hardly could you have recovered any others,
and no doubt but you are men of little worth, or reputation, for the Devil
could never have invented such wickedness as you have set abroach, so as if
the King should cause a thousand such as you are to be hanged, yet could he
not hold him satisfied for the treachery which you have done unto him, but
your children shall bear the punishment for you. My Lord Grumedan said they,
although you wish it so, yet shall it not haphen so, if God please: for our
sons delivering us from shame, shall obtain the victory with honor. You
shall see said Grumedan what the issue will be. And because this talk
continued longer then the King liked, he sent every man unto his lodging. And
the same night those which the next morning were to perform the combat, did
look that nothing might be wanting in their armor, especially Angriotta and
his Nephew, who withdrewe them unto a Chapel where they continued in prayer
until the day break. And because the King had received injurious speeches by
the twelve knights of the Island, they went unto their tents, with Madasima and
her Damsels, where they remained all that night. But the day appearing, they
all mounted on horseback, and came to accompany their fellows Angriotta and
Sarquiles, unto the place of combat, there were already arrived the King,
Princes, and Lords, with the Queen and the other Ladies. Thus the combatants
entered into the field, Angriotta and Sarquiles on the one side, Tarin, Corian
and Damas on the other side. Then the trumpets sounded, whereupon each of the^
pulled down the beaue^ of his helmet, and with their Lances in their rests,
they set spurs to their horses, running with such force one against another,
that Corian and Tarin brake upon Angriotta, and Damas upon Sarquiles: but
Angriotta hit Corian so sound a stroke with his Lance that he unhorsed him.
Then turning his face, he saw Tarin ready with his sword in his hand: who
beholding his brother overthrown, came with great rage against Angriotta, and
thinking to strike him upon the top of the helmet, the blow fell short, and
lighted upon the head of his horse, wherewith he was grievously wounded.
Notwith-standing Angriotta finding that he was near his enemy, he hit him so
soundly with his sword, that with the stroke he unhorsed him, and at the same
instant he himself perceived his horse waxed faint, with the wound he had
received upon his head, forsook him and leaped on the ground. Then with his
shield on his arm, he came against him whom he had first ouer-throwne, who was
already risen up and marched against Angriotta. And thus began the combat
between the^ two, where shortly after came Tarin in like sort, and Angriotta
was to answer them both: nevertheless he did make known, that he was not to
seek in such an extremity: for he had led them so roundly that he gave them
not so much leisure as to take their breath, so that in less space then an
hour, their armor was hacked in pieces, and they so wounded that the blood
ran down on all parts. I believe there is none of you all that does hear this
History, who understands not well enough, that Angriotta could not defend
himself so well, but that he felt some part of the strokes, for he was sore
wounded in many places, yet was it nothing in respect of the others. In the
mean time Sarquiles, whom Damas had in hand, began to be ashamed with the over
great resistance that his enemy made unto him, and for the same cause setting
spurs unto his horse, he found the means to buckle with his enemy: and as they
were struggling together and striving who should fall first, Angriotta doubting
that his Nephew would have the worst, drew toward him, but before he came
near unto him, Sarquiles and Damas fell down one upon another: By this means
was their encounter re-enforced, because that Angriotta endeavored to succor
his Nephew, and the others to relieve their kinsman: Who being under Sarquiles
could by no means rise up, for Sarquiles held him so short, that pulling off
his helmet, he thrust his sword into his throat, then seeing his enemy dead
he left him there, and came running upon Tarin and his companion, who were in
a manner out of breath, and ready to yield, or to ask mercy. The which the
King, Broquadan and Gandan^el perceiving, they were so sorry that they departed.
Notwithstanding although they were displeased with this sight, yet all the rest
of the Court there present, took pleasure to behold it, for the love which
they did bear unto Amadis and his friends. And more gladder yet were they when
they saw them brought to the extremity of their unhappy end. For scant had the
King turned his head from the window, but that Angriotta did hit Corian so
forcible a blow, that he quite cut off all his right shoulder: with the
extreme grief whereof, giving a sign of his death, he fell down kissing the
ground with his nose, after whom Tarin stayed not long before he did as much.

Thus were the sons of these traitors slain, for the which Madasima, Oriana,
and many others did greatly rejoice. Then Angriotta and his Nephews took the
bodies of the vanquished, and dragged them forth of the fields, afterward they
demanded of the Judges if they had performed as much as was requisite, who
answered that they had. Whereupon they both retired in great triumph, and
accompanied with their friends, they came unto the tents of their fellows,
co^ducting with them Madasima and her women, because they knew assuredly that
King Lisuart was very angry for the good fortune which had happened unto the^, so
much hurt did he wish unto Amadis, notwithstanding that he well perceived how
his affairs prospered very badly ever since he had driven him away, and the
French knights of his company.

The end of the Second Book.
A Table of the Chapters contained in this Second Book.
CHAPTER 1. THe description of the Firme-Island. Who made the enchantments, and
placed those great riches which were found in the same. Fol. 1. Chap. 2. How
Amadis, Galaor, Florestan and Agraies, having taken leave of the fair
Briolania, to return unto King Lisuart, were carried into the Firme-Island to
prove the arch of Loyal lovers, and the other adventures in the same. Fol. 6.
Chap. 3. How Durin departed to go toward Amadis, unto whom he delivered the
Letters from Oriana, and what hurt happened thereby. F. 14. Chap. 4. How Gandalin
and Durin followed the same way that Amadis had taken, brought the rest of his
armor which he had left behind, then found him sleeping, and how he fought
against a Knight who^ he did over come. Fol. 18. Chap. 5. Who was the Knight
vanquished by Amadis, and what happened unto him, before he fought with him.
Fol. 23. Chap. 6. How Don Galaor, Florestan and Agraies, undertook the search
of Amadis: who having left his armor, changed his name, and withdrew himself
to an Hermitage, in the company of a very old Hermit. There to live solitary.
F. 27. Chap. 7. How Durin returned unto the Princess Oriana, unto whom he
declared the sorrowful news of Amadis: and of the great sorrow which she
made, after she understood of his despair. Fol. 35. Chap. 8. How Don Guillan
the Pensive did bring unto the Court of King Lisuart, the shield, armor and
sword of Amadis, which he had found lying by the fountain of the plain
field. Fol. 39. Chap. 9. How the Fair Forlorn being in the Rock with the
Hermit, there arrived a ship, in the which was Corisanda, who sought for her
friend Florestan, and of that which happened unto them. Fol. 46. Chap. 10. How
the Gentlewoman of Denmark going in search of Amanis, after long travail
coasting along many strange Islands, by chance she arrived in the poor Rock,
where Amadis was, who was called the Fair Forlorn, whom show knew, and how
they returned together toward Oriana. Fol. 53. Chap. 11. How Galaor, Florestan
and Agraies, departed from the Firme-Island, to go seek Amadis, of whom they
could hear no tidings at all, whereupon they al returned unto the Court of
King Lisuart. Fol. 60. Chap. 12. How King Lisuart being set at the Table, there
came before him a strange Knight armed at all points, who defied him: The
conference that Florestan had with him, and how Oriana was comforted with the
good news that she received from Amadis. Fol. 71. Chap. 13. How the Fair
Forlorn sent Enil his Esquire unto London, to cause a new armor to be made
for him, and what adventure chanced unto him in going to Mire^^eur. Fol. 78.
Chap. 14. How that after the Fair Forlorn had ended his adventure, he went
unto the fountain of the three Channels: from thence he took his way to
Mirefleur, where he found Oriana, with whom he remained eight days together:
and at the same time there arrived in the Court of King Lisuart an ancient
Gentleman, bringing with him two Jewels of singular virtue, whereby the
faithful lover, from the fained might be tried, the which Amadis and Oriana,
determine to make proof of, in such secret manner, that they would neither be
known of the King nor any other. Fol. 90. Chap. 15. How the Damsel of
Denmark was sent unto London, to know what answer Enil had received from the
King, touching the safe conduct which was demanded by the Fair Forlorn, who
did afterward bring Oriana thither to prove the strange Jewels. Fol. 99. Chap.
16. How after the Fair Forlorn had brought Oriana back again to Mirefluer,
he departed, that he might be in the battle with King Lisuart: and what
happened unto him. Fol. 110. Chap. 17. How King Cildadan and Galaor were
unawares to themselves, carried away by twelve Damsels, and one of them was
put into a strong Tower, environed with the Sea, and the other in a Garden
enclosed with high walls, where they thought they had been in prison, and of
that which happened there unto them. Fol. 120. Chap. 18 How the evening
ensuing, the King being risen from the Table, walking about the galleries of
his Palace, he beheld two great fires upon the Sea, that came directly toward
the City. Fol. 130. Chap. 19. How after the departure of Vrganda, the King
being ready to mount on horseback, to execute the enterprise which he had
determined to make upon the burning Lake, there came before him a Damsel
Gyantesse, to understand whether his Majesty would be pleased to refer the
quarrel that he pretended in his voyage, upon the combat betwixt Ardan
Canila, and Amadis of Gaul, with such conditions as shall be declared unto
you. Fol. 137. Chap. 20. How Bruneo de bonne Mer did fight with Madamine the
ambitious, brother to the Damosel injurious, and of the accusations that were
made by some of the enemies of Amadis unto the King, for which cause he and
many others (that were desirous to follow him) departed from the Court. Fol.
151. Chap. 21. How Amadis with many others his confederates (...) the service
of King Lisuart, and went as well to prove the adventures of the Arch of loyal
lovers, as also of the forbidden chamber. Fol. 163. Chap. 22. How Oriana
remained in great perplexity, not only for the departure of Amadis, but also
because she felt herself great with child: and of that which happened to the
twelve Knights that were departed from the Firme-Island, to deliver Madasima
and her Damsels. Fol. 173.
FINIS.

