A DISCOVRSE OF THE SABBATH AND THE LORDS DAY. WHEREIN THE DIFFERENCE BOTH IN
THEIR INTSITUTION and their due OBSERVATION is briefly handled.

BY CHRISTOPHER DOW, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his shop
under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. MDC XXXVI.

To the Reader.
THe substance of this discourse, being at first, the materials of some
letters written for the satisfaction of a private friend, was afterward drawn
together into the form in which it now appears, and found the favor, from
some unto whom it was communicated, to be desired to the Press; for which end
it has lain in the Licensers hand, now above a year expecting the conduct of
that Reverend Prelate who upon special occasion then offered, (as it appears)
by command, undertook this argument: Which having performed, like himself,
with such variety of learning and profoundnesse of judgment, this Pamphlet of
mine may now justly seem as unnecessary to follow, as heretofore it was unable
and unworthy to lead the way: yet considering that the brevity of it might
make it pass and find acceptance with some; and that, being of a mean
strain, it might better meet with common capacities, then larger and more
elaborate tractates; I was willing it should see the light, and that in its
own garb without any polishing or alteration. And so I commend thee and it to
Gods blessing.

PErlegi hunc tractatum Theologicum, cuititulus est [A discourse of the
Sabbath, and of the Lords day, etc.] in quo nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut
bonis moribus contrarium, quominus cum utilitate publica imprimi possit, ita
tamen, ut si non intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur, haec
licentia sit omnino irrita.

Ex Aedibus Lambethanis November. 18. 1635. GUIL. BRAY.
R. P. D. Arch. Cant. Capel. Domesticus.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE SABBATH AND LORDS DAY.
THat men may not be deceived with shows, and mistake Iudaisine for
Christianity; or that they, who so mistaking, use to disrellish all things
which suit not with the principles of their Catechismes, may not think they
have engrossed all Religion and Piety to themselves, and they thereby
encouraged to proceed in their hard censures of those that concur not with
them: And that the piety and religious care, which is eminent in the Governors
of our Church and State, may appear in their true luster, and outshine those
mists, wherewith some seek to obscure them: And that it may appear also that
they whose chiefest care, next to their duty to God, is to yield all ready and
cheerful obedience to Gods Vicegerent, and to those Reverend Fathers which
under God, and His Sacred. Majesty have the oversight of this Church, are not
hood-winkt in their obedience, or blindly led to yield to their Commands
without respect to religion or conscience, as if they had rather obey them then
God; I have adventured upon that obloquie, which has been the lot of such as
(though upon never so good grounds) dissent from these men in opinion. And this
I the rather do in this subject, for as much as in it I have not only the
authority of the sacred Scriptures, (which are the rule of things to be
believed and done) but, the consent also of the whole Church of Christ; neither
the Ancient Fathers nor the Reformed Churches (to omit the Church of Rome,
whose Doctrine though in this case not to be condemned, is of little credit
with those whom I dissent from) ever teaching other Doctrine then that which I
shall endeavor the defense of. For whereas in other things which they dislike
among us, they have for Patrons the principal Authors of the Reformation
abroad, and the Prime Doctors among them, whose learning and piety, much
admired by them, may seem to plead for their over-earnest, and heedlesse
embracing of their Principles: In these Sabbatarian Paradoxes, they are
singular and left alone, without the Patronage of those whom otherwise they so
much admire, and without the example of any Church in Christendom. And I
believe further (being ledd thereunto by their doctrine, delivered in their
Writings extant, and by the general and constant relation, of all that have
known their practice and compared it with ours) that there is not a State in
Christendom who have made better provision for the due observance of the Lords
Day, and the decent performance of the sacred Acts of Gods Worship, then are to
be found in the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Laws of this Realm, nor where
such Laws are more duly executed by those in Authority, or more generally
observed or practiced by all, then they are at this day among us. These
considerations have animated me to this work, hoping thereby to settle the
minds of such as are contrary minded rather for want of due consideration,
then out of wilsulnesse and contempt of Authority.

He that goes about to vindicate the just liberty of Christians in the use of
lawful recreations on the Sunday, shall find himself upon a double
disadvantage. 1. In regard of the preconceived opinion among weak people, of
their piety and religious zeal which hold the contrary. And 2. in that the
strict observance of that day, is by some made a prime character of a good
Christian, to distinguish him from a carnal Worldling, and so the Question in
hand accounted as an infallible mark to know the state of Religion; which
stands or falls according, as it is either way determined. It behooves me
therefore to walk with a wary and sure foot, and following the truth to strike
an equal course between an over nice strictness, and a profane license: and
so to speak in this cause, as that the soberly religious shall have no just
cause to complain; nor the profane be encouraged to go on in licentiousness.
Either of which ways as it is easy to offend, so in whether of the two a man
offends most, is as uneasy to determine; the one letting loose, the other
ensnaring men's consciences; the one shutting up the kingdom of Heaven, and
making the way thither more narrow then it is; the other making it broader, and
enlarging the mouth of Hell. My aim and endeavor shall be to avoid both.

Among those things which have occasioned the general prevailing of the
Opinion, That the Sunday or Lords Day ought to be observed with such
strictness as will admit no works which may be called Ours, that is, (as they
call them) works of our particular Callings, and much less Recreations: it is
none of the least that now of a long time among us (contrary to the use of the
Primitive Church, yea and of our own in the memory of our Fathers) it has
lost its Christen name, and entertained the Jewish, being vulgarly known and
called by the name of the Sabbath. Whence it comes to pass that men (prone
more to respect names then things) never heeding the difference between the
old Sabbath and our Sunday, or thinking it to be little or none at all, take
those places of Scripture, which so severely prohibit all work upon the
Sabbath, as if they did no less belong to us now, then heretofore to the
Jews: and by this means, those precepts, threatenings, and promises which
concerned the observation of the Sabbath, are pressed upon us point blanck.
Whereas indeed they concern us only indirectly, and cannot without fetching a
compass, be alleged at all for our Sunday. Now the Scripture being so
express (as it is apprehended) for the strict observance of our Sunday under
the name of the Sabbath, no marvel if men have made it a prime Case of
Conscience, and that so many scruples are daily raised, and so many traditions
broached about the beginning and ending of the Sabbath; about the works of a
man's particular Calling, what they are, and how far lawful on that Day: what
are the proper duties of the Day, and the like? For the clear resolution
therefore of this Question; Whether the use of Recreations may stand with the
due observation of the Lords Day, it is convenient that I have some recourse to
the Sabbath. Where because I love not Cramben saepius coctam apponere, or to
stuff my discourse with a tedious explanation of those things which are
commonly known; and every where to be found, I will with as much brevity as the
cause will suffer, inquire into these 4. particulars.

1. Whether, and how far forth the fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath
is moral, and perpetual, and so belonging to Christians. 2. When and by whom
the Lords day was instituted. 3. What works the lews might do on their
Sabbath. 4. Whether, and what liberty Christians now have on the Sunday more
then they had, and how far that liberty is to be extended?
To begin with the first. The law which God gave unto his people the Jews
(according to the threefold variety of the object, or things prescribed) is
threefold, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial. The Moral is that which
concerns the manners of men, What the Moral law is.
and belongs to them as men: and this commands those things which are in
themselves acceptable, and well-pleasing to God, and those which he will have
all men every where, and at all times to observe, as the perpetual, and
unchangeable rule of living, being the express image of the mind of God,
according to which, he (who is the Lawgiver) judges it meet and right, that
the reasonable creatures should order their lives. The Ceremonial What the
ceremonial law is.
belongs to men, as joined together in that Society which is called the Church,
and this contains those precepts which concern the external worship of God,
and were given by him to the Jewish Church, in accommodation to the times, in
which the Church was under age, and under the promise, and therefore instituted
for the signifying, prefiguring, and sealing of the truth of the promises made
to them, to be fulfilled in the exhibition of our Savior: and withal for the
preservation of order, and decency in their Ecclesiastical meetings, and
performances. The judicial belongs to men as What the judicial law is.
joined in a civil Society or Commonwealth, containing the form of civil
government, to be used by them, tending to their good, as they were a Society,
and to the preservation, and exacting of the eutward worship of God, and the
discipline thereof, as it was commanded in the Moral and Ceremonial Laws. So
that the Ceremonial Law determined Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 101.
the Moral in order to God; the Political or judicial in order to men in a
civil society; and both in accommodation to that state of the Church: And
these though they have in them something which is juris moralis, and so far
forth are contained under the Moral precepts, yet being fitted to serve that
state of the Church, which was to be held in expectation of the Messiah; when
the time came that he was actually exhibited, and so the promise fulfilled, the
shadows were then of no longer use, Col. 2. 17.
the body being come: and therefore at the time of the death of Christ, they
were abrogated de jure, so that they became unnecessary, and unprofitable, and
had their power of obligation taken away: And afterward when by the Apostles
doctrine Christians came to understand that Christ was the end of the Law, and
when the Temple (the seat of their religion, and the place destined to the use
of those ceremonies) was destroyed, they were de facto actually and fully taken
away: and those things, which before the death of Christ were commanded, and in
that interim, between his death and the destruction of the Temple (which was
the space allotted for the solemn funerals of the Jewish Synagogue) were
tolerable, though already dead, became from that time forward deadly and
intolerable. So that, only the Moral Law remains now in force, for the
practice of Christians; The ceremonial and judicial (excepting in that
wherein they are reducible to this) are antiquated, and out of date. Now the
precepts of the Moral Law are summarily comprehended in the Decalogue or ten
Commandments: which had this prerogative peculiar to them, that they were
delivered (not by Moses, but) by God himself, and by him written in tables of
stone, and preserved in the Arc; to show their dignity above others, and to
note out the perpetuity of observance, which was due unto them. Where, before
we apply these things to our present purpose, two things are to be noted.
First, Aq. 1. 2. q. 100. Moral precepts not all equally belonging to the law of
nature.
That howsoever all the precepts of the Moral law belong to the Law of Nature
(as being agreeable to reason, which is the rule of Humane actions) and are in
that respect of perpetual observance; yet all of them are not of the same
rank, nor belong in the same degree and manner to the law of Nature. There are
some things which by the instinct Aq. ibid.
of nature, and natural light of the understanding, we presently see to be
good or bad, and which are so plain, that without any great consideration,
they may by the first principles, or common notions implanted in us, be either
approved, or rejected, and these are absolutely of the law of nature. Others
there are that require more consideration of circumstances, and the use of
Discourse to apprehend, and judge of them: and these are so of the law of
nature, that notwithstanding they require the help of discipline, by which
those which are ignorant, and not able by diligent consideration or discourse,
to attain to the knowledge of them, may be instructed by the wise and learned.
And lastly, there are some, to the knowledge whereof humane reason stands in
need of Divine Instruction. And these two latter sorts, especially the last,
though they in some sort belong to the Law of Nature (and were happily at our
first Creation, written in the tables of man's heart, in more plain Characters,
and more easy to be read then now since the fall, they are) may, in respect of
the other, be termed moral (non ratione naturae, sed disciplinae) not in
regard of nature dictating, but in regard of Discipline informing nature.
Secondly, that the fourth Commandment (as it enjoynes the external
observation of the seventh day) is not moral either of these ways. Whence S.
Augustine Inter emnia illa 10. praecepta solum ibi quod de Sabbato positum est
sigurate observandum praecipitur. Aug. ep 118 cap. 12. Caetera ibi praecepta
proprie sicut praecepta sunt sine ulla figura a significatione observamus. Idem
Ibid.
says, That among all those ten Commandments, that only of the Sabbath is
figuratively to be observed; whereas (as he after says) We observe the other
Commandments there properly as they are commanded without any figurative
signification. And generally the Ancients (as Calvin has truly observed)
called this Precept Inst. l. 2. and 8. 28. Vinbratile veteres nuncupare solent.
Dinudia tantum exparte rem attingunt. Id. Ibid.
a shadow, which (as he there says) was truly, but not fully said of them. And
therefore they do better, and more fully express the nature of this
Commandment, which say it is Sabbati praeceptum est partim Morale, partim
Ceremoniale, unde into contine^er aliquid aternum, et aliquid temporarium.
Mart. These. in Exodus 2.
partly moral, and partly ceremonial. So Peter Martyr, and generally all
Divines both reformed and others, use now to speak. Now if any shall therefore
think it unworthy a place in the Decalogue, and to be rankt with those
precepts which are moral, and of perpetual observance; Aquin. 2. 2. q. 122.
art. 4 ad primum and secundum. Vidaeundem 1. 2. q. 100 a. 5. ad secundum.
Aquinas may seem to give them full satisfaction, who says, 1. that the
Precept concerning the Sanctification of the Sabbath, is put among the Precepts
of the Decalogue for that which is moral in it. 2. That this Precept as
Ceremonial, ought rather to have a place in the Decalogue then any other: The
other Ceremonies being signs of some particular effects of God; but this of
the Sabbath was a sign of a general benefit, viz. the Creation of the Medul.
Theol l. 2. c 15 ^. 11.
Universe: So that that which Amesius will have a most certain rule, and
received among all the best Divines (as he calls them) That all, and only the
Moral precepts were delivered by the voice of God himself, and by Him written
in the tables of stone, is not true, unless Saint Augustine, Calvin, Martyr,
etc. be in his esteem none of the best Divines. Yet perhaps we may admit that
rule so far as to say, That all the Moral Precepts are contained in the
Decalogue, and that every Precept there contained is Moral, though all of
every Precept be not so, but may have something that is ceremonial annexed to
it: which happily God thought good to place among the moral precepts, to
intimate the perpetual necessity of having some ceremonies in the Church;
though that ceremony be not necessarily perpetual, but (with the rest of that
nature) to expire at the death of Christ: which though we admit, yet cannot
any justly charge us, that we diminish any of the ten words; or that we
expunge one Commandment out of the Decalogue; Deuteronomy. 4 13.
in as much as we affirm, that only which was ceremonial in this
Commandment to be expired and out of date, and that there is in it a morality
still remaining, which retains its full power of obligation, and exacts the
same obedience, under the same penalty, which it did at its first promulgation
or inscription in the heart of Adam. In which respect, the Church has good
cause still to use her accustomed Antiphona at the repeating of this
Commandment, as well as at any of the rest, and to pray Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.

And here, because some who love to have this Commandment termed moral
(though thereby they intend no more then what has been already granted) use
so to argue, as if they did not acknowledge it at all to be ceremonial; it
will not be amiss, before we proceed any further, to answer some of the
principal arguments that are brought to this purpose.

And I will begin with that of our Savior, Math. 1.
5. 17. Think not that I came to destroy the Law or the Prophets; I came not
to destroy, but to fulfill. Which words (in their opinion) make strongly for
the morality and perpetual obligation of the fourth Commandment: For from
hence they argue to this purpose. That which our Savior did not destroy, but
fulfill, is still in force; but he did not destroy the law contained in the
Decalogue: Therefore it is still in force.

For answer hereunto, I say, That in this argument two things are by them
supposed.

First, they suppose, that by the Law in this place, is meant only the law
contained in the Decalogue or ten Commandments.

Secondly, That our Saviors fulfilling, and not destroying this law, was the
ratifying and perpetuating of the observation of it under the Gospel.

If we grant them both these, we shall condemn the Christian Church for
altering the day from the seventh to the eight or first day of the week, which
cannot stand with this exposition of our Saviors speech, who, in the words
following, says expressly, That not one jot or title shall pass from the Law.
But both these are beside the meaning and intent of our Savior, as will easily
appear to any that (with indifferency) does consider his words. For,

First, the Law which our Savior here speaks of, is of larger extent and
latitude, and comprehends not only the Decalogue or law moral, but the
Ceremonial and judicial also: As being indeed put for the Pentateuch or five
books of Moses: And so, The Law and the Prophets, as much as, Moses Luke 26.
29 31. Mal^onat. in Mat. 7. 12.
and the Prophets: Which forms of speech, are used as a Periphrasis of the old
Testament, of which these two are the maine essential parts: The Books of
Moses, so containing and describing the Law, that they reserre whatsoever else
they contain unto that, receive their denomination from it, as from the
principal subject of them. The Prophets, that is, their Books, comprehend all
the rest of the old Testament, which the Hebrews divide into the former and
latter Prophets, and the Hagiographa: Fra^. Iu^^^ (...).
All which (though they be not Prophesies) being written by divine inspiration,
and by holy men as they were moved by the Spirit of God, may justly be termed,
The word of Prophecy, and pass 2. Pet. 1.
under the name of the Prophets.

That the Law is taken in this sense, is manifest by the use of the same phrase
else where: Where, not only the duties commanded in the Decalogue, but Christ
and faith in him, is said to be taught and witnessed by the Law: to which
purpose the Apostle S. Paul uses the same phrase, Acts 28. 23. Romans 3. 21.
Now, what word in all the Decalogue gives witness to Christ, or persuades the
faith, which is required in him? Certainly, (however some have found not only
the faith in Christ, but the Sacraments also of the New Testament commanded in
the Decalogue yet,) there is no one word there which imports any such thing.

Yea, the very context evinces thus much: for our Savior, having thus prefaced
his exposition of the Law, keeps not himself within the bounds of the Moral
Law; as appears verse 18. And therefore Interpreters generally upon this
place, show how our Savior did not destroy but fulfill the Ceremonial Law
also, as well as the Moral, which were altogether needless, if by the Law,
that only were understood.

Now, the Law being (as it must needs be) thus largely taken, any man may
easily perceive that the not destroying but fulfilling of it, is not the
ratifying and the perpetuating of the observation of it under the Gospel: for
who sees not, that upon this ground they might conclude for Circumcision, and
the legal Passover and Sacrifices, with all their typical Rites and
Ceremonies, as well as for the Sabbath?

The truth is; our Savior as he was to fulfill not only the Moral but the
Ceremonial and Judicial Law also: so he speaks of all, and did indeed, not
destroy but, fulfill them all, though in a different manner.

1. He fulfilled the whole Law, by his actual and personal obedience to it,
and by supplying the defects of it, that it, being unable to justify us in it
self, might, by the help of his grace and accession of faith in him, be able
to perform that Romans 8. 3, 4
which otherwise it could not.

2. He fulfilled the Ceremonial Law, and so the Judicial too, so far as it
was typical; besides his subjection to them, by a real exhibition of that
whereof they were shadows. And though by this means, their observation
(according to the letter of the Law) ceased, yet did he not hereby destroy,
but perfect them; according to that of the Apostle, speaking of Circumcision,
which was a legal Ceremony. Do we then (says he) make void Romans 3. 31.
the Law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law. This place then,
expounded according to the truest meaning and intent of our Savior, makes
nothing for the total morality of the fourth Commandment, nor is in the
least, contradictory to what I have delivered concerning it.

Secondly, they argue from the Institution of the Sabbath, which was (say they)
in the beginning of the World, in the time of man's innocence, when there was
no need of Ceremony; and therefore it was moral and perpetual.

To this I answer, 1. That it is not universally true, that whatsoever precept
was given to Adam in Innocence, was therefore Moral and perpetual; for then
the Symbolicall Precept of not eating of the forbidden fruit, must be such;
which no man, (I suppose) will affirm. 2. If it be true (which Willet has
affirmed, and that by ten reasons which Dr. Willet on Genesis 3. 23.
he there alleges) that Adam fell the same day that he was created, then did
he fall before the giving of the Precept for the observation of the Sabbath,
and had it not in the state of Innocence. But the truth is, this is a mere
conjecture disputable any way, so as a man may better oppose whatsoever is
affirmed, then solidly conclude any thing. 3. If it be not false that the
Sabbath was then instituted, yet it has and may, not without good reason be
doubted of. That place which is brought for it, Genesis 2. 2. does not
convincingly prove it. And if the reasons, which are alleged for the prolepsis
in that place, be, without prejudice, considered, their opinion who so expound
it will not seem improbable, as 1. That there is no mention any where made of
it, to have been observed by the Patriarchs. 2. Where it is first spoken of,
Exodus 16. it is spoken of as a new thing not known to have been observed
before. 3. In that it is called a sign between God and the Israelites, that
he was their sanctifier Exo. 31. 13 Deuteronomy. 5. 15. Ezck. 20. 12.
and deliverer out of Egypt, which it could not be if it were given to all
Nations in Adam. But lastly, granting the whole Argument. I would feign know
how that day, that was then instituted and sanctified, could cease, and another
be substituted. How could it be Moral and perpetual, and yet determine with
the Jewish Church? The words which are brought as the Institution, say; God
rested the seventh (N. B.) and for that cause, God Genesis 2 3.
blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, viz. that seventh day on which he
rested. The Text does not say, God rested the seventh day, and therefore he
would have one of the seven to be sanctified; That is but the exposition or
gloss, not the Text; the word of man, not of God. But some may happily say, That
the particular day was alterable, and upon good ground was altered. This I
grant, but say withal, that he which holds the Sabbath to be instituted before
the fall, and for that cause Moral and perpetual, cannot so say, but either
he must wave his own Principles, or cry up the Jewish Sabbath postliminio.

Secondly, they argue from that of our Savior (Matthew. 24. 20.) who foreshewing
the destruction of Jerusalem to his Disciples, advises them to pray, that
their slight be not in the Winter, neither on the Sabbath Day. If (say they)
this Precept had been Ceremonial, then had it been all one to fly on the
Sabbath day, as on any other day: because all Ceremonies were before that time
(which was not till forty years after Christ's Ascension) to be abrogated. But
in that Christ does allow this fear of flying on the Sabbath Day more then on
any other day of the week, he shows plainly that the force of the Sabbath
was not abrogated by his resurrection, and therefore no Ceremony.

Thus they argue. To which it were answer Dr. Williams p. 297. Dod. p. 130.
Elton. p. 90.
sufficient to show that hereby they still rush upon the same rock, and while
they labor to establish a needless morality of the Lords Day, they unawares
bring in Iudaisme. For the Sabbath day there, cannot with any show of reason
be taken (though now a days it is too common so to take it) for the Lords
Day: and if our Savior did intend by bidding his Disciples pray that their
flight might not happen on the Sabbath day, to intimate the necessity of the
observation of that Day by Christians: Then did S. Paul cross Colos. 2. 16
our Saviors intent in numbering that among the shadows which vanished at
Christ's death; and then has also the Church of Christ ever since erred in so
accounting it, and condemning the observation of it, with an Anathema to those
that in Council. Lacdic. can. 29. In Mat. Hom. (...).
this point shall be found to Iudaize. S. Chrysostom is so far from thinking
that the Sabbath which our Savior there speaks of, did belong to Christians,
that upon that ground he expounds that speech of our Savior as spoken not to
his Apostles but to the Jews. Thou see (says he) that he speaks to the
Jews -- for the Apostles were not to keep the Sabbath, etc. But grant that it
were spoken to the Disciples; yet can no such thing be thence collected as
they would have. For our Savior had good ground so to advise his Disciples,
notwithstanding God at that time required no keeping of the Sabbath. For though
the Ceremonies of the Law (and this among the rest) were dead with Christ, yet
were they not buried (as I have showed) nor the practice of them deadly Act.
21. 20. Non fuerunt tanquam diabolica Gentiunt sacrilegia fugienda, etiam cum
ipsa gratia iam coeperat revelari quae umbris talibus fuerat praenunciata, sed
permittenda paulu^ eis, maxim qui ex illo populo cui data su^t, venerant.
Postea vero tanquam cu^ honere sepulta sunt a Christiau^s omnibus
irreparabiliter deserenda. Aug. ep 19. And a little before in the same Chapter,
-- ^um venisset fides que prius ictis obs^^vatiambus praenun^iata, post mortem
and resurrectione^ Domini revelata est, amiserunt tanquam vitam officii (...).
Verum tamen sicut defuncta corpora necessariorum officiis deducenda ^^ant
quodammodo ad sepultueam. -- Non autem deserenda continuo vel inimicorum
mersibus pro. j^ienda ^^oind^ (...) quisquis Christianorum quamvis ex Iudaeis
similiter ea celebrare voluerit, tanquam sopitos cineres (...), non erit pius
deductor vel, bajulus corporis, sed impius sepu^tu^ae uiolat^^.
till the Temple was destroyed: till which time, even the Apostles themselves
were zealous of the Law, and retentive of their old Ceremonies: to which
weakness of theirs, our Savior there accommodates his speech, willing rather
that their own experience in the destruction of the Temple should teach them
that harsh lesson of the abolishing of the Legal Ceremonies, then by a
praemature urging it, to startle such as were yet weak in faith, or hinder
others of that Nation from believing in Him. Besides; be it that Christians did
hold themselves freed from the observance of the Sabbath, yet being among those
who still made conscience of it, even to superstition, (as did the unconverted
Jews) it could not but prove very incommodious to their speedy and far
flight (which the greatness and suddenness of the danger required) in as much
as thereby they should expose themselves to the fury of those who were no less
zealous in compelling others, then superstitious in observing it themselves. In
these respects our Savior might well admonish his Disciples to pray that their
flight might not be on the Sabbath day, and yet not teach them to observe the
Sabbath after his death, or that while the observation of it lasted, they
should think themselves so tied in conscience of it, that they might not on
that day fly far to save their lives: and much less to establish the
Morality of the Lords Day, which neither He, nor his Apostles, nor the
following ages of the Church, (till within these few years) ever designed by
the name of the Sabbath, without some difference added to distinguish it from
that of the Jews. For though we find it sometimes called our Sabbath, or the
Sabbath of Christians, in regard that in the maine end of it, it succeeded
that, yet generally the Sabbath simply put, and without addition, notes the
Jewish Sabbath, or the Day on which it was celebrated, which is our Saturday;
and the day before that which we keep, which is therefore called by the
Evangelists and S. Paul, (...), one, or the first day from the Matt. 28. 1.
Mar. 16. 1. John 20. 1. 1. Cor. 16 2 Revel. 1. 10
Sabbath, and by S. John in the Revelation, the Lords Day: by which name, or
that which the same day had among the Gentiles, (viz. the Sunday) it has ever
since been known in the Christian world.

But I will leave these, and now return thither whence (for the answering of
these objections) I have digressed. And having seen the nature and several
degrees of Moral Precepts; and in general, that the fourth Commandment has
in it somewhat not moral, That I may apply these things to our present purpose,
and manifest the truth thereof: I will more particularly inquire into the
nature of that Commandment, and in it distinctly consider these 4. things.
First, A Day, or time set apart for Gods service. Secondly, the seventh day, or
one in the revolution of seven. Thirdly, the particular seventh there
mentioned, namely the seventh from the Creation. Fourthly, the strict Some time
to be consecrated to God, moral
surcease or rest from ordinary labors on that day.

For the first of these. It cannot be denied, but that the very Law of Nature
it self (to use the words of a Worthy of our Church) requires no Hook p. 378
less the sanctification of times, then of places, persons, and things. For
which cause it has pleased God heretofore as of the rest, so of times
likewise, to exact some parts by way of perpetual homage. And that (as
Aquinas) it is moral, Morale est quantum ad hoc, quod homo deputat aliquod
tempus vitae suae ad vacan (...) di. vinis, etc. Aqui^i. 22. q. 122.
that man should depute some time of his life for the service of God. For there
is in man a kind of natural inclination, that to every thing necessary there
be a time assigned: as to our bodily refection, sleep and the like: Whence
also to the spiritnall refection of the soul, whereby the soul is refreshed
in God, by the dictate of natural reason, a man deputes some time. And so to
have some times for holy Offices comes under the Moral Law, and is absolutely
of the Law of Nature written in the heart of every man, being involved in that
principle which even depraved nature has ever acknowledged; viz. that God is
to be worshipped. And therefore Amesius has well Medul. T^eol. l. 2. c. 15. ^4.
observed that thus far the time of Gods worship falls under that precept
which exacts the worship it self: and as God when he created the world, is
said to have concreated time with it: so when he ordained religious actions, he
appointed also to the same, a time for them, as a necessary circumstance,
without which they could not be performed. And as the time in which such
actions are done, so that some Day, or Days should be destinated and set apart
for the more solemn performance of those actions, may seem to be a dictate of
the same Law of nature: in as much as the Heathens who had no other guide but
the law of Nature, had their solemn Feasts and set Days in all ages
consecrated to the worship of their Gods; whereby they manifested (though not
the knowledge of the true God, yet) their acknowledgement of that Principle,
That God is to be worshipped, and the conveniencie of assigning some Days
peculiarly to that end.

For the second: That one day in the revolution of seven should be thus set a
part: this cannot be said to be absolutely of the Law of nature: Nature being
ignorant of this, without the instruction of the written Law, in which God has
revealed his pleasure, concerning the Quota pars, or how much of our time he
requires to be consecrated to Him: And this will easily appear to any that
does without prejudice consider it. For it is an easy thing to give an
estimate of what Principles are natural and written in the hearts of all men;
and what are gotten by instruction, discipline, and information: Now men may by
the light of Nature from the creature, climb up to the knowledge of the
Creator, and from the nature of God conclude his worship, and from the nature
of his Worship, conclude a time (as to all other things) to be due to it. But
to go further, and to determine what part of our time, we cannot. For it will
not follow that because some time is due, therefore the seventh day, more then
the eighth of every month, which was observed by the Graecians in Plutarch in
v^^ Thesci.
honor of Neptune, or any other day, above, or under that number. And for this
cause it is (says Saint Chrysostom) that in the giving of this Commandment
S. Chrysostom. (...). ^om. 6. p. 542. Edit. Savill. Deuteronomy. 5. 15. and 14. 18.
concerning the Sabbath (which he calls a Precept not made known to us by our
conscience) God added a reason, as because Ged rested the seventh day from all
his work; and again; because thou wast a servant in Egypt, etc. Whereas in
those Precepts that are purely moral, as when he says, Thou shall do no
murder, he only gives the precept, without giving any reason at all. Why so?
(says that Father,) because our conscience had taught us this before; so that
God speaks, as to those that knew and understood reason sufficient for the
Prohibition. Neither does Eusebius (though alleged by De praeparatione Evangel
13. c. 7.
some to that purpose) any way contradict this, when he says, That not only
the Hebrews, but all almost, both Philosophers and Poets acknowledged the
seventh day to be sacred: For here it is not questioned, whether the Gentiles
which wanted the law of God to inform them, did hold the seventh day as
hallowed, but whether they were induced by the instinct of nature so to account
it; or that so accounting it, they held themselves bound to consecrate that,
more then any other to the worship of God: The Gentiles (as Eusebius at large
declares) came to the knowledge of it from the Jews, and did in that, as in
other things, become their Imitators, and receive it into their manners. Or
upon some other ground or superstition they might account the number of seven
to be sacred; as because by that number the Planets (which they honored as
their chiefest Deities) were terminated: for which cause (we know) by their
names they entitled their days. But what ever were the motive, as it is
without all question, that the Gentiles, as well as the Jews, held the number
of seven in great veneration, accounting S. Aug. de civit lib. 11. c. 31.
Hieron. in Amo^. 5.
it the number of perfection, and full of mysteries; So it is as
unquestionable, that by the light of nature they knew not that that part of our
time was to be separated to Gods service. And therefore Zanchius speaks more
inconsiderately Zanch. in quartum Praecep.
then beseemes his learning, when he says, That Nature teaches all men to
consecrate one day of seven to the external worship of God: Which, Med. Theo.
l. 2. 6. 15. n. 6.
others (and among them Amesius) better considering acknowledge to be only of
positive right, and moral, not in regard of nature, but of discipline, as
coming under that rank of moral Precepts, which need instruction to help
natural reason to know, and judge of them. Now, albeit Calvine Instit l. 2. c.
8. D. Calvin's opinion of one in seven.
(who in this as in other things, wants not his followers) thinks the seventh
day, not to be so stood on, as that he would tie the Christian world precisely
to that: Yet there are many grave and judicious Divines, both Ancient and
Modern, that judge the institution of one Day in seven to be so far moral,
as that it does bind the Church perpetually and immutably. Thus among the
Ancients (...) etc. Eccl. Pol. p. 379.
Saint Chrysostom upon those words, And God blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it, Genes. 2. 3. Here, says he, from the beginning God intimates to
us this Doctrine, instructing us to separate and lay aside one day in the
compass of every week for spiritual exercises. And among our modern Writers
that admired Hooker, says. That we are bound to account the sanctification of
one day in seven, a duty which Gods immutable law does exact for ever. Thus
he, with many others, whose judgments I honor, yet dare not herein wholly
subscribe to them neither: For the Law exacting the observation of one day in
seven, being only positive (as must needs be granted) cannot contain in it
self any perpetual obligation. For all Laws of that nature (though made by
God himself) admit mutation (at least) when the matter concerning which, or
the condition of the Persons, to whom they were given, is changed: Now the Day,
concerning which this Precept was given, together with the State of the Church,
to which it was given, being changed, I see no reason, why the proportion of
one in seven, should be simply and in it self immutable; Yet thus much, I
willingly grant them, that (some time to be set apart for Gods worship, being
absolutely of the Law of nature) that proportion of time, which God himself
made choice of for his own People, is the fittest that can be imagined: and
Nature informed by God, cannot but acknowledge His wisdom and goodness in
this choice, in that he has so attempered it, that neither the long space
between can make us forget our duty to him, nor the quick return of it
hinder our providing for the necessities of nature. And hereupon the Church of
Christ, has taken it as an obligation belonging to them, and that (as it is in
our Church Hom. of the place and time of Prayer. Part.
Homily) Gods will and commandment was to have a solemn time, and standing
day in the week, wherein the people should come together, and have in
remembrance his wonderful Benefits, and render him thanks for them as
appertains to loving, kind, and obedient people. Thus far then, this
Commandment extends to us Christians, as well as to the Jews, in as much as
to consecrate some part of our time to God, is moral, and a seventh part,
though not moral, yet fitly chosen, and appointed by God, and observed by the
Church of Christ (not as simply immutable, yet) as most worthy to be retained.

For the third particular. The particular seventh day there mentioned, that is,
the seventh day from the Creation; This cannot be said to be Moral any way,
but is ceremonial and temporary, and expired with the dissolution of the
Jewish Church. And this is generally confessed by all, whom the heresy of
Iudaisme has not infected: and the mutation of the Day approved by the
practice of the Christian world ever since the Apostles times, is a sufficient
disclaim to the morality of it.

For one of these three must needs hence be inferred. Either that that which is
moral may be changed; or that the Church of Christ has now for this sixteen
hundred years erred in the change of it; orlastly, that the particular day
prescribed to the Jews was Ceremonial, and not perpetual. The first, no man
will say that understands the nature of moral precepts, and their dependence
upon the Law of nature, which is one and the same with all men every where, and
in all ages, and in that regard immutable. And he deserves not the name of a
Christian that dares affirm the second. It remains therefore that we pitch
upon the third, and confess that herein that Commandment was Ceremonial and
not perpetual. But besides the practice of the Church we have the warrant of
the Apostle S. Paul. Col. 2. 16. 17.
who ranks the Sabbath among the shadows of things to come whereof the body is
Christ. Now the body Speech against Trash. p. 72
had (they are the words of the late learned Bishop of Winchester) the shadows
vanish: that which was to come, when it is come to what end any figure of it?
it cease too. So that to hold the shadow of the Sabbath is to continue, is to
hold that Christ the body is not yet come. Neither can the force of this Elten.
p 91 ^^lliams p. 299. Ames loco supra cu.
place be avoided by saying that the Jews had other Sabbaths that were there
meant, as the Sabbaths of weeks, and the first and last days of their great
feasts which were called Sabbaths. For the Apostle speaks indefinitely of the
Sabbath days, and has not there left any ground to raise any distinction
upon, or to show that he aimed only at them more then this. That he speaks
there in the plural number will not help this shift, but rather cross it: it
helps it not, because we know it is usual in the new Testament to use that
number when the Sabbath in question is spoken of: it crosses it rather in that
being in the plural number it may rather seem to comprehend all their
Sabbaths whatsoever they were: and so to be far from excluding this. The place
then is clear, and alone sufficient to prove the point in hand: To which I
will only add; that the reason drawn from the example of God, who rested upon
the Sabbath day, namely, when the Creation was finished, endured only till the
time of the new Creation in which al things were made new by Christ; at which
time it ceased, or at least, a second reason taken from that new Creation
coming in place, the former both reason and day (become now old) are passed
away, and behold all 2 Cor. 5. 17.
things are become new. For this work of redemption or new Creation being the
greater may deservedly take place of the other. And as the Prophet Jeremy Ier.
16 14. 15.
speaking of the deliverance that God would vouchsafe his people from the
Babilonish captivity, says: Behold the days shall come (says the Lord) that
it shall no more be said; the Lord lives that brought up the Children of
Israel out of Egypt: but the Lord lives which brought up the children of
Israel from the land of the North, etc. So may we say of the day appointed for
his worship; that the day wherein he finished the work of Creation shall no
more be observed, but the day wherein our Lord Jesus Christ by his resurrection
from the dead finished the work of our redemption, and begun a new life to be
finished in all his members, who (as S. Peter 1 Pet. 1. 3.
tells us) are by his resurrection begotten unto a lively hope of an eternal
Inheritance.

The fourth and last thing in this Commandment and that which denominated the
day is the resting from ordinary labors. And this in regard of the diverse ends
it had admits a diverse consideration. 1. This rest may be considered as a
means without which the duties of Gods worship cannot be performed. For seeing
the general and public duties of piety and devotion, and our own private
businesses cannot both be followed at once, there must be such a cessation
from ordinary labors on that day, wherein men are to perform those duties, as
that thereby they be not hindered in the performance thereof: in which
regardthose works that in themselves, and at other times are not prohibited,
are on that day unlawful, so far Aq. 2. 2. q. 112. 4.
as they hinder a man from applying himself to divine duties: and therein are
contrary to the observance of that precept, which requires the performance of
them. And therefore when God commands a day to be dedicated to Him, he does
likewise in the same command such a rest as a means necessary to that end. So
that, thus far it is connected with, and participates of the morality of that
Precept that enjoynes the duties for which it was appointed; and in this
consideration we are no less bound at this day, to rest from our labors on
the days devoted to Gods solemn worship, then were the Jews, and (as
Venerable Hooker says) The voluntary scandalous contempt of that rest from p.
385.
labor wherewith God is publicly served, we cannot too severely correct and
bridle.

Another end of this rest is mentioned. Deuteronomy. 5. 14. viz: that there might be a
time of rest allowed to servants and laborers for their refreshment. And this
no less concerns us, then it did them; for necessity of nature requires some
time of remission from labor: and religion teaches us, to be merciful even
to our beasts, and much more to our servants Prove. 12. 10.
who are our brethren. But this is not so connected with the observance of the
day of Gods public worship, but that it may at other times be supplied, yet
is then so far requisite, as it makes for the solemn performances of the
duties of the day, that all, as well servants, as others, may join together in
the service of God: which while they do, they at once enjoy the refreshment of
their bodies, and freedom to refresh their souls, with holy and religious
exercises.

But this rest, as it was prescribed to the Jews, had yet a further end, in
regard of which, it was exacted so strictly, and beyond that which either the
solemn service of God, or the necessary refreshment of laboring persons did
require. And that was figurative for the signifying of things past, present,
and future.

1. Things past; and so it was a memorial of Gods resting from his work of
Creation: and as the day which they observed, so the strict rest upon that day
served as a sign of the common benefit of Creation which they thereby
acknowledged to be Gods work, when they celebrated that day wherein God rested
from creating, and sanctified it by an holy and total surcease from their own
works. And this end is assigned by God himself, and annexed Ex. 20. 11.
to the commandment as a principal reason of the institution of it.

Secondly; it was a memorial likewise of their deliverance out of Egypt, so
expressly said to be Deuteronomy. 5. 15. where, in the repetition of the Law, this
reason, is added instead of the former, and God is therefore said to command
them to keep the Sabbath, that they might remember their servitude in Egypt,
and their deliverance from thence.

Again; the Sabbath was a sign also of their present condition, and a note to
distinguish them from all other people, they being then the only peculiar
people of God, whom he had separated, and sanctified to himself: For a sign
of which peculiar sanctification they were commanded to observe the Sabbath, as
we read Exodus 31. 13. and Ezech. 20. 12.

3. Lastly; the rest of the Sabbath was a Type whereby was prefigured that rest
which remained Heb. 4. 9 Vid. Aqum. in loc. ver. 4.
for the people of God, to be purchased for them by Christ. Into which rest
they which believe do enter, and shall have the full possession thereof in the
Kingdom of glory, when, after all their works finished, they shall rest from
their labors. And Rev. 14. 13
this rest the Apostle designing by the name of a Sabbatisme, intimates the
prefiguring of it by that Sabbath which the people of God under the Law were to
observe. So that, as the place of this Celestial, and eternal rest, was
shadowed out by the promised Land, so the rest it self for the nature, and
condition of it was no less presignified by their usual Sabbaths. Now in
relation to these good things which were thus veiled under the outward
observation of this rest, it was very requisite that the rest whereby they were
represented, should be, as strict as might be; for the more exact the figure
Figurae debet esse exactae, alioqui non been significant. Bellarm. t. 2. l. 3.
c. 10
is, the better it signifies; and the more strictly the rest was observed, the
more lively was the representation of those things, which it aimed at. To this
if we add the condition of those, to whom it was enjoined, we shall have the
complete reason, why it was with that strictness commanded and exacted, and
the violation of it with such severity punished.

For first, the Jews though the people of God, and heir and Lord of all, yet
being, as the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 1.
a child, differed not from a servant, and as servants were to be held in
bondage under the strict yoke of outward observances, and of this among the
rest, till the fullness of time came, when God sent forth V. 45.
his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

Secondly, the Jews by reason of their long abode in a place of continual
servile toil, could not suddenly be weaned and drawn unto contrary offices,
without some impression of terror; whence the severity with which this duty,
was enjoined, and the violation thereof punished, was to them most necessary.
And besides, we know, that there is nothing more needful, then to punish with
extremity the first transgressors of those Laws that require a more exact
observation for many ages to come. These considerations then being peculiar
unto them, that strict rest which was thereupon exacted, being but accidentally
annexed to the principal sanctification of the Sabbath, cannot belong unto us
by virtue of that command by which it was enjoined them. And this is confessed
even by those that stand most for the observation of the Sabbath: who grant
that the strictness of the rest on the Sabbath was Ceremonial, and did belong
to the Jews only and is abrogated by the death of Christ. Elton.
So Elton. And Amesius. It may be granted, that there P. 98.
was somewhat a more strict observation of the Sabbath Potest qui them concedi
actionem aliquam observatienem Sabbati illis temporibus suisse imperatam,
paeelagoglae and scivitutis tempori accommodatam, quae omnibus seculis non
obtinet. Med. Theol. l. 2. c. 15. n. 23. V. Perkins cases. l. 2. c. 16. 1.
commanded in those times, as fitted to the pedagogy and time of servitade,
which obteynes not in all ages. So he, and generally the most of those which
propugne the Doctrine of the Sabbath.

To give a brief and full resolution to the first question propounded. viz.
whether, and how far forth the fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath is
moral, and perpetual, and so belonging to us Christians

To the former part, I say the fourth Commandment is partly moral, and partly
Ceremonial. To the latter I say. First, it is moral, and perpetual that some
time be dedicated to the solemn, public worship and service of God.
Secondly, that one day in the revolution of seven, be consecrated to this end,
is not moral; yet very convenient and fitly observed, and retained by the
Church of Christ. Thirdly; that the particular seventh day, which the Jews
observed, is neither moral, nor sit to be observed, being altogether
abrogated and out of date, ever since the death of Christ. Lastly; the resting
from ordinary labors, as it is connected with the duties of Gods worship, and
a means without which, they cannot be performed, is no less necessary on the
days consecrated to that end now, then heretofore; but as it concerned the
Jewish Sabbath, it is together with the Sabbath abrogated. So that Christians
are not bound either to rest on that day, which the Jews did, or to rest on
their own Sabbaths or days consecrated to Gods service, with the same
strictness, which was enjoined the Jews on theirs. Thus much shall serve to
have spoken of the first general question.

Having explained the nature of the fourth Commandment touching the Jewish
Sabbath: I come now to speak of the Lords Day; in which, that which was Moral
in that Commandment, is and ever has been observed by Christians. The
institution of which, when and by whom it was, being the second general part
of our inquiry.

And here all Divines are not of one opinion. Some ground this no less then
the Jewish Sabbath See Doctor Williams of the Church. P. 301.
upon the fourth Commandment, which (say they) includes both the Sabbath of
the Jews, and of the Christians: Because the Lord does not say, Remember that
thou keep holy the seventh Day, but Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath
Day; that is, the Day of rest: which, before the coming of Christ, was the
seventh from the Creation; but afterward, the first day of the week, or Lords
Day.

But these men while they over greedily seek after a divine foundation for the
Lords Day, do not consider that they stretch the Precept beyond the intent of
the Lawgiver. For though it be granted that the Lord does not say, Remember to
keep holy the seventh day, but the day of ceasing indeterminately, yet seeing
in the following explication, which God added, it is determined unto that
particular seventh, which was the seventh from the Creation, to which it
expressly is referred, as to the special reason of the Institution: the Sabbath
there cannot without forcing, and manifest absurdity, be said to be as the
Genus to the Jewish, and Christian Sabbath, and to include both. For is it not
manifestly absurd, and unbeseeming a rational man, and much more the wisdom
of the Supreme Lawgiver, to say; God in six days made heaven and earth, and
rested the seventh, and for that cause sanctified the seventh Day; Ergo, He
will have men in imitation of him to rest sometime (viz. before the coming of
Christ) on that day whereon he rested, and sometime (viz. after Christ's
coming) to rest on the day in which he began to work. Neither can this
absurdity be salved (as some have endeavored to Cleaver Declar. of Christian
Sabbath. page 99.
do) by saying, there is always more meant in the Precepts and prohibitions,
then in words are expressed: for those things which are so meant without
particular expression, must either be necessarily connected with, or some way
subordinat to that which is expressed, that so it may be included in it. Sure I
am, it ought no way to be excluded, as (we see) this is by Gods own exposition
of himself, and the reason which he alleges, which can no way agree both to
the Jewish Sabbath, and the Lords Day.

Again, others urge the Institution of the Lords Esion p. 90. Dod p. 127.
Day, as founded upon Gods sanctification of the seventh Day at the Creation,
which being before all Ceremonies, must (say they) needs bind Christians, as
well as the Jews. But this labors of the same weakness, and absurdity, which
the other did. For what day did God sanctify there? Surely not the first day
of the Week, but the seventh from the Creation, which they must with the Jews
cry up again, if they will have their argument hold good. But besides this,
the weakness of this foundation appears in that (as has been showed) they
cannot prove that God instituted the Sabbath, and commanded it to be observed
from that time forward; but only that Moses there, relating the story of the
Creation, intimates the reason of Gods after Commanding his people to rest upon
that Day. And lastly, granting that to be the Institution (which cannot be
proved) and that not the seventh day from the Creation (as the words expressly
say) but a seventh, or one in seven, were thereby intended to be perpetual,
and to belong to us Christians: If all this be granted, here will yet be but a
partial foundation, and no complete institution of that particular day which
we observe: for, all this notwithstanding, why might not the second, third,
fourth, or any other have been observed, and yet that institution of one in
seven no way violated?

Others therefore (no doubt espying the weakness of it) Amesius Medul. Theol
l. 2 c. 15 n 27.
forsake this hold, and seek for authority to prove it, to be of Divine
Institution, out of the New Testament. And among these Amesius will have it to
be done by Christ himself: laying this for a ground work, that He alone
could change the day of the Sabbath, that was Lord of it, that is, Christ. So
that according to him, Christ was the Author of this change, and that either
mediately by his Apostles, whom he assisted by his Spirit in the Institution of
it, no less then he did in the doctrine which they taught: or else, (as he
holds to be most probable) immediately, and in his own person; and the
probability of this he labors to prove by diverse Arguments; wherein he does
(as one has well observed in the like case) as if one should demand a Legacy,
by force and virtue of some written Testament wherein there being no such thing
specified, he pleades, that there it must needs be, and brings arguments from
the love and good will, which always the Testator bore him; imagining that
these or the like proofs will evince a Testament, to have that in it which
other men by reading, can no where find. Certainly it is a bold and a strange
course, for men to adventure to argue, that God must needs have done the thing,
which they imagine was to be done: whereas in matters that concern the
actions of God, the most dutiful, and safe way on our part, is to search what
God has done, and with meekeresse to admire that, rather, then to dispute what
he, in congruity of reason, ought to do. He might therefore have spared all
the reasons he brings, and in stead thereof, to have alleged one place out of
the New Testament, which does command the change of the Day, especially seeing
he denies it, (and that for many reasons by him there urged) to be an
unwritten Tradition: which seeing he does not, nor indeed can do, what does
he else by all his arguments, but endeavor to lay an aspersion of imperfection
upon the Scriptures, and of neglect in Christ himself of that office, which as
the great Prophet of his Church belonged to him? As if unless he had been as
careful to appoint the observation of this day, as Moses was to appoint the
old Sabbath, he could not (absit verbo blasphemia) be as faithful in the
house of God, as Moses was. But far be such blasphemous thoughts from us,
far be it from us to measure the faithfulness of our blessed Savior by our
phansies: or to judge him unfaithful, because he did omit that which our
shallow conceits judge necessary and fit for him to do. We know that the high
Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, was Heb 3. 2.
faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his
house. And this faithfulness of his was by him sufficiently demonstrated, in
that he fully declared the will of his Father to the world, in all things to
be believed and done, and showed how, and what worship Christians must give
unto God, though the circumstances of that worship as Time and Place (in as
much as concerned the particular designing of either) he left to be determined
by the Church, whom he promised to be with to the end of the world. And as he
cannot be said to be less faithful in the house of God, then Moses or Solomon
(who provided the one a Tabernacle, the other a Temple) because he did not
appoint set places for Gods worship; so neither can he be justly taxed for not
appointing the set times for the same; these two circumstances of time and
place, being of equal necessity and use, and joined together by God himself,
Lev. 19. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. I am the
Lord. Neither is the difference of Places more taken away now under the Gospel,
then of Times. But as the true worshippers of God are not tied to worship
either in Jerusalem, or any Ioh. 4.
other peculiar place, but may worship him in spirit and truth in all places,
lifting up pure hands: so I Tim. 2. 8.
neither are they tied to any special time or day, but may pray continually,
and at all times. And I These. 5. 17.
therefore they who are so indifferent for the place, that they can be content
to account a Wood, a Parlor, or a Barn, place good enough for Christians to
meet in for the performance of Gods public worship, have no reason to
complain for want of a set day, or time, for the same purpose. The truth
Difference of times and places how taken away under the Gospel.
is, that that peculiar blessing which God once bestowed upon the Sabbath of
the Temple, and thereby differenced them from all others, is enlarged to all
times and places; and any day and place may, by the Church, be dedicated and
set apart for Gods worship; and being so dedicated, and set apart, they inherit
that holiness which was once peculiar unto the, in relation to the duties then
and there performed to God, who in regard of the abundance of grace vouchsafed
now in the time of the Gospel, may be said to be more present at such times,
and in such places, then heretofore in those of his own assigning. But it was
not necessary that Christ himself, or his Apostles from him, should by express
precept particularly design, either of these: if any think such Ames. loco
supracit. n 30.
precept to be necessary, let them show the place of Scripture, where such
precept is to be found, or else confess the Scripture to be deficient in
things necessary, and so forsake their colors of reformation, and pass over
into the Camp of the Romanists. If they be ashamed of this, let them learn
and confess: That, however it be necessary that some time be dedicated to Gods
service, yet the determination to this or that particular day, is not necessary
to be defined by Scripture: which they may perhaps the more easily be brought
to see, if they consider, that in this it is no otherwise, then it is with
other things of equal necessity with this in the general (as the Sacraments,
Fasting, and Prayer it self) which yet for the particular, when, and how often
they are to be used, is not any where in Scripture defined, nor necessary so to
be.

But some who will have the Lords day so called, Dod p. 133.
because Christ himself instituted it, say, That, the Apostles, by the
authority of that Spirit, that always assisted them in their ministerial
office, did alter the day, and themselves kept, and ordained it to be kept in
all Churches, as may appear 1. Cor. 16. 1. Where he says, Every first day of
the week, when ye meet together, etc. But certainly, it is most evident,
even to a vulgar consideration, that no such thing does appear out of that
place. For, what does Saint Paul say there? That he would have Christians
meet every first day of the week, to serve God? No surely, there is not a
word of meeting in the text, but what is foysted in, to deceive the credulous
Reader. That which S. Paul says, is, That on that day he would have every one
lay by him in store, as God has prospered him. This implies neither the
meeting together of the Church on that day, nor the performance of any
religious duty; but only a repositing or laying up, and that not in a common
bank, but every man ((...)) by himself. See Saint Chrysostom upon that
place, who says, (...) etc. and a little after, (...), etc.
Again, grant that S. Paul (as he did not) had enjoined Christians to meet on
that day: and at their meeting to make a Collection for the poor; yet could
not this serve for a sufficient institution of that Day to succeed the Jews
Sabbath: unless such collections did involve in them all the service of God,
on that day to be done, or were so connected with them, that they could not be
separated: which no man, I suppose, will affirm. To leave these therefore, who
out of an overweening conceit of the day, are willing to catch at any shadow
that may seem to countenance it, and gain to it the reputation of Divine
institution; Let us pitch upon that which is certain, which though it rise not
so high, as an immediately-divine authority, yet is sufficient to ground our
practice upon, and to exact the due observation of the Day.

First, then it is most certain, that our Blessed Savior did honor this day
with his most glorious Mat. 28. 1 Mar. 16. 1. Ioh. 20. 1.
resurrection, and by his often Ioh. 20. 19. 26.
apparitions upon it to his Disciples: and thereby (as it were) pointed out
this day to his Disciples, as worthy to be made choice of to be celebrated in
honor of him: who on that day began his glorious exaltation, after his triumph
over Principalities and Col. 2. 14. 15.
powers, upon his Cross whom he there spoiled, having nailed to it, and
thereby cancelled, the handwriting of Ordinances that was against us; that is,
the obligation to observe the Jewish rites and ceremonies, and among these
their Sabbath: Ver. 18.
which from that time forward, the Apostle would Ad Januar. epist. 119. c. 13.
Dies Dominica Christians resurrectione Domini declaratus est, et ex illo habere
caepit festivitatein suam. Demonstrare and consecrare dignatus est. Ibid. c 9.
Domini resuscitatio promisit nobis aeternum diem and co^secravit nobis
Dominicum diem. Id. de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 15.
have no man to judge Christians in: who as they were freed from it by the
death of Christ, so by his resurrection they had ground sufficient ministered to
direct them to the observation of a new Festival. Whence S. Augustine says,
The Lords Day was declared -- to Christians by the resurrection of our Lord,
and from that time began to be celebrated. So that for ought that appears, our
Savior did not command the first day of the week to be observed. He did (to
use the words of the same Father) Vouchsafe to demonstrate, and consecrate it;
or (as he elsewhere speaks) The raising again of our Lord, promised us an
everlasting Day, and consecrated for us the Lords Day.

Secondly, it is no less certain that the Apostles (upon this ground no
doubt) did observe this Day, and had thereon their holy assemblies, as Acts 20.
7. And that for the same cause the Apostle designed it for the storing up of
their alms, that the memory of the benefits which on that day they obtained,
might make them more readily contribute to the necessities of their brethren,
as S. Chrysostom has observed upon 1. Cor. 16. 1. And lastly, that in the
time of the Apostles it obtained the name of the Lords Day, as appears Revel
1. 10.

Thirdly, that the ages of the Church immediately after the Apostles (whether
by constitution, or only in imitation of them, is not known, nor much
material) did observe this Day, as the Christians Festival; stiling it the
Lords Day, and conveyed the same practice by continual succession even to
this day: as the late learned Bishop of Winchester Speech against Traske. p. 74.
shows, avowing it on his credit, That there is not an Ecclesiastical Writer
in whom it is not to be found.

We find thus much then without contradiction. That it has been the practice
of the Christian Church, to observe the Sunday or Lords * Pet. Mart. These. in
Exodus 20. Non erravit Christiana Ecclesia, cu^ loco Sabbati flatuit observandum
Diem dominicum, cujus iasacris sitteris men tio habetur, quamvis de ejus
observatione praeceptum non ^x^^^.
Day, and that ever since, yea in the very Apostles times: a practice warranted
by the example of the Apostles, and the honor vouchsafed to that day by our
Blessed Savior himself. Whence we may conclude with a late learned Divine,
That the Christian Church did not err, when in stead of the Sabbath it
appointed the Lords Day to be observed; of which, there is mention made in the
Scripture, though there be no Precept for the observation of it. In which words
of his, I will observe three things. First, that he says, [the Church] not the
Apostles, or Apostolical men: (for though that be most probable, and has for
it the authority of S. Augustine, and for that it has been Sermon. de Temp.
251. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conci^^^t institutu^, sed ^emper
retentum est, non nisi autoritate Apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. --
Id. de Bap. contra Don. l. 9. c. 24. and l. 5. c. 23.
ever observed by the Church, it may justly be ascribed to them, yet) because
if they did it, they did it not as therein reporting the immediate Field of the
Church P. 377.
Precept of Christ, nor by any power that was properly Apostolical, but by
virtue of their Pastoral power and office, which was common to them with their
Successors, it may be termed an Ordinance of the Church, and it little
concerns us to know whether it were delivered by the Apostles themselves, or
their next after-commers.

Secondly. The Observantiae Diei Dominicae in nova lege, succedit observantia
Sabbati, non ex ui praeceptiet legis, sed ex constitutione Ecclesiae, and
consuetudine populi Christiani. Aquin. 2. 2. q. 122. ^. 4.
Church appointed this Day, but whether at the first by express constitution
it were commanded, or by custom only observed, it appears not. Aquinas
attributes it to both: and how ever, thus much is out of question, that this
Custom or Constitution was afterward by many Council. Nican can. 20. La^d. Con.
19. Auresion. 3. Can. 21. Matise. Can. 2.
Canons of the Church, and Constitutions of Christian Eusch. de vita Constan.
jl. ^. ^. 18.
Emperors ratified and approved, and many things ordained tending to the right
and due observance of it.

Thirdly, That the Christian Church did not herein err, as having sufficient
to warrant it out of Scripture, though there be no Precept for it. Yea, and if
the Scripture did yield no example of this practice, or other ground for it in
particular, yet had not the Church erred in ordaining it. For things pertaining
to order and decency in the Church (such as is among others, the particular
determination of the set times of Gods worship) being undetermined in the word
of God, are in the power of the Church to be ordered; so as they be done
according to the general Laws of nature, and without contradiction to any
positive Law in Scripture. Neither is it derogatorie to the word S. August.
Epist. 86 ad ^^^lan.
of God, or any whit detracting from the perfection of it, to affirm that
(though it sufficiently and abundantly contain in it all things necessary to
salvation, yet) it has left a number of other things, free to be ordered at
the discretion of the Church. And as to take from the Scripture, the sufficient
determination of things necessary to salvation, were an injury, and an
impairing of that honor which God challenges to his word; and the Church of
God has ever deservedly yielded to it; so it were no less injury to the
Church of Christ, to abridge it of the power of determining of this and such
like things, which being not of absolute necessity, are yet convenient and
profitable. For this prerogative and power, the Church of God has ever
obtained and enjoyed, (even See Hooker p. 92. p. 95. and p. 121.
when it was most obliged to hold to the letter of the Law, prescribing the
Ceremonies belonging to the service of God) that it might without imputation of
adding to, or altering the law of God, from time to time appoint sundry rites
and observances, not any where prescribed in the Law. Such were the appointment
of the hours, for the daily sacrifices; the building of Synagogues throughout
the land, to hear the word of God, and to pray in, when they came not up to
Ierusaleme the Feast of the Dedication which was solemnised even by our
Savior, and yet never spoken of in the Ioh. 10. 22.
Law: and many more which the Church, without any particular command, only
following the light of reason, in her discretion judged meet. And certainly,
the Church of Christ has not now less power, or privilege then the Jewish
Church then had, to which it is no way inferior, but far superior in regard
of the measure of grace, and the presence of the spirit of Christ, by which it
is assisted, as in other things, so in ordaining Laws for the edification of
the Church.

Now least any should think it a matter of indifferency to obey, or disobey
the Orders of the Church, which are thus constituted without the express
command of God in Scripture, and that the transgressions of such Constitutions
are no sins; I will close this point with that which worthy Hooker (from whom
I have borrowed the Eccl. Poll. 3. 9 p. 107.
greatest part of this last discourse) has judiciously and fully delivered to
this purpose. Unto Laws thus made (says he) and received by a whole Church,
they which live within the bosom of that Church, must not think it a matter
indifferent either to yield, or not to yield obedience. Is it a small offense
to despise the Church of God? My son keep thy Fathers commandment, 1 Cor.
11. 22. Pro. 6. 20.
(says Solomon) and forget not thy mothers instruction, bind them both
always about thine heart! It does not stand with the duty which we owe to our
Heavenly Father, that to the Ordinance of our Mother the Church, we should show
ourselves disobedient. Let us not say we keep the commandments of the one,
when we break the Law of the other: for unless we observe both, we obey
neither -- Yea that which is more, the Laws thus made God himself does in
such sort authorize, that to despise them, is to despise in them Him. Thus he
with much more to the same purpose. Which I therefore thought good to add,
that no man might think that while I ascribe it to its true Original, I go
about to impair the authority of it, or to withdraw any thing from the due
observance of it. And thus I have done with this second Question, viz. When and
by whom the Sunday or Lords Day was instituted.

These things thus discussed and cleared, it may now seem superfluous to
enquire into the liberty that we Christians have, how far it may justly be
extended in regard of ordinary labors upon the Sunday. For if it be granted
that the strict rest on the Sabbath was Ceremonial, and abrogated with the
Day; and that the Day which we keep is not by virtue of the fourth
Commandment, but by the custom or Constitution of the Church: It will not be
hard for any to conclude, that Christians are not bound to rest on that day
from all works, further then the duties of the day, and they who enjoined it
require. Yet for more full satisfaction, I will add somewhat more
particularly, concerning those two Questions that remain: To enquire then
first, What works the jews might do or their Sabbath.

This will easily be dispatched, in as much as herein the Scripture is very
plain, and little or no difference of opinion among Divines: Yet will it not
be altogether needless, in regard that the liberty we now have under the
Gospel, when it is compared with theirs under the Law, will the better appear.

Now these works are fitly reduced under three See D Willet on Exodus 20.
heads. The first of which are Works of necessity, such as could not well be
deferred or prevented. Of which sort are reckoned diverse, which how ever
Pharisaicall superstition had prevailed with the people to scruple at, yet were
never, in the intention of the Lawgiver, prohibited them, as may appear by
the doctrine and practice of our Savior; who was both ways the best expositor
of the Law, and who both ways came, not to destroy, but to fulfill it. And
among those thus allowed by Math. 5. 17 Math. 12 1 Luke 13. 15 Luke 14 5.
our Savior we find, the providing of food in the case of hunger; the
watering (and by the like reason the foddering) of cattle, the saving them
from imminent danger. Whence by analogy and congruity of reason, we may
conclude the lawfulness of many more things of the like nature: as that of
Mattathias and his company, resolving 1 Macc. 2. 41.
to fight upon the Sabbath to save their lives. So the quenching of an house on
fire, the saving of corn, and other necessary substance from perishing, and
the like. To which we may add works communis honestatis, as the decent
attiring of our selves, and all other works which necessity of nature has
imposed upon men, and thereby allowed as fit to be done.

The second sort of works permitted them; Luke 13. 11 John 5. 8.
were works of mercy and charity: as to visit the sick, heal the diseased,
and the like: which we find approved by our Saviors often practice; and
together with those beforementioned, justified by that axiom of his: The
Sabbath was made Mar. 2. 27.
for man, and not man for the Sabbath: that is, (according to Erasmus's Gloss)
it is fit that the observation Aequum est ut Sabbati observatio cedat hominum
utilitati, et non homo Sabbati causa^ percat ^^^m Parap^. in locum. Hosea. 6.
6. Acts 13. 27
of the Sabbath should give place to man's benefit, and not that man should
perish for the Sabbath: as also by that of the Prophet by him cited: God will
have mercy and not Sacrifice: that is, rather have the miseries of men
relceved, then the letter of the Law observed.

The third and last sort of works, were works of piety, belonging to the
service of God, as to read the Law, to teach the people, to circumcise
children, to offer Sacrifice, with their attendants, as to make fires for them,
to slay and prepare the beasts: for these works though servile in themselves,
being directed to the service of God were sacred, and no way violating the
Sabbaths rest. So our Savior Math. 12. 5.
testifies that notwithstanding these works, done by the Priests in the
Temple, yet the Priests were blameless, and not transgressors of the Law: And
the Jews had it among their traditions, that Hinc definitio est Jadaicarum
traditionu^: In templo nunesse Sabbatu^. F^. Lu ca^ ^^oc.
in the Temple there was no Sabbath. Intimating that the Sabbaths rest must
give place to those things which were to be done by the Priest in the Temple
for the service of God. Having seen what might be done on the Sabbath; let us
now see, whether, and what liberty Christians now have on the Sunday, and how
far that liberty is to be extended, which is the last part of our Inquiry.

And here though some few (transported with True Church. P 300.
a heedlesse zeal of maintayning the dignity of this day) have not struck to
affirm that the Jews had as much liberty as we have, and that we are as much
restrained, as they were: Yet the most, even of the strictest, and most precise
exactors of the Sundays rest, do grant a liberty which Christians now have,
more then the Jews had. But what liberty this is, wherein it consists, and how
far to be extended, is not on all hands agreed upon.

Some there are who when they come to define this liberty, they pin it up
within so narow a room, that it proves either none at all or to no purpose.
Amesius says; There is nothing can be brought out of Med. Theel. l. 2. c. 15.
n. 24.
Scripture concerning the strist observatio^ of the Sabath, which was commanded
to the Jews, which does not in the same manner belong to all Christians,
except the Praeter accensionem ignis, et cibi communis apparatum.
kindling of fires, and the dressing of ordinary diet. And these, he thinks it
probable too, that the Jews might ordinarily do on their Sabbath, though upon
special occasions, they were forbidden them: so that he seems to retract that
liberty which before he granted them. But others do Elton. p. 101. Perkins
cases. c. 6.
freely grant these, and some few like them, as making of beds, carrying of
burdens (to wit, on special, and urgent occasions) and these they allow by
this name of works of Christian liberty. Egregiam vero libertatem! A great
liberty (no doubt) and worthy that precious blood by which it was purchased!

But two things may here be demanded. First, how it will appear that
Christians have this liberty? And here (for ought I can see) we must be
contented to take their own authority: for Scripture they allege none to
purpose. Those two places which are cited by Elton on this occasion speak no
such thing; and besides, that which is there Mat. 12. 1. 2. 3. Mark. 2. 27
said (whatever it be) proves no peculiar liberty belonging to Christians,
which the Jews had not. For in them our Savior justifies his Disciples from
transgressing the Sabbath which was then in force, but does not show what might
be done afterward, when by his death the Sabbath should be abrogated. If they
allege that our Savior bad the sick man on the Sabbath to take up his bed,
(which may seem to have some reference to making of beds, or carrying of
burdens) It may be answered, that our Savior does not there show what might
ordinarily be done; but by his authority gives a special dispensation to the
sick man to take up his bed etc. without which dispensation, the man could not
have been excused from breaking the Sabbath. So that here is no certainty
(according See Fran Lucas Brugen^. upon the place.
to their principles) for any thing to be done, which the Jews might not do,
but that men must (for all their pretended liberty) either Iudaize, or else
adventure for this small liberty with a doubting conscience.

Secondly, It may also be demanded. How we shall know that only this liberty
is allowed Christians? This also we must take upon* their credit. For reason or
Scripture they allege none at all. And if they, without either reason or
Scripture shall take upon them to give laws to the Church of God, and
prescribe bounds to Christian liberty; I see no cause, why we may not upon
solid grounds of Scripture and reason, assert that liberty which of right
belongs to us, as purchased by the all precious blood of our dear, and Blessed
Savior.

And this will appear if we consider what rest or cessation from labors is on
this day required: First then, for that it is a day of Gods public, and
solemn worship to be performed by the whole Church, which cannot (as has
been showed) be performed, unless there be a vacation from ordinary and
common worked, a vacation therefore and resting from these, as they are
impediments to Gods service, is on that day required, as necessary. Yet not so
necessary, no not in the times of public assemblyes, but that the works
which necessity imposes upon men, and rarer occasions in men's particular
affairs, subject to manifest detriment Ho^ker. p. 385.
unless they be presently followed, may, with very good conscience draw men
aside sometime from the ordinary rule; considering the favorable dispensation,
which our Savior grounds upon this Axiom. The Sabbbath was made for man, and
not man for the Sabbath. Which rule, if it held for the Jews on their Sabbath,
is certainly no less in force at this day for Christians. In the use of which
notwithstanding, some cautions must be observed, As first that men pretend not
necessity or charity, when it is covetousness or a careless neglect or
contempt of Gods public worship; upon which ground no doubt, it was that the
Emperor Leo repealed that liberty which by Constantine was granted Council.
Matisc. 2. can. 1.
to Husbandmen: and the Counsel of Matiscon forbids men to frame a necessary
to themselves of yoking their Oxen; therein allowing both a just dispensation
in necessity, and forbidding the unjust pretense of necessity where none is.

Secondly, men must take heed that they do not by their negligence, or
improvidence and forgetfulness draw a necessity upon themselves: in which
regard the word (Remember) which God prefixed to the fourth Commandment is yet
in force, to exact our care and mindfulnesse so to provide before hand, that
the duties to which this day is consecrated, be not by our default omitted, or
hindered.

Thirdly, that being necessarily hindered or forced to omit the solemn and
public duties of the Day, we do (as much as may be) by private devotions and
meditations make supply of that defect.

Again, such is the reverence that is due to the solemn and public duties
of devotion, that they require not only a surcease from other works and
thoughts for the time of their performance, but also a decent preparation
beforehand; that we look to our feet, when we enter into the house of God,
and put off our shoes before we stand upon holy ground: Eccl. 5. 1. Exodus 3. 5.
that so our thoughts and affections, which are naturally bent upon the world,
and not easily withdrawn from it, may be raised to a disposition befitting so
sacred an employment. In which respect it is convenient, if not necessary, that
til the public service of God be ended, men entangle not themselves with
unnecessary businesses, or give themselves to sportings or recreations, whereby
their minds should be hindered from the right preparing of themselves, or due
performance of those holydutyes.

Lastly it is good and commendable to spend the rest of that day in holy
meditations, private prayer, reading and calling to mind what we have read,
or heard; These works, as they are at all times profitable and beseeming
Christians; so on that day they are most seasonable and suitable to those
public actions of Devotion which are the proper work of the Day. Thus S.
Augustine Sermon. de. Temp. 251.
exhorts his Auditors on this day to sequester themselves from worldly
businesses, that they may be employed in these works; and the Council of
Matiscon, Council. Matisc. 2. can. 1. Can. 23.
yea and our own Church Canons prescribe the spending of this day (and other
holy days devoted to Gods service) in these and the like religious
employments. And therefore they who thus spend the Lords day (if it be done
without superstition or judging other men's liberty) cannot therefore justly be
condemned.

Now by this it is easy to judge of our liberty. First then, here is a liberty
in case of necessity, though thereby the solemn duties of Gods worship be
hindered. Secondly, a liberty in things not absolutely necessary, so as thereby
the service of God, and the due preparation thereto be not hindered: under
which the use of honest and seemly recreations, after the public duties of the
Day are finished, may be comprehended. For though it cannot be denied that a
man may commendably spend the whole day in works of piety and devotion, yet
that cannot prescribe to all Christians, or infringe their liberty. For it is
one thing to exhort to a thing as commendable, another to urge it as
necessary; one thing to say, this or that is a good work, and is well done at
this or that time, another, to enjoin it by way of Precept, so as at such time
it may not be omitted, nor other work permitted. And the reason is, because
Gods affirmative Precepts, though they warrant, and commend the works that
they enjoyne, and make them good and commendable, whenever they are
performed; yet they bind not precisely to any determinate time for their
performance: For example we are commanded to pray and that continually, so that
he that is most frequent 1. These. 5.
in prayer, observes this Precept best, and deserves the praise of a devout and
religious man: and yet he that prays not at this or at that time, when happily,
another does, cannot therefore be said to sin, and much less be counted
irreligious or profane. David prayed and gave thanks unto God at midnight,
Psalm. 119. 62.
and so did S. Paul and Silas, and surely those Godly Souls were blessedly
employed: but shall we Acts 16. 25.
therefore condemn him who does not the like? S. Paul also being to depart
from Troas, continued his Sermon till midnight on the Sunday, and no Acts 20. 7.
doubt, but he did well; yet no man will therefore prescribe the like length to
every Sunday Sermon. The case is the same in this business we have in hand:
for we do not presently affixe these duties to the day, which we say may be
commendably on that day performed; nor on the other side, do we disallow the
spending of the whole Sunday in holy and religious actions; because we dare not
rigidly tie all men so to do, or lay it upon them by way of Precept, as if God
had expressly commanded that time to be no otherwise spent. There is a good and
a safe use of that distinction of Precepts and Counsels; (though the Romanists
abuse it to the patronising of their imaginary works of super erogation) and
things in themselves good without relation to any determinate time, we may
wish, exhort, and counsel men to perform at any time, when we cannot by
Precept impose them upon all. We know our Savior commended some things to his
Disciples with a Let him that is able to Mat. 19. 12
receive it, recieve it advising and exciting all to that, which nowing the
infirmity of many, he would not exact by his authority as necessary to be
performed by all. And in this case we may do well to imitate him considering
that it is no where enjoined in Scripture, and that such is the condition of
many, that they are not capable of such an injunction, as namely those who by
reason of their mean education or natural parts are not fitted for long
meditation requisite for the spending of the vacant time of the Day, and to
whom in regard of their hard labor in the week days, it is a mercy to permit
some bodily recreation on this day; which certainly cannot be displeasing to
him who has said, I will have mercy and not Sacrifice. Mat. 12. 7.
And if they, who use to judge the use of all recreation on this day sinful,
had known what that means, they would not have condemned the guiltless.

If any think that God has so commanded: let him produce the place of
Scripture, and I will quickly recant. The places which are usually alleged for
that purpose, and wherewith men are so frighted and thundered against out of the
Pulpet, being intended for the Jews, and that in regard of that special
positive Precept, given for the strict rest upon their Sabbath, cannot with any
Esaias 58. 13 Exodus 20. 10.
show of reason, be extended to Christians, when both Day and Precept, are out
of date.

But happily some may yet further contend, that though the Day be changed, yet
the equity of it still remains, and that they may argue thence (a pari, or (as
some think) a minori) as from the less to the greater. That if the Jews upon
their Sabbath which was instituted in memory of the Creation, and of their
deliverance out of Egypt, ought to do no work, nor so much as to speak their
own words, and that for the whole day: then by the like reason, nay much
rather ought Christians so to do on their Sabbath, or Sunday which is
consecrated to the memory of a far more glorious work, the work of our
Redemption, accomplished in the resurrection of our Savior. Here, in this
kind of reasoning there is some truth, but (as it is too common) it is
over-strayned, and so is but a mere color to countenance that, for which it
is brought, and not any solid foundation whereon to build it. The truth is,
Christians have as much (if not more) cause to celebrate the Redemption of
mankind by a solemn weekly Commemoration, as ever the Jews had to celebrate
the Creation of the world, or their deliverance out of Egypt: and this may
serve as a good ground to justify the Institution of the Lords Day, and the
Churches practice in observing it: But this truth is overstrained being applied
to the manner of Celebration, which was peculiar to the Jews, and accommodated
to the then-State of the Church, which was (as has been showed) to be held
under the yoke of a strict outward rest, in expectation, and for the
prefiguring of that eternal rest, which now Christ has actually purchased;
and therefore injuriously laid upon Christians, who are freed from that yoke,
under which they groaned: And they may as well upon the same ground conclude
against making of fires, and dressing of meat upon the Sunday, and make the
gathering of a few sticks upon that Day to deserve no less Number. 15. Aut simus
Christiani, and Dominicum colamus, aut simus Iudaei, and Sabbatu^ observemus.
S. Aug. ep. 86
now, then he suffered for doing the like upon the Sabbath. So that we may
say to those who thus argue (as he in Saint Augustine, upon far better
ground then he did) Either let us be Christians and keep the Lords Day, or let
us be Jews, and observe the Sabbath.

But is it not reason that God should have one whole day in seven, given unto
him now, as well as heretofore? Yes certainly; but yet with such difference,
as suites with the different condition of the Church that now is, from that
which then was, that being guided by the spirit of fear, this of love, that in
a state of bondage, under the unsupportable 2. Tim. 1. 7^
burden of legal Ceremonies, this in a state of liberty, and under Christ's
easy yoke: In a word, they Jews, and we Christians: and this being
considered, we may be said to give God a Day, no less now, then they then,
though in that Day we do not so strictly observe the outward ceremonial
rest, as they were bound to do

Secondly, I say, that our Church is so far from abridging God of one day in
seven, that it gives more, as having appointed and consecrated diverse Holy
days to the same solemn and public worship of God, which is enjoined to be
performed upon the Lords Day. For these (though they may admit some difference
in regard of their accidental dignity, in as much as those benefits
commemorated in them are greater or lesser yet) in regard of their essentials
they are equal, as being all of them dedicated to the honor of the same God,
in memory of some great and special benefits vouchsafed to the Church, and
therefore do go pari passu in our Canons, and in our ancient Can. 13. Act for
Uniformity of Common prayer, etc.
Statutes, which require the same observance of both under the same penalty.
And therefore those who stand so much for a whole Day of seven to be
consecrated to God, if the worship of God were all they affected, might see
that there is a compensation made for the defect which they so much complain
of in our observation on the Lords Day; and they themselves might do well to
take advantage, by a religious observation of these days, to make up their
failings on the Lords Day: But this they are so far from, that they account
the observation of these days a breach of the fourth Commandment, and think
it a sin Ames. med. Theol. lib. 2 cap. 15.
to make more Holy days then one in seven. In which regard, it cannot be
judged altogether impertinent, if I here take occasion to vindicate the
practice of our Church, from their unjust censures.

And in the first place, I may return their own Argument upon them, and say;
Is it not reason that God should, now under the Gospel, have more set days to
commemorate his benefits then one in seven, as well as under the Law? Under the
Law, we know, they had, beside their weekly Sabbaths, the Passover, Pentecost,
and the Feast of Tabernacles; and not only those which had Gods express
command for their Institution, but the Feast of Purim, and of the Dedication,
which (as I have before showed) were ordained by the Church, without any
express command of God, and observed by our Savior himself, whose example
alone (if any thing) is sufficient to exempt us from scrupling at the like now
in the time of the Gospel.

Secondly, if they will not run clean counter to their own principles, and
deny the morality of the fourth Commandment altogether, they must acknowledge
thus much (at least) to be moral: That there ought to be a certain part of
our time given to God, and some days set apart for his public worship: Now
these (being left undetermined in the word of God) if it be not in the power
of the Church to determine them, I wonder how that precept should be observed:
And if the Churchupon this ground, have reason and power to appoint any one
Day, why not more? seeing her power is not limited or restrained within any
other bounds but those generals, of decency and order: which I presume no man
will say are transgressed in the ordination of those 1. Cor. 14. 40.
Holy days which are observed among us.

Thirdly, to this that such times are in the general commanded by God; we may
add two things more, which being well considered will abundantly discharge the
observation of such days from superstition: and those are,

First, that the duties therein required are no other then such, as according
to the word of God, ought to be performed by all Christians: For what else is
required on those days but the solemn prayers and praises of God in the
Church, joined with the hearing of his Word, and a special commemoration of
his benefits, which as on those days were received? And which of all these is
not required in the word of God? And if it be lawful, yea commanded, that we
should perform those duties at all times and upon all occasions, they cannot
at any time whenever they 1. These. 5. 17, 18.
are performed, justly be termed superstitious, or (which must follow by
consequence) unlawful.

2. The other thing to be considered is, That the grounds and occasions of the
Churches determination of these duties unto those special days which we
observe, are such as deserve no less. As being real, great, and general
benefits vouchsafed by God unto his Church.

First, they are true and real, not imaginary fictions founded upon the fained
actions, or fall martyrdomes of titular Saints, such as are many in the Romish
Church.

Secondly, they are great, not ordinary or common benefits, and therefore
require a more then ordinary acknowledgement.

Thirdly, they are general; the good whereof redounds, not to a few, but to
the whole body of the Church; and so, if our acknowledgement be answerable, it
must be public and solemn, performed jointly by all those that are partakers
of the benefits.

Now, if we shall run thorough the whole Calendar, take an impartial view
of all our Holy days, we shall not find so much as one among them all, of
which thus much may not truly be affirmed.

For they may almost be ranked under two heads. First, such memorable steps in
the story of our blessed Savior, as by which the great work of our redemption
advanced unto its happy accomplishment. Secondly, the memorialls of that
goodness and glory which he afterward manifested to the world by his holy
Apostles, Evangelists and Martyrs, whom he honored so much as to make them
founders of that Kingdom which cost him his dearest blood, and to count them
worthy to suffer death for his sake. Concerning the former, I suppose there is
none but will say in the words of the Psalmist (as our vulgar translation
reads them) The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous
works, that they ought to be had in remembrance. Psalm. 111. 4
And what better means can be devised then the appointing of set solemn days
for Eissc. Dco) benesiciorum ejus solemmtatilus sestis et diebus ^a. tuus
dicamus sacramusque memoriam ne volumine temporum ingrata subreparobli^io Aug.
de Civ. l. 10. c. 4.
their commemoration, I cannot see: And this was the Churches aim in
appointing these days: So S. Austine, We (says he) dedicate and consecrate to
God the memory of his benefits in solemn feasts and set days, least in the
revolution of times ungrateful forgetfulness should creep upon us.

The like may be said of the latter: For if our Savior appeared so glorious in
them, and by them conveyed so great and general blessings to his Church,
what reason can be alleged why the Church may not retain an annual
honorable memorial of them to the glory of him whose instruments they were?
The Psalmist tells us that the righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance. Psa. 112. 6.
And the Wiseman, That the memory of the just shall be blessed. And therefore,
to have some days in Prove. 10. 8.
which the memories of those, who were in their generations most famous for
righteousness, may, with blessing, be perpetuated, is but their due and
agreeable to his will who has granted them that honor: so that we may justly
solemnize the days wherein those barning and shining lights first appeared to
the world; or the days of their departure hence, which were the days of their
happy inauguration into the Kingdom of glory, when they, both left to the
Church militant the glorious example of their Christian fortitude, and became
an occasion of new joy to the Church triumphant, by the accession of new
Citizens to that heavenly society. Either of which, afford matter sufficient of
solemn joy and rejoicing to the Church, and consequently of praise and
thanksgiving unto God.

Lastly, to convince them yet farther out of 4.
their own principles: They allow the Church power, in the times of great
calamities, either feared or felt, to appoint solemn days of fasting Dies
illi habendi videntur quasipro Sabbatis extraordinaru^s Ames. med. theol. l. 2.
c. 15. Read M. Mason of Christian humiliation. p. 66. Edit. 2.
and humiliation; and those days they will have held as Sabbaths
extraordinary, and that therein men are bound to abstein from their bodily
labors, according to the same streitnesse that they are bound to observe the
Sabbath; I would gladly then know some reason why the Church should want power
to ordeine the like days for the celebration of special benefits, to be
observed (not as Sabbaths which are now antiquated and no presidents for us
Christians, but) with such a cessation from labors, as is necessary for the
performance of the public worship of God, and fit to accompany such
solemnities of public joy and rejoicing, to which Rest is more naturally
requisite, then to the times of sorrow and humiliation.

But it is not the having of such days that some Possunt autem dies qual
scunque pie converti in occasiones cultum Dei promovendi Ames. ^b. Elton p. 117.
scruple at, or the duties required in them, for they much desire to have some
days besides the Lords day to meet together for the hearing of the Word, and
for the words sake can be contented to endure the Liturgy of the Church. But
the things which they dislike are; first the obligation that we put upon men
for the observance of them; for they would have the appointment and observation
of them to be held a thing indifferent and no duty binding conscience.
Secondly, they dislike the names that we give them, in that we style them the
days of such or such a Saint, which to them Idem ibid.
seems to favor of Idolatry; neither would they have them called holy days,
or accounted more holy then others; forasmuch as such difference of days
belonged to the Jews, and is now under the Gospel taken away.

To these I answer, first, for the obligation of the Churches commands, and
that it is not a thing indifferent to obey or disobey them, I have already
spoken so much as may satisfy those that are not page 45.
studious of contention, I only add now upon this occasion; that it seems to
me very ridiculous, to grant the Church a power of ordeining such times, and
yet to require that the observation of them so ordained be held a thing
indifferent. For if their ordinance lay no tie upon men, but leave things
notwithstanding still indifferent, their power surely, is to no purpose and
nothing worth.

Touching the names that we give them. I say, first that the festivalls of the
Saints are dedicated, not to them by whose names they are called, but to God.
To him, and not them, our prayers are directed; to him our praises, though for
them, and with reference to those blessings, which by them are vouchsafed unto
us; We honor him as the author of all that good which either they, or we, by
them, are partakers of: We honor them only as his instruments, and as those
who having been imitators of our blessed Savior, are worthy patterns of our
imitation. To this purpose we find the Church of Smyrna answering the like
calumny raised against them by the Jews, upon occasion of their affection
which they expressed toward -- Ignorantes not nec Christ unquam relinquere qui
pro totius servandoru^ mundi salute passus est nec alium quenquam colere posse.
Nam hunc qui^dem tanquam filu^ Dei adoramus; Martyrs vero tanqua^ discipulos
and imitatores Domini digne propter insuperabile^ inrege^ ipsoru^ and
praeceptorem benevolentia^ disigimus, quoru^ and nos consortes and discipulos
fieri optamus. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. Romans 14. Gal 4. 5. Col. 2.
that glorious Martyr Polycarpus. These men (say they) are ignorant that we
cannot ever leave Christ who suffered for the salvation of the whole world nor
can we worship any other. For him we adore as the Son of God; as for the
Martyrs, we worthily love them as disciples and imitators of him their Lord,
for their insuperable affection toward their King and Master, whose partners
also we desire to be, and to become their disciples. And thus much they might
easily answer themselves out of our Church Liturgy, where there is no one word
in any office appointed for any Saints day, that gives the least ground or
color to this scruple.

The other imputation of Iudaisme which they tax us with, because we style our
Christian festivalls, holy days, has as weak a foundation as the former. For
I willingly grant them what they allege for the countenancing of this
objection, That now under the Gospel the difference of times and days is no
less taken away then of meats; That is, as we have now no meats that are
unclean either in themselves, or by reason of any positive precept given to
the Jews, but that they may be eaten with thanksgiving; so neither is there
any day or time which in it self, or by reason of any such Judicial precept,
is now to be accounted more holy then others; all this is evident from the
places which they allege for this purpose: Whereupon we conclude, that none
of the Jewish Festivalls (not the Sabbath it self) ought to be observed by
Christians, nor (which is more) any Christian Festival to be observed, after
the Jewish manner, or with their rites and Ceremonies. And this may justly tax
them who stand either for the Jewish Sabbath, or which turn the Lords day into
a Sabbath, exacting the same strictness of observance in regard of the outward
Ceremonial Rest. But it can no way prejudice the Church, in consecrating days
to the service of God, or in accounting them (though in themselves, and setting
aside the Ordinance of the Church, they are all alike See p. 31.
yet) in relation to the duties to be performed in them, more holy then others.
And this they must grant, unless they will affirm one of these three things.

First, That the works of God now under the 1
Gospel are not so great, so glorious, and consequently, so worthy of set times
for their solemn remembrance, as heretofore under the Law.

Or that the Christian Church has now less power 2
in appointing days for the solemn worship of God, in relation to those
glorious works of his, then the Jewish Synagogue once had.

Or lastly, That the worship which we Christians now perform to God is not so
holy, as that 3
in the time of the Jewish Synagogue, and so less able to sanctify the days
in which they are performed.

But every one of these being most absurd; I conclude, that to consecrate
certain days, besides the Lords day, to the solemn worship of God, in memory
of his special blessings vouchsafed to the Church on such days, and to
account such days, so consecrated, more holy then others, is lawful and free
from all superstition and Judaisme. And however, that they who would feign
affixe so extraordinary holiness to the Lords day, should of all men have
abstained from this last imputation, till they had better proved the
immediately divine institution of the Lords day.

But I have too long digressed; yet not without cause, in as much as they, who
seem so zealous for the giving to God his due time, refuse notwithstanding to
give him that, which the regular piety of the Ancient and our own Mother
Church has ever, upon so sound reason, consecrated to him. I return now to
answer another objection which they frame against the extending of our
Christian liberty, to the use of recreations on the Lords day.

The liberty of Christians (say they) ought to be spiritual, and not in
carnal and common things; and therefore cannot be extended to patronize
recreations, or ordinary labors on the Sunday, but that they are as unlawful
on that day as ever they were on the Sabbath.

To this I answer, that Christian liberty, as it respects the things from
which we are freed, is not merely spiritual, but extends it self, to carnal
and common things also; for thereby we are freed not only from the guilt, and
condemnation of sin, and the reigning power of it, which are things
spivituall; but also from the servitude of the Ceremonial Law, which among
other respects which it had, was as a Schoolmasters, or Tutour, whereby the
Church in her nonage or infancy, was to be kept under the Elements of the
world, (as the Apostle Gal. 4. 3.
calls them) that is, tied to the observation of days, and months, and years
and meats and drinks; which being in themselves indifferent, were yet
forbidden the Church of those times, that their bondage under these might
nourish in them the hope and expectation of the promised Messiah, in whom they
were to have deliverance, and so lead, or rather drive them to believe in Him.
Now when the fullness of time was come, and that Christ was exhibited, the
Church being then no longer Gal. 4. 4.
under age, is not subject to those observances, but for any tie of that Law of
Moses now upon it, enjoyes the free use and exercise of these things as
indifferent. As then there were many things, which, in themselves, and to us,
now are indifferent, prohibited to the Jews; so as they might not eat of all
meats, though otherwise wholesome, they might not wear all kind of garments,
though useful and profitable, etc. So there were some works in themselves not
sinful, nor at other times unlawful, prohibited to be done at some special
times, in regard of the peculiar observance then due to those times, which now,
when those times cease to be observed, can by no means be accounted sinful,
or unlawful. Granting therefore that ordinary labors, and all bodily
recreations were on the Sabbath unlawful, yet being in themselves not sinful,
and so under the Gospel indifferent, they cannot be so upon our Sunday.

I answer further, that I know no reason why honest recreations, moderate
feasting, and such like expressions of rejoicing, may not fitly be counted a
part of the external observance and sanctification of this day; in as much as
it is solemnized in memory of the resurrection of our Blessed Savior, and so
our redemption fully wrought, to which we may (with S. Augustine) apply that of
the Psalmist, This is the Day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice, and
be glad in it. And as on the day of his Passion, and other days appointed for
solemn humiliation, we express the sorrow of our hearts by our mourning and
neglected attire, by Fasting, and abridging our selves of those delights, which
use to refresh our natures; at which times The voice of the Vyoll, and of the
Harp, the voice of the Bridegroom, and the voice of the Bride are
unseasonable; so on the day of his resurrection to express our joy, and
rejoicing by our arraying our selves in our best attire, by Feasting, and other
acts of cheerfulness, is most agreeable to the solemnity of that Day, Of
which we may say in the words of Nehemiah and Ezra, This Day is holy unto the
Lord your God, mourn not nor weep -- but -- eat of the Nehem. 8. 9. 10.
fat, and drink of the sweet, and send portions to them for whom nothing is
prepared, for this Day is holy unto the Lord. And however some men will have
every fasting day a Sabbath, and every Lords Day a fasting day (not allowing
either the dressing, or liberal use of Gods creatures, and therefore judging
it inconvenient to celebrate marriages on that day) yet the Church of God in
better times condemned Die Dominico jejunare nesas ducimus, Tertull. de Cor.
Mil. c. 3 council. Gangr. Can. 18. Cartiag. 4. Can. 64. Iustellus in cod.
Ca^onu^. not. in Can. 70.
Fasting on the Lords Day as unlawful, and most incongruous and disagreeable
to the use of that Day, which was ordained as a Festival, and day of mirth and
rejoicing: For which end also the Church in her most ancient times, had on that
Day their Agapae or Love Feasts, as for the refreshing of the poor, and for
the nourishing of mutual love and amity, so also for the unanimous expression
of joy in all sober mirth, and in the free (though temperate) use of Gods
creatures. Upon which ground (doubtless) we may conclude the lawfulness of
the use of such recreations, feastings, and other testifications of rejoicing
upon the Lords Day, as are in themselves honest, and are so used as they prove
no hindrances to the service of God, which is the proper work of the Day.

Besides, even the Jews themselves (though out of superstition, they did for
the most part overdoe this Precept of the Sabbath, abstaining from those
things, which they might have done, without any violation of Gods commandment,
yet) accounted their Sabbath a Feast, not a Fast; a day of rejoicing, and not
of sorrow, or humiliation; and judged it not unlawful to make Feasts upon that
Day, as is evident by that Feast made upon the Sabbath, by a chief Pharisee
(one of their strictest Sabbatarians) whereat our Savior himself (who Luke
14. 1.
was no Sabbath-breaker) vouchsafed his presence among many others that were
invited. And Paulus Addit. 4. in Exodus 20.
Burgensis (himself a Jew) reports, that the Jews held themselves bound to
eat three meals that day, which on other days they used not. And Syranus
(another of the same Nation) says, That the Hebrew Doctors held that the word
Remember was prefixed to this Commandment, that if they had any precious
garment, or any other thing of price, They should remember to keep it till the
Sabbath, to give it at first a Sabbath-dayes wearing. I am not of their mind,
but think that word prefixed for higher, and more important reasons: yet I
verily believe that their conceit did speak their usual custom of apparelling
themselves in their most costly and best garments, as best befitting the joy of
that high Festival, which (as one has well observed) has this singular
privilege to be a day Ainsworth in Genesis 2. 3.
of rest and holiness; of delight, and Feasting unto the world; and therefore
(says he) This day is not described by evening and morning, as were the other
six which consisted of light and darkness: but Esaias 60 20 Rev. 21. 25
this is all day, or light, figuring out our perpetual joys. And, no
question, but, that Day which was the memorial of Gods resting from his work,
when he rejoiced in the works of his hands, (so the Chaldee Paraphrast expounds
Gods resting on the seventh Psa. 104. 31 Genesis 2. 2.
day) and of the deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage was celebrated with
mirth, and rejoyoing: so that I can hardly be induced to think, that on their
Sabbath day, they were bound to abstain from all kind of recreations, but
that they did, or, at least, might use such expressions of joy and mirth, as at
their other Festivalls were usual among them; as feasting, singing, dancing,
and the like: which, I conceive, were no way forbidden in the commandment,
which only seems to aim at works of toil or such as are servile, or
undertaken for profit or gain, or at least that might hinder them in the
service of God: and not to exclude all recreations, which (though they may,
happily, in a large sense be termed works, yet) being such as do refresh, not
weary nature, and being so used, as that the worship of God might
notwithstanding be duly and solemnly performed, cannot be said to cross the
intent of the Law, which was the decent and solemn service of God, and the
testification of their freedom from Egyptian servitude.

But let this pass as a private conceit, yet sure I am, that Tostatus (whom
Doctor Willet approves) Tostatus Qu. 12. in Exodus Exo. 16. 29
says, They were not bound to attend all the day upon Gods service. And the
same Doctor Willet expounding these words: Abide ye every man in his place;
Let no man go out of his place on the seventh day, says, They were not to
go forth, that is, with intent to gather Manna, which lay round about the
Host, or to do any other business: they were not forbidden all kind of
walking, and going out for their solace and recreation. Certainly then
Christians cannot justly be blamed, if on the Lords day God be solemnly and
decently served at fit times, and no other work entertained to the hinderance
of this, though every moment of that Day be not spent in performance of the
acts of Gods worship, nor the vacant space observed with a superstitious rest,
which shall exclude all other works, and all, even lawful recreations, which
to exact at the hands of Christians, what is it but to surpass the Jews in
superstition about the Sabbath, and having only changed the day, in dishonor
and contempt of the Jews, to require notwithstanding the same Ceremoniality of
observance? which what fruits it has had, or can have, I cannot see, save the
engendring of endless scruples, and inextricable doubts, and the needless
wounding of the consciences of many well-meaning people, when they have no sure
guide to direct their practice, and when that which is required is beyond the
ability of mortals to perform. For I will appeal to the consciences of these
rigid Taskmasters, whether ever they, or any other did yet, or could possibly
keep the Lords day, in that strict manner as they urge it? But, happily this
little moves them, who being taught that it is impossible to keep Gods
Commandments, will therefore the rather be induced to think, it is commanded,
because they are unable to keep it. Yet sure our Savior would never have
styled his yoke easy, Mat. 11. 30.
and his burden light, had this strict observance of the Lords Day been a
part of it, and Gods Commandments, so as he now under the Gospel requires
them to be done, and with the assistance of his grace, wherewith he seconds
them (whatever men rashly say of them) are not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5. 3..
much less impossible to be done.

To set down briefly and plainly, that which in more words has been
hitherto driven at: and it is but this. There are three things considerable in
the Sunday, or Lords day. 1. A Day. 2. That Day. 3. The manner of celebrating
it. The first is Gods immediate precept. The other two not so, but mediate and
by the power he has given to his Church. First God commanded some time wherein
men setting aside all worldly business and thoughts, should apply themselves
to the duties of his solemn and public Worship, and this is the substance,
or that which is Moral, in the fourth Commandment. Secondly, the Custom or
Constitution of the Church, warranted by the Apostles practice, and the honor
vouchsafed unto it by our Savior himself, determined that time or day to the
Sunday, or first day of the week; and secondly, prescribed how and when, for
the decent time and manner of performing those duties.

By these our liberty is limited, which must not be (without necessity)
extended to the violation of either of them: Hence then, 1. He sins that
does not separate some time for God, etc. as violating the immediate precept of
GOD in the fourth Commandment. 2. He sins no less, that for this end
observes not the Sunday, and that in that decent manner, which the nature of
the duties, and the authority of the Church has enjoined; and this he does in
two respects. First, because he violates Gods mediate Command, who has
authorized the Church in his right, and by his power to ordain such things; so
that, to neglect the Church, in this case is, to neglect God. Secondly, because
the immediate Precept of God is wrapped up in the Precept of the Church: by
which, that which by him was left indefinite, is defined, and determined.

But that liberty either for ordinary labors, or honest recreations, which may
stand with the observation of these Precepts, no man can justly account
sinful, unless he can produce (not the phansies of some Zelotes, or the
opinion of this or that man, though accounted never so good or learned, but)
some other Precept given by God, or those whom God has commanded us to obey:
For it is an undoubted Maxim, which the Apostle delivers; Where no Law is,
there is no transgression. Romans 4 15.
The prohibition of the Law only is that, whereby things are exempted from our
power and liberty, which otherwise (except in case of scandal) remains entire.

And this alone is sufficient to terminate this Dispute, upon which we will
join issue with those that are contrary minded, being not more confident that
they can show no binding Precept for the restraining of our Christian liberty
in this case, then willing to retract what has been said, if they shall prove
themselves able to do it.

FINIS.

