THE Last East-Indian Voyage.

CONTAINING MVCH variety of the State of the several kingdoms where they
have traded: with the Letters of three several Kings to the Kings Majesty of
England, begun by one of the Voyage: since continued out of the faithful
observations of them that are come home. ()

AT LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Walter Burre. 1606.

To the Reader.
READER,
THe beginner of this relation following, would no doubt if he had lived have
himself set it out to thy good liking: but this I assure thee, that both his
and this continuation of it is set forth with as much faithfulness as could be
gathered out of the best observations of them that are come home. If I find it
to thy liking, look shortly for an exact and large discourse written by
Master Scot chief factor or at Bantam, ever since the first voyage,
containing whatsoever has happened since their first Arrival there to trade
in those parts read this, look for the other, and so farewell.

VV. B.

THE LAST EAST INDIAN VOYAGE.
Containing many memorable matters of the state of the Countries where they
have traded. March the 23. 1603/4.
BEing provided of all things necessary for so long a Voyage, with leave
taken of the Governor, and others of the Commities, we departed from
Grauesend the 25. of March, being Sunday at night, and the tuesday following
came to the Downs, where the General before we came to an anchor, gave order
to the Purser to call the company, and take their names: which being done,
there was found 40 men lacking of the copelment of our Ship, so that we were
forced thereby to come to anchor, to tarry for them. The General gave order
presently the Pinnesse should be manned, and sent the Master with his brother,
and the Purser for better dispatch to Sandwich, where they escaped very near
drowning. The Assention Pinnesse likewise put off to set their Pilate a land,
and so was cast away: which when the General heard of, he was exceeding angry
with Captain Styles that he would offer to go a land at such a time without
his order. The last of March the Master, Captain Middleton, and the masters
Mate came aboard. The first of April, we weighed anchor in the Downs and
twarth Dover, we found our men in Ketches ready to come aboard, we took them
all into our ship, being 28 men, which was far short of that number we
expected. But howsoever the General was determined to proceed, although he
lacked forty men, rather than loose the benefit of so fair a wind: so the
same day of Beachey, the General gave order to the Boatsswayne to take new
muster of our men; and he found we had twenty more than our copelment aboard
the Admiral, and trarrying to speak with the rest of the ships, we haled
them one after another, and found they had every ship more than their
copelment; the cause of which error, could not be imagined without foul
weather caused them to hide themselves, at such time of general muster; or
else that some of them misdoubting they should be set on land, played least in
sight: but howsoever, this ouer-plus of men was as grievous to the General as
the lack he had before. To see how he had been deluded to come to anchor with a
fair wind for lack of men, and now of force must put into some place to set
them again a land. So the General gave order to the Master, he should have a
care he did not pass Plymouth that night, for that he was minded to put in
there to discharge those men. So the next day morning at day break, we were
ready with tacks aboard to stand into the sound of Plymouth: and stood in a
good while, till such time as it began to be gustie weather. And the wind to
souther upon us, so that we were enforced against the Generals liking, to
proceed on our Voyage steering along the land with much wind, and in the
afternoon we lost sight of England; and so continuing our course with a fair
wind, upon thursday being the 6. day of April, we were twarth Cape Fennester,
and the 7 day, of the Rock. And upon Easter day being the 8 day, of Cape Saint
Vincences with the wind large, and fair weather; and continuing our course
till the 15, we came to the Canaries, where in the calmes, trial was made to
take in the Hectors boat, but she could not stoe her, by reason she was both
too long, and too broad, which if she could have done, the General was minded
not to touch in any place til he doubled the Cape: so that was the principal
cause he went to the Islands of Cape-deuerde, so the same night we departed
from the Canaries, and directed our course for Maio, one of the foresaid
Islands.

The 22. day, we had sight of Boa Vista: the 24. day we anchored at Maio upon
the south west side, where the General with the rest of the Captains and
merchants went a land to seek fresh water: but there was none to be found but
a small Well, which would yield scarce a Hogs-head a day. Presently after our
landing, there came to our General a Portingale that had wounded one of his
fellows, desiring to save his life, and upon that condition he would give him
all the wealth he had, which was some 500, dried Goats. 7 he General would give
no ear to him nor his request, for that he would give no occasion of offense,
to them of the Island, yet by entreaty of the Vise admiral and the other
captains he was contented to take his Goats and him aboard, which presently
was effected; also the same afternoon, there came two Portingales more of the
Island to our General, who came very kindly unto him and bad him welcome, so
after some discourse the General desired them that for his money, he might buy
some live goats of them for the refreshing of his men, they presently made
answer again, they would sell none but that we might kill as many as we
would, and no body would be offended thereat, and so presently they went with
the General, and showed him how we should enclose them, and so set our dogs
upon them; and having killed half a dozen of goats, they took their leave in
friendly manner for that night, promising in the morning to return and bring
their dogs with them, and to help us to so many Goats as we would desire, so
the General with all the rest came presently a board.

The next day, the General would not go a land, but sent Captain Styles,
Captain Keeling, and Captain Middleton, with express order to keep their
people from straggling, and when all their company were landed, Captain
Styles called them all together; giueing them warning to keep company
together, and not range one from the other, which speech was reitterated again
by Master Durham saying, that whosoever was found straggling, should be
severely punished, and therefore willed them all to take good heed. And so
after this warning given, they marched up into the country to kill some
Goats, where they met with two Portugals, which did as sift them in all the
might: in the mean while they were at their sport a land, The General with
therest, were busy in slowing the Heetors long boot, for that he was minded,
to go to Sea so soon as they had done, but they could not stowe her; without
cutting of her stem: and part of her bows, which seeing no other way, was
presently efected. And so drawing toward night, our land men repaired aboorde,
with some few Goats they had killed. And after supper the wind coming of the
land, the General gave order to the Master to wey, and that a warning piece
might be shot of. And so presently the Cable was brought to capstaine and our
ship was presently loose, but before we had up our anchor, Captain Styles
sent word one of their Merchants was missing so that we came presently to
Anchor again, and did ride tell day. He that lost himself, was the party
which was so careful to give other men warning, which took none himself. Day
no sooner appearing, but the General sent Captain Styles with at least 150.
men to seek for him. And if it were possible to speak with some of the
Portugals: but all that day was spent in vain, and no news of him; so the
General would spend no longer time there, but left him to learn the language:
so the 16. of May we passed the line where many of our men fell sick of the
Scuruy, Calenture, Bloody flix, and the Worms, being left to the mercy of
God, and a small quantity of Lyman juice every morning: our physician shipped
for that purpose being as unwilling as ignorant in any thing that might help
them. A great oversight in the company, and no doubt will be better looked to
hereafter.

And to our proceeding voyage the 13. day of July being Friday we had sight of
Cape, Bona, Esperansa, the wind at South-west, a gentell gale the General
commanded the tackes a board intending to go about the cape. But our sick men
cried out most lamentably, for at that present there were sick of the scuruy
at the least 80. men in our ship, not one able to help the other, who made a
petition to the General most humbly entreating him for Gods sake to save there
lives, and to put in for Saldania other ways they were but dead men. The
General perusing there pitiful complaint, and looking out of his cabin door,
where did attend a swarm of lame and weak diseased criples, who behoulding
this lamentable sight, extended his compasion toward them. And granted their
requests: that night the wind came up at the South and continued tell the 17.
day before we could get into the rode. The next morning being Wednesday the
General went on land, with provision to set up tents, and a little way from
our landing place, the Negroes had their houses: which were no other then a few
crooked sticks set in the grownd, and mattes cast over them, and they had great
store of Cattle, both beeves and sheep grasing fair by them. Our General
and the captains went to batter with them for small pieces of Iron, and bought
some 12. sheep, and more would have sold us, till that they saw us begin to set
up our tents, which as it seemed, was to their disliking; for that incontinent
they pulled down their houses, and made them fast upon their Beasts backs,
and did drive away; yet all means possible was sought to draw them to sell us
more: but in no case they would abide any longer with us, but drove away with
all the speed they might. It lay in the generals power to have taken them all
from them, as some counseled him to do, but he in no case would give ear
thereunto; but let them depart, not doubting but that they would return
again, seeing we offered them no wrong, when it was in our powers to
dispossess them of all their cattle. The 19. day we got our sick men on
land, and the 20. our boats were sent to the Island, where we found such
infinite number of seals, that it was admirable to behold, all the seashore
lies ouer-spread with them, some sleeping, some traveling into the Island, and
some to the sea-ward: Besides all the Rocks which lie a pretty distance off
so full as they can hold, thousands at a time going, and as many coming out:
there be many of them as big as any Bear, and as terrible to behold. And up
toward the middle of the Island, there be infinite numbers of fowls called
Pengwines, Pellicans, and Cormerants, The Pengwines be as big as our
greatest Capons we have in England, they have no wings nor cannot fly, but
you may drive them by thousands in a flock whether you will, they be
exceeding fat, but their flesh is very rank, for that they live upon fish,
there be so many of them upon this small Island, which is not above 5. miles
about, to lade a ship of 50 tonnes with all. Upon Sunday the 23 the first man
that died out of our ship. Upon monday morning the General went into the
Country to buy fresh victuals, but the people of the country seeing so many
in company fled* But the General caused all the company to make a stand, and
then sent 4. to them with a bottell of wine, and victuals, with a Taber, and a
Pipe, they seeing no more in company came to them, and did eat, drink, and
dance with them so they seeing with what kinds they were used, took heart
unto them and came along withour General to our tents, where they had many
toys bestowed upon them. As pins, points, beads, and branches, and so they
returned all very well pleased making signs to return the next day with
Cattle, but foul wether prevented them for 3 days. The forth day after being
the 26. they brought us 44. sheep, and the next day 23, sheep and two kine,
and the next day 15. sheep and one bullock, and the 30 day we bought 120.
sheep and 6. Beeves, the next day 9. sheep and three beeves, and the 2. of
August 3. sheep. The 3. of August: the General went in his pinnes and other
boats with him to kill whales, for all the bay is full of them, they stroke
diverse with harping Irons, and especially they in the Susans pinnes stroke
their harping Iron into one of them very sure, and veered their boat a good
scope from her, she feeling her self wounded, towed the boat for the space of
half an hour, up and down the bay, with such swiftness that the men were
feign to go all of them and sit in the starne, and let the whale towe them,
which was with such swiftnes that she seemed to fly, but in the end they were
Enforced to cut their rope, to keep their boat from sincking, they were carried
so swiftly throw the Sea. The next that stroke one, was in the Generals pinnes,
and there were two of them together, and their fortune was to strike a young
one, which played like reakes, as the first did, and continued for a good time
and then they haled up the boat somewhat near, and wounded her in diverse
places with iauellins, the great whale all this time would not depart from the
little one although it had received many wounds, but stood to the last to fight
it out against al our boats, sometimes giving one boat a blow, and sometimes
another, and would come under our boats, and lift them almost out of the water,
she bestowed one bange on the Generals Pinnesse, that split all the timbers and
boards, so that he was feign to take another boat to save himself; for she was
presently full of water, yet with much a do they saved the Pinnesse, and
brought her on land, where it cost all our Carpenters three days work to
repair her. And when the young Whale began to be weary, the old one would
take the young upon his back and carry him, but the old one seeing that would
not prevail against us, would leave his carriage, and betake himself to his
fight, which was to cast his tail out of the water, and to strike so
valiantly, that if he had taken any of our boats with one of these blows, he
would have split it all to pieces. It was very good sport to stand and look
on, but very dangerous to them in the boats: To conclude of this matter, the
young Whale could not be killed till the sunne-set, the old one never forsaking
her whilst it had any life. So after it was dead, we towed it to our landing
place, and at hye water haled it so hye as we could. The occasion why we killed
this Whale, was for lack of oil for our lamps, for in all the ships we had
great lack, the oil was put in very bad caske, and leaked out. But whereas
we hoped to have had oil enough out of this Whale to have served all our
turns, it did scarce yield four gallons it was so young and lean.

The 8 day, the General sent a dozen of our men to buy fresh victuals, for
that we had not any left. So they were out all day, and brought home but two
sheep at their return, which was late, the General demanded of the Purser
of the Hector, which was chief purueyer, what was the occasion they stayed out
so long, and that they brought no more cattle. He answered, that the people
had sold them good store of cattle, which he had paid for, but being so few
of our men in company, and they weaponlesse, they would abuse them in
snatching their iron from them, and not to suffer them to drive the cattle
away they paid for. The General seeing how they used him, thought by policy
to go beyond them; and this it was: He himself with 120 men in his company;
would go by night and lie in ambush in a wood nere the place where our men did
barter with them, and when it was fair day, the purueyor and his crewe, should
come as other times, and bargain with them for so many as they would sell; And
when they had sufficient to make a sign, and then the General and his
company should come out of their lodgings, and drive them away. This matter
was put in practice this night, and the Cenerall three hours before day
departed from the tents, and had imbosked himself and all his followers to
their own contents, only three fellows of captain Styles his company, to
taste of a bottell of wine they carried for their captain, and in the mean
while they were drinking, they had lost sight of their General and all his
company and took a contrary way, never staying til they came to the houses of
the Negroes: they seeing three men armed to come to their houses, began to
suspect some false measures; these fellows seeing they had mistaken
themselves, retired back to the woods, and in sight of the Indians hid
themselves in the bushes, at that time the Sun being up half an hour after
these fellows had hid themselves, came our weaponlesse Merchants from the
tents and began to barter with them, for two or three sheep, which of
purpose they had sent down to our people, to keep them busy while they were
getting their herds of Cattle to run away. Which our merchants perceiving,
they presently unarmed as they were, went amongst them, and sent word by one
of them to the General, to come away with all his people; for that he and all
his company were discovered, so that the General was enforced to break out
of his ambushme^t to rescew his men, which were amongst them without weapons:
but before he could come to their rescew, they had wounded one of our men, with
four darts sticking in his body; which being down done, they betook them to
their heels and all the cattle before them, as fast as they could drive to the
mountains. Our men, as then, having the raines in their own hands, pursued
after them in such scattering manner, that if the people of the country had
been men of any resolution, they might have cut off most of them. The General
caused a trumpet to sound a retreat, but could not cause them to leave their
chase. And whilst that he was taking order to send the hurt man to the tents,
he was half a mile from the nearest of our men, and not past five men in his
company: so he and those men in his company were feign to run to over take
some of them which were before, that in the end they were a dozen in his
company. Yet the General took it grievous, to see his men scatterred over all
the Plain, and scarce three of them together in a company: which if the people
of the country had joined together, and set upon them being so scattered,
they had cut most of them off, which thing the General greatly doubted, yet
God be thanked it sorted better. For some of our men ouer-tooke some of the
Negroes at the foot of the mountain, and drove them away from some of their
Catttle, and made a stand by them till more of their company came up, and so
returned homwardes with a hundred Kyne and Calves, which was welcome to our
sick men.

But in our absence from our Tents, Captain Colthurst, with the Master, and
such as were left, being very doubtful all was not well with us, thought it
best to send our Pinnesse to the bottom of the Baye, to help us if we stood
in need: but master Cole, being ouer-bold in his pinnesse to go a shore, both
he and the boat were cast away, and two more that presumed of their swimming
were drowned, the rest escaped very hardly, came running naked along the sands
to us wards, and there certyfied the General of all that happened, which was
but forrowfull news to him. The next day, the General sent sufficient store
of men to march by land, to the place where the boat was cast away, and found
her dry upon the strand, split and full of sand: but with much trouble she was
freed, and sent aboard. Also we found master Cole upon the strand, and brought
him to our Tents, and buried him.

This night, and the next after, our sentenels had spied the country people
lurking about our rents, so that alarome was given, and they fled: upon the 14.
of August we departed all a board our ships, where we rid tell the 19. the
wind not serving to carry us out, which then served our turns, we put to Sea
and stood to the Westwards, and the 25. day we dubled the cape of Good hope;
with very favorable winds tell the fifth of September; and after that time we
met with the wind scarce, and now and then calmes, and here began the scuruy to
grow amongst our men, and every day did the disease increase. Here might some
what be said of the ignorance and uncharitableness of him that was shipped for our
physician, as a caveat to them that shall go hereafter to be better provided:
but for 2. respects I forbear, the one in regard of his other calling but
chiefly for that he is since dead in the voyage; where for my part I wish his
faults may be buried with him.

The 19. of December, we had sight of Ingana an Island lying near Sumatra, the
20. we had sight of Sumatra, the 21. we ankerd within the Islands where we were
put to great trouble to have up our yardes, and get up our ankors, our men were
exceeding weak, we were feign to send men out of our ship to help the rest,
and so with much a do we came to Bantam rode. The occasion why we first
ankered was because the Assention shot off a piece of ordenance within night,
which was contrary to our articles, we doubting she was in some great
distress came suddenly to an anchor to tarry to know what was the matter, which
proved to be nothing but that there Gunner was dead and thrown over board,
and had that piece for a farewell: which folly of theirs, put us to great
trouble, causing us to anchor in the Sea, in 25. fadomes: then winds all
westerlye, which brought in a great seagate, that the next day morning, we had
much a do to get up our anchor, and as for the other ships they were not able
to wey without our helps, which we sent them, and so with very much trouble,
we got us all under sail, steering away East and by North, and East North
East, tell we came to anchor between the Island and the maine at the entrance of
Bantam bay, in 7. fadomes sandy ground. This night at 7. a clock came a
Hollands boat a board us from Bantam, sent by a General of 12. ships, which
came there two days before us; in which boat came the vise admeral of the
fleet, with refreshing from shore presenting it to our General, with offer of
any kindness they could do us, which afterward they effected toward us, in
sending their boats to setch us water: many other curtisyes besides, we of our
selves not able to do the same, our weakness being so great. This fleet had
passed, along the cost, from Mosimbique to Selon, and had taken diverse ships,
and burned a Carrick, and afterward came hither withal their men in good
health. An hour after their coming a board of the hollanders came a prawe or
a canow from Bantam, with master Scot and others of our men left their the last
voyage by whom the General knew the estate of their business, the 23. at 2. a
clock we came to anchor in Bantam rode, and saluted the town and Hollanders
with most of our ordinance, and were answered again with the like from all the
Hollanders, the 24. day our vise-admerall was sent unto the king, to excuse the
Generals not coming a land, for that he was not well. This day being the 24.
came in 2 sail of hollands fleet a ship and a pinnes the same day one of the
theeus that had set our house on fire was stopped to death. According to the
order of the country. The 26 day the General gave new articles to all the
ships, wherein every man was absolutely forbidden to buy any spice, and diverse
other articles for the good demenor of his men which here I omit to write: The
27. 28. and the 29 nothing happened worth writing. The 30. day the General of
the Hollanders and most part of the principal of his fleet dinied a board with
our General. The 31. our General went on land, with a letter from our Kings
Majesty, and a present to the King of Bantame which he delivered him, and were
very acceptably received. The King but 13. years of age and governed by a
protector, the 3. day we had order to ru^mage our hold to take prouition of
water and merchants goods, for that we were appointed, and the Assenssion to go
for the molucas, and the other ships to take in their lading of peper, and to
go home; likewise this day we took in diverse fardells of Merchandise, and so
continued taking in water and Merchandise tell the 8. day, and then our
General came a board, and appointed such men as should go a long with him to
the molucas amongst which number, master Tauerner was removed, from the Susan
to the Assenssion, we continued busy in taking in of Merchandise, and
vittelles of the Hector and the Susan tell the 15. day we made an end, of
taking in of merchandise. This day our pursser William Griffen, and master
Foster dyed both of the flixe.

The sixteenth day our Cenerall, departed from Bantam: and came a board to
proceed on his voyage to the Mollocos, this night dyed Henry Dewbrey of the
Flixe; also the same day, master Sur^flict was appointed to go home in the
Hector, to the great contenting of all in our ship: likewise one of our
masters mattes, master Smith, was appointed for Masters Mate in the Hector.
The 17. day dyed of the Flixe, William Lewed, John Ienkens, and Samuel Porter
the 18 day the General having dispatched his letters, went aboard the Hector
and the Susan and took leave of them: and after diner wayed, and stood to the
sea-ward till night, and then ankred in 8. fadomes of water the 19. in the
morning we weyed again, and proceeded with a fair wind till 6, a clock at
night, and then came to anchor in 14. fadome of ye ground fair by a small
Island; the 20. by break of day we weyed and steering along the land with a
fair wind: this day dyed Henry Styles our M. Carpenter, and James Varnam; and
John Iberson, all of the Flix. The 21 and 22 days we held on our course, with
blusting rainie weather; the 22. day dyed of the Flixe James Hope: the 24. day
in the morning we fell with the shouldes which lie off the East, North east
part of Iaua: this day dyed John Leay, and Robert whitthers of the Flixe.
January the 25. we held on our course, with very much wind and rain, at
night one of our men leaped ouer-board, having the Callenture. and three more
dyed of the Flixe, their names were William Bellidine, William Pooter, Gedyon
Marten, and Robert Vennes: the 26. day stering our course with a fair wind
suspecting no danger, upon a sudden we saw the ground under the ship, heauing
over the lead, we had but 4 fadoms water: this night dyed of the Flixe George
Iohnes, and Frances Buck-man, and Gilbert Mesterson: the 27. day in the morning
we stered away East and by South, we came into should water which lies to
the southward of Ruinata: so that we were feign to stand South and by West and
South to get clear of the shouldes till noone, and then we came into deep
water, and so bearing up we stered Est and by south and by and by we were in
fine fadomes so that we stood to the southward some three leages, and then
held on our former course: this day dyed of the Flixe, Robert Smith, and Thomas
Dawson: the 28, day we fell with Selebis, being high land, and at 4. a clock
in the evening we came to an anchor in 26. fadome; sandy ground, four leages
from land: the 29. in the morning we weyed, steering Est along the land, and
the General went in our pinnesse along the land to seek for fresh water, for
that he greatly doubted it was the Bantam water that killed our men, but he
lost his labor, and returned without any for there was none to be found; at
night we ankered in 30. fadomes water, this morning dyed William Paret of the
flixe: the 30. day we passed the straites of Selibis and shaped our course for
the Isles of Beton: the 31. in the morning we were fair by the land of Betton,
and all the night lay by the Lee. The first of February we held on our course
with a fair wind. the second dyed of the flixe Henry Lambert: the third day
dyed of the flixe Edward Smith, the 4. in the morning we had sight of Blewe,
and Barrow, being two Hands: this day dyed Henry James, the fifth day Richard
Miller dyed of the Flixe: the sixth day we were fair by the land Blewe, and our
General went in the pinnesse to seek for fresh water, and went with the
people of the Country, and they brought him to a fine sandy Bay, where there
was very good water; and there they took in three Baricoes and brought aboard,
and would spend no longer time there because it was toward night, and Amboyna
so near at hand: the seventh day we had sight of Amboyna, and of a ship which
played off and on the land, but would not come and speak with us: this
afternoon we were fair by Amboyna, and the wind very variable but it fell
calm, so that we could not get in: the eight day at ten a clock came up a
gale of wind, which brought us to Amboyna shore, where we costed with our
ship very nere, but could not have any ground to anchor in, for that all the
Islands have very deep water hard aboard the shore: we came to a Bay, where
we found sixty fadomes water, and the^re we ankered, and the Indiaus brought
us some fruits to sell: this afternoon we saw two Hollanders pinnisses under
the shore of Verranula, which came out from under the land to show themselves
to us, but did return back.

The people of Verranula be great enemies to the Portugals, and had sent to
Bantam to the Hollanders, desiring their aid to expel the Portugals out of
these Islands; which if they performed, they would become subject to them, and
sell none of their Cloves, to any other Nation but them. This I knew to be
true, for that the parties who were sent to Bantam, I have often spoken
withal: this day dyed of the Flixe our Master his mate Thomas Michell. The
ninth day we waterred but could not come to the speech of any of the country
people: this after noone dyed Thomas Eldred of the Flixe.

The tenth day we weyed anchor, and stood to the Easter end of Amboyna, and
came to an anchor in an hundred fadomes water, fair by the shore, fair by a
town called Mamalla. Before we came to an anchor, there came an Indian aboard
of us which spoke good Portugese, also there came a letter to our General from
the Captain of Amboyna, but it was directed to the General of the Hollenders,
or any other Captain of his fleet, supposing us to be Hollenders. (...) The
effect of his Letter was, to desire them to certify them of some news of
Portingale, and to send an answer by any of his people of his letter, who
should be very welcome, and should both safely come and go. The General
went this day a land, and delivered a present to one they called their King and
other great men, and did desire to know whether we might have trade or no:
they made answer, that they could not trade with us without license of the
Fort: this night dyed of the flixe Mark Tailor. The 11 day our General sent a
letter by John Rogers to the captain of the Fort, and diners of the principal
of the town of Mamalla accompanied him thither to have license to trade with
us, which they had granted them by the captain: the effect of our Generals
letter, was to certify him of the death of our Queen, and peace between
England and Spain, with other news of Christendom, and for better
confirmation of truth, he sent the captain of the sort, our kings Maiefly and
the princes pictures, with diverse of his Majesty's new coin, and in conclusion
as there was peace with our Princes and their subjects in Christendom he
desired that the like might be between us, for that our coming was to seek
trade with them and the Amboynians which he hoped he would not deny him. The
party which carried our Generals letter, was very kindly entertained by the
Captain and Soldiers, but that night permitted not him to come within the
fort: but lay in a good lodging without the walls, where he was viseted by the
principal of them. This evening 5 sails of Hollanders were entered into the
mouth of the harbor and turnning up for the fort. The 12. the forenamed
Hollanders came to an anchor within musket shot of the fort, the Portugals not
offering to shoot at them, this afternoon John Rogers returned with an
answer of the letter and their came in his company a Portugal Soldier, which
brought a warrant from the Captain to the Governor of Manillia, to trade with
us, and like wise to give John Rogers for his pains a Bahar of cloves, which
was presently delivered him, before the coming away of John Rogers the
Portugals with a flagge of truce went a board the dutch Admerall to know
wherefore they came thither; if in friend ship they should be welcome: if
otherways to give them a direct answer, the dutch General made answer that
his coming thither was to have that Castle from them, and willed them, to
deliver him the keys and they should be kindly dealt withal. Which if they
refused to do, he willed them to provide for themselves to defend it, for that
he was minded to have it before he departed, and that his staying was but for
the rest of his fleet, which as then were in sight. Therefore willed them by
fair means to yeald, the Portugals made answer the Castle was their Kings,
and of sufficient strength, and therefore willed them to depart thence. And as
he came as a messenger in way of truce they desired they might have free
liberty to depart, which was granted the with an answer in writing to the
Captain, willing him to surrender up this fort unto him in the prince of
Orringe his name, by 2. a clock that day, or look for the extremity of war,
what after passed betwixt the^ I know not. The answer of our Generals letter
from the Captain of the fort was, that he and all the Portugals in the place
were exceeding glad of the good news we brought them of that long and wished
for peace, between our nations and that there was not any thing in their
power; In that Island wherein they might pleasure us, but we should command it.
And as touching the cloves of Manillia, he had sent special order to the
Governor, to make sale of all they might make, at a reasonable price, and
likewise he had good store of cloves in his castle, which should be all ours
if playsed the General to come with what speed he could thither, whereby he
hoped to Come to some good composition with the Hollanders. This day dyed of
the flixe Daniell Ask. The 13. we wayed our ankers to come ride nearer the
shore of Manillia; but our General made the Portingall soldier believe he
wayed to go to the fort which was no part of his meaning, for that there was
not any hope of good to be done for us, the Hollanders being there before us,
but before we came to an anchor, we hard ordinance go of, so that we made
account the fight was begun between them, for that the Portingall soldier
told our General, they would never yield up their fort, but fight it out to
the last man, with many other braggs of their strength and resolution, which
afterward proved to be nothing but words. This day our General went a land
with some Merchandise to barter with them, but nothing was done that day but
put of tell the next day.

The fourteenth our Merchants went a shore with commodites, and the chief of
the town came and prised our wares: which they liked very well; But offered
very little for them, and for such cloves as they had, they would not sell
under 100. ryalls of 8. the bahar which made shoe they had no will to deal
with us: The Portingall soldier went a land, with our General with a letter
to his Captain and four yards of green cloth given him for a reward, but
when they came to talk with the people to know what news at the fort, some
said it was taken, others said they were in fight, but in these doubts their
came a messenger from the fort, which brought us certain news, it was yealded
to the Hollanders by composition, but upon what conditions I knew not. The
Portingall soldier hearing this certain news durst not return, for fear the
people would cut his throt by the way, but desired the General he might tarry
with him, which he granted; and after the Governor of the town, had hard that
the Hollanders had the castle, He then told our General he would sell us no
cloves without license of the Hollanders, so that all hope of trade in this
place was gone. The fifteenth day we took in water, and made particio^ of the
merchandise, to the Assention for she had taken none in at Bantam, but all was
put in to our ship by reason they were so exceeding weak, they were no table to
stoe them.

Here our General was almost in despair for the attayning of his layding, and
especially for Cloves, Nutmegs, and Mace; we hard they had good store at Banda,
but the Hollanders were there before us with great store of such commodities as
we had, which they had taken in a ship bound to the Molucos, laden with the
same commodities, yet there was hope of the Banda commodities which is Nuts and
Mace, by reason of the great quantie we hard say they had: likewise this day
the General called a counsel of the Captains, Masters, and Merchants, and
there told them, that their was no way left us to attain to our lading, but to
part company. And the Assention to go for the Isles of Banda to seek her
lading of Nutmegs and Mace, and that he was minded with the Dragon to go to
the Molucas, or else at leastwilse to do his best to get thither.

This speech of his was disliked of all: for that in both our Ships at that
present were not so many serviceable men as would sail the Assention, and
therefore we should hazard both the ships to part company having so weak a
company, and likewise to attempt the Voyage to the Mollucas, it was against
reason, for that he had both the wind and corrant against us, and to plye it to
wind ward with so weak a company, it would be lost labor. This was the
opinion of all, saving the General, who still had a good hope we should attain
it. At this time nothing was concluded, but left to be considered upon til the
next morning. The 16 day very early in the morning before day, M. Grove came to
the Generals bed side, telling him he cold take no rest all the night, for
thinking of the motion made by him, and our going to the Molucas, although it
was a thing never attempted by any, yet he saw no other way to put it in
practice; otherwise we must make account to return back to Bantam without
lading.

The General was glad to hear him of that mind, and at the coming aboard of
Captain Choulthurst, and his master, it was absolutely determined upon, to
part company, although greatly to the dislike of them both, for they thought
never to see us again: our weakness in both ships being so exceeding weak:
the seventeenth day we wayed, and plied to windeward all the day and all the
night to get to sea, the way we came in: the eighteenth day we got to sea
clear of Amboyna, and stood to sea till the afternoon, and then we parted
company with the Ascension, bearing up for Banda before the wind, not having
passing a day and a half sail. From the eighteen to the one and twenty, we
plied it and got very little to wind-wards; this day it fell calm, and we were
carried between two Islands, they be called Manipa, and Ambovzeylioe, with a
great current, and lost more in the calm in one night, then we had got in two
days: the General sent his brother to Manipa, to buy fresh vittels, but
every thing was so dear they came without, saving a couple of Goats the king
sent our General for a present.

The king of this I Will used our men very kindly, and feasted them, being very
glad to hear of the health of our Queen: he asked for Sir Francis Drake: this
king was at Tarnata, when Sir Fraucis Drake was there. The two and twentieth
day, we ankered under Manipa, on the South west side, in 50 fadomes: this day
dyed Thomas Harman of the Flixe: the three and twentieth, we weyed with very
much ado, for our anchor was foul of a rock, we broke one of the flooks
thereof, before we could way it. The 24. day most part calm, in which calmes
we were carried very near Manipa shore, all sails standing and upon a sudden
came a gust, which had like to have put us upon a ledge of rocks, which we had
no way to avoid, but all sails standing came to an anchor, we ankerd within a
quoits cast of the rocks, and so escaped that danger. The 25. day died Thomas
Beynes: the 27. day much rain, the wind westerly.

March, the first, the winds all Northerly: this day dyed of the Flixe Thomas
Wheeler: the second day the wind at the North west for the most part, this day
dyed of the flixe, Richard Hedges; and William Flud.

The third day we came fair by an Island, not specified in our cards, it lies
West South west, from the Southermost Island of Bachan some fourteen leagues:
this I Will of Bachan, we gave to name Hathowling, for that in 7. days sailing we
got not a mile: the fourth and fifth days we plied all we might, but could do
noe good, and those few sound men we had were tired with contiuall labor, we
at this present lacking both wood and water, came to an anchor under Halbowling
in sixty fadomes, this time the Master and boatsone were both very sick of
the flixe, insomuch that the General was in great doubt of their recovery: the
sixth day very much wind, at North west, our General went a land to seek for
fresh water but could find none, but digging a well in the sand we found
very good water, as for Wood, we needed not to seek for; that the Island
yielded nothing but wood to the seaside, that one was scarce able to pass,
the trees and brakes were so thick: here our portingal soldier was very
sick of the flixe, and the General was very careful of him, for that he
hoped by his means to have trade with the Portingales of Tydore for Cloves.
The 7.8, and 9 days, we spent in wooding and watering, which we got all
aboard: the ninth day the winds continuing northerly with much rain. This day
died of the flixe William Elmesmore, The 10. day we weyed, but had much ado
to get up a small anchor, our weakness was so great, that we could not
start it without tackles: this day dyed David Flud. The 11. day raynie weather,
the wind at north-west, we stood to the northeast-ward: this day dyed one of
our Merchants called Master George Ware of the flixe. The 12, 13, and 14 days,
we spent in turning to wind-ward, sometimes upon one tacke, sometimes of the
other. The 13. day dyed Edward Ambrose of the flixe. The 15. and 16. days, the
winds easterly, we made some 19. leagues north west.

The 17. day we were in 10. minutes of south latitude, the winds all
westerly, and we ran some 10. leagues north: this day we had sight of all
the Cloue-Islands, that is to say, Makian, Muter, Tidore and Tarnata, all of
them picked hills in form of a sugar-loafe. The 18 and 19 days, we were
fair under the land of Makian; Between that and G^olr, where the people of
Makian came aboard of us with fresh victuals, but sold very dear: they said
they had good store of Cloves in the Island: but they could not sell us any
without leave of the King of Tarn^. The 20 and 21. we spent plying to wind
wards with little wind, between Makian, and Muter. This Island of Muter is
uninhabited, but has great store of Cloves upon it, this Island stands
between Tidor and Makian, but nearer to Makian by one third of the way tha^ it
is to Tidore; the people of this Island have been slain most part in the wars
between Tarnata and Tydore, for sometime it was subject to one King, and
sometime to another. The 22. day, we got under the land of Tydore, and bearing
up between a small Island called Pulo Cauallie, and Tydor, there came rowing
two of their Galleys from Tarnata, making all the speed possible they could
toward us, the headmost of the two weuing with a white flagge unto us to strike
sail, and to tarry for them. At the same time came 7. Tydore Galleys, rowing
betwixt us and the shore, to chase the Turnatanes Galleys, we not knowing
their pretense, they in the Tarnate Galleys did all they might to overtake our
Ship weauing with two or three flags at once to tarry for them, which our
General seeing, caused the top-sayles to be struck, and lay by the lee to
know what was the matter; so that the foremost of these Galleys or Caracolles
recovered our ship, wherein was the King of Tarnata, and diverse of his
Noblemen, and three Dutch Merchants, when they had fast hold of the ship, the
Dutch Merchants showed themselves to us looking pale, and desired our General
for Gods sake, to rescue the Caracole that came after us, wherein were diverse
Dutchmen, which were like to fall into the enemies hands, where there was no
hope of mercy, but present death: whereupon our General caused our Gunner to
shoot at the Tydore Galleys, yet that would not cause them to leave their
chase, but within shot of our ordinance discharged all their shot at the
Tarnata Galley, and presently boarded them, and put all to the sword saving
three men, which saved their lives by swimming, and were taken up by our men in
our boat, there were no Dutchmen in her as they reported, but all Tarnatanes:
if we had not tarryed as we did, the King of Tarnata and those with him, had
fallen into his enemies hand, where no hope of mercle was to be expected: the
Dutch-marchants coming aboard, told our General they thought we had been
Hollenders, and bound for Tarnata, and that was the cause they had put
themselves in such danger, and likewise to know whether we were bound, our
General told them that he was going then for Tydore, to seek trade with the
Portugals, with whom we were in amity: they diswaded the General not to
attempt any such thing, for there was no other thing to be expected at their
hands but treachery; the General answered he knew them well enough, but
minded to work so warily with them, that he doubted not of any harm they
could do him.

The Dutchmen seeing our General minded to go to the Portugall-towne of
Tydore, desired him that he would not let the king of Tarnata and them fall
into their enemies hand: whom so lately he had delivered them from, and as for
Clowes there was good store to be had at Tarnata, and Makean, and for their
parts they would not be our hindrance, for that they had nether wares nor
money left. So the General caused them to entreat the king to come into the
ship, who came in trembling: which the General seeing thought he was a cold,
and caused his man to fetch him a black damask gown, laid with gold lace,
and lyned with unshorn Velvet, which the king put upon his back, but never
had the manners to surrender it again, but kept it as his own: the king being
in the Generals Cabin desired him to go with him to Tarnata, where he minded
to have a factorie, but himself and his ship would make no stay there, but
go to Tydore, to see what usage he should find of the Portugals.

The king did what he could to persuade him to the contrary but could not
prevail. Hear the General delivered a Letter from the KINGS MAJESTY of
ENGLAND, with a fair standing Cup, and a cover double gilt, with diverse of
the choicest Pintadoes, which he kindly accepted of, and presently had the
Letter red, and enterpered unto him wherewith he made show to be greatly
contented.

We trimmed our Sails by a wind, and plied to wind ward for Tarnata: the
Kings Carracole not daring to put from the ship. About four of the clock in
the afternoon, came the King of Tarnatas eldest son aboard in a light
Frigate which rowed well: he greatly doubted the welfare of his father, and
the king stood in doubt of his son. At his coming to his father aboard our
ship in the Generals cabin, he kissed his fathers right foot, and he kissed his
head the General had given warning to all his company that they should tell no
news of the Hollands fleet, but before night it was told the King and all the
rest, but by whom could never be learned. From the twenty two, to the twenty
four, the King and all his crewe tarried a board of us. the four and twentieth
day, we came by the chief town of Tarnata, and saluted them with seven
pieces of ordinance, the same after noone we came to an anchor in the rode,
which is in the Southest part of the Island in fourteen fadomes sandy grownd:
the rode is from the town two leagues and a half. The twenty five day the
king sent for his plate and vittells from the town, and feasted the General
in his own cabin, there sat none of his nobles with him at table, none sat but
his son and the General: the rest sat upon the floor of the Cabin cross
legged, like tailors: after dinner the General desired him that he would take
some order, he might have a house to establish a factorie, for that he was
minded to go to the Portugals to see what he could do with them: the King
persuaded him earnestly not to meddle with them, for he was sure there was
nothing but villainy and treachery with them: The General said it was a folly
to dissuade him from it, and therefore prayed him that he might have a house
according to his promise. The King seeing in what earnestnes the General did
speak unto him, said he would presently depart to the town, and cause a house
to be provided in a readiness for his Merchants. The twenty six before day our
General was in a redines with such Merchants and Marchandizes as he minded to
leave at Tarnata, went to the town, and an hour before day came thirther, the
King hearing a noise of trumpets knew that our General was come, and sent a
small Prawe to our pinnes to will our General to come unto him; he was a board
the admiral of the Caracoles, he came into our pinnes and sat some half an
hour there taking Tabacko, and then came the Sabendor, with light and brought
the General to his house, and the King to his Caracole. Our General presently
after his landing caused his men to land all our goods, and carry the^ to the
house, which was performed before day light: then the Dutch Merchants enuited
the General and Master Brown to dine with them, with whom they presently
went to the Dutch-house, where they showed them, what every sort of commodities
were worth in that place, with proffers of any kindness they could do him. As
for the prices of our wares the General had made inquiry of the Gusorates
which came aboard, which did agree with the Dutchmen, in rating of every sort
of them, whereby he knew that they did not dissemble.

Before it was dinner time, there came a Messenger from the King, to will the
Dutch Merchants to come and speak with him; and the General came home to our
house, where he had not stayed half an hour, but one of the Dutch Merchants
came for him to come speak with the King; So the General taking Master
Brown, and John Addeyes; one that had the language, and my self with him,
went presently with them that were present, where we found the King in a large
room sitting in a chair, and all his chief Counsellars about him sitting upon
mattes on the ground; before him the Dutch-Marchants sitting among them; when
the General came, the King willed him to sit down, after he was set, the
King caused the Letter brought by our General from the kings Majesty of
England to be openly read; which being done, the King acknowledged himself
beholding unto his Majesty, for so kind a Letter and a present, which he
would endeavor to requite. And for confermation thereof, he gave his subjects
free leave to trade with us for cloves, and likewise as one wishing us all the
good he could, he desired our General for his own good, that he would not
have any thing to do with his enemies, (the King of Tidore and the
Portugalles,) with whom he should find nothing but treason and treachery.

The General by his interpretor gave him great thanks for his kindness, in
giving so free liberty to trade with his people, and likewise for his good
counsel to shun the treachery of the Portugalls, but for his part he doubted
no treachery at all should harm him, for that he did mind to stand upon such a
guard as all the strength they had should not offend him, and therefore desired
his highness to pardon him he did not follow his counsel, for that he
purposed withal speed to go thither and to offer them peaceable trades,
which if they refused, he had the thing he desired, then had he just cause to
be at wars with them, and if they would not accept of peaceable trade, he
minded to join with the Hollanders against them, when GOD should send them
thither.

This spech of the General, contented the King and all there present so that
they had no more to say, but entreat him, that he did not furnish them with any
of our great ordinance, and to take great care of their treachery: and so the
counsel broke up, The General taking his leave of the King and all his
nobles, for presently after dinner, he minded to depart abord: also the King
promised, if the Portingales would not trade with us, he would write his letter
to the governor of Makeau to deal with us, for all the cloves in that I Will.
And, so the General and Master Brown went to the Duch house to dinner: which
being done he came home with the Duch merchants in his company. And so, taking
leave of them and of us, departed abord.

The 27. day in the morning came abord 2. men, sent by the King of Tarnat, with
aletter to the governor of Makeau, to trade with us. They were sent by the King
to go along with us thither, for our better usage. So about 8. a cloak in the
morning we weighed, and plied it all day for the road of Tidore: and about
sun setting we came to an anchor, in 32. fadomes sandy ground, on the
western side of the I Will fair of, by the shore. Coming to an anchor there came
a Caricole with two swift Ca^oas to take vewe of our ship. Our General
Commanded one to weaffe them with a white flag: and presently, one of the small
Prawes came fair by us, demanding whence we were. Our General caused our
Portingall soldiar, to will them to come aboard, for we were English men and
their friends. And so there came aboard us three Portingales, which entered in
to the gallery, and went into the Generals cabin: where the General told
them, his coming thither, was to seek trade with them as friends, for that
the wars between our nations was done, and a peace concluded, The Queen of
England being dead, and the King of Scots, King of England. They made answer,
that they knew that the Queen was dead, by way of the Phillipines, and to
hear of the long desired peace they were very glad, and for trade with us they
said they could say nothing, till that they had made the Captain acquainted
therewith: and because it was night, they were desirous to be gone, promising
the next day morning to return. So the General let them depart, and our
Portingall soldier with them, with a letter to the Captain of the fort,
wherein he did certify him of the news of Christiandome, and the cause of our
coming thither, and so they departed.

The 28. day about 6 a clock, we weighed, having very little wind, and at 8. a
clock came a Carticole, and 2. Prawes from the Portingalls town, and in them
five Portingalls, and our above named soldier: the General stood in the wast,
and entertained them: our soldier telling the General, the principal of them
was called Thome Detoris Captain of a Galeon, and the rest married men of the
town. Captain Detoris delivered our General a letter from the captain of
the Fort: the effect was, that he was welcome with all his company, to him and
all the rest of the Portingalls inhabiting in that place, and whereas the King
of Tarnata and the Hollanders their enemies, had given bad reports of them,
saying there was nothing but villainy and treason to be had at their hands, he
hoped our General did conceive better of them, and that their reports were of
malice and not of truth, and no credit to be given to the report of their
enemies. But experience should prove them liars, and themselves no such bad
minded people: and therefore he willed the General to have no doubt of good
usage at their hands, and for trade which he desired with them, he would
resolve him thereof the next day: for as yet they had not called a council
concerning that matter, without which council, he could not do it, but willed
him to have no doubt thereof. So the general took them down to his Cabin to
breakfast, and the Carricole and the botes towed the ship to the townwards,
being very little wind. About eleventh a clock we came to an anchor, a little
to the northwards of the Fort, and saluted the fort and town, with 7 pieces of
Ordinance: and from the fort answered with 3. pieces, and presently upon the
same, in a boat came the Captain of the fort, called Petro Alleneris Debbroo,
and the Captain of the other Galeon called Ferdinando Perrera de Sandy: these
Galeons that these Captains did belong to, did ride within a league of rocks
very near the shore, with their broad sides to seaward, with Ordinance placed
therein to shoot at their enemies, which come rowing by the^ sundry times. The
General brought the Captain of the Fort, and the other Captain down with
the rest to breakfast, the Captain of the Fort making great have to be gone.
After many co^plements passed between our General and them, they took their
leave and departed, promising the next day to come look upon our commodities,
and to agree upon price for them. About 3. a clock our General sent his
brother a shore with presents to the 3. Captains, which they very kindly
accepted: The Captain of the Fort returning the General a fat beef.

The 29. day came Captain Torris and other Portingalls aboard, and the
General caused our Merchants to bring a note of all such commodities as were
in our ship, into his Cabin: where he showed every sort unto them, setting a
price upon them. Captain Torris and the rest of the Portingalls, said they
were too dear at such rates, saying and ptotesting they sold better cheap
such like commodities one to the other, and therefore desired the General to
be more reasonable, and then he should have all the Cloves in the Island. The
General withdrew himself apart, and in writing set down his lowest prices,
how he would sell, willing them to go a land and consider of it, and return
with an answer (if they could) that night: so they took their leave and went a
shore.

The 30. day Captain Torris came aboard, and would have abatement of each sort
of commodities: which the General would not yield unto, telling him, if he
would not give such prices, he would be gone for Makeau: and upon the same
presented the two Tarnataes which the King sent to him for the same purpose. So
he seeing nothing would be abated of that price, agreed with the General, and
appointed his own dwelling house for our factory, with many kind proffers,
which he faithfully performed.

The 31. being Easter day, Captain Torris with diverse of the principal men of
the town, dined aboard with our General.

April the 1. in the morning the General sent his brother and M. Woodnoth
with merchandise a land to Captain Torris house, and within an hour after, the
General went a land himself, where he was visited by the king, the Captain of
the fort, and all the principal men of the town, who entertained him most
kindly. They stayed some small time with him, and departed all of them. They
being gone, the General began to set his Merchants a work, to buy Cloves of
the Portingalls: and having set them in a ready way how to deal with them, he
went with Captain Torris to dinner, where there was no lack of good cheer.
After dinner come the high priest, to welcome our General, willing him to have
no doubt of any bad dealing in that place: upon his soul he would undertake,
that there were not any in the town that wished him or any of his company any
harm: with many other complements, and so departed. Captain Torris made offer
to the General, to be his chief Factor, and to help his brother and M.
Woodnoth in their business, each having more to do then they could well turn
them to: and to say the truth, he was so careful in their business, as if it
had bin his own. This day died of the flixe, M. Mitten our cook, and of the
flixe Thomas Halls. The Tydoryans came not aboard to sell us any thing: the
General doubted it was long of the Portingals, who had put them in some
needless fear.

The 6. day the General sent his brother to the king of Tydore with a present,
and to diverse of his principal men, desiring his highness, he would give his
subjects leave to repair aboard with cloves, and fresh victuals, and that
there was no cause of fear why they should abstain from so doing. The King
said, they should have leave to bring us refreshing a board: But for the cloves
his people had, should be brought to the English-house, otherwise the quantity
we should buy, would not be known, whereby the King of Portingall might loose
his custom, and presently upon the same, the King made a Proclamation,
willing all his people to repair to the English factory, with such Cloves as
they had. The Captain of the Fort, proclaiming the like in his town, there
came a flying report, the Hollanders were in sight, and upon the same the King
sent out a Caricole to sea, but saw no shipping.

The 9. day the General sent his brother a shore again unto the King, with a
present to desire his highness to give his subjects leave to repair aboard
with their Cloves, for that the Portingalls would not permit them to repair to
his house, but would be served themselves with the best wares, and let his
people have but their leauings. Whereupon the King promised they should come
aboard: which they afterward did.

The 12. day came news the Hollanders were in sight, and out went the bloody
colors, at the Fort. The 14, day being Sunday Captain Torris the Kings
factor, and diverse other of the principal of the Portingals, dined with the
General. This day the Captain of the Fort, sent our General word, that the
Hollanders were off, and on Bachan, willing the General to cause his factors
to get in his debts that were owing before their coming.

The 15. day the General sent his brother a shore, to gather in such debts as
were owing, and likewise to buy Cloves, if any came to the house to be sold:
which he performed, buying some small quantity, for that most in the Island were
in our hands, without it were some 80. Bahars which the Kings Factor had, which
he could not sell, because they did belong unto the Merchants of Malaea. The
captain of the fort gave commandment to al men, to make present payment,
which they honestly performed. The General sent to Captain Torris, to know
the cause: he sent him word, we had bought all they had, without it were,
those which were in the factors hands, which could not be sold.

The 19. day we prepared for our departure from hence, to go to Makeau. The 20.
day came a Portingall a board with a letter to our General, from the Captain
of the fort, the effect thereof I could not learn. The King of Tarnatas two
men, which all this time of our being in this place had tarried aboard, were
very earnest with the General for their departure to the I Will of Makeau, where
they made no doubt but to lade our ship with cloves. They began to be merry to
see us in such readiness to be gone, for they lived in no small fear of some
treason, to be attempted against us by the Portingals and Tydorians, in so much
that all the time of our being here, they were the best watchmen in our ship.
The General sent his brother to the King, desiring his highness, he would
write his letter to the Governor of Taffasoa, to sell him such cloves as they
had there, which he presently did. This town of Taffasoa is upon Makeau and
holds for the King of Tydore. all the rest of the Island is the Kings of Tarnata.

The 21. day being Sunday, came the same Portingall that brought our General
the letter the day before, with commendations from his Captain to the
General, and to certify him the Hollanders ships were in sight. The
Portingall taking his leave, about eleven a clock we weighed with a small
favorable gale of wind, to go for Makeau. As we passed by the Fort, we
saluted the^ with 5. pieces, they answering us with 3. Likewise coming thwart
the Kings town, we gave them 5. pieces, and were answered with 6. from the
Galcons. At this present we had sight of the Hollanders. Capten Torris our
Generals great friend, coming a board presented him with hens, which be both
scarce and dear, and so took his leave: we keeping on our course with little
wind, for Makeau, passing bettwene Mottera and Poulacaualya, the Holla^ders
seeing us come rome upon them, were in good hope we had been a Portingall that
for fear was flying away. Night being at hand, they spread themselves, that we
could not pass them, but one or other must needs see us. About midnight, we
came amongst the^, sounding our trompetes, whereby they did know we were not
Portingales. The Admiral sent his shiper in his pinnasse aboard, to know what
news: which was certified them at full. He departing, they saluted us with 3.
pieces of ordinance: we answred them with the like. They told our General,
that they had taken Amboyna castle, and left a garrison therein.

The 22. day we came to an anchor about seven a clock at night, a little to
the eastwards of the chief town of Makeau: the town is called Mofficia, in
which town the Viceroy for the King of Tarrata is resident, this after noone,
came a carry cole aboard before we came to an anchor, and told our General, they
would go about the I Will, and to all the towns, to give them warning to repair
to our ship with their cloves before night. They had compassed the Island, and
came aboard us again.

The 23. day, the General sent his brother with the two Tarnataes, and the
Kings letters, and a present to the Governor. The present he received, and
caused the letter to be publicly read: but for the cloves of that Island, he
said they were not ripe, but those few that were to be had, the General
should have them the next day. This day died of the flixe, our Baker Griffith
Powell.

The 24. day the General went a shore himself, to the Governor, to know why
the people came not with cloves according to promise. He made answer, he
thought there were not any ripe in the Island, but he had sent to all the
towns, to warn them to bring in cloves: which they would not fail on the
morrow. The General seeing their delays, began to suspect, the King of
Tarnataes letter was to command them to sell us none: therefore, if they came
not the next day, he would go to Taffasoa. Much quarrel and war is between
those of this place, and they of the Island: and if there be any taken of
either part, the most favor they show them, is to cut off their heads.

The 25. day came most of the chief men of the Island aboard to our General,
and told him they had small store of ripe cloves in the Island, which they were
willing he should have. But they were sent for, by the King of Tarnata, to
repair with their forces, to assist him in his wars, against the King of
Tydore, and the Portingalls: and therefore desired him not to be offended with
them, for that that they could not sell him cloves till the wars were done.
This day they of Taffasoa had taken ten men of this town, and cut off their
heads.

The 26. we weighed, with very little wind, and plied it for Taffasoa, which
stands on the west-northwest part of the Island.

The 27. day the General sent his brother in his pinnasse to the town of
Taffasoa with the king of Tydores letter, which he delivered. The governor
having read it, made answer, that all the cloves they could make, the General
should have: for that the King had sent him word in an other letter, which he
received the day before, that he should cause all in the town to be sold him.
The Portingalls have a small Blockhouse with 3. pieces of Ordinance in this
town, wherein were five Portingalls: they had some cloves which they promised
the General should have. The pinnasse returned, and brought one of the
Portingalls aboard, the ship lying becalmed all the time of their absence.

The 28. day, about 10. a clock in the morning, we came to an anchor, right
before the town of Taffasoa in 70. fadome water, hard by the shore.

The 29. day the General went a land to the Governor, who offered himself, and
town, to be at his disposition saying his King commanded him so to do. The
General demanded, whether the people would bring their cloves aboard: he made
answer, they had small store of boats, and could not therefore so conveniently
come aboard. So the General told him, he would set up a tent upon the strand,
right against the ship: if he would cause his people to bring them thither, he
liked well thereof and came down with the General to choose out a convenient
place, and so took his leave, promising, so soon as the General sent aboard
to will them to make provision to set up a tent: which in two hours after was
done.

The 30. day was an alarm in the town, their enemies having taken a man
without the walls, and cut off his head. The King of Tydore has soldiers
there, which keep good watch and ward, the town standing upon a point of a
land, close by the sea, and is compassed with a wall. The King of Tarnata has
twice attempted with all his force to take it, but could do no good. They live
in such fear, they dare not at any time go a flight-shot out off their walls,
without a guard of soldiers. They have often truce, but they break it upon
slight occasions. A little before night the Governor came to our General, and
told him, there were no more cloves to be had, and therefore he presently
caused the tent to be pulled down, and sent all things aboard.

The second day in the morning our General received a letter from the Captain
of the fort, wherein he certified him, of the burning of the two Galeons by the
Hollanders, and entreated him to make speed thither to see the fight, which he
daily expected and to bring those five Portingalls with him, which were at
Taffasoa: willing the General, that he should come to an anchor before the
Kings town, where he should have all the cloves they had.

The 3. day in the after noone, we came before the Kings town, where we found
all the Hollanders riding, and let fall an anchor amongst them, in a 100.
fadomes, fair by the shore. The King of Tarnata was likewise there, with all
his Carricoles. After the mooring of our ship, the General sent M. Grave our
Master to the Dutch admiral, who found but cold intertainement: the Dutch
affirming, we had assisted the Portingalls in the last fight, whereby they had
received great hurt, and that they were told so by a Gossorat. The Master
denied it, and said, the Gossorat lied like a dog: saying, if the General
had done so, he would not deny it, for any fear of them, but justify it to
their faces, either here or any where else. These hot speeches being
ouerpassed, they grew into milder terms, and then they began to tell our
Master the manner of their fight with the Galeons, and the burning of them,
with the loss of some of their men in the same fight: and they minded the next
day to fall down to the Fort, and lay battery to it: which they had done
before, if the King of Tarnata had not withhold them, in persuading them to
tarry for more help, which he expected from the other Islands. So the Master
having learned what news he could, came aboard, and told the General, what
speeches had passed. An hour after the Masters coming aboard, there came a
praw from the Kings town, with a letter to our General from Captain Torris,
wherein there was nothing but commendations, and that he would come aboard,
when it was dark, and see him. The General willed him to come, either night or
day, he should be welcome. This evening the King of Tarnata rowed over for
Battachina, with all his Carricoles: and Captain Torris came aboard to see our
General, tarrying some two hours, telling the General, they desired to fight
with the Hollanders, not doubting of victory: and for such cloves as they had,
they should be brought to the Kings town, and so conveyed aboard us. So
growing very late, he took his leave and depatted ashore.

The 5. day, the Hollanders expected the coming of the King of Tarnata but he
came not.

The 6. day, our General sent sent his brother and M. Woodnoth to the King of
Tydore, to know if he would sell them any cloves. He made answer, at that time
all his people were busy in fortifiyng the town, so that he could not spare
them from their work, but bid the General assure himself of all the cloves
that he and the Portingals had. This night came one of our men in a small
Carrycole, from Tarnata, and told our General, that they were hardly used by
the King of Tarnata, in not suffering them to buy and sell with his people,
according to promise, and had taken their weight from them, giving commande^
^ent that no man should sell them any cloves. Likewise he said, that they could
get no victuals for their money, because of the wars, and that all our men
were very sick, save M. Brown. The king by his Carricole, sent the Hollanders
word, he would be with them in the morning.

The 7. day in the morning came the King of Tarnata, with all his forces, and
he himself went aboard the Hollands admiral, where most part of the forenoone
was spent in counsel, and about one of the clock the ships weighed, and came
under their foretopsailes fair by the Fort, and let fly all their Ordinance,
the Fort shooting now and then a piece at them. They came to an anchor a little
to the Northwardes of the Fort, where they spent the most part of that
afternoon in shooting at it, but harmed them not at all. The Portingalls could
not harm the ships as they rid, having but one piece laid out that way. In
the hottest of this battery, the King of Tarnata and the Hollanders landed some
of their forces a little to the northward of the town: not finding any
resistance they entrenched themselves where they landed in the sand, and there
continued all the night without molestation. After the Hollanders had done
their battery, Captain Torris came aboard, to see our General, where he was
very merry and pleasant, saying as always he had, that they nothing doubted of
a happy victory, and for such Ordinance as had bin shot at them, it had done
them no harm at all, only he was sorry that the Ordinance did hinder them for
bringing of cloves to him. But he desired the General to have a little
patience, and he should not want cloves to lade his ship: which were nothing
out words, for it was well known to the General he had but 80. bahars in
the town, which the factor had.

The 8. day, very early in the morning, the ships began to batter the fort.
which continued the most part of the morning, in which time those men of the
Hollanders, which lodged a land, had brought themselves within Saker shot of
the Fort, and there raised a mount, whereon they placed a great piece of
Ordinance, and began their battery. The Portingals now and and then shooting a
piece to no purpose.

The 9. day, before it was light, the ships began their battery, and they
likewise from the mount, and upon a sudden the Dutch, and the Tarnataes
sallied out off their trenches, with scaling ladders, and had entered upon the
walls, before the Portingalls in the Fort were aware, and had placed their
colors upon their ramparts, which the Portingalls seeing, came with a charge
upon them, with shot and fire-workes, throwing at them which were so mounted,
that they cast down their weapons, and leaped down far faster then they came
up, leaving their colors and their furniture behind them: the Portingalls
still continuing throwing of fire works amongst them, whereby diuets were hurt
and scalded. At such time as the Hollanders gave the scalado, 30. of the
choicest Portingals with great number of the Tydorians were going in the woods
to give an assault upon the backs of them which were lodged, where the piece
of Ordinance was mounted: in which time of their absence, the Hollanders entered
upon their walls. If these men had bin in the fort it had gone far worse with
the Hollanders. The Portingalls that were abroad, hearing the alarm at the
fort, came running back again, and some that ran fastest, came to the walls,
at such time as they in the Fort had put them to the retreat, where they went
to handy blows with them. Captain Torris, which had the leading of the 30.
men, was shot with a musket and slain. By this time the most of the 30.
Portingalls were gotten, some within and some under the walls: and the
Hollanders and Tarnatans throwing away their weapons, began to take their
heels to run into the sea. At this very iustant, when the Portingalls and
the Tydorians had the victory in their hands, and very ready to charge upon
their flying enemies, the Fort took fire, and blewe up even with the ground,
so that all the Portingalls which were under the walls of the sort were there
buried, and the most part within the Fort were blown up into the air: The
Captain being newly gone out to place two soldiers at a little posterne door,
gave them charge to kill any Portingalls which should go out that way, in which
time of his absence, the Fort was blown up, whereby his life was saved but
how, or by what means it took fire it could not be known. The Hollanders and
Tarnatans seeing the fort blown up, began to gather up their scattered
weapons, and made a stand, not daring to enter the rumes of the Fort, till the
Portingalls had left it: which was ha^fe an hour after. In which time the
Portingall and Tydoryan slaves had sacked the town, setting fire on the
factory, where the cloves were, which they could not carry with them, leaving
nothing of any worth behind them. When the King of Tarnata saw the victory on
his side, he with all the Carricoles, came rowing toward the Kings town, in
triumph: but durst not come very near, for that the King of Tydore did shoot
at them. And so rowing by our ship, singing and making great mirth, returned to
the Fort, where was no resistance, but so long as the Portingalls had it, he
durst not come within a mile, When the Tarnataes had pillaged the town, they
set all the houses a fire which were quickly burnt even with the ground, being
all made of canes. After this victory, the King of Tidore sent his son and a
Nobleman, to our General, desiring him to be a means of peace between the
Holladers and him, for now he had what he desired, which was victory over the
Portingales. The General sent him word, he would do his best, as well for him,
as for the Portingalls, which by fortune of war were fallen into their
enemies hands. So presently the General caused the Pinnasse to be manned, and
he and the Master went aboard the Dutch Admiral. When they came thither, they
asked for the Admiral, who was a shore: but they sent for him. At his coming,
he bad our General welcome, after many speeches passed of their fight, and
commendations undeserved given of themselves, they exclaimed upon the Tarnataes
for cowards and attributed all the glory to themselves, saying they durst not
stand by them in the fight, but ran away. After a great deal of vain glorious
commendations of themselves, the General was desirous to see what prisoners
they had taken of the Portingalls: one was brought forth being one of Captain
Pereros soldiers. The General bad him declare a truth in a matter he would
ask him: he made answer if he could he would, then he asked him what great
ordinance, powder, shot and guns, they had from him to assist the^? He
answered, he knew not of any, so turning to the Dutch admiral, he maruailed he
should give credit to such untruths reported by a slave. He answered again,
such things were told, but he did not believe them to be true. So the General
asked, what he meant to do with the Portingales his prisoners? He said he would
hang them. The General entreated him to show them mercy: considering they did
nothing but what all good subjects are bound to do, in defense of their King
and Country: and therefore desired not to take their lives, nor deliver them to
the King of Tarnata. He promised, at his entreaty, not any one of them should
die, nor be delivered to the King of Tarnata, but that he would ship them away
to Manallia. The General gave him thanks, taking leave of them, and came
rowing along the shore, by the kings town, where he took in the Captain of
the Fort, and brought him along with him aboard, where he both supped and
lodged, and from him had the truth, of all the fight, far differing from
that which the Hollanders reported. The General told him his going to the
Dutch Admiral was, principally to entreat him, to show mercy unto the
Portingales: which he promised to perform. The Captain gave him great thanks
for the care he had of them, saying, now all their hope rested upon him: and
upon the same, he presented the General with a small Ruby set in a ring,
praying him to wear it for his sake: which the General would not take, saying,
what he could do for them, was in Christian charity, and not for reward.

The 10 day, in the morning, our General went aboard the Hollands Admiral, to
see if he could bring the King of Tarnata and the King of Tydore, and the
Hollanders to a peace. The Dutch admiral made answer, the King of Tarnata
would be very hardly drawn to any peace with the King of Tydore, but he for
his part would be willing thereunto: and if it pleased the King of Tydore, to
repair aboard his ship, he should safely come and go, to have conference with
him. The General thought, he could persuade him to come aboard his own
ship, so that he would leave two duch Captains a shore in pledge for him.
But to come aboard his ship, he was sure he would not. So the Dutch Admiral
sent two of his chief Merchants with the General, to be left as pledges, if
the King would come aboard: whereupon our General went to the king of Tydore,
and told him what he had done in his behalf, persuading him to come aboard our
ship, which he was loath to yield to. The General seeing him fearful, told
him, there was no such cause, for that he had brought two Dutch Captains, to
remain as pledges, and that he would leave his brother with them. Then the
King was willing, and caused his own boat to be fitted, and embarked himself.
Being ready to put off, came the Kings sister, and his son weeping as if he had
gone to death, detayned him in this manner half an hour. In the end he put
off, but when he was half way between the shore and the ship, he saw a
Carricole rowing off from the Fort: which he stood in fear of and would
proceed no further, but returned back, promising the next day to come aboard,
if we would ride with our ship nearer his town.

The 11. day, in the morning we weighed, and anchored again before the Kings
town. The General with his pledges going a shore, there was an alarm in the
town, which was suddenly done: the cause was, that a great number of the
Tarnataes had consorted to go rob some outhouses in the Kings town, and
finding nothing therein set them a fire. The Tydorians gave a sudden assault
upon them, and had the cutting off, of a dozen of their heads: all the rest
hardly escaped by running away. The heads they presented to the King, our
General standing by him, telling him the cause. The King seemed to be offended
with the Hollanders, which had promised that no hostility of war, should be
offered in this time of parlye. The Hollands Captains which were in our
Pinnasse seeing the heads, were in no small fear of their own. After the
rumor was appeased, the King embarked himself with our General, and the
Captain of the Fort. The Dutch Merchants, and Captain Middleton rowed a shore
for Pledges, but the King and our General came aboard our ship, where they
stayed the coming of the Dutch Admiral: who coming aboard was brought down
to the King, in the Generals cabin, and they saluted one the other very
friendly. After some little pause, the King said, whereas at your first coming
hither you sent me word, your coming was not to harm me, nor any of my
subjects, but to expel the Portingalls your enemies out of the land, and make
the place open for trade for all nations, and therefore you desired I should not
take with them against you: which I performed till such time I did see my
mortal enemy, the King of Tarnata join with you, so that I was enforced to
arm my self against him, who I know desires nothing so much as the
overthrow and subuertion of my estate, and therefore you have just cause not
to blame me for arming my self and people, against the invasion of my mottall
enemy. And now seeing you have the upper hand of your enemies the Portingalles,
it rests in your power to dispose of them as you shall think good. Now you
have your desire of them, I would know whether you will have peace, or join
with the King of Tarnata against me. The Dutch Admiral answered, his coming
was only to expel the Portingals: which he thanked God, was now in his power.
And for peace, he said it was the thing he desired with all princes in those
parts, and that he would do what in him did lie to make an agreement, between
the King of Tarnata and him. The King answered, that he desired a good peace,
but it could hardly be: for that any slight occasion, was daily cause of breach
between the^. Therefore he desired the Holla^ders, they would take part with
neither, and he doubted not, he should have as good as he brought. The Admiral
answered, he would do what he could, to make an agreement: which if he could
not bring to pass, he promised the King (taking our General to witness) that
he would take part with neither of the^. Which speeches greatly contented the
King, who excusing himself of not being well, took leave and went a shore.
After the King was gone, came the Captain of the Fort, looking very heavily,
as he had just cause: which the Dutch Admiral seeing, took him by the hand,
bad him be of good cheer, telling him that it was the chance of war, and that
the fury being now gone, he minded to deal friendly with him and all the
Portingals: Willing him to repair aboard, where he should be welcome, and
safely go and come. The Captain gave him thanks, for his kindenes. So dinner
being ready, and the pledges come from the shore, they dined all with our
General, and departed every man to his home. The 12. day being sunday, the
Portingal captain with 6. of the principal of the^, came aboard to dine with
our General, entreating him to go with the^ to the Dutch admiral, and be a
means to hasten their departure, which he did, and at his entreaty they were
sent away in three Pinnasses and a frigate, to Manillia, for which they gave the
General great thanks.

The 12. day, the General sent his Pinnasse to Tarnata, with provision of
victuals to our men which were there: and they returned the next day, and
brought our General word of the death of his servant John Abell, for whom he
was very sorry.

This 13. day our General and the Master went to the King of Tornata, to know
whether he would let him leave a factory in his Ila^d of Tarnata? He answered,
he should, but willed him to return the next day, for that he would call a
counsel concerning the matter, and then would give them an answer. From thence
the General went aboard the Dutch Admiral, and there told him, how the king
of Tarnata had promised he should have a factory there: yet nevertheless, if
he would buy such wares as we had left, and make payment at Bantam, he should
have them. Who answered, he thought the King of Tarnata would not forget
himself so much, as to grant us a Factory, considering he had written to his
excellency, and likewise promised him, that they would trade with no nation but
with them. And as touching our commodityes, he would not deal withal, for
that they had two ships which were sent, one to Bengalla, and the other to
Cambia, to buy such commodities, which they daily expected. Our General said,
he had no reason to cross him, for leaving a factory there, for that Sir
Francis Drake had trade in Tarnata, before the names of the Hollanders were
known in those parts of the world. So, for that time they parted, either part
to take their best advantage for their adventures. The 14 day, the General
went again to the King, to know his answer concerning his factory. he found
him aboard a Carticole and one of the Dutch Captains in his company. The
General told him, his coming was according to his appointment. The king made
present answer, he could grant him no factory, for that he had made promise by
writing, and word to the Hollanders, that no nation should have trade with him
or his people, but only they. The General demanded, why he had not told him
so, when he saved him from the Tydorians? and then he could have told what to
have done. He said, both he and his subjects were willing we should tarry
there, But the Hollanders did still urge his promise. The General seeing he
could not leave a factory, desired him to send such order to Tarnata, that he
might have leave to carry those small quantity of cloves as his factors had
bought and paid for, aboard, and he would trouble neither him nor the
Hollanders. The king answered, that within seven days he would be there
himself, desiring the General, to ride still. He made answer, he lived at too
great charges to lie still, and do nothing, and therefore could stay no
longer, but would be gone the next morning: and so departed from him.

The 19. day, the General went a land, and took his leave of the King of
Tydore, and al his Noble men and all the Portingals, they being all sorry for
his departure.

The 20. day, we weighed in the morning, for Tarnata and at 5. a clock in the
evening, came to an anchor again on the north-east side of Tydore. This day
died of the flixe Thomas Richmond.

The 21. day, at 4. of the Clock in the morning we weighed, and about 10. a
clock, came to an anchor in Tarnata rode in 16. Fadomes, fair by one of the
Dutch ships, which two days before us came from Tydore. this ship was to take
in her lading of Cloves here. This after noone, the General sent his Pinasse,
to know, if the King had sent word to the Sabendor to see the delivery of such
cloves, as was there of ours. The pinnasse brought word, M. Brown was very
sick, and all the company which were with him. This after noone came aboard to
our General, the Kings uncle of Tarnata called Cichell Gegogoe. To this man
our general told, how unkindly he had been used by the King and the
Hollanders, and how the King would neither give him leave to buy cloves,
whiles he tarried here, nor permit him to leave a factory there, contrary to
the promise he made him, when he saved both him and the Hollands factors, from
enemies hands: which good turn both the one and the other have quite
forgotten: likewise he said he thought the king had been as our Kings in
Christiandome are, which never will promise any thing, but they will perform
it. Chichell Gegogoe hearing this, said, he would that night go to the King,
and then would tell him how much he did dishonor himself, to be so ouerruled
by the Hollanders, and therefore willed the General not to have doubt of
leaving a factory, and likewise to trade so long, as they tarried here in the
despite of the Hollanders. And upon the same, seeming to be angry, he
departed, promising the next day to return again. This man could speak
Portugais, whereby the General let him understand his mind to the full. He knew
Sir Francis Drake, when he was at Tarnata, and had been aboard his ship with
him.

The 22. day, the General sent his brother again to the town, to know if the
Sabendor were come from the King with order to deliver the cloves. Captain
Middleton found him now come to town, and brought him to our General, who
told him, he had order to deliver the cloves, and likewise that he should have
free liberty to buy and sell as well as the Hollanders: and that the King
desired the General not to depart til he came, which should be shortly after
the messenger. All this friendship Chiche Gegogoe procured. The Sabendor and
his two sons supped and lodged in the Generals cabin that night.

The 26. being sunday, Chiche Gogogoe was al afternoon with the General in his
cabin, where he feasted him, in the best manner he could, and gave him a very
fair caliuer set with bone and many other things.

The 28. day, the pinnasse went to the town, to fetch such cloves away as the
Merchants should buy. The General or his brother, still going or coming in
her, at this time it was Captain Middletons chance to be in her, and as he and
the Merchants were busy buying and weighing of cloves, in came a Tarnatan, and
told them, that there was a man that was indebted unto us, that had brought a
Canoa laden with cloves, to pay his debts, and the Hollanders had both carried
him and the cloves to their house, because the man was likewise indebted unto
the^. Out ran our men with weapons, but she was gone before they came, or else
if they had not made the more have, they had not carried them away so easily as
they did. The mariners were hired by one of those factors, whose head the
General so lately had saved, for a Royal of 8. a man, to do this brave
exploit, at their coming aboard. They told the General, how the Holland
factors used the^, which he took very evil.

The 29. day, the General went to the town with 20. armed men, some shot, and
some pikes, and Halberts: and at his coming, he sent word to the Dutchhouse,
they should restore the cloves they had taken away. They told our General,
that the party had bin in their debt these two years, and they could not get
him to any payment, and that the King had made proclamation, that no man, that
was indebted unto the Hollanders, should sell him any cloves, yet nevertheless
they would not be their own judges, but would stand to the judgment of the
King, when he should come: and the cloves to remain in the Sabendors hands,
till the matter was tried. So the General was pacified, threatening to give the
bastinado to the factor which was the cause: but after that time, he durst not
pass by our doors. This breach betwixt us and the Hollanders, caused the king
to make the more haste, for that he doubted we would go by the ears with the^,
and having very few men in the town, he doubted the worst, for that the
Hollanders, are not beloved of the country people: the cause is, their
manyfold disorder in their their drunkenness, against men, but principally
against the women. The first of June, about 1. of the clock at night, came a
Caracole from Tydore, rowing by our ship, calling to the watch. The General
hearing it, knew it was the King that spoke, and rose out off his bed, and
saluted him by his name: the King did the like to him, and asked him, how he
knew him in the dark. The General by his interpretor said, that he knew him
by his voice: which caused him to laugh. And so spending some little time in
talking, he willed our General to meet him at the town in the morning. The
General gave him 5. pieces of Ordinance at his departure, which he took very
kindly. They delight much to hear ordinance to go off at pleasure so that
they be not at the cost. When it was day, the General went to the town, and
had not stayed in his house half an hour, but the king came, and spent all the
forenoone with him. The General was desirous to know of him, whether he should
leave a factory or no. He answered he could not tell, for that it was to be
determined by a counsel: which he had not leisure to call as yet, by reason of
much business. He said, the Hollanders did threaten him to forsake his
country, and to establish a factory at Tydore, if he did let the English tarry
in the country, and establish a factory. They saying we were thieves, and
robbers: and so if he did trust us, he should find us: saying that Holland was
able to set out 20. ships, for Englands one, and that the King of Holland was
stronger by sea, then all Christiandome besides: with many untruths of their
own people and Countries commendations, and the disparagement of our people
and country, and of al other Christian princes. If this frothy nation may have
the trade of the India^s to thmselues, which is the thing they hope for, their
pride and insolency will be intolerable. The General answered, what Hollander
so ever he were that had told his highness so, he lied like a traitor: and
said, he would justify it to their faces: and for their country, if the
Queens majesty of England had not pitied their ruin, in sending her forces
to withstand the Spaniards, their country had bin ouer-run, and they marked in
the faces for traitors and slaves many years ago. And therefore desired the
King, to inquire of a Spanish Renegado, which was in the town, and he would
certify him of the truth. Then the General demanded, whether he should have
those Cloves which the Flemings had carried away by force. He answered, we
should have so many of the^ as should pay the debt, and the Holla^ders should
have the rest: which was in the afternoon performed. The king told our
General, that the morrow he must return for Tidore, where he must spend 3. or
4. days, before he could return. In the mean time he gave him leave, to buy
and sell with his people. And at his return, he should have an answer whether
he should leave a factory or no. The general entreating him, whilst he tarried
in the country, he would let him have a house to lodge in, where he might be
nere his business, and not be forced every night to go aboard. The king
promised he should, and so took his leave and departed. An hour after he sent
his Sabendor to the General, who brought him to a fair chamber, the king
sending him a fair gilded bedsted, and a Turkey carpet to lie upon: so after
that, the General was not enforced every night to go aboard, as before time he
had done. The 2. day about 8. a clock at night, came a light prawe of Tydore
aboard, with a letter to out General: the effect was, that the king of Tydore
found himself agreeued with the Hollanders, for taking part with the King of
Tarnata against him: and that upon his sending away of the Portingales they had
shot into his town, demanding Taffasoa to be surrendered to procure his peace.
The General answered, he thought he needed not fear the Holla^ders, for that
their shipping would shortly be disposed of, to other places, and that at any
time, for that town (if so it need) he might make his peace. With which answer
they returned, making a bold attempt, to either come or go, the sea being full
of their enemies. The 5. day the King of Tarnata, and the Hollanders admiral
came from Tarnata, to conclude of our banishment. The 6. day the king sent our
General word, that both he and the Dutch admiral should come face to face,
before him and his counsel, to hear what either could say against other. The
General sent the king word, he had nothing to say against the Dutch, unless
he withstood his leaving of a factory there: which if he did, he desired his
highness, that they might meet face to face, before him, to hear what either
could say: the king sent word, it should be so. The Dutch admiral came to our
generals chamber, to visit him. Our General asked, whether he came to procure
his banishment? He answered, he was bound to do the best he could for his
adue^turers. The General told him, the king was minded the next day to know,
why we should not have a factory in the country as well as they. He said he
would challenge the kings own writing and promise. The 7. day the General
waited, to be sent for, to the King: but seeing no body came, he sent to know
the reason. He sent word, he was very busy that day, and could not intend it
till the morrow. The Dutch admiral had conference with the King twice this day:
where belike he had what he desired, for as soon as night came he departed
for Tydore.

The 8. day, the King sent his secretary, and one of the Dutch Merchants unto
him, with a letter sealed with hard wax, which seal had two letters, an H and
a B. which stood for Hance Beerepot, with a Merchants mark between the
letters. This letter they delivered, and told him, it was the Kings letter to
the King of England. The General would not believe, the King would send so
great a Prince as the King of England, a letter with so little state, and a
Merchants seal upon it. They answered: and if he doubted thereof, they would
cause the King to come, and justify it. The General said, he would not
otherwise believe it. So they left the letter and departed. Half an hour
after, came the King, and a great train to our Generals chamber, where
saluting him kindly, they sat down upon a trunck together. The King said, I
sent you a letter sealed by my secretary, which you have received, making
doubt, it is not sent by me, to so great a king, and delivered with so little
state, and sealed with a marcha^ts seal. Now you heard me say thus much, I
hope you are satisfied: the letter is sent by me, and none other, therefore
prepare your self to morrow to be gone. The General neither would, nor durst
deliver it to the King of England, willing him to take it again, He would not,
but departed.

The 9. Chichell Gegogoe the Kings uncle, hearing how the General had bin used
by the king and the Hollanders, came to visit him at his chamber, where there
passed much talk between the^ concerning the foresaid counterfeit letter,
intended to have bin sent (to the disgrace of the General) to the king of
England. Chichell Gegogoe assuring the General, that if it lay in his power,
he would procure of the king, that they might leave a factory there. Moreover,
that at his next return to him, he should know the co^tents of that base and
slanderous letter, invented by the Hollanders: and so he departed, with promise
to return the next day. The people of the country, understanding the
Hollanders had procured our banishment, were much offended that the petty
prince of Holland, and his (whom they esteemd but debaushed dru^kards) should
be esteemed before the mighty King of England, and his subjects. and knowing we
were commanded to depart, brought all their commodities to us, and none to the
Hollanders. Whereat they finding themselves agreeued, caused our beam that we
weighed cloves with, to be taken away: but it was restored again, by the
means of Chichell Gegogoe. Which the Hollanders perceiving, they sent to their
admiral at Tydore, to return to Tarnata: which he did, threatening the King,
that he would leave him, and establish a factory at Tydore. Whereupon the King
with the unwilling consent of his council, gave order for our banishment.
sending the Sabendor to our General, to will him to lingar no longer but to
depart aboard.

The 16. day toward evening, the king of Tarnata with a great company of his
Nobles, came down from the town, landing right against our ship, and caused
a tent to be set up: sending for our General to come a shore, which he
presently did. The King caused him to sit down by him, excusing himself, that
we left not a factory there, alleging, that the Hollanders inforst him to the
contrary: he and his subjects owing them much, which he hoped to pay the next
harvest: and that the^ he would take an other order with them: which being done
he caused a letter to be read by his Secretary openly, the contents whereof
follow at the end of the book. Sealing it up, he delivered it to the General,
entreating him to return, and he should be welcome. Who answered, that it was
in vain for the English to return thither, so long as the Hollanders bare
rule, holding it a disparagement to his nation, to give place to them, being so
far their inferiors. This communication ended, by the sudden coming of a
great many of lights, and in the midst, one of his chief Noble men, under a
Canopy: carrying in a platter of gold, covered with a couerture of cloth of
gold, the letter which was before so publicly read: and the General looking
earnestly, not knowing what the matter was, the King called unto him, willing
him to arise, and receive the letter he sent to the King of England. Which he
presently doing, the party which carried it, made low obeisance, after their
country fashion, and then delivered it to the General: which he kissing
received, and sat him down again by the King. Giving him thanks in doing our
king and himself that right, in delivering the letter in such sort as it ought
to be. The king answered this letter which you have, is unsealed, and written
in the Malaya tongue, to the intent at Bantam it might be interpreted by some
of your own people, which have learned that language. But the other was
invented by the Hollanders, to have done you injury: telling him in brief the
effect thereof: excusing himself that he had no good thing to send the King
of England, but only a Bahar of Cloves, which he hoped his Majesty would
accept in good part, considering his country yields no other thing of worth.
Likewise he bestowed upon our General a Bahar of cloves, and caused them
presently to be carried to the Boat: which done, he took his leave, and
departed aboard his Caracole. The 17. day, the King of Tarn^ata came roing
about our ship, and diverse of his women with him in a Caracole; the General
entreating him to come aboard, but he would not. Chichell Gegegoe came aboard
this afternoon to our General, certifying him that the contents of the
Hollanders counterfeit Letter was, that we had sold powder, great ordinance,
and other munition to the Portugalls. And more, that to their great hurt in the
fight, we had assisted them with Gunners, and that was the cause we left not a
Factory there, hoping the General would have carried and delivered it to his
own disgrace: but he suspecting their slanderous treachery, refused it.

The 18. day the King and his Uncle came aboard in a small Prawe, because he
would not have the Hollanders which rid by us to know of his being there, for
it was death to them to see him use our General kindly: their coming was to
take leave of our General, he desired them to come down to his Caben, and
made them a banquet, whih they kindly did accept, and spent most part of the
day with him, urging our General to return thither again, or at the
leastwise to send, and he or they should be welcome, do the Hollanders what
they could, with protestation, that both he and all his people were very sorry
for his departure, finding we were good people, and not such as the Hollanders
did report us to be, which lived only by robbing and stealing. During this
communication, the Holland ship which rid by us shot off three pieces, which
the King hearing, sent to know the cause, word was brought, the Hollanders
Admiral was come from Tydore and gone aboard, which the King hearing, took a
short farewell of our general, and went to his caracole: showing evidently his
great fear to offend the Hollanders. Before he could put off his boat from
the side, our ship was under sail: giving him seven pieces of ordinance, and
held on our way beetweene Tarnata and Tydore. About noone the 21. day we came
to an anchor at Taffasoa: the Governor presently came to our General with a
present of hens, and fruit, telling him that he had been at Tydore, and the
King had given him order to surrender the town unto him, if he came thither
again, and the sort, praying him to dispose thereof as his own. The General
gave him thanks, telling him he had few men, but if he had so many as he had
when he came from Bantam, he would leave such a Garrison there, as they should
doubt neither the Hollanders nor the Tarnatanes: but his weakness was such,
that he could leave no men there. He answered, he doubted not the keeping of
the town in dispite of all their enemies: and although he could leave no me^
there, yet had he order by his king to surrender his right and title to the
King of England, to whose use he would keep it, desiring the surrender thereof
might be drawn, and the General should have the original and he the copy.
Which done he caused the people to bring those Cloves they had, and so took
his leave and departed, we directing our course for Selebis, where we had such
water as the place afforded, but it was brakish, buyng some Cocus of the people
who are like lauans.

July the 24. we came to anchor in Bantan road, were Master Scot chief factor
there, certified our General of the mortallitie of men in the Hector, and
Ascension before they departed, so that he was forced to hyer Chinese to help
them home, and that of 24 left there in their factorie, 12. were dead, where we
continued till the sixth of October: which day having taken leave of M. Scot,
and the rest left there, we set sail for England, continuing in our course
with variable weather till the 19. of December, which day the wind scanting
upon us we though to put into Saldania road: about 10. a clock in the morning
we saw a sail to leewards, thinking it had been the Ascension, whose company
we lost 14. days before, but contrary to our expectation it proved the
Hector, which went in company of the Susan from Bantam above 9. months before,
in such lamentable distress, that had we not met with them that day, they had
purposed the next to have run themselves aground at Pengwin Island, having for
that purpose fardled up their apparel, and such other things as were most
necessary for them. Our General caused our Pinnesse to be hoysted out and sent
for Cap: Keeling and the Purser who related their extreme miseries, having but
10. Englishmen and 4 Chinese alive: so supper being done, with thanks given
to God for their miraculous preservation, our General sent 12. men more to help
the^ into S^ldania road, where we stayed repairing the ruins of the Hector,
and providing other necessaries til the 16. of January following, when we set
sail for Saint Helena, where we arrived the second of February following: the
eleventh of* February we departed from Saint Helena continuing at Sea with such
varytie of weather, as those that use the sea are usually accustomed unto, till
the second of May following when we were of Plymoth: and the sixth following at
the Downs.

FINIS.
The King of Tarnata, to the King of England, Scotland, France and IRELAND, etc.
HEaring of the good report of your Majesty, by the coming of the great
Captain Francis Drake, in the time of my father, which was about some 30.
years past: by the which Captain, my Predecessor did send a Ring unto the
Queen of England, as a token of remembrance between Us: which if the
aforesaid Drake had been living, he could have informed your Majesty of the
great love and friendship of either side: he in the behalf of the Queen: my
Father for him and his Successors. Since which time of the departure of the
aforesaid Captain, we have daily expected his return, my Father living many
years after and daily expecting his return, and I after the death of my
father have lived in the same hope, till I was father of eleuen-children: in
which time I have been informed that the English were men of so bad
disposition that they came not as peaceable Merchants, but to dispossess them
of there Country: which by the coming of the bearer hereof we have found to
the contrary, which greatly we rejoice at. And after many years of our
expectation of some English forces by the promise of Captain Drake; Here
arrived certain ships which we well hoped had been Englishmen, but finding
them contrary, and being out of al hope of succor of the English Nation, we
were enforced to write to the Prince of Holland, to crave aid and succor
against our ancient enemies the Portingals, and according to our request he
has sent hither his forces which has expeld all the Portugales out of the
fortes which they held at Amboyna and Tydore. And whereas your Majesty has
sent to me a most kind and friendly Letter by your servant Captain Henry
Middleton, that does not a little rejoice us.

And whereas Captain Henry Middelton was desirous to leave a factory hear, we
were very willing thereunto, which the Captain of the Hollanders understanding,
became to challenge me of a former promise which I had written to the Prince of
Holland: that if he would send me such succor as should expel the Portugales
out of these parts, that no other Nation should have trade hear but they
only. So that we were inforst against our liking to yield unto the Hollanders
Captains request for this time: whereof we crave pardon of your Highness: and
if any of your Nation come hereafter, they shall be welcome. And whereas the
chief Captain of the Hollanders does solicit us, not to hold any friendship
with your Nation, nor to give ear to your Highness Letters: yet for all their
suite, if you please to send hither again, you shall be welcome. And in token
of our friendship, which we desire of your Majesty, we have sent you a small
remembrance of a Bahar of Cloves, our Country being poor, and yielding no
better commodity, which we pray your Highness to accept in good part.

TARNATA.

The King of Tydors Letter to the KINGS MAJESTY OF ENGLAND.
THIS Writing of the King of Tydor to the King of England, is to let your
Highness understand that the King of Holland has sent hither into these
parts a Fleet of ships to join with our ancient enemy the King of Tarnata,
and they jointly together, have overrun and spoiled part of our Country,
and are determined to destroy both us and our Subjects. Now understanding by
the bearer hereof, Captain Henry Midaleton, that your Highness is in
frienship with the King of Spain, We desire your MAJESTY that you would take
pity of Us, that we may not be destroyed by the King of Holland and Tarnata
to whom we have offered no wrong: but they by forceable means seek to
bereave Us of our Kingdom. And as great Kings upon the earth are ordained by
God to succor all them that be wrongfully oppressed: so I appeal unto your
MAJESTY, for succor against my enemies; not doubting but to find relief at
your MAJESTY'S hands. And if your MAJESTY send hither, I humbly entreat that
it may be Captain Henry Middleton or his Brother, with whom I am well
acquainted.

Thus We end, praying God to enlarge your Kingdoms, and bless You, and all
your Counsels.

TYDOLR.

The King of Bantam, to the King of ENGLAND.
A LETTER given from your friend the king of Bantam, to the King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland: desiring GOD to preserve your health, and to
exalt you more and more, and all your Counsel. And whereas your MAJESTY has
sent a General, Henry Middleton, he came to me in health. I did hear that
your MAJESTY was come to the Crown of England, which does greatly rejoice my
heart. Now England and Bantam are both as one. I have also received a Present
from your MAJESTY: the which I give you many thanks for your kindness. Idoe
send your MAJESTY two Beasar stones, the one waying fourteen Masses the other
three: And so GOD have you in his keeping.

Bantam


