THE SPEECH OF THE LORD CHANCELLOR OF England, in the Eschequer Chamber,
touching the Post-nati.

LONDON, Printed for the Society of Stationers. An. 1609.

The Printer to the courteous Reader.
THrough great haste (the common Spoiler of most serious Labors, Hillary Term
being half spent ere this Book could come forth) the word Non, in the 45.
page, and 15. line, of all the Books of the first Impression was left out,
which altered the Sentence to a clean contrary Sense: Therefore, in those
first imprinted Books, for Quod lego, non credo, read quod non lego, non
credo, according to the correction of that place in these Books of the second
Impression.

To the loving Readers.
BEfore I presumed to speak in the Eschequer Chamber in R. C. Case (which is
now commonly called, the Case of Post-nati,) I considered mine age and
infirmities, and how long I had discontinued from such Legal Exercises. I
might hereupon have justly challenged the privilege of silence: But greater
and weightier Reasons ouer-ruled me, and enforced me to waiue the benefit of
that privilege: For, looking into the nature of the Question then in hand, and
examining the Circumstaunces, I found the Case to be rare, and the Matter of
great import and consequence, as being a special and principal part of the
blessed and happy Union of great Britain.

I heard many learned and judicious Arguments, made by the reverend Judges: and
finding that they did not all concur in Opinion (though the number was
indeed so few, of them that differed, that in Greek it would not make a
plural number) and that some things were by them omitted, which seemed to me
to be both pertinent to the Matter, and necessary to be known, and more
proper and fit to be spoken by me, respecting the place I hold, than by them,
that did wholly bind themselves to the form and rule of legal Argument and
Discourse: I thought that I could not, in duty, sit as a dumb and idle
Hearer only: The Cause being iudicially depending in the high Court of
Chancerie, where I was to judge of it according to Law, following the rule of
mine own Conscience, and the measure of mine own understanding, and not to
be swayed with the weight of other men's opinions.

I considered also, that although Silentij tutum proemium is often true in
humane policy, yet sometime, there is Crimen Reticentiae; and therefore the
Prophet said, Vae mihi quia tacui. And Chrysostom observes, that, Tribus
modis in veritatem peccatur: 1. Veritatem prae timore tacendo: 2. Veritatem in
mendatium Commutando: 3. Veritatem non defendendo. Remembering this, my
Conscience told me, that howsoe^^^ Silence might in this Case ^^^e excused me
of the second, but I could not have escaped by ^^^ence, from offending in the
first and last. And if Festus thought it not reason, to send a prisoner, without
showing the Causes which were laid against him, I might have been worthily
and ^ustly censured, if upon other men's arguments, and as it were ^implicita,
I should have pronounced my judgment and sentence in so great a Cause, without
declaring the grounds ^^d reasons vvhereupon I stood. ^^us, Duty and
Necessity ^^r, ratio sapienti necessitas) were the causes that induced me to
speak in this rare and weighty cause, and the force of truth moved me to
speak that which I did speak, without respect of pleasing or displeasing any.
And so, having the warrant of a sincere conscience, which is truly said to be,
veluti Comes, and Testis, and I^dex actionum, I have in the Chancerie judged
and decreed the Case for R. C. And the like Judgment is also given by the
Judges of the Kings Bench, in the Assise depending in that Court. The decree
and judgment being thus passed, diverse imperfect Reports, and several
patches and pieces of my Speech have bin put in writing, and dispersed into
many hands, and some offered to the Press. The Kings Mie. having knowledge
thereof, misliked it, and thereupon commanded me to deliver to him in writing,
the whole discourse of that which I said in that Cause.

Thus I was put to an unexpected new labor, to reuiew my scribled and broken
papers. Out of which (according to the charge imposed upon me) I gathered all
which I had before spoken, and so set it down faithfully and plainly, and (as
near as I could) in the same words I uttered it: it pleased his sacred Mie. to
take some view of it, and taking occasion thereby, to remember the diligence of
the L. chief Justice of the common place, for the summary report he had
published of the Judges Arguments, he gave me in charge to cause this to be
likewise put in Print, to prevent the Printing of such mistaken and imperfect
reports of it, as were already scattered abroad.

Whatsoever it is, it was first conceived and spoken out of conscience and
duty; and is now published in humble obedience to my most gracious Sovereign.
And so I offer and commend it to your good acceptance and favorable
interpretation.

T. Ellesmere Canc.

Post-nati.
MY Lords, mine age, mine infirmity, and indisposition of health, my decaie
and weakness of memory, and Desuetudo, and long discontinuance from this
manner of Legal exercise (above fourteen years) have bereaved me of the
means and helps that should inhable me to speak in so great a Case.

I fear therefore, that it will be deemed presumption (if not worse) that I
adventure to speak herein at all; specially after so many learned and
judicious Arguments of so many grave, learned, and reverend Judges.

To say the same that has been said, must needs be unpleasant, wearisome,
and loathsome to the hearers; and not to say the same, is to speak little to
the purpose: for, what more can be said than has been?

Yet, for that the Case is depending in Chancerie, and adiourned hither for
difficulty in Law, and there I must give judgment according to the Law,
Whether the Complainant be inhabled, by Law, to maintain his suit in that
Court, or not: I hold it more fitting to deliver the reasons of my judgment
here, where others have been heard, than there, before a few, which have not
heard that which has been so learnedly argued, and largely debated here.

And therefore the Case standing thus, I will speak what I think: And I must
say as one of the grave Judges said, I can tell no news; But some old things
which I have read and observed, I will remember; but I can not divine, or
prophecy de futuris, I leave that as Justice Yeluerton did.

I am free, and at liberty Nullius addictus iurare in verba Magistri, and
therefore I will speak ingenuously and freely.

In the arguing of this Case, some things which are of great weight with me,
have (in mine opinion) been passed over too lightly; and some other things
which seem to me but light, have been ouerweighed, as I think.

Half an hours time longer or shorter I mean not to strive for, and
therefore I will presume on your patience, and assume to my self such
convenient time as others have done: And yet I will husband time as well as I
can.

I will not be abashed to strengthen my weak memory with help of some
scribled papers, as others have done: for I account it a point of wisdom to
follow wise men's Examples.

Other Exordium, Insinuation, Protestation, or Preface for the Matter it self,
either to prepare attentive and beneuolent auditors, or to stir offense or
mislike against either party, I mean not to use; it is fit for Orators, I
never professed the Art, I had never skill in it: And it is not Decorum for
Judges, that ought to respect the Matter, and not the humors of the Hearers.

The Exordium the Ciuilians use in their Sentences I like well; In Dei nomine
Amen, and Deo primitus inuocato; other Exordium I care not for.

The Case now depending in Chauncerie which is adiourned hither, The Case.
is thus.

Robert Calvin, son and heir apparent of James L. Calvin of Colcrosse in
the realm of Scotland, an Infant of three years of age, borne in the said
Realm of Scotland, makes title by his Bill to a Message and Garden with
th'appurtenaunces in the parish of Saint Buttolph without Bishops-gate in the
city of London: and complains against John Bingley, and Richard Griffin, for
detaining the Evidences concerning the same Message and Lands, and taking the
profits thereof.

The Defendants plead, that the Plaintiff is an Alien, and that in the third
year of his Majesty's reign of England, and in the nine and thirtieth year of
his Majesty's reign of Scotland, he was borne in the Realm of Scotland,
within the ligeance of his said Majesty, of his Realm of Scotland, and out of
the ligeance of our sovereign Lord the King of his Realm of England.

And the Defendants say further, That at the time of the birth of the
Complainant, and long before, and ever sithence, the said Kingdom of Scotland
was, and still is, ruled and governed by the proper Laws and Statutes of the
said Kingdom of Scotland, and not by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of
England: And therefore the Defendants demand judgment, Whether the Complainant
ought to be answered to his said Bill, or shall be received to prosecute the
said suite against the Defendants, being for, and concerning the title of
Inheritance, and evidence touching the same.

Hereupon the Complainant has demurred in Law.

This is the special Case now depending in the Chancerie; in which, and
touching all like Cases in general, mine opinion is, and since the question
was first moved has been, That these Post-nati are not Aliens to the King,
nor to his Kingdom of England, but by their Birthright, are liege subjects to
the King; and capable of estates of Inheritance, and freehould of Lands in
England: and may have and maintain as well Real as Personal actions for the
same. And that therefore the now Complainant Robert Calvin ought to be
answered.

This opinion I did first conceive upon those rules and reasons in Law (as
well the Common Law of England, as the Civil law) which hereafter in the
course of my Speech I will remember. And in this opinion I have been since
confirmed by many great and weighty reasons.

First, The proceeding in the general Case of Post-nati.
in the Statute made in the first year of his Majesty's reign of England,
authorizing the Treaty between the Commissioners for both the Kingdoms,
Stat. 1. Iac.
it is said (as Justice Warburton noted well) That both the famous and ancient
Realms of England and Scotland, 19. Mart. 1603
are now united in allegiance and loyal subjection in his royal person, to
his Majesty, and his posterity for ever.

Here we have the Judgment of the Parliament, that there is a Unity in
allegiance to one Royal person; And therefore I see not how we may out of
imaginary conceits, and by subtle distinctions strain our wits to frame
several allegeances to one and the same Royal person, contrary to so plain a
declaration made by Parliament.

Next follows his Majesty's Proclamation 20. Octobris 1604. The Proclamation,
2. Iacobi 20. Octobr. 1604.
by which he assumed to himself the Name and Style of King of great Britain:
In which Proclamation, among many other weighty reasons, this is added for one,
We have received from those that be skilful in the Laws of the Land, That
immediately upon our succession, diverse of our ancient Laws of this Realm
are ipso facto expired; as namely, that of Escuage, and of the naturalization
of the Subjects. This was not done suddenly, nor lightly; but upon grave and
serious deliberation, and advise: And therefore seems to me to be a matter
of great importance, and not to be lightly regarded.

The same twentieth of October, The Commissioners authorized by Parliament, did
begin 20. October. and did continue until 6. December. 2. Iacobi.
these Commissioners began their Treaty. Of the grave and judicious Course
which they held, in debating of the Matter then propounded, I will forbear to
speak: But for this point of Naturalization now in question, their resolution
in the end was thus:

That it shall be propounded to both the Parliaments at the next Sessions, The
resolution of the Commisioners.
that an Act be made containing a declaration, as follows: That all the
Subjects of both the Realms, borne since the decease of Elizabeth the late Qu.
of England of happy memory, and all that shall be borne hereafter under the
obedience of his Majesty, and his royal Progeny, are by the common Laws of
both the Realms, and shall be for ever, inhabled to obtain, succeed,
inherit, and possess all Lands, Goods, and Chattels, etc. as fully and amply
as the Subjects of either Realm: respectively might have done, or may do in
any sort within the Kingdom where they were borne. This, after long debating,
and grave and deliberate consideration, was, in the end, the resolution of the
greater part of the Commissioners, not one openly gainesaying it. And diverse
of the principal Judges of the Realm were present at all times when the point
was debated. And herein I note the wise and judicious form of that resolution,
which was not to propound to the Parliament the making of a new Law, but a
declaration of the common Laws of both the Realms in this question.

Now, if we consider who these Commissioners were, what Lords of the higher
House, and what persons of the common House, selected of all degrees, most
eminent for their learning and judgment, as well in Civil and Common Law, as
in knowledge, and experience other ways, being assisted by the grave Judges
of the Realm: If this, I say, be well considered, then this Resolution must be
accounted and esteemed as a matter of great and weighty importance, and much to
be regarded in the deciding of this question.

According to this Act of the Commissioners, The Judges opinion in Parliament.
the Case was propounded in the next Session of Parliament. In the higher
House, the Judges were required to deliver their opinions. There were then
eleauen Judges present; whereof ten did with one uniform consent affirm the
Law to be, That the Post-nati were not Aliens, but natural Subjects (one
only dissenting.) After this, the Question was debated in a solemn Conference
between both the Houses of Parliament at several times, and at great length,
and with much liberty: Nothing was omitted that Wit or Art could invent to
object against this opinion; And that was done by men of great learning, and
singular judgment in the Common Law, and Civil Law; and by some other
Gentlemen of the Common House, of rare gifts for their learning knowledge,
elocution and experience.

At this Conference the Judges were present; who, after they had heard all that
was, or could be said, did confirm their former opinions, which they had
before delivered in the higher House: Three of the chief of them declaring
their reasons, and all the rest (saving one alone) concurring in the same. So,
here was now a general resolution by all the Judges of the Realm (one
excepted) and that delivered, not privately, but in Parliament; which without
more ado had been sufficient to have decided and determined this Question.

Touching the Proclamation, The force and strength of the Kings proclamations.
it was discreetely and modestly said by a learned Gentleman of the lower
House. That it was of great respect, and much to be regarded; but yet it was
not binding, nor concluding: for, Proclamations can neither make, nor declare
Laws: And besides, that this Proclamation was not grounded upon any resolution
of the reverend Judges; but upon the opinion of some skillful in the Laws of
this Land.

Of the strength of Proclamations, being made by the King, by the advice of his
Counsel and Judges, I will not discourse; yet I will admonish those that be
learned and studious in the Laws, and by their profession are to give
counsel, and to direct themselves, and others, to take heed that they do not
contemn, or lightly regard such Proclamations.

And to induce them thereunto, I desire them to look upon, and consider
advisedly these few Proclamations, Provisions, or Ordinances, which I will
point out unto them; and of what validity and force they have been houlden to
be in construction of Law, albeit they be neither Statutes, nor Acts of
Parliament.

M. 4. H. 3. in Dower, Fitzh. Dower. 17^.
the defendant pleaded, Quod petens est de potestate Regis Franciae, and
residens in Francia; Et prouisum est a Consilio Regis, quod nullus de potestate
Regis Franciae respondeatur in Anglia antequam Angli respondeantur de iure suo
in Francia. This the Plaintifes Attorney could not deny; and thereupon the
judgment was, Ideo sine die.

Anno 20. Hen. 3. certain Provisions and Ordinances were made which were
called Prouisiones Merton, where the King assembled his Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, and Barons for the Coronation of the King, and his wife Queen Elenor;
and the words be, Prouisum est in curia Dom. Regis apud Merton cora^ Willihelmo
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, and Coepiscopis, Suffraganeis suis; Et coram maiori
part Comitum and Baronum Angliae ibidem existentium pro Coronatione ipsius
Domini Regis and Helionorae Reginae, pro qua omnes vocati fuerunt: Cum
tractatum esset de communi vtilitate Regni super articulis subscriptis. Ita
prouisum fuit and concessum, tam a praedictis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Comitibus, and Baronibus, and alijs. De viduis primo etc.

Fitzherbert cites a Provision made Anno 19. H. 3. Fitzherbert Not. Br. 32.
in these words, Et prouisum fuit coram Domino Rege, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Comitibus, and Baronibus, Quod nulla Assisa vltimae praesentationis de caetero
capiatur de Ecclesiis, Praebendatis nec de Praebendis. This Provision was
allowed and continued for Law, until W. 2. Anno 13. Edw. 1. ca. 5. which
prouides the contrary by express words.

Anno 6. Ed. 1. Anno 6. Ed. 1.
the King and his Judges made certain Explanations of the Statute of
Gloucester, Explan. stat.
which are called, Explanationes statuti Glocestriae: Gloucestr.
And these be the words. Postmodum per Dominum Regem and Iusticiarios suos
factae sunt quaedam Explanationes quorundam articulorum superius positorum.
Which Explanations have ever since been received as a Law.

There is a Proclamation by King Ed. 3. A Proclamation. 15. Ed. 3.
bearing Test at Westminster Anno 15. Edw. 3. And Judge Thorpes opinion Pa.
39. Ed. 3. 7. both which I will now forbear to report, and wish the Students
to read the same in the printed Books, where they shall see both the effect,
and the reason, and the cause thereof; They are worth their reading, and may
inform and direct them what judgment to make of Proclamations.

Touching the opinion of the Judges, How the Judges opinion delivered in
parliament ought to be regarded.
some have objected (yet modestly, and I suppose, according to their conscience
and understanding) That there is not like regard to be had of Judges opinions
given in Parliament, Object.
as ought to be of their judgments in their proper Courts and Seats of
Justice: for, in those places their Oath binds them; but not so in the other.

1. To this I answer: Respons.
The reverence, and worthiness of the men is such, as is not to be
quarrelled and doubted of, if there were no Oathe at all: For, if men of so
great and eminent places fear not God and his judgments, even out of a
religious conscience, which is Fraenum ante peccatum, and flagrum post
peccatum, it may be doubted that the external ceremony of adding a Book will
little avail.

2 Their Oath does bind them as much in the Court of Parliament, as in their
proper Courts: for, that is the supreme Court of all; and they are called
thither by the Kings Writ, not to sit as Tell-clockes, or idle hearers; but,
quod personaliter intersitis nobiscum, ac cum caeteris de Consilio nostro super
dictis negotijs tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri: And those Negotia
be Ardua and vrgentia negotia Regni etc. And their Oath, amongst other things,
is, That they shall counsel the King truly in his business.

3 This Exception may serve against the Judges, as well in Cases when they sit
and give judgment, as Justices of Assizes, Nisi prius, Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail Delivery, as in this Case of Parliament: for, there they have none other
Oath but their general Oath.

4 It becomes us to esteem of Judges now, as our forefathers esteemed them in
times past; for, as they succeed them in Time and Place (I thank God, and the
King, I have neither cause to fear any for displeasure, nor to flatter any for
favor: wherefore I will neither be afraid, nor abashed to speak what I
think:) I say therefore, that as our Judges now succeed the former Judges, in
Time and Place; so they succeed them, and are not inferior to them in
Wisdom, Learning, Integrity, and all other judicious and religious Virtues.

Then let us see what the wisdom of Parliaments in times past attributed to
the Judges opinions declared in Parliament; Of which there be many Examples;
but I will trouble you but with two or three.

I will not remember Richard the seconds time (of which some of our Chroniclers
do talk idely, and understand little) where power and might of some potent
persons oppressed justice, and faithful Judges, for expounding the Law
soundly, and truly. The first that I will remember, is this.

In the Parliament 28. H. 6. 16. Ianuarij, the Commons made suite, That W. de
la Poole Duke of Suffolk should be committed to prison for many treasons and
other heinous crimes committed by him. The Lords in Parliament were in doubt
what answer to give; they demanded the opinion of the Judges: Their opinion
was, That he ought not to be committed; And their reason was, for that the
Commons did not charge him with any particular offense, but with general
slanders and reports; And therefore because the Specialties were not showed,
he was not to be committed. This opinion was allowed; And thereupon 28.
Ianuarij, the Commons exhibited certain special Articles against him, viz.
That he conspired with the French King to invade the Realm etc. And thereupon
he was committed to the Tower.

2 In the Parliament Anno 31. H. 6. in the vacation (the Parliament being
continued by prorogation) Thomas Thorpe the Speaker was condemned in a thousand
pounds damages in an action of Trespass, brought against him by the Duke of
York, and was committed to prison in Execution for the same. After, when the
Parliament was re-assembled, the Commons made suite to the King and the Lords,
to have Thorpe the Speaker delivered, for the good exploite of the Parliament;
whereupon the Duke of Yorkes Counsel declared the whole Case at large. The
Lords demanded the opinion of the Judges, whether, in that Case, Thorpe ought
to be delivered out of prison by Privilege of Parliament: The Judges made
this answer, That they ought not to determine the Privilege of that high
Court of Parliament; But for the declaration of proceeding in lower Coutts, in
cases where Writtes of Supersedeas for the privilege of the Parliament be
brought unto them, They answered: That if any person that is a Member of the
Parliament be arrested in such cases as be not for treason or felony, or for
surety of Peace, or condemnation had before the Parliament, it is used that
such persons be released; and may make Attorney, so as they may have their
freedom and liberty, freely to intend the Parliament. Hereupon it was
concluded, That Thorpe should still remain in prison according to the Law,
Notwithstanding the privilege of Parliament, and that he was the ^peaker.
Which resolution was declared to the Commons by Walter Moyle, one of the Kings
Serieants at Law. And then the Commons were commanded in the Kings name, by
the Bishop of Lincoln (in the absence of the Archbishop of Canterbury then
Chauncellor) to choose another Speaker.

3 In the Parliament An. 7. H. 8. a Question was moved, Whether spiritual
persons might be conuented before temporal Judges for criminal causes; There
sir John Fineux and the other Judges delivered their opinion, that they might
and ought to be so. And their opinion was allowed, and maintained by the King
and the Lords: And D. Standish, who before had houlden the same opinion, was
delivered from the Bishops. And it is worth the noting, what words passed in
that Case between the Archbishop of Canterbury, and that worthy Judge Fineux.

4 If a Writ of Error be brought in Parliament upon a Judgment given in the
Kings Bench, Writs of Error sued in parliament.
the Lords of the higher House alone (without the Commons) are to examine the
Errors; But that is by the advice and Counsel of the Judges, who are to
inform them what the Law is, and so to direct them in their judgment. And if
the judgment be reuersed, then commandment is to be given to the Lord
Chancellor to do Execution accordingly. And so it was in Anno 17. R. 2. in a
Writ of Error brought in Parliament by the Deane and Chapter of Lichfield,
against the Prior and Covent of New-port-Panell, as appears by the Record.
But if the judgment be affirmed, then the Court of the Kings Bench are to
proceed to execution of the Judgment, as it appears in Flowerdewes Case P.
1. H. 7. fol. 19. But it is to be noted, that in all such Writtes of Error,
the Lords are to proceed according to the Law; and for their judgment
therein they are informed and guided by the Judges, and do not follow their
own opinions or discretions otherwise.

This extrauagant Discourse touching Proclamations, and Judges opinions
delivered in Parliament, and how they ought to be regarded, I have thought
material and necessary, both in respect of the time wherein we live, and the
Matter which we have in hand: And these be things which I think have been
too lightly passed over: But if you condemn it as impertinent, I must then
confess I have presumed too much upon your patience; I pray you bear with
me, it is but my labor lost, and a little time misspent, if it seem so unto
you: You are wont to pardon greater faults; Call it either a Passe-time, or
Waste-time, as pleases you. Now, to return to the Case we have in hand.

The general Question having had this passage (by Proclamation, The process
and form of proceeding in the Case of R. C. now in question.
by Commission, and by debating in Parliament) remains yet without conclusion
or judgment: And as every man abounds in his own sense, so every one is left
to his own opinion; Specially those that were not satisfied with the grave
Resolution of the Judges in Parliament, which (although some may term and
account as bare opinions) I must always value, and esteem as a real and
absolute judgment. Now, I say, this general Question is reduced to two
particular Cases, and is iudicially depending in two the highest Courts of
Justice in this Realm; and that is by one Complainant against several
Defendants for the freehoulde and inheritance of several parcells of Land: and
(as M. Solicitor said well) is a Case, not fained, nor surmised, but a true
Case between true parties: And being Quaestio iuris, non facti, is by both
these Courts adiourned hither to be decided, and determined by all the Judges
of England, as the rareness of the Case, and the weight and importance of it,
both for the present and the future does require.

And the Case being of this nature and quality, it is not amiss to observe
the proceeding in it: for, it is worth the observing, and not to be
forgotten. The Defendants counsel, men of great learning, and in their
profession inferior to none of their quality and degree, men conversant and
well exercised in the Question, and such as in the great conference in
parliament, most of them were specially selected and chose^ (for so they well
deserved) as most sufficient, able, and fit, as well for Learning and
Knowledge, as for all other gifts of Wit and Nature, to handle so great and
rare a Question. And although it has pleased them of their good discretion to
use the pains but of a few in the debating and arguing of the Case at the
Bar: yet no doubt that was done upon mature deliberation and conference with
all the residue: And whatsoever the Spirits, the Learning, the Wisdom, and
Knowledge of all the others, upon long study could affoorde, was put into the
mouth of those few to serve as Organs and Instruments to deliver it unto us;
which they have so well and sufficiently performed, that they deserve great
praise and commendation: For, in my poor opinion, the wit of man could not
devise to say more touching this Question in Law than they have said. And
whatsoever has been sithence spoken for that part, it is for the Matter but
the same in substance, which the counsel at the Bar did deliver; though it
has been varied in form, and amplified with other words and phrases, and
furnished with show of some other strained Cases and authorities.

The handling of it by the learned and reverend Judges, has been such, as it
may appear to the world, that every one has spoken his own heart and
conscience; and has labored by long study to search out the Law and the
true reason of the Law in this rare Case; and so they have spoken, as Coram
Deo and Angelis: None, with desire to seem popular; for nothing ought to be
tam populare quam veritas: None to seem to be Time-seruers, or Men pleasers;
for the King (whom under God they serve) being Pater patriae, and sovereign
head of both these great united Kingdoms, is to them both, like as the head of
a natural body is to all the Members of the same, and is not, nor can not be
partial more to one than to an other. He deliteth in truth, and desires it;
and without truth he can not be pleased. He rules by his Law, and
commands his Judges to minister to all his Subjects Law and Justice
sincerely, and truly; and equally and indifferently, without any partial
respect.

It was never seen, but that in all rare and difficult Cases, there have been
diversity of Opinions; but yet without breach of Charity, which is the Bond
of Unity. So it has happened in this Case. The Case has been argued at
large by fourteen learned Judges; twelve of them have concurred in judgment,
but upon several reasons: for, as many ways may lead to one end of the
journey; so diverse and several reasons may conduce to one true and certain
conclusion.

And here I may not omit the worthy memory of the late grave and reverend
Judge, Sir John Popham, chief Justice of the Kings Bench deceased (a man of
great wisdom, and of singular learning and judgment in the Law) who was
absolutely of the same opinion, as he often declared, as well in open
Parliament, as otherwise.

The Apostle Thomas doubted of the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ,
when all the rest of the Apostles did firmly believe it: But that his doubting
confirmed, in the whole Church, the Faith of the Resurrection.

The two worthy and learned Judges that have doubted in this Case, as they
bear his Name, so I doubt not but their doubting has given occasion to clear
the doubt in others; and so to confirm in both the Kingdoms, both for the
Present and the Future, the truth of the judgment in this Case.

Thus, my Lords, have you hitherto nothing from me but Amen, to that which all
the Judges (saving two) have said; and much more you cannot expect from me:
Yet, since I must give judgment in this Case; and I said in the beginning,
that I would render the reasons of my judgment: (for that is the course of
argument I must houlde) I will now deliver unto you, what are the special and
principal reasons that first have induced me, and still move me to houlde
the opinion that I do: And as I go, I will endeavor to clear some doubts and
questions, that partly in the conference in Parliament, and partly otherwise, I
have heard made; not only touching this Case it self, but also touching the
form and manner how it is to be decided and judged.

The Case is rare, How this Case is to be judged, and by what Law.
and new (as it has been often said) it was never decided Terminis
terminantibus; It was never judged by any Statute Law, which is a positive
Law; nor by judgment of the Judges of the common Law.

Now, the first Question is (as some would have it) How it is to be judged, and
by what Law; and have wished that it might have stayed until the Parliament,
and so be decided by Parliament. They that make this doubt, I will let them
demurre, and die in their doubts: For, the Case being adiourned hither before
all the Judges of England, is now to be judged by them according to the common
Law of England; and not tarry for a Parliament: For, it is no transcendent
Question, but that the common Law can and ought to rule it, and overrule it,
as Justice Williams said well.

But then this Question produces another; What is the common Law of England:
and whether it be Ius scriptum
That is, What is the Common Law of England; Whether it be Ius scriptum, or
non scriptum; and such other like niceties: For, we have in this Age so many
Questionists; Questionists
and Quo modo and Quare, are so common in most men's mouths, that they leave
neither Religion, nor Law, nor King nor Counsel, nor Policy, nor Government
out of question.

And the end they have in this Question, What is the Common Law? is to shake
and weaken the ground and principles of all government: And in this particular
Question of the Law of England, to overthrow that Law whereby this Realm has
many hundred years been governed in all honor and happiness: or at least to
cast an aspersion upon it, as though it were weak and uncertain. I will
therefore declare mine opinion in this point plainly and confidently, as I
think in my conscience, and as I find to be sufficiently warranted by ancient
Writers, and good authorities void of all exception.

The common Law of England is grounded upon the Law of God, The ground of the
Common Law.
and extendes it self to the original Law of Nature, and the universal Law
of Nations.

When it respects the Church, it is called Lex Ecclesiae Anglicanae, as Magna
Charta ca. 1. Ecclesia Anglicana habeat omnia sua iura integra and illaesa.

When it respects the Crown, and the King, it is sometimes called Lex Coronae,
as in Stat. 25. Edw. 3. cap. 1. Lex Coronae Angliae est and semper fuit etc.
And it is sometimes called Lex Regia, as in Registro fo 61. Ad iura Regia
spectat: And, Ad conseruationem iurium Coronae nostrae, and ad iura Regia ne
depereant etc.

When it respects the common subjects, it is called, Lex Terrae; as in Magna
Charta ca. 29. Nisi per legale iudicium parium, vel per legem Terrae.

Yet, The common Law is not originally Lex scripta.
in all these Cases, whether it respects the Church, the Crown, or the
Subjects, it is comprehended under this general term; The common Laws of
England: Which although they be for a great part thereof reduced into
writing; yet they are not originally Leges scriptae.

This I first learned of the late Lord Treasurer Burleigh (whose Honorable
memory England can never forget) and hearing it from him, I endeavored by my
private study to satisfy my self thorowlie in it. And, whosoever shall well
consider the Laws of England, which were before the Conquest (whereof we have
some Remnants and Patches) or since the Conquest until Magna Charta, Anno 9.
H. 3. will make little doubt of it.

In H. 2. time Glanuile writes thus; Leges Anglicanas licet non scriptas,
leges appellari non videtur absurdum.

And in Hen. 3. time Bracton writes thus; Cum autem fere in omnibus Regionibus
vtantur legibus and iure scripto, sola Anglia vsa est in suis finibus iure non
scripto and consuetudine; in ea quidem, ex non scripto Ius venit quod vsus
comprobauit.

But I may not agree with Bracton, that Sola Anglia vsa est iure non scripto:
For I find that the grauest, and the greatest learned Writers of the Civil
Law, both ancient and of this our time, do hold the same opinion, touching
the Civil Law it self, for thus they write: Ex non scripto Ius venit quod
vsus approbauit. And thus; Ius Civil dictum ex non scripto natum est. And; Ius
non scriptum dicitur Consuetudo, non quod scripto perpetuo careat, hoc enim
falsum est. Nam and Consuetudines in memoriam constantiorem reducuntur in
Scripturam, vt caetera quoque quae sine scriptura perficiuntur: Sed non
scriptum ius est: id est, quod a scriptura vis eius non coepit nec pendeat. So,
hereby it may appear how in this we concur with the Civil Law.

But hereupon these Questionists move an other Question, How the common Law of
England may be known.
viz. If the common Law be not written, Object.
how then shall it be known?

To this I answer; Respons.
It is the common custom of the Realm (as Bracton says, Ius venit quod vsus
comprobauit:) And it stands upon two maine pillars and principal parts, by
which it is to be learned and known.

The first is, Maxims and Principles.
certain known principles and Maxims, and ancieut Customs, against which
there never has been, nor ought to be any dispute. As in Cases of Subjects;
an estate in Fee-simple, for life, for years, Dower, Courtesy etc.

In Cases of the Crown, the Female to inherit: the Eldest sole to be
preferred: No respect of Half Blood: No tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy
of the Crown: No disabilitie of the Kings person by infancy etc.

The second is, Responsa prudentum.
where there be no such Principles, then, former judgments given in like
Cases: And these be but Arbitria Iudicum, and Responsa Prudentum, received,
allowed, and put in practice and execution by the Kings authority.

Of these Bracton speaks; Ego H. de Bracton animum erexi ad vetera Iudicia
iustorum perscrutanda; facta ipsorum, Consilia, and Responsa in vnam summam
redigendo compilaui.

And before the Conquest, King Ethelbert caused a Book to be made, which was
called Decreta Iudiciorum: And king Alured did the like, Lambard in
explicatione verbi Hyde.
as master Lambard a judicious and learned obseruer of Antiquities, does
remember.

Of these also the Judges speak H. 33. H. 6. Moyle, fo. 8. We rule the Law
according to the ancient course. Ashton, fol. 9. All our Law is guided by
Use, and by Statute. And Prysot says, fol. 9. There cannot be a positive Law,
but such as was judged or made by Statute. Wherein I note also that he
equalleth a Judgment with a Statute.

In 36. H. 6. fol. 25. Fortescue reasons thus; The Law is as I have said,
and so has been always since the Law began.

In 37. H. 6. f. 22. Ascue reasons thus; Such a Charter has bin allowable in
the time of our Predecessors, which were as sage and learned as we be.

In H. 4. Edw. 4. fol. 41. Markham reasons thus; It is good for us to do as
it has bin used before this time, and not to keep one way one day for one
party, and another day the contrary for the other party: And so the former
Precedents be sufficient for us to follow: And judgment was given accordingly.

And in the former Case 36. H. 6. Anno 36. H. 6.
Fortescue says further; We have many Courses and Forms which be houlden for
Law.

Also every one of these four principal Courts, The Chauncery, Kings Bench,
Common-plees, and Eschequer, have in many things several courses and forms
which are observed for Law, and that not only in that proper Court, but also
in all Courts through the Realm; whereof many Examples be remembered in the
Case of the Mines in Plowdens Commentaries.

The third: In nouo casu nouum remedium.
But if there be no such former Judgments, nor direct Examples or Precedents,
then this Rule has a further extention, which is this.

There is a Rule in the common Law, that in nouo casu nouum remedium est
appone^dum. Et concordent Clerici de Breue faciendo, ita quod nullus recedat a
Cancellaria sine remedio. For the Cha^cery is properly Officina Iustitiae and
AEquitatis; where all original writs (which in ancient times were the Grounds
of all Suites) are devised and framed. And these Clerici were grave and
ancient men; skillful, and long experienced in the course of the Chancerie;
and called Clerici de prima forma: And of late time Magistri Cancellariae; who
in new and strange cases, besides their own knowledge and experience, had
oftentimes conference with the grave Judges for the devising and framing of new
Writtes when need required. And this I take to be the same which is in the
Statute W. 2. cap. 24. St. W. 2. ca. 24.
Et quotiescunque de caetero euenerit in Cancellaria, Anno 13. Ed. 1.
quod in vno casu reperitur breue, and in consimili casu, cade^te sub eodem
iure and simili indigente remedio, non reperitur, Concordent Clerici de
Cancellaria in breui faciendo, vel atterminent querentes in proximum
Parliamentum: Et scribantur casus in quibus concordare non possunt, and
referant eos ad proximum parliamentum: Et de consensu Iurisperitorum fiat
Breue, ne contingat de caetero, quod Curia Regis deficiat conquerentibus in
Iusticia perquirenda.

Wherein I note these three things: First, The Clerks are to agree; and if
they agree, that is an end, and stands for Law, and then no referrement to
the Parliament. Second, If the Clerks agree not, and so the Case be referred to
the Parliament; Then De Consensu Iurisperitorum fiat Breue: So Consensus
Iurisperitorum is the Rule, and not the multitude of vulgar opinions. The third
is, That Justice fail not them which complain: Which will often fail, if you
stay until a Parliament: For Parliaments are not to be called for the wrong of
a few private Subjects: but for the great and urgent affairs of the King and
the Realm.

I find also a like Rule in the Civil Law; Vbi non est directa Lex etc.
Vbi non est directa lex standum est arbitrio Iudicis, vel produce^dum ad
similia. And another says, De similibus ad similia iudicium and argumentatio
recipiuntur.

4 Besides these, Rex solus iudicat, etc.
there is an other general and certain Rule in the Civil Law, which I
reserve to the last part of that which I mean to speak in this Matter.

So, leaving that unto a more proper place, I will hereupon conclude, That if
there be no former Judgments, nor Examples, nor Precedents to be found, then
Concordia Clericorum, and Arbitrium Iudicum is to seek out the true and solid
reason; and thereupon to ground their Judgments in all new Cases: For it was
truly said by a learned Gentleman of the lower House, Deficiente lege
recurrendum est ad consuetudinem: Deficiente consuetudine recurrendum ad
rationem. And so from the Judges we shall have Responsa prudentum to decide all
such new Cases and Questions. And according to this Rule, all such new doubts
and questions have been resolved and decided by the grave Judges in former
times.

But here, A request to the professors of the Civil Law.
before I proceed further, I am to make a suite, which is this:

That whatsoever I have spoken, or shall happen to speak of the Civil Law;
or whatsoever I shall cite out of any Writer of that Law, I pray favor my
Masters that profess it. I acknowledge that Law to be ancient and general
in many parts of the world; and I reverence the professors of it, as men of
great learning, wisdom, and judgment. I profess it not; I have learned
little of it; but in that little I have found that in the real and essential
parts of Justice, the Civil and common Law do in many things concur,
though they differ much in the form and manner of proceeding. And that which I
shall have occasion to produce of that Law, will be to show how the common
Law and Civil do agree in one reason and judgment in those things which I
shall speak of.

Yet I must take liberty to say, That neither in Spain, nor in France (those
two great Monarchies) it is not generally received nor allowed as a concluding
and binding Law.

They take there the reason of it only as a direction to their proceeding and
judgment: But to produce or allege it as a concluding or binding Law, was no
less than Capitis poena.

This I make not of my self; for, besides common practice and experience, I
have an honest and substantial witness, Master Adam Blacwood a Scottishman,
Blacwood ca. 10
a man of singular learning in the Civil Law, who defends in like manner
the Laws of Scotland, as appears in his learned Book entitled, Pro Regibus
Apologia, written by him against a seditious Dialogue or Libell made by George
Buchanan, De iure regni apud Scotos, where he tells him, Aliud Sceptrum, aliud
Plectrum. But it is not amiss to recite his own words, which are thus;
Philippus cognomento Pulcher, cum Lutetiae supremae iurisdictionis curiam
institueret, eam Romano iure solutam esse declarauit in eamque sententiam vetus
extat eius Curiae decretum, ne causarum patroni Romanarum Legum auctoritatem
patriae legibus opponant. Sed cum illae bono and aequo niti videntur and
probabilem vtilitatis publicae causam continere, nos earum vtimur haud imperio,
sed ratione cui omnes homines naturae praescripto subijciuntur. Quin etsi quid
aduersus rationem legum Romanarum perperam ac temere iudicatum est, id earum
multis poenis haud aestimatur, sed vel Principis, vel superioris magistratus
arbitratu. Nam cum in publici muneris partem admittimur, and conceptis verbis
inauguramur, solemni sacramento regiarum and municipialium legum atque morum
obseruationem, nulla Romani iuris mentione, spondemus. Apud Hispanos capitis
poenam ijs indictam legimus qui Romanarum legum auctoritatem vel in foro
laudarent, vel in puluere scholastico profiter entur. Sed si quid occurreret
patrijs legibus ac moribus indefinitum quod iudicanti religionem adferret,
vnicum erat eximendo scrupulo regis consulendi remedium. Alaricus Tolosae
regnans, idem Gothis imperauit, vt si quis aduersus ipsius leges, Civil
Romanorum ius citaret, temere factum morte lueretur.

Now to return to that which I have touched before, Recurrend* ad Rationem etc.
I say, that when there is no direct Law, nor precise Example, we must
Recurrere ad ratione^, Quod non lego non credo.
and ad responsa prudentum: For, although Quod non lego, non credo, may be a
true and certain rule in Divinity; yet for interpretation of Laws, it is not
always so: For we must distinguish between fidem moralem, and fidem diuinam,
or else we shall consound many things in the civil and politic government
of Kingdoms and States. For, the first Precedent which we have now, had no
precedent when it began; But as Tacitus says, Quae nunc vetustissima creduntur
noua fuerunt, and quod hodie exemplis tuemur, inter exempla futurum est. And to
those that hold, that nothing is to be done but by former Examples, Horace
speaks thus; O imitatores seruum pecus: And Cicero says, Non exempla maiorum
quaerenda, sed confilium est eorum a quibus exempla nata sunt explicandum.

Thus has Justice been duly administered in England, and thereby the Kings
have ruled, the people have been governed, and the Kingdom has flourished
for many hundred years; and then no such busy Questionists moved any quarrel
against it.

Thus have all doubts growing upon Magna Charta, Exposition of Statutes.
and Charta de Foresta, made in King Henry the thirds time, and upon the
Statutes of Westmin. 1. Westminster. 2. Westminster. 3. and many other Statutes made in Ed.
1. time: And upon Praerogatiua Regis, and many other Statutes made in Ed. 2.
time, been from time to time expounded; and so of later times, the Statutes of
Fines, of Uses, of Wills, and many more.

Thus also have all Doubts and Cases, Exposition of Laws.
whereof there was no Statute or Positive Law, been always expounded: for
such are most of the cases which we have in our Yeere-Bookes, and Books of
Reports, which are in effect nothing but Responsa prudentum, as Justice Crook
did truly say.

Upon this reason it is, Laws obsolete.
that some laws, as well Statute Law, as common Law, are obsolete and worn
out of use: for, all humane laws are but Leges temporis: And the wisdom of
the Judges found them to be unmeet for the time they lived in, although very
good and necessary for the time wherein they were made. And therefore it is
said, Leges humanae nascuntur, vigent, and moriuntur, and habent ortum,
statum, and occasum.

By this Rule also, Laws changed.
and upon this reason it is, that oftentimes ancient Laws are changed by
interpretation of the Judges, as well in Cases criminal as civil.

In criminal cases the Law was Voluntas reputabitur pro facto; but it is not
so now, saving in treason only.

In an appeal of Maime Britton fol. 48. says, Soit le Judgment, que il perde
autiel member, come il aver toll a le plaintiff; but it is not so now.

In ancient time, one present, aiding, comforting, and assisting to a murder,
was taken to be no principal, but an accessorie, as it appears M. 40. Edw.
3. fol. 42. and 40. li. Ass. p. 8. and p. 25. But now in that case he is
judged a principal. And so it was ruled by all the Justices M. 4. H. 7. 18.
and so Plowden affirms the Law to be, in his Commentaries fol. 99. and 100.

In civil causes in ancient time, the Law was houlden, That he in Remainder
in Tail could not have an action of Waste, nor be received upon default of
tenant for life: But afterward, the Law was often judged otherwise; and so is
the common experience and practice at this day.

In Anno 40. Ed. 3. 28. Fynchden, chief Justice of the common place, says,
that in ancient time the Vicar could not have an Action against the Parson; But
he says the contrary is used at this day, which is the better.

In ancient time a Disseisee could not enter upon the feoffee of the Disseisor,
for saving of the warranty; but for many years the Law has been houlden
otherwise, and so the common practice yet remains.

By this Rule it is also, Construction of words.
that words are taken and construed, sometimes by Extension; sometimes by
Restriction; sometimes by Implication; sometimes a Disjunctive for a
Copulative; a Copulative for a Disjunctive; the present tense for the future;
the future for the present; sometimes by equity out of the reach of the words;
sometime words take in a contrary sense; sometime figuratively, as Continens
pro contento, and many other like: And of all these, examples be infinite, as
well in the civil law as common law:

And oftentimes the reverend Judges have had a grave regard in their
proceeding, Judges consulted with the privy Counsel.
that before they would resolve, or give judgment in such new Cases, they
desired to consult with the Kings privy Counsel; as appears in diverse
Cases in King Edward the third his time.

R. VV. assaulted Adam Brabson in presence of the Justices of Assise at
Winchester, 39. E. 3 li. As. p. 1.
for which A. B. complained by Bill before the said Justices, alleging this
offense to be in despite of the King and his Justices, to his damage of an
hundred pounds. R. VV. pleaded, Not guilty; and was found guilty, and
damages taxed to ten pounds. Thereupon the Judges awarded him to prison in
the Sherifes keeping. And for the Fine, and that which should be further done
for the King; for the assault done in the presence of the Judges, they would
have the advice of the Kings Counsel: M. 19. Ed. 3. Judgment 174
For in a like case, because R. C. did strike a Iurour at Westminster, which
passed in an Enquest against one of his friends; It was adjudged by all the
Counsel, that his right hand should be cut off; and his lands and goods
forfeited to the King. These be the words in the Book.

In this case I note three things.

1. The Judges consulted with the Counsel. 2. They have a like case before
when the Counsel was also consulted with, viz. Anno 19. E. 3. and yet they
would not proceed in this case before they had again consulted with the
Counsel. 3. That before Anno 19. Edw. 3. there was no like case nor precedent
for such a Judgment; And therefore the Judges would not of themselves
pronounce that heavy judgment before they had conferred with the Counsel
touching the same. And after they had the opinion and advise of the Kings
Counsel, they proceeded to that Judgment.
Thomas Vghtred Knight brought a Forme-done against a poor man and his wife;
M. 39. Ed. 3. 35
They came and yielded to the Demaundant, which seemed suspicious to the Court:
whereupon they examined the Matter, and stayed Judgment, because it was
suspicious. And Thorpe said, that in the like Case of Giles Blacket it was
spoken of in Parliament: And we were commanded, that when any like Case
should come, we should not go to judgment without good advise. Wherefore sue
to the Counsel, and as they will have us to do, we will; and otherwise not,
in this Case.

Green and Thorpe were sent by the Judges to the Kings Counsel (where there
were 24. Bishops and Earls) to demand of them, M. 40. Ed. 3. 34
whether by the Statute 14. Ed. 3. ca. 6. a word may be amended in a Writ,
as well as a letter or a syllable: for, the statute speaks but of a letter or a
syllable; and it was answered, That it may well be amended: For, there cannot
be a Word without a Syllable; and that it was a nice question of so sage men.

Thus Arbitria Iudicum, and Responsa prudentum have been received, allowed,
and reverenced in all times as Positive Law; and so it must be still; For,
otherwise much mischief and great inconvenience will ensue: for new Cases
happen every day: No law ever was, or ever can be made that can provide
remedy for all future cases; or comprehend all circumstances of humane actions
which Judges are to determine: Therefore, when such happen, and complaint is
made; what shall Judges do? Shall they give no remedy to the party grieved?
Shall they stay for a Parliament? Judges to be directed by reason and
discretion.
Interim patitur iustus. They must therefore follow Dictamen rationis; and so
give speedy justice. And in many matters of material circumstauces they must
guide themselves by discretion.

As in judging upon Presumptions; To discern which be Presumptiones
temerariae, which Probabiles, which violentae.

So for Time; what is a convenient Time, and what not.

So for Waste; what is Waste punishable, and what not.

So for Tenders of money; what is a convenient place for tender of money, and
what not: and what is a lawful Tender, and what not.

So for Disparagement; what is a disparagement, and what not: And so of other
the like cases, which are infinite.

If it be said (for so some have said) That if this be thus, Object.
then the common Law of England is uncertain; That the common Law is uncertain.
and so the rule of Justice, by which the people are governed, is too pliable,
and too weak, and uncertain.

By the same reason it may be said, Respons.
That all the Laws of all Nations are uncertain: For, in the Civil Law, which
is taken to be the most universal and general Law in the world, they hold
the same rule and order in all cases which be out of the direct words of the
Law; and such cases be infinite: For, as I said, new cases spring every day
as malice and fraud increases. And since the Roman Impire began, most of
their Laws be either Edicta Principum, or Arbitria Iudicum, or Responsa
prudentum. And in their Judgments they are guided by Arrests and former
Judgments, as may appear in the Books of many that have collected such
Arrests. And they attribute so much to such former Judgments, That as Prysot
equalleth them to a Positive Law, so they hold, that Sententia facit Ius, and
res iudicata pro veritate accipitur, and legis interpretatio legis vim obtinet.

Nay (which is more uncertain) sometimes they rely upon Doctors opinions
delivered in their Prelections and Treatises. And when they find them varying,
and differing one from another (as sometimes they do) then they prefer that
which is Communior opinio: And so in good reason they may: For, Pluralitas idem
sentientium, semper superat; quia facilius inuenitur quod a pluribus quaeritur.

But to conclude this point, I would ask of these Nouelists, what they would
have done in Sibill Belknappes case; if they had lived in Henry the fourths
time?

Sir Robert Belknappe, M. 2. H. 4. 7.
that reverend and learned Judge, of whom sundry noble and worthy persons,
and some now of great and eminent place in England are descended, was banished
out of the Realm, (Relegatus in vasconiam,) not for any desert or offense of
his, but by the might of his potent enemies, and malice of the time. The Lady
his wife continued in England; she was wronged; she brought a Writ in her own
Name alone, not naming her Husband. Exception was taken against it, because her
husband was living; and it was adjudged good, and she recovered: and the Judge
Markeham said;

Ecce modo miru^ quod foemina fert breue regis,
Non nominando virum coniunctu^ robore legis.
Here was a rare and a new case, yet it was not deferred until a Parliament:
it was judged, and her wrong was righted by the common Law of England, and that
Ex arbitrio Iudicum, and ex responsis prudentum; and yet it was counted Mirum
with an Ecce.

Now to apply this to R. Caluines case: his case is rare and new, so was that:
There is no direct Law for him in precise and express terms: There was never
judgment before touching any borne in Scotland, since King James began his
happy reign in England: He is the first that is brought in question: So
there was no direct Law for Sibill Belknap to sue in her own name without her
husband, who was then living: nay rather there was direct Law against it; yet
by the Law of England she had judgment to recover with an Ecce modo mirum:
So by the law of England judgment ought to be given for Robert Calvin, but
not with an Ecce modo mirum; but upon strong Arguments deduced a similibus, and
ex dictamine rationis.

But before I come to those arguments, I will use a few words more touching some
Rules which I have read for the interpretation of laws.

There is a grave and learned Writer in the Civil Law that sets down
four ways and forms of interpretation of laws: Note four forms of
interpretation of Laws.
that is, first, Interpretatio historica; secondly, Etymologica; thirdly,
Analogica; fourthly, Practica.

In the Argument of this Case all these forms have been used, and largely
handled: and the two first be those that seem but light to me, and therefore
in mine opinion have been too much stood upon, and ouer-weighed.

For the Historical interpretation, Historica.
it is always dark, obscure, and uncertain, of what kingdom, country, or
place soever you speak; I do always and only except the divine Histories
written in the Bible.

Liuy says, In tanta rerum vetustate multi temporis errores implicantur.

Saint Augustine speaking of the supposed Books of Henoch says, Libri isti
ob nimiam antiquitatem reijciuntur.

Wherefore, for this part let this suffice, whether in the beginning there
were one or several Kingdoms in great Britain; or one or several Monarchs
and Kings of these two great and famous Kingdoms in great Britain. The King
our Sovereign is lawfully and lineally descended of the first great Monarchs
and Kings of both the Kingdoms; Fergus.
and that by so long a continued line of lawful descent, Inas.
as therein he exceeds all the Kings that the world now knows; and
therefore to inquire further of Historical knowledge in this Case, I hold it
needelesse.

For the Etymologicall interpretation, Etymologica
there has been very much said, even as much as Wit and Art could devise:
There have been alleged many Definitions, Descriptions, Distinctions,
Differences, Divisions, Subdiuisions, Allusion of words, Extension of words,
Construction of words; and nothing left unsearched to find what is Ligeantia,
Allegiantia, Fides, Obedientia, Subiectio, Subditi; And who be Aborigines,
Indigenae, Alienigenae, Aduenticij, Denizati, etc. And much of this has been
drawn out of some Writers of the Civil Law; amongst whom the Etymologicall
interpretation of the words Ligeus, and Ligeantia, is as uncertain and
doubtful, as it is with our common Lawyers; And so upon any of these there
cannot be any certain Rule found for Judges to judge by, especially in new and
rare Cases.

As for Definition, Vlpian teaches us, Omnis definitio in iure Civilly est
periculosa: and it is said, that Definitio est duplex: Propria, quae constat ex
genere, and differentia: Impropria, quae and descriptio vocatur, and est
quaelibet rei designatio: So Definition and Description are often confounded,
and both uncertain. Then, since both be uncertain and dangerous, I will leave
both, and seek a more certain Rule to judge by.

As for Etymology of words, I agree with him which says, It is Leuis and
fallax, and plerumque ridicula. It is a Pedant Grammarians fault. Marcus Varro
and others have been noted for it. And if you examine the Examples which some
do bring, you will perceive how ridiculous and vain it is. So this Rule will
not serve to find out that which we seek for: These be but Tendiculae
verborum, and Aucupationes syllabarum as one calls them: It may have some
use, and serve a turn in Schools, but it is too light for judgments in Law,
and for the seats of Justice.

Aquinas sets down a more certain Rule, In vocibus videndum, non tam a quo,
quam ad quid sumantur. And words should be taken Sensu currenti: for Use and
Custom is the best Expositor both of Laws and Words, Quem penes arbitrium
and ius and norma loquendi.

Wherefore, of the many and diverse distinctions, divisions, and subdiuisions,
that have been made in this Case, I will say no more but, Confusum est
quicquid in puluerem sectum est: and will conclude with Bishop Iuel; A man may
wander and miss his way in Mists of Distinctions.

Then leaving these Historical and Etymologicall interpretations, Ligeantia
sensu currenti est vinculum fidei etc.
and these curious and subtle Distinctions and Divisions, I say, Ligeantia, or
Allegiantia understood Sensu currenti, is vinculum fidei and obedientiae, as
Justice Daniel said well. And he that is borne in any of the Kings Dominions,
and under the Kings obedience, is the Kings liege subject, and borne Ad fidem
Regis (for that is the proper and ancient word which the law of England has
used; Ad fidem Regis Angliae, Ad fidem Regis Franciae) and therefore he cannot
be a Stranger or Alien to the King, or in any of his Kingdoms; and by
consequence, is inhabled to have lands in England, and to sue, and be sued in
any Real action for the same.

And Ligeantia has sometimes a more large Extension: For, he that is an Alien
borne out of the kings Dominions, under the obedience of another king, if he
dwell in England, and be protected by the king and his Laws, he owes to the
king the duty of Allegiance; and so he is Ligatus Regi, and Ligeus Regis:
and if he commit treason, the Indictment shall be contra ligeantiae suae
debitum, as it was in Shirley the French-mans Case: yet is he not the Kings
subject: for, he was not borne Ad fidem Regis; But, this is not that Ligeance
which we must find: For, in a true and lawful subject, there must be
Subiectio, fides, and obedientia; and those cannot be severed, no more than
true Faith and Charity in a true Christian. And he that has these three a
natiuitate, is Ligeus Regis, and can not be a Stranger or Alien to the King,
or in his Kingdoms. And that it is so, may be proved by the Rule of the other
two interpretations of Law; That is, Analogica.
Analogica, and Practica.

King James has now the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Isles of Gernsey, and Iersey by descent; all these be his Dominions, and under
his subjection and obedience.

King Henry the second had England and Normandy by descent, from his mother
Mawd the Empress; and Aniow, and Maine by descent from his father Geffery
Plantagenet; and Ireland by conquest.

Henry the third had England and Ireland by descent from his Grandfather Henry
the second: and Aquitany by descent from his Grandmother Queen Elenor wife to
King Henry the second, and daughter to the duke of Aquitany.

Edward the first had all the same by descent; and part of Scotland by
Conquest.

Edward the second, and Edward the third had all the same by descent also: and
besides, Edward the third claimed all France by descent from his mother Queen
Isabell, and had the most part of it in possession; and so had Henry the fifth
and Henry the sixth also.

Now if in these kings times, subjects borne in those Countries, being then
under their obedience, were no Aliens, but capable of lands in England: And
if at this time subjects borne in Ireland, or Gernsey, and Iersey be no Aliens,
but capable of lands in England; then, by an Analogicall interpretation, why
should not subjects borne in Scotland be at this time in like degree? For, in
proportion, and in likeness, and conueniencie, there can be no difference at
all.

But whether the subjects borne in those Countries in the time of those kings
were then capable of lands in England as natural subjects; Practica: and sic
ad similia.
or were deemed Aliens, is the Question: and therein Interpretatio practica is
to be considered; and so the Case is brought to be examined per similia. And
in Divinity Praxis sanctorum est interpres praeceptorum.

Now then the Question is, Whether the kings Subjects of England and Scotland,
that be Post-nati, may be resembled to the Kings subjects of Ireland, and the
Isles of Gernesey, etc. as now they be: and to the subjects of Normandy,
Aniow, and Gascoyne, and part of Scotland in former times, when the same were
the Dominions, and under the obedience of the King of England: (for I speak
always, and would be understood of kingdoms and dominions in possession, and
under obedience, and not of those whereunto the King has right, but has no
possession or obedience.) I houlde, that in all points material concerning
this Question they are alike, though not in all things: (for, then it were
Idem, and not Simile:) and this can not be better understood, than by
examining the Objections to the contrary: which in substance may be reduced to
four in number.

First for Ireland, Ireland.
it was gotten by Conquest, Object. 1.
and the Conqueror may impose what Laws he will upon them: But it is
otherwise of kingdoms coming by descent.

This is a conceipted difference, Respons.
and lacks the foundation of Reason, and has not the true parts of a
difference: for those that are borue in Ireland, and those that are borne in
Scotland, are all alike for their birth within the Kings Dominions, and are
borne under the like subjection and obedience to the King, and have the like
bond; Nay, even the same bond of Allegiance; That is, they are borne Ad fidem
Regis.

Besides, where it is said, The Conqueror may impose what Laws he will: Then
consider how it was in the Interim before King John gave laws to Ireland.

Nay, which is more, I ask whether the Conqueror of Ireland can give new
laws to England, and make Irish men to be as natural borne subjects in
England (if their birthright do not give it them) which before the Conquest
they were not? for, that is properly the Question: But if any difference be,
the Case of descent is the stronger: For, (as Justice Yeluerton said) that is
by an undoubted Title made by law; the other by a doubtful Title won by the
Sword.

But leave Ireland gotten by Conquest; France.
what say you to the great kingdom of France; which Edward the third had
first in right by lawful descent, and after in possession by triumphant
Conquest; and which Henry the sixth held after in possession by descent? Was
ever doubt made, Whether the subjects borne there so long as it was in
subjection and obedience to the King, were capable of lands in England?

I will now turn the Case, and ask an other Question; If King James our
Sovereign had first been King of England by lavvfull descent (as now he is)
and after Scotland had descended unto him, should not the Subjects of Scotland
(I speak still of Post-nati) have been judged as Natural subjects in
England, as those of France were in Edward the thirds time?

Then, he having now both kingdoms by lineall, true, and lavvfull descent, it
can make no difference touching the capacity of Subjects, which kingdom
descended to him first, and which second; but both are to him alike. And it is
clear, Post-nati in England are now capable and inheritable in Scotland,
though some have made a causeless and needelesse doubt of it: and so on the
other side those of Scotland are in England.

It is said, Normandy and Aquitany.
Normandy and Aquitanie were no monarchies or kingdoms, Object. 2.
but dukedomes or seigniories in France, and holden of the Crown of France,
and therefore not to be resembled to Scotland, which is an ancient and
absolute kingdom.

This Objection reaches not to the reason of our Question: Respons.
For, be they kingdoms, be they Seigniories, yet the subjects borne there,
were borne out of the kingdom of England, and so in that respect Aliens: But
in that they were borne within the kings dominions, and under his subjection
and obedience, they were no Aliens but liege and natural borne subjects to
the King; and so capable and inheritable in England.

I say besides, the Dukes of Normandy and Aquitany were absolute Princes, and
had sovereign power in those countries, although they did not bear the name
of kings; as at this time the Duke of Sauoy; the duke of Florence; the Duke and
State of Venice; and of late, the great Duke of Russia; the Duke of Burgundy;
the Archduke of Austria, etc.

So the difference in Style and Name makes no difference in Sovereignty: For,
king Henry the eight had as absolute soueraignetie in Ireland, when his Style
was Lord of Ireland, as when he changed his Style, and was called, King of
Ireland.

And, to say, That the tenure of the Crown of France should give any
privilege to them of Normandy and Aquitanie in England is a strange conceit;
It might rather be objected against them. But, as I said before, they were
borne within the kings Dominions, and under his obeisance, and therefore as
subjects borne in England.

And if men may believe some ancient Stories, Aquitany and Normandy had
sometimes kings, and were kingdoms of themselves: and not depending nor subject
to the Crown of France: and the kingdom of France was then a small portion of
Gallia, and but a little one, in comparison of that which it is at this day.
And some say, that there were four and twenty kings in Gaul: But as the
kings of France increased in power and strength, they subdued their
neighbor-Princes, and so that kingdom grew to that greatness that now it is
at; even as the Heptarchie in England was dissolved, and made an entire
kingdom, when one of the kings mightier than the rest subdued his neighbors.

It is said further, The Crown and great seal of England.
that Normandy and Aquitany were subjects to the Crown of England; Object. 3.
and to the great Seal of England; but so is not Scotland: Ergo etc.

This stands not well with that which Respons.
was objected before; That they were but Seigniories houlden of the Crown of
France. And it is true, that before Edward the thirds time, those Kings of
England that held those great Seigniories, did acknowledge, that they held the
same of the Crown of France.

But these Objections be light, and not worth the time that has been spent
about them. The Soueraignetie is in the person of the King; the Crown is but
an Ensign of Soueraignety; the Inuesture and Coronation are but Ceremonies of
honor, and majesty: the King is an absolute and perfect king before he be
crowned, and without those Ceremonies.

The Seal is to be altered and changed at the will and pleasure of the King:
he may have one, he may have many, as pleases him. The King did use Queen
Elizabeth's Seal, for diverse months after his coming into England: Queen
Elizabeth used king Philips and queen Mary's Seal for a time; and queen
Marie used king Edwards seal. And all that was so done, was well and lawfully
done. Many things were done by ancient kings of England before the Conquest by
their signature, and sign manuell without any seal at all; and some such
since the Conquest also: as Graunts made by Maude the Empress to Albericke de
Vere, and others.

The King may by his great seal command all his subjects that be under his
obedience wheresoever they be in the world: So he did in Normandy; so he did
in Aquitany; so he did in that part of Scotland that he had in possession. And
in 24. Edw. 1. his Judges kept ordinary Courts of justice there: and I have
seen the Records of Placita. Exercitus Regis apud Edinburgh, Apud Roxburgh,
Apud S. Iohns-towne, etc. in Scotia. So he may command his subjects, if they
be in France, Spain, Rome, or Turkey, or the Indies. And for several seals,
the Earl of Chester had a special seal for that his ancient County
Palatine. The Duke of Lancaster had a special seal for his new County
Palatine. And after, when these Counties came to the kings possession, the
Kings continued several seals in them both for the administration of
justice; but as subordinate to the great Seal of England.

And I make little doubt, but if the King shall now command any of his
subjects of Scotland under his great seal of England, they will (as they
ought) duetifully obey him. As in king Edward the 1. Edward the 2. and Edward
the 3. times they commanded many of the Lords of that part of Scotland which
then was under their obedience.

I find, that in 13. Edw. 2. quarto die Iunij, the King Constituit Adomaru^ de
Valentia comitem Pe^brochiae Custodem Regni sui; ac locum suum tenente^ quamdiu
Rex in partibus transmarinis mora^ fecerit. And the next day, viz. Die Iouis
quinto die Iunij Rex ordinauit, quod magnum Sigillum suum remaneret clausum in
liquo loco securo, dum Rex esset in partibus transmarinis: Et ordinauit quoddam
aliud paruum Sigillum interim pro regimine Regni, ad breuia, etc. Consignanda,
sub Test Adomari de Valentia Comitis Pembroch. Nota, here was a petty Seal
pro regimine Regni, wherein are comprised Commissions for Justice, Mandatoria,
and ad breuia consignanda; which is for Remedialia as they are termed.

It is said, Several Laws.
that Scotland has Laws that are proper for that kingdom, Object. 4.
and that they are not subject to the laws of England, and so e contra.

And lastly it was said, that in England every person was within the
jurisdiction of some Leete, and at the age of twelve years every one is to be
sworn in the Leete to be Foiall and Loiall to the King of England; That is,
to the Laws of England, (for so he understood Loiall:) But Post-nati in
Scotland can not be so; and that they have an other form of oathe in Scotland:
Ergo, etc.

For this last part, Respons.
of the Oathe in the Leete, the Lord chief Baron did clear it so plainly, as
more needs not to be said. This is Legalis ligeantia, It is not Alta ligeantia
by birth, which is that which we have now in question.

The Historical discourse that has bin made of Leetes, of Law days, of
Decenna, Decennarij, of the Tenne-mens Tale, and the Oathe of all Male children
of twelve years, etc. taken at the Leete, is no news indeed, it is very old.

Master Lambard has it all, Lambard in explicatione verbi Centuria.
and more too, at large in Explicatione verborum in the word Centuria; It was
before the Conquest.

But it makes no hing to this natural Allegiance and subjection of birth; it
is not Alta ligeantia by birthright; it is but Legalis ligeantia by Policy:
And Fitzherbert calls it Swearing to the Law.

And if that were the only Bond and Mark of Allegiance, many are out of it,
and so at liberty. As, children under twelve years; yet sometimes they may
commit treason and felony; where, Malitia supplet aetatem: So women of all
sorts; yet they may be shrewd and dangerous traitors; and if they be women
nobly borne, or widows that were wives to noble men, they shall be tried per
pares.

Also Noble men of all sorts, who are neither bound to attend the Leete, nor
to take that Oathe, as appears by Britton cap. 29. treating of the Court
called The Shirifes Turn, out of which the Leete seems to be extracted: For,
whatsoever is not presented in the Leete may be presented and punished in the
Shirifs Turn. And M Kitchen cites Britton in this point for the Leete; and
alleges also the statute of Marlebridge cap. 10. to the same purpose.

And at this day the view of Francke-pleges, and the putting in of
Francke-pleges, and the Decennarij, are but bare names of things past, the use
and substance is obsolete and gone.

And, as it was said, few in this place have put in such Pleges, or taken that
Oath, and yet I trust we are good subjects, and bear true faith and
allegiance.

But this has been so fully answered and cleared by the Lord chief Baron,
and the Lord Coke, chief Justice of the Common pleas, as I do wrong to spend
time in it.

But touching the several Laws; I say, that several laws can make no
difference in matter of Sovereignty; and in the bond of Allegiance and
obedience to one King: And so it concludes nothing for the point in question.

Normandy and Aquitany had several laws differing from the laws of England:
so had France in King Edward the 3. and Henry the 6. his time.

Ireland, before king John's time continued their ancient Laws, and so, for
the most part, have done ever since.

Gernesey and Iersey have yet at this day several laws, which, for the most
part, were the ancient Laws and Customs of Normandy.

Wales had, and in many things yet have several Laws: so for the County
Palatine of Chester also.

Yet these never were, nor must not be cantelled and cut off from their
allegiance and obedience to the King; nor the Kings subjects borne there be
incapable of lands and inheritance in England: for where there is but one
Sovereign, all his subjects borne in all his Dominions be borne Ad fidem
Regis; and are bound to him by one bond of Faith and Allegiance: And in that,
one is not greater nor lesser than an other: nor one to be preferred before
another: but all to be obedient alike; and to be ruled alike; yet under
several Laws and Customs. And as Saint Gregory says of the Church, In
vna fide nihil officit Ecclesiae sanctae diuersa consuetudo. So I will conclude
for this point, That diversity of Laws and Customs makes no breach of that
unity of obedience, faith, and allegiance which all liege subjects owe to
their liege King and Sovereign Lord. And as none of them can be Aliens to the
king, so none of them can be Aliens or Strangers in any of his kingdoms or
dominions; nor Aliens or strangers one to another, no more than a Kentishman,
to a Cheshire-man; or e contra.

And therefore all that have bin borne in any of the kings dominions since he
was King of England, are capable and inheritable in all his Dominions without
exception.

And as to the other part of the Objection, Defect of Trial.
that there will be defect of trial; for, things done in Scotland, cannot be
tried in England; I say, that that makes little to our present Question,
whether Post-nati in Scotland, be Aliens in England, and not capable of lands
in England: but it trencheth to* cast some aspersion upon the common law of
England; That it is not sufficient to give justice to the Kings subjects for
lack of sufficient means of trial of questions of fact: but to this baron
Altham gave so full an aunsweare, as more cannot be said: And so he did both
clear the doubt, and did vphould the sufficiency of the law of England in
that behalf. And it seems strange, that this should now be found out to be
objected against Scotland, since it was never heretofore objected for France,
Normandy, Aquitany, nor is at this day for Ireland, Gernesey, and Iersey, etc.
whereas all stand upon the same reason for the point of trial. But the
wisdom of the law of England has been such, as there never failed certain
rules for trial of all questions in fact; and those were fitted and adapted to
the Matter which was to be tried. And therefore, whosoever does diligently
observe it, he shall find in the course and practice of the laws of England
above twenty several forms of trialls: as by Battle; by Jury, and that in
diverse kinds; by Wager of Law; by Proofs; by Examination; by Inspection; by
Certificates of diverse kinds; and by many other ways: And lest there should
be any defect in that behalf, the Law has provided several forms of
Joining of issues; and in that, has special regard of things done out of the
Realm, as every Student may see in the Books of Reports.

Thus I have passed these four Objections, and therefore for this part I
conclude, That if Argumentum a simili were ever good and concludent in Law, my
Lords the Judges have proved this Case by so many plain and direct Examples,
and like Cases; and by so many strong arguments and solid reasons drawn out
of Book Cases, out of Statutes, out of the true rules and form of pleading,
and out of ancient Records and Precedents, some produced by M. Attorney, and
many more remembered by the Judges, as no one thing can be more plainly
exemplified, nor appear more like to an other, than this Case is to those
Cases which they have remembered.

But if examples and arguments a simili do fail, Recurrend ad Rationem.
then it remains Recurrere ad Rationem; and what reason that ought to be,
and how to be understood, is to be considered: for, it is said, that Lex est
ratio summa, iubens ea quae facienda sunt, and prohibens contraria. So it must
be the depth of reason, not the light and shallow distempered reasons of common
Discoursers walking in Powles, or at Ordinaries, in their feasting and
drinking, drowned with drink, or blown away with a whiffe of Tobacco.
Lucretius notes, that in many there is Rationis egestas: And saint Gregory
says, Qui in factis Dei rationem non videt, infirmitatem suam considerans cur
non videat, rationem videt: For, although Reason and Knowledge be infinite,
yet no man can have more of it than he is capable of: Every man must receive
it, and keep it in his own vessel; he cannot borrow his neighbors
braine-pan to put it in. And therefore it is not without cause, Hopperus de
vera Iuris prudentia page 118
that one of the grauest and best learned Lawyers of our age, and a privy
Counselor to one of the greatest Monarchs of Europe, describes those that
should be Interpreters of Laws by four special qualities, That is, 1.
AEtate graves, 2. Eruditione praestantes; 3. Vsu rerum prudentes, 4. Publica
authoritate constituti: So, there must be gravity, there must be learning,
there must be experience, and there must be authority: and if any one of these
want, they are not to be allowed to be Interpreters of the Law.

How all these Qualities concur in these reverend Judges, whom we have heard
in this present Case, I will spare to speak what I think: For, Chrysostom
teaches me, Qui laudatur infacie, flagellatur in cord.

In seeking out this depth of Reason, the same Author gives a caution,
Hopperus ibid. page 119.
which is this; Vitium quod in hoc genere fugi debet est, ne, si Ratione^ non
inuenias, mox legem sine ratione esse clames. And in 36. H. 6. Fortescue says
the same in effect, which is thus; We have many Courses and Forms which be
houlden for Law, and have been houlden and used because of Reason; and
notwithstanding the reason be not ready in memory, yet by study and labor a
man may find it.

Now when we come to examine by reason, whether Post-nati in Scotland shall be
disabled as Aliens, or shall be capable of lands in England, as natural borne
subjects there; we are first to consider what is the reason why Aliens in
the Dominions, and under the obedience of other foreign Princes, are nor
capable of lands in England: And surely, the true reason is, that which was
noted by baron Altham; and has since been often remembered, viz. The danger
that might thereby come to the king and the commonweal: Specially by drawing
hither too great multitudes of them: for so the Treasure of the Realm might
be transported by them into other foreign Kingdoms and Countries; whereby it
might be used against the King, and to the prejudice of the State. And
besides, they might underhand practice Sedition and Rebellion in the kingdom,
and cause many other dangers and inconveniences: but that reason cannot serve
against Post-nati in Scotland, now that there is but one King of both the
kingdoms, no more than it can serve against those that are borne in Ireland,
or Gernesey, or Iersey: and therefore in reason they are as capable of lands
in England, as the kings subjects of Ireland, and Gernesey, and Iersey are.

Against this, Objections.
there have also been many Objections made, and Reasons devised that seem
witty, and have some show of probability to prove that Post-nati in Scotland
are Aliens, and ought not in reason to be capable of lands in England,
videlicet*

1. That England and Scotland were two ancient several kingdoms under
several kings, and several crowns.

2. That they continue yet several kingdoms.

3. That they have yet several Laws, several Seals, several Crowns, and
several Kings: For, it is said, though king James be king of both, and has
but one natural body, yet in judgment of Law, he is in respect of his two
several kingdoms, as two several kings, and the subjects of each several
kingdom are bound to him by distinct allegiance, according to the several
Laws of the kingdom where they were borne.

And all this is grounded upon this rule or fiction in Law: Quando duo iura
concurrunt in vna persona, aequum est ac si essent in diuersis.

And upon this ground is this new form of pleading devised, which the
Defendants have used in this Case, such as cannot be found in any Record, ever
to have been pleaded before; and may as well serve against the Kings
subjects of Ireland, as against the Post-nati of Scotland. And sithence in
former times the like form of pleading was never seen against any of the
Kings of Englandes subjects, which were borne in any of his dominions out of
England, as in Normandy or Aquitanie, or in France (I mean such part of it as
was in the Kings possession, and in subjection and obedience to him, and not
in that part of France which his enemies held) it may be probably inferred,
That it was then generally houlden, that neither such a form of pleading, nor
the Matter it self was sufficient in Law to disable any such Plaintiff:
for, against Frenchmen that were not under the Kings obedience we find it
often pleaded. And as those that were not subjects to the King, nor borne under
his obedience, did then presume to bring suites, and actions in England. So it
can not be thought, but that the king having then so large and ample Dominions
beyond the Seas, as Normandy and Aquitany, and many other parts of France,
some of his subjects borne there, had cause to have, and did bring the like
suites in England. And sithence no such Plea is found to have been then used
against them, it can not in Law and Reason be now allowed against the
Post-nati in Scotland: For, I may say as Ascue said in 37. H. 6. Our
Predecessors were as sage and learned as we be.

And I see not, but that in this Case a good Argument may be reasonably
deduced from the Negative, as it was in the Case reported by the great learned,
and most grave and reverend Judge sir James Dyer chief Justice of the Common
pleas, P. 23. Elizab. Dyer. 376.
Anno 23. Elizab. The Question there, was, Whether an erroneous judgment given
in Rye, which is a member of the Cinqueportes, might be reuersed in the kings
Bench, or Common place at Westminster; And it was thus resolved; Sed pro eo
quod nullu^ tale breue in Registro, nec in aliquibus Praecedentibus curiarum
praedictaru^ inueniri potuerat, dominus Cancellarius Bromley per opinionem
Capitalium Iusticiariorum vtriusque Banci denegauit tale breue concedere. And
so Justice Fenners argument houldeth well, viz. There is in this Case no law
to exclude the Complainant, Ergo he is a liege and a natural borne subject.

But the form of pleading in the time of king Ed. 1. in Cobledickes case,
which was cited out of Hengam, (and the Book showed here by the Lord chief
Justice Coke) is so direct and plain for this our Question, as nothing can be
more plain: and therefore I think it not amiss to report it again.

That Case was in effect and substance, thus:

A woman brought a Writ of Ayel against Roger Cobledicke, and declared of the
seisin of Roger her Grandfather, and conveyed the descent to Gilbert her
father; and from him to the Demaundant, as his daughter and heir. The Tenant
pleaded, that the Demaundant was a French-woman, and not of the ligeance nor of
the fidelity of England; and demanded judgment if she ought to have the
action against him. This plea was houlden to be insufficient; and thereupon
the tenant amended his plea, and pleaded further, That the Demaundant was not
of the ligeance of England, nor of the fidelity of the King; and demanded
judgment, etc. And against that plea none exception was taken, but thereupon
the Demaundant prayed license to depart from her Writ. By this it appears
plainly, that the first plea, alleging that she was a French-woman, and not
of the ligeance, nor of the fidelity of England, was insufficient (and so
declared by Berreford the chief Justice;) For, there can be no fidelity nor
allegiance due to England, respecting the land and soil without a Sovereign
and King. But the second Plea alleging, that she was not of the ligeance of
England, nor of the fidelity of the King, was good and sufficient: For, to the
King fidelity and allegiance is due; and therefore, since she failed in that,
she was not to be answered: and thereupon she prayed license to depart from
her Writ, and so she left her suite.

Now, Stat. 14. Ed. 3.
for the reasons which have been drawn and strained out of the statute An.
14. Edw. 3. That the Realm of England shall not be subject to France.
if they be well examined, they serve little for this point which we have in
hand.

It is to be considered, at what time, and upon what occasion that Statute was
made: King Edw. the third being right heir to the Crown and Kingdom of
France by descent from his Mother, and having spent many years for the
recovering of the same, resolved to take upon him the Name and Style of King of
France; being advised thereunto by them of Flaunders: Hereupon he did take the
Style of King of France; and altered his Seal and his Arms; and after a
while, placed the Arms of France before the ancient Arms of England, as they
are borne at this day. This gave occasion for the making of this statute: for
some people (Ascun gentes, says the statute) seeing this change, and
considering the large and ample extent, and the magnificence of that great
Kingdom, began to doubt that the king would make his Imperial seat there;
and conceived thereby, that the kingdom of England, being the lesser, should
be in subjection of the king and kingdom of France, being the greater, and to
be governed and ruled by a Viceroy, or Deputy, as they saw Ireland was. And
though in the Kings Style, England was placed before France, yet they saw the
Arms of France marshalled before the Arms of England; though at the first
bearing thereof some say it was not so.

To clear this doubt, and to take away this fear from the Subjects of
England, was this Statute made, as does plainly appear by the words of the
statute it self.

Now if you will make an apt and proper application of that Case then between
England and France, to this our Case now, between Scotland and England, it
must be thus:

1. Edw. 3. then king of England (being the lesser) had afterward the
kingdom of France (being the greater) by descent, and took the Style of King
of France.

King James king of Scotland (being the lesser) has afterward the kingdom of
England (being the greater) by descent, and takes the Style of King of England.

2. King Ed. 3. altered his Seal, and his Arms, and placed the Arms of
France before the Arms of England.

King James has changed his Seal, and his Arms in England, and has placed
the Arms of England before the Arms of Scotland.

3. It was then doubted, that King Edw. 3. would remove his Court out of
England, the lesser, and keep his Imperial seat and state in France, the
greater.

King James has indeed removed his Court out of Scotland, the lesser, and
does in his royal person (with the Queen and Prince, and all his Children)
keep his Imperial seat in England, the greater.

4. In all these the cases agree; but yet one difference there is, and that is
in the Style: For king Ed. 3. in his Style placed England, the lesser, being
his ancient kingdom, before France, the greater, being newly descended unto
him.

But King James in his Style places England, the greater, though newly
descended unto him, before Scotland, the lesser, being his ancient kingdom.

5. Now, this being thus; perhaps Scotland might out of this Example have
conceived the like doubt against England, as England did then against France:
But as there was then no doubt made, whether the kings subjects borne in
England should be capable of lands in France; so, out of this statute, and upon
this example no doubt can be inferred, whether the kings subjects now borne in
Scotland, shall be capable of lands in England.

But, all these Objections, and the ground whereupon they are framed, viz.
Quando duo iura etc. have been so thoroughly and profoundly examined, and so
learnedly and fully answered and cleared by the Judges, as I make no doubt but
all wise and indifferent hearers be well satisfied therein.

And if there be any so possessed with a preiudicate opinion against Truth,
and Reason, that will say in their own hearts licet persuaseris non
persuadebis; and so, either Serpent-like stop their ears, or else wilfully
absent themselves, because they would not hear the weakness and absurdities
of their own conceits laid open and confuted: If there be any such I say
(as I trust there be but few, and yet I fear there be some) I would they had
learned of Tertullian, That Veritas docendo suadet, non suadendo docet. And I
wish that they be not found among the number of those to whom Saint Paul
says, Si quis ignorant, ignoret: And Saint John in the Apocalips, Qui sordidus
est, sordescat adhuc. And I will exhort with Saint Paul. Qui tenet, teneat, and
not waver or doubt by such weak arguments and objections.

But in this new learning, A dangerous distinction between the King and the
Crown.
there is one part of it so strange, and of so dangerous consequent, as I may
not let it pass, viz. That the king is as a king divided in himself; and so
as two kings of two several kingdoms; and that there be several allegeances,
and several subiections due unto him respectively in regard of his several
kingdoms, the one not participating with the other.

This is a dangerous distinction between the King and the Crown, and
between the King and the kingdom: It reaches too far; I wish every good
subject to beware of it. It was never taught, but either by traitors, as in
Spencers Bill in Edward the seconds time (which Baron Snig, and the Lord chief
Baron, and Lord Coke remembered) or by treasonable Papists, as Harding in his
Confutation of the Apology maintains, that Kings have their authority by the
positive Law of Nations, and have no more power, than the People has, of
whom they take their temporal jurisdiction; and so Ficlerus Simanca, and
others of that crew.

Or by seditious Sectaries and Puritans, as Buchannon De Iure Regni apud
Scotos, Penry, Knox, and such like.

For, by these, and those that are their followers, and of their Faction, there
is in their Pamphlets too much such traitorous seed sown.

But leaving this, Absurdities in this dangerous distinction
I will add a little more, to prove, that in reason Robert Calvin, and other
like Post-nati in Scotland, ought by Law to be capable of lands in England:
and for that, I will remember one rule more which is certain and fails not, and
ought to be observed in all Interpretation of Laws; and that is, Ne quid
absurdum, ne quid illusorium admittatur.

But, upon this subtle and dangerous Distinction of Faith and Allegiance due to
the King, and of Faith and Allegiance due to the Crown, and to the Kingdom
(which is the only Basis and fundamental maine reason to disable the
Plaintiff, and all Post-nati) there follow too many gross, and foul
absurdities, whereof I will touch some few, and so conclude, that in Law and
Reason this subtle, but absurd and dangerous distinction, ought not to be
allowed.

This Bond of Allegiance whereof we dispute, is Vinculum fidei; it binds the
soul and conscience of every subject severally and respectively, to be
faithful and obedient to the King: and as a Soul or Conscience cannot be
framed by Policy; so Faith and Allegiance cannot be framed by Policy, nor
put into a politic body. An oath must be sworn by a natural body; homage
and fealty must be done by a natural body, a politic body cannot do it.

Now then, since there is but one king, and sovereign, to whom this faith and
allegiance is due by all his subjects of England and Scotland, can any humane
policy divide this one King, and make him two kings? Can cor Regis Angliae be
in manu Domini, and cor Regis Scotiae not so? Can there be wars between the
King of England, and the king of Scotland? or between the kingdom of England,
and the kingdom of Scotland, so long as there is but one king? Can the king of
England now send an army roial into Scotland against the king of Scotland? Can
there be any Letters of Mark or Reprisall now granted by the king of
England, against the subjects of the king of Scotland? Can there be any
Protections now, Quia profecturus in exercitu Iacobi Regis Angliae in Scotiam?

Nay shortly, Can any man be a true subject to King James as King of England,
and a traitor or rebel to king James as king of Scotland? Shall a foot
breadth, or an inch breadth of ground make a difference of birthright of
subjects borne under one king? Nay, where there are not any certain bounds or
limits known at all, but an imaginary partition wall, by a conceipted
fiction in Law? It is enough to propound these and such like Questions,
whereof many more might be remembered: they carry a sufficient and plain
answer in themselves: Magis docet qui prudenter interrogat.

As the King nor his heart cannot be divided, for he is one entire King over
all his subjects, in which soever of his Kingdoms or Dominions they were
borne, so he must not be served nor obeyed by halues; he must have entire
and perfect obedience of his subjects: for, Ligentia (as Baron Heron said
well) must have four qualities; It must be 1. Pura and simplex: 2. Integra
and solida: 3. Vniuersalis non localis: 4. Permanens, continua, and illaesa.
Divide a man's heart, and you lose both parts of it, and make no heart at all;
so he that is not an entire subject, but half faced, is no subject at all;
and he that is borne an entire and perfect subject, ought by Reason and Law
to have all the freedoms, privileges, and benefits pertaining to his
Birthright in all the Kings Dominions; and such are all the Post-nati in
England and Scotland. And the inconvenience of this imaginary local allegiance
has been so lately, and so fully declared by the Lord chief Justice Coke,
as more needs not be said in it.

In some special Cases there sometime may be a king of subjects without land
in possession, as Justice Fenner noted in the government which Moses had over
the people of Israel in the wilderness; and as in the Case which sir John
Popham the late Lord chief Justice did put in the Parliament: If a King and
his subjects be driven out of his kingdom by his enemies, yet notwithstanding
he continues still King over those subjects, and they are still bound unto
him by their bond of allegiance, wheresoever he and they be: But there can
not be a King of land without subjects: For, that were but Imperium in
belluas, and, Rex and subditi sunt relatiua.

I said there was an other general rule for expounding of Laws, Rex solus
iudicat etc.
which I reserved to be last spoken of, I will now but touch it; for, I will
not stand to examine by humane reasons, whether Kings were before Laws, or
Laws before Kings; nor how Kings were first ordained; nor whether the kings,
or the people did first make Laws; nor the several constitutions and frames
of states and commonweales; nor what Plato or Aristotle have written of this
argmment.

They were men of singular learning and wisdom, but we must consider the
time, and the country in which they lived, and in all their great learning
they lacked the true learning of the knowledge of God. They were borne and
lived in Greece, and in popular States: they were enemies, or at least
mislikers of all Monarchies; yet one of them disdained not to be a servant or
mercenarie hireling to a Monarch. They accounted all the world barbarous, but
their own Country of Greece: their opinions therefore are no Cannons to give
Laws to kings and kingdoms, no more than sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, or such
Pamphlets as we have at every Mart.

I believe him that says, Prou. ca. 8.
Per me Reges regnant, and Principes iusta decernunt; And I make no doubt, but
that as God ordained kings, and has given Laws to kings themselves, so he
has authorized and given power to Kings to give Laws to their subjects; and
so kings did first make laws, and then ruled by their laws, and altered and
changed their Laws from time to time, as they saw occasion, for the good of
themselves, and their subjects.

And this power they have from God almighty; For, as Saint Augustine says, In
hoc Reges Deo seruiunt sicut eis Diuinitus praecipitur, in quantum sunt Reges,
si in suo Regno bona iubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad
humanam societatem, verumetiam quae ad diuinam religionem.

And I hold Thomas Aquinas his opinion to be good, Rex solutus a Legibus quoad
vim coactiuam, subditus est legibus quoad vim directiuam propria voluntate. And
for this opinion there is a stronger authority, even from God himself in
Ecclesiastes, ca. 8. ver. 2. Ego os Regis obseruo; Et praecepta iuramenti Dei:
and ver. 4. Sermo illius potestate plenus est: Nec dicere ei quisquam potest,
quare ita facis?

Now being led a little from the Common Law to the Civil Law, I find in
the civil Law a direct Text, warranting that general Rule which I reserved
to this place, Cod. li. 1. Tit. 14 le. 1.
which is this; Inter aequitatem iusque interpositam interpretationem nobis
solis and licet and oportet inspicere.

And another like Text in these words, Ibidem le. 12.
Sententia Principis Ius dubium declarans, Ius facit quoad omnes. And some
grave and notable Writers in the civil Law say, Rex est lex animata: Some
say, Rex est lex loquens: Some others say, Interpretantur legem consuetudo and
Princeps: Another says, Rex solus iudicat de causa a iure non definita.

And as I may not forget Saint Augustines words, which are these; Generale
pactum est societatis humanae regibus suis obtemperare: So I may not wrong the
Judges of the common Law of England so much as to suffer an imputation to be
cast upon them, That they, or the Common law do not attribute as great power
and authority to their Sovereigns the kings of England, as the Roman laws
did to their Emperors: For, Bracton the chief Justice in the time of king
Henry the third, has these direct words, De Chartis Regijs and factis regum
non debent nec possunt Iusticiarij nec priuatae personae disputare. Nec etiam,
si in illa dubitatio oriatur, possunt eam interpretari. Et in dubijs and
obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos contineat intellectus, domini Regis erit
expectanda interpretatio and voluntas; Cum eius sit interpretari cuius est
condere. And Britton in the time of king Ed. 1. writes as much in effect.

So as now if this question seem difficult, that neither direct law, nor
Examples and Precedents, nor application of like cases, nor discourse of
reason, nor the grave opinion of the learned and reverend Judges, can resolve
it, here is a true and certain Rule, how both by the Civil Law, and the
ancient Common law of England it may and ought to be decided: That is, by
sentence of the most religious, learned, and judicious king that ever this
kingdom or Island had.

But this Case is so clear as this needs not at all.

And in this I would not be mis-vnderstoode, as though I spoke of making of new
Laws, or of altering the Laws now standing; I mean not so, but I speak only
of interpretation of the Law in new questions and doubts, as now in this
present case: neither do I mean hereby to derogate any thing from the high
court of Parliament; (far be it from my thought) It is the great Council of
the kingdom, wherein every subject has interest. And to speak of the
constitution or form of it, or how, or when it was first begun, is for busy
Questionists; It ought to be obeyed and reverenced, but not disputed; and it
is at this time impertinent to this Question.

But certain it is, it has been the wisdom of the Kings of this Realm to
reserve in themselves that supreme power to call their Nobles, Clergy, and
commons together, when they saw great and urgent Causes; and by that great
Council to make Edicts and Statutes for the weal of their people, and safety
of the Kingdom and State, as in Anno 10. Edw. 3. the Assembly at Nottingham
for the great wars in France: And in Anno 20. H. 3. Prouisiones Merton, which I
remembered before.

There have been made some Objections of inconueniencie, Object. of
Inconueniencie and frugalitie.
as for bearing of Scot and Lot, and such other charges; and some out of
frugalitie, that the king shall lose his profit of making Denizens, and such
like: These are so light as I leave them to the wind; They are neither fit for
Parliament, nor Council, nor Court.

Another argument and reason against the Post-nati has been lately made out
Object. upon diffidence.
of diffidence and mistrust, that they will come into England sans number, and
so as it were to surcharge our Common; and that this may be in secula
seculorum. I know not well what this means. The Nation is ancient, noble and
famous; they have many honorable and worthy Noble men and Gentlemen, and
many wise and worthy men of all degrees and qualities; they have lands and
fair possessions in Scotland: Is it therefore to be supposed, or can it in
reason be imagined, that such multitude sans number will leave their native
soil, and all transport themselves hither? Has the Irish done so? Or those of
Wales, or of the Isles of Man, Gernesey, and Iersey? Why should we then
suspect it now more for Scotland?

Nay, do you suppose that the King of England will ever suffer so great a
part of his Dominions, and so great and famous a Kingdom as Scotland is to be
dispeopled? It is a doubt imagined without any foundation or ground of reason.
But if it were to be doubted, the twelve Judges that have concurred in
opinion, and that late worthy Judge Popham had as great cause to fear it as
any others: They are wise, they are learned, they have fair possessions and
good estates, They have posterity to care for, as others have.

Yet, admit it be a matter worth the doubting of, what is that to the young
Post-nati that are not like in many years to come hither in such number? Shall
we upon this causlesse fear deprive them of their lawful Birthright?

Have we seen in these five years past any more of them than this one alone
that have gotten any Lands in England? And this little that he has is so small
and poor a portion, that his purchase is not great, and therefore no just
cause of offense to any.

Nay, Ante-nati.
if you look upon the Ante-nati, you shall find no such confluence hither, but
some few (and very few in respect of that great and populous kingdom) that
have done long and worthy service to his Majesty, have, and still do attend
him, which I trust no man mislikes: For, there can be none so simple, or
childish (if they have but common sense) as to think that his Majesty should
have come hither alone amongst us, and have left behind him in Scotland, and
as it were cast off, all his old and worthy Servants.

And if these Noble and worthy Gentlemen of Scotland, I mean the Ante-nati be
lovingly and brotherly entertained amongst us, with mutual love and
benevolence, that so we may coalescere, and be united together, by marriage,
and otherwise (as in some particular cases we see it already happily begun)
no doubt God will bless this Union of both these Nations, and make them, and
the King, and great Britain to be famous through the world; and feared and
redoubted of our enemies, and of all that wish us ill: For, Vis vnita fortior,
and concordia multos facit vnum. But what may follow upon such arguments of
diffidence and suspicion, which seem but to hinder Union, and to breed
discord and dissension I will not speak; Let every wise man consider it well:
For, Humana consilia castigantur vbi coelestibus se praeferunt. And remember
Saint Paul's caution, Si inuicem mordetis, videte ne ab inuicem consumamini.

And for the resemblance that has bin made of this Case of Post-nati (but
indeed for the Union of both Kingdoms) with the houswifes cutting of her cloth
by a threede, I will say but this, That if she cut her piece of cloth in
length as well as in breadth, all the threeds will be cut, and the cloth
marred. And this cutting in this our Case, is, to cut all as well in length as
in breadth, even through all the Kings Dominions; and so will rent asunder the
whole frame of the Union; and cut in pieces all the threeds of Allegiance.

But now I will ask this question: A Question, how long this suspicion and
disunion shall continue?
How long shall this suspicion and doubt continue? Shall there be a disunion
for ever? If it be said, No, but until the Laws, and Customs of both
Kingdoms be made one and the same: then I ask; how, and when shall that be
done? And it may be, that the Constitutions of the Countries be such as there
can hardely in all things be such an absolute and perfect reconciling or
uniting of Laws as is fancied. Is it yet so between England and Wales? or
between Kent and Cornwall? or between many other parts of this Kingdom? I
say no; and I speak it confidently, and truly it is not so, nor well can be
so. Therefore let England and Scotland be in like degree now, as England and
Wales were for many hundred years, and in many things are yet still; and yet
let Union and Love increase amongst us, even in secula seculorum. Let us not be
such as Saint Bernard notes, Bernard.
Amant quod non decet, timent quod non oportet, dolent vane, gaudent vanius.
And let us no longer make question, whether several Laws and Customs be
marks of separation and disunion, or of several Allegeances; for certainly
they are not.

One other Reason remains against these Post-nati, Objection upon Divination
and that is out of a provident foresight, or as it were a prophesying: What if
a separation of these Kingdoms fall hereafter?

Of this I can say but Absit omen. Respons.
It is Potentia remota (as Justice Williams said) and I trust in God
Remotissima: And I will ever pray to God that it never fall so, until the King
of all Kings resume all Scepters and Kingdoms into his own hands. And let us
take heed of sins of Ingratitude and Disobedience; and remember, that Adam
and Eve were punished, Non propter pomum, sed propter vetitum. And for such
Prophets, let the Prophet Ezechiel ca. 13. answer them, Vae Prophaetis
insipientibus qui sequuntur spiritum suum, and nihil vident. And the Prophet
Esaias speaks to all such with an other Vae, Vae illis qui dispergunt.

Now then, as M. Solicitor began with seeking out the truth; so I will
conclude with Esdras words, Magna est Veritas and praeualet: And with this
further, Eatenus rationandum donec veritas inueniatur: Cum inuenta est veritas,
figendum ibi Iudicium: Et in victoria veritatis, soli veritatis inimici pereunt.

The Conclusion.
THus I have here delivered my concurrence in opinion with my Lords the
Judges, and the reasons that induce and satisfy my conscience, That To.
Calvin, and all the Post-nati in Scotland, are in Reason, and by the Common
Law of England natural borne subjects within the allegiance of the King of
England; and inhabled to purchase and have free-hould and inheritance of lands
in England; and to bring real actions for the same in England.

For, if they have not this benefit by this blessed and happy Union, then are
they in no better case in England, than the king of Spaines subjects borne in
Spain, etc. And so by this Union they have gotten nothing: What they have lost
Justice Yeluerton did well note.

And therefore I must give Judgment in the Chancerie, That the Defendants
there ought to make direct answer to To. Caluines Bill for the Lands and
Evidences for which he complains.

T. Ellesmere Canc.


