Here follows the.C. Hystoryes of Troy.



Lepistre de Othea deesse de Prudence / enuoyee a lesperit cheualereux Hector
de Troy / auec cent Histoires. Nounessement (...).

The Prologue of the transletour.
Book of thy rudeness by consyderacion
Plunged in the walowes of abasshement
For thy translatoure, make excusacion
To all to whom thou shall thy self present
Besechynge them upon the sentement
In the composed to set their regard
And not on the speech cancred and froward.
Show them, y^ thy translatour has ye wryte^
Not to obtain thanks or remuneracions
But to the intent, to do the to be written
As well in England, as in other nacyons
And where mysordre, in thy translacion is
Unto the perceyuer, with humble obeysaunce
Excuse thy reducer, blamyng his ygnoraunce.
And pray him where he fi^deth y^ mysordred
To take the pain, therein to amend the
So y^ by him, thou be not blamed but fordred
But enuyous tongues, fro the^ god defend the
Them dred thy tra^slatour ever wha^ he pe^ned y^
Therefore wha^ thou shall, be blamed of envy
Set not his rancoure, at a butterflye.
Let him go keep the dorre with a (...)
Daughter to king Cypres of Athenes
And dylygently him self dyspose
With her against manner any to make resiste^ce
That he never enter to here by vyolence
And like to Ethna a^is skyll and right
Let him bren him self and hurt none other wigh^
And if any man make question unto the
How thy reducer in his translacion
Without intellygence had audacite
For to presume upon this compylacion
If he be of honor make thy suplycacion
For pardon thereof, and if he love dyscene
With lawful excuse, pray him to be content.
Which shall be this, say that the translatour
When the to reduce, he set his enterprise
was flowring in youth, what time y^ i^stigatour
Of hell has most power, vi^ce on hi^ to surmyse
Finding him in Idleness, which to despise
He has enterprysed, this rude reduction
For youth may not yield most eloque^t i^struccion.
And if he woll, as yet, further reply
Against the translacion, thus or thus
Allege the upon Aucthoryties boldly
As of saint Bernarde, the doctor mellystuous
How he says against all persons ocious
what aco^pt or reso^ shall be by you forth brought
wha^ you it shall behoue to tell each idle thought.
The said saint Bernarde says that ociosite
To mother to vice, and stepdame to virtue
She overthrows strong men into iniquyte
She norysseth pride, and virtue does subdue
And makes the way ready, hell to pursue
Do always (says Iherome) some good busine^
That the devil, find the not in ydlenes.
Says also the holy doctor Augustyne
No man that is strong, and able to labor
Ought to be Idle, but to some work enclyne
And to the same says John^ Cassiodore
The Idle man thinks upon no more
But lecherous viandes, to make his belly chere
Therefore pray all that shall the read or here.
To take in gre this simple translacion
As (without doubt) all vertuoue will do
But such as ben replete with emulacion
May not refrain y^ their hertes draws unto
Thus (book) remember what thou have to do
More charge (as now) shall not to the be laid
But do thy best, in this that I have said.
Finis Prologue.
The first History.


Here begins the Epistle, which Othea the Gods send unto Hector of
Troy, when he was of the age of.xv. years.

The first text.
OThea gods of Prudence
Which does adresse good hertes in valyaunce
To the noble Hector, prince of most excellence
Which flouryssheth in Arms have so great puyssaunce
That whom thou encountrest thou put to vtteraunce
Sone to the mighty Mars god of battle
Which all the feats of Arms susteyneth or does to sail.
And also to Mynerue, the goddess puyssaunt
Maystresse of arms, as poets give sentence
Successor of the Troyans tryhumphaunt
Prince of Troy, and of the Citezens
Heir unto Pryamus, father of sapyence
Salutacion sends first unto the
With perfyghte true love, with out duplycyte.
The first Gloss.
OThea after the gree and intent may be taken for ye sagenes of a woman And as
the ancient before that they had received the light, and spendour of the
Faith, adoured and worshypped many Gods, under which law ben passed the
most high Seygnoryes and lordshyppes that have been in the world. As the
realm of Assyrye, of Perse, the Greeks, the Troyans, Alexandrye, the Romans,
and many other. And specially all the most great Philosophers, As that GOD ne
had as yet set open the gate of his mercy. In this present age we Christen
men, by the grace of God enlumyned of the very and perfyte Faith, may reduce
and bring unto Moralytie the opynyons of the auncyentes And thereupon many
Alegoryes may be made, And as they were accustomed to adoure and worship all
things, which above the common course were prerogatyue, or fortherynge the
common profit by any manner of grace, many Ladies, which were in their time,
were called Goddesses.

And it was of a truth after the History, that in y^ time of Troy the great
flowrysshed in his high reno^me. A much sage Lady named Othea consyderyng the
fair youth of Hector of Troy than much flowrysshynge in virtues, which might
be a demonstrued of grace to be in him, in time to come. Send unto him many
fair and notable gifts. And especially his fair destryer, which was named
Galathee, to whom in goodness none in the world might be compared. And for
so much as all graces mo^dayne, which a good knight ought to have were fyxed
and comprysed in Hector, we may say morally that he them took by the
admonasteme^t and aduertysement of Othea, which send unto him this Epistle.
Morallye.

By Othea we shall take and understand the virtue of Prudence and sagenesse,
whereof she right well provided and aourned. And as the.iiii. virtues Cardynall
be necessary to a good governance, we shall of them speak here in this present
volume hereafter. And to this first, we have given a name and taken the manner
to speak somewhat Poetyquely, and according to the very Hystory the better to
ensue and proceed upon our matter, and to our purpose we shall take some
auctoryties of ancient Philosophers. We shall say even so in this present
volume, as by the said Lady it was given or send unto the good Hector, that
semblably it may be unto all other desiring bountye and sagenesse. And how
the virtue of Prudence is much to be reco^mended, speaks the prince of
Philosophers Arystotyle.

For so much as Prudence is the most noble of all other things it ought to
be demonstred and showed by the best reason, and the most couenable manner.

The.i. Text
ANd as I have great desire and talent
My self to endeavor, the perfyghte nobleness
Of the to preserve and ever to augment
And that thy valyaunce and high prowess
In all times be observed with out distress
By mine Epistle thy youth to supporte
I wol the ennorter say and exhort.
Of such things, as been most necessary
To valiaunce high great and preemynent
And to the opposite of prowes contrary
To the end that thy good heart set his intent
The horse for to gerte by good aduertysement
That flies by the air and pegasus is named
To whom al valiant hertes ben attamed.
For so much as I know that thy condycyon
To feats cheualrous is right able to stand
Upon all sides by direct inclynacyon
More than of other.v. hundred thousand
And as a Goddess, I know and understand
By science, not by perceive ne conjecture
In every thing what shall be thine adventure.
Of the well me ought to have remembrance
For well I know algates that there shall be
Worthyest of worthy, and mos^ of valyaunce
And above all other have the reno^me
But to thentent that I be loved of the
Loved, and why not? sythen I am she
Loath to come to her which al them enhaunse that have me in chyertie.
Sitting in my chair, I read them a lesson
Which unto the heavens does them to ascend
So I the pray that thou be of them oon
And that thou me believe and well my words attend
Remembrynge well what I the write and send
And if thou me here recounte proferer or say
A thing that is to come after this day.
And that I to the say, that thou as well it ought
As if it were passed, to hold in memory
Know thou for truth, that they ben in my thought
Comprysed by the sprite of prophecy
Therefore ente^de and be not weary
For nothing shall I say, that is or shall befall
Than since if they be to come, remember them at all.
The prologue of the Allegory.
For to bring to Allegory the purpose of our matter, we shall take unto our
sayenges the holy scripture to the edyfycacion of the soul, being in this
miserable world.

EVen so as by the soueraygne sapyence and high puyssaunce of God, all things
ben creat and made, reasonably, they ought to attend and awayte for their end
by this mynystracion. And for so much as our soul of God, creat and made
after his propre Image, is of all his creatures most noble after Angels. It
is a thing conuenable and necessary that it be aorned of virtues, whereby it may
be conueyde to the end whereto it is made. And in so much as it may be
empesshed and let by the assaults and instigacion of the enemy inferyall,
which is her mortal aduersyte, and ofttymes her destourneth to come to her
beatytude, we may call the life of man very cheualrie, as the Scripture in many
places does express and as al things mondayne ben transytorious and fallyble
we ought to have in contynuall memory the time to come which is without end.
And for so much as this is the conclusion and the perfayte cheualrie, and all
other is of no comparyson, and that thereof the victoryous ben crowned in
glory. We shall take the manner to speak of the spryte cheualrous. And be this
done unto the lawde of almighty God pryncypally, and to the profit of them
which shall take dylectacion in the herynge of this present volume.

The first Allegory.
IN like manner as prudence and sagesse is the Mother and conductres of all
virtues without whom they may not be well governed. It is necessary unto the
spryte cheualryous that of Prudence it be aourned, as says saint Augustyne in
his book of the syngularitie of clerks that in what place that prudence be
abidyng lightly may be esesed and eschewed all things contrary, but there as
Prudence is despised, all things contrary have signourie and dominacion. And
to this purpose says Solomon in his Proverbs.

Si intrauerit sapienti^ cor tuum et scientia anime tue platuerit consilium
custodiet te / et Prudentia seruabit te. Prouerbioru^ secundo capit.

The.ii. History.


The.ii. Text.
AND to the end, that thou understand
What the behooves to do, and that thou make
The virtues more propyce and apt to thine hand
The better to come to, receive and take
The promysses whereof, I here spoke
As of Puyssaunce / valyaunce / and Cheualrous
Albeit so, it is aduenturous.
Yet unto the, one thing shall I tell
A Sister Germayne, is there one to me
Replete with Beaultie, that other does excel
But over al thing in espetialite
Sweet, and coye, she is attempred wise and fre
And never with the, she is surprysed
For any thing, without measure promised.
She is the goddess of attemperaunce.
Vvithouten whom, the name of great grace
Thou may not obtain, for but she pease the balaunce
All valueth not, when peyse in this case
Therefore thou shall her favor purchase
For she is the Goddess in price most raised
Of all that been sage, much loved and praised.
The.ii. Gloss.
OThea says, that Attemperaunce is his systre, whom he ought to love. The
virtue of attemperaunce verytably may be said systre and semblable unto
Prudence. For Attemperaunce is the demonstraunce and showyng of prudence. And
of prudence follows attemperaunce Therefore she says that he hold
attemperaunce for his friend, so as se^blably ought for to do all good knights
desyryng the lawde that is given to all good, so as says the Philosopher named
Democritus. Attemperaunce amodereth, or measures the vices, and makes perfyte
the virtues.

The.ii. Allegory.
THe virtue of attemperaunce which has the proprete to lymite superfluyties
ought to be had of the good spryte. And Saint Augustyne says in his book of
the manners of the church, that the office of attemperaunce is to refrain and
appayse the manners of concupiscence, which ben unto us contrary and destourne
us from the law of God, and also to despise all carnal delytes and worldely
louynges. To this purpose speaks saint Peter the Apostle in his first
Epistle.

Obs^^eo vo^ tanquam aduenas et peregriuos abstinere vos a carnalibus
desideriis / que militant aduersus animam.

Prima petri secundo capit^o. The.iii. History.


The.iii. Text.
TO the with us twain, is force convenient
Great virtue, if thou take in reputaunce
To Hercules ward, reuert thine intent
Regarding his prowess and puyssaunte valyaunce
Whereof he had with great habundaunce
And notwithstanding that he was contrary
Unto the lygnage, and did against them vary.
Shall we take not in dysdeyne nevertheless
His virtues full of force, and so notable
Which have unclosed, the gates of prowess
But if thou entende, with mind ferme and stable
Invaliaunce to be his se^blable
Yet unto the it is not necessary
With folks infernal, to contend or vary.
What needs it to make lytygacion or strife
Against the god Pluto prince of darckenesse
For Proserpyne, which was the herpers wife
Called Orpheus and daughter to Ceres the Goddess
Whom pluto ravished upon the sea of greesse
The needs not to cut the chains of Cerberous
Porter within, that valey tenebrous.
Ne to take attaynte, by them that be in hell
Which in dysloyaulte, ben al by lapped
As (for his fellows, named as books tell
Pirotheus, and Theseus,) in Hell to him lapped
Which two stood, on an ase to have been by trapped
Fyghtyng in that place where many souls ben brent
By wrapped in pains and grievous tourment.
For have thou in war, never so great pleasure
To thine intent (trust this that I the tell)
Thou may in this world find good salve and cure
Without dyscendynge to seek it down in hell
Ne also it needs the not for to mell
(In purchasing of arms the bone courage)
With fyerce Sepentes replete with cruel rage.
To Lions, ne wolfes, the needs not make voyage
(I know not if thou this ymagyne or guess)
To Tygre, Oliphant, ne other beestes Savage
For to acquire reno^me of great prowess
Except that it be, in such dystresse
That case require, thy self to defend
If any such beestes, would the offend.
Or the to assail, will them self advance
In keeping thy self from dommage, the defense
Is than honorable, and with out doubtaunce
For as the wise man, gives sentence
Who so gardeth him self, makes good prouydence
And in such case, if thou have victory
It shall be to the much honor and glory.
The.iii. Gloss.
THe virtue of force or strength is to understand not alonely corporal
strength, but also constance and stedfastnes, which the good knight ought for
^o have in all his assayres delibered by good wysdom, and strength to restyst
against the contraryties / that to him may come, as if it be in fortune in his
^rybulacion, and there against strong and puyssau^t courage may be profitable
to the exaltacion of his valor, and for to give material example of force, we
shall allege us upon Hercules, to the end that in two manners it be
profitable, that is to know, in so much as materyall force is virtue, and
specially in feats of knighthode, wherein ye said Hercules was right excellent.
And for the hyghnes of Hector, it was conuen^ble thing to give him high
example* Hercules was a knight of great marvelous force, and he brought to end
man^ knyghtly promyses, he was a great l^bourer, and voyager by the world. And
for the great and merueylous voyages tha^ he did in things of great strength*
The Poets (which speak under coueture, and in manner of fables,) say tha^ he
went into hell to fight with the princes Infernal. And yt he fought agayn^^
serpents and fyerce beestes, whereby is t^ be understand the strong
enterprise that he accomplyshed. And therefore she says unto the good knight yt
he ough^ to behold him self, that is to wit, i^ his prowess and valyaunce
after hi^ possybilite. And like as the cleretie o^ the son is profitable to
all men. S^ may be a good example as says a ph^losopher. The grain of wheete
wha^ (...) falls upon good land it is profitabl^ ^o all men. Semblably may
be a good ^xample avaylable to all them that de^yre valiaunce. And one sage
says thus The virtue of strength makes a man ^romanable to vanquishe all
things.

The.iii. Allegory.
EVen so as without force and vygour, the good knight may not deserne ^he
price of arms. In like manner the ^ood espryte may not have ne gain ^he lawde
and price due to al vitorious without it. And saint Ambrose says in ^is first
book of offices, that the very ^orce of man's courage is such as is never
brysed in aduersite, and that never (...) orguyllous or proud in his
prospe^^te. And that endeavors him self to ^epe and defend the adurmentes of
ver^ues, to sustain ryghtwysenes, which ^aketh continual war against vices
which is never recreant in labors whi^he is hardy in perils, did royde
a^aynst the carnal desires.

and to this purpose speaks Saint John^ the Euangelyst / in his first
Epistle.

Scrivo vob^s inuenes quousam fortes estes / ^ verbum de^manet in vobis /
dicistis malignum. Prima Iohann^s secundo capitulo.

The.iiii. History.


The.iiii. Text.
YEt the behooves Minos t^ resemble
If thou wylt be arenged in oudaunce
Although he cause many souls to tremble
As justice of hell, having the conueyaunce
For if thou entende thy self to auaunce
Make unto Justice, thy cheyfe repair
Else any Realm, to have in governance
Thou art Indygne, or any healme to bayre.
The.iiii. Gloss.
PRudence says unto ye good knight that if he will be of the rent of the good,
it is to him conuenyent, to have the virtue of Justice or ryghtwysenes as says
Arystotle, he that shall be a perfyte Judge ought first to Iustefy him self for
he that is not rightwyse in him self, is not worthy to Judge any other so it
is to be understand, that he correct him self of his defaultes so that they be
all extinct and quenched, and after a man so correct may well and ought to be a
correctour of many other men. And for to speak morally we shall say a fable to
this purpose / after the couerture of Poets. Minos as says Poets is the
Judge of hell. And as the prouoste and soueraygne Baylyfe, and before him ben
brought al souls, discendyng into that valley. And like as they have deserved
penance, and after their degrees like as he woll that they be put in
porfou^dyte he turns his tail about him, and for somoch as hell is the
ryghtwyse Justice and punysyon of God, take we at this present time to speak to
that purpose. It was of very truth that a king was i^ Great, named Minos of
meruaylous fyerstie. And had in him a great rygor of Justice. And therefore say
the Poets, that after his death he was made as to be Judge of hell. And
Arystotle says Justice or ryghtwysenes is a thing which God has established
upon ground, for to lymyte the things.

The.iiii. Allegory.
ANd in somoche as god is heed of ryghtwysenes and of all the order. It is well
necessary to the spryte cheualrous entending to come to glorious victory that
he have that virtue. And saint Barnarde says in one sermon, that Justice is
none other thing, but to yield to each man that is his. Than said he, yield to
every manner of people that which is theyrs. To thy soueraygne / to thy fellow
or egall / and to thy subject or servant. To thy soueraygne thou ought to
give reverence and obeysaunce, reverence of thine heart and obeysaunce of thy
body. To thy fellow thou ought to yield counsel and aid counsel in
ensygnyng or informyng his ygnoraunce, and aid in comfortyng him in that
whereto he has no puyssaunce or power, to thy subject thou ought to yield
guard and dyscyplyne guard in keeping him from doing evil. And disciplyne in
chastisyng him when he has trespassed. And to this purpose speaks Solomon in
his proverbs.

Ercogitat iustus de domo impii vt detrahat im^ios a malo, gaudium est iusto
facet Iusticiam.

Prouerbiorum.xxi. capitulo. The.v. History.


The.v. Text.
AFter behold / thy self in perseus
Of whom through all the world abroad is laid
The glorious fame, which rode on Pegasus
Flyenge by the air, with wings dysplayed
And from the monstre, delivered he the maid
Which named was Andromeda the bright
And by his force the monstre he desmayde
Like a good and perfyte, gentle arrant knight.
He rendered her, unto her Parents old
This feate ought thou to keep in remembrance
For each good knight, the same manner should hold
If he woll have, honor and valyaunce
Which valueth more, then all mondayne substance
So shadow the under his shynynge shield
Fight with his fashyon, that puts all to vtteraunce
Than shalt thou be strong, and stable in the field.
The.v. Gloss.
ANd for somoche as it is a thing convenient that to the good knight be due
honor and reverence, we shall show thereof a figure after the manner of
Poets. Perseus was a much valiant knight, and many realms he conquered, and
of him was named the great land of Perse, and the poets say that rode upon
the horse which flewe by the air, named Pegasus. And it is to understand,
renome which flies by the air into all countrees. He bare in his hand a
fauchyon or a sithe which is said for the great foyson of people which by him
were dyscomfyted in many battayles, he delivered Andromeda, fro the monstre of
the sea, which was a fair maid, whom he delivered from the said monstre,
which by the sentence of God should have devoured her. Which is to understand
that all knights ought to succoure women which shall have need of their aid.
So may be noted by Perseus and his flyeng horse, good renome and fame which the
good knight ought to have and purchase by his good merytes, and thereupon he
ought to ride, that is that his name ought to be borne in to all lands and
regions. And Aristotle says, good renome and fame makes a man relusant and
shining to the world and agreeable in the presence of princes.

The.v. Allegory.
REnome ought to be desired of the knyghtly soul, or spryte cheualrous
amongst the noble company of the blyssed saints of Paradyce purchased by his
good merits. The horse Pegasus, which bare it, shall be his good angel, which
shall bear of him good report at the day of Judgment Andromeda which shall be
delivered is his soul whom he shall deliver from the enemy by banquysshyng
sin, and that a man ought to fly over it, that is to have good renome in
this world to the end to be rewarded of God, and not to have vaynglory. Saint
Augustyne says in his book of correction, that two things ben necessary to a
good liver, that is to say, good conscience, and good name or renome,
conscience for him self, and renome for his neighbor, and he that assysteth
him in conscience, and dyspyseth renome is cruel: for it is a sign of noble
courage to love the goodness of renome, and to this purpose says the sage.

Curam habe de bono nomine / magis ^niet^ perman^bit tibi quam mill thesauri
preciosi.

Ecclesiastici.xli. capitulo. The.vi. History.


The.vi. Text.
Amongst all thine other inclynacions
Of Iupyter use / the manners glorious
Thou shall obtain, many collaudacions
If them in right kind, thou hold and dyscusse.
The.vi. Gloss.
AS it is said before the Paynimes which worshypped many Gods, held the
planettes of the air for their especial gods. And of the.vii. planettes they
named the.vij. days of the weke, Iupyter or Iouis, they held for their
gretest god, for somoch as he is set in y^ highest aspect of planettes after
Saturn. Of Iouis has the thursday his name, and especially the
Arsmetriscientes have attribued and compared the virtues of the.vij. metalles
to the.vij. planettes and named the terms of their sciences by the same
planettes as it may be seen in Geber, and Nycholas, and the other Aucthorities
of that science. To Iupyter they attrybued the metal of Tyn, or pewter.
Iupyter or Iouis is a Planet of sweet condition, amiable, and much joyous and
is fygured to the sanguyne complectio^. Therefore says Othea that is to say,
Prudence, that y^ good knight ought to have the conditions of Iupyter, and that
specially ought to have al noble men hau^tyng cheualrie. To this purpose says
Pytagoras, that a king ought gracyously to be conuersaunt with his people, and to
them show Joyous vysage. And in semblable wise it is to be intended of all
valyaunte entendynge to honor.

The.vi. Allegory.
Now bring we to our purpo^e the Allegory, of the propreties of the seven
Planettes.

Ouis which is a sweet Planet, and gentle of whom the good knight ought to
have the conditions. I
To us may sygnifie mercy and compassion which the good knight ought to have
in him, for saint Gregory says in his Epistle to Nepotian: I remember not
(says he) to have seen or hard yt he may be deed which has voluntarily
acco^plyshed the works of mercy, for misericorde or mercy has many
intercessours and it is impossyble but that the prayers of many should not be
exaulted. And to this purpose speaks our lord in the Gospel.

Beati misericordes quontam iperi misericordiam consequantur. The.vii. History.


The.vii. Text.
MAke not thy Goddess / of blind Venus
Ne of her slypper promise, take none head
Her to pursue, it is much trauaylous
Not honorable, but full of quakynge bread.
The.vii. Gloss.
VEnus is a Planet of the Air, of whom the friday has his name, and the
metal which we call Coper to her is attrybued. Venus gives influence of
love, and of vagant mind, and there was a Lady so named, which was queen of
Cypres. And for somoche as she excelled all other in beaultie and Iolitie, and
was right Amourouse and not constant in one love but abandoned to many, they
called her the goddess of love. And because that she gives influence of
luxury says Othea to the good knight that he make not of her his goddess:
that is to understand, that unto that vice he ought not to abandone his body
nor his intent, and to this purpose says Hermes. The vice of lechery que^cheth
all virtues.

The.vii. Allegory.
VEnus of whom the good knight ought not to make his Goddess, gives us
understanding that y^ good soul ought not to have in her any vanite. And
Cassiodore says upon the Psalter. Vanite does the angel to become a devil:
and to the first man she gave the death and made him void of the felycite
that unto him was granted. Vanite is mother of al evil, founteyne of all
vices, and the vain of all iniquity, which debouteth and casts forth man
from the grace of god, and makes him odyous and to be had in hatred, and to
this purpose says David in his Psalter, in speaking unto God.

Odisti obserauntes vanitates super^a^ur.

Psalmo.xxx. The.viii. History.


The.viii. Text.
AT any time when thou syttest on Judgment
Take heed that thou resemble old Saturn
Gyuynge sentence, delyberer thine intent
Till doubt be passed, let it in mind so iourne.
The.viii. Gloss.
OF Saturn is named the Saturday, and the metal which we call Lead, and he
is of condition, slow, peasaunt and sage. And there was a king of Crete so
named, which was much sage, of whom the Poets speak under the couerture of
fables, and say that his sone Iupyter, cut from him his genytores which is to
be understand that he took from him his puyssaunce that he had a^^ him
dysheryted and chased from his country, and therefore is he peasaunt and sage:
Othea woll therefore say that the good knight ought much to pease and wey the
matter before that he give his sentence, be it price of arms or in other
affairs. And this specially ought to be noted by all Judges which have offices
apperteynynge to Judgment. And to this purpose says Hermes. Take good
delyberacion in all thine affairs, and in especial in the judgment of
another.

The.viii. Allegory.
AS the good knight ought to be tardyse in Judgment that is to say, well to
pondre the sentence before that he give it. Semblably ought to do the good
sprite of that which to him apperteyneth: for to god apperteineth Judgment,
which can diserne the causes egally. And saint Gregory says in his Moralles,
that when our fragilite can not compryse the Judgments of God, we ought not
them to dyscusse in hardye words, but we ought them to honor in quakynge
scylence. And what soever he do that unto us resembles meruaylous we ought to
repute it for Just and ryghtwyse and to this purpose speaks David in his
Psalter.

Timor domini sauctus permanet / in seculum seculi. Iudicia domini vera
iustitic^ ea in semetipsa.

Psalmo.xviii.

The.ix. History.


The.ix. Text.
MAke clear thy speech and from untruth to turn
Appollo thereof, shall give unto the cure
For any fylthe or ordure, to soiourne
He may not suffer, under his couerture.
The.ix. Gloss.
APpollo or Phoebus is the Son to whom the Sunday is attribued, and also the
Metal which we call Gold. The Son by his clerety shows many things that been hyd. And therefore veryte or truth which is clear and shows secret
things to him may be attribued. Tho which virtue ought to be in the heart and
mouth of every good Knight. And to this purpose says Hermes.

Love thou God and truth,
And give Loyal counsel.
The.ix. Allegory.
APpollo, which is to say the son by whom we note verite, we may take it that
veryte ought to be had in the mouth of the very knight Jesus christ, and he
ought to steal falsetie, as says Chrysostom in his book of the louynges of
saint Paul. The condycion of falsetie is such that especyally where she has
none saying against her she falls into her self. But contrary thereto the
condition of verite is so establyshed that in somoch as she has no adversaries
saying against her, the more she increases and is more raised. And to this
purpose says holy scripture.

Super omnia vincit veritas.

Secundi Esdree. tertio captulo. The.x. History.


The.x. Text.
TO Phebe in any wise / be not semblable
For she is mutable, and full of emulacion
Against constaunce and courage, strong and stable
Full of melancoly, and pensyfe opperacion.
The.x. Gloss.
PHebe is called the Moon of whom the monday has his name, and to her is
attrybued the metal which we call Silver. The Moon never rests the space
of an hour in one right point. And she gives enfluence of mutabylite and
folly. And therefore says Othea that the good Knight ought to keep him fro such
vices. And to this purpose says Hermes. Use the to sapyence, and be constaunte.

The.x. Allegory.
PHebe which is the moon by whom we note or mark inconstaunce which the good
knight ought not to have and semblably the good sprite as says saint Ambrose
in the Epistle to Simplician, that the fool is mutable as the Moon. But the
sage is ever constaunt in one estate, he is not brysed by dread, he is not
changed by puyssaunce, he enhaunseth not him self in prosperytie, nor he
plungeth not into trystesse or he uynesse for aduersyte. There where as is
sapyence is virtue / force / and constaunce the sage is ever of one courage, he
is not minyshed nor augmented for the mutacion of things, he fleteth not in
diverse opynyons. But abides always perfyte in Jesus christ founded in charity,
and rooted in faith. And to this purpose says holy Scripture.

Homo sanctus in sapiencia permanet sicut sol. Nam stuitus sicut luna mutatur.

Eccle^i xxvii.c.i. The.xi. History.


The.xi. Text.
TO Mars thy father, affyxe thine Imytacion
Doubt not thereof, fair feats to defyne
Of him thy condition must take his inclynacion
By dyscent of Troy, from the stately line.
The.xi. Gloss.
OF Mars is named the Tuesdaye, and to him is attrybued the metal which we
call Iron. Mars is the planet which gives influence of war and battayles,
and therefore the knight which loves to ensue arms and feats of cheualrye
and thereof has the name of valor may be called the son of Mars. And
therefore Othea so named Hector. Notwithstanding that he was son to king
Priam. And she said that he should well ensue his Father as a good knight ought
to do, and thus says the sage. By the works of man may be known his
inclinacions.

The.xi. Allegory.
MArs the God of battayles, may well be called the son of God, which
victoryouslye did battle in this world, and that the good espryte ought by
his good example ensue his good father Jesus Christ. And do battle against
vices says Saint Ambrose in his first book of offices. That he which woll
be the friend of God, it is conuenable, and it behooves him to be enemy to the
Devil. And he that woll have peace of Jesus Christ, it behooves him to have
war against the vices. And even so as a man makes war in vain in the
field against his strange, there as the City is full of pryuy espices, so may
not they vanquyshe their evil outward, which do not make strong war
against the sins of their souls. And it is the most glorious vyctory that
is. A man to vanquysshe him self. And to this purpose speaks S. Paul the
Apostle.

Non est nobis colluctatio aduersus / carnem et sanguines / sed aduersus
prin^^^es / ^potestates aduersus mundi rectores tenebrarum haru^ / contra
spiritualia nequicie in celestibus.

Ad ephesi^^, sexto capitulo. The.xii. History.


The.xii. Text.
BE thou aourned, of perfyte eloquence
And of speech clean and pleasant
Hectors brother
Thereof shall Mercury, give the influence
Which of well speaking, rules star and rother.
The.xii. Gloss.
OF Mercury is named the wednesdaye, and to him is atrybued the metal which
we call quick silver. Mercury is a Planet which gives influence of
pontyfycall meynteyne and of fair language aorned of rethorike therefore says
Othea to y^ good knight that he ought to be aorned for honorable maynteyne and
fair eloquence is well sytting to a noble man desyring the hye price of
honor, but that in any manner that he guard him well that he speak not over
much. For Diogenes says yt of all virtues this is the best, except the much
speech.

The.xii. Allegory.
MErcurius which is said the god of language, by him may we understand that
the knight of Jesus christ ought to be aorned of good predicacion and of the
word of doctrine, and also he ought to love and honor the announcer and shewer
of them. And S. Gregory says in his Omelies yt a man ought to have in great
reverence the prechers of the holy scripture for they ben ye currours which go
before our lord and our lord the^ follows, holy predicacion comes before and
than our lord comes into the habitacion of our heart, the words exortacion
ben the fore course and than verite is so received into our entendeme^t, and to
this purpose says our lord to ye apostles.

Qui vos odit / me odit: et qui vos spernit / me sperait.

Luce decimo capitulo. The.xiii. History.


The.xiii. Text.
ARmours and weapons, of one sort and other
Thy body to prepayre, strong, sure, and metal hard
Enough shall deliver, to the Minerue thy mother
Which (doubtless) is thy friend and not froward.
The.xiii. Gloss.
MInerue was a lady of right great knowledge, and found the manner to make
Armours, for before the people used none armoure, but Lether tanned. And for the
great sagesse that was in this Lady they called her a Goddess. And for so much
as Hector couth right well, put Armours in operacion, and that it was his right
mestier and devour. Othea called him son of Minerue. Notwithstanding he was
son to Queen Heccuba of Troy. And by semblable name may be named all armours
of Arms. To this purpose says one Auctorite. The knights given / ben unto
her Subjects.

The.xiii. Allegory.
BY this that is said that to the good knight his mother shall deliver enough
of armours good and strong, we may understand the virtue of faith which is a
virtue Theological, and is mother to the good espryte and that she shall
deliver enough of armours, says Cassiodore, in the exposycion of the Credo.
That faith is the light of the soul / the gate of Paradyce / the wyndowe of
life / and the foundement of health perdurablye. For without faith no man may
please God. And to this purpose says saint Paul the Apostle.

Sine fide impossible est placere deo.

Ad Hebreos.xi. capitulo. The.xiiii. History.


The.xiiii. Text.
TAke next unto the Pallas the Goddess
To thy prowess let her annexed be
If thou her have, be sure of all goodness
For well with Mynerue, does Pallas agree.
The.xiiii. Gloss.
AFter says Othea, that he shall annexe Pallas with Minerue, which is well
syttyng, and a man ought to know that Pallas and Minerue ben but one proper
thing, but the names diverse be taken unto.ij. understandings. For she that was
named Minerue was also surnamed Pallas. Of an I Will which was named Pallance,
wherein she was borne, and therefore because that she was sage generally in all
things, and found of new, many arts and faculties fair and subtyle they
called her the goddess of science or knowledge. So is she named Minerue to that
thing that apperteyneth to cheualrie. And Pallas to al things that perteyne to
sagesse, therefore will Prudence or Othea say that he annexe sages with
knighthod which is right good instruction, and like as arms ought to be the
guard and shield, of the faith: it may be understand to this purpose that
which Hermes said. Conioyne or annexe the love of the faith with Sapyence.

The.xiiii. Allegory.
ANd as Pallas which is noted sages, ought to be annexed with cheualrie, ought
to be the virtue of hope conjoined to good virtues of ye knyghtly soul without
the which she may not profit. And Origenes says in his Omelies upon Exodie,
ye hope of goodness to come is the solace of the^ which travail in this life
mortal, right so as to laborers, ye hope of their payment adulceth or makes
sweet the labor of their busynes, and to champions which ben in battle hope
of the crown of victory atte^pereth the dolor of their wounds, and to this
purpose says s. Paul the apostle.

Hortissimum solatium habemus ^ confugimus ad tene^dum prepositam spem: quam
sicat. authoram habemus ^ic tutam.

Ad Hebr. vi. ca.

The.xv. History.


The.xv. Text.
Hold thou in charity Panthassillee
Which of thy death shall take thought and grame
Well ought such a woman loved to be
Of whom is sown, so noble voice and fame.
The.xv. Gloss.
PAnthassillee was a maid Queen, of Amaso^ne and much fair she was and of
meruaylous prowess in arms and hardynes, and for the great goodness which fame
and renome by all the world wytnessed of Hector the prowe, or worthy, she loved
him of right perfyte love. And came from her parties unto Troy, in the time of
the great syege for to se Hector, but when she found him deed, she was thereof
dolent above m^asure, and with a great host of dammoselles right cheualrous
she venged much vygorously his death, where she did meruaylous prowesses, and
many griefs unto the Greeks. And for so much that she was virtuous / Prudence
says unto the good knight that he ought to love her. That is to understand
that every good knight ought to love and praise all women strong in the virtue
of wisdom, and of constaunce, and the same woman is much grieved for the death
of Hector, that is to understand when prowess and valor is amortiesed or
quenched in a knight. And thus says the sage. Bounte ought to be loved, where
it may be perceived.

The.xv. Allegory.
BY Panthasillee which was socourable to the Troyans we may understand the
virtue of charity that is the third Theological, the good esprite ought
perfytly to have in him charity. And Cassiodore says upon the Psalter the
charity is even so as the rain which falls in the pryme time which
dystylleth the dropes of virtue under the which does bourgen good heart and
voulented, and good operacion does fructyfye. She is pacient in aduersite,
atte^pred in prosperity, puissaunt inhumilite, joyous in afliction, well
wyllyng to all her enemies, especial friend to al her enemies and commen of her
goods. And to this purpose speaks S. Paul the apostle.

Caritas patiens est benigna est. Caritas non emulatur / non agit perperam /
non inflatur / non est ambitiose / non querit que sua sunt,

primo ad Cor xiii. ca. The.xvi. History.


The.xvi. Text.
REfuse to ensewe. the fair Narcisus
As with great Pride, to be accloyde
For the Knight proud, and surquydrous
Of many graces / is destytute and void.
The.xvi. Gloss.
NArcisus was a young man which for his great beaulte was inhaunsed in so great
orguyll or pride that he had in dispyte all other, and because he praised no
man but him self, it is said that he was so amorous and assoted upon him self
that he thereof dyed, after that he had regarded and beheld him self in the
fountain, there is to be understand oultre cuydance or pride of him self.
Therefore Prudence defended the good knight to advise and behold him self in
his good deeds, whereby he may be proud thereof. And to this purpose says
Socrates. Son keep well that thou be not disceyued in the beaulte of thy youth
for it is a thing not durable.

The.xvi. Allegory.
Now make we Allegory, to our purpose in applyeng it to the.vij. mortal or
deedly sins. By Narcisus understand we the sin of pride from the which the
good knight ought to keep him self. And Origenes says in his Omelies. Whereof
does this earth and asshen make proud him self, or man how has he audacite
to enhaunce him self in arrogauncye, when he remember whereof he is comen, and
whereto he shall return, and in how frail a vessel his life is contained, in
what ordure and fylth he is plunged, and what vncienlynes he cease not to
cast from his flesh by all the conduyctes of his body? And to this purpose
says the holy Scripture.

Si ascenderit ad celum superbia cius et (...) ^ius nubes tetigerit quasi (...)
predetur.

Job.x. capitulo. The.xvii. History.


The.xvii. Text.
AThamas fullye enraged / and royde
Caused his two children, to be estraunged
By the Goddess of furye, that gladly ottroyde
Therefore with Furye, be not ne^wefangyled.
The.xvii. Gloss.
AThamas was a King and married to the queen Juno, which did to be sown sothen
sede, for to dysheryt her children in the law, which she with money corrupted
ye priests of the law which showed and reported the answers of their gods,
so said she to the king and to them of the country that the sede which they had
sown in the ground, brought forth no profit. For somoche as it pleased the
Gods that the two children of the king which were fair and gente / should
be chased and exyled, and because the king consentyng to the exyle of his two
children did it all with grudgyng and great dolor. The fable says that the
gods Juno would thereof take vengeance, and went into hell to say to the
Gods of fury or woodenes that she should come against the king Athamas. And
than the horrible and espouentable Gods came with her hears Serpentine and
set her upon the flower of the pallayse, and stratched her arms to the two
sides of the gate, and than such contencion and strife began betwixt the king
and the queen that little it failed yt either slew not other. And wha^ they
supposed to have voyded from the palys than that furyous Gods pulled of.ii.
horrible serpents of her hears and cast them upon their skyrtes. And when
they beheld gods so espouentable and dredefull, they both twain became
furious and enraged. Athamas slew the queen by woodenes, and sythen his two
children, and him self he cast from the hight of an high Rock into the sea.
The exposycion of this fable may be yt a queen was so diverse to her step
children, that she caused them to be dysherited, wherefore never after was peace
betwyxte their father and their step mother, and it may be that at the last he
slew her. And because that Ire is a mortal vice and so evil that he which is
therewith strongly atteynted has no cognissau^ce ne knowledge of reason. ^inea
Goddens of Prudence says to the good knight that he ought to keep him well
from Ire. For it is a right great defaulte in a good knight to be Irous or
wrathful and therefore says Arystotle. Keep the from Ire, for it troubles the
understanding and dysapoynteth reason.

The.xvii. Allegory.
BY Athamas which was so full of Ire we shall understand proprely the sin
of wrath, whereof the good soul ought to be void. And S. Augustine says in an
Epistle, that even so as Venigre corrupts the vessel wherein it is put if it
abide therein by long space. So Ire corrupts the heart where in it is fyxed, if
it abide from one day to another therefore says s. Paul the apostle.

Sol non occidat super iratu^diam vestram ^deo hesios quarto capitulo.
The.xviii. History.


The.xviii. Text.
OVer all things, whylest thou art man
From false Envy, thy mind return
Which made Aglaros, discolored and wan
And then into a stone to turn.
The.xviii. Gloss.
AGlaros as says a fable was systre to Herce which was so fair that for her
beaultie she was espoused to Mercurius God of language, and they were daughters
to Cicrops king of Athenes, but Aglaros had so much envy upon her systre Herce
that for her beaulte she should be so auaunsed as to be married to a god, that
she brenned all of envy, and became dry and discouloured and as pale as asshen,
for the envy that she bare to her systre. Upon a day Aglatos set upon the
thresholde of the door and to Mercury which would have entered into the house to
se the entree. For no prayer that he might make to her, she would not suffer him
to enter. Than the god took displeasure, and said that for ever might she abide
as hard as she had the courage. And than became Aglatos hard as a stone, so
may be verified the fable by se^blable case to come or befall to any persons.
Mercurious may be a puyssaunt man well spekyng which caused his systre in law
to be imprisoned or dry for any displeasure which she to him has done, and
therefore says the fable, that she was changed into a stone, and because that
it was a right vyllaynous tuche and against gentylnes to be envious. She says
to the good knight that he keep him therfro over all things. And Socrates
says he that bears the burden of envy, has pain perpetual.

The.xviii. Allegory.
Right so as the Authority defends envy to the good knight, the same sin
defends holy scripture to the good esprite. And s. Augustine says envy is
the hayne of the felycite of another. And envy stretches her from the envious
against them which be more greatter than he, because he is not so great as
they, and against them which be less the^ he of dread that he has left they
should become as great as he. And to this purpose says the scripture.

Dequam est oc^lus mundi et auertr^^ ^ociem suam.

Ecclesiasti.xiiii. capitulo. The.xix. History.


The.xix. Text.
BE not lachesse, nor long soiourne
To guard the from vlixes malice
Which when he did, fro Troy return
Byrefte the Geante, his precious balesse.
The.xix. Gloss.
ONe fable says that when Vlixes returned in to Greece, after the dystruction
of Troy, great tempest of w^de transported his Ship unto an I Will where was a
Geant which had but one eye amyddes his forheed, of horrible greatness, which
Vlixes by his subtelt^ byreft him, that is to understand he bored it forth and
quenched the fight thereof, so it is to be constrewed yt the good knight keep
hy^ that by parest or sloth he suffer not him self to be surprysed with the
barates and ill invasion of the malicious, so that thereby his eye be not
rauyshed from him, that is to know the eye of his entendement, his honor o^
his lauds, or that thy^g which he has most dear, as often befall many
inconveniences by sloth and lachesnes. And to this purpose says Hermes. Right
happy is he which uses his days inconuenable busynes.

The.xix. Allegory.
THis which is said that the good knight be not prolyxe nor slow / we may
understand the sin of sloth, which the good spryte ought not to have, for
as says Bid upon the Proverbs of Salomo^. The slothful man is not worthy
to reygne with god, which woll not labor for the love of god and he not
worthy to receive the crown promised to knights which is a cow^rte to
enterprise the champion of battle, therefore says the scripture.

Cogitationes robusti semper in habundantia omtis autem piger in egestati erit.
Prouer. xxi. ca. The.xx. History.


The.xx. Text.
ENsewe not the vyllaynes / which became Frogs
Ne soil not thy self, in their Ryuere
They brayde upon Lathona / like Dogs
And troubled to her, the water clear.
The.xx. Gloss.
THe fable says that the Goddess^ Lathona was mother to Phoebus and Phebe,
which is the Son and the Moon, and she bare them both at one burden. Juno
chased them by all the country, because that she had conceived them by the
operacion of her lord and husband Jupiter. Upon a day was the Gods Lathona
sore trauayled, and arrived at one lake, and than she enclyned her to the water
to stanche and quench her great thurst. There were a great company of villaynes
which for ye great heat of the Son bathed them in the water and they began
to bray camposue and make bruyte upon Lathona, and troubled unto her the water
which she supposed and also intended to have dronken, but for any prayer yt she
might make they would not suffer her, nor have pity upon her mysease, so she
accoursed them and said that for ever more forthwarde might they demoure and
abide in the maresse, and that they should be loathsome, foul, and abominable,
and that never should they cease to bray and ramposue from thensforth on, than
became the vyllaynes, Frogs. And sythen they never ceased to bray as it
appears in the season of so^mer upon the banks of such small lakes or
maresses. So may it be understand that some pessauntes or common rude people
did dyspleasure to some great maystres which caused them to be cast into a
river and drowned, so became they renouyles or frogs. This is to understand,
that the good knight ought in no wise to soil or defowle him self in the lake
or maresse of vyllany, but ought to fle and eschew all vyllaynous tuches
which ben contrarious to gentylnes, for like as villainy may suffer in him no
gentylnes, also ought not gentylnes to suffer in him any vyllany, nor
especially contend or take debate with any person vylayne of deed or of
speech. And Plato says. He that myxeth with his gentylnes the noblenes of good
manners, is to be praised. And he that is suffised with the gentylnes which
comes of the parents without acquyryng and purchasyng, thereto good
conditions ought not to be holden for noble.

The.xx. Allegory.
BY the villaynes which became frogs we may understand the sin of avarice
or couetyse, which is contrary to the good sprite. And S. Augustine says, that
the auaricious man is semblable unto hell. For hell can not engloute and
receive so many souls, that he woll say he is suffised. And if al ye treasures
of this world were gathered upon a hepe into the possession of the couetise
man, he should not be satisfied ne content, and to this purpose says the
scripture.

Insatiabilis oculus cupidi / in part iniquitates non satiabitur,

Ecclesiastici.xiiii. capitulo. The.xxi. History.


The. xxi. Text.
OF the God Bacus, refuse the manner
For his co^dicions should be extued
Virtue and he, ben set on stere
Thoroughe him men ben / to Swyne transmued.
The.xxi. Gloss.
BAcus was a man which first planted vines in Greece And when they of the
country felt the force of the wine which made them dronken and destytute of
reason, they said yt Bacus was a god, which had given so great force unto the
plant. So by Bacus is to be understand dronkenes, and therefore says Othea to
the good knight y^ in no wise he ought to abandon him self to dronkenes, for
that is a right impacient vice to all nobleness and to a man which woll use
him self to reason. And to this purpose says Ipocras. Superfluytie of wynes
and meats, destroys the body, the soul, and the verues.

The.xxi. Allegory.
BY the God Bacus we may understand the sin of Glotony, from the which the
good sprite ought to keep him self, of Glotony says S. Gregory in his moralles
that when the vice of glotony takes dominacion upon a person it appears tha^
all the goodness that he has done, and when the belly is not restrained by
abstine^ce al virtues be together drowned, therefore says s. Paul.

Norum finis interitus / quorum deus venture est / it glorin inconfusione eorum
/ qui terrena sapiunt.

^d Philipenses tetrio capitulo. The.xxii. History.


The.xxii. Text.
BE not assoted on the image
Of Pigmalion if you be wise
For of such a fygures vysage
The beaulte is seldom, worth the price.
The.xxii. Gloss.
PIgmalion was a much subtell worker in making of Images. And a fable says yt
for the great vylyte that he saw in the women of Cidoyne, he dispraised them
much, and said that he should make an Image yt no man should repreue the making
thereof, he graued and made an Image of a woman of sovereign beaulte, when he
had made it, perfyte love which has the knowledge subtelly to rauysshe the
hearts, made him amorous of his Image, and for it he was agrudged with the
malady of love, complayntes, and clamours, with petious sighs he made unto
it, but the Image of stone understood not his entention. Than went Pigmalion to
the temple of Venus and made unto her so devout a clamor, that the gods
there of had pytie, and in demonstraunce thereof she lyghted and set a fire the
bronde which she held in her hand. Than for the sign the lover was much
joyous and hasted him toward his Image, and took it betwixt his arms, and
somoch eschansed it with his bare flesh that the Image had life, and began to
speak, and so Pigmalion recovered joy. To this fable may be put many
exposycyons, and semblable to all other fables. And therefore the poets made
them to the end that the entendementes of me^ should be made more sharp and
subtle to find diverse purposes. So may be understand that Pigmalion desprysed
the viletie of folyshe women and fyxed his love upon one maid of right great
be aulte, the which would not or might not entende his complayntes, petuous no
more than if she had been of stone. He had made the Image, that is, that by
remembrance and thought upon her beaulte she was of him loved, but in the end
he prayed her somoch and held him so nere her, that she loved him at his
volent and had him in marriage. And so has the Image being hard as a stone
received life by the Goddess Venus. Therore says Othea yt the good knight
ought not to be assoted of any such made Image in such manner that he leave to
ensue the mestier and exercise of arms to the which he is bounden and obliged
by the order of knyghthod. And to this purpose says Aptalym. An Impertinent
thing it is unto a Prince to assote him upon a thing, that is to be
reprehended.

The.xxii. Allegory.
THe Image of Pygmalyon, upon whom the good knight ought not to be assoted, we
shall take it for the sin of Lechery, from the which the good cheualrous
spryte ought to guard his body. Of Lechery speaks S. Hierome in an epistle, O
fire of hell, of whom the busshe is Glotony, the flame, is pride: the yesylles
or sperkes, be^ corrupted speech: the smoke, is evil name: the asshen ben
poverty: and the end, is the tourment of hell. To this purpose says S. Peter
the Apostle.

Voluptatem existemantes delscias coinquinationie / and macule delictis
affluentes conutuiis suis luxuciantes.

Secundo Petri. ii. capitulo. The.xxiii. History.


The.xxiii. Text.
TO chaste Diane, thy mind entyce
For the honesty, of thy body
For she dyspyseth, life fowled with vice
Dyshonesty and also luxury.
The.xxiii. Gloss.
DIane is the Moon, and as there is nothing so evil, but that it has some
properte, the Moon gives chaste condycyon, and they named her by one lady so
called, which was right chaste and always a virgyn. So would Othea say: that
honesty of the body well appeteyneth unto a good knight. To this purpose says
Hermes. He may not be of perfyte sense or wisdom that has not in him chastyte.

The.xxiii. Allegory.
ANd for to bring the Articles of the says to our purpose, the which may
profit the good spryte cheualtous: Take we for Diane god of paradyce which is
without any tuche. The love of al clenlynes, and to whom things soylyed and
defowled may not be agreeable. As the creator of heaven and earth the which
thing it is necessary to the good espryte to believe. As says the first
Article of the faith which was said by my Lord saint Peter.

Credo in deum patrem omnipotentem trea^or^m c^li et terre. The.xxiiii.
History.


The.xxiiii. Text.
REsemble well Ceres, the Goddess bright
Which gives all men corn, and none does deny
So should him self abandon, every good knight
That well woll sustain, the order of cheualrie.
The.xxiiii. Gloss.
CEres was a Lady which found the art to air the lands for before they sewe
their gaygnage of their sede without labouryng. And by the land bare more
abundauntly after that it was ayred and plowed, they said that she should be the
gods of Corn, and the ground they named of her name. So woll Othea say,
that as the ground is abandoned and large gyuer of all goods so ought to be
also the good knight to all persons abandoned and to give his aid and comfort
after his power, and Arystotle says. Be thou a lyberall gyuer, and thou shall
purchase friends.

The.xxiiii. Allegory.
CEres whom ye good knight oug^^ to resemble take we for the blyssed son of
God, whom the good spryte ought to ensue which unto us so largely has given
of his high goodness. And in him ought to be our steadfast believe as says the
second Article which saint John^ said.

Et in^^sum x^m filium tius vnicum dominum nostrum. The.xxv. History.


The.xxv. Text.
Plant thou all virtues / within thy body
As Ysis the plants of Trees, both cause and make
With blosomes to burgen and fruit to tructyfy
So to edefye the manner, should thou take.
The.xxv. Gloss.
YSis they say also to be gods of plants and of graffyng which gives unto
them vygour and growing to multiply. Therefore says prudence is the good
knight and gives comparion that so ought he to fructyfy in all ve^tues, and
all evil byces to eschew, an^ Hermes says to this purpose. O man if thou
knew the incouenience of vice. how well should thou keep the therfr^^ and if
thou knew the laud of valiance, O how well should thou love it.

The.xxv. Allegory.
THere where she says that to ^u^^ ought the good knight to be rese^blaunt, we
may understand the blyssed consepcion of Jesus christ by the holy Ghost in the
blyssed virgyn mary mother of all grace, o^ whom the great louynges may not be
Imagined ne said entierly, the which dygne and worthy concepcio^ ought ye good
sprite to have planted in him, and to hold fermly the worthy Article as says
S. James the more.

Qui conseptus est despiritu sancto natus et maria virgin The.xxvi. History.


The.xxvi. Text.
SVbmytte the not / to the Judgment
Ne to the counsel, of king Mydas
To whom Judging byrnde intendement
Were given to Huyre, the ears of an Ass.
The.xxvi. Gloss.
MYdas was a King, which had small understanding, and a fable says that
Phoebus and Pan, God of shepherdes and herdes, stryued together. And Phoebus said
that the sown of a Harp was more to be praised than the sown of a Frestell
or Pype, and Pe^ sustended the contrary. And said that more was to be praised
the sown of the Frestell. Upon Mydas they put the Judgment of this dyscorde,
and after that they had played a fore Mydas by long leisure, he Judged y^
better was the sown of the Frestel, and more to be praised. So says the fable
that phoebus which was greatly corrouced and angry in dyspyte of his rude
Judgment, caused him to have the ears of an ass in demonstraunce that he had
the ente^dement of an Ass, which so rudely had given Judgment. So may it be
that a man Judge folishely against a prince which causes him ever after to
bear upon him a sign of folly which is the understanding of the ears of the
Ass. So this fable is to be understand that the good knight give not him self
to hold to folysshe Judgment, not grounded upon reason, nor he him self ought
not to be Judge of folyshe sentence, to this purpose says one Philospher, the
fool is as a moll warpe, which hereto and understands not. And Diogine^^
compares the fool to a stone.

The.xxvi. Allegory.
THe Judgment of Midas whereto the good knight ought not to hold him, we may
take for it Pilate w^^che Judged the blyssed son of God to be taken, bound,
and hanged, upon the gybet of the cross, as a these, he being without any
tuche of offense so it is to be understand the good spryte ought to keep him
fro geuyng of Judgment upon the Innocent, and he ought to believe the article
which said S. Andrewe.

Passus ^ub pontio pilato crucifixus mortu^s et sepultus. The.xxvii. History.


The.xxvii. Text.
True fellows if thou have, mo or las
Thou ought to go succoure, them at need
Though it be to Hell, where Hercules was
Where ben many souls, brennynge in glede.
The.xxvii. Gloss.
A Fable says that Pirotheus and Thesius, went in to hell to recover
Proserpine upon Pluto, which had her rauyshed, and evil had they ben appointed
if it had not ben for Hercules, which was their companyon, which came them to
succor, and did there so much of arms, that he made all the company
Infernal affrayde, and cut the cheynes of Cerberus porter of hell. So woll
Othea say, that the good knight ought not to fail his loyal fellow for doubt
of peril what so ever it be, for loyal company ought for to be as a man's
proper thing or cause. And Pytagoras says. Thou ought to kept the love of thy
friend dylygently.

The.xxvii. Allegory.
WHere the Aucthorite says that he *** ought to succor his loyal fellows of
arms, though it be to hell, we may understand y^ blyssed soul of Jesus christ
which brought forth the good souls of holy Patriarchs and Prophets which were
in limbo and that example the good sprite ought to do, and to draw unto hy^ at
virtues, and believe y^ article as says s. Phillip.

Discendit ad inferna. The.xxviii. History.


The.xxviii. Text.
Love and praise, Cadmus so excellent
And his dyscyples, hold thou in chyerte
He gaygned the fountain, of the Serpente
With right great pain, before that it would be.
The.xxviii. Gloss.
CAdmus was a much noble man and founded Thebes which city was greatly
renomed, he set there a study and he him self was much profoundly lettered
and of great science. And therefore says the fable that he daunted the serpent
at the fountain that is to understand the science and sages that always
springs, the Serpent is noted for the pain and travail which it be houeth
the student to daunte before that he may purchase science. And the fable says,
that he him self became a serpent, which is to understand, he was a corrector
and master of other. So wol Othea say that the good knight ought to love and
honor the clerks lettered, which ben grounded in science. To this purpose
says Arystotle to Alexandre. Honor thou science and fortyfie it by good
masters.

The.xxviii. Allegory.
CAdmus which daunted the Serpent at the fountain which the good knight
ought to love, we may understand the blyssed humanite of Jesus christ which
dompted the serpent and gaigned the fountain that is to say the life of this
world from the which he passed before with great pain, and with great travail.
Whereof he had perfyte victory when he rose again the third day, as says s.
Thomas.

Vertia die resurrexit a mortuis. The.xxix. History.


The.xxix. Text.
Delight the much, the science for to se
OF Yo, more than in other substance
For thereby thou may attain great dygnyte
And of gooddes foyson / and great abundaunce.
The.xxix. Gloss.
YO was a damsel daughter unto king Ynacus, which was of great science, and
found many manners of letters which before had not ben seen, howbeit that some
fables say that Yo was the love of Jupiter, and that was transmued to a cow
and after was a common woman. But as Poets have cloked the truth under
couerture of fables it may be understand that Jupiter loved her, whereby is to
be understand the virtues of Jupiter which was in her, she became a cow, for
as the cow gives milk which is sweet and norysshyng so gave she (by the
letters yt she found) sweet noryture and fode to the entendement. That she was
a common woman may be understand that her sense and wisdom was common to all:
as letters ben common to all people. Therefore says Othea that the good knight
ought much to love Yo, which may be taken for letters and scriptures, and
also hystoryes of good men, which the good knight ought Ioyously to here
recompted and also red, whereof the example may be to him profitable. To this
purpose says Hermes. He that enforces him to acquyre science and good manners,
he fyndeth that thing which pleases him in this world and in the other.

The.xxix. Allegory.
YO, by whom is noted letters and Scryptures, we may understand that the good
sprite ought to delight him in redyng the holy scriptures, and have them written
in his mind and entencion, and thereby he may learn to mount or assende to
heaven with Jesus Christ, by good works and holy contemplacion. And believe the
worthy article which said saint Bartylmewe.

Ascendit ad celos sedet ad dextera^ de^ patris omnipotentis. The.xxx. History.


The.xxx. Text.
WHere ever thou be, take heed ententyfly
That sown of Pype / to sleep the not adaunte
Mercury played, so sweet and pleasauntly
That he with his pype the people he did enchaunte.
The.xxx. Gloss.
A Fable says, that when Iupyter loved Yo the fair, that Juno had thereof
great suspection. And she dyscended fro heaven in a cloud, for to take and
surprise her husband with the deed but wha^ Jupiter saw her come, he changed
his love i^ to a Cow, but not for y^ Juno was dyscharged of Ialousy and
demanded of him the Cow in Ieste, and Jupiter maulgre his courage granted
thereto as he that durst not refuse, for doubt of suspection. Than Juno be took
the cow to be kept, to Argus her cow herd, which had an. C. eyes, and ever
he watched her, but the god Mercury by the commandment of Jupiter took his
pype wherewith he played right swetely, and so long he pyped at the ear of
argus, that all his hundred eyes he brought aslepe, one after another: the^ he
took from him the Cow, and detrenched his heed fro the shulders. The
exposicion of this fable may be that some puyssaunt man loved a damsel whom
his wife would have in watch so that her husband should not come to her, and
great watchers and gardes she there set and clear seeing, which may be noted by
the eyes of argus, but the lover by some person malycious and well spekyng did
so to be done, that ye gardes or watchers consented to yield unto him his love,
so were they endormed by the pipe of Mercury, and had the heed detrenched.
Therefore says Othea to the good knight that by such a pype he suffer not him
self endormed nor enchanted so that thereby he be robbed and dysapoynted of
that thing which he ought well to keep. And to this purpose says Hermes. Keep
you from them which do govern them selves by malice.

The.xxx. Allegory.
BY the Pype of Mercurius we may understand that by our ancient enemy the
good sprite should not be dysceiued in any misbeleue upon the faith or
otherwise, and he ought to believe steadfastly the Article which said Saint
Mathewe the Euangelyst, which said that our Lord shall come to Judge the
quycke and the deed by these words.

Inde venturus est iudicare vsuos et mortuos. The.xxxi. History.


The.xxxi. Text.
Believe thou that Pyrrhus / shall be resemblaunte
Unto his Father, and work great mysease
Unto his Enemies, and be to them greuaunte
For he shall revenge, the death of Achylles.
The.xxxi. Gloss.
PYrrhus was son unto Achylles, and well he resembled his father of force and
hardines, and after the death of his father, he came upon Troy and much
asprely revenged the death of his father, and greatly endomaged the Troyens.
Therefore says Prudence to the good knight, that if he have mysdone the father,
that he keep him well from the son, in his old age. For if the father has been valiau^t, semblably ought to be ye son. To this purpose says the wise.
The death of the father draws to him the vengeance of the son.

The.xxxi. Allegory.
THere where it says that Pyrrhus shall resemble his father: we may
understand the holy ghost which proceeds from the father, in whom the good
sprite ought to believe as says s. the less*

Credo in spiritu^ sanctum. The.xxxii. History.


The.xxxii. Text.
THe Temple frequente, and honor as is due
The god of heuens, in each hour and moment
And of Cassandra, ye usage thou ensue
For to be holden sage, if thou put thine intent.
The.xxxii. Gloss.
CAssandra was daughter to king Priam, and she was a right good lady and
devout in their law, the gods she served, and the temple she haunted, and
little she spoke without necessyte, and when it behooved her to speak she said
nothing, but that it was verytable, and never mendacite or lesyng was found
procedynge from her mouth, much sage was Cassandra: therefore says Othea to
the good knight that her he ought to resemble? for mendacious speech, or to be
a lesyng mongre, is much to be reproved in the mouth of a knight. So he ought
to serve God and honor the temple, that is to wit the church and the
mynysters thereof. And Pytagoras says a right lowable thing it is to serve god,
and sanctify or holowe his say^tes.

The.xxxii. Allegory.
THe Auctorite says that the good knight ought to frequent the temple, by
semblable case ought to do the good spryte and ought to have a synguler
devotion in the holy Church catholyke and in the comunion of saints as says
the article which said s. Simon.

Sanctam ecclesiam catholicam sanctorum communionem. The.xxxiii. History.


The.xxxiii. Text.
Often to go by see, if fortune have the lent
Thou ought for to reclayme
Neptune in thy mind
And well his feats to halowe his service to augmente
To the end that he the keep from great tempest and wind.
The.xxxiii. Gloss.
NEptune after the law of Paynymes was called the God of the sea and therefore
she would say to the good knight that he ought to serve him to the end that he
should be succourable to him upon the sea. So it is to be understand that the
knights which often go in many voyages upon the sea, or other diverse perils
have more necessyte to serve god, and his saints, than other people to the end
that at their need, they be to them succourable and aydyng, and they ought to
take a synguler devotion to God by good devout Oraysons by the which they may
reclayme hy^ to their aid in their need, and how it suffyseth not all only
the devotion of the mouth says the sage. I repute not God to be all only
served by words but by good works and by leadyng good life.

The.xxxiii. Allegory.
NEptune whom the good knygh^^ ought to reclaim if he go often by see, we shall
take that the good espryte which is contynually in the sea of the world ought
to reclayme devoutly his creator, and pray that if he give him to life yt he
may have remission of his sins, and he ought to believe in the Article which
said saint Jude.

Remissionem pecratorum. The.xxxiiii. History.


The.xxxiiii. Text.
Have good regard, in every time and hour
To Attropos, and to his darte or spear
Which stryketh and spares, for no dread or favor
It shall the exhort, thy soul in mind to bear.
The.xxxiiii. Gloss.
THe Poets called the death Attropos. Therefore says Othea to the good knight
that he ought to remember that he shall not always live i^ this world, but
shall shortly depart from it, so ought he rather to use the virtues of the
soul, then him to delight in the vices of the body. And thereof ought every
Chrystyan man and woman to think to the end that they have in memory the
promyssyon of the soul, which shall endure without end. And to this purpose
speaks Pytagoras, that even so as our beginning comes of GOD / it behooves
that in him be our ending.

The.xxxiiii. Allegory.
THere where she says to the good Knight that he have regard to Attropos
which is noted the death. Semblably ought to do the good esprite, which by
the merytes of the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, ought to have steadfast
esperaunce with the pain and dyligence which he shall take upon him to have
Paradyce in the end. And he ought to believe fermely that he shall rise again at
the day of Judgment, and shall have life perdurably if he deserve it, as says
the last Article, which said S. Mathie.

Carnis resurectionam et vita^ ^ternam, Amen. The.xxxv. History.


The.xxxv. Text.
OF Bellorophon make thine examplayre
In all the Feats / that thou wolte defyne
Which rather chase to death, to repair
Than to do desloyaultie, with heart, or mind inclyne.
The.xxxv. Gloss.
BEnorophon was a knight of right great beaultie and full of loyalty, his
Lords wife was strongly esprysed with his love, but not for that he would not
consent unto her volent. She did so much, that he was condemned to have been
devoured with fierce beestes and he loved better to chese the death, than to do
desloyaultie. So says Othea to the good knight that for doubt of death, he
ought not to do desloyaultie. To this purpose says Hermes. Thou ought
rather to have the will to dye without a cause, than to do Inconuenyence or
desloyaultie.

Now come we to declare the commandments of the law and thereof take we
Allegory to our purpose.

The.xxxv. Allegory.
BEllorophon, which was so full of loyalte may be noted god of paradise and as
his worthy mercy has been and is to us full of loyalte we shall take here the
first commandment which says, thou shall not adoure nor worships strange
gods, this is to say as says s. Augustyne, the honor which is called latria
thou shall not bear it neither to Idol nor to Image, ne to his se^blaunce, ne
to no manner of creature, for ye is the honor due alonely unto god, in this
commandment is defended al Idolatry, of this speaks our Lord in his Gospel.

Dominum deum tuum adorabis et miso^^ seruies.

Mathei quarto capitulo. The.xxxvi. History.


The.xxxvi. Text.
MEnymon thy loyal Cosen Germayne
Which does the assyst, in each dangerous place
And loves the so well / thou ought to love again
And at his need, with Armoure the enbrace.
The.xxxvi. Gloss.
MEnymon was cosen to Hector and of the line of Troyens, and when Hector was
in fyerce Estours and battayles where many times he was hardly empressed with
his enemies. Menymon, which was a right valyaunte knight followed him nygh, so
succored he Hector, and departed the great prease, as well it appeared, for when
Achylles had slain Hector by treason Menimon wounded grievously Achylles and
had him slain had not bryefely come unto him succor. Therefore says wysdom to
the good knight yt he ought to love him and succor his need, and that is to
vnderstan^d that every prince and good knight which has any parents be they
little or poor, so that they be good and loyal, he hought to love them, and
ought to bear and supporte them i^ their affairs and in special when he
fyndeth him loyal and true to him, and it fortuneth somtymes yt a great prince
is more loved and more loyal of his poor parent than of them that be right
puyssaunte. And to this purpose says the Philosopher Rabion, multiply thy
friends for they shall be to the succourable.

The.xxxvi. Allegory.
MEnymon the loyal cosen we may yet take for the god of Paradyce which is well
unto us a loyal cosen to take our humanite for ye which we may not him
guerdon. So here we may take the second commandment that says thou shall not
take ye name of god i^ vain, that is as writes s. Augustine, thou shall not
swear deshonestly, ne without cause to color falsyte, for there may b^ no
greater abusion than to bring in witness of falsite, Oath soueraygne and most
steadfast verite, and in this commandment is defended all lesynges, all
perjury and all blasphemynge. To this purpose says the Law.

Non habit du^s insontem eum qui assumserit nomen du^i dei sui frustra.

Exodi xx. capitulo. The.xxxvii. History.


The.xxxvii. Text.
Advise the well / that words of great menace
Of nycetie or folly, that comes to dyshonoure
Proceed not from thy mouth / and in this case
Of Leomedon, make to the a myrroure.
The.xxxvii. Gloss.
LEomedon was king of Troy, and father to Priam. And when Jason, Hercules and
their companyons, went into Colcos to get the golden flees and were descended
at the port of Troy for to refresshe them, without doing any do^mage to the
country. Than Leomedon as evil aduysed, send to them by his messagers
shamefully to go out of his land, and strongly them menaced if they avoided
not shortly. Whereof the Barons of Greece by this commandment of auoydaunce
held them so much Iniuried, that thereof after ensued the first destruction of
Troy. Therefore woll Othea say to the good knight that in so much as the word
menace is foul and vylayne: it ought well to be prepensed and delivered before
that it be said, for many evils thereof oftimes ensue. To this purpose says the
Poet Omere, he is sage which can refrain his tongue.

The.xxxvii. Allegory.
AS the word of menace comes of arrogauncie and pride, and to break
commandment is also oultre euydaunce or orguyl, we may take that man ought to
break the feasts or holy days for it is against the commandment which
says. Remember the to sanctyfye the Sabbath day, by the which is unto us
commanded as says S. Augustine that the Sunday we halowe in place of the
Sabbath day to the Iues, we ought to solempnyse it in repose rest of the body
and in cesynge from all bodily works of bondage, and in repose of the soul in
cesynge fro all sins. And of this rest speaks Esaias the Prophet.

Quiescite agere prouerse / discite benefacere. The.xxxviii. History.


The.xxxviii. Text.
SVppose not every thing to be certain
At the first Sign / but take delyberacyon
Till treuth be known, as for a while refrain
Of this can Pyramus / give best informacion.
The.xxxviii. Gloss.
PYramus was a young Bacheler of the City of Babylon, and when he had no more
but.vij. years of age, love him wounded with his darte, and he was esprised
with the love of Thesbe a fair damosyl and gent of his parell of age, and for
the great frequentaunce of these.ij. lovers together was apperceyued their
great love, and by a servant was accused to the mother of the damsel which
took her daughter and her enclosed fermly in her chambers and said that she
should well keep her from hauntyng Pyramus, great was the dolor of the two
children for this cause, and their plaintes and wepinges much pituous long
endured this prison, but the more y^ their age increased y^ more was embrased
in them the instygacion which for the absence was not destayned nor arrased.
But as betwyxt the pallays of ye two lovers was but one wall. Thesbe upon a day
aduysed the wall broken by the which she might perceive the light on the other
part. Than fyxed she her gyrdle in the creuesse of the wall, to the end that
her love might apperceyue it, which he did shortly enough, and there often
they made their assemble, the.ij. lovers with much pytuous complayntes: in
conclusyon (as by great love constrained) made was their accord such that upon
a night in time of the first stepe, they would secretly depart from their
friends, and should assemble under a white brere bery tree, without the city, at
a fountain where i^ their childhod they had been acustomed to dysporte the^
when Thesbe was come to the fountain alone all paruorous and full of dread,
than hard she a Lion come much rudely, whereof she al replenished with dread
fled thens to hide her in a busshe, y^ next she found, but in the way fell
from her her white wymple which the Lion defouled, soyled and made blody,
which vomyted and cast forth upon it the entrayles of beestes which he had
devoured, above mesure, great was the doloure of Piramus which believed none
other but that his love was devoured with fierce beestes, wherefore after many
pytuous regretes, he slew him self with his sword. Thesbe came out of the
busshe, but when she understood the syghes of her lover, which was at the point
of death and saw the sword and the blood, than by great dolor she fell upon
her lover which might nor speak to her, and after many great plaine^s,
regretes, swames, and trauntes she slew her self with the same sword. And the
fable says that for this pytuous case y^ beryes of the brere tree, became
black which ere were white. And because yt for so small encheason happened so
great mysaduenture. Othea says to the good knight that to a small ensygnement
he ought not to give great faith. To this purpose says one sage. Yield not
thy self certain of things which ben in doubt before that thou have had
conuenable informacion.

The.xxxviii. Allegory.
WHere it says that he should not believe al to be certain, we may note the
Ignorance which we have in our chyldhode, when we be under the correction of
the father and mother. And for the good deeds which we receive of them, we may
understand the fourth commandment which says. Honor thou thy father and
thy mother, which saint Augustyne exposes in saying, how that we ought to
honor our Parents in two manners. In berynge to them due reverence. And in
admynystrynge them in their necessyties. To this purpose says the sage.

Honora patrem tuum et gemitus matris tue ne obli^iscaris.

Ecclesiasti. vii. capitulo. The.xxxix. History.


The.xxxix. Text.
FOR corporal health, take in consyderacion
Of Esculapyon the wife, aduertysemente
And not of Cyres / the subtell incantacion
Her trompery / her charms / ne her inchauntemente.
The xxxix. Gloss.
ESculapion was a right sage clerk which found the science of medycyne, and
thereof made books. And therefore says she to the good knight, that he believe
his reports for his health, that is to say, if he have need, that he turn hy^
to the Physycions and medycynes, and not to the sorcery of Ceres, which was an
enchauntresse. And it may be said for them that in their maladies use sorcery
charms, and enchauntementes. And believe to be gueryshed which is a thing
defended and against the commandments of holy church, and which no good
christian man ought to use. Platon adnichilled and brenned the books of
enchauntementes and sorcery made upon medycyne, which sometime were used and
approved and he held him to the^ that were of science reasonable and of
experience.

The.xxxix. Allegory.
FOr Esculapion which was a Physycion and medicyne, we may understand the fyft
commandment, which says. Thou shall not sle, that is to say neither with
heart, with tongue, ne with hand. And so is defended all vyolence, percusyon,
and corporal hurtes. And it is not here defended to the Princes, to Judges,
and to Masters of Justice, to put to death the malefactors, but to them all
only, which have none aucthorytie, except in case of necessytie where a man
may not otherwise escape, in which case the Laws suffer well one man to slay
his adversary, in his corpse defendaunte, and otherwise not, to this purpose
says the Gospel.

Qui gladio ocesderit oportet / enen in gladio ^cetdi.

Luce. xiii. capitulo. The.xl. History.


The.xl. Text.
IN him (whom thou haste, offended with greuaunce
Which knows not how to venge him, or amend it)
Affye the not, for thereof comes myschaunce
Achylles death, can teach the to entende it.
The.xl. Gloss.
AChylles did much gryefe, to the Troyens, and to king Pryam he slew many of
his children. Hector, Troylus, and other, wherefore he ought to hate him.
Notwithstanding this Achylles affyed him in the queen Heccuba wife to Pryam, to
whom he had slain her children by treason, and he went by night to speak to
her, to treat of the marriage of Polexene her daughter and him, and there was
he slain by Paris and his fellows, by the commandment of the queen his
mother in the temple of Apolyne. Therefore says Othea to the good knight that
he ought not to affye him in his enemy to whom he has greatly mysdone without
making to him any peace or a mendement. To this purpose says one sage. Keep
the from the deceytes of thine enemy which may not revenge him self.

The.xl. Allegory.
Like as thou ought not to affye the in him to whom thou haste misdone we
may take it yt like as we ought to doubt the vengeance of god it is necessary
to hold his commandment which says, thou shall not do lechery, yt is to say
adultry, ne fornicacion, and so is defended, as says Isodore all or unlawful
to pulacion which is in the bond of marriage and al disordinat usage of the
me^bres general to this purpose says the law.

Morte moriantur mechus et adultera.

Leui. xx. ca. The xli. History.


The.xli. Text.
REsemble not Busyre, which no goodness pretended
But did him employe to murder and occysyon
His cruelty may well be / reprehended
Of all such Feats / exchewe the erudyccion.
The.xli. Gloss.
BVsyre was a king of meruaylous cruelte, and much him delyted in the occision
of men. And with his propre hands he slew them in the Temples with knyues, and
the^of made sacrifyce to his gods, therefore says Othea to the good knight yt
in no wise he ought to delight him i^ the occision of any humayne creature, for
such cruelte is agayn^t God against nature, and against al bounte, and to this
purpose says Socrates to the good counsayler, if thy prince be cruel thou
ought him to appese and amodre by good examples.

The.xli. Allegory.
BY Busyre which was an homicide and against humayne nature, we may note ye
defense yt is made to us by the commandment which says you shall do no thest.
And so is defended as says s. Augustyne, all unlawful usurpation of the goods
of other, al sacrilege all rapine all things taken by force, and seigneury
upon the people without reason. To this purpose says s. Paul the apostle.

Qui furabatur iam non furetur.

ad ephesi. iiii. ca. The.xlii. History.


The.xlii. Text.
Have not so much delight / in thy pleasaunce
As in doubtefull balaunce / to put thy life to wander
For thy life with love / thou ought most to auaunce
Remember how the flod, has ouerqualmed Lehaunder.
The.xlii. Gloss.
LEhaunder was a young gentylman which greatly and of perfyte love, loved Hero
the fair, and as there was an arm of the sea betwyxt the manners of the two
lovers, Lehaunder swam over it by night many times to se his lady, which had
her castle nere the ryuage to the end that their love should not be apperceyued.
But it fortuned that a great orage of tempest arose which dured many days upon
the water and disapoynted all the joy of the lovers, so it happened one night
that Lehaunder constrained of great desire put him self in to the sea, in the
time of the tempest, and was borne there so long by those peryllous wawes yt
it behooved him to perysshe much pytuously. Hero which was upon the other part
in great thought for her lover when she saw the body come flotyng to the
ryuage, than estrayned of a marvelous dolor cast her self into the sea, and
in embrasyng the body that was perisshed there was she drowned. Therefore says
Othea to ye good knight that somoch he ought not to love his delight, as
therefore to put his life in over great adventure. So says one sage to this
purpose I am much meruayled of this that I se somoch of perils suffered for
the delight of the body. And so little puruayaunce made for the Soul which is
perpetual.

The.xlii. Allegory.
AS the Aucthorytie defended that he have not so dear his pleasaunce as to put
him in over much Ieoper dye. It may be understand the commandment that
says. Thou shalt not speak false witness against thy neighbor. And so it
is defended, as says saint Augustyne, all false accusacion, murmuracion,
detraccion, all false re^orte, and defamyng of another. And it is to be known,
(as says Isodore,) that the false wytnesser, does vylany to three parts. That
is to say, to GOD whom he dispyseth in forsweryng him. To the Judge whom he
deceives in making a lesyng, and to his neighbor whom he endomageth in false
disposyng him self against him, and therefore says the scripture.

V^stis falsus non erit impunitu^, et qui loq^utur mendacia non effuglet.

Proue^bior^m.xix. capitulo. The.xliii. History.


The.xliii. Text.
Yield again Helayne, if any man demand her
For great offense well may be reparable
Better is consent to peace, than to withstand her
And when the Stead is stolen, to close fast the stable.
The.xliii. Gloss.
HElayne was wife to king Menelaus and rauysshed by Paris in Greece, and when
the Greeks were come upon Troy with a great army for the vengeance of the same
deed, before yt they endomaged the land they required that Helayne should be to
them yielded again and amends made for the offense done or if not, they would
destroy the country, and because the Troyens would do nothing, thereafter
ensued the great mischefe which after to the^ befell, therefore woll Prudence
say to the good knight that if by folly he have done any inconuenyence, better
it is to him to leave it and make peace, than it to pursue, whereby evil may to
him come. Therefore says the Philosopher Plato, if you have done injury, to whom
soever it be, thou ought not to be at ease unto such time as thou be with
him at concord and have made peace.

The.xliii. Allegory.
HElayne which ought to be yielded again may be intended the commandment
which says. Thou shall not desire the wife of thy neighbor, by the which is
defended (as says S. Augustyn^) the thought and will to do fornicacion, whereof
is spoken before in the.vi. Commandment, for our Lord says in the Gospel.

Qui viderit maulieram ad concupiscendam eam ^am mechatus est incorde suo.

Mathie. vi. ca. The.xliiii. History.


The.xliiii. Text.
THe Goddess Aurora, resemble in no wise
Which yeldeth unto other, joy and gladness
At comes of her hour, and does her self despise
All joy, and holds to weeping and sadness.
The.xliiii. Gloss.
AVrora is the poynct or dawnyng of y^ day, and the fables say that is a
Gods, and that she had a son of hers slain in the battle at Troy, yt
was named Cignus, and for she was a gods, and had the puissaunce so to do she
transmued her son in to a swan, and so of him, came the first swannes. this
lady was of so great beaulte that she reioysed all them that beheld her, but
al her life she bewept her son Cignus which was deed, and yet she does be
weep him to this day, for the due which falls at the poynct of the day, they
say it is Aurora that wepeth for her son Cignus, therefore says Othea that
the good knight by his good virtues reioyseth other, ought not to be heavy and
tryste but joyous, and modre him self graciously. Therefore said Arystole to
Alexandre the great what soever heuines be closed in thy heart, thou ought
always to show a glad and a joyous vysage before thy people.

The.xliiii. Allegory.
BY Aurora which wepeth we may understand that no desire ought to weep or be
madified in us by coueytyng a thing not due, and by this we may note the.x. and
the last commandment which says. Thou shalt not coueyte the house of thy
neighbor / his Ox / ne his Ass / nor any thing that he has. by the which
(as says saint Augustyne) is defended the will to do theft, or rapyne whereof
the deed is defended before by the.vij. commandment, and to this purpose says
David in his Psalter.

Nolite sperare in iniquitate.
^apinas n^lite concupiscere.
The.xlv. History.


The.xlv. Text.
Though Pasyphe frequented folysshenesse
Yet use you not to read in thy stole
All women to be such, for many (nevertheless)
Of Ladies ben good, though she were a fool.
The.xlv. Gloss.
PAsyphe was a queen, and some fables says that she was a woman of great
dissolucion and especially that she loved a bull, and she was mother to
Mynothauris, which was half a bull and half a man, which is to understand
that she acqueinted her with a man of vile condition, of whom she conceived a
man which was of great cruelty, and of meruaylous strength, and all was
because he had the form of a man, and the nature of a bull. And for that he
was of so great strength, and asprety and so evil that all the country
trembled, the Poets say, by fiction that he was half a man, and half a bull.
And therefore if this lady were of vile condition. Prudence woll say to the
good knight, that he ought not to say, nor suffer to be said that all women
ben semblable as the veryte is manifest to the contrary. Galien learned the
science of medicine of a right good woman and sage named Clempare, which taught
him to know many good herbs and their propreties.

The.xlv. Allegory.
BY Pasyphe which was folysshe we may understand a soul returned unto God.
And saint Gregory says in his Omelies, that much greater joy is demeaned in
heaven of one soul returned unto God, than of one which has always ben
returned to him. Right so as the captain in the battle loves better the
knight which was fled thens, and sythen is returned, and after his returning
has wounded the enemy, than him which has done no fair feate. And as the
labourer loves better the land which after the thorns bears fruit
haboundauntly, than that which never had any thorns, and has not borne
fruit. To this purpose says god by the prophet.

Beuertatur vnusquisque a via sua pessima and propietous ero iniquitati and
peccato ipsorum.

Hiere. xxvi. ca. The.xlvi. History.


The.xlvi. Text.
IF thou have daughters, able to be married
And that thou would bestow them and auaunce
To men by whom, thou would not be myscaryed
Of King Adrastus, have thou remembrance.
The.xlvi. Gloss.
ADrastus was king of Arges, and much puyssaunt and a wise man. Two knights
arrant that one called Polomites, and that other Thideus faught together in an
obscure night under the portall of his pallays, whereof that one challenged that
loges of that other, because of the strong wether and great rain which had
turmented them all the night, and thereof adventure they were fyghtyng. At that
hour the king arose from his roast, which had hard the noise of the swords
upon the sheldes, and came to depart the two knights. Polomites was son to
the king of Thebes, and Thideus to another king of Greece, but from their lands
they were exyled. Greatly honored Adrastus the two Barons, sith he gave the^
in marriage, two right fair daughters which he had. After to put Polomites to
the right of his land that Ethiocles his brother held. The king Adrastus made
a great army, and went upon Thebes with his great host, which were all
dyscomfyted, deed, and taken: And the.ij. sons in law to the king slain And
the brethern betwyxt whom was the dyscorde slew each other in the battle,
and to Adrastus beside his own person, were not left on live three knights.
And therefore because to set and establysshe people exyled, in to their right:
is a great affayre. Prudence says to the good knight that in such a case he
ought to have counsayl, and take example by the said adventure, and as Adrastus
met upon a night that he should give his two daughters by marriage to a Lion,
and a Dragon, which should fight together, the exposicion of dremes says, that
sweuyns commen of fantasy which may be demonstraunce of good or evil adventure
which shall come to creatures.

The.xlvi. Allegory.
WHere it is said that if he have any Daughters to be married that he shall take heed to whom he shall give the^, we may understand that the good mind or
spryte cheualrous to GOD, ought to regard well with whom he shall hold
company if it so be that he wol go in to company, as did the good Thoby. Also
he ought to assygne and set all his thoughts in holy meditacions. And saint
Augustyne says in an Epistle, that they which have learned of our lord to be
debondare, humble, and meke, do profit more in meditacion and prayers, than
they have done in redyng and herynge. Therefore said David in his Psalter.

Meditabar i^ mandatis tuis que dilexi. The.xlvii. History.


The.xlvii. Text.
When thou art young, and flouryng in pleasaunce
Acquaynte the with Cupido / but not frequente
For so that measure, leede the in her dance
The God of battle / holds him well content.
The.xlvii. Gloss.
CVpido is the God of love, and for somoch, as it is not vnsyttyng unto a young
knight, to be amorous upon a Lady that is good, his condycions may thereby
become better. But because Othea knows that the hauntynge thereof is
withdrawynge a man, and a thing much anoyenge to Arms, she says to the good
knight, that she is well consentyng that he acqueynt him with Cupido. And a
Phylosoper says that to love of good courage proceeds of Noblenes of the
heart.

The.xlvii. Allegory.
THat it pleases well to the God of battle that he acqueynt him with Cupido,
may be understand penance, if the good sprite repentaunt of his sins
fyghting against vices be young and enter newly in to the right way, well it
pleases to God of battle, y^ is Jesus Christ that he acqueynte him with
penance and that Jesus Christ by his worthy battle was our rede^ptoure says
saint Barnarde, what word (says he) of more great mercy might one say to
the sinner which was dampened, that where as he was sold, by his sin to the
enemy of hell, and had not where with to redeem him self. GOD the Father
said. Take my son, and give him for the. And the son said. Take me for thy
Ransom and redeem thy self by me. This is brought into remembrance by saint
Peter the apostle in his first Epistle.

Non corruptibilibus aned vel argento cede^^^ti est is: sed precioso sanguine
quasi agni incontaminati et immaculati jesus xvi.

prima Pet. i. ca. The.xlviii. History.


The.xlviii. Text.
Slay thou not Corinis, the fair
For the report, of the Raven unjust
For if thou her Slay, half in dyspayre
Thou shall repent after, thou may me trust.
The.xlviii. Gloss.
COrinis was a damosyll as says a fable whom Phoebus loved paramoures, the
Raven which than was his servant reported to him, that he had seen Corinis
his love lyenge-with another young man, of this novel was phoebus somoch dolent
that he slew his love as soon as he saw her, but thereof meruaylously he after
repented him, and the Raven which attended for his euerdon which he should have
of his lord for his good deed, was by him cursed and chased, and the feathers
which he was wont to have white as snow, Phoebus them changed into black in
sign of dolor and Phoebus from thensforth on ordained him to be a beyrer and
announcer of evil tidings and nouelles, and the exposicion may be understand,
that the servant of some puyssaunt man brought to his lord semblable
tidings, wherefore he was chased and dysapoynted of his service. Therefore woll
Othea say, that the good knight ought not to auaunce him to say to his prince
such tydinges whereof he may have the heart corrouced or angry, for in the end
evil may come to him thereof, and also he ought not to believe the report
which is unto him made by flatery. To this purpose says he Philosopher Hermes
The reporter or contriuer of tidings either he makes a leasing to him to
whom he shows them: either he is false to him of whom he says them.

The.xlviii. Allegory.
BY Corinis which ought not to be slain we may understand our soul, whom we
ought not for to slay by sin? but therefro well to keep her. And saint
Augustyne says, that the soul ought to be kept as the Cofre that is full of
treasour, and as the Castle which is assyeged with enemies and as the king
which reposeth him in his chamber of retraite, and this chamber should be closed
with v. gates, which be the.v. wits of nature, and it is none other thing to
close those gates, but only to retraye or draw a back the dilectacions of
the.v. wits and if it fortune that the soul should Issue, by any of his
gates to his outward operacions, she ought demurely, aduysedly and in
dyscrecion to Issue. And even so as the Princes when they woll Issue fro their
chambres have huyssyers before them holding maces, to make way in the prease,
so when the soul should Issue to se, here, speak, or feel, she ought to have
before her, Dread, for her huyssyer, which should have for the mace the
consideracion of the pains of hell, and of the Judgment of GOD. And thus to
guard the Soul admonesteth the Sage, saying.

Omni custodia serua tuum / cor quoniam ex i^o vita procedit.

Prouer. iiii. capitulo. The.xlix. History.


The.xlix. Text.
TAke upon Juno, no cure ne lust
If thou to the name of honor have more favor
Than to the degree, which falls to duste
For prowess is better, than all gold and hauyoure.
The.xlix. Gloss.
IVno is the Gods of riches, and substance, after the fables of Poets, and
because that hauiour and riches, is behoueful to be gotten with great pain,
business, and travail, and that such busynes may dystourne a man to seek
honor. And as honor and valyaunce is more lowable than riches, in as much as
the Cornell of the Nutte is better than the shell. Othea says to the good
knight that he ought not to set upon riches so strongly his felicite that he
delay the pursuyte of valyaunce. To this purpose says Hermes. That better is
to have pouerte in doing good works, than riches gotten shamefully. For
valyaunce is perpetual, and riches is fallyble.

The.xlix. Allegory.
Juno of whom it is said, that he ought not to set upon her over much his
cure, is taken for riches, and that the good spryte ought to despise them,
says saint Barnarde. O Children dyscended of the coueytous lygne of Adam, to
what encheason loue^ ye so much these mondayne riches, which be not very nor
yet youres, and whether ye wol or not, them it behooves you to lose at the
death. And the Gospel says that the Camel should more easly pass thoroughe
the hole of a nedle, than the rich man attain the Realm of heaven For the
Camel has upon his back, but one burden. And the evil rich man has
twain. One of worldly possessions, and another of sins, it behooves that he
leave the further burden, at his death. But the other, (woll he or not,) he
shall bear with him, if that he leave it not before that he dye. To this purpose
says our Lord, in the Gospel.

Hac^tius est camelum perforamen acus transire / quam diuitem in^eare in rignum
celorum.

Mathei. xix. capitulo. The.l. History.


The.l. Text.
Against the Counsel, of Amphoras the wise
Go not to destroy, (where death may the over charge)
Of Thebes / and of Arges / the Cities most of pryse
Ne there assemble / none host / sheelde / ne Targe.
The.l. Gloss.
AMphoras, was a right sage clerk, of the City of Arges, and much he had of
science. And when the King Adrastus would go upon Thebes to destroy the City.
Amphoras which knew by his science that evil should come to him thereof, said
to the King that he should not go thither in any manner, and that if they went
thither, they should al be slain, and destroyed. But he gave to his words no
credence, and so it be fell as he had to him said. Therefore she woll say to the
good knight. That the counsayl of the sage is little profitable to him that
woll not use him thereafter.

The.l. Allegory.
BY the Counsel of Amphoras, against the which he ought not to go in to
battle, we may note, that the good spryte ought to ensue holy predycacions.
This says saint Gregory in his Omelies, that like as the life of the body may
not be sustained without often taking his corporal refection, right so may not
the life of the soul be sustented without often heryng the word of God. Than
the words of God which ye here with your corporal eats receive them to the
profundite of your heart For when a word is hard, and is not retained within
the womb of the memory. It is like the evil dysposed stomach, which casts
forth or vomyteth the meat, and also as he that nothing retayneth, but
casts all forth, is in dyspayre of the life. So is he, in the peril of death
perdurablye. Which hereth the predicacions, and retayneth them not: nor
puts them to operacion. Therefore says the scripture.

Non (...) solo penensult homo sed in omni verbo ^ood procedit de ore dei.

Mathei. iiii. capitulo. The.li. History.


The.li. Text.
OF thy tongue, give Saturn the charge
So that unto evil / it be not free and ioly
Vnsemynge it is, of speech to much and large
And he that it hears / perceyueth well the folly.
The.li. Gloss.
Saturn as I have said before is a planet / slow / tardiue / and sage.
Therefore says she to the good knight, that his tongue ought to resemble him.
For the tongue ought to be tardyue, so that speak not to much, and sage that he
say not amysse i^ any thing, and that he say nothing, whereby may be perceived
in him any folly, for a wise man says. By his words is known the sage and the
fool by sight and regard.

The.li. Allegory.
THe tongue which ought to be Saturnyue, that is to understand, slow in
spekyng. To this purpose says Hugo de sancto victore: that the tongue which
has no guard of discrecion is as a city without a wall / as a vessel yt has
no couerture, as the horse that has no bridle, as a ship which is without
stere, or gouernal. The tongue evil kept is glasyng and slippy as an Ele, it
perceth as an arrowe fast flieng, it leseth friends and makes enemies, it
moves noise, and sows dyscorde, at one stroke it stryketh, and sleeth many
persons, he that keeps his tongue, keeps his soul. For the death, or the
life, ben the puyssaunce of the tongue. To this purpose says David in his
Psalter.

Quis est homo qui vuit vitam dies diligit videre bonos prohibe linguam tuam a
malo et labia ne loquantur dolum. The.lii. History.


The.lii. Text.
Give credence to the counsel of the Crow
Never thereby / shalt thou entysed be
Evil reports, and nouelles, for to sow
Which who so escheweth, is most at liberty.
The.lii. Gloss.
THe Crow as says a fable encou^tred the Raven or the Roke when he brought
tydinges to Phoebus of his love Corinis which was evil done, and somoch enquired
of him that he said to her the occasyon of his error, but she disalowed it in
giuyng him example by her self, which for a semblable case was derecte and
chased from the house of Pallas where she was whylome wont well to be auaunced,
but he ne would give to her counsel and credetice, wherefore evil to him came
thereof. Therefore says Othea to the good knight that he ought to believe the
Crow. And Platon says. Be thou no Iangler, ne to a king a great reporter of
nouelles.

The.lii. Allegory.
WHere the Crow ought to be believed. She woll say that the good spryte ought
to use the Counsel, as says Saint Gregorye in his Moralles. That force or
strength valueth nothing, where Counsel fails. For force is right soon
abated, if it be not appuyed or borne up by the gift of Counsel. And the
Soul that has lost within him the syege of Counsel, is outwardely
dispersed to diverse desires. And therefore says the Sage.

Si inteauit it sapiencia cor tuum censilium custodiet te / et prudencia
seruabit te.

Prouerbiorum secundo capitulo. The.liii. History.


The.liii. Text.
IF thou the efforce, with thy stronger to be
To make fair pastymes / of force or puyssaunce
Beware of damage, that may turn unto the
And of Ganimedes, have thou remembrance.
The.liii. Gloss.
GAnimedes was a yongeman of the lygnage of the Troyens. And a Fable says
that Phoebus and he were upon a day together to cast the bar of iron and as
Ganimedes was not of power against the force of Phoebus, he was slain by the
reboundynge of the bar which Phoebus cast so high that he had lost the sight
thereof. And therefore says Othea that with his stronger, or most puyssaunte,
it is not good a man for to strive. For thereof may not come but inconvenience.
So says one Sage. A man for to play with the men that be ungracious, is sign
of pride. And is fyninished most commonly with wrath.

The.liii. Allegory.
AND as it is said that against his stronger he ought not to enforce him it is
to be understand that the good spryte ought not to enterprise over strong
penance without counsel. Of this speaks saint Gregory, in Moralibus. That
penytence profyteth not, but if it be discret, neither the virtue of
abstynence, is nothing worthy, but if it be so ordained, that it not more
aspre than the body may sustain. And therefore he concludes that no simple
person, neither ought to enterprise penytence wtoute the counsel of more
dyscrert than him self. Therefore says the Sage in his proverbs.

Vbi mul^a consilia ivi erit Calus.
Prouerbiorum secundo capitulo.
And the common Proverb says.

Omnia fat cum consilio et postea non penitebi^. The.liiii. History.


The.liiii. Text.
Jason to resemble, thy self, well thou should
Which by Media in conquest gave the glory
Of the Golden flees, wherefore he did her yield
A right evil Guerdon, after his vyctorie.
The.liiii. Gloss.
Jason was a knight of Greece which went into a strange country, that is to
wit, into the I Will of Colcos by the endictement or commandment of Peleus his
uncle, which by envy desired his death. There was a sheep which had his flees
of gold, and by enchauntement was kept but as the conquest was so strong that
no man came thither, but he lost his life. Medea which was daughter to ye king
of that country, was greatly surprysed with the love of Jason that by the
enchauntementes that she understood being in that faculty a sovereign
maystres, she gave charms and taught enchauntementes to Jason, whereby he
conquered the golden flees, and thereby had honor above al knights living, and
was restored from death by Medea, to whom he had promised for ever to be a
loyal lover, but after faith to him failed, and he loved another, and her
utterly he refused and forsook. Notwithstanding that she was of right
sovereign beaulte. Therefore says my Lady prudence to the good knight, that he
refuse to resemble Jason which to much was misknowyng and desloyall unto her
which had done to him great goodness. As it is a vyllayne thing to a knight to
be ingrate, unkind, or mysknowyng, any bounte, or goodness that he has
received, be it of Lady, Damosyll, or other. But he ought to remember it and
yield guerdon therefore to his power. To this purpose says Hermes. Attend not
to reward him which has showed to the bounte, (For why.) Thou ougtest to
remember it for ever.

The.liiii. Allegory.
Jason which was unkind, ought not the good sprite to resemble, which for
the benefytes and goodness inenarrable received of his creator ought not to be
unkind, s. Barnard says upon the Cantycles, that ingratitude or unkindness is
enemy to the soul, the impediment of virtues, the dispersion of merytes, and
the destruction of perdycion of good deeds. Ingratytude is as a drye^ wind, yt
dries up the fountain of pity, the dew of grace, and the river of mercy. To
this purpose says the Sage.

Ingrati enim spe^ tanquam hibernalis glatiis tabescet / et disparie^ tanquam
aqua superuacna.

Sapientis.xvi. capitulo. The.lv. History.


The.lv. Text.
OF the Serpent Gorgon, fle the consystorie
Her figure to regard, beware thy self well
The valyaunte Perseus, have in memory
Vhiche all the History, thereof can the tell.
The.lv. Gloss.
GORgon, as says the fable, was a damsel of soueraygne beaulte but because
that Phoebus had pastyme with her in the temple of Diane, the gods took therein
so great displeasure that she transmued her into a serpent of right horrible
figure, and such a properte had that serpent, that the man which beheld her,
was suddenly turned into a stone. For the evil that of her did proceed, Perseus
the valiant knight, went to fight against the fyerce beeste. And in the
resplendour or brightness of his sheelde, which was all of gold, he beheld
hy^self, to thentent that he should not regard the evil serpent, and he did so
much, that he stroke of her heed. Many exposycions may be made upon this said
fable. And Gorgon may be understand for one Cytte, or Town, which has been
wont to be of great bounty. But by the vices of the inhabitauntes it becomes
a serpent and venomous, that is to understand that many domages and euyls it
does to the marches nere adjacent, as of al them to rob and pylle and the
merchants, and other passing by ben taken, and put in strayte prison, and so
be they turned to stones. Perseus beheld himself in his cheualry and went to
fight against the said City and took it, and bereft it of the power for any
more doing evil, and also may it be a Lady that is right fair, and of evil
manners and affairs which by her couetyse leueth naked and unclothed many of
their hauiour, riches, and substance. And many other entendementes and
exposicions may be set upon it. Therefore wol she say to the good knight that he
be well ware to behold that thing that is evil, and to evil may him draw.
And Aristotle says, fle from people full of Iniquity, and follow the Sages.
Study in their books, and behold the in their Feats.

The.lv. Allegory.
THat he ought not to regard Gorgon yt is that the good sprite ought not to
behold or think upon any delyces, but behold his own figure in the sheelde
of the estate of perfection. And the delices ben to be refused says
Chrysostom, that as it is impossyble that the fire bren in water, so is it
impssible that compunction of heart be amongst the delyces of the world. They
ben two things contrary which destroy each other, for compu^ction is mother
of tears, and the delices engendre laughter. Compu^ction restrayneth the heart,
and delyces puts it at liberty. To this purpose says the scripture.

Qui seruia^nt in letrimie: in exultacione me^^t. The.lvi. History.


The.lvi. Text.
IF love by night, constrayne the to wake
Take heed that Phoebus, thereof be not aduysed
By whose advertisement, thou may be take
And with the bonds of Vulcan to be surprysed.
The.lvi. Gloss.
A Fable says that Mars and Venus loved each other peramours. It befell upon a
night that these two lovers, (arm in arm,) were fallen on sleep. Phoebus
which saw clearly them surprysed and apperceyued he them accused to vulcan
husband to Venus, tha^ he seeing them in that point, forged a chain, as he
that was Smyth to the Gods, and in heaven forgeth the seat foulders,
thondres, and tempests, and with his chains made of coper, he bound them
both twain together so that they might not move them self and so he them
surprised and showed to the other gods. And such laughed thereat that would
well have been fallen in a semblable mysdede. This fable may benofed to many
entendementes, and especially some points touching the science of Astronomy,
and also Arsmetyke. Therefore says wisdom to the good knight that he keep him
in what case soever he be, to be surprysed by time forgoten, and a sage says,
with pain is a thing so secret but that it is perceived by some man.

The.lvi. Allegory.
WHere the aucthorite says that if leave run upon him by night, we shall say
that the good spryte ought to keep him from the baytes and grinnes of his
enemy enfernal. Of this speaks S. Leo the Bishop. That the ancient enemy
which can transfygure him in to an angel of light, sesseth not to attend by
all the snares of his temptacions and to espy how he may advise the faith of
creatures he looked who he may embrace with the fire of couetise whom he may
inflame with the ardour or hete of Lechery, how he may set forth the baytes of
glotony, he examineth of al customs, he dyscusseth the hearts, he coniectureth
or gessyth the affections. And there seeks be the cause to noye, or hurt,
where he fyndeth the creature most dylygently enclyned and occupied. Therefore
says saint Peter.

Sobrii estote et vigilate quia ol necsariu^ vester diabolus tanquam leo /
rugiens circuit quereus quam deuoret.

Secundo petri vltimora. The.lvii. History.


The.lvii. Text.
BE not Thamarys, of the desprysed
Though she a woman, and to Arms set her intent
Remember how she made, Cirus agrysed
And his dysprysynge, dearelye to repent.
The.lvii. Gloss.
THamaris was a Queen, a much valiant Lady full of great prowess and of
great hardines and right sage in Arms, and governance. Cirus the great king
of Perse, which had conquered many regions with his great host esmeued and
concluded in his mind to go upon the said Thamaris Queen of Femenie of whom he
praised the prowess as a thing of little value. But she that was expert and
subtle in the mestier of arms suffered him to enter in to her realm without
mouyng her self against him, unto such time as he had brought him self into
strayte passages among mountains, where as was a right strong country. Than
did asshementes which Thamaris did to be made, was Cirus assailed with an host
of women on all sides, and it was brought so well to pass, that he was taken,
and all his people dead and taken. The queen did him to be brought before her,
and his heed to be strycken of, and to be cast in to a vessel full of the
blood of his Barons which she had caused to be headed before him. And so she
said. Cirus thou which haste never ben satisfied nor had the full desire of
man's blood, now may thou thereof take thy full draughte. And so ended Cirus
the puissaunt king of Perse which might never ere than be vanquysshed in any
battle. Therefore says my lady Othea to ye good knight that he never be so
proud nor surcuydrous, but that he have doubt ye evil may to him fall by
some fortune, and be meine of him self. To this purpose says Plato. Disprayse
no person for his little faculty, for his virtues may be great.

The.lvii. Allegory.
THamaris which ought not to be dyspraysed. Notwithstanding that the good
spryte ought not to despise nor hate the state of humilite (be it in religion
or other state.) And that humylyte is to be praised says John^ Cassian. That
in no manner may the edyfye of our building of virtues, rease him, self in
our Soul, nor address his beginning except that there be founded in our
heart the ground works of the very humylytie, which may right steadfastly
sustain the hyghenesse of perfection and of charity. Therefore says the Sage.

Quanio mayor as humilia teipsum in omnibus et coram deo / inuentis ^ ^am.

Ecclesiastici.iii. capitulo. The.lviii. History.


The.lviii. Text.
Refrain thy mind when that it is affyred
From foul delight, and not give away all
Thy Cheuesaunce, when that it is desired
Medea thereof, to Counsel may thou call.
The.lviii. Gloss.
MEdea was one of the most knowers of Sorseryes, and Scyences, that ever was,
after the Hystories. This notwithstanding she gave her mind the Bridle, to
ensue his fre will, for the accomplysshement of her delight, when she suffered
folysshe love to have over her the masterye. So that upon Jason, she set all
her heart / and unto him she gave her honor / her body / and her
cheuesaunce. Wherefore he yielded unto her an evil Guerdon.

Therefore says Dame Prudence / that the good Knight ought not to suffer
reason for to be vanquysshed in him / by a folysshe delight in any case / if he
woll use the virtue of strength. And Plato says / a man of light courage /
hurts him self soon, in that thing that he loves.

The.lviii. Allegory.
THat he suffer not his wit to be rouersed by folysshe delight / may be
understood / that the good Spryte ought not to suffer his fre will to have
Lordeshyppe over him. For if the Lordeshyppe of the propre will, were not /
there should be no Hell / nor the fire of Hell should have no Seygnourye, but
upon the person which suffers his propre will to be his master.

Thy propre will, fyghteth against God, and is orguyllous, it is that thing
that dyspoyleth Paradyce and reuesteth hell. It makes vade the valor of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, and submytteth the world to the seruytude of
the enemy. And to this purpose says the Sage.

Virga at^ correctio tribuent sapientiam puer autem qui dimittitur proprie
voluntati confun^^^ (...) suam.

Prouerbiorum.xxix. capitulo. The.lix. History.


The.lix. Text.
SVbiect to Cupide, if thou be or shall
Beware to be surprysed, with enemytiee
So that the Rock, upon thy back ne fall
As it did on Achis and Galathee.
The.lix. Gloss.
GAlathee was a Nymphe or a gods which love a young man named Achis. A Giant
of horrible, and foul stature, was amourous also on Galathee, and somoch he
aspyed them that he apperceyued them both twain at a creuesse of a Rock, tha^
was he surprysed with the sudden rage of Ialousie, and in such wise he shoke
the Rock that Achis was therewith oppressed and deed, but Galathee which was a
Nymphe, put her self into the sea, and so she escaped. So is it to be
understand that the good knight beware himself to be surprised in such a case
by such as have the power so to do.

The.lix. Allegory.
THat he keep him well fro the Giant that is subject to Cupyde, is to be
understand that the good sprite ought to keep him that he have no Imagynacion
to the world ne to the things contained therein, but that he have always
remembrance that mondayne Iewelles ben little while enduryng, and s. Hierome
says upon Hieremie, that there is nothing which ought to be reputed long in
consyderacion of things yt take no end, nor all our time in consyderacion of
the Trinite of paradise. To this purpose says the Sage.

Veansi^runt omnia velud vmbra et tanquam nuntius percurrens,

Sapientio. ca. v. The.lx. History.


The.lx. Text.
Fly from the face, of the goddess Dyscorde
Evil ben her snares, and also her condycion
She troubled the weddynges, at Peleus board
Whereby assembled much people in conclusion.
The.lx. Gloss.
Discord is a Gods of evil affayre, and a fable says that when Peleus
espoused the gods Thetis of whom after was brought forth Achylles. Jupiter
and all the Gods, and goddesses were at the wedding. But the gods Dyscorde
was not byden or invented to the feeste. And therefore as enuyous she came without
sendyng for, but she came not for naught, for well could she the service of her
master or properte Than were set to diner at one table the three goddesses.
Pallas / Juno / and Venus. Than came dame Discord which cast upon the table an
Apple of Gold upon which were written these words (be it given to the
fairest,) than was y^ feeste sore troubled, for echone sustained that she ought
to have it, before Jupiter they went for Judgment upon this discord, he would
not please one, and dysplease another. Therefore he put the debate upon Paris of
Troy, yt was than an herd, for his mother had dremed (when she bare him within
her womb,) that he should be cause of the destruction of Troy. Therefore was he
send in to the Forest to the herdes of whom he supposed no other but to have been the son. And there Mercurius which was conduictour of the ladies said to
hy^ whose son he was. Than he left to keep the flocks and went to Troy to
his great Parents, as witnesses the fable where the true History is cloked
under couerture. And because that oftentimes many great myschyefes does ensewen
by dyscorde and debate. And therefore it is a right foul custom, for to be
dyscordaunte.

Othea says to the good Knight, that he ought to fly discord. And therefore
says the philosopher Pitagoras. Go thou not in that way, where grows
haynes, or hatered.

The.lx. Allegory.
AS it is said that he ought to fly dyscorde. So ought the good sprite for to
fly all the empeschementes of conscience. And the contentours and Ryottes ben
to be eschewed says Cassyodore, upon the Psalter. Souerayntly (says he,) fly
contencion and Ryotte. For strife against peace, is enragerye. Strife against
his Soueraygne, is woodnes. And to strive against his Subject, is great
vyllaynye. Therefore says saint Paul the Apostle.

Non incontentione: et emulatione. ^d romanos. The.lxi. History.


The.lxi. Text.
THy trangressyon, put thou not in oblyuyon
After that thou haste unto any man offended
For he woll attend, therefore to yield Guerdon
Thereby Leomedon, has his life ended.
The.lxi. Gloss.
LEomedon as I have said before, was king of Troy, and great vylleny had he
done to y^ Barons of Greece, in chasyng them from his land, which they put not
in oblivion, but Leomedon had let it slide wholly from his remembrance. At
such time as the Greeks ran upon him and him surprised, he vnpuruayed and
dysapoynted, so they dystroyed and slew him. Therefore says the good lady
prudence to ye good knight her dysciple, that if he have offended to any man,
that he have ever good watch thereof. For he may be certain that he woll not
fogette it, but woll revenge him self thereof, when he may have time and
place. And to this purpose says Hermes. Take heed of thy-Enemyes that they
take the not when thou art vnpuruayed.

The.lxi. Allegory.
THat he ought not to put in oblyuyon his mysdede, when he has to another
offended. May be understood that when the good spryte feleth him self
fallen in to sin, by defaulte of resystence / he ought to think what
punycion it requires, as it is of them that be dampened if they amend not them
self. And of this speaks saint Gregory. The Justice of GOD, comes now all
fayrely and slowly. But in time to come it shall recompense more grievously. The
mercy shall tarry for her attent. To this purpose says the prophet Ihoell.

Conuertemini ad dominum deum vestrum quia benignus et miseriscore est patiens
et multe misericordie prestabilis super maliciam.

Ihoelis tercio ca. The.lxii. History.


The.lxii. Text.
IF it so be that thou, have love frequented
Beware well unto whom, that thou thy mind show
So that thy deeds and words be not repented
Remember Semelle which did drink, as she did brewe.
The.lxii. Gloss.
A Fable says that Semelle was a damosel whom Jupiter loved paramours. Juno
which was thereof in Ialousie took the semblau^ce of an old woman and came to
Semelle, and by fair and pleasant words she began to reason with her, and
she did so much that Semelle knowleged and confessed all the conceyte betwyxt
her and her lover, and that she was right well loved of him, and thereof much
auaunted her self. Than the gods said to her (which took head that she
should not take her with the dysceyuaunce) that in nothing she had as yet
perceived the Iustynes ne Iolytie of her lover. But (she said) that when she
should require of him one gift or demand, and when he should have firmly it
promised and thereto accorded, that she should demand of him that he would
accoll and embrace her in such manner as he did his wife Juno, when it pleased
him to solace him self with her, and by this manner (said Juno) she might
apperceyue the love of her paramour. Semelle forgot it not, and when she had
made her request to Jupiter and that he had it promised, and that as a God, he
might not call it, again he was right dolent, and well he knew that she had been perceived. Than took Jupiter the semblaunce of fire and accolled and
embraced his love Semelle which with in a moment was totally brenned to asshen,
of which adventure Jupiter was right pensyfe and thoughtfull. Upon this fable
may be set many entendeme^tes, and especially upon the Science of Astronomy (as
says the masters) but it may be that by some way, a damosel was deceived by
the wife of her lover, whereby he him self did her to dye thorough ygnoraunce.
And therefore says Othea to the good knight yt he take heed when he speaks of
a thing which he would have to be kept secret, before whom he discloseth it, and
to whom he speaks / for by the circumstantes may be understand the matter.
Therefore says Hermes. Make thou not reuelacion of thy secret thoughts, but
only unto them whom thou haste well proved.

The.lxii. Allegory.
THat he should take heed to whom he speaks, we may understand yt the good
spryte (what soever his good thoughts be,) ought to keep them in every case
where he might fall into evil suspection of another (as says saint Augustyne,
in his book of Verbes) that we ought not only to set our hearts to have good
conscience, but in asmoche as is in our unsteadfastness, and in the dilygence of
man's fraylte. We ought to have the heart, that we do not ye thing which
co^mech of evil supection against our brethren, or even christen. To this
purpose says saint Paul.

In omnibus prebe et exemplum honorum operum.

Ad Titum.^. capitulo. The.lxiii. History.


The.lxiii. Text.
THe deduyctes of Diane not over much ensue
For she ne has co^ceyt, ne fantasy
To such as cheualry, do pursue
But ever to muse i^ her chasery.
The.lxiii. Gloss
DIane is called Goddess of woddes and of chasery. So woll Othea say to the
good knight pursuynge the high name of arms ought not over much to muse or
take his pastaunce is the deduyctes of chase or huntyng, for it is a thing that
appertains to occiosyte or Idleness. And Arystotle says, that Idleness
brings to perfytenesse, all Inconue^yence.

The.lxiii. Allegory.
THat he ought not over much to ensue the deduyctes of Diane which is said
for occiosite, may specially be noted to the good spryte. And that it is to be
eschewed says saint Gregory. Do always some operacion in goodness, to the
intent that the enemy may find the occupied in some good excitacion. To this
purpose is it said of the wise woman.

Consideranit semitas domus sue et panem oci^sa non comedit.

Prouerbiorum.xxxi. capitulo. The.lxiiii. History.


The.lxiiii. Text.
AVaunce not thy self, for damage thereof may come
To Iragnes, which did her self auaunte
Against Pallas, the Goddess of wisdom
Wherefore the Goddess, did her enchaunte.
The.lxiiii. Gloss.
YRaygnes as says a fable was a damsel much subtle in the art of weyuyng
and spynnyng and tapystery work, but she was over much surcuydrous and proud
of her science, and of her deed she auau^ted herself against Pallas, wherefore
she ran in to the indyngnacion of the Gods, which for her auauntyng
transmued her in to an Attercoppe, and then said that for her auauntyng somoch
she should for ever Spyn / weyue / and twyst / work of no value. And so came
first the Actercoppes, which spynne and weyue unto this day. So may it be
that some Handemanne auaunted him self against her maystres, whereby evil unto
her came by some manner.

And therefore says she to the good knight, that he ought not to auaunte ne
booste him self. And an unsitting and foul custom it is a knight to be a
vaunter, and much it may abate the loss of his bounty and semblably speaks
Plato. When thou do, a thing better at one time than another eschew to
auaunte the thereof. For thereby thy balour shall be much less.

The.lxiiii. Allegory.
THat he ought not for to be a pompous, nor auaunter of him self. We may
say, that the good Spryte ought to keep him from vauntaunce. And there
against speaks (S. Augustyne, in the.xij. Book of the City of GOD.) That
auauntaunce is no vice of man's lawdynge But it is a perfyte vice of the
soul, which loves humayne praysynge and dispyseth the very wytnes of his
proper conscience. To this purpose says the Sage.

Quid prosint nobis superbia aut di^les^rum iartanti a quid contulit nobis.

Sapien. v. ca. The.lxv. History.


The.lxv. Text.
IF to thy mind, it be much pleasant
Greatly to love, the deduyctes of chase
Of Adonius, (at least,) be recordaunt
From whom the wild Boore the life he did arase.
The.lxv. Gloss.
ADonius was a young man of much amourous countenance and of great beaultie,
whom Venus loved peramours, but for somoche as he delyted him much in chaserye
and huntyng. Venus which doubted that evil might to him come thereof by some
mysaduenture, many times prayed him to keep him well from chasynge of great
beestes, but to her aduertysement Adonius took little regard, so in conclusyon
he was slain with a wild Swyne. Therefore says Wisdom to the good knight,
that if he woll al gam^s chase and hunte, that he keep him from such venorye,
whereby evil may to him come. To this purpose says Sed^chias the Prophet. That
a king should not suffer his son to exercise over much chasery ne ociosyte.
But he should cause him to be instruct in good manners, and to fly vanyties.

The.lxv. Allegory.
WHere he ought to have remembrance of Adonius, it may be understand that if
the good spryte have erred or transgressed in any manner, he ought to have
reme^braunnce of the peril of perseueraunce therein, for how the enemy has
great puyssaunce upon sinners, says s. Peter in his.i^. Epistle, that sinners
ben servants of corrupcion, and the enemy has puyssaunce upon the^, for he
that is surmounted and vanquysshed by another in battle, is become his
servant or bondeman. And sign of this, it is said in the Apocalipse.

Data est bestie potestas in omnem (...) s^um et populum.

Apoca. xiii. ca. The.lxvi. History.


The.lxvi. Text.
IF thine enemies upon the, make assault
Take heed, least thine own people, the annoye
With them which thy City, would bring to defaulte
And take a good example, of the first Troy.
The.lxvi. Gloss.
When Hercules with a great foyson of Greeks came upon the first Troy, and
the king Leomedon had hard of their coming. Than he and all his people
which he might have within the City Issued forth, and went against them at
their landynge, and there assembled and joined a right fyerce battle, and the
City was reuersed and void of people. Than Thelamon and such other, as lay
in an Enbusshemente nere the walls of the City, put them self within. And so
was the first Troy taken. Therefore says she to the good knight. That he take heed that by such a turn or conueyaunce he be not deceived of his enemies,
and Hermes says / keep the fro the snare of thine Enemies.

The.lxvi. Allegory.
WHere he should keep him, if his enemies assail him / that his City be not
left void. It is to be noted that the good Spryte ought always to hold him
self ceased, and replenysshed of virtue. And of this speaks saint
Augustyne. That in like wise as in time of war, the men of arms, dyssease
not them self of their armoures, nether despoyle not by day neither by
night, so during the time of this life present, they ought not to be
dyspoyled of the virtues. For he whom the enemy fyndeth without virtues, is as
he whom the adversary has found with out armours. And therefore says the
Gospel.

Hortis armatus custodit atrium suum.

Luce. xi. capitulo. The.lxvii. History.


The.lxvii. Text.
BE not much assoted, ne set all thy joy
In Orpheus Harp, if thou wolte Arms frequent
For no pryncypall mestier, thou haste not to employe
Thy mind, to the Sown, of any Instrument.
The.lxvii. Gloss.
ORpheus was a Poet, and a fable says that he could so well play upon the
harp, that for to harken the sown the renning waters returned their course,
the fowls of the air, the beestes savage, and the fyerce serpents thereby
forgot their cruelty, and stood still wtoute mouyng to give aduerte^ce to the
sown of his harp. So it is to be understand that so well he it sowned, that
all people of each condition delyted them greatly to here the Poet playenge.
And for so much as such Instruments assoten oftentimes the hearts of men,
Prudence says to the good knight, that over much he ought not to delight him
therein. In so much as it is not sitting to them that pursewe cheualrie, over
much to muse in Instruments, nor other in ociosyte. To this purpose says an
Aucthorytie: The sown of an Instrument is the snare of a Serpent: And Plato
says. He that has set wholly his pleasaunce in carnal delytes, is more bond
than an esclaue.

The.lxvii. Allegory.
THe Harp of Orpheus, whereof he ought not to be assoted. We may take it that
the good Espryte cheuaulrous ought not to be assoted, neither to muse in any
worldly company be they his Parents or other. Saint Augustyne says in his
Book of the Syngularyte of Clerks. That the solatary is leest prycked with
the temptacion of the flesh which haunteth not the frequentacion of
volupties. And lest ben they grieved with auaryce, which never se the riches of
the world. Therefore says David.

Vigilaui et factus sum sicut passer solitarius in tecto.

The.lxviii. History.


The.lxviii. Text.
Upon lewd Dremes, or of folysshe illusyon
Edyfie no empryse or affayre
Be it right or be it wrong, it is but abusyon
And of thy brother Paris, make thine examplayre.
The.lxviii. Gloss.
FOr somoch as Paris had dremed that he should go into Greece, for the
accomplysshement thereof, was prepayred a great army and send fro Troy^ into
Greece where Paris rauysshed Helayne. Wherefore for the ame^dement, of the same
misdede came after upon Troy all the power of Greece, which was than so great a
country, that it extended unto the country which we call Poile and Calabre, or
Italy. And than was it called little Greece, and of that country was Achilles and
his myrrondo^nes. This great quantite of people confounded and destroyed Troy
and all the country adjacent. Therefore says Othea to the good knight, yt upon
an auision he ought not to enterprise any great feate or affayre, for thereby
great evil and myscheyfe may come to great furtheraunce, and that a great
enterprise should not be done with out great deliberacion of counsayl says Plato:
do not that thing which thy sens or wit has not before proved.

The.lxviii. Allegory.
THat a great enterprise ought not to be put to perfection, for auisio^ is that
the good intent cheualrous ought in no wise to presume of him self, ne of him
self to enhaunse in arrogancy for any grace that God has to him given and s.
Gregory says in his Moralles, that there ben.iiij. spies in whom all the
production of arrogancy is showed, the first is when the goodness that they
have, they repute it only of them self, the ^econde is when the goodness that
they have, if they think that they have it of god, they thy^ke that they have
well de^erued it, and that they receive it for their merits or good deeds / the
third wha^ ^hey vaunte them self to have that thyn^e which they have not. The
fourth is when they dysprayse other, by desire that people may know what
goodness is in them. Against this vice speaks the sage in his proverbs.

Arrogantiam et superbiam et os bilingna ^etestor.

Prouerbiorum octauo capitulo. The.lxix. History.


The.lxix. Text.
IF thou have great delight in hawks or hounds fair
Let Antheon, being so gentle of condycion
That became an Heart, vnt^ thy mind repair
And ever beware of damage in conclusyon.
The.lxii. Gloss.
ANtheon was a young man mo^^ curtoise and of gentyl condicion^ and greatly he
loved hounds and ha^kes, and a fable says that upon a (...) he chased al
alone in a thick forest wherre he had lost al his people, than Diane the
gods of woddes had chased in the forest to the hour of mydday, she was so
sore chaufed and hoar, for the ardour and hete of the Son, that a great
talent took her to bath her in a fountain fair and clear which she there
auysed, and as she was all naked, enuyr^nned with Nymphs and Goddesses which
served her. Antheon which took no head thereof, came sodeinly and vnauised where
she was, and beheld the gods al mother naked, whose face (because of her
great chastity of shamefastnes) became all red, and great was she dolente, and
than said she thus, for somoch as I know that young men vaunt them and make
their co^municacion of Ladies and damoselles, to the end that thou shalt not
vaunt the to have seen me naked, I shall take fro the, the puyssaunce of
speaking, and theirwth she accursed him. Than Antheon became a wild Hearts, and
nothing remained to him of man's shape, but only his understanding: wherefore
he full of dolor and of sudden dread went flyeng by the wodde and so much
was he chased of his proper hounds and his own people which went by the
forest serchyng for him, but now have they found him, but they can take of him
no knowledge, so was Antheon attaynt which before his people wept, and there
distylled from his eyes many great tears, and voluntarely he would have cried
them mercy if he might have spoken, and ever sythen have the Hearts wept at
their death. There was Antheon slain and martred with great dolor, by his own
meany which in short space had him wholly devoured. Upon this fable may be made
many diverse expocisions, but to our purpose, it might be a young man which
abandoned him to tally to ociosite and Idleness and dyspended al his hauiour and
his cheuisaunce for the delight of the body, and in deductes of chase, and
thereto he kept Idle people and meany, by this may it be said that he was hated
of Diane, which sygnyfyeth chastyte, and devoured by his own people. Therefore
woll Prudence say to the good knight, that he beware to be surprysed in like
case. And thus says one Sage. Ociosyte engenders ygnoraunce and error.

The.lxix. Allegory.
BY Antheon which was transmued to an Heart. we may understand the very
penytent which was wont to be a sinner, now has he mated and vanquysshed his
propre flesh and made it subject and servant to the soul, and has taken
the estate of penance. S. Augustyne says upon the Psalter, that penitence is
a burden well easy and a light charge, and it ought not to be called the
burden or charge of a man, but the wings of birds flyeng. For so as the
birds bear the charge of their wings in earth, and their wings bear the^
into the air. So if we bear upon the earth the charge of penitence, it shall
bear us right up into heaven. To this purpose says the Gospel.

Penitentiam agite appropinquabit cuim regnum celorum.

Mathei tercio capitulo. The.lxx. History.


The.lxx. Text.
GO not to the gates of iron leadynge to pain
Of Hell / for to go seek, Erudicen the gaye
Orpheus with his Harp, very little did gain
As I in Books have red, and also hard men say.
The.lxx. Gloss.
ORpheus the Poet, which so well harped. A fable says that he married the
fair Erudice. But the day of their marriage, she went walkyng in a medowe bare
foot for the heat of the wether. Than an herd coueyted that fair, and her to
have enforced, he put him self to run, and she which fled before him for
fere, was stonge upon the hele with a serpent which was hyd under the grass,
whereof the maid was deed wtin a little term. Greatly dolent was Orpheus of
this evil adventure, than took he his harp and went him to the gates of iron,
in the vale tenebrous before the infernal palace, and there began to herpe a
right pytuous lay, and to sing so swetely that all the turmentes of hell were
appesed thereby, and all the offices infernal were ceased for to give
aduertence to the sown of his harp, and especially Proserpine gods of hell,
was moved with great pytie. Than Pluto, Lucyfer, Cerberus, and Acaron, which
saw that for the herper all the offices of infernal pains were ceased and
still, yielded unto him his wife, by such condition so that he should go before
and she after, without turnyng him bakwarde or else he should lose her without
ever to recover her. But as soon as they were Issued forth of that obscure
lake, he which greatly loved her might not refrain to return his face to
regard his love, and forthwith Erudyce departed and fled again from him into
hell, and never might he have her again. This fable may be understand in
diverse manners, and it may be that one had his love taken from him and after
rendered to him again, and sythen he lost her again^e or it may be a Castle, or
another thing. But to our purpose it may be said, that well he seeks Erudice in
hell which seeks a thing impossyble to be had, ne to recover such a thing a
man ought not to take melancoly. The same says Solin. Great folly it is to
seek that thing, which is impossyble for to be had.

The.lxx. Allegory.
THat he ought not to go to seek Erudice in hell. we may understand that the
good spryte ought not to pray or require of God, a thing myraculous which is
said to tempt God. And s. Augustyne says upon the Gospel of s. Ihon^ that the
request which the creature makes to God, is not exalted nor hard, when he
requires a thing that he may not do him self, or yt ought not to do or a
thing wherein he should mysuse him self, if it were to him granted. Or a thing
which might hurt his soul if it were hard and exalted. And therefore it comes
of the mercy of god if he give not to the creature ye things wherein he knows
he should mysuse. To this purpose says s. James the apostle i^ his Epistle.

Petitis er non accipilis eo quod male petatis.

Iacobi. iiii. capitulo. The.lxxi. History.


The.lxxi. Text.
TO know a perfyte knight if thou wolte assaye
When he within a Cloister / is enclosed
The proese which did, Achylles by wraye
Shall teach the, the manner / if that thou be dysposed.
The.lxxi. Gloss.
AChylles, (so says a Fable,) was son to the Gods Thetis, and because she
knew as a gods that if her son haunted arms he should be slain in
battle, she that loved him of great and perfyte love, clothed him in the
vesture of a maid, and did him to be bayled as a Nonne in the Abbay of the
Gods vesta, long was Achylles there kept secret, that he was nere at his
full growing. And the fable says that he there engendered Pyrrus which
afterward was much cheualrous by the daughter of king ystrus. Than began the
great wars of Troy, and the Greeks knew by their sorcery and answers of
their Gods, that it was necessary for them to have Achylles, all about was he
sought, but tidings of him might not be hard. Vlyxes which was replenysshed of
great subtelte and malice, sought in every place, so came he to the Temple, but
when he might not have any perceiuaunce of the verite he advised him of a great
cautele: than Vlyxes took small Rings, wymples, rich girdles, fair books,
and precious Iewelles, for Ladies, and therewith he took Armours fair and
quaynt for knights, so cast he all in mydward of the place in presence of the
Ladies, and said, ye echone should take that thing that was most to her
pleasaunce, and than (as each thing draws to his nature) the Ladies ran to
the fair and pleasant Iewelles and Achylles took the armours, and than ran
Vlixes him to embrace, and said that he was the same whom he sought and for so
much that knights ought to be more enclyded to arms than to other
quayntyses, pretty Iapes and Iewelles which appertain to ladies, the aucthoryte
says, that by this mean may a man know the very knight. To this purpose
says Legmon, the knight is not known, but by armours, and Hermes says: prove
the men before thou have in them over great affyaunce.

The.lxxi. Allegory.
WHere the aucthoryte says that if he woll know a perfyte knight he must
assay as did Vlyxes. We may say it that the knight of Jesus christ ought to be
known by armours of good operacions and that such a knight has the salayre
and wage due to the good, says S. Hierome, that the Justice of God, as it
leueth none evil deed unpunished, also it leueth no good deed unrewarded. So
unto the good men ought no labor to seem hard ne no time long when they
attend and awayte for the glory perdurably, for their huyre and salayre.
Therefore says the holy Scripture.

Confortamini et non dissoluantur manu^ / vestre erit enim merces operi vestro.

sedi paralipomenon.xv. ca. The.lxxii. History.


The.lxxii. Text.
Strive not with Athalenta, her to over go
For she has more talent, than thou to run fast
(For why,) she has good mestier, so for to do
And unto such a course, thou no mestier haste.
The.lxxii. Gloss.
AThalenta was a Nymphe of much great beaulte, but hard was her destenye, for
by her many lost their life. This damosyll for her great beaulte was of many
coueyted, to be had in marriage, but such an edycte or proclamacion was made
that no man should have her except that he her vanquisshed by rennyng, and if
she him vanquisshed he should lose his life, and by this mean many were put to
death, this course may be understand in many manners. And it might be some thing
that much was coueyted of many men, but with out great travail it might not be
had, the course that she made, may be the defense or resystence of the thing,
and especially this fable may be noted of many that make great strife without
necessyte. So woll the aucthorite say, that with a man hard courageous and a
great stryuer, he ought to take no cure as to strive over much for things
unprofitable which be not towchyng his honor, or by the which he might
endomage him self, for many great euyls have many times ensued by such
strife. And Thesybelle says Thou ought to do that thing which is most
profitable to the body and most conuenable to the Soul, and to refuse the
contrary.

The.lxxii. Allegory.
BY that, that he shall not strive with Athalenta. We may understand (...) the
good spryte ought not to empesshe him self of any thing yt the world does nor
in what governance it be, and of this says S. Augustyne in an Epistle, that
the world is more peryllous when it is sweet unto creatures, than when it is
aspre and sharp, howebeit a man than sees him self more grieved and ought
less^ to empesshe hy^ or be abashed, and less when he draws men to his
love, than when he gives occasion to be despised To this purpose says Ihon^
the Euangelyst in his first Gospel.

Si quis diligit mundum non est caritas patris in eo.

primo Iohan^. ii. ca. The.lxxiii. History.


The.lxxiii. Text.
IN Judgment like Paris, no sentence out cast
For thereby some men, endure great damage
By evil sentence, granted in haste
Many men have received, an evil wage.
The.lxxiii. Gloss.
A Fable says that three Goddesses of great puyssaunce yt is to know Pallas the
Gods of knowledge and science: Juno Gods of riches and hauyour: and Venus
Gods of love and Iolite. Came before Paris holding an apple of gold, that
was written with these words (be it given to the fairest Of this apple was
great dyscorde, for echone of the Goddesses said that she ought to have it, so
were they put upon Paris for Judgment of the dyscorde Paris would first
dilygently enquere o^ the force of each of them by them self And than said
Pallas I am gods o^ ^nyghthod and of sages, and by me are departed arms unto
knights, and science unto clerks, and if thou wylt give me the apple, know
thou that I shall make the cheualrous and knyghtly above all other, and all
other to excel in all sciences. After said Juno gods of riches, and
seygnoury, by me are departed and given the great treasours to ye world, and if
thou wolt give me the apple I shall make the rich and puyssaunt, more then any
other. Thyrdly spoke Venus by much amourous words and said I am she yt uphold
the scole of amors love, and Iolite, which have the puissau^ce to make the
fool sage, and the sage folysshe, the rich I may make pauro^nyers and beggars,
and make rich the^ that been exyled and in pouerte, and (shortly to conclude)
there is no puissaunce that ought to be compared unto mine, and if thou wolt
give me the apple, the love of fair Helayne of Greece shall be (by my mean) to
the given which may be unto the much more of valor than al other riches. And
than Paris gave his sentence and renounced knyghthod wysdom and riches, for
Venus to whom he gave the apple, for which encheason Troy was after destroyed.
So is it to be understand, for somoch as Paris was not cheualrous, and that he
took no cure of great science, but on love set all his intent, therefore to
Venus he gave the golden apple. And therefore says prudence to her own knight
Hector, and to al good knights ye semblably they ought not to do. And
Pitagoras says. The Judge which gives Judgment unjustly deserved all evil.

The.lxxiii. Allegory.
PAris that Judged folyshly, is that the cheualrous knight of Jesus christ
ought to keep him fro gyuyng Judgment upon another. Of this speaks s.
Augustyne against the, that.ij. things there be which we ought especially to
eschew, Judgment of another pryncypally, for we know not of what courage ben
the deeds that they have done, which to co^dempne this great presumpcion, so we
ought to take and constrewe them to the better party. Seco^darely for we know
not, ne be not certain what they shall be, which now ben good or evil. To
this purpose says our Lord in the Gospel.

Nolite iudicare et non indicabimini inquo enim iudicio indicaueritis /
indicabimini.

seprimo. capitulo. The.lxxiiii. History.


The.lxxiiii. Text.
IF great Fortune lysteth, to take the to her grace
Unto her promyses, have thou none affyaunce
For in a momente, she changes her face
And such as sit highest, fall lowest sometime by chance.
The.lxxiiii. Gloss.
FOrtune after ye manner of ye spekinge of Poets may well be called ye great
Gods, for by her we se the course of al worldly things to be governed and
because she promyseth to many enough of prosperyte, and gives it in deed to
some creatures, and sythen takes it fro them again in a momente of an hour,
at her pleasure. Therefore says the aucthorite to the good knight that he
ought not to affye him in her promyses, ne to dyscomforte him i^ her
aduersytyes or contraryties, Socrates says. The circuytes or wheles, of
fortune be as engynes to take fisshes.

The.lxxiiii. Allegory.
BY this that is said that he ought not to aff^e him in fortune, we may
understand that the good sprite ought to fly, and despise the delyces of the
world. Of this speaks Boere in his third book of consolacion. That the
felycytie of Epicures, or of them that have the conueyaunce of all mondayne
dylectacion, ought to be called infylycitie. For this is the plain and
perfayte felycitie that man may make to him self, to be suffisaunt / puyssaunt
/ reverend / solemn / and joyous / which conditions give not these things
where in the mondayne or worldly people set all their feylycties. And therefore
says GOD, by the Prophet Esaias.

Popule meus qui te beatam dicunt ip^i te decipiunt. The.lxxv. History.


The.lxxv. Text.
War if thou wolte move / empryse or auaunce
Make not of Paris, thy pryncipall Capytayne
(For why,) he knows better the conueyaunce
Helayne to embrace, betwyxte his arms twain.
The.lxxv. Gloss.
PAris was not much apt in his conditions to arms, but all wholly to the
Troyens and conceytes of Venus, and therefore says the aucthorite to y^ good
knight yt he should not make captain of his host or of his batayles a knight
not condicioned to arms. And therefore says Aristotle to Alexandre, thou
ought to establyshe and make Connestable of thy cheualry, him whom thou
felest and perceyuest sage, and expert in arms.

The.lxxv. Allegory.
THat he ought not to make Paris heed of his wars, is that ye good sprite
going to the only cheualry of heaven, ought wholly to be substracte and as deed
to the world, and to have most eleuate the life contemplative, and s. Gregory
says upon Ezechiell that the life conte^platiue by good right is preferred and
set above the active life, as she that is more dygne and more great, for the
actyue life trauaileth her self in y^ labor of this life present, but the
contemplatyue life begins now to taste the savor of the repose and rest
that is to come. Therefore of Mary magdaleyn (by who^ conte^placion is figured)
says y^ gospel.

Optimam partem elegit sibi maria que non auffetetur ab ca ineternum.

Luce. x. ca. The.lxxvi. History.


The.lxxvi. Text.
TO watch or espy, set not thy besy cure
But evermore hold forth, thy right voyage
The wife of Loath, shall give the such nurture
And of Cephalus, which chased beestes Savage.
The.lxxvi. Gloss.
CEphalus was an ancient knight And a fable says that all his life he took
great dilectacion in the deduyctes of huntyng and venory, and merueylously well
he had the experience and feate of castyng a Iau^iot that he had which had such
a property that never was it cast in vain, and it slew all that it might
attain and because he was acustomed to rise early upon the morrow to go to the
forest to watch the beestes savage, his wife was in great Ialousy that he had been amourous upon another than her, and for to know the verite she went upon a
morrow after him to watch and auyse his deed. Cephalus being in the wod, hard
the leaves of a busshe move and make noise wherein his wife was hyd, and he
supposyng that it had been a wild beeste, cast, (therewith,) his Iauelot, which
attained his wife and so was she slain, much dolent was Cephalus of this
mysaduenture. But remedy might none be set. The wife of Loath (as witnesses
holy scripture) returned her face abacke, against the commandment of the
Angel, when she hard the five Cities foundre behind her, and therefore
incontinent was she turned into a salt stone. And as all things ben fygured,
here might be enough of entendementes, but (for to take truth for an example)
no good man ought to delight him in watchyng an other in a thing which ought
not to pertayne to him, and how no man would be watched says Hermes, do thou to
thy companion no more than thou would that he should do to the ne be not in
will to lay snares for to take men, ne to purchase their damage nor dishonor by
deceit nor cautele, for in conlusyon it may turn on thy self.

The.lxxvi. Allegory.
THat he ought not to take cure of watching any man, may be understand that
the good sprite ought not to take pain to know the deed of another ne to
enquire nouelles or tidings of another. And s. John^ Chrysostom says upon
the Gospel of s. Mathe, how (says he) in the deeds of another see thou so
many of little defaultes, and in thy proper deeds suffrest to ouerpasse so many
of great defaultes. If thou love thy self better than thy neighbor, for what
intent do you empesshe the of his deeds and take no regard nor cure to
thine own. Be dilligent first to co^sydre thine own deeds, and after consydre
the deeds of another. To this purpose says our Lord in the Gospel.

Quid autem vides fes^ucam in oculo feateis tui? trabem autem in oculo suo non
vides.

Mathei. vii. capitulo. The.lxxvii. History.


The.lxxvii. Text.
DEsprayse not the counsel of Helenus the sage
But by mine advise, give unto him aduertence
For often or this time, has hapened great damage
To ye sage for gyui^g, no crede^ce.
The.lxxvii. Gloss.
HElenus was brother to Hector, and sone to Priam, and he was a much sage
clerk and full of science, so he discounsayled and withstode in as much as he
might the voyage of Paris his brother into Greece to rauyshe the fair Heleyne.
Howbeit, yet no credence was to him given, whereof great damage came after to
the Troyens. Therefore says Othea to the good knight, that men ought to give
credence to the sage and to his counsayl, and Hermes says that he which
honors the sage and uses their counsel, is perpetual.

The.lxxvii. Allegory.
HElenus that discounsayled ye war, is that the good spryte ought to eschew
the temptacions, and s. Hierome says, that the sinner has no excusacion which
suffers him self to be surmounted by temptacion, for the enemy is there in
so foeble that he may none surmount but only him which is recreaunt and
yeldeth him self unto him wylfully. And to this says saint Paul the Apostle.

Hidelis deus qui non patietur vos temptati supra id quod potestis: sed faciet
etiam cum exultatione prouentum vt possitis sustinere.

Primo ad Corinthios.x. capitulo. The.lxxviii. History.


The lxxviii. Text.
Rejoice the not to much, ne be dysmayde
By night, for fantastyke auisyons
Of Morpleus which massagier is said
Of GOD, and shows the sleper Illusyons.
The.lxxviii. Gloss.
MOrpleus (so says a fable) is son and messagier to god sleping, and he is
god of Sweuyns and caused auisyons, and because that dreming is a thing much
troublous and obscure and sometimes sygnifieth nothing, and sometime sygnifyeth
all the contrary to that thing that a man meteth of, ne there is none so sage
that can properly speak thereof, what soever ye expositours say. Othea says to
the good knight that he not to rejoice nor yet to trouble esmay hy^ self for
any such auisyons whereof no man may declare a certain sygnification ne ^o
what end they should turn and specyal^y how one ought not to trouble ne
re^oyce him self of the Iestes of fortune, which ben transytory says Socrates
Thou that art a man ought not to ^eioyce nor trouble thy self for any case.

The.lxxviii. Allegory.
WHere it says that a man ought not ouermoch to rejoice ne trouble hy^ self
for auisions, we shall say that the sprituall knight ought not over much to
rejoice him ne trouble for any case, that may to him come. And that he ought
to bear the tribulacion patiently says s. Augustyne upon the Psalter, fair
son (says he) if thou weep for the evil that thou felest, weep under the
correction of thy father, if thou complain the of trybulacions which come
upon the take heed that thou do it not by in dygnacion and pride, for the
aduersytie which God sends unto the, is to the a medicine and not pain, it
is to the chastysment and not dampnacion, redoubt thou not in any wise the rode
or yard of thy father if thou be in will that he shall not extremely abject
the from his heritage, and think thou it no pain that thou haste in suffrynge
his scourge, but consydre, what place thou haste in his Testamente.

To this purpose says the Sage.

Esse quod t^bi applicatum fuerit acci^e et in dolor^m sustine et in humilitate
parientiam habe.

Ecclesiastici ii. ca The.lxxix. History.


The.lxxix. Text.
TO go by See, when thy co^clusyon is
Or peryllous voyage to take / art desposed
Of Alchione, believe the admonycions Iwys
By whom of Ceys, the death may be exposed.
The.lxxix. Gloss.
CEys was a king a much prudent and worthy man and greatly loved of Alchione
his queen, deuocio^ took this king to go by see, upon a perilous passage. In
time of tempest, he put him self upon the sea, but Alchione his wife which
perfytly loved him of great love put her in great pain to destourne hy^ fro
that voyage and in great wepinges and tears she prayed him much thereof, but
for her might be set no remedy nor to go with him he would not suffer her
which she would have done to what end someuer fortune should them bring and she
put her within the ship, to be part with him, but the king Ceys her
recomforted, and by force did her to remain, whereof she was much anguysshous.
and dolent, for she was i^ over great turment and thought because that Colus
God of wind moved sore the sea raised the walues in hight with the wanne water.
Ceys the king within few days after perysshed in the sea, whereof when
Alchione knew the adventure she cast herself also into the sea, and there was
trenched. But the fable says that the Gods had thereof pytie, and transmued
the bodies of these two lovers into two birds to the end that of their great
love should be had in perpetual memory. So fly they yet unto this present day
upon the sea, the same birds ben called Alcionees, and their feathers ben all
white and when the maryners se them come then they ben in certain that they
shall have tempest. The right exposicio^ may be that two lovers loved each
other, in semblable manner i^ marriage whom the Poet has compared to the said
birds. So woll Prudence say that the good knight ought not to put him upon
peryllous voyage without the counsayl of his good friends, and Assalon says. The
wise man enforseth him self to put damage far from him, and the fool takes
upon him great pain to find it.

The.lxxix. Allegory.
THat he ought to believe Alchione / is if the good Spryte be by evil
temptacion empesshed with any error or doubt in his thought that he ought to
put him upon the opinyon of the church. And s. Ambrose says in the second
book of offices, that he is enraged and mad, which dyspyseth the counsel of
the Church. For Joseph aided much more profitable the king Pharaon by the
counsel of his prudence than if he had given him of money, for money should
little have provided for y^ famine of the realm of Egipte, as did the
counsel of Joseph that set remedy against the famine of Egipte by the space
of certain years. And therefore conclude thou to believe counsel and thou
shall not repent. To this purpose says the sage Solomon in his Proverbs, in
the person of the Church.

Custodi legem meam atque consilium o^ erit vita anime cue.

Prouerb^orum.lil. ca. The.lxxx. History.


The.lxxx. Text.
TO the counsel of a child, give no credence
And Troylus thy brother, into thy mind retain
Believe the ancient, that have good experyence
And that know of arms, the charge, pleasure, and pain.
The.lxxx. Gloss.
When the king Priam had redefied Troy, which for the cause of the vylany done
to the^ which went into Colchos, had been destroyed, than of his destruction
would Priam take vengeance than assembled he his counsel where were many
Barons high and wise to know if it were good that Paris his sone should go into
greece, to rauisshe He layne in exchange of exione his systre that had been
taken by Thelamon ajax and brought in seruage. But all the wise barons
accorded yt he should not go because of the Prophecies and scriptures which said
that by such rauysshement Troy should be destroyed, than Troylus being a child
and youngest of the sons of Priam said, that a man ought not to believe in
counsel of war the vyllectes and ancient me^ which by recreandise
counsel rest and peace, so counseled he al contrary, than was the counsel
of Troylus holden, whereof great evil ensued. Therefore says she to the good
knight that to the counsel of a child ye naturally is of light and small
consyderacion, he ought not to hold nor give credence. Of this says an
aucthorite, y^ realm is not inquiet of who^ the prince is a child.

The.lxxx. Allegory.
TO the counsel of a child ought not the good sprite to accord, and that is
to understand his counsaylour ought not to be ignorant but knowing and well
learned and instruct, so yt he may be profitable to his health, and against the
ignorauntes says s. Augustyne. Ignorance is a right evil mother, and has
two as evil daughters, that is falshod and doubtaunce, the first is myschant,
the second is miserable, the first is more vycious, but the.ij. is more
grievous, and these twain ben extynct and quenched by sapience. Of this says
the Sage.

Sapientiam preter euntes non tantum in hoc lapsi sunt vt ignorent bona: sed in
sipientie sue celiquerunt hominibus memoriam.

Sapie. v. ca. The.lxxxi. History.


The.lxxxi. Text.
OF Calcas and his complyces have dysdayen
Of whom the malice, and falsenesse infynyte
Indurable realms, and Empyres betrayhen
In all the world, nys people more to wit.
The.lxxxi. Gloss.
LAncas was a subtle clerk of the city of Troy, and when the king Priam knew
that the Greeks came upon him with a great host, he send Calcas in to ye I Will of
Delphos to their god Dampne, Appollo Delphicus, how it should be of the war,
and to what conclusion ^t should turn, but after the answer of the god (which
said that after.x. years the Greeks should have the victory.) Calcas returned
him toward the Greeks and him acqueinted with Achilles which was coming into
Delphos for the same cause, and with him he returned toward the Greeks, whom
he helped and aided with his counsel, against his proper City, and many
times after he desturued and let the peace to be made betwyxte the Greeks
and the Troyens, and because he was a traitor, the Aucthorite says to the
good knight that such subtle and evil persons he ought to hate, for their
treaso^s made by many sleyghtes, cauteles, and frauds, may much endomage
realms and empyres and all people. Therefore says Plato, the subtle enemy
poor and not puyssaunt, may more grieve, tha^ the rich, the puissaunt, and
them that been without knowledge.

The.lxxxi. Allegory.
CAlcas which ought to be hated, may be understand that the good spryte, the
knight of Jesus christ ought to hate and eschew all malice and frauds against
his neighbor, and in no wise he ne ought thereto to consent, and s. Hierome
says. That the traitor adoulteth ne makes debond are ne frendfull him self,
neither for famyliarite of company, ne for preuyte of eating and drinking, ne
for grace of services, ne for plenty of benefytes, or good deeds. And of this
vice said saint Paul the Apostle.

Erunt homines elati cupidi superbi proditores proterni tumidi.

ii. Ad thimote. iii. ca. The.lxxxii. History.


The.lxxxii. Text.
TO grant that thing, be never dangerous
Which thou may employe, without vytuperacion
And make the a Myrroure, of Hermophroditus
Which damage received, for his denegacion.
The.lxxxii. Gloss.
HErmophroditus was a young man of great beaulte. A Nimphe was greatly
surprysed with the love of him in no wise he would love her again, and over all
she him pursued, to have purchased his love, so much that upon a time the young
man was much weary, for the chase wherein he had all the day travailed, than
arrived he at the fountain of Salenaxis, where was a fair slagne or standing
water clear and burblyng than he took talent therein to bath him he dispoyled
him of his clothes, and put him self into the water, wha^ the Nymphe saw him
all naked, she despoyled her of al her abillementes and attyres and lept after
him into the water, and began to embrace the young man by great love, but he
being full of felony debouted and cast her from him by great rudenes, and for
any prayer that she might make she might not molyfie his heart, than with great
volent prayed the Nymphe unto the gods that she should never depart but ever
remain with her lover which so debouted her, the Gods graciously herd her
devout Oraison, and set the two bodies of the^ twain in one, which had two
sexes or kinds, that is to wit, of the man and woman. This fable may be
understand in many manners, and as the clerks and subtle Philosophers have
obu^bred and shadowed their great secrets under the couerture of fables, here
may be understand a sentence apperteynyng to the science of Astronomy and
Arsmetrike as say these masters, and for somoch as ye matter of love is more
dilectable to here than other, they made comenly their fyctions upon love for
to be more delectable and especyally to rude people which take nothing thereof
but the skyn or outward parts, and to the^ that been subtle is more greable to
taste and such the lycour thereof. But to our purpose we may understand that
it is a foul detestable and vyllayne thing to refuse or grant with danger
that thing which should turn to no vice, ne by the granting whereof should come
no prejudice to ye grau^ter, and Hermes says, make thou no taryeng to put in
execucion, that thing which you ought to do.

The.lxxxii. Allegory.
THe good sprite ought not to be hard or dangerous to grant a thing where
he sees that there is necessyte but to comfort the nedy to his power (as
says saint Gregory in his Moralles) that when we woll comfort the sorrowful
in heaviness we must first sorrow with him, for he may not proprely recomforte the
dolent or sorrowful which accords not to his dolor. For like as a man may
not join two pieces of iron togythers, but if both twain be heated, chaufed,
and molified with the fire also we may not redres the heaviness of another,
except that our heart be molyfied and made soft by compassion. To this purpose
says the holy scripture.

Confortate manus dissolutas er genua debuta ^^bozate.

Esais. xxxv. ca. The.lxxxiii. History.


The.lxxxiii. Text.
Thou may esbatre, and take thy delectacion
At place and at time, in Vlyxes plays
For they be subtell, and of honest recreacion
In the time of trewes, and in the feestfull days.
The.lxxxiii. gloss.
VLyxes was a Baron of Greece, of great subtelte, and in time of the long syege
before Troy, that endured.x. years in all the days wha^ trewes was taken he
contryued and found plays, and pastymes much subtle and fair, for the
knights to esbatre, play and dysporte the time of their soiournyng, and some
men say that he found the play of the Chesse, and other semblable games to
pass the time, and Solin says, every thing subtle and honest, is allowed to
be done.

The.lxxxiii. Allegory.
THe plays of Vlixes may be understand that when the sprite cheualrous shall be
weary of prayeng adournynge, and to be in contemplacion he may well of batre
and take his deduyctes in redyng holy scripture: for (as says S. Hierome in
his moralles) the holy scripture is proposed and set open to the eyes of our
heart, as a myrrour, to the end y^ we may se therein the face of our Lord,
there may we se the ardour and vyletie that is in us, there may we se in what
manner we profet, and how far we be from profytyng. To this purpose says our
Lord in the Gospel.

Scrutatis scripturas in quibu^ putatis vttame e^ernam habere.

Iohan^. v. ca. The.lxxxiiii. History.


The.lxxxiiii. Text.
IF with Cupydo, thou ever be attaynte
And give to him thine heart, steadfast as stone
Beware with Bryseyde, the for to acquaynte
For she has the heart, now here, and now gone.
The.lxxxiiii. Gloss.
BRyseyde, (whom master Chaucer calls Cressayde, in his Book of Troylus) was
a damsel of great beaulte, and yet was more quaynte mutable and of vagaunt
condycions. Troylus the youngest son of Pryam (which greatly was replenysshed
of knyghtly prowess, great beaulte and gentylnes) loved her of great and
perfyte love, and she gave him her love and promised him for ever so to
contynewe, and never to faulse ne wtdrawe it. Calcas father to the damsel,
which by science knew y^ Troy should be destroyed did so much that his
daughter was yielded and so brought forth of the City unto him in exchange of
anthenor, and so was she brought to him, great was the dolor of the two lovers
at their departing, nevertheless wtin short time Diomedes which was a great
Baron of y^ Greeks and a much valiant knight, acqueynted him wi^h Briseyde,
and did so much by his purchase that she granted him her love and utterly she
put in oblivion her lover Troylus. For somoch as Bryseyde was so light of
courage. Othea says to the good knight, yt (if he wol give his heart) beware to
acqueynt him with a lady semblable to Briseyde, and Hermes says, keep the out of
the company of the evil, that you be not as one of them.

The.lxxxiiii. Allegory.
BRiseyde of who^ he ought to eschew the acquaintance, is vayneglory wherwt
the good knight ought i^ no wise to acqueynt him, but to fly it to his no were,
for it is very light and comes suddenly: S. Augustine says upon the Psalt^^,
that he which has well learned and essayde by experience to surmount and
overcome the degrees of vices, is come to knowledge yt vaynglory is a sin that
most specially is to be eschewed of perfect men, for it is among al sins, it
is most strong to be vanquysshed. Therefore says saint Paul the Apostle.

Qiu gloriatur in dn^o glorietur.

ii. ad corin. The.lxxxv. History.


The.lxxxv. Text.
TO Achilles take thou good head upon
After that thou shall have, Patroclus slain
For (trust me well) them two ben both as one
And have their goods common, betwyxt them twain.
The.lxxxv. Gloss.
PAtroclus and Achylles, were fellows together and so perfete friends and
lovers, that never two brethren loved better each other, and they and their
good were as one only and proper thing, and because that Hector slew
Patroclus i^ battle, therefore came the great hate of Achylles upon Hector.
But because he much doubted his great puyssaunte and force, he never ceased to
watch him to thentent to run upon him being dyscouered by treason. So says
Othea to Hector as by prophecy of this that was to come that when he should have
slain Patroclus it was nedeful to keep him from Achylles. And it is to be
understand, that what man soever has slain or mysdone to the loyal fellow
of another, that his fellow being a live, woll take vengeance thereof, if he
may. Therefore says Madarge. In what place soever thou be with thine enemy,
hold hy^ ever for suspect, although that thou be stronger than he.

The.lxxxv. Allegory.
WHere it is said that when he should have slain Patroclus, he should have ever
a good eye upon Achilles, we may understand that if the good spryte suffer him
self to incline to sin he ought to doubt the death everlasting, and (as says
Job) the life present is but a cheualry and insygne thereof, this present life
is called melitant to the difference of the life above, which is called
tryumphaunt, for that has the vyctory of Enemies. To this purpose says saint
Paul the Apostle.

Induite do armatur a dei vt possitis st^re ad^^^sus insidi^s diaboli,

Ad ephesi. vi. ca. The.lxxxvi. History.


The.lxxxvi. Text.
GLadly to Echo, her requests at troy
Be thou not in will, her playntes to augmente
If thou have power, to set her heart in joy
Thou know not what Fortune is unto the lent.
The.lxxxvi. Gloss.
ECho (so says a fable) was a Nymphe, and because that she was wo^t to be over
great a Ia^gleres and by her iangling accused Juno, yt upon a day she watched
her husband by Ialousy, she ra^n^ i^ the indignacio^ of y^ gods, which said
that from the^sforth she should never spe^e first any word to such time as
another had spoken it before Echo was amourous upon ye fair Narcisus but for
any prayer or sign of amite yt she might to hy^, he dayned not to have upon
her pity, i^ somoche y^ the far Echo dyed for his love, but in dyeng she
prayed to the gods yt she might be venged upon him, in whom she had sound so
much of cruelte and that they would give hy^ to feel the amourous pancture or
pryckyng of love whereby he might know the great dolor that the perfect and
fine lovers have, which of love ben refused, and thereof behooves to take their
death, therwt fynished Echo her life but the voice of her remained which yet
does endure, and the gods made her everlasting memory of ^his adventure and
yet she gives answer to the people in valleys, and upon ryuers after the
voice of (...) her, but she may never speak first Echo may sygnify a^ son, that
by great necess^t^e, requires a thing of another: the voice that did remain,
is y^ the people suff^yng pain or desease think the time long enough, how
short so it be, and they may not speak but after another, yt is the^ may not
help the^self without the aid of another. Therefore well Othea say to the good
knight that he ought to have pite upon such as suffer wh^^ they (...) any thing
of him, (...) y^ ^yll well keep the (...) to aid (...) fren^^ (...) of (...) to
(...) the^ suf^^e, to be (...) to (...) y^ ryg^t is to his (...) from all vices
and (...).

The.lxxxvi. Allegory.
ECh^ which ought not (...) her request denied, we may understand mercy,
which the good sprite ought to have in hy^, and s, Augustyne says i^ his book
of the sermon of our lord in the mountain, that blyssed ben they which
volu^tarely succor in this pefent life them yt ben in mysery, for they deserve
well y^ the mercy of god deliver them fro their miseries, and it a just and
rightwise thy^g yt he which would be aided by his sovereign that is more
puissaunt tha^ he, in like wise yt he help such as belesse tha^ ^e in y^ thing
wherein he is more puissau^t Therefore says the sage.

Qui pronue est ad in am benedictiue.

Pro. x^ii. ca. The.lxxxvii Hystory.


The.lxxxvii. Text.
OF the Laurier if that thou set thine entente
To have a crown, which vaineth more than gold
Daphne to pursue, to the is co^gruent
Tha^ shall thou it have, if thou her right path hold.
The.lxxxvii. Gloss.
A Fable says that Daphne was a damosel whom Phoebus loved by love, and much
her pursued, but in no wise she would to him accord. It befell upon a day that
he saw the fair maid going by the way, and when she saw him come, she took
her to stye, and the god after, and when he was so nere y^ she saw well she
might not escape, she made her prayer to Diane gods of chastity that she would
save unto her poor maid the virginite of her body, and contynent was the body
of the Pucell transmued in to a grene Laurier, and when Phoebus was approached
thereto, he took of the brannches of the tree a made him thereof a cha^plet in
sign of victory. And ever sythen unto this day; has a chapiet of Laurier
sygnified victory, and specially in the time of the great felicite of the
Romans they crowned ever with Laurier the victorious. Many entedeme^tes may
be had of this fable, and it may be that a pu^^saunt man pursued with long
travail a lady, in somoch that v^de^ a Laurier he at feigned her to his
pleasure, and for y^ cause he loved the Laurier ever after, and bare it in
deuyse and speech in sign of vitory that he had of his love under the Laurier,
and the Laurier may be taken for gold, which sygnifieth nobles, and because yt
the Laurier sygnifieth honor, she says to the good knight that it is
convenient for ^ym to pursue Daphne if he w^ll ha^^ (...) of Laurier, yt is to
understand he must pursue pain, and travail if he w^l come to honor. To this
purpose says Omere, by great dylygence comes a man to perfection.

The.lxxxvii. Allegory.
IF he woll have a Crown of Laurier, it behooves him to pursue Daphne, by this
we may understand, that if the good spryte woll have glorious victory, him
behooves good perseueraunce which shall bring him to the victory of Paradyce.
Whereof the joys ben infynite, (as says saint Gregory.) What is (says he) the
tongue that suffyseth to recompte, and what is the endemente that may
comprehend how great ben the joys of this soueraygne City of Paradyce? to
be each day present with the order of Aungelles, to be assystynge with the
blyssed sprytes, in the glory of the maker. To regard and behold presently the
visage of God. To se the light i^circu^scriptible. To be sure never to have
dread of death, to rejoice him self i^ the rest of everlasting incorrupcio^. To
this says David in the Psalter.

Gloriosa dicta sunt de te^ciuitas dei. The.lxxxviii. History.


The.lxxxviii. Text.
OF Andrometha thy wife / I shall make mention
By that vision, to be advertised
Refuse not al, i^ thine entencion
Ne of none other women, that well ben apprysed.
The.lxxxviii. Gloss.
ANdrometha was wife to Hecto^ and the night before that he wa^ slain came an
auision to the lady tha^ if upon the day ensuynge, Hector wen^ to battle,
without fail he should be slain whereof Andrometha with great sighs and wepynges
did her power that he should not go into battle, but he would not give credence
unto her, and so was he slain. Therefore says Othea that the good knight ought
not fully to disprayse the auysions of his wife, yt is to understand the
counsel and auyse of his wife if she be sage and well condicioned, and Plato
says, you should not disprayse the counsel of a little person, which is
sage, for though it so be that you be old have thou no shame to take the auyse
which a child shows unto the, for some time the ignorant may auyse the sage.

The.lxxxviii. Allegory.
THe auysion of Andrometha which should not be dispraysed is that the good
sprite ought not to adnichille and set at naught ye good purpose that the holy
ghost has put in his heart, but he ought anon to put it to effect after his
power of this says s. Gregory, that the good sprite to have us to do well
admonesteth us, moves us, and ensigneth us, he admonesteth our memory, he
moves our will he ensygneth and techeth our entendeme^t the spryte doulce and
sweet, suffers no spot of maculacio^ to remain wtin the habitacio^ of the
heart, wherein he hy^ self enspireth, but i^ contine^t he bre^neth it with the fire
of his subtle circu^spectio^. Therefore says S. Paul the Apostle.

Spiritum nolite extinguere.

Ad hebreos.xi. ca. The.lxxxix. History.


The.lxxxix. Text.
IF that great war, upon the be surmysed
In force of Babyloyne, over much the not affye
For unto N^nus, the force so well suffysed
That he it took no man might him deny.
The.lxxxix. Gloss.
BAbyloyne the great, which was edefied by Nemdrothtite. Giant was the most
strong city that ever was made, but that notwithstanding it was taken by the
king Ninus. Therefore says she to y^ good knight that he ought not over much
to affye him in the force of his City or cas^ello time of war, dut that he
be we four^ayde of people at many as him behooves, for conuenable offense. And
Plato says, he that affyeth him all quelye in his force, is oftentimes
vanquysshed.

The.lxxxix. Allegory.
IN the force of Babyloyne, no man ought not to affye him self ouermoch that
is that the good spryte ought not to set his trust, ne to give attendaunce for
any thing that the world promises Of this says s. Augustyne, in the bo^e of
the syngularite of clerks, that it is over lewd affya^unce, a man to repute
his life sure, against the perilles of this world, and folysshe hope it is to
supose to be safe, among the morsures or bytynges of sin, little certaynte
has a man of victory, as long as he is among the darts of his Enemies, and
he yt is enuyrouned all about with hydeous flames of fire is not delivered
lightly without brennynge. Believe in him that has the experyence, if the
world laughe upon the, have in him none affyaunce. In GOD set all thine hope.
Therefore says David.

Bonum est confidere in domino, s^ confidere in homine. The.lxxxx. History.


The.lxxxx. Text.
HEctor, me behooves, with syghes despytuous
Thy death to express, which does my heart to breast
Which shall to the fall, when of king Pryamus
Thou wolte not obey the prayer, ne request.
The.lxxxx. Gloss.
THe day that Hector was slain in the battle. Andrometha his wife came to
pray king Priam with pytuous and great complayntes and wepynges, that he should
not suffer Hector to go in to battle, for without fail he should be slain if
he thither went, for it was certainly showed unto her by Mars the god of
battle, which in slepyng had appeared unto her. Priam treated in asmoch as he
might, and him greatly endeavored to desturne him, so that he should not sight
that day, but Hector stole himself preuely from his father and went forth of
the City, by a way made under the ground, and went in to battle, where he
was slain. And so because that he had never dysobeyed his Father, but only
that day. She might well say that the day wherein he should dysobey his
Father, he should dye, and it is for to be understand, that no man ought to
dysobey his good friends, when as they ben sage. And therefore said Arystotle
to Alexandre. As long as thou shall believe the counsel of them which uses
sapyence, and that loves the loyally, thou shall reygne victoryously.

The.lxxxx. Allegory.
WHere she says to Hector that it behooves her to show his death, is that the
good spryte ought to have in contynuall memory, the hour of death (Of this
says S. Barnarde.) That nothing is found among the things humayne, more
certain than the death, nor more uncertain than is the hour of death, for
death has no mercy of pouerte, she bears none honor to richesse, she spares
neither sapyence, manners, nor age. Of the death no man has other certayntie,
but that she stands at the door of the ancient or old people, and to the
young, she is in manner of an espy. To this purpose says the Sage.

Memor esto quoniam mors non tardabit.

Ecclesiastici.xiiii. ca. The.lxxxxi. History.


The.lxxxxi. Text.
YET the to make Sage, I shall do my best
Take heed that in bataile thou use not this conceyte
Of Arms to dyscouer, thy body, ne thy breast
Which unto death, may well be called a bayte.
The.lxxxxi. Gloss.
HEctor in the battle was found dyscouert of his Arms, and so slain.
Therefore says Othea to ye good knight that of his arms in battle he ought
not to discover him, and Hermes says the death is like to the stroke of an
arowe, and the life is like to the arowe that is coming.

The.lxxxxi. Allegory.
WHere it is said that he ought to hold him couerte of his arms, is to be
understand that the good knight of Jesus christ, ought to hold his wits close
and not vagaunt. Of this says s. Gregory in his moralles, that the person
which disperseth his wits is semblable to the Iangler, which find no worse
house then his own, therefore he is evermore forth of his house. So the man
which holds not his wits close is ever waueryng forth of the house of his
conscience, and is as a place open so that a man may enter at al sides.
Therefore says our Lord in the Gospel.

Clauso hostio ora patrem tuum in abscondito.

Mathei. vi. ca. The.lxxxxii. History.


The.lxxxxii. Text.
OF Polybetes, ne coueyte, also, but exchewe
The arms (for why) myschau^ce is in them roted
For at the despoylynge / thy death shall ensewe
By him that does follow, and has the deed noted.
The.lxxxxii. Gloss.
POlybetes was a king much puyssaunt, whom Hector had slain in battle, after
many great feats that he had done that day, and because he was armed with much
rich a precious armours, Hector did coueyt them greatly and enclyned him upon
the neck of his horse, for to despoyle the Corpse. Than Achylles which followed
behind his back, for to take him at his gre dyscouerte, stroke him under his
Armours. And at one stroke, cast him dead to the ground. Whereof it was great
damage, for a more valyaunte knight never gyrded him with a sword: Of whom any
Hystories make mention. And that such couetyse may be domageable in such a
place it appears, by the said adventure. Therefore says the Philosopher.
Couetyse dysordinate, brings a man to death.

The.lxxxxii. Allegory.
THat of Polybetes he should not coueyte the Arms. We may note that the good
spryte ought not to have couetise of any worldly thing. For how it brings the
soul to death (says s. Innocent, in the Book of the vyletie of man's
condition. That couetyse is a fire, that is never saciat nor extyncte, for the
couetyse person is never content having all the he desires, for when he has
that which he first desired, he desires ever more, always he establysshed
his conclusyon in that thing which he looks to have, and not in that which
he has. Auaryce and couetyse ben two horse leches, which never sease to say
(bring, bring.) And the more that the value of the money grows, the more is
augmented the love thereto. Couetyse is the way, of spyrytuall death: and many
times of the death temporal. Therefore says S. Paul the Apostle.

Radix omnium malorum cupiditas est.

Primo. Ad thimotheum.vi. ca. The.lxxxxiii. History.


The.lxxxxiii. Text.
BE not surprysed, with strange love, ne assoted
As did Achylles, (regard ententyuelye)
Which did suppose (as in folly adoced)
His lover to make, of his greatest Enemy.
The.lxxxxiii. Gloss.
AChylles assored him of the love of Polixene the fair maid which was systre
to Hector, and as he had seen her in the vnyuersarie of the obsequies of
Hector, i^ time of trewes, wha^ many Greeks went i^to Troy, he was somoch
surprysed with her love, that in no wise he might endure. Therefore he send to
queen Heccuba, that she would cause the marriage to be treated, and he should
cause the wars to be ceased and the siege to depart, and for ever they should
be friends, long time was Achylles without armyng him against the Troyens
because of this love, and great pain he took to cause the host to depart
which he might not do, therefore was not made the marriage: After this Achylles
slew Troylus which was so full of valor that he was well se^blable to Hector
his brother after his young age. Of this was so sorrowful ye queen Heccuba, that
she send unto him to come into Troy for the marriage to be entreated, and
there was he slain. Therefore says she to the good knight, that of strange
love he ought not to assote him, for by far love have many euyls happened. And
therefore says one Sage, when thine enemies may not revenge them, than is
mestier to keep well and watch thy self.

The.lxxxxiii. Allegory.
OF strange love the good Sprite ought not to assote him, that is to
understand, he ought to love nothing except it come wholly of God, and endyng
in him, and every strange thing (that is to say the world) he ought to fly,
and yt the world is to be hated, says s. Augustyne in exposyng the Epistle of
s. John^, the world passes with all his concupiscence. Than, O thou man
reasonable whether seems the better, to love the temporal, and to pass and
slide away with the time: or to love Jesus christ and to live perpetually with
him. To this purpose says s. John^ in his first Epistle.

Nolite diligere mundum nec^ ca q^ in mundo sunt.

Primo. Iohan^. ii. ca. The.lxxxxiiii. History.


The.lxxxxiiii. Text.
Enterprise thou never, folisshe arms in feelde
To body, and soul, which peril does purchase
As (one arm bare) to fight (or without any sheelde)
Of Ajax, take thou aduertence in this case.
The.lxxxxiiii. Gloss.
Ajax was a knight of Greece moc^ orguyllous and proud, but he was nevertheless
a good knight of his hand, and by pride and fyexitie, he enterprised arms,
and to fight with one arm bare, and discovered of his sheelde, so was he persed,
through and, through, and cast down dead. And therefore says Othea to the
good knight to do such arms is of no honor, but is reputed for folly, pride,
and over much perilous, so says Aristotle: many err and transgress by
ignorance and defaulte of knowledge and they know not what is to be done, ne
what is to be refused, and other fail by pride and arrogancy.

The.lxxxxiiii. Allegory.
THat he ought not to enterprise folisshe arms is that the good sprite ought
not to affie him in his proper fragilite, as says s. Augustine in a sermon
that no man ought to presume of his speech when he pronounces a wondre, ne no
man ought to affie him this strength when he suffers temptacion, for if we
speak sagely our words come of God, and if we endure steadfastly temptacion,
the adversities come of god, and not of our patience. To this purpose says s.
Paul.

H^duciam ta^em habemus per christum ad deum non ^ sumus fucientes aliquid
cogitare ex nobis / tanquam ^t nobis.

Secundi ^d corinthios.iii. ca. The.lxxxxv. History.


The.lxxxxv. Text.
THe traitor Anthenor, exyle and chase
Which against his, Country has purchased treason
As a desloyall, scarioth Judas
So yield unto him his Huyre / due to him by reason.
The.lxxxxv. Gloss.
ANthenor was a Baron of Troy when it came to end of the grievous batailes of
Troy, the Greeks which had long holden the syege before the city, knew not how
to come to the mean to take the city, for it was of great strength, but by
the exhortacio^ of Anthenor, for wrath that he bare to king Priam he exhorted
them and said: how they should feign to make peace with the king, and by that way
he him self should put them wtin the City and give to them passage, so was it
done, whereby Troy was betrayed, and for somoch that to great was the treason
and euylnes of him, she says to ye good knight that all his semblables where
he may them know he ought to chase and exyle, for much ben such people to be
hated. Plato says Baxate, is the Capytayne and gouernoure of evil men.

The.lxxxxv. Allegory.
ANthenor which ought to be chased, we may understand that the good spryte
ought to chase fro him all thing whereby inconvenience might to him come. Of
this says s. Augustine, yt he which is not diligent to eschew the
inconveniences, is semblable to a butterflye, which turns her so long
about the fire of the Lamp, that her wings ben brent, and thems she drowned
in the oil, and the bird which flies so long about the byrdlyme that at the
last it is fastened in her feathers. Example of s. Peter which abode so long in
the court of the prince of the law, that he fell in such inconvenience to
deny his master. And Solomon says.

Huge a via malarum ne transeas pe^cam.

Prouerbiorum, iiii. ca. The.lxxxxvi. History.


The.lxxxxvi. Text.
SVffre none offering to come to the Temple
Of Myn^erue / by thine Enemies perjured
Of the Horse of tree / take thou good exemple
If it had not ben / Troy had yet endure.
The.lxxxxvi. Gloss.
THe Greeks made a trewes by fayntyse to the Troyens, by the treason of
Anthenor, they said they had auowed a gift to Minerue the gods which they
would offer, and they caused to be made an horse of tree of merueilous greatness
which was full of armed knights, and it was so great that it behooved to break
the gate of the City, that they might enter, and upon wheles was set this
horse which they drew unto the temple. And when the night was come, up stert
the knights and put themself forth of the horse into the City, all the people
they slew, brent, and destroyed, the city. Therefore says Othea to the good
knight, that i^ such fayntyse, nor such offryng he ought not to affie him. To
this purpose says the sage, a man ought to doubt the subtelties and engines
of his enemy if he be sage, and if he be a fool, his euylnes.

The.lxxxxvi. Allegory.
BY the temple of Mynerue, we may understand the holy church, where ought not
to be offered out orayson, and s. Augustine says i^ the book of faith, that
without the company of our mother holy church any goodness may to no man profet,
ne the works of mercy may be of no valor, ne the life perdurable be had, ne
without the circuit of the church may be none health. Therefore says David.

Apud te laus mea in ecclesia magna. The.lxxxxvii. History.


The.lxxxxvii. Text.
IN strength of thy Castle, be not to much assured
For Ylion, the strong Castle / and Thune
Ben taken, and brent, though they were strongly mured
All thing is betwyxte, the hands of Fortune.
The.lxxxxvii. Gloss.
YLion was the master dongeon or strong hold of Troy, the strongest and the
fairest, that ever was made / whereof the Hystories makes mention but this
notwithstanding it was taken, brent, and brought to naught, and also was the
City of Thune, which was sometime a great thing, and for so much as such
cases do happen by the mutabylytie of Fortune. Prudence woll say, yt the good
knight ought not to ^norguel ne to hold sure him self for any strength.
Therefore says Ptholomeus, of asmoche as seigneury or lordshyp is more high, of
somoch is ye reygne or fall thereof more peryllous.

The.lxxxxvii. Allegory.
THat he shall not trust to have a sure castle, we may understand that the
good Spryte ought not to have regard to any delyces. For the delyces ben
transytoryous, not sure, but leadynge to dampnacion, says saint Hierome. That
it is impossyble, that a person shall pass from delyces to delyces, as to go
from the delyces of this world, unto the delyces of Paradyce, that hear
fulfylleth his belie, and there should fill, and satysfye his soul. For the
condition of the soul, is there to have her dylectacion. And it is not given
to them which suppose to have the world perpetual in delyces. To this
purpose is it written in the Apocalipse.

Quantum glorificanit se et indeliciis fuit ta^tum dare ei tormentum et luctum.

Apo. xviii. ca. The.lxxxxviii. History


The.lxxxxviii. Text.
Regard that the Port, of Circes be exchewed
Where, of Vlixes, the knights did repair
And were to the figure of swyne. transmued
Remember the favor, that fortune did them bayre.
The.lxxxxviii. Gloss.
CIrces was a queen which had her realm upon the sea of Italy, and was a great
enchauntres and much she knew of sorcery, auauncementes, and incantacions. And
when Vlixes which went by the sea after the destruction of Troy, intended to
return in to his Country, by many great and peryllous turmentes, that he had.
He arrived at the port of her land, and send to the queen by his knights to
know if he might surely take haven upon her ground. Circes much fayrely
welcomed and fested the messagiers, and by semblaunt of curteysye she did to be
brought unto them drink that was much delicious to drink, but such virtue it
had by poison that sodeinlye the knights were transmued into Hogs. Circes
may be understand in many manners and may be intended for a land or a country,
where the knygtes were put in foul or vyleyne prison, and she may be also a
Lady full of inconstaunce, mutabilite, and vagaunt. And that by her many
knights errant, that is to say pursuyng arms, which specially were of the
people of Vlixes, that is to say malicious and auysed were holden at soiourne
as hogs or swyne. And therefore says she to the good kynght that at such
so^ourne, he ought not to rest him and Aristotle says. He that is wholly
enclyned to fornicacion, may not in the end be lawded ne allowed.

The.lxxxxviii. Allegory.
THe port of Cires, we may understand for Ipocrisy, which the good spryte
ought to exchewe over all thing. And against the Ipocrites says s. Gregory in
his morales, that the life of Ipocrites is no more but a fantastic auysyon,
and a fantasye Imagynatyfe / which shows outwardlye the semblaunce of an
Image, and in very deed is nothing worth inwardely. To this purpose says our
Lord in the Gospel.

Ve vobis ipocrite qui similes estis sepulcris dealbates que a foris apparent
hominibus speciosa i^tu^ vero plena sunt ossibus mortuorum.

Mathei. xxiii. ca. The.lxxxxix. History.


The.lxxxxix. Text.
Thou ought not to show wise parables and fair
To them that lacks reason / them to understand
Of this by Yno, take good examplayre
Vviche the sodden corue, did sow upon the land.
The.lxxxxix. Gloss.
YNO was a Queen, which caused for to sow Seeds, after that she had sodden
it, wh^^he never would grow again neither dear fruit. And therefore woll
Othea say, to the good knight, that fair reasons well ordained, and sage
aucthorities, ought not to be said to people of rude understanding, which
know not the intent thereof. For than they be lost and wasted in vain. And
therefore says Arystotle. Even so as the rain profyteth not to the Seed,
that is sown upon the stone. In like manner good arguments does not profit
unto the Insypyent.

The.lxxxxix. Allegory.
THat fair r^asons, ought not to be said unto them, which ben Ignorant,
which can not understand them. So that it is a thing lost. But that
Ignorance is to be blamed says saint Barnarde in a Book of the fyftene
degrees of humylytie, that they excuse them for naught of fragylyte or
Ignorance, which to the intent that they may sin, more freelye ben
wylfullye frail or Ignoraunte, and many things which ought sometime to be
learned / ben oftentimes unknown / by negligence to learn them, (by sloth to
demand them,) (or by shame to inquire them.) And al such Ignorance has non
excusacion. And therefore says saint Paul the Apostle.

Si quis ignorant, ignorabitur.

Primo, ad corinthios.xiiii. ca. The.C. History.


The.C. Text.
The.C. Aucthoryties, set in this book
Despise not the effect, for the words abused
For of a woman, August documente took
That to be adoured, he utterly refused.
And where the translatoure, has not well perused
His style, because of ygnoraunt entendemente
The virtuous (doubtless) woll hold him excused
But the enuyous tongues, ben ever insolente.
The.C. Gloss.
Caesar Augustus was Emperor of Rome, and of all the world, and because that i^
the time of his reygne was peace through all the world, so that he reigned and
governed all peasible. The folysshe people miscreaunt believed that the same
peace was because of the goodness of him but it was not, for it was because of
Jesus christ, which was borne of the virgyn Mary, and was than upon earth, and
as long as he lived in earth as man, peace was established by all the world. So
would the blind people have worshypped Caesar as a God. But than Sibilla Cumana
to him said that he should keep him fro being adoured and showed him that there
was but one only God, which al has created, and than she brought him upon an
hye mounteyne forth of the city, and wtin the son by the will of our Lord,
appeared a virgyn holding a child, Sibille showed it unto him and said, that
the same was the very God which ought to be adoured, and than Caesar adoured
him, and to hy^ did great reverence. And because that Caesar Augustus which was
prince of all the world, learned to know God, at the credence of a woman, may
be said to purpose the aucthorite said by Hermes: be thou not ashamed to here
truth and good ensygnement who soever says them, for veryte ennobleth him that
does pronounce it.

The.C. Allegory.
WHere Othea says yt she has written to him an C. Aucthorites, and that
Augustus took lerning of a woman is to be understand that good words, and good
ensygnementes are to be allowed of what soever person they be said. Of this
says (Hugo de sancto victore.) in a book called Didastalicon. That the wise
man hereth gladly al things and lerneth ioyously of every man, he redeth
voluntarely al ensignementes, he dispyseth not ye scripture, he dispiseth not
the person, he dispyseth not the doctrine, he enquireth indy^ferently over all,
of all, where he sees that he has defaulte, he co^sydereth not what he is
that speaks but what it is that is spoken, he takes no regard of how much
he him self has knowledge, but of how much he knows not. To this purpose
says the Sage.

Auris bona audiet tum omni concupiscentia sapientiam.

Ecclesiastici.iii. ca. Thus ends the.C. Hystories of Troy, translated out
of French in to English, by me. R. W.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer, dwelling in s. Martyns parysshe, at charyng
Cross. at the sign of s. John^ Evangelist beside the Duke of Suffolkes place.

Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.

ROBERT WYER.


