THE ANATOMY OF Arminianisme: OR The opening of the CONTROVERSIES lately
handled in the Low-Countryes, Concerning the Doctrine of Providence, of
Predestination, of the Death of CHRIST, of Nature and GRACE.

BY PETER MOVLIN, Pastor of the Church at Paris.

Carefully translated out of the original Latin Copy.

LONDON: Printed by T.S. for Nathaniel Newbery, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Star under Saint Peter's Church in Cornehill, and in Popes head Alley.
1620.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sr. Henry Mildmay, Knight, Master of his Majesty's
Jewels, and Sir HENRY ROW, Knight: All Health, Prosperity and Happiness.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL: It is not a new fashion, for such as publish any Books,
whether of greater or lesser worth, to present them to some worthy Personages,
for to be patronized, which howsoever it may be superfluous and unfit at
sometimes, and for some Books, yet it cannot but be very requisite and sit in
this, both in respect of the Author, and of his work: For the Author by
Nation is a stranger, and the work doubtless shall meet with many enemies:
And therefore howsoever they are both of them of very great worth, yet both of
them will have need of good countenance and defense. And as their necessity
in a foreign Region requires this; so their great worthiness and pious
intention demands it, as a duty, at the hands of all good men: for herein the
scrupulous doubts, or rather the subtle and querilous questions and disputes of
ouer-witty and audacious men, in very weighty points of Faith, are exquisitely
discussed and resolved, to the pacifying no doubt of many unsettled and unquiet
minds in the Church of Christ, which are more ready to be inquisitiue into
deep mysteries, then to believe them. Now then my self being utterly obscure,
and indeed altogether unaccomplished for such a business, yet the Lot being
fallen to me to send this translation forth into the world; I had almost let
it go at all adventures, to receive such entertainment as the world usually
affords unto strangers, but that calling to mind your Worships great courtesy
and affability, I thought they should not be unwelcome unto you: Besides,
having a great desire to testify the love and much respect I bear unto you; I
imagined that I could not better do it, then by intitling your Worships unto
so learned and holy a Treatise, tending to the maintenance of Religion and
Truth; because as one of your Names is honored, Emanuell College in
Cambridge, founded by Sir Walter Mildmay.
and that most worthily, by a famont and lasting Monument of love unto
Learning, Religion, and Truth; so I rest assured, that by your patronage of
this Book, your Honorable fame shall be increased; for which, and for all
other blessings abundantly to be conferred upon you, praying unto almighty God:
I beseech your Worships to pardon the boldness, and to accept of the good will
of him, who ever will rest most humbly

At your Worships command.

TO THE MOST JLLVSTRIOVS AND Most Potent Lords: the Lords the States general
of the United Provinces of the Low-Countryes.
INnumerable are the benefits (most Renowned and most mighty Lords) which have
happened to your Provinces by the goodness of God, and are supplied to you, as
it were by the immediate providence of God. These are great things, that your
Commonwealth, flourishing with Riches, enlarged with Territories, potent by
sea and land, famous in the Arts both of War and Peace, has so beaten back
the force of a most mighty enemy, that you have always waged war on your
enemies ground, and your Cities in the midst of the heat of the wars,
enjoyed Halcion-dayes of Peace. All which are done by the authority of your
most Honorable Senate, and by the conduct of the Prince of ORANGE; of whose
praises it is better to be silent then to speak but little. Even they who envy
your good successes, do yet admire your virtue. Finally, your Commonwealth
has had such a Senate, and such Princes, as God does give whenever he will
advance poor and afflicted estates, to the highest top of power and glory.

But among the other benefits of God, this is most eminent, that when the
bottomless pit does cast out that thick smoke, which covers almost the
whole world in a thick mist of ignorance, amongst you the Sun of Truth does
clearly shine in his pure orb, and has scattered the darkness of ignorance.
Whence it is come to pass that your country, together with civil bondage,
has shaken off the yoke laid upon your consciences.

Satan, that he might hinder the course of these prosperous affairs, has
for many years tried outward forces: From which enterprise being driven, he
has betook himself to crafty subtiltyes, and to intestine dissentions:
having gotten men, who affecting nouelty, under the pretense of Piety, have
torn the bowels of their own Country and Church. Pitiful was the sight of
your Pouinces: The enemy of our salvation did brandish amongst you the fire
brand of deadly dissension: A tumultuous tragedy was acted on the Theater of
Belgia, your aduersari^s beholding it with much pleasure: Finally, we saw your
Commonwealth shaking, and your estate almost desperate, had not God appearing,
beyond all expectation, turned away this imminent destruction by timely and
seasonable remedies: using to that purpose, your Authority, Wisdom, and
prudent Constancy. With how great patience you have endured these turbulent
wits, with how great vigilance you have prevented this spreading contagion, if
no man should speak of it, yet the greatness of the disease, and your estate
restored again to safety, would abundantly witness. In which enterprise, the
virtue of the most famous Prince of ORANGE has manifestly appeared, in whom
we have a singular proof what very great industry can perform with greatest
fortitude; who has added to so many warlike acts the praise of civil
prudency. By this deed (most Honorable Lords) ye have obtained more praise,
by restoring, then by enlarging the Commonwealth: For this intestine
pestilence has in few years brought more damage, then foreign wars were
able to bring in many ages. Of which your virtue all the Orthodoxe Churches
throughout Europe do reap great fruit; because the sparks of this flame did
already fly to them; and the judgments of many among foreign nations did
waver concerning these controversies. For in the questions of Providence and
Predestination, that opinion is wont to be most acceptable among the common
people which does measure the counsels of God by the counsels of men, and does
put upon God humane affections.

But among other things which were prudently and happily done by you, the
convocation of the Synod of Dordt has obtained the chief place. Then which
Synod for many ages past there has been none more famous, more holy, nor
more profitable to the Church. Whereunto that ye might call most choice men
from diverse parts, ye spared neither cost, nor labor; wherein all things were
done so orderly and gravely, that it has drawn the people into admiration,
and has stayed those that were staggering, and has so troubled headstrong and
obstinate persons only with the sight thereof, that they which before did
seem to be desirous of the conflict, and greedily to call for the encounter,
have by contrary practices, (whether fear struck them, or their conscience
affrighted them) begun to shun the hearing of the cause, to hate the light, and
to work delays. To so excellent a thing, both other Princes did exhort you,
and especially the most renowned Prince JAMES, King of great Britain, who
has always been most earnest and forward to drive away the errors of all
innouators; who as he is rightly styled the Defender of the Faith, so he has
his eyes vigilant on all sides, carefully watching lest Christian faith should
any where receive any damage.

And I who to so holy a work could not bring my travel, have at least brought
my desires. It cannot be expressed how earnestly I desired to be present at
that reverend Synod, to which the Churches of France appointed me, with some
of my brethren. What were the impediments which hindered my determined journey,
I need not rehearse; yet being absent, I performed what I could; For I sent to
the Synod my opinion of the five points of the Controversies which are hindered
in Belgia, having strengthened it with places and proofs out of the holy
Scripture. And when many men, and the same good men, and of great authority
and wisdom amongst you, had exhorted me that I would write somewhat upon
these controversies, I not unwillingly obeyed; which I have done, not so much
in hope of effecting what I would, as being ashamed to refuse them, and
desirous of making trial: For I had rather that godly and learned men should
find in me want of prudence, then accuse me of negligence. Therefore I have
printed my Scheduls and papers, and have reviewed those things which I had
meditated upon these questions, which I have uttered in a plain and untrimmed
style, that as it were in a lean spare body, the force of the truth might
clearly appear. And I have indeauoured to bring light to this darkness, in
which the most quicke-sighted do often grope at the way.

I am not ignorant, how dangerous a thing it is to undergo the hazard of so
many judgments; how many there that are ambitiously sour, and proudly
disdainful; how few there are that take and understand these things; how fewer
that are taken by them; how hard it is to contend with wily and witty men; who
even when they themselves are caught, do so speak as if they had catched
others; and who in a desperate cause do so carry themselves, as if they were
touched with commiseration: who undo again the things that have been begun
by themselves, and do of purpose infold their meanings, fearing to be
understood; like Lyzards, who out of the open field do run into bushes. Nor
am I ignorant how hard a thing it is for a man that is employed, whose mind is
troubled with other cares and business, to write punctually and exactly
concerning those things whereto the most free studies are scarce sufficient,
nor men at greatest leisure,

But your humanity and wisdom has moved and stirred me up, to be bold to
attempt it: For ye know, that in great and hard enterprises, the endeavor is
laudable, even when success is wanting. Nor have I doubted to consecrate these
my labors to you, that the work done for the defense of that cause, which ye
happily maintain, might manifest it self in your name: I shall seem to my
self not to have lost my labor, though I get no praise, if I obtain pardon:
Or if by my example, I shall stir up any to perform some thing more
perfectly, whereby the truth may stand unshaken against these innouators, which
do naughtily abuse their wits, and are of a wicked and unhappy audacity.

In the mean while, in your wisdom you shall observe from what beginnings,
to how great increases this pestilence has come, and how under a show of the
liberty of prophesing, the raines are let loose to wanton wits, which cover
licentiousness under the name of liberty. For whilst (as it were for the
exercise and show of wit) men dispute of those foundations of faith, of which
heretofore there was no strife amongst us, the most holy and most certain
things began to be called into doubt, and their scholasticall skirmishing,
forthwith burst out into a serious and earnest fight. For when this liberty (as
it falls out) had passed from the Schools into the holy Pulpets, and so into
the Streets, Tauernes, and Barbers-shops, the whole Country was changed into a
certain sea, boiling with tumults: Whence hatred has been bred in the
people, and piety is turned into contention, and obedience toward Magistrates
is more slack: to which evils, when the ambition of some men, affecting
novelties, had joined it self, which stirred up this fire with wind and fuel
laid to it, this flame in a short time has vnmeasurably increased: But by the
goodness of God, and by your authority and prudent vigilance (most illustrious
Lords) the flame of so great a fire is abated, liberty is recovered, the
Commonwealth is settled, the University purged, and truth, which in many
places durst scarce open the mouth, or else was disturbed by contrary clamours,
broke through the obstacles, and (as it is in the striking of flints) it shone
more clear by the very conflict; yea truly, by it there have appeared no
obscure increases of piety in the people; by it there is greater concourse to
hear the word of God, and greater attention. For God (such is his goodness)
does use vices themselves to stir up virtues which grow sloathfull in
idleness; For zeal and pietre being provoked do increase, even as the fire
of the Smiths furnace decaying, is set on fire by water poured on. Also they
that have learned by experience, what snares Satan does lay for them that are
a sleep and unwary, are stirred up to keep watch for the time to come.

There yet remain some relics of this disease, neither is the malice of the
Factions quite assuaged; but there is hope that the sides of this wound will in
a short space close together again, and men's minds will be reconciled. So
that it may be unlawful in your University (from whence this contagion crept
into the whole Country) hereafter to teach any doctrine differing from the
truth, and to call into doubt those things which are piously and prudently
determined out of Gods word in your sacred Synod; and that hereafter no man be
admitted to the sacred Ministry, whose faith is not tried, and his consent
with his brethren known; and that the authority be restored to Synodes, and
their use be made more frequent: that the evils that are breeding may be
prevented at their beginnings, as when the stinging Scorpion is bruised
presently upon the wound. Also it has been wisely provided by you that these
things hereafter be not published among the common sort, that the people be
not taught so much to dispute, as to live: and that they accustom themselves
to fight with their own vices, and not with other men's opinions. For it is a
most hard, and a very profitable combat which every godly man makes with
himself. On the contrary side, when strife is sown by strife, and not the
truth but the victory is sought, first charity and then truth is lost among the
contenders.

And especially diligence is to be used, lest peace and riches bring
forgetfulness of the Cross of Christ: and lest the people unmindful of the
benefits of God, should at length draw upon them his judgments. There are not
wanting examples of people to whom when religion had brought forth riches and
prosperity, a while after the same riches and prosperity choked religion, and
with a shameful parricide killed their Mother. So much the more care therefore
is to be had, that the ears of your people may always ring with those
instructions whereby the memory of the calamities driven from them may be
refreshed, and their minds might tremble with a godly fear, when they
foro-see a far off the dangers to come, and Satan lying in wait for them.

To which thing it is no light instigation, that by these late tumults you have
tried, that the peace of the commonwealth, does consist in the integrity of
Religion, neither can the purity of true Religion (which is maintained by you)
be violated, but that also the pillars on which your commonwealth stands,
and by which the authority of your supreme Magistracy is sustained, will be
shaken. For these two are so knit together by a mutual bond, that the one
cannot be overthrown, but the other also must fall down. Your authority was
struck at through the side of Religion; and in the foundations of the Church
the foundations of the commonwealth were undermined. Your power therefore will
be sound and safe, when obedience due to princes, shall be thought to be a part
of piety: and when the Pastors of the Church shall train up, by the word of
God, the people to perform obedience to you. And on the other side, the Church
shall flourish when Princes shall be her nourcing fathers, and shall think
themselves to be set by God at the stern of the Commonwealth, that God might
reign by them, and that Religion might grow up, and might carefully be manured
under the shadow of their civil power. This you do (most Illustrious Lords)
diligently and happily: It cannot be said how much your people are indebted to
you, and they will still owe you more. Surely, all good men in the Christian
world, do greet your so prosperous success, and do admire at your wisdom,
and do strive in prayers with God, that he would preserve you long to the
Church and commonwealth; whom he has used to preserve the Church and
commonwealth: and that he would so govern you by his spirit, and defend you
by his careful providence, that all your endeauours may obtain their wished
ends, and that ye may have a commonwealth happily governed, a State set in
safety, domestical concord, abundant riches, valiant armies, frequent
victories, a people obaying your command, and who may doubt whether they should
call you Lords or Fathers.

One that does highly honor your most illustrious Lordships, PETER MOVLIN.

COurteous Reader, be entreated to take notice of these faults, because they
are material: The rest may be amended by the prudent Reader. Page 4. line 2.
read people, out of the Pulpit: seeing. p. 13. l. 18 r. offend, God not
compelling: But. p. 37. l. 1. r. by well advised men. l 2. r. by unadvised men.
p. 41. l. 1. r. order. We deny not that, etc. l. 3. r. as man's will. p. 54. l.
5. r. thou do not play. p. 69 l. 30.31. r. every where received. l 32. r.
organicall body. p. 72. l. 7 to put sin into the will. p 83. l. 10.11.
reprobated: and some are preferred others being neglected. p. 93. l. 22. r. the
greatest punishment p 95. l. 27. r. He could not. p. 144. l. 14. r. who will.
p. 155. l. 5. r. We are predestined to faith p. 169 l. 25. r. sense. In his.
p. 171. l. 15. r. in order, admit. p. 209. Let this be the title of the 26.
Chapter. Of Reprobation p. 218. l. 7. r. from good. p 223 l 18. r. a token
hereof that. p. 246. l. 14. r. of the son, is p. 284 l. 7. r. inordinate
affections. p. 311. l. 27 r. remainds, if universal sufficient grace be added.
p. 348. l. 14. r. this action of the spit it he carries. p. 422. l 7. should
not change. p. 462, l. 3. r. that by those words. p. 476. l. 27. but may
finally.

The Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
HOw soberly we are to deal in this argument. chap. 1. That we are not
therefore to abstain from the doctrine of Providence and Predestination,
although some abuse it to curiosity and impiety. And whereto it is
profitable. chap. 2. What the providence of God is. How far it extends. That
God is not the author of sin. What permission is, and what blinding and
hardening is. chap. 3, Of the will of God. chap. 4. Of the Antecedent and
Consequent will of God. chap. 5. Of the sin of Adam. chap. 6. That all
mankind is infected with Original sin. chap. 7. What Original sin is,
and whether it be truly and properly sin. chap. 8. How the sin of Adam may
belong to his posterity, and how many ways it may pass to his offspring. And
first of the imputation of it; and whether the sins of the Grandfather and
great-Grand-fathers are imputed to their posterity. chap. 9. Of the
propagation of the sin of Adam to his posterity. Where also of the
traduction both of the soul and of sin it self. chap. 10. Whether the power
of believing the Gospel is lost by the sin of Adam. chap. 11. That God does
save those whom of his mere grace he chose out of mankind, corrupted and
obnoxious to the curse. What Predestination is; the parts of it. That Arminius
did not understand what the decree of Predestination is, and that he has
utterly taken away Election. chap. 12. Of the Object of Predestination, that
is, whether God electing or reprobating, considers a man as fallen or not
fallen. chap. 13. That the Apostle Saint Paul in the ninth to the Romans, by
the word Mass; understood the corrupted Mass. chap. 14. That Arminius does
willingly darken the words of the Apostle which are clear and express. chap.
15. The opinions of the parties, upon the doctrine of Predestination. chap. 16.
That the Arminians make fore-seene-faith the cause of the election of
particular persons. chap. 17. The decree of general Election is searched into,
by which Arminius will have all men to be elected under the condition of faith.
chap. 18. The election of particular persons, in respect of faith foreseen,
is confuted by the authority of the Scripture. It is proved that men are not
elected for faith, but to faith. chap. 19. Election for faith foreseen is
confuted by places taken out of the Gospel of Saint John. chap. 20. The same
is proved out of the eight, ninth, and the eleauenth Chapter to the Romans.
chap. 21. The same Election, in respect of faith foreseen, is confuted by
reason. chap. 22. The opinion of Saint Austin concerning Election for faith
foreseen. chap. 23. The arguments of the Arminians, by which they endeavor
to stablish Election for faith foreseen, are examined. chap. 24. whether
Christ be the cause and foundation of Election. chap. 25. Of Reprobation. chap.
26. How far, and in what sense, Christ died for all. chap. 27. That
reconciliation, remission of sins, and salvation is not obtained nor
purchased for all, and particular men, by the death of Christ. chap. 28. The
objections of the Arminians are answered, by which they endeavor to maintain
and confirm the obtaining of salvation for all men. chap. 29. That it was long
ago desputed whether Christ died for all, but in a far other sense. chap. 30.
Whether God love all men equally, and does alike desire the salvation of all.
chap 31. Of free will: the opinions of the parties. chap. 32. It is proved out
of the holy Scripture, that an unregenerate man is altogether destitute of the
power and liberty of free will in those things which belong to salvation. c.
33. The reasons of the Arminians are examined, by which they maintain
free will in an unregenerate man concerning things that are spiritual and
belonging to salvation. chap. 34. The objections of the Arminians borrowed from
the Pelagians, and Papists, are answered. Whether an unregenerate man does
necessarily sin; and whether necessity excuses the sinner: Also whether God
commands those things which cannot be performed by man. chap. 35. Of the
outward and inward calling, and whether the one may be without the other. chap.
36. Of the distinction of Grace into sufficient and effectual Grace. chap. 37.
The opinion of the Arminians concerning universal grace, which is also called
sufficient grace. chap. 38. Universal sufficient grace is confuted by places
of Scripture. chap. 39. The same sufficient grace is impugned by reasons. chapter
40. The arguments by which the Arminians maintain universal sufficient grace
are confuted. chap. 41. The consent of the Arminians with the Semipelagians is
declared. chap. 42. The opinion of the Arminians concerning the manner of the
operation of grace, and of that power which they call Irresistible. Of moral
persuasion. And of the power and act of believing. chap. 43. The opinion of the
Orthodoxe Church, concerning the conversion of man, and of the manner and
certainty of conversion. chap. 44. The question of moral persuasion is sifted,
and whether every persuasion may be resisted. chap. 45. The certainty of the
conversion of the elect, and the final vnconquerablenesse of grace is proved.
chap. 46. The judgment of Saint Austin concerning this controversy. chap. 47.
That the Arminians do openly stablish that vnresistiblenesse which they
impugn. chap. 48. The weak objections of the Arminians against
Irresistibility (that is, infallible certainty of conversion) are answered.
chap 49. An addition to the thirteenth Chapter, containing some places taken
out of the confession of the Church of France, and out of the special doctors
of this age, concerning the object of Predestination, and the judgment of the
Synod of Dordt.
FINIS.
THE ANATOMY of Arminianisme.
CHAP. I.
How soberly we are to deal in this Argument.
IF in any other Argument especially in this which we are to treat of, that
rule of Saint Paul is to be kept; Romans 12.3.
that no man be wise above that he ought, but that he be wise unto sobriety.
For God has put a great mist over the secrets of his wisdom, into which it
is a sin to rush, lest while we search into his Majesty, we be ouerpressed
by his glory: Prou 25.27.
It is better to understand things that are safe, then things that are high;
and to keep Gods commandments, then to pry into his counsels. This curiosity
has undone mankind. Adam, whilst he would be like God in the knowledge of
good and evil, lost his good, and learned evil to his loss, being punished.
Hence Heresies have been bred, whilst men, violently carried with the itching
of their own wit, run out beyond the bounds of Gods word. Hence have
proceeded those troubles which Satan has stirred up in this age (which is as
fertile of disputes, as it is barren of piety:) having used thereto men, who by
their lewd wit and rash presumption, daring to call God to account, and to
prescribe laws to him, have greatly afflicted the most flourishing Churches of
the Low Countries. Most safe therefore it is to follow God as our guide, to
understand so much as he has made manifest to us in his word, to command
silence to our selves, where God himself speaks not. But we must have a very
great care, least we patronize and maintain the wisdom and providence of God,
with the damage of his justice: and again, lest while we defend his justice,
we put out the eyes of his providence. God is not to be thought unjust, if he
do any thing that does not every way answer to the rules we have conceived in
our own minds. These two things are seriously to be avoided, as two fatal
and dangerous rocks; and yet it is far worse to set on God the mark of
injustice, then to place limits to his providence. For with less peril is God
made a careless spectator and beholder of sin, then if he be believed to be
the author and incitor to sin. Neither is there any more capital mischief,
then to transfer on God the cause of man's wickedness. For thus it comes to
pass, that men having broken their bars, do scot free commit all riot, as
having God the patron and author of their wickedness.

And yet to restrain curiosity, and to strike our minds with a religious
fear, the consideration of our own meandness being compared to the divine
majesty, is much profitable. For if any of us should crush to death an Ant
with his foot, no man would lay to his charge an action of injustice for it,
although the Ant has not offended him, although he has not given life to the
Ant, although he has destroyed another work, which cannot be restored by
man, and although between man and it, there is no infinite inequality, but a
kind of certain and finite proportion. But man has grievously offended God,
and yet God has given life to man, and there is no proportion between God and
man, but as infinite a distance, as between a finite and infinite thing. If
therefore God shall crush those sinful men, which he is able to save; if
patiently tolerating the vessels of anger, he shall make them the matter of his
glory, shall any man expostulate with God, or think goodness wanting in him,
or accuse his justice?

CHAP. 2.
That we are not therefore altogether to abstain from the doctrine of
Providence and Pre^estination, although some abuse it to curiosity and impiety.
And whereto it is profitable.
THere are some who being weary of the contentions which proceed from the
doctrine of Providence and Predestination, do think that it is most safe for
the peace of the Church and quiet of conscience, not to touch these questions,
nor to speak any words of them to the people, to be suggested into them:
seeing that by these speeches scruples are fastened in men's minds, doubtings
are bred, and the faith of the weak is shaken. Let the people be taught, (say
they,) not what God does or decrees, but what he would have to be done by us:
let the doctrine of good Works be instilled into their minds, and the secrets
of Election and Reprobation left to God.

Surely this speech sauoureth more of honesty, then truth. For these men while
they make show of the study of piety, and love of concord; they do secretly
accuse Christ and his Apostles of imprudency and indiscretion, because they so
often beat upon the doctrine of Election, in the new Testament. And while they
are held with a preposterous religion, they are the authors, that the Pastors
of the Church cut away a portion from the word of God; neither do they
propound to the people the entire Doctrine of the Gospel. And whilst in a
voluntary ignorance they affect the praise of modesty, they require discretion
in God himself.

And what shall we say to this; that without this Doctrine, due honor cannot
be given to God, nor our faith made stable? For by the Doctrine of
Predestination, that immeasurable heap of the goodness and love of God
toward us, by which he loved us and respected us, before the foundations of
the world were laid, does enter into our minds. Also whatsouer light or grace
God does measure to us, is acknowledged to be a river flowing from that
eternal love. By this doctrine man's merits do fall to the ground; and the
imaginary faculty of free will in things pertaining to salvation, does vanish
away. The confidence of our salvation will also stagger, unless it be vpholden
by the immutable decree of God, and not by man's free will. This doctrine also
is a great lightning of our sorrows, and mittigation of all bitterness: while
we consider that all things, even those that are most grievous, turn to the
good of them, who are called by the purpose of God. Neither is there any more
forcible instigation to good works, then the acknowledgement of that eternal
love, wherewith God, in Christ, has loved us before all worlds. Finally, by
this doctrine we are taught to search into our selves and to try our own
consciences, to find in us, and to stir up the testimonies of our election;
knowing that our own endeavor and care ought to further the election of God,
and that by the way of hell, that is, by impenitency and unbelief, it is
impossible to come to heaven.

This Doctrine therefore, the Scripture being our guide, may profitably be
propounded, so we keep mediocrity between affected ignorance, and rash
curiosity; and follow such a moderation, that while we do avoid things
unlawful, we do not abstain from those that are lawful.

In this work we have to do with men which offend both ways, and do run
upon either extremity: For if any one, Arminius does break into the secrets of
God, and does with a scrupulous curiosity cut into pieces the decree of
Election; and yet the same man does extenuate the whole doctrine of Election,
as a thing, which if it were not known; Gods love by it would not be
diminished toward us, nor any injury done to his grace: They which deny this
election (says he) deny that which is true, In Perkin. Page 84.
but without any wrong to the grace or mercy of God.

CHAP. III.
What the providence of God is. How far it extends. That God is not the
author of sin. What permission is. And what blinding and hardening is.
I. Providence is a divine virtue, the gouernesse of all things, by which God
has fore-knowne and foreordained from eternity, both the ends of all things,
and the means tending to those ends.

II. All things being present to God, there is nothing which from eternity he
has not foreseen: But whether he has made a peculiar decree for all
several events, it may be doubted. For it does not seem likely that God, from
eternity, has decreed, how many ears of Corn shall grow in the Neapolitan or
any other field; or how many shreds hang on the torn beggars coat, or
covering: Because these things have no respect of good or evil, neither do
they add to the glory of God, or protection of the world: Sum: Theol. 2 part.
Qu. 23 Art. 7.
And therefore Thomas is of opinion, That by the decree of God the number of
men is determined, but not the number of Gnats or Worms. Not that those little
things do escape the knowledge of God, or that God cannot extend his
providence to them, but because it does not seem convenient to his so great
wisdom, to decree any thing which does add nothing to his glory, or to the
protection of the universe. Surely God has, from eternity, fore-knowne all
things, even those that are least: But he has only pre-ordained and decreed
those things which have in them some matter of good, and whereby the glory of
God is made more illustrious, or the world more perfect.

III. The will of God cannot be resisted. Romans 9.20. God speaks of himself.
Esaias. 46.10. My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And Saint
Paul. Ephesians. 1. God has made all things according to the purpose of his Will.
This does not please Arminius: For he in his book against Perkins, the 60.
page, is of opinion, that God may make frustrate that particular end which he
has propounded to himse fe; and page 198. does think that the antecedent will
of God may be resisted: But how truly, we shall hereafter see.

IV. God is in no wise the author, or instigator of sin. Psalm. 5.5. Ps. 45.8.
For God is not only just, but also justice it self: And it is as impossible
that he who is justice it self should sin, or be the author of sin, as
that whiteness should black the wall, or heat make one cold. Neither does
God only do the thing that is just, but therefore the thing is just, because
God does it. And surely that idle devise of some, is to be hissed out, who
say, that God, though he does enforce men to sin, yet himself does not sin;
because there is no sin where there is no law, and God is bound by no laws. I
confess indeed that God is obnoxious to no Law: And yet it is certain, that
he can do nothing that is contrary to his own Nature. God cannot lie,
because he is truth it self. God cannot sin, because he is perfect
righteousness it self. These speeches, that sin is committed either by Gods
procuring or furthering, are altogether to be rooted out of divinity.

V. Man by his own fault has brought destruction to himself, neither can the
fall of man be imputed to God. Thy destruction, O Israel, is from thy self;
but in me is thy help. Hosea 12.9.10. As in the generation of the Infant, the
sun and man do work together; yet if a monster be generated, it is not
ascribed to the sun, but to man: For therefore is the monster bred, because
through the defect of the organs, or the evil affection of the matter, the
universal agent cause is withdrawn from the accustomed course. Even so to
humane actions, God and man's will do concur, yet if any evil be in the
action, it ought not to be ascribed to God, but to the disposition of man's will.

VI. And yet the Scripture does sometimes use those phrases of speech, which
do yield occasion to the profane, of imputing their sins to God, as being
committed by his will and incitation. It is well known with how great
wickedness, the sons of Jacob, moved with envy, sold their brother Joseph:
Of this fact Joseph himself thus speaks. Genes. ^0. Ye indeed thought
evil against me, but God meant it unto good, that he might save much people
alive. As if GOD had been the author of this fact. The Scripture says of the
sons of Samuel, that they did not obey their fathers admonitions, because God
would slay them. 1. Samuel 2.25. And 1. King. 2. the malignant spirit sets
himself before the tribunal of God, and offers to God his service, to deceive
the Prophets: To whom God said, Thou shall deceive, and thou shall prevail:
Go forth, and do so. Shemei curses David with foul imprecations. 2. Samuel
26. which David receives as done by the incitation of God. Let him curse (says
he) for God has said unto him; Curse David. Very grievous calamities followed
David's adultery with Bathsheba, and his murder of Vrias, by the rebellion of
his son Absalon, who drove his father from his kingdom, and openly abused
his wives. Nathan, sent to David from God, does declare how these things came
to pass, in these words: Thou did this secretly, but I will do these
things before all Israel. 2. Sam. 12. Satan afflicted Job, the Chaldees steal
away his goods; what says this servant of God to these things? The Lord (says
he) has given, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the name of the Lord.
In the fourth Chapter of the Acts, Saint Peter says thus: Against thy holy
child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the
Gentiles, and the people of Israel, are assembled together, to do whatsoever
thy hand and thy counsel have determined before to be done. Saint Paul, in
his first chapter of the Epistle of the Romans, speaking of the people that
were worshippers of Idols, and were given over to all wickedness, says, that
God gave them up to vile and wicked affections, that they might do these
enormious things. God himself does witness, Exodus 10. and Romans 9. That he
hardened Pharaohs heart. Finally who does not tremble at these words of God which
are set down in the sixth Chap. of Esaias. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: Least they see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and so convert
and be healed.

Least any profane person should abuse these things, to the unloosing of the
claspe of intemperancy; and least any whose heart is hardened against the word
of God, should impute the hardness of it to God, who cannot be resisted. As
that young man in Plautus, In ^ulularia.
thus excusing himself; Deus mihi impulsor fuit: God was an incitor to me, it
was he drew me to her: therefore some things are to be set down whereby this
question may be cleared, and the truth may be brought out of this darkness.

VII. Before all other things we admonish, that the middle way be kept
between the two extremes. One whereof is, to make God the author of sin;
the other is to assign any thing to be done, God being unwilling, ignorant, or
not regarding, as if sitting in a watchtower he did expect casual events
depending upon chance, or upon man's pleasure. Let him run into neither of
these, who would acknowledge the providence of God without damage of his
justice, not fathering his sins upon him, and would not call in ignorance or
neglect of things in God, for the defense of his justice.

VIII. First therefore, it must be granted that sin is not committed without
Gods permission: Neither ought this word of permitting offend any one as if it
derogated from the care and providence of God, seeing Saint Paul himself in
the 14. chapter of the Acts does use this word; where he says to the men of
Lycaonia, God in times past (...).
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways; therefore God suffered
sin. To permit sin is, not to hinder it when thou can: thence it comes to
pass that there are so many means of permitting sin, as of hindering it. God
does hinder sin two manner of ways; either by his Justice, or by his Power.
By his Justice he hinders sin, by commanding, by forbidding, by
admonishing, by threatening, and by promising. By his power he does hinder it,
when he does take away ability, or remove the occasion of sinning, or by the
efficacy of his spirit, does change and incline to piety our wills that are
prone to sin. The former is a moral impediment, the latter a natural, or even
a supernatural. According to these means of hindering sin, the means of
permitting it are also diverse: For God does permit sin either by unloosing
the Law, and giving liberty of sinning; or by not drawing away the ability of
sinning, which might hinder men from sinning in act. After the former manner
God does never permit sin: after the latter manner he does permit it; which
he does in not hindering that man should assay it; and in not giving a certain
succor and measure of his grace, which if it were present, the sin might be
prevented.

IX. This permission is a certain act of the divine will, seeing it is
voluntary; for God does nothing unwitting or unwilling: God therefore permits
sin, because he will permit it; neither had he permitted it, if it had not
been good that it should be permitted: for if there were not evil, it would
not be known what is good: even as we should not know what light were, unless
there were a night; neither had his justice (whereby he punishes, nor his
mercy whereby he pardons) been made known, nor his wisdom, whereby he can
draw good out of evil; nor his infinite love, whereby he sent his son into
the world that he might die for us; not that God does stand in need of our
wickedness to illustrate his glory, but because, otherwise, man could not come
to that full felicity to which he was created. For God cannot be perfectly
known, and therefore not perfectly loved, so long as his justice and mercy is
unknown: So that by the very fall of man, God has framed to man, a step to a
more perfect condition; and although in the respect of many particular persons
which perish, it might have been wished that man had not sinned, yet in
respect of the universal good, whereof regard is rather to be had, God ought
not to have used his power to have hindered sin, that it might not have been
committed.

X. Furthermore, although God does permit the Devils and men to sin, yet does
he not so let loose the reins to them, but that they are held fast bound by
the bonds of his providence, and whilst they wander out of the path of
righteousness, they are yet included within the limits of his providence, that
they should not hurt them whom God loves: For although man's will has corrupted
it self; yet is not therefore the government of God diminished, to which the
wills of men are subject, how much soever they are adverse to his
commandment, and driven with the spirit of rebellion do gnash their teeth
against his government.

XI. The principal faculties of the soul are two, the Understanding, and the
Will; the one by which man knows, and the other by which he moves himself.
By the understanding, we are learned or unlearned, by the will, we are either
good or evil. That which in the understanding is to affirm or deny, that in
the will, is to desire or to refuse. God does not put wicked desires into the
mind: but he does often cast darkness into the mind, and in his just judgment
does blind the understanding, striking the rebels with a giddiness, and
making them drunk with the spirit of sleep; yea truly, no otherwise then the
master does justly blow out his servants candle, which by night he does abuse
at dice: So God does take away the light of his knowledge, when man does abuse
it to the contempt of God, and to the liberty of sinning. Howbeit, God having
taken away this light, the erring will does stumble, and grievously offend; but
hardness of heart does, of it self, follow this blindness of mind. For
Saint John joins these together as hanging one upon another. Chap. 12.40. God
has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts. By this means latter
sins, are made the punishment of former sins; as Saint Austin teaches at
large in his fifth book against Julian. Chap. 3. For by the very same thing,
whereby man by his latter sins is made more wicked, by the same he is also
made more miserable: Not that sin is sent from God as a punishment, but
because God does use for a punishment that sin which is not from him. And
hence does that doctrine of a bare and careless permission vanish; because a
judge does not punish by a careless permission; but by decreeing or judging
according to justice.

XII. The subministration, and furnishing of the outward means of salvation,
such as are the word and sacraments do also work to this obduration, and
hardness of heart. For unless God move the heart by the powerful grace of
his spirit, man's wickedness is more stirred up by those outward helps, and
having cast off this troublesome yoke, he is carried through by-waies, and
does violently throw down himself with greater ruin: And then is fulfilled
that which is said in the 81. Psalm. I gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, that they might walk in their own counsels. But yet, that you might
know that this hardness of heart does proceed from man himself; the
Scripture does not only say, that God hardened Pharaohs heart: but Pharaoh
himself is said to have harden^d his own heart. Exodus, 8.15. Neither is that
of Saint Paul, Romans 1. any otherwise to be understood; That God delivers
over the wicked (...), to a reprobate mind and vile affections: For this
reprobate mind, these vile affections are not put into the wicked by God, but
they being in the ungodly, God having put out his light, does suffer these vile
affections to exercise their authority over them; as Thomas teaches. Lib. 2.
Quest. 79. Art. 1.

XIII. Furthermore, they are two sorts of them whose hearts are hardened; for
besides that hardness of heart which is common to all the reprobates, whereby
a man is left to himself, whence it comes that he does always grow worse,
there are some that are (...) men of a high rank of wickedness, whom God does
deliver to Satan with a peculiar and extraordinary vengeance; such as were
Pharaoh, Saul and Judas.

XIV. Every positive being does depend upon God as upon the first and
principal entity, neither can the creature move it self without the
assistance and sustentation of God: For by him we live, and move, and have our
bring, Acts 17. Neither does he only work by influence into the creatures, or
assist them by a general power and influence, but also by his peculiar
assistance, by which he does sustain and direct several actions. The events
which follow of several actions do declare this, which he does witness, do
not happen by chance, but of his purpose, God so willing: Deuteronomy. 19.5. Exodus
21.13.
If an Axe falling out of the hand of him that cutteth wood, does kill one that
passes by, God does affirm that it was done by him. The Lot is cast into the
lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Pro. 16.33.

XV. Furthermore, although God by his concurrence, does give his influence into
humane actions, sustayning the agent, and directing the actions, setting bounds
to them, ordering the events, and drawing good out of evil; yet must it not
therefore be thought that God does instigate to evil actions, or to have
forced Eve to the eating of the forbidden tree. To the clearing of which
assertion, we say that God does not only work by the creature, but also work
with the creature; both God and the creature are concurrent causes to one
(...), to the bringing forth of one effect; and these two taken together, are
the total cause of any action: which creature, if it does work voluntary, may
by his concurrence pollute the action wherein there is the concurrence of God,
and determinate it to evil: By this means the whole fault does remain with
the creature. For God effectually infusing into the creature, does not take
away from it the free contribution of its own power. If man sins any thing
in an humane action, the concurrence of God is natural, but the concurrence of
the creature is moral: whatsoever was natural in the eating of the forbidden
Apple was from God; whatsoever was moral and straying from the path of
justice, was from man. As God does give to a lame living creature the power of
going, yet is not his lamenesse from God; so though God does give to man the
faculty of willing, and does sustain the natural motion of the will, and the
act of willing; yet if any evil come which does defile that act, it must not
be said to be from God: Man is the effector of sin, God the permitter. That
act in which there is deformity, is naturally good, in as much as it is from
God: but morally evil, in as much as it is from man. The action in which the
sin is, is one thing, the deformity of the action in which formally the sin
is, is another thing. To the action it self God does concur with man, but
not to the sin.

XVI. Neither is God to be blamed that he does concur with the creature,
which he knows will abuse his concurrence and assistance to sinning: For
man's vice cannot straighten the limits of Gods power, nor dissolve that
eternal law, by which the whole frame of nature does stand, nor pull away that
natural necessity, whereby the creature cannot move it selfe^, without the
assistance of God. So the Soul although it knows that the body will abuse her
moving power to halting, does not keep back her moving force, or abstain from
the motion of the body. Neither will therefore the power of God be diminished
in natural things, or his influence cease, because in moral things, the will
of man is disobedient to the law of God: Yea, God cannot require obedience from
the creature, unless he should sustain it, and give to it power of moving it
self.

XVII. As the Sun is not the cause of darkness, although darkness does
necessarily follow the absence of it: So God seeing he is the most exact
justice, is not the cause of sin, although inordinate affections, blindness
of mind, and the prauity of the will, do necessarily follow the denial of
the grace of God. This is their meaning, which say, that God is not the
efficient, but the deficient cause of sin: Yet I could wish men would abstain
from this kind of speaking.

XVIII. Although wicked men do work freely, and of their own motion are
carried to sin, God not alluring nor forcing them: yet it is certain, that
the events which do follow thence are directed and governed by Gods
providence. For as the downfall of the running water, inclining to the lower
parts, may be turned, the channel being guided by the diligence of the
conueyor: so although wicked men of their own disposition are prone to sin,
yet by the providence of God and his secret counsel, they are inclined to
commit this sin rather then that, that they may serve the execution of the
judgments of God, when he will use them either to punish any ones wickedness,
or to try the faith of the godly, or to stir up their sloathfulnesse. This
similitude Solomon does use, Prou. 21. The heart of the King is in the hand of
the Lord, as the rivers of waters, and he turns it whether he will. By this
means as Saint Peter says, Act. 4. The wicked do whatsoever things the hand
of God and his purpose had determined to be done. Hence it is that God says,
Esaias 5. that he will whistle for the remote nations, to say waste Judea. And
Chap. 10. he calls Ashur the rod of his wrath. Jeroboam seeks after novelties,
and does practice a reuolting from Solomon; Ahias the Prophet sent from God,
does declare to him the event of this attempt: God did not instill this
rebellion into his heart, which was before conceived; but hardened his mind,
which was already evil, to the daring this wicked attempt, that he might use
the wicked man to punish the sins of Solomon and Rehoboam.

As therefore Horse-leaches applied to the parts of a sick man, while they
satisfy their own gorge, do perform the intent of the Physician: so wicked
men, whilst they rage against good men, besides their own intention, they
further the purpose of God: as Esaias teaches in his tenth Chapter; where God
says that he had decreed to use the King of Assiria to punish the hypocrisy
of Israel, but that this mind was not in the King, being led only by ambition
and desire of prey: Thus God used the wickedness of the brethren of Joseph to
keep famine from his people: and the treason of Judas, for the death of
Christ, and by it, for our redemption; and the ambition of Augustus Caesar
taxing the whole Empire, for the bringing of Mary out of Galile to Bethlehem,
that there she might be delivered, and so the prophecy of Michai be
fulfilled. Even they which resist the commandment of God, help forward his
providence, and like Rowers which set their backs that way which they go. God
by the folly of men, does work the purposes of his wisdom; he does use
unjust men to the exercising of his justice: as if one with a crooked staff
should strike a straight blow.

XIX. Whenever God letting loose the reins to Satan, does permit him to
tempt any man, Satan truly may allure the appetite by propounding Objects, or
trouble the fantasy by the alteration of the humors of the body, but he
cannot compel the will; otherwise the man should not sin but Satan: Neither
could God justly punish a man for sin, to which he had been compelled by an
outward cause, without his own inclination.

XX. But because God, when he would avenge the contumacy of his enemies, or
punish the sins of his own, does sometimes use Satan as his minister; the
holy Scripture does attribute one and the same event both to God and to Satan.
So 1 Samuel 16. the evil spirit troubling Saul, is said to be from God. and 1
Chro. 21. Satan is said to have rose up against Israel, and to have stirred up
David to number the people; and 2 Samuel 24. it is attributed to God. There God
is to be considered as a just judge, and Satan as an incitour of the
wickedness.

By these instructions well conceived, the way of ex^using Saint Austen will
easily be found, from whom sometimes there fall some speeches which trouble
tender ears, if they be not moderated with a fit interpretation; such is that
which he says of Shemei cursing David, in his Book de Gratia and libero
arbitrio. Cap. 20. What wise man does understand how the Lord said to this man,
Curse David? For he did not bid him by commanding him, that his obedience
should be praised; bu because God inclined his will, which by his own proper
vice was evil, to this sin, by his just and secret judgment, and therefore
is it said, the Lord bid him. And Cap. 22. God works in the hearts of men to
incline their wills whithersoeuer he will, either to good things of his own
mercy, or to evil things according to their deserts. And against Julian the
Pelagian, lib. 5. cap. 3. Many other things we might rehearse, in which it
would plainly appear, that the heart is made perverse by the secret judgment
of God, that the truth which is said might not be heard, and so man might
sin, that sin might be the punishment of a former sin: Yea, in the same
place, he does contend against Julian, that those which are delivered up to
their own desires, are driven into sins by the divine power. Neither does
Thomas teach things unlike these, in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the
Romans, and the ninth Chapter.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the will of God.
I. THE will in man is (...), the rational appetite; whereby man of his own
accord, and with knowledge, does move himself to obtain good, whether it be
truly good, or good only in show, and in the opinion of man. But sometimes
the will is not taken for the faculty whereby we will, but for the act of
willing or desiring: sometimes it is taken for the thing it self which we
will, after the same manner as Saint Paul speaks, 1. These. 4. That the will
of God is our sanctification.

II. Will, in God, is not a rational appetite; for God is not capable of any
appetite, yea, nor reason: But the will of God, is that act of willing, whereby
he does either command, or appoint and decree.

III. For the will of God is twofold, the one is his decree, the other is his
commandment. The decree of God, belongs to the providence of God, and the
commandment of God, belongs to his justice: By his decree, he does appoint
and dispose the events of things; by his commandment he does govern our
actions. By the former will, God does appoint what he will have done; by the
latter, what he would have us do. To the former all creatures obey, even the
Devils themselves; to the latter only the faithful, and yet not that
perfectly.

IV. These faithful men are esteemed just, not because they obey the decree of
God, but because they are obedient to his commandment. So the wicked son,
wishing the death of his sick father, does sin against the will of God,
although his wicked mind does consent with the decree of God: On the other
side, the son which does pray to God for the health of his sick father, does
obey the will of God, although by the decree of God his death is certain, and
the desire of the good son, is contrary to the purpose of God. God forbids
murder; and yet he decreed that the Jews should kill Christ, by which fact
they sinned against God, howsoever they fulfilled his decree. Act. 2.23.
Vorstius himself does acknowledge, That God would not have had his people so
soon sent away by Pharaoh, viz. because God had decreed not to bend the heart
of Pharaoh to obedience: But as concerning the commandment, it is no doubt but
God commanded Pharaoh, that he should send away the people without delay; for
therefore God inflicted upon him so many scourges; because he did not obey the
commandment of God. Neither by this will Vorstius make God guilty of
Hypocrisy, or fraudulent dissimulation; as he does falsely lay to our charge.

V. These two wills, the Scripture does sometimes mix, and take them
promiscuously one for another. So when Christ, John 6. says, that he descended
from Heaven, that he might not do his own will, but the will of him that
sent him; it is certain that Christ understands both these two wills,
because Christ by those actions did both fulfill all righteousness, and also
did execute the decree of God: And therefore either of these wills is called
the purpose of God. Esaias. 46.10, Luke 7.30. Act. 20.27.

VI. This decree of God, is properly, and by it self, called the will of God;
the law of God is not so properly called his will, for the law is rather a
document or lesson, then his will, and rather a declaration, wherein God does
make known to man, by what means he may be pleased, then what he has
absolutely appointed to come to pass. For only of the will of God, so
properly called, is that true which is said, Psalm 115. God does whatsoever
he will.

VII. The promises and threatenings of God, are yet more improperly called the
will of God, seeing by them God does neither command, nor decree any thing
absolutely; but they are declarations, whereby God does declare what shall come
to pass; if man obey the law, or if he do not obey it; if man believe the
Gospel, or if he do not believe it.

Perhaps the promises and threatenings of God, Peter if he shall believe, but
he electeth him to faith, that he might be saved: Neither was he only willing
to preserve the Ninevites if they would be turned, but he also gave them
repentance whereby they turned.

VIII. They which say that Gods decree is his secret will, but his
commandment, his revealed will, seem to me, to speak inconsiderately: For
many things are made known to us of the decrees of God, not only those things
which are made manifest by the events, but also may other things, which God in
his word has taught us shall come to pass. As the coming of Christ, the
resurrection, etc.

IX. Thomas, and the Schoolmen, do distinguish the will of God, In
voluntatem beneplaciti, and voluntatem signi; Into the will of his good
pleasure, and the will of his sign, that is, his signified and revealed will;
The members of which distinction, fall one into another: For many things of the
will of his good pleasure are signified to us: Neither is the word beneplaciti,
good pleasure, which in Greek is, (...), sufficiently applied here: For
(...), or good-pleasure, does for the most part include, Love and good will: as
Luke 2.14. (...), On earth peace, toward men good will. See also Ephesians. 1.5.
and 9. But the decree of God, is also extended to his judgments, and to the
punishment of the wicked.

X. They do very ill, which set these two wills one against another, and
would have them be contrary. Surely if God should drive a man to do those
things which he has forbidden to be done, or should keep back him, who is
indeauouring to obey the Law, with an opposite bar from his obedience; God
should will things that are contrary, and should resist his own will: But his
decree does not resist his commandment, when he does require those things from
man, which do exceed man's power, and does not minister to man that ability
whereby he may fulfill what is commanded; for man himself is the cause of his
own impotency and inability, neither is God bound to give those powers to man,
which he lost by his own fault. He which is in debt, does not owe the less
because he has consumed his estate; neither does that creditor deal unjustly
which requires his debt of the Bankerupt; because he does not consider him as
a poor man, but as a debtor. Arminius therefore is deceived, in reasoning thus
against Perkins. He that will deny to any one (says he) necessary help to
perform the act of Faith, he does desire that such a one should not believe.
Certainly he that will not give money to a poor man, which is fallen into
poverty by his own fault, does not therefore desire he should be poor, nor
is delighted with his poverty. Nor is that any better which he does add. As it
cannot be said (says he) that God is willing that creature should live, to
whom he does deny the act of his preservation: So also it cannot be said,
that God is willing that that action should he performed by any one, to whom
he does deny his concurrence and help, necessary for the performing of that
action. These things, and other such like, does he ill beat upon, for he
does use a similitude, which is a plain dissimilitude, for no man is bound to
his Esse, to his being, neither can God exact from him, that is not, that he
should be: But to obey God, man is naturally bound; Therefore God can rightly
require of man what he owes, and yet is not therefore bound to give him
ability of obeying and fulfilling what he commands; for God is not bound to
restore to man, that power which was once given and is now lost by the fault of
man. But here I would use the fittest words, and I had rather say, that God
decreed not to give grace to one, whereby he should be converted and should
believe, then to say, that God decreed that the man should be an unbeliever and
impenitent: For the word decreeing, is more fit to note out those things which
God determined to do, then those things which he determined not to cure.

XI. Furthermore under the word obedience, I comprehend also faith in Christ,
for as much as it is one kind of obedience to which we are bound by the law,
which does command that God be loved, with all our heart, and with all our
strength, and therefore that God be obeyed, that his word be believed,
whatsoever it shall be that God shall command: Whence it comes to pass, that
we cannot reject the doctrine of the Gospel by unbelief, but we also sin
against the law by disobedience; which if it be so, although faith on Christ
was not expressly commanded by the Law, nor was Adam before his fall bound to
believe in Christ, yet it is certain that God commanding assent and reverence
to be exhibited to his Gospel, does require that that love which is commanded
in the law, and which is naturally due, should be yielded to him, that is, to
Christ.

All these things that have been spoken, tend thither, that we might teach
that there is no difference between these two wills of God. Let Saint Aus^ens
Encheridion to Laurentius, Chapter 101. be read, where he does teach, how Gods
will may be done of them which do not the will of God: and that, that is not
done besides Gods will, which is done against his will.

CHAP. V.
Of the Antecedent and consequent will of God.
DAmascen in his second Book of Orthodox faith, Chap. 29. does set down two
wills of God; the one (...), or Antecedent; the other (...), that is,
Consequent. Arminius has catched this distinction, and does place in it the
chief strength of his Doctrine; and as often as he is urged by our side, he
creepes into this den, as the Lyzard into the thickets.

I. The Antecedent will of God, he says is that, whereby God does will any
thing to the reasonable creature, before all the actions of it, or before any
act of that creature; but the consequent is that, whereby he does will any
thing to the reasonable creature, after any one act, or after many acts, of the
creature. To the explication of which distinction, he brings these examples.
God (says he) by his Antecedent will, would stablish and confirm for ever the
kingdom of Saul; by his Consequent will, he would put him from his kingdom,
and substitute in his place a man better then he. Christ by his Antecedent
will, would gather the Jews as a Hen gathers her Chickens; but by his
Consequent will, he would ^^atter them through all the Nations. By his
Antecedent will, they are cited to the marriage; which by his Consequent will,
were declared unworthy, Matthew. 22. By his Antecedent will, the man without the
wedding garment was invited; by his Consequent will, he was cast out. By his
Antecedent will, the talents are given; by his Consequent will, the talent is
taken from the servant.

II. The one of these wills is called the Antecedent will, the other is called
the Consequent; not because that will goes before this, for in this sense,
this distinction may be admitted, because there is a certain order among the
purposes of God: Thus his will of creating man, was in order before his will of
feeding or clothing him: But with Damascen and Arminius, it is called the
Anrecedent will of God, because it goes before the act of man's will; and they
call that the consequent will of God, which is after the will of man, and does
depend upon it. This Arminius does clearly teach in his definitions before
laid down.

III. Between these two wills of God he puts this difference, that the
Antecedent will of God, may be resisted, the consequent cannot. He would have
it, that God should be disappointed in his antecedent will, and fail of his
propounded end; But the consequent will of God cannot he frustrated, but it
must necessarily be fulfilled: for he thinks that God does not always attain
to that which he intends, and that sometimes he is disappointed of that
particular end which he propounds to himself; and that God is prepared to do
that which from eternity he knows he shall not do; whence it comes to pass,
that he has prepared himself in vain, and that by his consequent will, which
is eternal, certain, and immutable, he has decreed to harden those
reprobates, which by his antecedent will he is prepared to mollify and
convert: And so he is prepared to do, that which he has decreed not to do.

IV. Between these two wills of God (if any credit may be given to Arminius,)
does man's will come in, which does cause, that God does revoke his antecedent
will, which is far the best; and being driven from his propounded end, does
turn himself to another thing, then that which at the first he had intended:
so far, that Vorstius says, Disput. de Deo. p. 65. that God afterward will
not do some things, which before he had promised, yea sworn that he would do.

V. If any Doctrine be contumelious against God, this is, accusing him of
folly, putting upon him human affections, and falsely attributing to him
wishes of no strength, and a desire of no force: as if they should bring in God
speaking thus: I do indeed earnestly desire to save you, but ye hinder, that I
cannot do what I desire; I would if you would: therefore seeing by you I am
frustrated of my intent, I will change my purpose of saving you, and my will
being otherwise bent, I have determined to destroy you for ever. It is
certainly plain, that this Antecedent will of God, is not a will; but a
desire and wish, which God does obtain only by entreaty, and as much as he
may, by man's good pleasure. Armin in Perk. p. 196. Affectus quo Deus
desideratomnium hominum and singulorum salutem, est in deosimplex naturalis and
extra conditio^em.
Therefore Arminius does oftentimes call this will, a desire and natural
affection, and it is common to these sectaries to take those places, Psalm.
81.14. Esa. 48.18. where God is brought in speaking, as one wishing and
desiring, and disappointed of his wish, as if they were properly spoken, when
these things are spoken by an Anthropopathy and after the manner of men.

VI. Furthermore, how grievous a thing it is to be defrauded of ones desire and
natural affection, and how disagreeing this is to God, who does not see,
unless it be he that will willingly be deceived? For if God be most perfectly
good, yea goodness it self, it must needs be, that his affections and
natural desires (if he have any) are of highest sanctity, justice, and
perfection: and therefore nothing is so much to be wished, as that that
natural affection might be fulfilled, and that God might obtain his desired
end. There is cause therefore that we should grieve for Gods cause, who is
deceived of that end which is far the best, and who might be made partaker of
his wish, if man would let him. See whether the wit of these nouators does
plunge it self, and how honorably they think of God. Hitherto belong those
impious and wicked speeches of Vorstius; who does affirm, Collat. amic. cum
Piscat. Sect. 27.
that something does happen unexpected to God, and which is bitter and very
distasteful to him, and does (although it be improperly spoken) bring very
great grief to him, and which does proceed, not from his Antecedent, but from
his Consequent will, having tried all things in vain; Which speech, does
doubtless abase God below the state of man: For if any such thing should
happen, even amongst men, and any ones endeavor, having tried all things in
vain, should be deluded, it would be an argument, either of imprudency, or
weakness, or infidelity. There is cause therefore we should lament the state
of God, who using an unprosperous success, has so ill performed the business.

VII. It is also absurd, yea impious to affirm, that God, to whom all things
from eternity are not only foreseen, but also provided for; should intend any
thing that from eternity he knew would not come to pass, and to have
propounded an end to himself, to which he knew he should not attain; as if
one should level at a mark which is not, nor ever will be: For if God from
eternity knows that this man shall be damned, in vain does he wish from
eternity, that he should be saved: and he does from eternity know that he
shall not be partaker of his natural desire, and his antecedent will.

VIII. What a thing is it, that hereby there is brought in resistance between
these two wills of God, the latter of which does correct the former? for by this
Antecedent will, God does desire to do that, which from eternity he is
certain he shall not do. And God is imagined doing something hardly and
unwillingly, and against that end which he had first intended, because man's
will comes between, by which it comes to pass, that God does cease from that
end propounded to himself, which was far better, as if per (...), upon a
second advise, he should obtain some secondary good. Arminius does not
dissemble this, whose words are these: In Perlin. Page 195.
God does seriously desire all men should be saved, but being compelled by the
stubborn and incorrigible malice of some men he will have them make loss of
their salvation. But God does nothing unwillingly, neither can he be compelled
by man, to the changing of his will.

IX. And if these weak affections and ineffectuall desires, of which he is
disappointed, by the stepping between of man's will, be attributed to God,
there is no doubt, but that God created man floting between his Antecedent and
Consequent will; as not without grief foreseeing the fall of man, and knowing
that he created a creature which would certainly perish, and yet he would
not abstain from his creation, because his decree of creating man could not be
abolished: so that God bound himself in those straights, out of which he
could not quit himself.

X. It is not also to be endured, that the will of God should remain
uncertain, until the condition, under which God does Antecedently will any
thing, be either fulfilled or broken. For although the general affection of
God toward all men, be not made to depend on man's will, yet (according to
Arminius) the effect thereof is uncertain, until God by his consequent will
has decreed to save this or that man. But Arminius makes this Consequent will
in God to depend on man's free will, and does make it to come after faith, and
the right use of grace: Therefore Vorstius, Vorstius. Amic. Costat. cum Piscat
Sect. 79. and 217.
a man of a sharp wit, but of an unfortunate audacity, is bold to write that
the will of God is after some manner mutable, and that some change may be made
in some part of Gods decree.

XI. But although all the counsels of God are eternal and immutable, neither
can God be said to will any thing anew, which he has not willed from eternity;
yet whosoever shall exactly consider this Consequent will of God shall find
that it is made to come after his Antecedent will, not only in order, but in
time: For it is impossible that God should at one time desire to save all men,
and to damn some. And it must needs be, that the Antecedent will of God must
cease, as blotted and raced out by his Consequent, before there can be place
for his Consequent will.

XII. And when the Apostle, Romans 9. does affirm, that the will of God cannot
be resisted; by this distinction, there is made a will of God which may be
resisted, and the execution whereof may be hindered by man.

XIII. And here, if any where, we may see how little constant the Arminians
are. For they do contend, that in the ninth Chapter to the Romans, it is
spoken of the Antecedent will of God, by which God will have mercy upon some,
(for so they speak) that is, upon such as believe, and not of his Consequent
will, by which he has determined precisely and absolutely to have mercy on
this or that man: And yet they forgetting themselves, say, that this Antecedent
will may be resisted; when notwithstanding Saint Paul says in the same place.
Who can resist his will? Either therefore let Arminius deny, that the
Antecedent will of God is a will, but rather call it a wish, desire, or
affection; or if he does contend that it is a will, let him confess that it
cannot be resisted.

To which purpose, excellently Saint Austen, Enchared. Cap. 95. Our God in
heaven does whatsoever things he will, both in heaven and earth; which is not
true, if he has willed some things, and has not done them: And which is more
unworthy of him, has not therefore done them, because the will of man has
hindered that the Almighty should not do what he willed.

XIV. Arminius indeed does confess, that God does not want power to fulfill
that Antecedent will, whereby he does earnestly desire all men to be saved: But
it is not true (says he) that the thing which he does wish and seriously
desire, that he will effect the same by what means soever he is able, but by
those means by which it is decent and conuement, that he should effect it. The
Father wishes, and does earnestly desire, that his Son would obey m^n, but
he does not violently draw his Son to obedience: and a little after. The
similitude of a Merchant, who does desire his wares should be safe, and yet
casts them into the sea, does very well square and agree to the purpose. God
does earnestly desire that all men should be saved, but compelled by the
stubborn and incorrigible malice of some men, will have them make loss of
their salvation. For although God does earnestly will and intend the salvation
of all and singular men, yet he will not then put forth his omnipotency, least
he should force man's free will. I answer. Nothing is effected by these
similitudes; for they are plain dissim^litudes. Arminius uses examples of men
which cannot be made partakers of their vows, but by means that are not
convenient; and of them who are oftentimes disappointed of their intention. But
to God there are never wanting just and convenient means, by which he should
obtain that which he intends; neither can he be disappointed of his intent.
But you say, if God should exercise his omnipotency, in converting man, he
should force man's free will, and compel man's voluntary liberty. But that I
deny: For he can without constraint so bend the will, that it should follow of
its own accord. Without constraint he suddenly changed the mind of Esau,
Genesis 33. and the mind of Saul, 1 Samuel 19.23. and the mind of the Egyptians,
Psalm. 105.25. and of Kings, Pro. 21.1. If God does make this change of the will
in wicked men, the liberty of man's free will untouched; how much more may he
do it in good and faithful men? God without constraint did change the heart
of the Thief on the Cross, and so does he of all, from whom he takes their
stony heart, and gives them an heart of flesh, Ezekiel 36.26. and of those, who
when they were dead in sin, he raised up with a spiritual resurrection,
Ephesians. 2.5. We shall see Arminius is of opinion, that the understanding is
irresistably endued with light by God, and that God does irresistably give
power of believing the Gospel to all men, to whom the Gospel shall be
preached, and that he draws their affections: But when the mind has fully
received in this persuasion, and the affections do stir up the will, it is
impossible but their will should move it self, whether the mind, instructed
by God, does appoint it, and whether the appetite does force it; for these are
the only incitements of the will, neither is it moved by any other impulsion.
The school and followers of Arminius, are also of opinion, that the Elect are
drawn of God by effectual and powerful grace, the effect whereof is most
sure, because God does draw them in a congruent and fit time and manner, in
which he knows they will infallibly follow him, calling them: And yet the
Arminians mean not hereby that any force is offered to the will of man, but
that it is so vehemently affected with a moral and sweet persuasion, that it
follows of its own accord. The example of the Thief, does seem to me to
be notable above all the other; whose heart so suddendly changed in a time of
adversity, when the faith of the Apostles themselves did shake, is an evident
lesson, how great the efficacy of the holy Spirit is on them who are called by
the purpose of God, Romans 8.28. But of this efficacy of calling, it shall be
spoken more at large in his proper place.

XV. Hence appears with how prepostrous diligence Arminius has turned his wit
to the defense of free will. For there lay open to him a most sure and plain
way, whereby God might show forth his power in the conversion of man, without
the diminishing of our liberty. Nor, while he does patronize and defend free
will, ought he to strike against the wisdom and perfection of God, whom he
would frustrate and disappoint of his own end and natural desire, and wish
those things which he knows he shall not obtain, and propound an end to
himself which shall never be.

XVI. In the mean while, the prudent reader shall easily discern whereto that
similitude of the merchant making loss, and casting his wares into the sea,
with his own hands, may belong. For Arminius does not only expressly say
that God is compelled to do something which he had not intended, (for the
merchant did not intend to do this, but does it (...), nolens, volens,
between willing, and nilling) but also by these he does insinuate, that God
being driven from that better end which he had propounded to himself, turned
himself to another end less to be wished; which things, whether they be
spoken by prudent men to the reproach of God, or by unwise men through
ignorance, it does strike horror into pious minds.

XVII. But in this distinction of the will of God, into Antecedent and
Consequent, the first whereof does go before, the other does follow man's will;
this is far the worst thing, that by it, the will of man is made to go
before the election of God: For according to Arminius, God by his antecedent
will would save all men, and give them power of beleeueing in Christ; but by
his consequent will, does elect or reprobate several men, according as he
fore-knowes their faith, or infidelity. A deadly doctrine, by which the
election of man does depend upon man's will, and our faith is made the cause,
and not the fruit of our election, and man chooses God, and applies himself
to God, before he is chosen of God: Whence it comes to pass, that on the one
side, man's pride is blown up, as it were, with bellows, and on the other
side, faith is undermined, as it were, with trenches, and confidence does
decay: For what certainty can there be of our salvation, if our election depend
upon so instable a thing. But of these things more at large in their proper
place. Now those examples with which Arminius does support that double will of
God, are to be examined.

XVIII. God (says he) by his antecedent will would stablish the throne of
Saul for ever; but by his consequent will, he would overthrow it, as it is 1.
Sam. 13 13. but there is no such thing to be found; for Samuel does not say,
that God would stablish the kingdom of Saul; but he says, God had
established thy kingdom for ever; between which there is a great deal of
difference: If God had established it, it had been his will to stablish it:
But because he did not establish it; it is certain it was not his will to
establish it.

XIX. There is no more force at all in the other example. Christ (says he) by
his antecedent will, would gather the Jews, as a Hen gathers her chickens;
but by his consequent will, he would scatter them through all nations. Math.
22.37. But this place signifies quite another thing. Christ speaks to
Jerusalem, and says, that he would have gathered his children together; but
Jerusalem her self resisted, with all her power. Jerusalem is one thing, and
her children another, who here are expressly distinguished from the city: By
Jerusalem understand the Priests, the Levites, the Scribes, and the prince of
the people, for these did most of all withstand Christ: By the children of
Jerusalem, understand the people. Christ says, that he would have gathered
together these children; neither is it to be doubted, but that he gathered
together many of them, although the rulers were unwilling. This place,
therefore, makes nothing for that Antecedent will, which these men would have
not to be fulfilled, when indeed it was fulfilled as much as seemed good to
God. Then also these words, how often would I, they misunderstand them of the
Antecedent will, which is the decree of God; when to will, is here nothing
else, then to inuit and command: So Saint Austen thinks, Encherid. Chap. 97.
Or rather (says he) she indeed would not have had her children to be
gathered together by him: but even she unwilling, he gathered those of her
children whom he himself would (...).

XX. The other examples are unworthy that we should stay long upon them. By his
Antecedent will. (says he) those were called to the wedding, which by his
Consequent will were declared unworthy: By his Antecedent will, he without the
wedding garment is invited; by his Consequent will, he is cast out. By his
Antecedent will, the Gospel is offered to the Jews; by his Consequent will,
it is taken away. In all these things, that will of God, whereby men are
called, is no other thing, then to command, and inuit, not to decree that by
his Antecedent will, which afterward he has broken off by his Consequent will.

XXI. Neither are we scrupulously to enquire why God has called them, whom
he knows will not follow. The end why God does this, is evident, to wit, to
require of men, that which they owe. To search any farther into the intent of
God, is to make God obnoxious to accounts, and to break into his secrets.

XXII. It is not to be ouerpassed, that Arminius will have God, equally desire
to save all men by his Antecedent will, but when he is prepared to the effect,
and execution of that will, he does those things which are contrary to that
will. For he preaches the Gospel to those that are very wicked, as to the
men of Capernaum; he does deny that favor to those that are less wicked, as
to the men of Tyrus and Sydon; and he does suffer many wild people and stupid,
with their barbarous cruelty, to be overwhelmed in darkness. But why so?
because (says he) their Ancestors refused the Gospel. O ridiculous reason!
Should he that does equally desire the salvation of all, be hindered with so
light an impediment, and which is contrary to his justice, as shall afterward
be taught? Thus though Arminius does teach, that God would by his Antecedent
will save all several men; it is yet manifest by experience, that God through
many ages has denied, and does yet deny, to most nations, those means without
which they cannot be saved, and does only supply those means, which means
alone, none ever used well.

XXIII. But God (says he) seeing he is very good by nature, cannot but wish
well to all men by his Antecedent and primary will; as being created after his
own image. These things were spoken by them rightly, and agreeably to the
nature of God, if we were borne without original sin: But seeing the image
of God is almost blotted out, and in place of it, the image of the Devil has
succeeded, no reason does compel us to believe that God is willing to save all
and singular men; but the holy Scripture does teach, that some are saved by the
mere grace of God, and by election, according to his purpose, the rest being
left in their natural perdition, and appointed to damnation for those sins
which they were to commit of their own accord.

XXIV. All these things are not therefore spoken, that we should reject this
distinction of the will of God, into his Antecedent and Consequent will: For we
know, that among the decrees of God, some are before, and some are after in
order. But we deny that there are two decrees of God, between which man's
will steppeth in; as if man's will came between the decree of creating man, and
the decree of condemning certain men. But we deny that the will of man does
so come between the two decrees of God, that the first, or Antecedent decree
is broken off by the will of man, and that God is compelled to absist from that
end which he had propounded to himself, and which he did seriously intend: We
deny also, in the work of our election, the precise will of God to depend on
the foreseeing of any power or action of man's free will; or the Consequent
will of God to be suspended on man's will: Concerning which thing, it shall be
diligently spoken in the proper place.

CHAP. VI.
Of the sin of Adam.
I. GOD, having created man, enlightened his mind with a supernatural light,
and adorned his will with righteousness and holiness; but so that he was
mutable; for otherwise God had created a God, and not a man; for not to be able
to change, is a prerogative peculiar to God, whereby he is distinguished from
all created things.

II. Arminius, whom the old way has always displeased, Articul. Perpend. Page
18. is of opinion, That an inclination to sinning was in man before his fall,
although not so vehement and inordinate as now it is. If this be true, it must
needs be, that God put in man that inclination to sin; which seeing it is an
evil thing, God should be made the author of that which is evil, and to have
inclined man to sin; which cannot be spoken without heinous wickedness.

III. It was the least finne which Adam sinned in, gluttony, but that was far
the greatest, that he had rather believe the Serpent then God, and that being
spurred on by ambition, he would be like God in the knowledge of good and
evil: And that while he obeyed the Serpent, he gave credit to reproaches
cast upon God. Finally because he preferred so small a thing before the
commandment of God, therefore the lesser the eating of the Apple was, the
greater was his sin.

IV. This ruin began at the understanding, over which Satan had spread the
cloud of false opinion, and had cast the imagination of a false good. To whose
persuasion, when man showed himself ready, then perverseness of the will, and
inclination of the appetites to sin, followed this darkening of the mind.

V. This fall happened, God indeed not compelling it, but yet permitting it.
There was not wanting power to his omnipotency, by which he was able to hinder
this fall, neither did envy turn away his goodness: God therefore permitted
it, because he would permit it, and because it was good that he should permit
it He that is the chiefest good, would not have permitted evil, unless it had
been good that evil should have entered into the world; by that permission, he
made a way for the manifestation of his glory and opened a way, to man
himself, to a state far more excellent: For without sin, the mercy of God,
whereby he pardons, and his justice whereby he punishes, had neither of them
been made known, nor had he made known his infinite love to the church, by
the sending of Christ into the world, to abolish our sins, and to carry us to
a celestial glory: Neither do I say these things, as if I thought that God
does stand in need of our wickedness, to the manifestation of his glory; but
I say, that God created man, that he might come to greater perfection then
that was, in which he was created. And he could not come to that perfection,
without the knowledge of Gods justice and mercy, which does shine forth out of
this fall, and out of the remedy which he had prepared for this fall: To which
purpose, the words of Saint Austen, in his book de Correp. and grati. Cap. 10.
are very proper. He that created all things very good, and fore-knew that evil
things would rise out of those good things, knew that it did more pertain to
his omnipotent goodness, to make good things, even out of evil things, then
not to suffer evil things to be. The like he says, Encherid. Chap. 96.

VI. The Arminians bring no other cause of this permission, then this: Because
God would not force man's voluntary liberty, nor compel his will, neither did
he think it convenient to use his omnipotency, in a thing which belongs to
man's free will: But they do too negligently touch so great a matter, neither
do they sufficiently weigh the moment of things, and the circumstances of the
fall of Adam. For God without the diminishing of man's liberty, could have
restrained Satan, and hindered him that he should not tempt man. He could have
forewarned man, that he should not believe the Serpent. He was able not to have
propounded the tree to man, by the eating whereof he knew man would sin. He
could have given man more strength, and more light, and more understanding. He
could have given extraordinary strength in the very instant of temptation: And
yet by these, force had not been offered to man's will, nor his liberty
violated. The Angels are examples hereof, whom he does confirm in good,
without any constraint: By these it is manifest that the fall of man happened,
God not compelling, but yet dispenfing, and by his providence turning that
event which he fore-knew from eternity, to an end which he had determined
with himself from eternity.

VII. Neither is it to be said, that God withdrew his grace from man; for this
were to compel him, as the house does necessarily fall, when the pillars are
taken away; nor that God took from him the liberty of his will, for so he had
brought a necessity of sining; but he would not hinder that man should not be
tempted by Satan, nor would he help him with extraordinary succor. And
whereas man sinned freely, yet that fell out, which God from eternity fore-knew
would be, and the creatures themselves, before the creation of man, did
testify that it would come to pass: For before Adam had sinned, God had put
into the Plants healthful powers to keep away diseases; already had he
clothed the sheep with fleeces, and had formed cattle for the use of man,
which are reliefes of human infirmity, and had been in vain created, if man
had stood in his integrity.

VIII. Now whether the digestion and egestion of meat, to be refreshed with
sleep after labor, to enjoy the marriage bed, to grow in stature, to have
flesh that may be wounded and burnt (to all which man before his fall was
obnoxious,) whether I say, these are such things as may perpetually agree to a
creature perfectly blessed, or whether they do not secretly testify what
should be the condition of man to come, I leave it to be judged of by wise men.

IX. And yet it is no doubt, but that Adam, without any extraordinary help,
had strength to resist Satan: For it is not credible, that God gave a Law to
man, when he was made at first, to the performing of which he did not give
power: yet in respect of the foreknowledge of God, the fall of man was
certain. For the act of the will may be certain and defined before God; the
liberty of man's will being untouched and entire: So it is no doubt, but the
tortours had power and ability of breaking the bones of Christ, when yet in
respect of the foreknowledge and providence of God, it was impossible that
they should be broken. The will of man may by a certain and voluntary motion,
determine it self to some one thing, and yet do that which, either the
knowledge of God has certainly fore-knowne, or his providence has certainly
foreordained.

X. These things are firmly to be held, least the fault of man be transferred
upon God. For howsoever God does draw good out of the fall of Adam, yet he
never does do evil, that good may come of it: Neither must we think that God
would force man to sin, although his glory should manifest y appear thereby.
Gods glory must not be further. I with the damage of his justice; but after a
ma^ue^ous and unutterable manner, God does so dispose and govern the events of
things, that vnauo^dably those things happen, which he does condemn and
disalow, and the divine providence does keep a course between injustice and
negligence. They therefore do inuert the nature of things, who say that God
decreed that Adam should sin, because he had determined to send Christ, who
should cure Adams sin: when rather God decreed to send Christ, because Adam
was to sin. Man did not sin that Christ should abolish sin; but Christ
came that he might abolish sin.

Here is nothing said, that ought to trouble tender ears, or which should make
God partaker of sin: which yet if any one does either not conceive, or not
digest, it is better to accuse his own dullness, then accuse the justice of
God, and to abstain from lawful things, then attempt unlawful things.

CHAP. VII.
That all mankind is infected with Original sin.
I. Sin is either Original or Actual: I use the accustomed words for
clearenesse of speech; for if one would deal strictly, he shou d abstain from
these terms, seeing it is certain that Original sin is in act, and
therefore is actual. But use has obtained that that sin should be called
actual, which is committed in action or in deed; and that original which we
have from the birth, that hereditary blot which is sent into us, from our
Parents.

II. Of Original sin Saint Paul does treat, in the fifth and seventh
Chapter to the Romans. In the fifth Chapter, how it has passage into all
mankind; in the seventh Chapter, how it does remain in him, in whose mind
the law of God is perfectly written.

III. That no man is free from this blot, the Scripture does cry, and
experience does witness; Whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh, says
Christ, John 3. And there he does plainly teach, that all men are defiled with
Original sin, when he says, that it is necessary to be borne again, and to
be formed anew. We are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. Who can bring
forth a clean thing out of an vnclea^e? there is not one, Job 14. David
acknowledges himself infected with this contagion. Psalm. 51. Behold (says
he) I was formed in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me. He does not
ac^use his father, nor expostulate with his mother, but although he was
adorned with fingular prerogative, and replenished with benefits, yet he does
confess himself to be defi ed with that universal contagion: he fetches the
cause of his sin from that original, and in this common lot, he does lament
his own: Circumcision signi^ied this; for by that external symbol, ^e Church
was warned, that there was something ^n man (...) soon as he was borne, that
ought to be cut off and ^^^r^ ted. The end of Baptism is the same, watch (...)
the Sacrament of our cleansing in the blood of Christ, by which our natural
filthiness is washed away.

IV. Not only the progeny of Ethnicks and Infidels, or evil Christians, is
borne in this Original sin, but also the offspring of the godly and
faithful: No otherwise then he that was Circumcised, begat one that was
uncircumcised; and as a grain of Wheat well cleansed, and received in the lap
of the earth, afterward growing, does bring forth Wheat with chafe. Then was
Adam justified, then did he by his faith cleave to the promise of his seed,
that should bruise the serpents head; when he begot Cain the heir of his
natural wickedness, and not of his faith or repentance. Piety is not
hereditary, to be derived to ones heirs; neither does holin^sse come into us
by nature, but by grace: not generation but regeneration, does make men holy
and good. After the same manner that Aristotle, lib 2. Phisic does teach, That
artificial forms (as the form of a statue or image) are not begotten, but
only natural forms: Therefore in the children of the best man, as soon as
they begin to speak, you may see a crafty and lying disposition, and prone
to revenge, stubbornenesse against those that admonish them, pricks of glory
and sporting vanity: also that great honor wherewith they prosecute their
puppets and babyes, are no obscure seeds of their inclinablenesse to Idolatry:
For as puppets are the Idols of infants, so Idols are the puppets of those that
are grown in age: And therefore when any man has children of evil manners,
he ought to acknowledge his image in them; when he has good children, he ought
to admire the work of God in them: For these are they of whom Saint John
says, Chap. 1. who are not borne of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God.

V. The second Canon of the Mileuitan counsel is expressly to this thing. It
pleases us, that whosoever does deny little ones that are newborn, to be
Baptized, or does say that indeed they are Baptized for the remission of their
sins, but yet they drew no original sin from Adam, which is to be taken
away by the lauar of regeneration; whence it follows, that the form of
Baptism in them is to be understood not to be true, but false, be an Anathema.

VI. Christ alone was free from this blot, he derived not Original sin from
his Mother. Saint Paul indeed, Romans 5.10. says, that all men sinned in Adam;
neither is it any doubt but that Christ was in Adam, as being one of his
posterity; but that sentence of the Apostle does not concern Christ, because
the person of Christ was not in Adam, but only his human nature: neither is
he from Adam, as from the agent principle, and from the seminating power, but
thence he took that matter, which by the ouer-shadowing of the holy Ghost, was
freed from the common contagion.

VII. Now if you should ask me, whether Original sin is done away by
Baptism, or whether that blot does yet remain in those that are regenerated
by the holy Ghost; it is readily answered out of the Scripture, and experience,
which is so certain here, that there is no place left for doubting. David was
circumcised, and plentifully instructed with the gifts of the holy Ghost, and
yet he does confess, that he was not free from this stain, but was polluted
in an equal contagion with others. And Saint Paul, Romans 7. speaking (under his
own person) of every man, in whose mind the law of God is faithfully
imprinted, does acknowledge that sin does dwell in him, which he ^aileth the
law of sin, because it does stir him up to sin. We see infants dye as
soon as they are baptized; and death, the Apostle being witness, Romans 6. is
the wages of sin. I demand, for what sin do those Baptized infants dye? is
it for actual sin? but they have committed none: therefore it is for
Original sin. Whence it appears, that Original sin does remain after
Baptism, wherein sin is remitted, as touching the guilt, although it remain
in the act, as Saint Austen teaches at large in his first Book against
Julian, concerning Marriage and concupiscence, Cap. 25. and 26. The
concupiscence of the flesh (says he) is forgiven in Baptism, not that it
should not be at all, but that it should not be imputed for sin.

VIII. But seeing the regenerate do afterward sin, whence are these sins,
but from their inward corruption? For that being taken away, the effects also,
which do flow only from this cause, would be taken away.

IX. And what shall we say to this, that the best men beget their children
tainted with this blot, and therefore standing in need of Baptism? Now if the
parents begetting children, were without original sin, how could they send
this blemish to their issue, and give that to their children, which themselves
have not?

X. Therefore, say you, marriage is evil, seeing by it children of wrath are
begotten, and sin is propagated, which ought rather to be pulled up by the
root, and to be choked in the very seed. I answer, that marriage is more
ancient then sin, and instituted by God himself; the sin that came upon
it, does not hinder, but that marriage is naturally a good thing: No otherwise
then meat and drink, are things that are good, and to be desired, although
thereby the life of wicked men is sustained. Besides, marriage does bring forth
sons to God, and does serve to fill up the number of the Elect. I let pass,
that the faithful couple do join their prayers, do stir up one another to
good works, do cure one another incontinency, and in slippery places do
stretch forth the hand one to another. Neither are there wanting examples of
wicked men, to whom, by Gods benefit there have happened good and godly
children; even as God does send seasonable rain on those seeds which were
stolen and sowed by a thief.

CHAP. VIII.
What Original sin is, and whether it be truly and properly sin.
I. Original sin is the deprauation of man's nature, contracted and drawn
from the very generation it self, and derived from Adam into all mankind;
consisting of the privation or want of original righteousness, and the
pronenesse to evil.

II. These two things, to wit, the privation or want of original
righteousness, and the inclinablenesse to evil, are in original sin. For
as sickness is not only a privation of health, but also an evil affection of
the body from the distemper of the humors: so this hereditary blot, is not
only the want of righteousness, but also the inclinablenesse to
unrighteousness.

III. The last of these proceeds from the former. For the soul, which by
original sin has ceased to be good, is necessarily evil; and the soul
being instructed by the will, which cannot be idle, holiness and righteousness
being lost, must needs turn to the contrary part.

IV. This corruption brings blindness to the mind, perverseness to the will,
perturbation to the appetites, the loss of supernatural gifts, and the
corruption of those that are natural.

V. And although in Adam the mind was first stained with error, before the
will was infected with perverseness; yet is the corruption of the will far
worse, and that blot more foul, because we are not made good or evil by the
understanding, but by the will, for whatsoever evil is committed, it is the
sin of the will; the committing of wickedness is a greater sin then the
ignorance of the truth.

VI. The guilt or obliging to punishment, cannot be any part of the definition
of Original sin, Lombard. lib. 2. did. 30. Th^mas t. 2 Quest. ^2. art. 3.
seeing it is the effect of it.

VII. Lombard, and Thomas, and the other schoolmen, who say that original
sin is concupiscence, do not attain sufficiently to the nature of
concupiscence: For Original sin does infect all the faculties of the
reasonable soul, and concupiscence is the disease of the will and appetite;
also concupiscence, is contrary to one commandment of the Law, and Original
sin, is contrary to the whole Law: Neither by it, do men sin more against
the second table of the law then against the first. What? that concupiscence is
forbidden by a proper law: But I know not whether Original sin may be said to
be forbidden by the law; for God does not command, that we should be generated
or begotten pure and without sin, for so God should speak to man before he were
born. Surely man is not bound to obey the law, before he be man; and seeing the
law does not speak, but to them that hear, and are partakers of reason, to
think that the law commands a man that is grown to age, to be born without
sin, is a ridiculous thing, and well nigh a dream: For so the law, should
command him to be born, that is already born, and him to be begotten, that is
already grown a man. The law does not command, but presuppose Original
righteousness and does speak to man, being considered in the state wherein he
was before the fall, requiring that old debt and natural obedience: Whence it
is manifest, that Original sin, is condemned by the law, but not forbidden.

VIII. Of this sin, although the Scripture speaks so expressly, and sense
it self and experience does abundantly testify it, yet there have not been
wanting some who did deny this sin, and would not acknowledge mankind from
his first stock, and original, to be infected with sin. Cyrillus
Ierosolomytanus, or whosoever else is the author of those Catechismes which go
under his name, in his fourth part of his Catechism, has these words. Thou
do not sin by generation, thou do play the adulterer by fortune. And a
little after. We come without sin, but now we sin by our own election.

IX. In Saint Austins age, Pelagius and Celestius did deny Original sin, and
did contend, that sin did pass from fathers to their issue, only by example
and imitation: They did deny that sin was remitted to infants by Baptism,
because they had none; and did affirm, that by it only, the kingdom of
heaven was opened to them; whose heresy is long ago hissed out, and strongly
confuted by Saint Austin.

X. Saint Hierome (or whosoever else is the author of those brief comentaries
upon the Epistle of Saint Paul, which are put in among Saint Hieromes works)
does favor Pelagius: For those words of the Apostle, Romans 5. in whom all have
sinned, he restraines to example, and does take them as spoken of the imitation
of the sin of Adam.

XI. Saint Chrysostom in many places, does seem to creep into this error. In
his Homily upon new Conuerts, he denies Baptism to be profitable only to the
remission of sins: For (says he) we Baptize infants, although they are not
polluted with sin, that holiness, and righteousness, adoption, and the
inheritance, etc may be added to them. And in his tenth Homisie upon the
Epistle to the Romans, expounding that of Saint Paul, Romans 5. By the
disobedience of one, many were made sinners, by sinners, he would have us
understand, those that are guilty of punishment, and mortal, and not those
that are defiled by the blot of sin.

XII. Lombard, lib 2. distinct. 30. litera E. says, there were some that said,
Original sin was no vice in us, but only the guilt of punishment, even of
that eternal punishment, which is due to us, for the sin of Adam, unless we
be freed by Christ. The Arminians do not much differ from this opinion, who
do not care who they imitate, so they invent something that may make for the
safeguard of their error. Page 388. in Tilenum.
Arnoldus after Arminius does teach, that Original sin, has no respect of
vice, or sin, properly so called, for nothing is sin or vice, unless it be
committed by the free will. In the same place he denies that Original sin
deserves punishment, but says, that it is a punishment. And he does confess,
Page 389. and 390.
that Arminius does deny that Original sin, is sin, properly so called.
Arminius himself, Resp. ad 9. Quaest. P. 174. has these words, It is
peruersely said, that Original sin does make a man guilty of death.

XIII. The reasoning then of Saint Paul the Apostle, does fall to the ground,
Romans 5.13.14, where speaking of sin which has flowed from Adam, into his
posterity, when he had said, That sin was in the world until the Law, he
afterward proves it, by the death of the infants, who were dead before the
days of Moses: Death (says he) reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them
that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, that is, over
infants which had not sinned actually: He thereby proves, that sin was in
those infants, because death is the fruit and punishment of sin. Seeing
therefore the death of infants is a punishment of Original sin, if this
Original sin were not truly sin, but only the punishment of sin, then
this death of infants would be the punishment of a punishment, and not the
punishment of sin; but to say that God does punish punishments, and not
sins, is uncomely for any, especially for those who profess themselves to be
maintainers of Gods justice.

XIV. And if the Original blot of infants is not sin, but only the
punishment of sin, they are baptized in vain: For, baptism is not
profitable to wash away punishments, but to wash away sins. In vain are they
washed, that are without the filth of sin. Why is it necessary men should be
borne again; but because they are dead in sin? Whence is that peruersenes,
by which naturally men are prone to evil; but from vice? and what is this vice
but sin?

XV. But (you say) it is not sin, unless it be voluntary. I confess it, if
you speak of actual sins; but if you speak of the natural stain and
blot, it is not necessary, that this natural blot be procured by every ones
own will; it is enough if it be contrary to the Law: For this is the best
difinition of sin, that Saint John lays down, that sin is, (...), the
breach of the Law: And it cannot be doubted, but that that is contrary to the
law, which does stir up a man to rebel against the law. For although
Original sin has not yet stirred up the infant to sin in act, yet is it
apt and prone to stir him up: No otherwise then the Snake which has not yet
infected any one with her poisoning biting, has yet an engrafted poison in
her, and a natural readiness to hurt. Original sin also, may be said to be
voluntary, because by it we sin voluntarily, and also because we sinned in
Adam, and therefore in him we were desirous of this corruption. Finally, we
must rather believe Saint Paul, that teaches us that sin is in infants, then
these men, who strike themselves with their own stings, and entangle
themselves.

XVI. For, seeing that the Arminians teach, that by the death of Christ, all
mankind is reconciled to God, and that remission of sins is obtained for all
men: I demand, for what sins are infants punished, and do fall into torments
of body, and do suffer the assaults of Devils? Is it for the sin of Adam?
that, the Arminians affirm, is forgiven them. Is it for any actual sin?
they have committed none. It remains therefore, that they are punished for
Original sin, Vide Aransic. Council. secund Chap. 2.
unless we will brand God with the mark of injustice, as he that torments the
innocents and they that are guilty of no sin.

CHAP. IX.
How the sin of Adam may belong to his posterity, and how many ways it may
pass to his of spring. And first of the imputation, and whether the sins of
the Grandfather, and great-Grandfathers, are imputed to their posterity.
I. THe sin of Adam does pass to his posterity by two means, by imputation,
and propagation.

II. The punishments which all men suffer in the name of Adam, do argue that
the sin of Adam is imputed to us: This the Apostle teaches, Romans 5.12. Death
passed on all men, by one man, in whom all men sinned, (...).
or because all men sinned in him: For the sin of Adam was not only
personal, neither did he sin as a singular person, but as carrying all
mankind in the stock and original; no otherwise then Christ satisfying for
us on the cross, has not suffered as a private person, but as sustaining and
representing the whole Church in the head. Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5.15. speaks
thus: If one dyed for all, all likewise were dead. And Romans 6. does affirm
that we are dead and crucified with Christ. If therefore we dyed in Christ
dying, and were crucified with him, it is no doubt but that it may likewise be
said, that we sinned in Adam: For if the satisfaction and righteousness of the
second Adam be imputed to us, why shall not the sin of the first Adam be
imputed to us; seeing that therefore the righteousness of Christ is imputed to
us, that the sin of Adam might not be imputed to us?

III. Reason it self does consent to this: for if Adam had received good
things, not for himself alone, but for his posterity; it is no marvel, if
being spoiled of these good things, he lost them for himself and his
posterity. If any one be capitally punished for treason, and brought to
extreme poverty, his children also, with him do loose their Nobility. Nor is
any thing more equal, then that the son should pay his fathers debts, and
that as they are heirs of their estates, so they might be heirs of their
debts.

IV. But in this similitude there is one, and that a notable difference, that
is, when the debtor has wasted the inheritance, and there is more in debt then
in goods, the son may renounce the inheritance, and leave his fathers goods:
But here this yielding up cannot be made; because to the guilt by the sin of
Adam, there comes also the natural deprauation, and contagion; like as he
that is borne of parents infected which leprosy, which contagion cannot be put
off when they please.

V. Although these things are grounded upon the word of God, and the very rule
of justice, yet they seem to be charged, and followed with great
discommodities. First, that in Ezekiell, Chap. 18. v. 20. does offer it self;
The soul that sins shall die: The son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father: Whereunto the law of God, Deuteronomy. 24. is consonant and agreeable; which
law does forbid children to be punished for the sins of their parents. Why
then do we die for another sin? Why is the sin of Adam imputed to us? Or
is it credible, that he that forgiues us our sins, will impute to any one
another sins? What? that the punishment is greater then the sin? For when we
sinned in Adam only, in potentia, in power and possibility, yet we are
punished in actu, in act: And that seems most cruel, that Adam, which sinned
in act is saved, and for the same sin many are damned, who sinned in Adam
only in power and possibility.

I answer, the place in Ezechiel must be taken thus; the innocent son shall
not bear the punishment of his fathers sin: So when God says in the law,
that he will visit the iniquity of fathers upon the children, he speaks of
children which walk in their fathers steps, and are partakers of the same
fault: But the sons of Adam cannot be said to be innocent, as they which not
only sinned in Adam, as in the stock and root of mankind, but also
themselves are borne stained with the same deprauation, and prone to the same
sin. Secondly, I say that that place in Ezechiel makes nothing to the present
matter: for he speaks of the sins of the fathers, whose sins are
personal, and who in sinning do not sustain the persons of their children:
For Arminius is deceived, in setting down the cause why those Infidels are
reprobated, who have not refused the Gospel, viz. Because (says he) they
refused the grace of the Gospel in their parents, In Perkins p. 92.
grandfathers, great-grandfathers, and their fathers, by which act they
deserved that they should be forsaken by God: For I would have them show me a
solid and sound reason, why Infants have not sinned against the grace of the
Gospel in their Parents, to whom the grace of the Gospel was offered, and by
whom it was refused; seeing in Adam all his posterity sinned against the Law,
and by it deserved punishment and forsaking. For the reason of the covenant of
God is perpetual, that children are comprehended in their Parents.

VI. Let therefore the School and followers of Arminius learn the cause of
this difference, and why the sin of Adam should be imputed to his posterity,
but the sins of other fathers should not be imputed to their children. Adam,
we lost original purity; but we have not lost it by the sins of our
Grandfathers, or great-Grandfathers. 2. Because Adam received gifts, Adam.
Vide Tho. 1.2. quest. 81. Art 2.
Surely I think that it cannot be said that Ezechias or Josias, who were the
posterity of David, did in David murder Vrias. 4. I will say somewhat more;
Adam while he lived committed many sins, yet I think that only that first
sin of Adam was imputed to his posterity, because only by this sin he
violated that covenant which was made with him, as with the author of mankind.
5. Arminius thinks, there is no cause why on the other side, one may not be
called effectually to salvation, because some one of his ancestors believed the
Gospel. For why shall the infidelity of the great-Grandfather be imputed to
the great-grandsonne, and his faith be not imputed? But that the faith of one
is imputed to another, Arminius himself is not of opinion, when he says out
of Habacuk 2. The just shall live by his own faith, and not by another: Nor
because Adam believed the promise of his seed, that should break the serpents
head, is this his faith therefore imputed to any of his posterity. Arnoldus
does seem to consent to this; Paul, 2 Cor. 5.10. where he says, that every
one shall receive the things done in his body, whether it be good or evil;
Arminius by this means would plunge himself. For it may come to pass, that
ones Grandfather by the fathers side has believed the Gospel, and his
Grandfather by his mothers side has refused the Gospel. It may come to pass
that ones Grandfathers or greatgrandfathers and so upward, part have believed,
and part have not believed. I demand of which of them, in the purpose of God,
shall respect be had? Shall the faith of the one, or the infidelity of the
other be imputed to their posterity? Then also, as often as the Gospel is
offered to any Nation or City, there is nothing so likely, as that some of
those people were borne of Ancestors that were Infidels and that some of them
were borne of faithful Ancestors; yet is the Gospel offered to all without any
difference. Also it will come to pass that some one proceeding of faithful
Ancestors, may refuse the Gospel; and on the otherside, one proceeding of
Inside^s, may be converted. his progenitors refused the Gospel a thousand
years before, there will scarce be any of the godly, that after this manner
has not refused the Gospel. 9. Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, there grace
abounded. What were the ancient Romans but thieves, depopulating and wasting
the world, and a scourge in the hand of God? What was Corinth, but the stews
of all Graecia, and the Mart or fair of most foul lusts? yet nevertheless,
in those cities, God by the preaching of the Gospel, raised up most
flourishing Churches, and there were very many in those dregs, which did
belong to the election of God. 10. Arminius ought not to extend it to so many
ages, seeing the law does not extend the visitation of the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, beyond the third and fourth generation: And that
because a man can scarce live so long, as to see his issue beyond the third or
fourth generation: For therefore are children punished, their fathers beholding
it, that grief might thereby increase to their parents, and that the fathers
might be punished by the mis^ries of the children; which is a cause to me of
suspecting, that this visitation of the sin of the fathers upon the children,
ought to be understood of temporal, and not of eternal punishments.

VII. But to that which was said, that the punishment was greater then the
sin, because they which in Adam sinned only in power, are for his sin
punished in act; it is easy to answer: For we so sinned in Adam in power,
that also the sin was in us in act: neither do we only bear the punishment
of another sin, but also of our own: nor is it any marvel, if God has
pardoned Adam, and does not pardon many of his posterity, for Adam believed and
repented, but these refuse the grace of God offered, and persist in impenitency.

CHAP. X.
Of the propagation of the sin of Adam to his posterity, where also of the
traduction of the soul, and of sin it self.
WE have already said that the sin of Adam is conveyed to his posterity two
manner of ways; by Imputation, and Propagation: Of imputation it has been
spoken; now we are to speak of Propagation.

I. That the sin of Adam has infected all mankind with an hereditary
deprauation, and that this contagion has far spread it self, has been
abundantly proved by those places, by which we have declared that every man was
conceived and borne in sin. As by one man, sin entered into the World, and
death by sin: so death went over all, in whom all men sinned. Romans 5.

II. And if any one would exactly view the manner and circumstances of Adams
sin, he shall find that in every man, the character, and no obscure image,
of that first sin, is deeply impressed: for there is engrafted in every man
curiosity and desire of knowing those thin gs which pertain nothing to him:
and also a distrustful haesitation, and doubting of the word of God: And as
Adam laid the fault upon his wife, and his wife upon the Serpent, so is it
natural to every man, to cover his fault with another fault: Also flight and
trembling at the meeting of God, lying, dissembling, and a sense of indecent
nakedness, are in all men by nature, and are derived into posterity from that
fountain; and to these things we are not taught, but made, not instructed, but
infected: To these things, we do not only not need a master, but contrary to
the teaching of masters, and to discipline, all stays and bars being broken,
we return to them, nature being conqueror.

III. As therefore the eggs of the Aspe are justly broken, and serpents new
bred are justly killed, although they have yet poisoned none; so infants are
rightly obnoxious, and subject to punishments: For although they have not yet
sinned in act, yet there is in them that contagious pestilence, and that
natural pronenesse to sin.

IV. But hence arises a question hard to be dissolved, to wit, by what means
sin is traduced from parents to their posterity, and how men's souls may draw
this deprauation. For seeing all things that God does, are good; it is not
credible nor likely, that God put Original sin into men's souls: For how
should he punish those souls, which he himself had corrupted? And if he
created the soul pure and just, but being included in the body, it is defiled
with the contagion, other discommodities no whit less do arise: For to
include a pure and innocent soul in a stinking prison, and to thrust it, as it
were, into a bridewell, that it might be corrupted there, does not seem to
agree with the justice and goodness of God.

V. Hereto is added also, that sin is the deprauation of the soul, not of the
body, for sin is a spiritual thing, a vice of the will; the body therefore
cannot give that to the soul, which it has not: And seeing the body does not
sin, but when the soul does use the body as an organ to sin, Romans 6.13. it
is manifest that sin does pass from the soul into the body, and not from
the body into the soul; to which thing, the very sin of Adam is a clear
testimony to us: For Adam first sinned in will, before he stretched forth his
hand to the forbidden Apple. Calvin saw this, who in the first chapter of the
second book of his Institutions, has these words: This contagion has not its
cause in the substance of the flesh, or of the soul: but because it was so
appointed by God, that what gifts he had bestowed upon the first man, he
should have them, and also loose them both for himself and his.

VI. Here is a way that is obscure and slippery, in which we must go with wary
steps. I do not propound to my self to satisfy them that are brainesicke,
and wickedly acute: I will only set down those things which seem to me to
be agreeable to the word of God, and to reason; whereunto that the way may be
made plain, some things are to be spoken of the original of the soul, and of
the traduction of it.

VII. Origin, following Plato, was of opinion, that all souls were at first
created together with the Angels, and afterward put into bodies. This he
disputes, lib. 1. (...). Chap. 7. Tertullian will have the soul to be conveyed
with the seed, and the soul of the son, to be from the soul of the father,
which is not to be marueiled at in him, who does contend that the soul is the
body, lib de anima, Chap. 5. Saint Jerome in his Epistle to Marcellina, and
Anapsychia, does witness, that the greater part of the west were of the same
opinion. Saint Austin has writ four books of the original of the soul, in
which he leaves this question undecided, neither dares he rashly determine
any thing: And his second book of retractations, Chap. 56. does witness, that
he continued in that doubt to his death: Yet in his 157. Epistle, he does
debate with Tertullian, and does more incline to the contrary opinion.

VIII. But we determine, that the reasonable soul is infused into the i e. The
child conceived, and not yet borne.
embryon, but not, (...), to come from without, as Aristotle would have it.
lib. 2. de generat. animal. Cap. 3. But we think that it is formed, by God, in
the fruit, and in the rudiment of man's body, being led thereto by the authority
of the Scripture, whereunto reason, and the nature of the soul it self does
agree.

IX. Moses, Numb. 27.16. says thus to God. Let the Lord, the God of the
spirits of all flesh, set a man over the Congregation. And the Apostle to the
Hebrews. Chap. 12. v. 9. And if (says he) we had fathers of our bodies,
which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather be in
subjection unto the father of spirits and live? It is not without
consideration, that God by a peculiar elegy and style, is called the father of
spirits, that he might be opposed to the fathers of the flesh: for if the soul
be by traduction, those that are fathers of the flesh, would also be the
fathers of the spirits: Neither should God by this title be distinguished from
the fathers of the flesh, if he wrought alike in both; and did not form men's
souls otherwise then their bodies.

X. Wherefore Ecclesiastes, Chap. 12. says. The body is dissolved to dust, and
the spirit returns to God that gave it, which surely would not be aptly
spoken, if God should give the spirit no otherwise then he gives the body.
Certainly by that word of returning of the soul to God, Solomon does
insinuate, that the soul came from God, and does return thitherwhence she had
her original, which cannot be said of the body.

XI. The conception of Christ, in the womb of his mother, does add credit to
this opinion. For seeing that, according to the flesh, he had not a father, it
is plain, that his soul was immediately created by God: And if it be
necessary that thou may be son of Adam, to have thy soul traducted by thy
fathers seed, Christ could not be called the son of Adam, nor of David.

XII. It is unsavory which is brought out of the beginning of Exodus, to prove
the traduction of the soul, Seauenty souls came out of the loins of Jacob;
for the propriety of the Hebrew, is well known, that by souls are understood
persons.

XIII. Also reason it self does agree with the word of God. 1. For the soul,
which is something which is above nature, cannot be in a common condition
generated with other natural things. 2. Because it is immateriall, it cannot
be brought forth by the power of any matter. 3. If the soul were not generated
unless by the body, it could not be without the body, nor could it subsist by
it self alone. 4. They that would have the soul to be traduced by the seed,
do drive themselves into straights, from which they cannot possible free
themselves. For why should not the soul of the mother, be also traduced into
the son? or if the soul of the son be traduced, as well from the soul of
the mother, as of the father, it must needs be, that two souls do grow
together, and are mingled into one. 5. What will be come of so much seed that
is lost, which either falls from them that sleep, or is unhonestly lost, or
being received into the womb does not come to conception? Will so many souls
of men be lost, or shall they be choked in the womb? or shall they remain
alone without matter, seeing it is certain that they belong not to the number
of men. 6. Also it must need be, that either the whole soul of the father is
traduced, and so the father shall be made soule-lesse; or else a portion and
part of the soul; and so the soul shall be diuisible. Neither can the whole
soul be transmitted, as when light is kindled of light; for such a propagation
is made, by the transmutation of the matter applied unto it; and so the applied
matter of the begetting soul, should be turned into the soul. 7. If the
definition of the soul, laid down by Aristotle ( Lib. 2. de anima, Cap 1.)
and every where conceived be true, by which he defines the soul to be, the
first act of the natural original body, having life in power, I do not see
how the rational soul can inform and shape the seed, in which there are no
Organs.

XIV. Neither is man therefore to be said not to beget man, although he does
not beget the soul, nor the soul be brought forth of the power of the seed;
yet is it sufficient for the generation of man, that in generating, although he
does not give the whole substance, yet he does give the subsistence of the
person, and does not only supply the matter of the infant, but does also
minister dispositions and aptitudes to receive that form, by which man has
his being. For, seeing that by the testimony of the Scripture, the Virgin Mary
is the mother of Christ, although the extraordinary power of the Holy Ghost
perfected his conception; who need doubt to affirm that, commonly man does
beget man, seeing all natural things are done by ordinary means and rules.
These thorns being plucked up, the way to know the manner of the traduction of
sin from parents to their children, is made playner.

XV. In the beginning, I think I have showed by sure reasons, that sin does
not pass from the body into the soul: And on the other side, that God put
into the soul this inclination to sin, it is a great wickedness to believe.
And yet that original sin was in the soul, God being unwilling, or being
indifferent, and permitting it with an idle permission, cannot be spoken or
believed without great offense: For seeing Original sin is the punishment of
the sin of Adam, he that says that this punishment was inflicted only by
the permission of God, and not by his will, does take away from God the office
of a Judge; for Judges do not punish by permitting, but by decreeing.

XVI. For the explication of this Doctrine, we lay down these six
propositions and foundations of the truth.

First, Although we had not been borne of Adam, yet because he had received
supernatural good things, both in his own and our name, seeing he lost them
by his own fault, we are justly deprived of them: Even as among many
brethren, one does waste and consume that money to his own and brothers loss,
which he received in his own and brothers name.

Secondly, God put into the soul these faculties, Understanding, Will, Sense,
and Appetite, which are naturally carried to things that are obuious and known,
and not to things that are unknown and far removed.

Thirdly, Man cannot know and love supernatural and divine things, without
divine and supernatural enlightening.

Fourthly, Neither could man use those things that are obuious and natural,
justly and conveniently, and to the glory of God, unless some supernatural
light did shine forth to him.

Fifthly, God has put into every man, for his own preservation, a love of
himself, which love is naturally good; but does then begin to be morally
good, when it does accord to, and help forward the love of God.

Sixthly, the manners of the mind, do for the most part follow the temper of
the body.

XVII. These things being laid down, I say that God does create the souls of
men good, but destitute of heavenly gilts and supernatural light, and that
justly, because Adam lost those gifts for himself and his posterity, which he
had received for himself and his posterity. Not to give supernatural light to
the mind is not to put into the will, although peruersenesle of will does
afterward follow the blindness of the mind. For the will being destitute of
this light, and of the knowledge of supernatural good things, cannot move it
self to things unknown, but only to things that are present and known, such
as are the pleasures of the body, riches, etc. Which although they be naturally
good, yet they turn the will from the study and desire of supernatural
things. Then also self-love, which is naturally good and necessary, does
begin to be morally evil, because it does invade that place which is due to
the love of God. Hence is that pronenesse to evil, which is in that inordinate
self love, which supernatural illumination does not direct: which light God
not giving to the soul, does not therefore put sin into it: No otherwise,
then if one does take away from the Traveler the light of the Sun, by
putting darkness between; be does not force the Traveler to stragle, nor
does turn him from the right way; but only he does take away that, without
which the right way cannot be known.

XVIII. The temper of the body does increase this contagion: For it is found by
experience, that sanguine men are bloody and libidinous, choleric men are
rash and angry, melancholicke men are suspicious and steadfast in their
purposes, deeply hiding their malice; black and yealow, choler are as
sparks and tinder put to the appetite, by which it catches flames, and
burns: And according to the temper of the body, one laughes under the scourge,
another weeps with a blow. The humors of the body therefore, are not causes,
but prouocations of sin; neither do they compel the will, but allure it;
nor do they impresse sin on the soul, but do put forward the sinful
soul, and there being may ways open to sin, they do incline the soul
hither rather then thither.

CHAP. XI.
Whether the power of believing the Gospel is lost by the sin of Adam.
I. IT is demanded, whether by the sin of Adam we have lost the power of
believing the Gospel; Arminius, that maruailous artificer of devising, does
deny it: For, that he might prove that God is bound to give to every man power
of believing in Christ and obtaining faith, he does contend, that Adam before
his fall, had not power of believing in Christ, nor was it needful for him;
and therefore we could not loose in Adam, that which Adam himself had not. He
says also, that faith was not commanded by the law, and therefore Adam was not
bound to faith, because only the law was given to him; he adds also, that no
man can believe, but he that is a sinner: And if Adam did not receive power
whereby, if he fell he might rise again, he did not receive power of believing
the Gospel, by which we rise out of this fall.

II. Seeing these things tend thither, that Arminius might make a way for
himself to that impious and ungodly opinion, whereby he affirms, that God is
bound to give to all men power of believing, and that God is prepared to give
faith to all men, if they themselves will: This question is of no small moment,
nor to be perfunctoriously and lightly handled.

III. We therefore contend against Arminius, that mankind by the sin of
Adam, together with their original purity and righteousness, lost also the
power of believing in Christ. For by the fall of Adam we lost the power of
loving God, and of obeying him. Now says does include the love of God, and it
is a certain kind of obedience.

IV. Adam indeed before his fall, was not bound to believe in Christ, because
he was not declared to him, neither then was there need; but he was bound to
believe every word of God, whatsoever should afterward be; this bond passed to
his posterity: but it had not passed, if Adam had not been tied to the like
bond. So the israelites in the time of David, were not bound to believe, Jeremy
foretelling the instant captivity into Babylon, because Jeremy then was not,
neither was it needful for them to know this; and yet the Jews in contemning
the prophecy of Jeremy, violated that law, by which the same people was held
and bound in the time of David. He were a fool who would say, that he that
has lost his sight, has not lost the power of seeing that house which was
built four years after: or that he that is blind by his own fault, has
not lost the faculty of seeing the collyria or plasters which the Physician
brings him some months after. Surely Adam, before his fall, had power of
believing in Christ, after the same manner that he had then power of succouring
and helping the sick and miserable, although before the fall there was no
misery, nor could there be. Adam was in the remote power to believe the
Gospel, as a sound man is in the remote power to use the remedies of a disease
that will or may come: But that he did not believe in Christ, it was not
because it did exceed the power given him by God, but because it was not
needful. Finally, seeing Adam by his incredulity, lost the power of believing
the word of God, it must needs be, that he lost also the power of believing
that word, by which God was to bring a remedy to this evil.

V. In vain does Arminius think, that it is unaptly spoken, if it be said
that Adam had power of believing when he had no need, which power was taken
from him, when he began to have need of it. For neither was the power of
believing wanting to Adam, nor was it taken from him, but he willingly lost
it, when he lost the power of obaying God: And God of his mere grace does
restore the same to whom he will, not because we will, but because he works
in us that we will.

VI. But that is ridiculous which Arnoldus, cap. 14. does say, that Adam before
his fall, did not receive power, by which he might rise, if he should fall: For
that power whereby men rise, after the fall, is not given before the fall,
seeing the power is lost by the fall; but after the fall is repaired. There is
no doubt, but that Adam before his fall, had strength whereby he might rise
again, if he had not lost it by his fall. Arnoldus therefore thus speaks; as
if I should say, that he to whom God has given sound and clear eyes, has
not received power, by which he might see with those eyes after he is made
blind,

VII. Finally, as many as are the posterity of Adam, are bound to fulfill the
law; this is a natural debt; and the law commands us to love God, and to obey
him, and therefore to believe him speaking: Whenever then Christ is preached,
the doctrine of the Gospel cannot be refused, but with the contempt of the
Gospel, the law also is violated. But he to whom Christ was never preached,
shall not be condemned, because he has refused Christ, but he shall be judged
by the law, which tied him to believe in Christ, if Christ had been preached
to him.

VIII. And Arnoldus is plainly deceived, when he does affirm that the power
whereby we believe God is one, and the power whereby they believe Christ is
another; because, says he, the word of the law, and the word of the Gospel
differ in the whole genus, and are opposite; this thing fell inconsiderately
from the acute man: Because white and black are opposite, is it therefore the
property of one power to see white, and of another to see black? is it not the
operation of the same faculty to know contraries? And yet I do not see how the
Law and the Gospel can be said to be contrary, seeing the Law is the
Schoolmasters to Christ, and the Gospel does minister the means, by which
the law should be satisfied: Surely between the creditor and the surety, there
is no discord. Christ came not that he might abolish the law, but that he
might fulfill it. Matthew 5.17. Romans 3.30.

IX. Out of these, it is easy to gather what is to be answered to that
question, whereby it is demanded, whether the law does command us to beleeu in
Christ: For this is even as one should demand whether the law of Moses commands
the Prophet Esaias to be believed: It is plain, that that is not expressly
commanded by the law; for no man was bound to believe Esaias before he was borne:
Yet I say it was commanded by the law implicitly, and by consequence, in as
much as the law does command obedience to be yielded to God: And God is to be
obeyed whether he speak to us immediately, or by his messengers: The same, I
think, may be said of Christ.

X. For of those things to which we are bound by the law, there are two kinds.
Some things are due absolutely, by all men, and at all times; yea by them to
whom the law, delivered by Moses, has not been made known, such as are to
love God and our neighbor: For Adam was endued with the knowledge of these
duties before the fall, and was bound to perform them in act: But there are
some things, to the observation whereof, we are then bound by the law of God,
when they are commanded in act, and when the ability of knowing them is given
us of God. Thus the Israelites in Egypt were not bound to obey the
commandment of the not gathering of Manna upon the Saboth day, or of looking
on the bralen Serpent, or of the passing over lordan, which notwithstanding, if
any had not obeyed when God commanded them, without doubt, they had justly
borne the punishment of the breach of the law.

XI. But Arnoldus does wrongfully say, that it is not spoken here of that
general power of believing every word of God; for of it, it is plainly spoken
here, seeing that the power of believing in Christ, is comprehended in that
general power: No otherwise then the power of seeing, does comprehend also the
power of seeing the remedies for blindness, although those remedies are not
present, neither is there any need of them before blindness.

XII. All these things pertain thither, that it might appear, that the power
of believing, and of embracing the remedies which God offers in the Gospel, is
lost by that natural corruption which is derived into us from Adam: And
therefore that Arminius does err, when he says, that God is bound to give to
all men power to believe in Christ, or that he is prepared to give faith to
all. For, God is not bound to restore to man that which man lost by his own
fault; nor does he deal unjustly, when he requires of man, that which he
does naturally owe.

XIII. Arminius is not constant to himself in this thing, and does pluck up
those things which he laid down: For he says, that many nations have for
many ages been deprived of the light of the Gospel, without which, yet there
is no faith, and that for a punishment of the incredulity of their ancestors:
He does acknowledge, therefore, that God has not given, nor was prepared to
give to these nations, power of believing in Christ. Yea truly Arminius, in
speaking thus, does set down the cause why God would not, and therefore was
not prepared to give to people that, without which, faith cannot be. Was God
prepared to give to the men of Tire and Sydon the power of believing, of whom
Christ gives this testimony, that they would have converted in Sackcloath and
Ashes, if the word and his miracles had come to them? Does he give power of
believing to them whose hearts he hardneth with his irresistable will, as
Arminius speaks? Could they believe of whom, it is spoken, John 12.39.
Therefore they could not believe, because it is written, he has blinded their
eyes, and has hardened their hearts? In Per^ins P. 294. and 295.
Does he give power of believing to them whom, Arminius says, are called of
God, by a means that is not congruent and agreeable, and by which he knows
man will never be converted?

XIV. Here Arminius does not obscurely accuse God of folly; for he will have
God to be adverse to himself, and to be prepared to do that, which that it
might not be done, he takes an incongruent and disagreeable course; nay, like
a judge, he sets laws for God himself; for what else mean these words, God
is bound to give the power of believing? Surely it seems that Arminius does
bind God by this Law: neither will God have any reason for his justice,
unless Arminius supply to him the means, whereby he may avoid the crime of
injustice.

XV. And although that impotency and disabilitie of believing be a punishment
of the sin of Adam, yet he is not unjustly punished, who by this impotency
has refused the Gospel, because the same impotency or disability, which is a
punishment, is also a fault, which I say, that it might appear how improperly
Arnoldus does here use the examples of punishments which are not faults. Is it
equity (says he) that to a Soldier that has been punished with the loss of
his eyes, for not keeping good watch, the General should offer the pardon of
some other fault, or should promise some other thing, with this condition, that
he should watch more diligently, and then punish him, because that being
blind, he has not watched: This example is not to the purpose; for to be
blind is not a fault, neither is any man by a natural obligation bound to
see: It is otherwise with our impotency to believing. Besides, he that is
punished with the loss of his eyes, is sorrowful, and does heavily bear the
loss of the light. But man therefore does not believe, because he will not
believe, and this impotency is voluntary.

CHAP. XII.
That God does save those whom of his mere grace he chose out of mankind
corrupted and obnoxious to the curse. What Predestination is: The parts of it.
That Arminius did not understand what the decree of Predestination is, and that
he has utterly taken away Election.
I SEeing that by one man, sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and
all men, without exception, are borne guilty of the curse; it is certain, that
that no man can be freed from the curse, but by the mere grace and favor of
God: This grace he has revealed to us in Christ, without whom there is no
salvation: For he put on our nature, that by this means of his coming
between, and as it were by this knot, man might be joined with God; and he
suffered death that he might satisfy for our sins, and so, reconciliation
being made, we might be restored to the title and degree of the sons of God.

II. This benefit, and saving grace, God does declare to us by the Gospel,
wherein that covenant of free grace, whereof Christ is the mediator and
foundation, is propounded.

III. By this Gospel, eternal life is promised to those that believe in
Christ: For as there is no salvation without Christ; so without faith, Christ
cannot be apprehended, nor can we come to the salvation appointed only for the
faithful: For as the Apostle says, Heb. 11, Without faith it is impossible to
please God: I call faith, not that vain trust whereby men sleep in their
vices, and their consciences are benumbed, while they have a good hope of the
mercy of God; but a lively faith, which does work by charity, Gal. 5.6. which
by that very means does increase love, because it drives away fear.

IV. This faith man has not of himself, neither is it a thing of man's free
will, but the gift of God, and the effect of the Holy Ghost, who does draw men
by a powerful calling, and does seal in men's hearts, and deeply, impresse in
their consciences the promises of God, propounded in the Gospel.

V. All men have not this faith, as the Apostie says, 2. These. 3. for then all
men should be converted and saved, but only they whom Paul says, are called
by the purpose of God. Romans 8.28. and whom God of his mere (...).
good pleasure has chosen to salvation.

VI. Faith is given by the mere good pleasure of God, neither is it given to
the worthy, but it does make them worthy when it is given: For God does not
find men good, but makes them so; neither does he foreknow any good in man but,
that which he himself shall do: as hereafter shall more fully be taught.

VII. This eternal, and therefore immutable decree of God, is called
Predestination; which is a part of the providence of God: For providence is
called Predestination, when it does apply it self to the salvation or
condemnation of the reasonable creature; and when it does dispense and dispose
the means, by which men come to salvation; for that these things are governed
by the divine will, and that God according to his good pleasure does give to
some, that which he does deny to others, cannot be doubted: For though the
Scripture were here silent, yet reason would cry out, that it is not likely,
that God, who does extend his care to all things, is negligent in this thing
alone, which is the chiefest.

VIII. Furthermore, although there be a Predestination among the Angels, as
Saint Paul witnesses, who 1. Tim. 5.21. calls the Angels Flect: Here we are
to deal only with the predestination of men, as that which alone belongs to
us.

IX. Predestination is therefore the decree, by which in the work of our
salvation, God has from eternity determined what he will do with every man.
Or thus: Predestination is the decree of God, by which, of the corrupted mass
of mankind, he has decreed to save certain men by Christ, and justly to
punish the rest for their sins.

X. Of this Predestination there are two parts; the one is election, the other
is reprobation, whereof the first does necessarily lay down the second: For,
as often as some are chosen out of many, the rest are necessarily reprobated:
and of them that are chosen, some are preferred before others.

XI. Of election, and of the Elect, there is often mention in the Scripture.
Many are called, but few are chosen. Math. 20.16. God has chosen us in Christ,
before the foundations of the world were laid. Ephesians. 1.4. The purpose of God
according to election does stand, not of works, but of him that calls. Romans
9.11. There is a remnant according to the election of grace. Romans 11.5. False
Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show signs and wonders to
seduce, if it were possible, even the elect. Mark. 13.22.

XII. On the other side, that some are reprobates, the Scripture does witness,
1. Pet. 2.8. Which stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they
were appointed. And Jude, v. 4. Certain men are crept in, (...), who were
before of old ordained to this condemnation. Hitherto belongs that which is
said Revel. 20.15. That there is cast into the lake of fire, whosoever is not
sound written in the book of life: Which book is nothing else, but the
Catalogue of the Elect, determined by the decree of God.

XIII. We have Jacob and Esau for a notable example of this difference, of whom
whilst they were yet shut up in the womb, before they had done either good or
evil, God does pronounce, I have loved lacob; I have hated Esau, Romans 9. Also
the two Thieves crucified with Christ, Two shall be in a bed, the one shall be
received, and the other left, Luke 17.34. Not much unlike that which happened
to Pharaohs Butler, and his chief Baker, who being shut up in the same prison,
the one was brought forth to honor, the other to punishment.

XIV. An example of this difference God has showed, not only in Abraham, but
also in his stock, which for no desert of theirs, he preferred before other
Nations, When the most high divided to the Nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam, the Londs portion was his people, Jacob was the
lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. And least any one should suppose that that
was done for the virtue of that people foreseen; he thus speaks to his
people: Understand therefore, that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good
Land to possess it, for thy righteousness, for thou art a stiff-necked
people, Deuteronomy. 9.6.

XV. And although Predestination does comprehend reprobation; seeing that it is
certain, that the wicked are appointed to a certain end, and to their
deserved punishments: yet the Apostle, by the word Predestination, does
understand only Election, as Romans 8. Those that he predestined, he called,
etc. And Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us to the adoption of children.
Thomas, imitating this manner of speaking, does thus define Predestination. 1.
Part. Sum. Quest. 23. Art 2. Predestination is the preparation to grace in the
present, and to glory in the world to come.

XVI. But when concerning this doctrine, diverse men think diversely; yet
Arminius alone has attained the nature of Predestination less then any other,
and does greatly stumble in the very entrance. He in his Theological
disputations. Disp. 13. The. 3. says, that the genus and general of
Predestination is the decree, and that (says he) not the legal decree,
according to which it is said, the man that does them shall live in them: but
the Evangelical decree, which speaks thus: This is the will of God, that
every one that sees the son and believes in him, should have life eternal
And all the Arminians following him, do comprehend the whole doctrine of
Predestination in four decrees: The first they will have to be that, whereby
God decreed to send his son to redeem mankind: The second, that whereby he
decreed to give eternal life to them that believe: The third, that, whereby he
decreed to give all men grace, and sufficient power to believe: The fourth,
that, whereby he decreed to give salvation to these, and they particular men
whom he fore-knew would believe, and would persevere in the faith; and as the
linkes of a Chain, they so knit these that the latter decrees depend on the
former, and by the former, the way is to the latter.

XVII. By these things it is plain, that Arminius did not understand what the
decree of Predestination was: For the decree of Predestination is that, whereby
God has appointed what he will do with us, and not what he would have us do:
Untowardly therefore does Arminius place, among the decrees of God, that will
of God, whereby he has appointed those to be saved, who shall believe, seeing
that in this will the commandment of God is included: Arminius himself in the
same place does comprehend Predestination under providence, and does make
predestination a species, or part of providence: If therefore that speech, he
that believes, shall be saved, is not the decree of providence, certainly it
will not be the decree of predestination; seeing Predestination is no other
thing then providence, restrained to the salvation or reprobation of men. This
does plainly appear from thence, that Arminius does oppose this decree, which
he calls Evangelical, to the legal decree, by which it is said, He that shall
do these things, shall live in them; which is manifestly, not the decree of
providence, but the rule of justice: And if not this, then certainly not the
other, seeing the rules of the Gospel do no more belong to the providence of
God, and therefore not to predestination, then the rules of the Law.

XVIII. Therefore of those four decrees, the second is to be wiped out, and a
place to be appointed for it in the doctrine of the Gospel, and not in the
eternal decree and secret predestmation. And so of those four linkes, the
second being taken away, the whole chain is broken, and as it were, one pin
being drawn out, the whole joining together of that frame is loosed and
dissolved.

XIX. Nay what? that Arminius does altogether overthrow Election, and make it
to be a thing only of name? Arnold. p. 17^. Dicitis Des soli motum esse qui
nam and quot sint elects: sed numerumtamenstatuitis certis esset and ex
praecisa Dei ordinatione determinatum qui nec angeriposs^t, nec m^nui idqu^
ex^^dem ordinatione Long^ vero aliter Enangelium Idem ai^ Greuinchou^^s in
prae^atione.
For he does deny, that the number of the Elect is determined by the decree of
God; whence it comes to pass, that no man at all is elected: For if the
salvation of several men, were determined by the decree of God, it would also
be determined, that this or that man were of the number, and so of several
men, the whole sum would be certainly and determinately finished: But if the
number of the elect, be not fore-determined, by the certain decree of God, the
Book of life containing the number of them that are to be saved, Revel. 20.
and the number of the brethren not yet fulfilled, Revel. 6.11. and whatsoever
the Scripture says of the sheep that were given to Christ, even before their
conu^rsion, must needs vanish away.

XX. And when Arminius will have all men to be elected by a conditional
election; that is, so they will believe, and by their free will, rightly use
the grace which is offered them: he does lay down an election which is not an
election, because it is equally extended to all: He does not elect, that does
not prefer some before others. What? that by this general election, Simon
Magus and Simon Peter were equally elected? and the election is extended to
Judas and Pharaoh.

XXI. But that is the most dangerous that Arminius does make the election of
several men to come after faith, and so does make the election of God to
depend on man's free will: Whence it comes to pass, that the salvation of man
is a thing merely contingent and not necessary, because it depends upon a
thing that is contingent and mutable, to wit, upon man's will. For although God
does certainly foreknow those contingent casual things, which are to be
after; yet is not therefore the election or salvation of man necessary, for a
thing is not therefore certain, because it is certainly fore-knowne. And
because election, is not an act of the foreknowledge of God, but of his will;
the execution whereof (if we may give credit to Arminius) does depend on the
fulfilling of the condition, which may be hindered by man: For the School and
followers of Arminius, are of opinion, that every man has power of believing,
and that God is bound to give to all men power of fulfilling the condition of
the second covenant, Arnold. p. 262. in Tilen.
and that the grace of God is but the cause in part of faith, and that it is
not begot in man by the grace of God alone.

XXII. So while the Arminians will have every particular person to be elected
by God, for faith foreseen; that is, that they are certainly appointed to
salvation whom God fore-seeth will come, when they shall be called, and will
persevere, they do plainly deny them to be elected: For to receive all that
come, is not to elect or choose; for although the Arminians will have both
precedent and concomitant grace to be given by God, yet they will have it in
the power of man's free will, to refuse grace, or not to refuse it. Surely
Arminius would have God to predestinate those to salvation, whom he from
eternity foresaw would by their own free will use aright his grace. But I
deny that this can be called Election, seeing it is rather a decree of
admitting those that will come to Christ, when they might not come: who (if
Arminius doctrine get place) do first choose God and apply themselves to him,
before they be appointed to sa^uation by God.

XXIII. I let pass, that Arminius will have particular men so to be elected
for faith foreseen, that they belong to the election, not whom he has
decreed, but whom he has foreseen will persevere in the faith until death.
Whence it comes, that God electeth none, unless he be considered as dead, or
else in the very point between life and death; which if it be true, Arminius
does say amiss, when he says, that believers are elected: for he should say,
that they are elected, who cease to believe.

XXIV. Add to this, that new and prodigious opinion of the Arminians, whereby
they think that reprobates may be saved, and those which are elect may be
damned, not as they are the reprobate or the elect, but as they are endued with
power to believe, and to come to salvation. But if he which is a reprobate by
the decree of God, may be saved, and he which is elected may be damned, it is
plain, that Predestination is not the decree of God, but a thing only in
title, and a floting will, or mere and bare foreknowledge; the certainty
whereof does depend upon the foreseeing of an uncertain thing, to wit, man's
free will. Who, I pray, would endure a man speaking thus? I am indeed a
reprobate, but I can effect that I should be saved; or, I am elected, but it is
in my power to effect that I should be reprobated.

XXV. If therefore the certainty of election should be made to depend upon man's
will, it might come to pass, that no man should believe in Christ, and so
Christ had died in vain.

XXVI. See Sect. 16.
But by that series and order of the four decrees, whereby Christ is appointed
to death, before God had determined who should be saved; Christ is made the
head of the Church, without any certain members, which is mere dotage: For
Christ is fained to be given to be the head of the Church, without the certain
will of God, what should afterward be his body. Yea, by the doctrine of the
Arminians, it may come to pass, that Christ should be a head without a body,
and the Church should be none at all, for they think that there is none of the
elect which may not be damned.

XXVII. This also is not to be omitted, that the Arminians, to the end they
might maintain that concatenation, or linking together of the four decrees,
do affirm, that Christ died, not for the faithful, but for all men
indistinctly; not more for Peter, then for Judas; and that Christ in his death,
had not determined whom he would save by his death; yea, that when Christ dyed,
election had no place, because election is a thing after the death of Christ.

XXVIII. The example of Caiaphas and of Judas, is here of special weight: For
by the doctrine of Arminius, God electeth all men under this condition, that
they believe in the death of Christ. I demand therefore, whether God chose
Caiaphas and Judas to salvation, under this condition, that they should believe
in the death of Christ? This surely cannot be said; because God had decreed to
use the wickedness of Caiaphas and Judas to deliver Christ to death. How could
they be elected to salvation, under the cond tion of believing in the death of
Christ, who were appointed to that very thing, that by their incredu^ity and
wickedness, Christ might be delivered to death? But we only touch these
things coursarily and by the way, they are to be expounded more exactly in
their place.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the object of Predestination, that is, whether God predestinating,
considers a man as fallen, or as not fallen.
ALthough God has elected to salvation, these men rather then others, for no
other cause, then that it so seemed good to him, nor is the cause of this
difference to be sought in man; yet what is the object of Predestination, that
is, whether God electing or reprobating men, has considered them as fallen and
sinners, or as not fallen, but as men in the Mass, not corrupted, it may be
doubted. The Pastors of the Valacrian Churches, strong maintainers of the
truth, in their most exact Epistle, the copy whereof they have sent to us, do
profess that they think that God considered those men which he did elect,
and which he did pass by, as fallen in Adam, and dead in sins: All the
anciens think so, to none of whom (as far as I know) it ever came in their
mind to say that God reprobated men without the beholding of sin. I see that
of the same opinion is Calvin, Zanchy, Melanchton, Bucer, Musculus, Pareus,
famous lights in this age of the Church, out of whose writings, I have added
some gathered sentences at the end of this work, least they should stay the
hastening reader, and should break off the thread of the disputation begun
against the Arminians: The confession of the churches of France does keep it
self within these limits, in the twelth Article, where out of the ninth
Chapter to the Romans, and other places of Scripture, Election and Reprobation
is proved to be out of the corrupt mass. The reverend Synod of Dordt (then
which for many ages there has been none more famous, nor more holy) harh
allowed this opinion: I do not see what can be opposed to so great authority.
A holy assembly gathered together out of diverse parts of the Christian world,
has prudently seen and discerned, that this opinion is not only more modest,
and more safe, but also that it is most fit to put back the objections of these
innouators, which do impudently triumph in this matter: Thus are their frames
dissolved, and their sinnewes are cut from them; for Reprobation without the
beholding of sin being taken away, which they assail with all their forces,
they beat the air, neither have they any thing that they should strike at:
the causes by which our confession, and also the reverend Synod is led, that
they thought it fit for them to rest in the Predestination, wherein man is
considered as fallen, I suppose be these.

I. First, that Phrase of Scripture which calls the Elect, the vessels of
mercy, offers it self: Now there is no place for mercy unless toward the
miserable. He cannot be elected to the salvation, to be obtained by Christ,
unless he be considered as one that has need of a redeemer: And seeing that
the appointment to an end, does include the means by which that end is come
by, and the means to salvation is the remission of sins, nor is there
remission of sins without sin, it is plain that they are appointed to
salvation, who are considered as sinners.

II. Neither could God, with the preservation of his justice, punish those men
whom he considered without sin, for God does not punish the guiltles: Damnation
is an act of the justice of God, which justice cannot stand, or agree with it
self, if innocent man for no fault be appointed to that desertion, and
forsaking, which eternal destruction must necessarily follow; or if God had
determined to destroy men, before he did determine to create them.

III. Then as God does not condemn, unless it be for sin; so it is certain
that he is not willing to condemn, unless it be for sin: But to reprobate
men, and to be willing to condemn, are the same thing, even as to elect and to
be willing to save, is the same thing: Therefore God does not reprobate unless
it be for sin.

IV. Furthermore it cannot be denied, but that reprobation or reiection of the
creature from God, is the punishment which can be inflicted on the reasonable
creature, because eternal torments do necessarily follow it, which if we get
to be granted; it will thence follow, that it is not the part of infinite
goodness and highest justice to forsake his own creature, and that not
because he has sinned, but because it so seemed good to God, that he might
seek matter for his glory out of the desertion, and forsaking of the soul
which he created. Can the father, who knows that the happiness of his son
depends on him, without the crime of cruelty, and want of natural affection,
forsake his sonue that is innocent, and found guilty of no wickedness,
especially if by this forsaking, his son should fall into eternal torments,
and by it be made not only most miserable, but also most wicked?

V. Neither should God deal justly, if he should give more evil to the
creature, by infinite parts, then he has given good: To which, when he had
given esse, a being, a while after, without any fault of it, he gave it, male
esse, an evil and miserable being, for ever. Indeed if God should only take
away that he has given, and should bring the creature to nothing, there were
no cause at all of complaining: But to give an infinite evil to that creature,
to whom he gave a finite good, and to create man to that end only that he
might destroy him, that out of this destruction he might get glory to himself,
the goodness and justice of God abhors.

VI. Yet this is the most grievous thing, that by this, either reprobation or
desertion of man, being considered without sin, the innocent is made not
only most miserable, but even most wicked: For the auersion and turning away
of the will, does necessarily follow the denying of the spirit of God; and
seeing according to this opinion, God hated man, that was made by him, before
man hated God, it cannot come to pass, but that the hatred of God, whereby he
hates man, by the same opinion, should be made the cause of that hatred whereby
man hates God, and so God should be made the author of sin.

VII. And if God hated Esau, being considered in the incorruptible mass, as
not a sinner, it must needs be, that God hates the innocent creature; and
hatred in God, although it is not an humane affection, nor a perturbation, yet
it is a sure and certain will of punishing, and punishment cannot be just, if
it be without offense; neither can a man be justly punished, unless he be
considered as a sinner.

VIII. If any man should say that God is obnoxious, or subject to no laws, and
therefore his actions are not rightly examined, according to the rule of
justice, seeing he is tied to no rules: I will anfwere, that the nature of
God, is more mighty then any law: That natural perfection, by which it is
impossible that God should lie, or that he should sin; is also the cause, why
he could not hate his guiltless creature, or appoint man to eternal torments,
for no fault of his: Yea if these things were true, it were the part of a wise
man to suppress these things, not to move this anagyris or offensive matter,
and rather to command silence or ignorance to themselves, then to break into
these secrets, which being declared, do cast in scruples and doubts, and yield
occasion to the adversaries, of defaming the true religion, and by which, no
man is made fitter to the duties of a Christian, or of a civil man, or to any
part of piety.

IX. That could not escape which should say, that by reprobation, men are not
appointed to damnation, but only are passed by, or not elected, Thus they
seek gentler words, that by them the same thing might be said; for it is all
one, whether God does appoint a man to damnation, or does that, from which
damnation must necessarily follow. Whosoever God does not elect, whether he be
said to be omitted and passed by, or to be reprobated, he is always excluded
from the grace of God, damnation does certainly follow this excluding; because
without the grace of election, there is no salvation. For seeing it is manifest
to all, that men by election, are appointed to salvation, I would have it told
me, to what they that are not elected, but passed by, are appointed: Surely if
election does appoint men to salvation, it is plain, that by reprobation,
which is called omission or passing by, the rest are excluded from salvation,
and appointed to destruction.

X. And if God have appointed the innocent creature to destruction, it must
needs be, that he has appointed it to sin, without which, there can be no
just destruction, and so God would be the impulsive and moving cause of sin:
Neither could man justly be punished for that sin, to which he is either
precisely appointed, or compelled by the will of God.

XI. That the decrees of God are eternal, and that he has fore-knowne all
things from eternity, does not hinder this opinion, which does maintain, God
in election and reprobation, to have considered man as fallen, before he
considered him as condemned: For although the decrees of God are certain, yet
there is some order among them; as the eternal decree of overthrowing the
world by fire, was in order after the decree of creating the world: So although
God, from eternity, had appointed the wicked to punishment, yet nothing hinders
but that the consideration, whereby he considered men as sinners, should be in
order before that whereby he considered men as reprobate, or appointed to
punishment.

XII. Neither does it follow of the opinion of the reverend Synod, and the
confession of our Churches, by which man fallen is the object of
predestination, that God created man to an uncertain end, or to have missed of
that end which he propounded to himself. The last end, propounded to God, was
the illustration, and setting forth of his glory, by the manifestation of his
goodness and justice; that he might come to this end, he decreed to create
man just, but mutable and free: The foreknowledge of the fall of man does
follow this decree, not in time, but in order, and election and reprobation
does in order follow this foreknowledge.

XIII. They are very far from the truth, which would have God, in electing
and reprobating, to have considered man as not created; for they do as much as
if they should say, that God considered man as nothing, and therefore as not
man. Surely in that very thing, that they call him a man, they call him
somewhat; but to consider something as nothing is a thing well-nigh a dream:
He that will save or punish a man, must necessarily, first have willed him to
be a man: For if God had appointed man to punishment before he had appointed to
create him, he should so do, as if any one should determine to beat his
children, before he has determined to beget them.

XIV. Finally, seeing the first act of his omnipotency was busied about
nothing, it must need, be that it went before the act of his mercy or justice,
which cannot be busied but about something that has being.

XV. They say the same thing in other words, which would have God in
predestinating to have considered man, as one that might be created and might
fail: For he which says he might be created, says he was not yet created; and
he that says he might fall, says that he had not fallen, but that to other
inconveniences, they add this increase, that they put a power and potentiall
faculty in that thing which is nothing In God indeed there was the active
power of creating the world, before he created it: But there was not in the
world the passive power for creating, before it was created: So neither could
there be power for the creation, or for the fall, in man being not created, and
it is plainly contrary to reason, that of him which is not, it should be said
that he may fall. Then also if God elected man that might be created, what does
hinder that it may not be said, that he elected some whom he never would
create? For these also may be created; but if God elected those whom he
presupposed he would create, the will of creating must needs go before the
election.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Apostle Saint Paul, in the ninth to the Romans, by the word Mass,
understood the corrupted Mass.
I. SAint Paul keeps himself within these limits, in the ninth chapter to the
Romans, where he speaks more fully, and more exactly of the election and
reprobation, then any where else. For if he had written with a beam of the
Sun, it could not more clearly appear, that he speaks of the corrupted
mass, and of the will of God, by which of sinful men, one is chosen, and the
other reprobated.

II. The scope of the Apostle, is to beat back the vain confidence of the
Jews, who boasted in the law, and in the righteousness of their works, to
whom it did seem an absurd and impossible thing that the Israelites, or the
greater part of them, fell from the covenant of God, and were not reckoned
among the sons of God. That he might pull this scruple out of their minds,
and might wash away this pride; he fetches the matter from the very original,
and does deny that carnal propagation, or the righteousness of works, is the
cause why any one is to be reckoned the son of Abraham, but the good pleasure
of God, and the free election of grace, by which God, of the issue of Abraham,
chose whom he would, and whom he would he rejected; has mercy of whom he
would, and whom he would he hardened: and of the same mass, has prepared some
vessels for honor, and has patiently endured the vessels prepared for
destruction. To which purpose he brings two pair of examples, Isaac and
Ishmaell, Jacob and Esau; and he does lay down Isaac and Jacob, as sons of
the promise, and examples of the free election of grace; but Ishmaell and Esau,
as examples of reiection: And he does seem of purpose to add the example of
Esau and Jacob for a prolepsis, or prevention of an objection. For the Jews
might except, that therefore the difference was between Isaac and Ishmaell,
because the one was of the servant, the other of the free woman: Then also
because when Isaac was borne, Ishmael already had showed the signs of an evil
disposition, and had done those things, for which he ought to be excluded from
the covenant. The Apostle does fitly prevent this objection, by the example of
Jacob and Esau, who both were the sons of the free woman, and neither of them
had done any good or evil, yet God loved the one, and hated the other.

III. All these things are brought by the Apostle, that he might teach in what
respect God chose some of the Jews, and reprobated others, although they were
puffed up with the opinion of legal righteousness: This nation seeing it was
impure and corrupt, it could not be compared to the pure mass: And the Apostle
should plainly speak besides the matter if he should use the example of the
undefiled mass, to teach how God out of a corrupted nation chose some, and
reprobated others.

IV. The examples of Jacob and Esau do convince and prove the same thing, of
whom, when they were in the womb, and had done neither good nor evil, God
does pronounce, that he loved Jacob, that he hated Esau. Now God could not
consider these twins in the womb, but he must consider them such as they were:
and they were corrupted and defiled with original sin. Surely he cannot be
said to be preferred before the other, because he was better when he was in the
womb, seeing neither of them had done good or evil. This is that with which S.
Paul does stop the mouth of these questionists, and will not have any to plead
against God, or answer him again; seeing there is no cause but the mere good
pleasure of God, why, of two that were equally evil, he preferred the one
before the other.

V. Neither is there any small force in these words; I have hated: for God
could not hate the creature whom he considered as pure and void of sin.

VI. It is no light thing that he so describes the elect, to wit, that they
are they whom God will have mercy on. ver. 18. whence also, ver. 23. they are
called the vessels of mercy: for mercy presupposes misery. They force the
words of the Apostle, who by misereri, to have mercy, understand simply
benefacere, to do well. I should doubt and make conscience to affirm, that
God had had mercy on Christ as man, on whom yet he has bestowed more gifts,
then on any other creature.

VII. There is great weight also in the word hardening: he hardneth (says the
Apostle) whom he will. As by those on whom God will have mercy, the Elect are
understood; so by them that are hardened, the reprobate are understood: And to
think that God determined to harden that man, whom he considers as pure,
and as in the incorrupted estate, is great wickedness, and contumelious
against the justice of God: By this means God should not only punish the
innocent, but also deprave and corrupt the guiltless. For obduration and
hardening is a species and kind of punishment, and therefore after sin; God
hardneth none, but he who is already hard; so he hardened Pharaoh, he being
already stubborn, and prone to rebel of his own disposition.

VIII. Neither is there need of much wit to perceive, that Pharaoh is no fit
example of reprobation, out of the incorrupted Mass, and of a man considered
without sin.

IX. It is also greatly to be observed, that the Apostle speaking of
reprobates, does say that they are vessels, (...), fitted, or prepared, to
destruction: He does not say, that God prepared or sitted them, least he should
seem to say that God put sin in them, by which they might be prepared to
destruction; but when he speaks of the elect, having turned his speech,
says, that God prepared them for glory, which God does, by giving them the
spirit, and faith. It is not without consideration that the Apostle would not
after the same manner speak in both places, viz. because God found some
vessels fitted to destruction, but made others vessels appointed to glory, and
that by having mercy on them.

X. Saint Austen is express to this purpose: For in six hundred places,
either explaning or touching this place of Saint Paul, he does understand by
the name Mass, the Mass corrupted and polluted with sin. So Epist. 105.
Because that whole Mass is justly condemned, justice has given that contumely
and disgrace that is due, and grace does give that honor which is not due: and
in the same Epistle, The universal Mass is justly condemned of sin: and a
little after, If they are the vessels of wrath, which are made for that
destruction which is du^ly given to them, let them impute this to themselves;
because they are made of that Mass, which for the sin of one man, is justly
and deservedly condemned of God. He does repeat the same thing, Epist. 106.
and Encherid. cap. 98 99. and 107. where he calls it the Mass of
destruction: See also the 2. lib. against the two Epistles of the Pelagians,
cap. 7. and lib. 5. against Julian, cap. 3. Neither did ever any among the
ancient, think that Paul speaks of the sound, and not corrupted Mass.

CHAP. XV.
That Arminius does willingly darken the words of the Apostle, which are clear
and express.
ARminius with a careful subtilty, but with an unhappy success, has written
a Treatise upon the ninth Chapter to the Romans; for he does torment the
Apostle, and does, as it were with wracks, draw from him against his will, what
things he thinks may make for the patronage of his error of Election for faith
foreseen.

I. He faines that the Apostles mind is to teach, that they only of the Jews
were to be reckoned the sons of Abraham, who letting pass justification by
the law, do follow after righteousness and faith; and the purpose, according
to Election, he denies to be the decree of the election of several men, but
the general and condition all decree of saving all, who were to believe: By
which decree Arminius will have all men to be elected conditionally, which
surely is no election, seeing election is not, but of several men, who are
chosen out of the multitude, others being rejected.

II. I confess indeed, that the doctrine of election by free grace, does make
the way to the doctrine of righteousness, by faith; yet all this dispute of
Saint Paul concerning election, which reaches from the sixth verse to the
thirteenth, does not deal of justification by faith, neither would the Apostle
prove in this place, that man is justified by faith, or that God does elect
those which apprehend Christ by faith: But by the doctrine of election, does
frame to himself an entrance, to the treatise of justification by faith, which
afterward he adds. He would here prove this one thing, that man is not
truly the son of the promise by the works of the law, but by the election
of free grace, and by the mercy of God; for it is manifest, that here works
are not opposed to faith, but to election, and to God calling. So Verse the 11.
he does not say, not by works, but by faith; but he says, not by works, but
by him that calls. So Verse 16. when he had said, It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs; he does not add, but of him that believes:
What then? but of God that shows mercy.

III. For when it is spoken of the cause, why, of two that are equally
conceived in sin (such as were Esau and Jacob,) God should prefer the one
before the other, the only mercy of God, and the election by grace, is to be
considered, and not faith, which is not the cause, but the effect of our
election, neither does it go before election, but follows it. So Saint Paul
1 Cor. 7.25. says, that he obtained mercy from God to be faithful, and not
because he was after to be so. Wherefore Saint Paul in all this speech wherein
he speaks of the cause of the difference which God makes between two that
were by nature alike, makes no mention of faith: But this Treatise being
finished, he does descend, verse 30. to the righteousness of faith, as to the
fruit which does follow election.

IV. But Arminius for the safeguard of his cause, does change the words of Saint
Paul, and does thrust in something of his own: Page 27.
For in the place of that which Saint Paul says, not of works, but of him
that calls, he does substitute these his words, feigned by himself; not of
work, but of faith, whereby God calling should be obeyed: when notwithstanding
in all that disputation which deals concerning election, there is no mention
made of faith, neither does the least step thereof appear.

V. It is marvelous, how much Arminius does abuse the examples of Isaac and
Ishmael, and also of Jacob and Esau: He does contend, that they are here
propounded, not as examples, but as types of them who followed after
righteousness by works, not by faith. Certainly there must be some agreement
between the type, and the thing signified by the type. But who ever heard it
said, that Ishmael would have been justified by the works of the Law, and not
by faith? seeing at that time the law was not given, neither were these
differences of justification by the law, and by faith known; neither is it
credible, that Ishmael ever thought of or regarded these things: Therefore
Arminius does as much as if Nimrod should be made a type of the Pharisaicall
righteousness. Can the night be a type of the light? or can Esau, whom the
Apostle, Heb. 12.16. calls profane, and therefore also a despiser of the
Law, be a type of them, who being set on fire with the zeal of the Law, would
be justified by their works? But it is worth the labor to here, why he would
have Esau be a type of the sons of the flesh, and of them which aff^ct
right^ousnesse by works. Because (says he) he was first borne. O acutely
spoken! He should have said, because he was red, or because he was a hunter: I
am ashamed to refute these things; and yet in these figments and forgeries, the
good man does place the chief safeguard of his doctrine of election, for faith
foreseen.

VI. Then also see how licentiously he mookes the Apostle: For when he lays
down Ishmael and Esau, not as examples of re^ection, by the secret counse^l of
God, but as a type, having no agreement with the thing signified; he does so
use these names, as Logi^ians use Socrates, or Lawyers Titius and Maeuius, for
any other man.

VII. But if we exactly weigh, what it is to have hated man, being yet in the
womb, before he has done good or evil; we shall easily see, that Esau is
not only laid down h^re as a type, but also as an example, to whom indeed
these things agreed, although he were not used for a type: For Malachy, from
whence these words are taken, does not lay down Esau as a type, but as an
example.

But how that which is said, that God hated Esau, being yet in the womb,
before he had committed any cuill, may be drawn to Arminius his purpose, and
belong to the type of those who will be justified by faith, he has seen,
surely I do not see.

VIII. Paul adds, What shall we say then? is there unrighteousness with God?
The sense is plain, and depending on those things that went before* He had
laid down two twins of like condition and nature, neither better then the
other, whereof yet God loves the one, and hates the other, and had brought the
mere will of God, who has mercy on whom he will, to be the cause of this
difference, and not the foreseeing of any virtue in the one. Hence is bred an
objection: whether God be unjust, who gives unlike things to them that are
alike; and why he has not mercy on both? What says Arminius here? Why, he
takes these things, as if Paul demanded whether there is injustice with God,
who excludes those from the covenant, who would be justified by the Law, which
he himself made, and who would have them that believe in Christ, to be
justified. This is a bold conjecture, whereof there is no step nor mention in
that which went before. But if it be lawful for any one to mingle and add to
the Scripture so many things out of his own wit, there is nothing so absurd or
impious, which may not be proved out of the Scripture. What? that there is no
color nor reason for this here? for what show is there here of injustice in
God? or who is so mad that he will expostulare with God, because he will
justify by faith in Christ, and obsolue them that are guilty of the breach of
the law? Truly whosoener does marvel or demand, why it seems good to God to
save sinners by faith in Christ, does not require justice in God, but does
peer into the secrets of Gods wisdom. And if this had been the Apostles
mind, which Arminius does feign to him, it had been easy to answer, that
God is not therefore unjust, who does save them that believe, and does supply a
better righteousness, to them who cannot be justified by the Law, of the breach
whereof they are guilty; or in place of the covenant of the law, which by sin
is made void, does set another, by which man might be saved. Saint Paul
answers no such thing, but does bring in God himself, answering thus; I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion: which words, do not speak of justification by faith, but of
the free election of God, whereby of two men alike conceived in sin, and
alike guilty, one is preferred before the other: Saint Paul does not say, that
because the law is violated therefore there is need of mercy; but he does
bring the cause of this difference between those that are equal by nature; I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: According to Arminius, he should
have said, I will have mercy by what means I will and I will make such a
covenant as shall please my self. For he will have God not to speak of the
election of several men, but of the manner, which it pleases God to choose to
exercise his mercy: As if he had said, I will have mercy as I will; and not, I
will have mercy, cuius volo, on whom I will: Surely this word Cuius, of whom,
does put this question to flight, and does make dull the weak wit of Arminius:
for this word marketh out particular persons, and not the manner whereby God
does exercise his mercy toward them: For he that asked the question; What
shall we say then, is there injustice with God? moved the doubt concerning the
hardening and reiection of particular men, and not concerning the manner by
which it seemed good to God to save men, or to have mercy on them.

IX. And these words, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and, it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows
mercy: By which salvation and election, is expressly ascribed to the good
pleasure of God, Arminius does darken and obscure them; for he thus
interprets them: It is not of him that wills, that is, righteousness is
not: But in the former verses, it is not spoken of righteousness, but of
election: Also those words, I will have mercy, on whom I will have mercy, are
taken out of Exodus, Chap. 33. v, 19. Where it is spoken of salvation, not of
righteousness: But grant that it is here spoken of righteousness; will it not
hence follow that faith is not of him that wills, and therefore neither
salvation? for salvation is by righteousness, and righteousness is by faith.

X. The obstinacy and affected stupidity of these sectaries, does maruallously
bewray it self in one thing. Paul brings in the demander thus speaking, Why
does he yet complain? for who has resisted his will? By which words it does
manifestly appear, that in this Chapter it is spoken of the will of God, which
cannot be resisted, and that Arminius is willingly blind, while he affirms
that it is here spoken of the antecedent will of God, which he thinks may be
resisted.

XI. What? That Arminius does secretly accuse Saint Paul of stupid dullness, or
of preposterous and needelesse modesty: for what need was there in the
business of the election and reprobation of several persons, to stop the
mouth of demanders, by saying, O man, what art thou that reply against God?
seeing by the doctrine of Arminius, there is at hand an easy and ready
answer: That God elected this man, because he foresaw he would believe; and
he reprobated that man, because he foresaw he would not believe. Did not the
Apostle see these things? Or did he see them, but did envy to us the clear
solution of this knot, that might bring light to this darkness? The ignorance
of Paul shall be always better to me, then the sharp understanding of
another.

XII. Maruailous is the wit and ridiculous audacitie of Arnoldus Coruinus, in
expounding this chapter. He in his work against Tilenus, Chap 9. does thus
expound the type of Jacob and Es^u. Surely (says he) as there the younger was
preferred before the elder, so also it was figured, that salvation should not
be by the Law, although it was first given, but by faith. Surely if this man be
believed, the Law is the elder brother, and Faith the younger: Did God then hate
the law, before it had done good or evil? I am ashamed to confute these
things; for seeing God preached the Gospel to Adam himself, by the younger
brother, the law is rather to be understood: Perhaps by the elder, he would
have those to be understood, who would be justified by the law; but this is no
less difficult to conceive, how God hated them before they had done either
good or evil, and how they could be the elder, seeing they never were sons.

XII. Finally the truth is here so evident, that Vorstius having left Arminius,
C^llat. aduers. Piscat. sect. 141
does yield to our part: For he thinks that the scope of the Apostle in this
chapter is to teach, that righteousness, and eternal salvation does depend,
not on the dignity and worth of works, or any carnal prerogative, such as the
Jews boasted of, but on the mere (...).
good pleasure ^o God that has mercy.

CHAP. XVI.
The opinions of the parties upon the doctrine of Predestination.
I. WE have already said that predestination is the decree of God, by which, in
the work of our salvation, God has from eternity determined what he will do
with every particular man; and that there are two parts or species of it,
Election, and Reprobation.

II. Arminius, These. 15. Theolog. Disputa. understanding by the name of
Predestination, only election, does thus define it. Predestination is the
decree of Gods good pleasure in Christ, whereby from eternity he has
determined with himself, to justify, to adopt, and freely to reward with
eternal life, the faithful, to whom he has decreed to give faith, to the
praise of his glorious grace. All other his sectaries do with one mouth say,
that election is the decree of God, of saving those that believe in Christ, and
shall persevere in faith.

III. But here the Arminians do with a maruailous craft hide their mind and
meaning: For that definition laid down by Arminius does seem to teach, that
God chose some certain men to salvation: But it is otherwise, nor is this the
meaning of this difinition: for by these words, the faithful to whom he
decreed to give faith, they do not understand some certain men whom God has
precisely elected; but they only insinuate of what quality they are whom God
would elect, to wit, such as should beseeue: And they teach, that God is often
disappointed of that will by which he has decreed to give men faith, and that
he may be condemned whom God has so elected: Greuinch. p. 101 dicit. Hoc
decretum esse condits, onale de qusitbet si credat seruando.
For they deny that this decree is precise, but that it is conditional, and
which depend of faith foreseen; of which faith the grace of God is but a cause
in part, for free will has also a part here, in the power whereof it is to use
well or ill the preventing and accompanying grace of God, and either to
receive, or to refuse it: Therefore they make God, by this decree, seriously to
intend the salvation of all men, and to have determined to give them sufficient
grace and power to bele^ue: but that he is disappointed of this his decree and
intention in many, man's will hindering it, whereby it comes to pass that God is
deceived of his natural desire and first intention, which surely must needs
be the best. Coll. Hag. p. 96.
Least therefore any one should think, that by this decree of election, which
Arminius has defined, some certain men are appointed to life, it must be
observed, that this decree, according to the meaning of Arminius, does
conditionally belong to all men whatsoever, and that by this antecedent will,
Pharaoh and Judas, Arnold P. 192.
etc. are conditionally elected; wherefore the Arminians do deny that the
number of the elect is certain by the precise appointment of God, which can
neither be increased, nor be diminished.

IV. Observe also, that that definition laid down by Arminius, does not belong
to infants, which are taken away by an immature and unseasonable death; for the
Arminians will have only them that believe to be elected.

V. Besides this general and conditional election, by which all men without
exception are elected, they make another election of particular men, which does
rest and rely on faith foreseen. This they define to be the absolute decree
of God, of saving some certain men, whom he from eternity foresaw would
believe in Christ, and persevere in the faith, which faith and perseverance,
they say, is considered in the decree of election, as already fulfilled: The
same men are also of opinion, that this election, while we are pilgrims upon
earth, is incompleate, and reuocable: For so Greninchouius, P. 136.137. As the
good things of our salvation, which are continued, faith being continued, and
are revoked and called back, faith being denied, are incompleate; so election
is in this life incompleate, not peremptory, not irreuocable: But the course of
election being finished, they will have this decree then to be complete and
irreuocable.

VI. They will have the will of God, of saving some certain men, to be after
the will of man, and to depend upon the foreseeing of faith.

VII. They will have that first election to belong to the antecedent will, the
latter election to the consequent will.

VIII. That God does supply tomen the means to believe, they think it to be
the act of his providence, and not of this election, whereby he has appointed
some certain men to glory: and they deny true faith and perseverance in
faith, to be an effect of this latter and absolute election: seeing precise
election does rather depend on the foreseeing of that faith, and faith is
before election: For they deny that God has precisely predestined any one
to faith, but they will have it, that they that have faith are predestined to
salvation.

IX. They comprehend the whole doctrine of election in four decrees, which
they so knit among themselves with a perpetual linking, that the latter depend
on the former.

X. The 1. decree of God, is of giving his son for the abolishing of sin, and
for the redemption of al mankind, in which redemption, they would haueal
mankind to be reconciled, and remission of sins to be obtained for all. The 2.
decree, that whereby God decreed to save them that believe, and would persevere
in faith: This is that general and conditional election. The 3. decree, is
that whereby God decreed to give to all men sufficient grace for faith and
repentance: which power, they say, is given irresistably, yea; and that God is
bound to give all men this grace: But the very act of believing, they say, is
not given but resistably, least force should be offered to man's will. They
deny therefore that God decreed to give to any one precisely and absolutely
faith, and the act of believing. The 4. and last decree, they would have to be
that whereby God has precisely and absolutely decreed to save some certain
men, for their faith foreseen.

XI. These are the decrees of the Arminians, and this is the sum of their
whole doctrine, in the searching and viewing of which, the labor is not small,
they do so enwrap their meanings, they do so hide their minds, that there
always lies open some hole to escape by; whose meaning he that does not know,
will easily believe, they have wrong done them, they do so parget over their
error with beautiful colors, as if they were of the same opinion with us,
when they are very far distant from us: Then also if one in expounding their
opinion, has not expressed all, even their least distinctions, or has not
observed all their shifts, it cannot be said, what tragedies they stir up,
how miserably they complain, as it were, of force and grievous slanders, and
calumny: Being ready also to forswear Arminius, and themselves to pluck up
their own opinions, and to maintain the cause of the Papists, finally, to do
any thing so they may escape our hands.

XII. But we handle the matter more plainly, nor do we so laboriously, cut
the election of God into members: Neither do we prescribe an order to God, by
which he should have digested, or yet ought to digest his thoughts, and to
dispose his decrees. We acknowledge there is no general election, seeing there
is no election where nothing is left: And we acknowledge no election, unless
it be of several and particular persons, and that also to be precise and
determined by the purpose of God; neither do we think any to be elected, but
he that shall certainly and infallibly come to salvation: Nor do we believe
that we be elected from faith, or for faith, but unto faith. For God does not
elect those that are good, by any goodness which goes before election, but by
his election he will make them good: Nor does he foreknow any good in us, but
what he himself is to bring to pass; which is not to foresee, but
fore-ordaine: Neither do we make the election of particular persons, to
depend upon man's will: Yea, and we believe, that perseverance, and the
confirmation of man's will in faith does proceed from Gods free election of
grace, by which he decreed to give to them whom he appointed to an end, the
means to come to that end.

XV. We agree with the Arminians in this, that God, in electing, does consider
a man, not only as fallen, but as one that by his gift is to believe: for
those which he appointed to salvation, he appointed also to faith and
repentance; but we do not think, that in election, faith is considered as
accomplished; but as that which should be accomplished by the grace of God, and
which is the effect of our election; and that God does this not by compelling
the will, but by bowing it, and by granting that of its own accord it should
follow him, calling: Not by a force, which is therefore called irresistible,
because thou can not resist it although thou would, seeing this very thing
is a part of this grace, that thou shall not be willing to resist it: But that
God is bound to give his grace to men, we detest it, as an opinion
contumelious, and reproachful, against the maresty of God. Also we despise the
opinion of the Arminians, whereby they determine that God equally desires
salvation to all, as an opinion contrary to the Scripture and to experience.

XIV. We say that election is the eternal, and therefore immutable decree of
God, whereby out of mankind fallen and corrupted, God decreed of his own mere
grace, by Christ, to save some certain men, and to give them the means
whereby they might come to salvation.

XV. The decree of giving faith and repentance, we make to be a part of that
decree: For the decree concerning the end, includes, also the means; so the
decree of making war, does include, Horses, Arms, and provision; and the
will whereby any one has decreed to build, does necessarily include the will
of gathering together stones and timber: Neither do we think it safe to pull
asunder the counsels of God, and as it were, scrupulously to cut them into
pieces.

CHAP. XVII.
That the Arminians make foreseen faith the cause of the election of
particular persons.
I. THe Arminian conferrers at the Hage, and as many as are their sectaries, in
many places do profess, that they do not make faith the cause of Election,
but only a precedent condition, and some thing pre-required before Election.
These things they say only in word: For the same men, with very great
diligence, do heap up arguments, whereby it may be proved, that faith is the
cause of the election of particular persons. But oftentimes, there falls from
them, either unwilling or unawares, that which they endeavor to press down,
and as Rats, they are catched by bewraying themselves.

II. Nicholas Greuinchouius. page 103. does confess, that Arminius was of
opinion, that election inuiti.
did rest upon foreseen faith. The Remonstrants in the conference at the
Hage, p. 117. do use the same manner of speaking: And Arminius in the 47. page
of his declaration; The decree (says he) whereby God decreed to save some
certain men, does rest on the foreknowledge of God, whereby from eternity he
has known who will believe, etc. The Arminians, page 38. of their answer to
the Walachrians, have these words: We determine, that the foreseeing of faith
and infidelity, does in order go before the decree of predestination, and that
this decree does inniti.
rest on that former foreknowledge. Truly he is blind that does not see that
it is one thing to follow one, and another thing to rest on him: For if the
rising star does in order go before the following star, does therefore the
latter rest on the former? Arminius therefore does not lay down faith only as
an antecedent thing, but as something which does sustain election, in which it
is founded, and on which election does rest: And he does no less make election
depend upon faith; who says, that faith is the foundation, then he that says
that it is the cause of Election: for the cause gives to election that it
should be, the foundation gives to it, that it should stand and be firm:
Either way alike injury is done to God, whether you say, that some virtue which
is in man, is the cause of the good pleasure of God; or whether you say that
the good pleasure of God has his foundation from some virtue of man.

III. But by those words, they do not obseurely acknowledge, that foreseen
faith is the cause of election: for they will have the foreseeing of faith so
to go before election, as the foreseeing of incredulity, does in order go
before reprobation: But that the reprobates are appointed to condemnation, for
incredulity, and because they are unbelievers, they every where acknowledge.
And Arminius against Perkins. p. 86. does roundly affirm, that sin is the
meritorious cause of reprobation. So Arnoldus, p. 151. Election and reprobation
of particular persons were made in respect of the foresight of faith and
incredulity. Arnoldus; Can any suspect your fidelity, that you take the word,
ex, equiuocally, in reprobation, to note the cause, but in election to note the
condition? It must needs be therefore, that they acknowledge that the elect
are appointed to salvation for faith fore seen, because they believe, and that
foreseen faith is the cause of the election of particular persons.

IV. But there is no difference, whether you say that Election does rest on
faith foreseen, or that it does rest on the foreseeing of faith: for both
wares faith is made the cause of election, in the latter it is made the nearest
cause, in the former it is made the remote cause: for foreseen faith is made
the cause of foreseeing it, and the foreseeing it, is made the cause of
election: For why does God foreknow that they will believe, unless because
they will believe? and why does he elect, unless because he fore-knoweth they
will believe? These are the words of Arminius against Perkins. p. 142. In that
God fore-knowes, he therefore fore-knowes, because it will afterward be.

V. The same men a little after, against the Walachrians, do use (although
fearfully) the word depending, that they might make election depending on
faith: And although (say they) that word of depending, which we are never wont
to use in this argument, be (...), easily subject to calumny, yet if a
maleuolent mind be absent, it cannot be drawn to the least suspicion of any
absurdity. Yes, it may be drawn to the greatest: For Greuinchouius himself,
Page 198.
does acknowledge, that dependency, strictly taken, does argue causality, and
the dependency of a superior by an inferior. And truly these men do not
obscurely declare how willingly they would use this word, if they did not fear
our pursuit.

VI. There is extant a Treatise of Greuinchouius, with this Title, Of election
ex.
for faith fore seen: but that word, ex, from, or for, does not only note
priority, but also causality: For who would endure a man that should say, that
Tiberius was from Octauius Augustus? or that this year is from the former,
because one went before the other? A man that is not vnskiifull of the Latin,
does sufficiently know, that the praeposition ex, is not fit to note only the
priority of faith, unless besides the priority, there is also some efficiency
or dependency: Wherefore the same man, page 24. has these words: It is
altogether convenient to the nature of laws and prescribed conditions, that
the will of the Judge should be moved to give the reward, by the required and
performed condition. This performed condition, the Arminians say to be faith,
which (if we believe them) is considered in election, as performed: They will
therefore have God to be moved by this fulfilled condition, that he should give
the reward; which if it be true, faith is plainly the cause, both of decreeing
and giving the reward, because it is that which moves the Judge.

VII. So in the conference at the Hage, the Arminians do contend, that God
does not elect without respect of qualities; which thing is true, not only of
faith, but also of repentance, so it be taken thus; that God in electing,
considered men, as they that by his gift and bounty would believe and be
renewed in repentance. If you take this respecting otherwise, it must needs
be, that this respecting is the cause; for one is said to choose any thing in
respect of some quality or virtue, who by that quality or virtue, is moved to
choose it, otherwise he would not.

VIII. Nay what? That the Arminian conferrers at the Hage, p. 86. do use the
word Cause? (God sends his word whether it seems good to him, not according
to any absolute decree, but for other causes lying hid in man: Then is man the
cause why he is called: whence it comes, that he is the cause also that he is
elected. For that which is the cause, why God does call a man to salvation, is
plainly the cause why God will save him; for these are things connexed and
knit together. The same men, page 109. It is absurd to put the absolute will of
God in the decree of election, for the first and principal cause, that it
should go before the other causes, to wit, Christ, faith, and all other
causes. Here you hear that faith is put among the causes of election:
wherefore Arnoldus, page, 53. does leave it in the middle, whether faith ought
to be called the cause, or the condition; Whether (says he) faith should be
called the condition, or whether it should be called the cause, it always
being laid down for granted, that it is the gift of God, this alone is the
question, how faith has respect to election. And a little before he had said,
If any should say, that in the decree of election, faith has the respect of a
cause, yet he should not thereby deny that it is the gift of God: Not obscurely
insinuating how prone he was to that part, and perceived that he was not
rashly to be blamed, who has called faith the cause of our election.

IX. Add to these that Arnoldus, page 186. and the rest with him, do contend,
that faith is not of those that are elected, but that the election is of those
that are faithful. We truly out of Saint Paul to Titus, chap. 1. v: 1. say,
that faith is of the elect, which we so take, because election is the cause of
faith; to which our assertion, seeing they oppose theirs as contrary, whereby
they say that election is of them that are faithful; what else would they, but
have faith to be the cause of our election?

X. Let also the moment and force of their reasons be weighed and considered.
In the conference at the Hage, they profess, that they do not refuse to write
with great letters, and to subscribe, that election is made by Christ, without
any consideration of good works: And yet do the same men, even to loathing,
beat upon this, that Election is the decree of saving them that believe; that
there is no man elected by God, but in respect of faith. But I would know, why
they so earnestly exclude the consideration of works from election, seeing
that the earnest endeavor of good works is a condition no less fore-required
to salvation, then faith? Who by these things does not see, that faith is not
laid down by them, merely as a fore-required condition? For if faith were
thus considered by them; it is plain, that the study and endeavor of good
works, had been joined and placed in the same degree with faith.

XI. And if God electeth to salvation, not those whom he absolutely decreed,
but those whom he foresaw would believe; it is plain that God in election,
has respect to some dignity and worth which is in these, but not in them: But
it is not likely, that any wise man does choose the best men, for any other
cause, then because they are the best: For if the goodness of the faithful
do go before election, he should do very ill that should elect them for any
other cause, then because they are good.

XII. And certainly, whenever any thing is promised to a man, under a
condition, which is in the power of man's free will; it is plain, that the
fulfilling of the condition by man's free will, is the cause why the promise is
fulfilled; and the Arminians do contend, that God does give, yea, and that he
is bound to give grace and sufficient power to believe: but to use that grace,
or not to use it, is in the power of man's free will.

XIII. Neither is it a hard thing to draw from them that which I would have.
For let the School and followers of Arminius tell me, what moved God, by his
consequent will to choose Simon Peter, rather then Simon Magus? why Gregory
rather then Julian? They have nothing to answer, but that it was done, because
God foresaw faith in them, and incredulity in these. Therefore although they
should get it granted, that by their doctrine, foreseen faith is not made the
cause why God has appointed this man to salvation; yet they must needs
confess, that according to Arminius, foreseen faith is the cause of the
difference between the elect and the reprobate, and therefore the cause why
this man is preferred before the other; which surely is no other thing, then to
be the cause of election: For every election is comparatiue, and does infer
the reiection of one or more.

XIV. So when they deny, that by the will of God electing, the number of the
elect is certain and determined; it must needs be, that they would have man's
will to be the cause why the number is such a number, and so every man is the
cause why he is of the number of the elect, and therefore also the cause of
his own election.

XV. Although therefore they would have this suspicion removed from them, yet
they will never wipe out this blot, by which they are contumelious against God,
and do weaken the firmness and strength of faith: As they which make the
eternal election and good pleasure of God, to depend on man's free will; and
will have salvation to be of him that wills and of him that runs; and they
do place some worth and virtue in man, which is the cause why salvation in the
eternal counsel of God, is appointed to one, rather then to another: Whence
it comes, that faith does shake, and salvation is uncertain: as that which
although God does certainly foreknow, yet he does not certainly and
infallibly will it; for Election is not an act of the foreknowledge, but of
the will of God, and this will, how can it be certain, if it does depend on an
uncertain thing, to wit, on man's will? But these things by the way; for they
shall be more exactly examined in their place.

CHAP. XVIII.
The decree of general election is searched into, by which Arminius will have
all men to be elected to salvation, under the condition of faith.
I. WE have taught in the fifth Chapter, that the antecedent will of God, as
Arminius has received it after Damascen, is a mere forged devise, and a thing
contumelious against God. This foundation being taken away, that universal
election, common to all men, under the condition of faith to be performed, does
fall down: For this general election Arminius will have to belong to the
antecedent will of God.

II. Whereunto add those things which we have spoken, Chapter 12. where we
have dissolved, and unloosed the chain of the four decrees, in which the
Arminians do comprehend the whole doctrine of Election: There we have showed
that the second decree, by which salvation is not decreed to particular
persons, but it is determined, that they shall be saved, who shall believe, is
not the decree of providence nor predestination, but is the rule of the
Gospel, which does prescribe and set down the way to salvation.

III. This question is put to slight, only by the name of election; for
Election cannot be of all men; he does not choose that takes all: Neither, in
the time of the deluge, had Noah been chosen that he should live in the
deluge, if no man had perished by the flood: He is elected, who is preferred
before others, the rest being either despised, or less accounted of.

IV. And seeing in all the points of faith, we ought to be wise, and taught
out of the Scriptures, much more in so high an argument, which does exceed our
capacity. Let therefore the Arminians show by what place of Scripture all men
are said to be elected, by that election which is opposite to reprobation (for
of that it is spoken here, and not of the election of several men, by the
consequent will of God. Who ever heard it said, that Pharaoh or Judas, did any
way belong to the election of God? Saint Peter indeed 2. Epist. Chap. 1. does
join calling to election, commanding us to make our calling and election sure,
that is, by the earnest endeavor of good works, to effect that the sense of
our effectual calling, and the persuasion of our election may daily be
increased in us: But he will not therefore have our calling and election to be
the same, nor will he have all that are any ways called, to be elected: Yea,
many are called, but few chosen, Matthew. 20.16.

V. That also is to be observed, that by this general election, it is not
decreed who are to be saved; but what manner of men are to be saved: and that
the Arminians draw the ninth chapter to the Romans to prove this; where it is
plainly spoken of the good pleasure of God, and his mercy toward some
several and peculiar persons, whom it seems good to God to choose: For those
words, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, speak of some certain
men; and not of what qualified men; for then he had said, Miser^tor qualium: I
will have mercy on men so qualified, and not cuius, or quorum, of whom: Neither
had the example of Isaac and Jacob, who were particular persons, been applied
to explain the election not of particular persons, but the election either of
all, or of men so qualified.

VI. But I would learn of the Arminians, whether Judas or Pilate; whether the
high priests and the Scribes, by the instigation and accusations of whom our
Savior was crucified, were elected conditionally, and comprehended in that
general election. If they were not comprehended, then that general and
conditional election which they would have to be extended to all men: falls
to the ground. On the other side, if Judas and those high priests were
conditionally elected, the decree of God, concerning the crucifying of Christ,
could not be absolute, because it was done by men, which were conditionally
elected, under a condition which they might fulfill: It might therefore have
come to pass, that before this wicked deed, they might have been converted
and become faithful, and so had not crucified Christ.

And truly it cannot be said, that Judas and Caiaphas, were elected to
salvation, under the condition of believing in the death of Christ, seeing they
were appointed to that very thing, that by their incredulity and wickedness,
Christ might be delivered to death: but if Judas and Caiaphas had believed in
Christ, Christ had not been delivered to death; and therefore this decree,
whereby the Arminians will have God to have elected Judas and Caiaphas, and
Pilate, under this condition, if they would believe in Christ, does infolde a
contradiction: For they do as much, as if they should bring in God, speaking
thus: I appointed to save Judas and Caiaphas, if they will believe in the death
of Christ: But if they shall believe, and shall be faithful, Christ should not
be delivered to death, nor be crucified.

Also of the four decrees of the Arminians, the two former are contrary one to
another: For by the first decree, God decreed to use the incredulity and
perfidiousnesse of Judas, to deliver Christ to death: But by the second decree,
God elected Judas under the condition of faith, in the death of Christ:
Therefore by the former decree, Judas is absolutely considered as an unbeliever
and a reprobate, but by the second, he is considered as one conditionally
elected. The school of Arminius is painted about with these monsters, and
Chimeraes, contrary one to another, which would move laughter, if the church
were not troubled by them, and the wisdom of God exposed to reproach.

VII. Furthermore, by that general decree whereby all men are said to be
elected under the condition of faith to be performed, Greuinch. p. 101 Decretu^
conditionale de quolibet si credat seruando. and Page 2. Decreuit salutem
confer sub condition fidei prestande ab ijs qui. bus salutem ap. plitaret.
God is openly mocked: For it is a foolish decree, which is made under a
condition, which condition, he that decreed it knew certainly in the very
moment he decreed it, that it would not be fulfilled; especially if this
condition cannot be fulfilled but by the help and power of him who decrees it:
For by such a decree, God should set a law to himself, not to man. But it is
manifest by experience that God does not minister to all men the means that
are necessary to the fulfilling of this condition: For he will not have his
Gospel preached to all, neither does he give the spirit of regeneration to all.

VIII. Finally, what is to be judged of this general election, appears by the
consectaries, and conclusions which are drawn thence; whereof that is the
chiefest, and far the worst, whereby they deny that the number of the elect
is certain, and determined by the will of God, electing; whence it follows
that the election of particular persons, is not certain by the will of God:
For if it were certain by the decree of God, that this, or that man, were of
the number of the elect, then of several persons joined together, the whole
sum and certain number would be made up. But that which Arnoldus says,
Arnold P. 192. Numerum statuitis certum esse and ex precisa dei ordinatione
determinatum, qui nec angeri n^^ minui possit idque ex eadem ordinatione long
viro aliter Euangelium and vera predestinationis doctrina que in genera tantum
docet quales sunt electi.
Page 192. That the number of the elect may be increased or diminished, is such
a thing, that there is no good man who does not tremble at the hearing of it.
For what is it in God, to diminish the number of the elect, but to change his
opinion, and to take from the number of the elect, those which indeed being
not sufficiently well considered of, and as having cast his accounts amiss, he
had brought into the white roll of the elect, which should rather have been
carried into the black book of reprobates?

IX. Of the same evil stamp, is that of Greuinchouius against Ames, Page 136.
making a half, an incompleate, and so a reuocable election. In the Scriptures
(says he) men are called elect, 1. incompleately, according to the present
state, in as much as they are such, to wit, faithful men for the present time,
the last term of their life being excepted, in which, 2. Election is
fulfilled. Behold a depending election, by which every most wicked man; is
incompleately elect, and the decree of God is incompleate, until it be made
complete by man, which surely are not, dogmata, but portenta, not doctrines,
but monstrous opinions, which never came into the mind of any one, of whom the
name of Christ is any where heard of.

X. But the Scripture teaches, that the number of the elect is certain,
Revel. 6. The souls which are under the Altar are commanded to wait while the
number of the brethren is fulfilled; Also that which Christ says of the sheep
that were given him, even before their conversion, John 10.1. As also that he
says, that all shall come to him, as many as are given him by the father;
John. 6.37. And that none of his sheep can be taken out of his hand, John.
10.28. do all plainly declare, that the number of them is determined by the
purpose of God. Saint Luke does also accord, in whom, Chap. 10. v. 20. Christ
thus speaks to the Apostles: Rejoice not that the spirits are subject to you:
but rather rejoice that your names are written in heaven. No less expressly
does the Apostle to the Hebrews speak, Chap. 12. v. 22.23. where he calls
the church, the heavenly Jerusalem, the assembly of the first borne, which are
written in Heaven. Hitherto pertaines that book of life, concerning which it is
spoken in other places. And, Revel. 20. where they are said to be cast into the
lake of fire, which are not found written in the book of life. The Arminians,
Page 96. of the conference at Hage, do with a vain interpretation expound
those words of Christ: Rejoice that your names are written in the book of
life: For they will not have these words to be taken of election to salvation,
but they will have this to be the sense of it; Rejoice that according to the
present state of faith, righteousness, and obedience, ye are accounted for
pious and godly men, yea for the sons of God. O good God, where is modesty!
Here is neither reason nor color for this. For, to be accounted faithful by
men, is not to have their names written in heaven: Nor was there any cause that
the Apostle should so rejoice, because men thought well of them, seeing that
often times happens to him that is most wicked; and this had been much
less, then that the devils did tremble at their voice, and fled from them:
which yet Christ reckons to be but a small thing, in comparison of having their
names written in heaven: Surely that speech, to be written in heaven, is
referred not to the opinion of men, but to the purpose of God: And this phrase
is taken from the Prophets, with whom, that is said to be written before God,
which is fastened and determined by his decree. So, Esaias 4. v. 3. they are said
to be written for life, who were to be preserved by the purpose of God. And
Chap. 65.6. Behold it is written before me, I will not keep silence, but will
recompense: As if he should say, it is certain and determined by me, to
revenge these wicked deeds.

XII. I am ashamed of that shift, whereby some of them say, that therefore the
names of the Apostles are said to be written in heaven, because they were
elected to their Apostleshippe: For so the name of Judas himself was written
in heaven; in which respect, he had so little cause to rejoice, that even his
very Apostleshippe turned to his destruction. Then also we have the words of
the Apostle to the Hebrews, which are plainly agreeable to these, by which he
calls the faithful, the first begotten, which are written in heaven: which
cannot be drawn to the election to an office, seeing it belongs to all the
faithful and the elect.

XIII. The question of the book of life is a greater and longer question, not
belonging to this place. I am not ignorant, that there is a certain book of
life, which is not the book of election, but the Catalogue of them who
profess themselves to be members of the Church, and are visibly grafted into
the covenant, of which book there is mention, Eze. 13.9. Psalm. 69. ver. 29. out
of which book, there is no doubt but some are blotted. But when they are
thrown headlong into hell, as many as are not written in the book of life; it
is plain, that in this book is set down the certain and determined number
of men, who while other are appointed to the fire, they alone are reserved to
life; the number of whom can be increased or diminished no more now then in the
last judgment.

XIV. These things concerning that general and conditional election. Now let
us come to the absolute election of several persons, which the Arminians would
have to rest and depend on the foreknowledge of faith, and to be made for
faith foreseen: The former of these elections has the second place in the
series and rank of the four decrees laid down by Armintus; the latter
election has the fourth place; that does pertain to the antecedent will of
God, this to the consequent; that does go before, this does follow man's will:
Arminius says, that God is disappointed of that, but cannot be disappointed of
this.

CHAP. XIX.
The election of particular persons in respect of faith foreseen is confuted.
It is proved that men are not elected for faith, but to faith.
OVt of the great abundance of places which the holy Scripture does supply to
us, we will tithe and choose out some that are most clear and most weighty.

I. Saint Paul to the Ephesians, Chapter 1. verse. 3.4. has these words, God
has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ,
according as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world. The
Apostle does plainly enough teach, that spiritual blessings, and therefore
faith, are given us according to the eternal election, and as we were elected.
Whence it follows, that election is necessarily before these blessings, both
in order and time. So he that says, that the Soldiers received their
donatiue and benevolence, as it seemed good to their General, does manifestly
say, that first it seemed good to the General before it was done, and that the
certain and absolute will of the General went before this largess and gift.
Neither are those words of less moment which follow: He elected us in Christ
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame
before him, in love. You see that we are elected to holiness, and not from
holiness, or for holiness; and if we be elected to holiness, then also are
we elected to faith, wherein our holiness chiefly consists. It cannot be
denied that faith is a part of our holiness, unless by him, who also denies,
that incredulity in the profane is a part of their profaneness and vice: For
by faith we are not only sanctified efficiently, but also formally; no
otherwise then the wall is formally whited by the white color. And if the
Arminians could get it granted, that the holiness which is spoken of here,
does consist only in charity, yet they would effect nothing, nor would it ever
the less be proved out of this place, that we are chosen to faith; for he that
is elected to charity, is necessarily elected to faith, which begets charity,
Gal. 5.6. Nor is it credible, that any one is elected to one part of holiness,
and not to the other.

Being beat therefore from hence, they seek other refuges. Arnoldus. p. 66.
by elect, would have they that are called to be understood; as if election and
calling were the same thing: but many are called, few are chosen, Matthew. 20.
Therefore among these elect (if Arnoldus be believed) there will be many
reprobates; neither will this election be opposed to reprobation. The same man,
page 142. does contend, that these elect are the faithful, which is false in
that sense he takes it, to wit, that they are considered as being already
faithful, when they are elected: For how can they that are considered as being
faithful, be elected to holiness, seeing in that they are faithful, they are
already holy? Paul indeed speaks to the Ephesians, whom he calls faithful
and blessed: but not, if now they were faithful and blessed, they were
therefore faithful before they were elected.

This good man therefore has devised another subtilty, and would have Paul to
speak not of the election of particular persons, but of the election, whereby
any one people is elected to the calling, by the Gospel. If this be true, it
must needs be, that among the elect, before the foundation of the world, there
were many reprobates: But the following words do not admit this
interpretation; for the Apostle says, we are elected, that we should be
without blame, in love. He will have us to be elect, that we might endeavor to
holiness and good works: Now good works are of particular men, and not of a
Nation; neither by the elect can here be understood, the nations admitted into
the covenant, seeing Saint Paul includes himself in this number, Has chosen
us in Christ, etc. Arnoldus himself does sufficiently declare how little he
trusts to this exposition, while he ioynes another which overthrows this: He
says, that here it is spoken of the election to glory, and therefore by
holiness, would have salvation understood: But the Apostle does fitly prevent
this starting hole; for he adds, that we might be holy and blameless; but to
be blameless is a virtue, and not salvation it self: Then also Paul expounds,
how we are holy, to wit in charity, nor in the fruition and enjoying of glory.
He understands the duties of charity which are exercised in this life, unto
which to be exhorted after this life is needelesse. Finally, by their so
various and diverse expositions, which overthrow one another, they do
sufficiently confess, that they have nothing wherein they may be constant: And
because they cannot master us by the weight of their expositions, they
endeavor to ouerwhelme us by the multitude of them.

It is of small importance, that from this word (...), that is, blameless,
they gather, that it is spoken of the perfection after this life: For the
Apostle will have us to be blameless, even in this life, as, Philippians 2.15.
Where he commands us to be (...), blameless, and harmless, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation. Certainly, when the Apostle says, that we
might be blameless in charity; it is manifest, that he does not speak of the
Saints enjoying glory, where there is no place for reprehension, nor for
exhortation, to the duties of charity. There is no little force in the
following verse: He predestined us to the adoption of children, by Jesus
Christ. Out of this place I thus reason: Those whom God predestined to
adoption, he has predestined also to the spirit of adoption, to be given
them, and this is nothing else but to predestinate them to faith; for the
spirit of adoption is it that bears witness in our hearts, that we are the
sons of God, Romans 8. and this testimony is faith it self. It is true
indeed, that God appoints no man to adoption, but whom God considers, as
one that by his gift will be faithful; but the same may also be said of those
that are appointed to faith, which is appointed to none but whom God
considers as one that will be faithful: And surely they are grosely
deceived, who think that the faithful are appointed to the adoption of
children, seeing in that they are faithful, they are already children: This
Saint John teaches, chapter 1. To them that believed, he gave this
prerogative, to be the sons of God.

II. Agreeable to this place are also many other, 1 Cor. 7.25. I have obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful, not because he considered me as already
faithful, John 15.16. I have chosen you, that you should bring forth fruit:
therefore he did not choose us, considered as already faithful, and therefore
as already bearing fruit. Should we imagine, that Christ speaks here only of
the election of the Apostles to their Apostleship? I think there is none of so
impudent a face, who can deny that the same thing may be spoken of any of the
elect, whereof there is none whom God has not elected, that he might be godly
and good: even as also there is no man, who is not of a shameless countenance,
who will deny that all the following documents and lessons, do belong to all
the faithful: These things I commend you, that you love one another: If the
world hate you, you know that it has hated me firsh, etc.

III. Not unlike this, is that which the Apostle says, 2 These. 2.13. God has
chosen you to salvation by sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the
truth. He says that we are elected to obtain salvation by faith, not for
faith, and so faith is after election, and a certain medium, or middle thing,
between election and salvation.

IV. The words of Ananias to S. Paul, Act 22.14. are consonant to this; God
has chosen thee, that thou should know his will; by which knowledge, faith
and assent to the Gospel is understood: for Saint Paul was not elected more to
know the Gospel, then to believe the Gospel: Paul therefore was elected to
beieeue, and so his election was before his faith.

V. The same Apostle, 1 Thessa. 1.3. praising the faith and charity of the
Thessalonians, does fetch the cause of these virtues from election it self:
Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of lone, as knowing
that you are elected of God.

Here the Arminians do willingly stumble in a plain way: for by Election they
will have Calling to be understood; which if it be true, the reprobates
themselves will be elected, as being also called. Then also Saint Paul is
deluded, as if he were not in his right mind: For what need Paul tell the
Thessalonians, that he knew they were called by the Gospel, seeing Saint Paul
himself preached the Gospel to them? He were a ridiculous Grammarian, who
should tell his Scholars that he had taught; I know you have learned Grammar.
Arnoldus, page 66. does suspect that the word, (...), knowing, is to be
referred to the Thessalonians themselves. But the good man has dealt too
negligently here, for he does not see, that by this means, the Greek speech
would be made incongruous and not agreeing, for then it must have been read
(...), that it might agree with (...), which is in the former verse. But
distrusting this exposition, he has smelt out that by the word election,
excellency ought to be understood, which truly is an intolerable license;
seeing election differs from excellency by the whole praedicament; for
election is an action, excellency is a quality, or a relation. Surely if it be
lawful to bring such portents and monsters of interpretation, what will there
be in the holy Scripture, which may not be deluded or depraved? Let Arnoldus
bring another place, where Excellency is understood by the word Election: For
although he that is elected, may be taken for him that excels, yet you shall
never find Election to be so taken for Excellency. Neither ought it to seem a
marvel that Paul says, he knew of the election of the Thessalonians; for God
might reueile that to him concerning the Tessalonians, which he revealed
concerning the Corinthians, Acts 18.10. I have much people in this city. Or if
that does not please, it may be said, that Saint Paul, when he saw the Gospel
received by the Thessalonians, with very great joy and much fruit, easily
persuaded himself that many of that people belonged to the election of God.

VI. The same Apostle, in the beginning of his Epistle to Titus, calls
himself, the Apostle, according to the faith of Gods elect. It is plain, that
faith is said to be of the elect, because it is peculiar to the elect, or else
it were not rightly adorned with this elogy and commendation, and that by the
confession of Vorstius himself: Collat. cum piscat. Sect. 118.
Faith (says he) is called the faith of the elect of God, Titus 1. because
faith is a proper mark of the elect, etc. But why is faith peculiar to the
elect? is it because as many as have true faith are elected by God? But the
Arminians deny this; for they write of the Apostasy of the Saints, and think
that the most holy men may fall away. It remains therefore, that faith is said
to be of the elect, which God gives to the elect, and which is a fruit of
election.

The Arminians avoid this dart and argument, by saying, that by the name of
faith, is understood doctrine: But they do not well avoid it so, for the
doctrine of the Gospel is not peculiar to the elect, neither can it be called
the doctrine of the elect, seeing it is preached also to wicked and profane
men Here therefore we may see the Apostle and Arminius to be striving together:
Saint Paul says, Faith is of the elect: Arnold p. 186. Fides non est pracise
electorum, sed electio sidelium.
Armintus on the contrary part says, that election is of them that are
faithful, and who are considered as already believing.

With like licentious liberty, do they abuse the word, of the elect, by which
they will have those that are called, and are holy to be understood: But after
what manner? Seeing that according to Arminius, among them that are called, and
holy, there are many reprobates; the elect therefore, by this means shall be
reprobates. Is the Scripture thus to be deluded? But let us see other places.

VII. Noteable are the words of Christ. Luke 10 20. Rejoice, that your names
are written in Heaven. Christ speaks to men that were living, and who had not
yet perseuered in the faith to the end: Yet notwithstanding, their names were
already written in Heaven, their salvation was determined by the certain
purpose of God: Their election therefore, was before their perseverance in
faith, contrary to which is the opinion of Arminius, who will have perseverance
in faith, to go before election, and will have us to be elected for faith
foreseen.

And if election be not peremptory, and immutable, but after final
perseverance, as the Arminians would have it, then we must say, that the names
of the Apostles, who did then first enter the race of Christian profession,
were so written in Heaven, that yet it was in the power of the Apostles to fall
away from the faith and so to be reprobated; And therefore they could bring it
to pass, that Christ should lie: See to what the audacity of these innouators
does come. Furthermore, that that is said in the Scripture to be written in
Heaven and before God, which is appointed and determined by his eternal
counsel, we have proved in the former Chapter; where we have rejected that
unsavory and rash interpretation of the Arminians; we will have the writing of
our names in heaven, to be nothing else then to be accounted the children of
God, by the present state of righteousness, and that for no other argument,
then because they will have it so.

VIII. S. Paul. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith: He does not
say, that they are saved for faith foreseen, but by faith, as by the means to
salvation: And if God does not save us for faith fore seen, he neither will save
us for faith foreseen, nor does he elect us for faith foreseen: For to elect,
is to be willing to save.

IX. The same words, By grace ye are saved through faith, do plainly say, that
faith is the means to salvation: and if salvation be the end, and faith the
means, it must needs be that God thought of giving salvation to Peter and Paul
before he thought of giving them faith, whereby they should come to salvation:
for the end is first in the intent before the means: so habitatio^ is intended
before building, life before food, health before physic. With what face
therefore dare the Armint. say, that God had decreed to give Peter and Paul
faith, before he had decreed to give them salvation.

X. But here Arminius has laid aside shame, and does deny that salvation is
Gods end; but he says, that salvation and faith are the gifts of God, tied
together by the will of God in this order, that faith should go before
salvation, in respect of God the giver, and in the thing it self. These are
the words of Arminius, which are cited and allowed by the Arminians, in their
answer to the Epistle to the Walachrians. Page 93. But besides that, I had
rather believe Saint Paul, teaching that we are saved by God, through faith.
Arminius himself does seem to me to grant the same thing, while he does deny
it: For it is not likely, that God is willing, that faith should go before the
obtaining of salvation, unless because he will give and bestow says unto
salvation. Now that which helps to obtain salvation, is the means by which
we come to salvation, as to the end. Greuinchouius following him, Page 12. does
deny that God intended the salvation of certain men in particular, as an end.
And Page 124. We have said (says he) that faith is to be considered two manner
of ways, either as it is prescribed and to be performed, or as it is already
performed: As it is to be performed, it is not the means, but the condition,
and the thing required: But as it is performed, it is the means to man, by
which he does obtain salvation, promised under the condition of faith. The
Reader shall observe his excellent wit. This man will have faith, then, to be
the means to salvation, when it is performed, that is, when faith cease: For
the Arminians then think faith to be performed, when one has perseuered in
faith to the end; at which time vision and sight succeeds to faith ceasing.
Therefore (if Arminius be believed) says will then begin to be the means of
salvation, when it is not faith: Then also that saying, that faith performed,
is the means for man, not for God, is very weak: For faith is the means for
a man to come to salvation, for no other cause, then because God wills and
causes that man should come to salvation by faith: So he that says, that
food is the means for a man to live, says also that it is the means that
God does use for the sustentation of man's life.

XI. It is of no small importance that the Apostle in the same place, calls
faith the gift of God: By grace ye are saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God: For the Apostle will not
have salvation alone to be the gift of God, but also faith: For he that gives
the end, gives also the means; as he that gives us life, gives us also
means to maintain our life. So Philip. 1.19. It is given to you for Christ,
that is, in that which concerns Christ, not only to believe on him, but also
to suffer for his sake: Therefore to believe in Christ, is the gift of God.
Wherefore we are not rightly said to be elected by God for faith foreseen,
seeing God himself gives faith: For God is not said (unless it be very
improperly) to foresee those things which he himself determined to do. He
would not be thought to have a sound brain, who should say that God foresaw
the Sun would be round or shining, for God himself turned it into
roundnesse, and put the light into it. How greatly the Arminians err here, and
that it follows of their doctrine, that faith is not the gift of God, although
sometimes they speak otherwise, shall be seen in the right place.

XII. Thither also belong the words which are in the eleventh verse of the
first chapter. Ephesians. 1.11.
Being predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things
after the counfell of his own will. If God has predestined any one to
salvation, he works also all things which are necessary to the execution of
that decree, and if all things, then also faith: Faith therefore, is something
after predestination, for it is a part of the execution of that decree.

XIII. There is a noteable place, Acts 13.48. (...): They believed as many as
were ordained to eternal life. While Paul preached to the men of Antiochia,
some believed, some refused the Gospel: Saint Luke brings this cause why they
did not believe, to wit, the ordination and decree of God. Election therefore
is before faith, because the election of God, is the cause why men believe.
According to Arminius, Saint Luke ought to have spoken thus: And as many as
believed were elected by God, in reward of their faith: But contrariewise he
says, they believed, because they were elected.

Socinus, and after him Arminius, do deprave and corrupt this place with very
great wickedness. For by, (...), they that were ordained, they understand,
they that were disposed, prepared and inclined, or well affected: as if Luke
had writ (...). Certainly a bold evasion, and an interpretation without color
and example: For neither the Scripture, nor any man, that I know, ever took
the word (...), in this sense. To which purpose when many examples may be
heaped up, yet they are most fit which are taken out of the book of the Acts
it self, that it may appear in what sense Saint Luke does always take this
word, Chap. 15.2. (...), they decreed or determined that Paul should go up.
And Acts 28.23. (...), when they had appointed him a day. So Saint Paul, Romans
13.1. (...). The powers that are, are ordained, or appointed by God. So S.
Chrisost. Hom. 30. upon the Acts does interpret this place of the Acts, as many
as were ordained to salvation, where he renders, (...), ordained, (...),
severed by God, and fore-determined. Then also, although the word were
ambiguous, reason it self would convince this: For none of the unregenerate
can be well disposed, or well affected to eternal life: But all these men of
Antiochia, before they believed the Gospel, were unregenerate, therefore they
were ill disposed to the obtaining of salvation. Let the school and followers
of Arminius tell me, what disposition was in the thief who was crucified with
Christ, to believe before he did believe: Or in the Apostle Paul, when like a
wolf he did rage against the flock of Christ, and swelling with Pharisaicall
pride, was a most eager maintainer of righteousness by the Law; yea also
common sense does abhor that kind of speaking which they devise: For we are
not wont to say, that one is well disposed, or prone, or well affected to
blessedness, but to virtue. This inclination must be to do something, and not
to enjoy or obtain something. So one may be said, to be inclined to the
exercise of his body, but not to health; to the combat, not to the reward or
victory: Or if any one please to take the word dispositum, disposed, for
cupido, desire, there is no man who is not disposed to salvation.

It is not for nothing, that the Greek has not the word, (...), simply and
alone, but (...), as many as were appointed: By which preterpluperfect tense is
plainly signified, not a present disposition, but an ordination that went
before.

It is to no purpose, that they therefore gather, that by those that are
ordained, are understood, those that are disposed, because in that place, they
are opposed to them that are unworthy. For Luke here makes no opposition, nor
if he did, would it any thing hinder us, who know that by the very election to
faith and salvation, men are made worthy, and therefore also we are opposed to
those that are unworthy. In the mean time let the Reader judge, what, and how
wicked a doctrine this is, which does make men to be worthy, before they
believe, and that some are found among Infidels, who are worthy of salvation.

XIV. Mark 13.22. False Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show
signs and wonders, to seduce, if it were possible, the very elect. There is an
(...), a cause and reason of it given in the word Elect: For the cause is
noted, why some cannot be finally deceived, to wit, because they are elected.
Election, therefore, is before perseverance in faith to the end, as being the
cause of perseverance: And that which is the cause of perseverance in faith, is
the cause of faith. That which is the cause why one does always believe, is
the cause why he does believe: Therefore the opinion of Arminius does fall to
the ground, by which he determines, that not only faith, but also
perseverance in faith, is before election. and that God in electing does
consider it as a condition already performed and fulfilled.

XV. The words of the Apostle ought not to be omitted, 2. Tim. 1.9. He has
saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began. These words seem to me to be diametrically, and
directly contrary to Arminianisme: For the Apostle does not only deny, that we
are saved for the foreseeing of works, but also he brings the eternal decree
of God, to exclude the respect of works. But if God has not elected us for
the foreseeing of works; then certainly, not for the foreseeing of faith,
which does beget and effect works: And if God has not elected any one for the
foreseeing of faith, then certainly, not for the right using of grace, nor
for the obedience of faith, for as much as this using and this obedience, is
manifestly a work: Neither is it any doubt, but that to embrace the Gospel by
faith, is a kind of work and action of the will.

XVI. What? Arnold cont Gomarum. Page 4^. Arminius dicit ip^um credere in
Christum nobis in iustitiam imputari, non vt infirumentum and P. 35. dicet
fidem estimati pro ^^edien i^ and op^re. Vorst. Cat. Error on Siber. P. 41.
Fides nobis ad iustitiam (...) putatur formal^er. Bretius Epist. ad Sabr. P.
69. 70. Non est in^ptum dicere cum Deus ipse ^d aicat, no^ habitu sen qualitate
inherente iustificari. Idem dicit Vorst. Cat. Err^rum Sibr. P. 61. and 54.
Impiutper paenetentiam iustificatur.
That Arminius does acknowledge faith not only to be an action, and therefore
aworke, but does also contend, that faith is imputed for righteousness, not as
an instrument, that is, not as it apprehends Christ, but as it is a work and
an action? The words of Arminius, are reported by the Walachrian brethren, in
their Epistle, and they are these: Faith is imputed for righteousness, not as
it is an instrument, but as it is an action, although it be by him, whom it
apprehends. Neither do the Arminians in their answer deny it, but do
willingly acknowledge that these are Arminius his words, and Page 87. they do
defend him. The same men in the page going before, do confess that Peter
Bertius, a man of special name amongst the Arminians, is of opinion, That the
very act of faith, is imputed to us for righteousness in a proper sense, and
therefore that we are justified by faith, as by an inherent quality; which
ulcer I do not touch here: But I only take that which makes for the present
matter, to wit, seeing that faith it self, is not only an action and a work,
but that also according to the mind of the Arminians, we are justified by
faith, in as much as it is an action and a work, and an inherent virtue; it is
plain, that the foreseeing of faith is excluded, by that very eternal good
pleasure of God, which the Apostle uses to exclude the foreseeing of works,
seeing that faith it self, is also a work and an action; yea, and does
justify, as it is an action, if Arminius be believed.

XVII. Hitherto pertaines that which is said, Romans 9.11. The purpose of God,
which is according to election, not of works, but of him that calls: because
faith it self is a work, and does justify as it is a work (as the Arminians
will have it) and to use grace aright, is with them to work.

XVIII. The Scripture speaks of the decree of election, as of a certain and
immutable decree. 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, and has
this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. And Romans 9. That the purpose
of God, which is according to election might stand. And John, 10.28. I give to
my sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand. And chap. 6.37. All that the father gives me,
shall come to me: whereunto add that which is, Mark. 13. that the elect cannot
be deceived. Did Pilate think it was an unlawful thing to change the title of
the cross, which was written by him; and will it be a thing worthy the majesty
and wisdom of God, to cancel those things he writ, and having changed his
opinion, to wipe out those which he had set into the white register of the
elect? He therefore does not think well of God, and does subvert the doctrine
of the Gospel, who will have the decree of the election of men to be mutable,
and reuocable, and to depend on man's will. We have heard that Greuinchouius
does deny the decree of election, to be peremptory and absolute, while we live
here. And the whole School of Arminius, does cry out with one voice, that the
number of the elect is not certain and determined by the election and will of
God: But if the number of the elect be not certain by the will of God, then
neither is election it self certain. And surely, they justly make election
mutable, who make it to depend on man's will: for they will have election to
rest on faith foreseen, and faith it self to depend on man's free will.
Indeed they say, that preventing and accompanying grace, is necessary to
be^eeue; but the use of this grace, they will have to be in the power of man's
will, which always has this liberty, that it may use that grace, or not use
it. And we shall see in his place, that the Arminians teach, that the grace of
God is not the total cause of faith, but only a cause in part.

Finally, you may every where find, that election is made by the purpose and
good pleasure of God, and for his mere grace, as 2 Timothy 1.19. Ephesians. 1. ve.
5.6. and 11. Rom 9.15. and 11. ver. 3. But I find no where that any one is
elected for faith foreseen; neither do the Arminians prove it any otherwise,
but by consequences far fetched, which we will examine in their place and
order.

CHAP. XX.
Election for faith foreseen is confuted by places taken out of the Gospel
of Saint John.
THis contention will cease, if we stand to the testimony of Christ himself;
in the Gospel according to Saint John, he faith many things which cut this
knot, and leave no place for doubting.

I. John 6 37. he thus speaks to the Jews, Whatsoever my father gives me,
shall come to me: To come to Christ, is to believe; for so Christ himself
expounds it, verse 35. He that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst: He might have said in both places; He that
comes shall not hunger, nor shall thirst; but in the latter place he puts
believe, for come, that we might know that we come to Christ by believing. The
meaning therefore of Christ is, that those that are given him by the father,
will believe in him.; and they are given to the son, who are therefore given,
that he might save them, and they might be his flock. The sense therefore of
these words, whatsoever my father gives to me, shall come, is this, Whosoever
my father gives me to be saved, shall believe in me. They are given then to
Christ, before they can come, or can believe; for therefore they come to
Christ, and believe, because they are given him. But Arminius will have them
believe before they be given, for he will have them to be elected, and
therefore to be given to Christ for faith foreseen. Christ says that
therefore they come, because they are given him: the sectaries on the contrary
say, that therefore they are given, because they come.

In another place, the headstrong obstinacy of these men, does no less
discover it self, by them who are given to Christ; they would have the
faithful to be understood, as if Christ had said, he that believes in me will
come to me. But we have already proved, that to come, is the same that it is to
believe. The sense therefore of these words of Christ, according to Arminius,
will be this; Whosoever does believe, shall believe in me: Add to these, that
seeing in the Arminian election, faith and perseverance in faith is considered
as already performed, and therefore they that are elected, are considered as
dead, or in the very limits of life and death; they cannot be said to come, who
have not already measured out the course of their life. Neither by them who are
given to Christ, can be understood those which first gave themselves to Christ;
for this were not to give themselves to the son, but to be willing that the
son should receive them coming to him. He indeed receives those that come,
but they therefore come, because Christ draws them; as he himself says,
verse 44. No man can come to me, unless the father, that sent me, draw him.

The Arminian conferrers at the Hage, page 87. do suspect, that by those that
are given to the son, are to be understood, not the faithful, but those that
are given to believe. But seeing the Arminians are of opinion, that the
reprobates also are given to believe, and that God does seriously intend their
faith and salvation, they should be falsely said, that they were to come to
Christ, that is, that they will believe, as many as are given him to believe.
The very words of Christ do affirm, and common sense do convince this, that
by those that are given to Christ, are understood his flock, and therefore the
elect: for as much as those that are given to Christ, are here severed from
those that are not given.

II. John 8.47. Ye therefore hear not, because ye are not of God: They
therefore which hear and believe, do therefore hear and believe, because
they are of God; and to be of God, what is it else, then to belong to God? As
on the contrary part, verse 44. they are said to be of the devil, who belong
to the devil. Seeing then that Christ himself does witness, that therefore
some men believe, because they belong to God; who does not see, that it must
needs be, that they first belong to God, before they believe, for as much as
to belong to God, is the cause why they believe?

III. Nor is there less force in the words of Christ, John 10.26. Ye believe
not, because ye are not of my sheep: They then who believe, do therefore
believe, because they are of the sheep of Christ: Not according to Arminius,
who would therefore have them to be of the sheep of Christ, because they
believe. It pleases the Arminians to have the faithful understood by the
sheep of Christ, and I do not deny, but that the sheep of Christ, are they
which believe; but I deny that the word sheep, can be so taken in this place:
For so an unsavory tantalogy and vain repetition should be put upon Christ; ye
believe not, because ye believe not. This is a declaration of it, that a little
before he called those also his sheep, which were not yet converted: Other
sheep I have, which are not of this fould, them also I must bring, and they
shall hear my voice.

IV. So, John 17.6. I have manifested thy name unto them which thou gave me:
Therefore first they were given, before Christ declared to them the name of
God, by which declaration they received faith. The Arminian conferrers at the
Hage, page 87. think that it is here spoken of the Apostles, who did already
believe; but they prove nothing by it: for this being granted, yet that stands
which I maintain, that the Apostles were first given to Christ, before he had
declared himself to them. But that it is not here spoke of the Apostles alone,
Christ himself does expressly witness, verse 20. Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe on me, through their word. And
seeing that ver. 9. they are opposed to the world, it appears that these
things are to be extended to all the faithful: Unless, perhaps the School
and followers of Arminius, do think that the Apostles alone are they that are
not of the world, and that they alone are exempted from the curse of the world.
Furthermore, seeing there is no part of the Scripture which does bring more
comfort, nor does more uphold our faith, striving with temptations, then this
divine and large prayer of Christ, because the petitions of Christ, making
intercession for us, are so many secret promises and declarations of the good
will of the father, which does always agree with the petition of the son;
let the Arminians see with what spirit they are led, and why with so great
diligence they endeavor to defraud us of that comfort, which is certainly
taken from us, if this Prayer of Christ does intercede for the Apostles alone;
and if the Apostles only be meant by those that are given unto Christ.

CHAP. XXI.
The same is proved out of the eight and ninth and the eleventh Chapter to the
Romans.
SAint Paul in the eight to the Romans, treating of Predestination, does
easily drive away all the clouds of error. His words are these, Verse
28.29.30. We know that all things work together for good to them that love
God, to them that are called, according to his purpose: For whom he did
foreknow, them also he did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his
Son, that he might be first borne among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did
predestinate, them also he called, and whom he called them also he justified,
and whom he justified, them also he glorified.

I. First of all, that speech offers it self, that we are predestined, that
we might be made conformable to the image of Christ: And seeing this conformity
in this life, is by faith and charity; it is plain by the Apostle, that we
are justified to faith, and not for faith. I know indeed that Christ himself
had not faith, as faith is taken in the Gospel; but seeing that the conformity
of the faithful with Christ is placed in charity, righteousness, and
holiness; and these are the effects of faith, which does work by charity: he
that says we are predestined to charity and righteousness, does also say,
that we are predestined to faith, which does effect and work all those
things; no otherwise then he who is appointed to go and to breath, is
appointed also to life.

II. What say the Arminians here? Why, they by conformity with Christ,
understand the cross, and afflictions for Christ: But the following words
disprove that, that he might be first borne among many brethren: For Christ is
the first begotten of the sons of God; as for other causes, so also because
he being more liberally furnished with the gifts of the holy Ghost, is an
example of righteousness and holiness; being anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. even as the first borne receive more of
their fathers goods: But that he should be called the first borne for the
cross and for afflictions, is a thing new and insolent, and that which reason
abhors. Also it is certain, that that which Saint Paul speaks of, does
belong to all the faithful. For he adds, whom he did predestinate, them also
be called, whom he called, them also he justified, whom he justified, them also
he glorified. Glorification, justification, calling, predestination, are the
four linkes of that chain belonging to the conformity unto the image of
Christ, and they are so interlaced and enfolded, that by no means they can be
pulled asunder: For all that are glorified are justified, all that are
justified are called by that effectual calling, which is peculiar to the
elect; all that are so called are appointed, that they should be conformable to
the image of Christ. Let the sectaries tell me, whether glorification,
justification, and calling, do not belong to all the elect: For Arminius,
while he does restrain this conformity to afflictions, he makes many elect,
that are not conformable to Christ, because many of the servants of God, even
of the best, have had peace without interruption, and quietness with honor.
Do the Arminians wipe themselves out of the number of the elect, who in the
height of peace, forgetful of the cross of Christ, have moved this sink,
pernicious and deadly to themselves, and to the Church? I am not ignorant, that
these things are spoken by the Apostle, to the comfort of the afflicted, to
whom all things turn to good. But what lets, that he should not comfort them
by those lessons which might belong to all. So the Apostle Saint Peter, 1. Pet.
2. when he had commanded servants to be subject to their masters, not only if
they were good, but also if they were evil and rough; a little after he does
exhort them to patience, by those instructions which are common to all
Christians, admonishing them that it is pleasing to God, if any of them endure
troubles for conscience sake; that Christ being innocent, therefore suffered,
that he might leave us an example, that we might walk in his steps: And it
is no doubt, but that these that are here said to be predestined to
conformity, unto the image of Christ, are the same with those, who in the same
place he says, are called by the purpose of God: But they that are afflicted
for Christ, are not only called, but also all the elect; among whom there are
many that are free from persecutions.

III. Especially observe, that Saint Paul here does speak of the election of
particular persons, those whom he Predestined, and those whom he glorified,
for but some, and that a few are glorified. These Innouators, will have the
election of particular persons to be after calling and they will have them to
be elected, whom God fore-seeth will follow him calling; and they make election
to rest upon this foreseeing. But Saint Paul here makes election to be before
calling, when he says, Whom he predestined them also he called, whom he
called, them also he justified; whom he justified, them also he glorified: For
as in order and time, justification is before glorification; and calling before
justification, so also the predestination of several persons is before calling.

IV. But it is worth the labor, to consider the linkes of that Apostolical
chain, Whom he predestined he called, whom he called he justified, whom he
justified he glorified, Do not you see how we are predestined to our
calling, and by our calling to justification? And seeing that we are justified
by Faith, it follows that we are predestined to Faith: For how can he be
predestined to justification by Faith, who is not predestined to Faith?
These things strike at the life.

V. I let pass, that the Arminians do ouerturne those words of S. Paul, whom
he justified, them also he glorified; while they affirm, that many are
justified who are reprobates. This they clearly show in their Epistle against
the Walachrians, Page 40. They who believe for a time, may be said to be
justified, whom the event does show to be reprobates.

VI. In the same chapter, v. 16. he says, The spirit of God bears witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of God. I demand whether this
tesiemony of the spirit be certain or doubtful? If it be doubtful, the
spirit of God is accused of a lie. If it be certain, I demand on what
foundation does this certainty rest? Does it rest on the power of free will?
Why this is a doubtful and deceitful certainty. Or is this testimony
certain, because it is given to none but them, whom God has certainly
appointed to salvation? Why, this is that very thing, which we affirm, and the
Arminians deny.

VII. There is no less force in the ninth chapter to the Romans, where the
Apostle does thoroughly and largely treat of Election and reprobation. The
scope of the Apostle, is to teach, that election and salvation, is not of the
works of the law, but of God, calling and having mercy, and his scope is not
(as Arminius faines) to treat of justification by faith. I will not repeat
those things which are spoken, chap. 15. where we hauer pressed Arminius,
torturing the Apostle, that he might draw him, against his will, to the
patronage of his cause.

VIII. Thus much the careful Reader shall observe; that Paul after he has
spoken of the purpose of God, according to Election, does presently lay down
Jacob, for an example of that Election; whom God loved before he had done any
good or evil, and therefore before he had believed (for to believe, is to do
something) and so Election went before Faith. Yea, although to believe the
Gospel and obey it, were not an action; yet if election went before the
consideration of works, it must needs also go before the consideration of
Faith, from which works do flow: For if Faith should go before Election, God
in electing could not consider Faith, but as bringing forth works, for
otherwise he had considered Faith, not as it is, but as it is not.

IX. Also that which he says, v. 16. It is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy, were false, if God had mercy on
men for faith fore-scene. For the Arminians do hold this steadfastly, and
defend with greatest diligence; that God gives all men power of believing in
Christ, yea, and that he is bound to give it, and how great grace soever God
may give to believe in act, yet it is in the power of man's free will to use
this grace or not to use it; to believe or not to believe, and that that man is
elected by God, whom he foresaw would believe, and whom he considers as
already believing. According to this doctrine, it may rightly be said, that
salvation is of him that wills and of him that runs, and not only of God
that shows mercy: But if Paul therefore said, that it is not of him that
wills, because it is not alone of him that wi^leth, why shall it not be also
lawful to say, that it is not of God that shows mercy, because it is not
alone of him showing mercy, but also of man's free will.

X. But if to that question whereby it is demanded, why God of one and the same
Mass, has loved one and hated another, why he had mercy of one, and hardened
the other; it may be answered, that it was done because God foresaw that the
one would believe, and the other would not believe: Saint Paul ought not to
have blamed the demander, and commanded him to be silent, seeing the cause of
this difference is in readiness, to wit, in the one, faith was foreseen, in
the other unbelief was foreseen. Did Saint Paul seem to Arminius, either not
to be quick of understanding, or to be scrupulous without cause? But least he
should be compelled to say this, he has devised I know not what subtilties,
and monsters of interpretations: Such as are these. Of him that calls, that
is, of Faith: And of God that shows mercy, that is, that justifies not for
works, but for Faith, which mercy, notwithstanding is common to many
reprobates. Then also that speech, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
by cuius, whom, he would have qualium, what sort of men, to be understood. And
it is not of him that wills, to wit, righteousness is not: For he denies
that these are to be understood of salvation, as if salvation were of him that
wills: Even as to have mercy, if Arminius be believed, is not to save, but to
give the means to righteousness, And many more such like, which are either
inconvenient or wrested, which we have examined in the 15. chapter.

XI. Add to these that which is in the eleventh to the Romans, Romans 11.5.
At this present there is a remnant according to the election of Grace. By this
remnant, or reserved portion, are understood those Jews who cleaued to Christ,
and who did not fall from the covenant with the rest. We have here therefore
the cause why these perseuered in the Faith, and have not fallen from grace, to
wit, because the reservation was made according to the election of grace:
Therefore perseverance in Faith, is according to the election of grace, and not
election, according to perseverance in Faith. as Arminius would have it.
Arminius, that he might shift off this place, says, that it is here spoken of
election to righteousness, not of election to Faith, which although it be
false, yet it does not infringe the force and evidence of this place: For,
whosoever is elected to righteousness, is elected to Faith. And surely I
cannot sufficiently marvel at that which Arminius says, Page 222. What is
that which is by grace? Armin. in Perk. page 222.
It is election to Faith, nothing less, but it is election to righteousness,
as if there were any righteousness without Faith: Or as if he who refuses
Faith, does not also refuse righteousness. Surely these things sound of
Socianisme, and do show that there is under them some hidden ulcer: Also what
is it to the purpose to contend, that it is here spoken of election to
righteousness, seeing according to Arminius, this is not certain by the will
of God, but does depend on man's free will.

XII. Arnoldus, Page 346. deals more warily: He thinks that it is spoken here
of the reiection of the Jews, and taking in of the Gentiles: But the word
remnant, or reservation, does confute this, for from hence, as also from the
former verses, it is manifest that he does enquire the cause, why a few of the
Jews, only a remnant, do belong to the covenant, being afterward to
explain how the Gentiles were engrafted into the place of the rest, which were
rejected and cut off.

Finally, against these places of Scripture, the Arminians (although they be
acute and witty men) do so fly the encounter, they do fight so recoylingly,
they do so entangle themselves, that they seem either to be unwilling to be
understood, or to distrust their own cause: Furthermore, if they say true, no
man yet had understood what Christian Religion is.

CHAP. XXII.
The same Election, in respect of Faith foreseen, is confuted by Reason.
I. REason it self does agree to the Scripture: For if perseverance in Faith,
be considered in Election, as a thing already performed, no man is elected but
he is considered as dead, and as having finished his course, for no man can be
said to have perseuered until the end, but he which is come unto the end.

II. Hence also it appears, that Arminius is contrary to himself; For he
says, Election is of them that believe: But they that are dead cease to
believe: Therefore, that Arminius might be constant to himself, he ought to
say, that Election is of them that cease to believe, and not of them that
believe.

III. Also if election to glory, be made for some foreseen virtue, Christ
himself, as he was man, was not predestined to glory: for he was not
carried to such a height of glory, for the foreseeing either of faith, or
works, or any virtue; for whatsoever virtue or holiness is in Christ, as he
is man, does flow from the personal union with the divinity, and from the
purity of his conception, by which he was free from original sin. Therefore
this his holiness cannot be said to be foreseen, but to be decreed. Nor was
he predestined for holiness, but to holiness. And that the election of the
head, should be contrary to the election of the members, and that the head
should be elected to virtue, the members for virtue, no reason does admit.

IV. Add to these, that while election is said to be for faith foreseen,
there is appointed an election, which does not belong to infants that are taken
away by an immature and untimely death, because they want faith.

V. Yea, election for faith fore seen, cannot be called election, but it is an
admission and receiving of them who come to Christ by Faith, and of them, who
by their free will, using Grace well, do first choose God, in whom they put
their trust before they be chosen by God. Christ on the contary side says,
John 15.16. Ye have not chosen me; but I have chosen you. The Arminians, while
they contend that it is here spoken only of election to their Apost^ship, do
not obscurely confess that this place does hurt them, if it be there spoken of
election to salvation: their will is therefore in the work of salvation, that
God be chosen by man, before man be chosen by God. Go to then, let us grant,
that it is here spoken only of election to their Apostleship, for that does
not a little further our cause. For if the Apostles were elected to their
Apostleship, not for any foreseen virtue, but were elected to receive those
virtues and gifts, by which they might execute their Apostleship; it is much
more likely, that man is not elected to salvation for any foreseen virtue,
seeing eternal salvation is a far greater benefit then the Apostleship, and
further removed from the power of man, and more exceeding our capacity, and
therefore it is a thing whereunto we have much more need of the help of God,
and which is less in the power of man's freewill, then the obtaining of an
Apostleship.

VI. By the same doctrine, faith in Christ, is made a thing of man's free will,
in the power whereof, it is to use grace, or not to use it, to believe, or not
to believe, and to use, or not to use those powers to believe, which are given
irresistably. Surely Arminius, had never said that election had been for says
foreseen, if he had thought that God had certainly decreed to give faith to
some certain men, whom he elected to salvation, for he acknowledges no
precise and necessary decree of God of giving to any one the very act of
believing: For this speech were unapt, God elected Paul because he foresaw
that he would give him Faith: If in election faith be considered as already
performed, and as that on which election does rest, it must needs be, that God
has not wrought it: Otherwise God should be said to be willing to save a man,
because he determined to give him faith; when on the contrary side, he does
therefore give faith to one, because he has decreed by his certain and
immutable will to save him.

VII. What is to be thought of this doctrine, Armin. in Perk. p 283 and 224.
Causa totalis cur iste credat is^e non, est voluntas Dei and liberum arbitrium
h^minis.
may be gathered by the consequents which they build on this foundation: such
as are these; The election of God in this life is not certain, nor
irreuocable; the number of the elect is not certain and determined by the will
and election of God: the grace of God is not the total cause of faith, which
is a grievous speech, and overthrows the foundations of faith, as we have
already proved, and hereafter more shall be spoken of the same thing.

VIII. What a thing is it? that by this opinion, no man can believe that he is
elected: For if any one did believe he were elected, he would believe also
that his faith was after his election. So he that believes he is a man, was a
man before he believed it: and if faith and perseverance in faith, does go
before election, he who believes in Christ, may indeed presume or hope that
he is elected, after he has perseuered; but he cannot believe that he is
already elected, seeing according to Arminius, no man is elected, but after he
has believed, and when he has ceased to believe. Has therefore this
pernicious doctrine torn the bowels of the Churches of the Low Countries, that
it might pull out of their minds he confidence of Election, and that no man,
unless it were impudently and falsely, might believe that he is elected by
God to salvation?

CHAP. XXIII.
The opinion of Saint Austen concerning Election for faith foreseen.
WE are beholding to Pelagius and his sectaries, for the learned Treatises of
Saint Austen, full of good fruit, wherein he has explained more fully and more
plainly then any other, the heads of Christian faith concerning Grace, Free
will, and Predestination: For before Pelagius his time, these things were
handled generally and grosely, and not exactly enough: Saint Austen himself,
in his book of the Predestination of the Saints, Chap. 3. and of his
retractations, lib. 1. cap. 24. and in many other places, does confess, that
he at the beginning writ, with little consideration, concerning these things;
the holy man was not ashamed to change his opinion, after he sharpened his wit
at this whetstone of contentions, and the sparks of truth broke out of the
disputation.

The heresy of Pelagius being driven away, the relics of the Pelagians did
yet remain in France, who to keep back envy, least they should seem to
favor Pelagius, they did distinguish nature from grace: But they did affirm
that sufficient grace was offered to all men, and that it did extend as far as
nature: they did acknowledge an election, but it was conditional and not
absolute. For they were elected by God whom he foresaw would believe and use
his grace well. And these are their opinions, That election is for faith
foreseen; and that the number of the elect is not determined by the certain
decree of God. They said that the fruit of the doctrine of Saint Austen
concerning election according to the purpose of God, was eit^er desperation, or
a benumbed sluggishnes, if the reprobate man cannot be saved by any labor and
contention, nor he that is elected be deprived of the kingdom by any
negligence. It is not amiss to set down their words, taken out of the Epistle
of Prosper to Saint Austin, which is incerted in the seventh Tome of Saint
Austins works: They determine that the propitiation, which is in the Sacrament
of the blood of Christ, is propounded to all men, without exception; that
whosoever will come to faith and to baptism, may be saved. And that God
fore-knew before the making of the world, who were to believe, and who by faith
(which afterward was to be assisted and helped by the grace of God) were to
remain: And that he predestined those to his kingdom, who being freely
called, he foresaw would be worthy of election, and would depart out of this
life with a good end, etc. But they say that the opinion of Saint Austen does
take away from them that are fallen, the care of rising again, and does yield
occasion of a heavy dullness to the Saints, etc. They do not yield that the
predestined number of the elect can neither be increased, nor diminished:
this is mere Arminianisme, the very same opinion; we are assailed with the
same calumnies wherewith Saint Austin was.

Against these Semipe^agians, the holy man writ a Book of the PRedestination
of the Saints; out of which Book, it will not be from the purpose to take out
and allege some places.

Chap. 3. We read (the Apostle saying it) I obtained mercy, that I might be
faithful: He does not say, because I was faithful: It is given then to him
that is faithful, but it is given him also that he might be faithful.

Chap. 17. Let us understand the calling whereby men are elected, not they
which are elected because they believed, but they which are elected that they
might believe. For this the Lord himself does make plain enough, when he
says; Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: For if they were therefore
chosen, because they believed, they had first chosen him, by believing in him,
that they might deserve to be elected. And a little after: They did not choose
him, that he might choose them, but that they might choose him, he chose them,
because his mercy prevented them, according to his grace, not according to
their desert. And in the same chapter; God then elected the faithful, but it
was that they might be so, not because they were already so. By choosing them,
he makes them rich in faith, as heirs of a kingdom; and rightly, because he
is said to choose that in them, which that he might work in them, he has
chosen them. Does any one hear our Lord saying; Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you? and dares he say that men believe that they might be chosen,
when rather they are chosen, that they might believe?

Chap. 18. He chose us in him before the world was made, that we might be holy
and without spot: Therefore not because we were holy, but that we should be
holy; it is certain, it is manifest: Therefore we were to be such, because he
elected us, predestinating us, that by his grace we should be holy.

In then inteenth chapter he repeateth the same words, and adds moreover
these; When therefore he predestined us, he fore knew his own work, who
has made us holy and without spot.

In the same place the Pelagians rejecting election for works foreseen,
stick only in the foreseeing of faith: We (say they) do say that our God
fore knew nothing, but faith whereby we begin to believe, and therefore he
elected us, etc. Against these things Saint Austin disputes much, and at the
length he does thus conclude his speech, Neither does faith it self go
before; for he does not choose us because we believe, but he chose us that we
might believe, least we should be said to choose him first: and that should be
false (which God forbid) which Christ says, ye have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you: Neither are we called, because we do believe, but we are called,
that we might believe, and by that calling, which is without repentance, it is
wrought, and thoroughly wrought, that we should believe.

Finally, he says, that Pelagius himself, to the intent that he might delude
the Palestine Synod, with an ambiguous confession, condemned those that say
that grace is given according to merit; which opinion was allowed by the
Synod; and they were condemned, who said election was for faith foreseen.
For Saint Austin confirms, that these two come to one and the same sense, in
his fifth book against Julian, chap. 3. God electeth no man that is worthy, but
by electing him, he makes him worthy.

And he does in six hundred places, beat upon absolute election, or (as
Arminius calls it) precise election, and not depending upon the foreseeing
of any virtue or worth. As Epist. 105. Why one should believe, and another not
believe, when both hear the same thing; and if a miracle be done in both their
sights, it is the height of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God,
whose judgments are unsearchable, and with whom there is no iniquity, while
he will have mercy on whom he will, and hardneth whom he will: for those things
are not unjust, because they be hidden and secret: But these things are not
hidden to Arminius, for he says, the cause of this difference is the
foreseeing of faith in one of them.

The Book de fide ad Petrum, whether it be the Book of Fulgentius, or of
Austin, in the third chapter, has these words; They shall reign with Christ
whom God of his free gracious goodness, has elected to the kingdom; because
by predestinating them, he has prepared them to be such that they might be
worthy of the kingdom, he has prepared them, whom according to his purpose he
will call; that they may obey, he has prepared them whom he will justify,
that having received grace, they might believe rightly, and live well: To which
kingdom they have come, whom God has saved of his free grace, for no
precedent merit of good will or good work.

CHAP. XXIV.
The arguments of the Arminians, by which they endeavor to stablish Election
for faith foreseen, are examined.
I. THe Arminians, who by a new name, call themselves Remonstrants, in the
conference at the Hage, do pour down a thick hail of places of Scripture,
by which they endeavor to persuade that election is of them that believe, and
that the decree of Predestination, is nothing else but the will of saving them
that believe. This is to do another thing, and not to touch the question, for
the controversy between us, is not concerning these things. The state of the
question is this Whether election be for faith fore seen: Then also, whether
God electing several and certain persons, does consider in them perseverance
in faith, as a thing already fulfilled, and as a condition, on the performance
whereof Election does rest. But these men leaving the question untouched, are
altogether in that, that they might prove election to be of them that believe:
Wherefore although the rank of their nine Syllogisms, which they set in order,
or admit many other exceptions, yet because they are all faulty in that
fallacy, which is called Ignoratio Elenchi; by which that which is concluded,
is thought to hurt the adversary, when yet it does not hurt him, it is better
to grant that which they would have, to wit, that God electeth none but they
which believe, and that election is of the faithful, so this be fitly
received, and in a good sense; to wit, that God does elect, and that he is
willing to save those that believe, because he saves no man but to whom he
will give faith, and because without faith it is impossible to come to
salvation. And that God in electing, does consider men as faithful; that is,
as those that by his gift were to have faith: And that the decree of election
is with respect of faith; because the decree of salvation does include also the
decree of the means to come to that end, and therefore also of faith in
Christ. And surely Arminius, and after him Arnoldus, page 92. do falsely fasten
on us this opinion: That God determined to save the elect, without the
consideration of faith in them.

The thunderbolt therefore that they cast with such a noise, is turned away
only with a blast, or with the wind of ones cap, and touches neither us, nor
to the matter.

II. No more to the purpose does the other sectaries, so often heap up the
words of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 1.4. He has elected us in Christ, which they so
take, as if Saint Paul had said, He has elected us for Christ, and considered
as already believing in Christ, when he did elect us. The Apostle says no such
thing, whose meaning is plain and simple; He elected us in Christ, that is, He
appointed us to salvation, to be bestowed upon us by Christ, or in Christ.

III. They effect nothing more by these places: No man shall separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.39. And, God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5. Surely here is not a word of faith
foreseen: For if they should bite their nails until the blood follows,
they could prove nothing by six hundred such places. God was in Christ while
he was on the earth, in him and by him, working out our reconciliation; but
what is this to faith foreseen?

IV. It is a weak dart which they cast, He that believes in me has
everlasting life, John 6. and, without faith it is impossible to please God,
Heb. 11. By these places indeed, the necessity of faith is proved, but not
the foreseeing of it before election: No man is saved, but he that believes,
because God would have this to be the way of salvation, and because he gives
salvation to none, to whom he does not give faith.

V. These are the words of Conradus Vorstius, in his book entitled the
Conference with Piscator. Sect. 18. If we are adopted by faith, we are also
elected by faith. But I deny that that will follow; for Adoption is after
Election, as the Apostle teaches, Ephesians. 1.5. He predestined us to the
adoption. He which says, we are adopted by faith, does not therefore say, that
we are elected by faith, or for faith; but he says, that by faith we are
affected with the sense of the fatherly love of God to us, and that the
believers receive the spirit of adoption.

VI. He does defend himself by the words of the Apostle, 2 These. 2. He has
chosen us from the beginning, through faith. But here Vorstius does wickedly
cut short the words of the Apostle, and does present them lame unto us. The
words of Saint Paul are these, God from the beginning has chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth: He
does not say, that we are elected for faith fore seen; but that we are elected
to obtain salvation by faith. And if it may be gathered from this place, that
we are elected for faith foreseen, it will be proved by the same place, that
we are elected for sanctification or regeneration foreseen, which does not
please Arminius.

He does urge that place of Saint James, chap. 2. Has not God chosen the poor
of the world, rich in faith? but in vain: for therefore they are rich in
faith, because God has given them faith, and he has therefore given it them
because they are elected. If I say, God has elected the Saints which do enjoy
glory, do I therefore think that God elected them for the foreseeing of the
glory to come? And if it be lawful for the Arminians to take these words of
Christ, I give my life for my sheep; as being spoken by anticipation or
prevention of those who were not yet his theepe, but were to be: why may it not
be lawful for us also to take these words, God chose the believers: as being
spoken by an anticipation, of those which do not believe in act, but are
considered as those who are to believe.

VII. Vorstius adds, that Mat. 22. few are said to be elected, because few
have the wedding garment. But I deny, that this is to be found there: Christ
shuts up with this sentence, the parable of those that were called to the
wedding, whereof only few obayed him, calling them; Many are called, few
chosen. In which words the reason is not yielded, why he was cast forth that
had not on the wedding garment, but why, of many that were called, there came
but a few: Which thing, that the Reader might not observe, Vorstius has used a
double deceit; for he has omitted those words, many are called, and then also
instead of Nam For, he has s^t down, Quia, because; that he might persuade
that here the cause was rendered, why he that was indecently apparelled was call
out: For he knew that the particle, Nam, for, does often set down the note or
mark, but not the cause, as M^t. 26.73. and in many other places: but in this
place, it is no doubt but that here the cause is signified: For the cause is
noted, why of so many that were called, so few followed him calling, to wit,
because although many are called, yet few are chosen. Whence it is manifest,
that this place, if any other does hurt Arminius.

VIII. The other things which he does heap up, that he might prove, that they
that are elected, are those that be ecue, are nothing to the purpose: For the
elect are the believers, and the belecuers are the erect: But they are not
elected, because they are belecuers, but that they might bereeue.

IX. There is no more force in the objection which he brings out of the 2.
Pet. Chap. 1. Make your calling and election sure: Out of which words he does
infer, that calling is before election. But Peter does not here set calling
before election, but the certainty of our cailing, before the certainty of our
election: I willingly acknowledge that that certainty is first in order. But
that election is before calling, Saint Paul teaches, Romans 8. Whom he
predestined he called, whom he called he justified, whom he justified he
glorified: For as justification is before glorification, and calling before
justification, so predestination is before calling.

X. Greuinchouius against Ames, Page 171. Arn^ldus after Armun us uses the
sam^ argument. P. 282.
does thus dispute. I say that by your predestination the Gospel is inuerted:
For this is the s^ntence of the Gospel: If thou beleeuest thou shall live: but
this your predestination says, if you are predestined to life you shall
believe. I answer, it is one thin^; to inuert or turn the sentence, another
thing to ouerturne it: For this sentence is conuertible, whosoever is elected
shall believe and whosoever does believe is elected: For we speak of that
faith which Saint Paul Tit. 1.1. calls the faith of the elect. Do not the
Arminians rather inuert the Gospel, which faith, that faith is of the elect;
but they say, that faith is not of the elect, but that election is of the
faithful? That which Greuinchouius in that place does stuff in concerning
reprobation, shall be examined in his own place.

XI. The same man, page 130. does thus argue. Salvation is the reward of faith,
1 Pet. 1.9. the crown of righteousness, the reward of labor, the prize of
our strife and finished course, the inheritance of the sons of God, that is,
of the faithful, John 1.12. Gal. 4.30. And because it is hard to see how these
things can be drawn to election for faith foreseen, seeing it is not there
spoken of election, nor of faith foree-seene, he adds these words, Therefore
Election to salvation is not the decree concerning the end of men, as they are
men simply, but of the salvation of men, as they are such sort of men, to wit,
of them that are faithful, and of them that persevere in the faith. This also
we confess in that sense which we said before; but it were better to say, of
them that were to persevere, because God electing, does not consider faith and
perseverance, as a thing performed, but as a thing to be performed, and that by
his bounty and gift.

XII. He further adds, The will of bestowing the reward, the wages, etc. does
necessarily presuppose the foreseeing of faith, and perseverance in faith, by
the covenant of the Gospel, if thou beleeuest and do persevere, thou shall
be saved. Here you digress from the question: For it was spoken of election
for faith foreseen; but you speak of salvation which is bestowed after faith.
God electing to salvation, does foresee that faith will come before the
obtaining of salvation, but he does so foresee it, that God foreseeth that
which he himself is to work, which to speak properly is not to foresee, but
to will. Furthermore, eternal life, is called the reward of faith, because it
is not to be had, but after the fight of faith, neither can we come thither but
by labor; but it is not given for the labor, neither are we chosen to
salvation, for the foreseeing of labor or faith; but God who does
predestinate us to the reward, does also predestinate us to the fight: As Paul
testifies, Phil. 1.26. It is given to you in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe in him, but also to suffer for him. It is also a kind of reward
freely bestowed, as Saint Ambrose teaches, Epist. 1. Lib. 1. The reward of
liberality and of grace, does differ from the stipend of virtue, and wages of
labor. In the mean while, the Reader shall note by the way, that the
Arminians strive for election, upon the foreseeing of works: For eternal
life in the holy Scripture, is called the wages or reward not only of faith,
but also of works, of almesdeedes, of patience, according to that of Matthew,
Chap. 19. Call the laborers, and give them the pay. If therefore it may thence
be proved, that election is for faith foreseen, because eternal life is
called the reward of faith, why shall not the same election be for works
foreseen, seeing eternal life is often called the reward of works;
especially seeing to believe, is it self a work, and that the chiefest work,
and the Arminians are of opinion, that we are justified by faith, as it is a
work, as shall be seen in his own place?

XIII. The same man, P. 170. and 188. does much please himself in this
argument. If predestination is such as you feign it to be, then the will of
God, concerning the salvation of a man that is to be saved, is two fold, and
contradictory to it self: One whereby he does will and ordain salvation to
him that does not believe, that is, not for faith foreseen: The other,
whereby in time he will not save the same man, unless as he is faithful. But I
deny that these things are contrary: To elect to salvation him that does not
believe, that he may believe, and to will the salvation of him that believes.
So if a father should appoint his little son of two years old, to the office
of a Senator, or of a Pastor of the Church, and afterward should have care to
furnish with learning the same son, when he is grown great, that he might
come to this office; does this father will contrary things, because he
appointed him to this office at the first, being unlearned, and afterward being
learned?

XIV. The same man, Page 194. does thus dispute. What men soever, and howsoever
qualified, and in what order soever, God in time does save the same men, and so
qualified, and in the same order he has decreed to save; But in time he first
gives Christ, then according to his wisdom he does justly administer the
means that are necessary to faith and repentance, both sufficiently and
effectually, and them that repent and believe in act, he does receive into
grace: And finally, those that persevere in Faith he saves. Therefore he has
decreed to save in the same manner and order those men, and so qualified, or so
considered.

Ans. The mayor proposition does mingle false and true things together, that
those that are false might lie hid in the multitude, nor is it in all respects
true. There is no doubt, but that whatsoever men, and what sort of men God in
time does save, the same men, and the same sort of men he has decreed to save:
But that God does save them in the same order in which he decreed, is one way
true, and another way false. It is true that God does save in the same order in
which he decreed to save; but it is not true, that God in executing or saving,
does follow the same order which he did in decreeing: For in decreeing, he
first thinks of the end, before he thinks of the means: Contrariwise, in
executing, he begins with the means and helps, and finisheth in the end.
So the Physician does first intend health before physic, but in executing, he
does first apply the medicines, before he heals. Greuinchouius therefore does
err, who from the order which God does follow in executing his decree, does
gather what should be his order in decreeing. In the mean while, by the way
observe in Greuinchouius the spirit of Arminius: He dares not say that God
gives faith, but that he gives only the means to faith, because he will
have it to be in the power of free will to use these means, and that faith is
but the gift of God in part.

XV. The argument of Arnoldus, page 181. has the same fault; These things
(says he) are thus coupled together: that God will first have one belecus,
before he will have him be saved; where as your predestination teaches
co^trarily, that God does first will to save a man and then he wills that he
should believe. In these words he does confound the order of decreeing, with
the order of executing: for in the execution of his decree, God will first have
him to believe, before he will have him to be saved: but in decreeing, God does
first decree to give salvation, before he decrees to give faith; and he first
thought of the end, before he thought of the means.

XVI. The same man, page 195. does contend that these are things incompatible,
and which cannot stand together, that God would save Peter absolutely, and that
he would not save him, but upon the condition of faith. I answer, there is an
homony my and equivocation in the word absolutely: If by absolutely, be
understood certainly, precisely, or necessarily, these are not contrary, to
will to save Peter certainly and precisely, and to will that Peter should be
saved by faith: Even as these things are not contrary; To will absolutely that
Peter should live, and to will that he should live by food and by breathing.
But if by these words, To will to save, absolutely, be understood that God will
save without faith: then we are slandered, for there is none of us of this
opinion, none believes it: but that this is the meaning of Greuinchouius, the
following words declare, for he adds, These things are contrary, to will that
the same man should believe, and that he should not believe. Which of us, yea,
what Christian has ever said, that God does will that a man should not believe
in Christ? and yet he does ascribe that opinion to Calvin, citing in the
margent his Institutions, lib. 1. chap. 18.. 13. where there is no such thing,
nor has there been any more rigid and precise maintainer of faith in Christ,
then that holy man: Therefore after his sick mind has vomited out this
poison against us, he triumphs, as of a thing well performed, as the Cock
crowing upon the dunghill; These things (says he) when you have reconciled, I
will say you are a great artist in reconciling. But it was not for Ames, a man
well deserving of the Church, to labor in reconciling the doctrine of the
Gospel, with the blasphemy of Satan.

XVII. The sectaries are wont, after this manner to accuse us of overthrowing
the Gospel: The Gospel say they) which on condition does promise life to the
believer, cannot serve for the executing the decree whereby life is precisely
appointed to certain and determined persons. But I affirm that it does serve;
because God promises life under a condition, which he decreed to work in the
elect. For what lets that God should not promise life to him that believes,
and yet decree to give faith to those certain and determined persons which he
has elected?

XVIII. Arnoldus, page 52. has these words; If faith be an effect of election,
it cannot be comprehended in the decree of election. But there is none of us
says, that faith is comprehended in the decree of Election, but a purpose or
will of giving faith: And this will has that respect to the decree of
election, as the part to the whole; for the decree of the means to the end, is
included in that decree by which the end is decreed; as in the will of building
a house, the will of providing stones and timber is contained.

XIX. It is a thing of small moment, which they every where beat upon:
According to the Gospel (say they) faith is a condition required in saving and
electing, but not according to your opinion. It is a ca^umny. We acknowledge
that faith is a condition required in saving a man, but not fore-required in
electing him, as Arminius would have it: Faith is a thing without which God
does not elect, but not that for the foreseeing whereof he does elect. That
faith is required in election, although the Scripture does not say it in the
same words, yet it may fitly be received, and according to the meaning of the
Scripture, if faith be laid down as a condition following election, and
without which God will have no salvation. No otherwise then breathing is a
condition to life, although a man be first appointed to life, before to
breathing.

XX. The Arminians in their Epistle against the Walachrian brethren, p 43. do
thus explain their opinion: It seems most inconvenient to us to affirm,
that God in election did decree what he himself would work in man, by his
spirit: For by the decree of absolute election to salvation, the conferring of
salvation alone, and not of faith is decreed. This their false and foolish
opinion they uphold by this argument: Seeing that salvation and faith are most
diverse predicates, neither do they make the same thing by it self, or by
accident; it cannot possible be, but that the decree of conferring salvation is
one, the decree of conferring faith is another. I answer: Although salvation
and faith are diverse things, yet faith is a necessary means to salvation; and
the decree of the end includes also the means; life and breathing are things
no less diverse, then faith and salvation: and yet by the same decree, whereby
one is appointed to life, he is appointed also to breathing, because breathing
is the means to life.

XXI. This objection of the Arminians is frequent and worn out with using: If
God does predestinate men to faith, as to the means by which they should come
to salvation, it must needs be, that God should also predestinate the
reprobates to incredulity and impenitency, as to the means by which they
should come to damnation. But I deny that this follows; for here we speak of
the means which God himself does supply, but incredulity and impenitency are
means which man himself ^ath suggested of his own. The means which God
finds already made, are to be distinguished from those which he makes: God in
predestinating, does consider man as corrupt and lying in sin; whence it
comes to pass, that the means to damnation are already in man: neither is
there any need that they should be supplied otherwise, much less by God, who
never is the author of sin. But seeing man is naturally destitute of the
means of salvation, they cannot come to man, unless God give them. Neither is
incredulity a condition required after the same manner in reprobates, as faith
is in the elect; for that is a condition required before reprobation, but this
is a condition following election: Thence it is, that incredulity and
impenitency, are things deserving reprobation, but faith is a thing not
deserving election nor salvation.

XXII. With that argument another also does fall to the ground, which these
Sectaries heap up, even with a loathsome repetition: If God (say they) does
not elect for foreseen faith, then he does not reprobate for foreseen
sin. But I deny that these things are alike, or that one follows of
another: for God foreseeth sin, because he is not the author of sin, but he
does not foresee faith, but does decree to work it; and this which God
decrees, he does not foresee it, but does will it: if we would use
significant and fit words, and not purposely darken things by an improper kind
of speech. And truly the Arminians seem to me, to strike themselves with
their own stings: For if this reason of theirs prevail, why may it not also
be lawful to reason thus. If God electeth without the respect of good works
(as Arminius will have it) then also he does reprobate without the respect of
evil works: The consequence is the same, and yet the Arminians do not admit
this. Arnoldus after Arminius does heap together many things, by which he
would get envy to our cause, and would load it with hatred, the knowledge
whereof is worth the labor, for they are clothed with much art, and searched
colors: In the front he does place arguments by which he would prove, that
our opinion is contrary to the wisdom of God.

XXIII. He therefore, Page 217. does thus argue. It is contrary to wisdom,
first to ordain absolutely to any one, that thing which is lost, and therefore
is not at all, and then to decree that he should obtain the samething. The
same homonomy, is in the word absolutely, which we noted before in
Greuinchouius, in the sixteenth objection; the answer therefore may be sought
for there. But it is not true that this is contrary to the wisdom of God, no
more then absolutely to decree that one should recover his lost health, and yet
decree that he should take Physic, and should obtain help of the Physician.

XXIV. He does repeat the same argument in other words, in the same and in the
following page, but that he also adds, That it is contrary to the wisdom of
God, to ordain first who shall receive the reward, before he ordaines on what
condition they are to receive it. But we do not teach this: For, we determine
that all the decrees of God are eternal, as concerning the order, we do not
part these into two decrees, one whereof should be of the persons to be saved,
the other of the condition whereby they should be saved. By one and the same
decree, God determined to save certain men by Faith: But if we should speak
as Arnoldus does imagine, nothing would thereby be derogated from the wisdom
of God. The father does often decree to give something to his children, before
he has determined on what condition, or by what labor. In this place Arnoldus
has stuffed in many things of vnresistablenesse, and of reprobation, which we
have put off to another place: Therefore from the wisdom of God, he passes
to the justice of God, which he does contend to be violated by us.

XXV. Therefore, Page 224. he begins with a calumny. You determine (says
he) that God decreed to save some men without the beholding of Faith. I say he
does falsely accuse us: For although God does not elect us for faith, yet he
does elect us to faith, and faith is a part of the definition of election. But
if of two that are alike sinners, he electeth one to salvation, not considering
obedience as a thing already performed, but electing him to perform obedience,
God shall not therefore be unjust: for concerning his own he does what he
will, according to that, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, etc. It
is enough that although he gives to the one the grace that is not deserved,
yet he imposes no punishment on the other but what is due. In the mean while
the Papists have cause to rejoice, who have sound a patron of merit in
Arnoldus: For it is said to be merit, when the reward is given to any one for
righteousness. Eternal life is a reward, and that it might be given for
righteousness, Arnoldus will have it given for the beholding of obedience
performed, therefore it is given to him that merits it.

XXVI. It is idle which he adds Page 225. By the decree whereby God has
decreed to give salvation to none but to him that believes, he shows that he
does rather love obedience, then the creature. But contrariwise by your decree,
God is made to love men, although they be sinners, rather then righteousness;
which is contrary to justice. Surely these things are knit together with a very
wicked art. For, first he imagines that we teach that God will save other men
then believers. Secondly, he does craithy compare that love wherewith God
loves obedience, with that love wherewith God loves the creature: seeing the
love of obedience (which is the very justice of God) is rather to be compared
with the love wherewith God loves his goodness and mercy. For although God
loves his own justice more then the creature, yet he does not love his
justice more then his goodness, by which he does do good to the creature: for
God does no less give clear and certain proofs and effects of his
goodness, then of his justice; which goodness is also a kind of justice, if
justice be taken not strictly for that virtue by which rewards are given to the
just, and punishments to the unjust; but for that general virtue, whereby God
does do all things conveniently and as it is meet. And although all things
are equal in God, yea all the attributes of God are one virtue, and the very
essence of God, yet the Scripture does extol the goodness of God with far
greater praises then his justice: So in the Law God does visit the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation, but does
extend his mercy to thousands of generations. So Psalm. 36. The judgments of
God are compared to the mountains, and his goodness to the deep. And Psalm
30. His goodness is extended to a life or an age, but his anger is restrained
to a moment. Saint James does consent to this, Chap. 2. v. 13. saying that
mercy does boast it self, and glory over justice; because God has manifested
to us more evident arguments of his goodness then of his justice. God is
therefore rightly called, Optimus maximus, The most good, and the most great;
but most good is set first, and then most great. And if you would repeat the
matter from the beginning, you shall find that in the first place the decree
of creating is to be laid down, in which there is goodness, but not justice.

XXVII. Arnoldus does more largely press the same things, Chap. 9. where he
says that the justice of God is violated by us, while we will have God to
have ordained men to salvation without the beholding of any obedience; which as
I have already said, is not our opinion. I confess indeed, that God does love
his own justice more then man; but I deny that he does more love the
manifestation or execution of his justice, then the manifestation of his mercy
and goodness toward man. God does more love that which is due to him by the
creature, then he does love the creature it self: But he does not more love
that which is due to him from the creature, then he does love that which he
owes to himself, to wit, the manifestation of his glory, by doing good to
the creature: Surely there was danger that God could not maintain his justice,
unless these innouators had issued forth, who patronize his justice,
preferring it before his goodness and wisdom. And this is the place where
Arnoldus will have God to be a debtor: Justice (says he) does appoint that God
should give to the creature performing obedience, that which is his. Never was
any thing said more harsh by the most vehement maintainers of man's merits:
Surely Arnoldus is prepared to say to God, give me that which is mine, for this
thy justice requires. O proudely spoken! But let us proceed to other things.

XXVIII. A little after he does endeavor to prove that we offend against the
same goodness of God, in the doctrine of reprobation: But we have appointed a
peculiar chapter for the examining of these things, as also there shall be a
place of examining those things which he does every where without order stuff
in, of Reprobation, and of Free will, and of Christ the foundation of election.

XXIX. It is not to be omitted, that it is familiar with the Arminians to inuey
against the doctrine of Election, which is believed in our Churches, and that
under the pretense of piety, and exhortation to good works. For they say that
precise election does extinguish all the endeavor of good works, prayers,
hearing of the word, and does takeaway every pious enterprise. For if one
believe that he were predestined to faith, and to good works, he will
leave the care to God of moving man infallibly, and would shake off all
wholesome fear, because he is persuaded that his salvation cannot be lost, nor
his faith cast off. These and other things borrowed from the Pelagians, and
still warm from the anuile of the papists, they carry about, as it were the
Circousean pomp, with a great clamor; Also these crafty men speak this, as
men taught by experience: For they say, that while they were of opinion with
us, they felt that vice growing on them by this doctrine, and that a languor
and diminishing of the love of God, crept upon them, and that sometimes they
felt some temptations of desparation: But as soon as they shook off that
opinion of precise election, they were healed of these diseases, and their
piety grew hot. No doubt we had bid piety and sanctity of manners farewell,
if this sect had not rose up, which has triumphed over vices, and has raised
up piety, almost dead. I do not search into their manners: thus much I say,
their writings relish of anger, and are full of bitterness.

But to the purpose. I deny that by our doctrine just occasion of sinning is
taken, and the raines let loose to intemperance: But nothing has ever been
said so holily, nor so truly, which may not be drawn to the worser part, and
be corrupted by a sinister interpretation. Saint Paul suffered the same
calumny, who in the sixth Chapter to the Romans, does with an opportune
prolepsis, and timely prevention, remove from himself this opinion, speaking
thus; Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound?

XXX. We deny therefore that these things which they imagine, do follow of
our doctrine. If God has predestined any one to faith and repentance, he
ought not therefore to be less careful how he may please God, and yield
obedience to him. For, repentance is carfulness it self. They therefore so
speak as if they should say, that the elect ought to want carfulness,
because God has predestined them to carfulness.

XXXI. Neither does the beneficence and bounty of God, hinder the vigilance and
watchfulness of man. So God gives us our daily bread, and yet by this he does
not hinder our labor. He does in vain expect from God succors for his life,
who does sit idle with his arms a cross. The same God which gives us food,
exhorts us to labor: for his blessing does not come upon sloth, but upon
diligence.

XXXII. Furthermore nothing lets, that a man should with less diligence
follow that labor, the event whereof is determined by the certain decree of
God, whether this decree be known to us, or whether it be not known. Christ
was not ignorant of the term of his life upon earth, and yet did he avoid
the dangers, and escaped the hands of the Jews more then once. Ezechias being
recovered from his disease, knew that he had yet fifteen years to live, in
which time it is no doubt, but he received food, and had care of his health.
God had revealed to Paul, that none of the passengers that were in the same
ship should be drowned, and yet for all that, he exhorted the Saylors to
labor, and commanded them to be kept in the ship, who having let down the
boat would have fled. The Arminians will not deny, but that the event of their
wars, was determined by the purpose of God, yet they would not thence
infer, that it was in vain to sight courageously. The Scripture does
testify in many places, that God has set to every one the limits of his life,
and that the number of our days is determined by the purpose of God, and yet
he is not to be dispraised, who sends for the Physician in his sickness, or
he, who before the battle puts on armor: For the industry of man, must serve
the decree of God; neither is it right, that the liberality of God, should be a
cause of negligence to us. So the infant moves it self in the womb, and does
it self help its own nativity, although that power which it has of moving,
is from God. Surely, seeing faith and repentance are the means to salvation,
nothing is so contrary to reason, as to use the end for the abolishing of the
means. Wherefore Saint Paul, Philip. 2. does acknowledge that it is received
from God, both to will and to do, and yet in the same place he does exhort to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling; whom we had rather believe
then Arnoldus, whose words are these, Page 273. It seems to me, that the
conscience of sin, is altogether extinguished in him, who knows that he is
delivered from sin by the absolute and immutable ordinance of God. What? Was
the conscience of David hardened to sin, or did he loose the sense of sin,
after that God signified to him by the Prophet Nathan, that he had taken away
his sin? No, he sorroweth, and does grievously lament his sin: for grief
and repentance does stick fast in the mind ever after pardon is obtained: So
Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 1. says, that God had mercy on him, and yet in the same
place he does detest his sin.

XXXIII. We are to think the same thing concerning prayer, as concerning the
labor and endeavor of good works: For we do rightly and piously ask of God
those things which are determined by his certain purpose: For God who has
determined to do good to us, will give that good to our prayers, and not to
sloathfulnesse and security. Iosaphat did not in vain pray before the fight,
2. Chro. 20. although he was not ignorant that God had already decreed what
should be the event of the battle. The Apostles knew well enough that their
sins were forgiven them by God, and yet they did daily pray, Forgive us our
trespasses. Christ did not doubt of his resurrection, and of the obtaining of
glory after the combat, and yet he did pray by night, and went aside into the
mountain to pray.

XXXIV. I let pass, that every man, even the best, is obnoxious and subject to
temptations, which assailing him, he is to fly for the help of God, least his
faith fail, or sloathfulnesse and negligence creep upon him.

XXXV. Does not Saint Paul also witness, Romans 8. that the Holy Ghost prays
in us, and does suggest sighs and prayers, whence he is called by Zachary,
the spirit of supplication. Zach. 12.10. Which seeing it is the effect of the
good pleasure of God, and the fruit of election, it were a marvel if election
it self should keep us back from prayer.

XXXVI. And if any man that is elected does yet doubt of his salvation, he has
somewhat to ask of God, to wit, (...), a full persuasion, and the sustaining
of his staggering faith, and the increase of charity and zeal, and the
obtaining of glory; and if he be certain of his salvation, he must ask the
increase of this confidence, he must ask perseverance in faith and good
works, he must pray to be kept back from sin, to which he feels himself
prone: he must pray for the fulfilling of the promises of God, he must pray
against the temptations of Satan, who although he cannot overthrow the elect,
yet he does prick their heel, and does dig into them with his goades.

XXXVII. That is of the same lump, wherewith Arnoldus from Arminius, Page 304.
does vpbraide us. Your doctrine (says he) does make the servants and Ministers
of God sloathfull in their ministry, because from thence it follows that
their diligence can profit none, but those whom God will absolutely save, and
who cannot perish, and again their negligence can hurt none but those whom God
will absolutely destroy, and who cannot be saved. The Pelagians objected the
same things to Saint Austin. Lib. de bono perseu. Chap. 14. August. de bono
perseu. cap. 14. ^iunt praedestinationis definitionem vtilitati prae^^catronis
aduersam.
Whereunto we have already largely answered: For the same reasons which stir
up the carfulness of the hearers to repentance and good works, are also of
power to stir up pastors diligently to undergo their office, and to prick
forward their hearers to repentance: For although the elect cannot perish, yet
we know that God does bring the elect to salvation, by the word and
sacraments, and by the ministry of the Gospel, whose decree our obedience
must serve.

And although the minister of the word, dealing perfunctoriously and carelessly
cannot cause, that he that is elected should perish, yet he hurts himself,
and shall bear the punishment of that negligence in the day of judgment.
Therefore although he did not hurt others, yet he should very much wrong
himself. Saint Paul, a most vehement maintainer of election, does profess
that he endures all things for the elect, that they may obtain salvation. 2.
Tim. 2.10.

XXXVIII. As concerning the Reprobates, if this reason of Arminius prevail, by
the like reason we shall neither eat nor drink, nor shall parents be bound to
be careful of the health of their children: because this negligence can hurt
none but them whom God will have to perish, who by his decree has set sure
bounds to the life of every particular person, which cannot be pulled back,
nor passed over. And if it were manifest to the pastors, which of their flock
were Reprobates, then there were some color for the doubting, whether they
ought to be careful for the salvation of them that are Reprobates: But seeing
that this is unknown to them, they ought to scatter the seed of the word
every where, and leave the event to God.

XXXIX. Arnoldus, Page 307. says, that which in my judgment is exceeding bad:
If any one (says he) should teach, that God himself has precisely appointed
to nourish one for some time in this life, and that he would so provide the
bread where with he should be nourished, that he could not but have it
abundantly: I grant that such a one need not be warned that he should be
careful, how to provide himself bread. But I affirm, that such an one
needs, and ought to be warned to prepare himself bread; because the same God
who does promise bread, and has decreed to give it, does also declare in his
word that he will give this bread to our labor, and by the means of our
carfulness: Therefore he that will give the bread, does also give strength,
will and industry, whereby this bread should be prepared: So that Arnoldus
yields that to himself, which no man in his right sense, would yield to him.

XL. Furthermore, the certainty of Election may be taken two manner of ways,
either for the immutability of the decree of God, or for that certain
persuasion, whereby any one does believe that he is elected: Of the former
kind of certainty, it is only spoken here, the latter does require a peculiar
treatise: But by the way, we say that we believe none of those things which
Arnoldus does falsely attribute to us, whereof this is one; that all men are
bound to believe that they are elected to eternal life: Nay, we teach, that he
that will not believe in Christ, and repent, is bound to believe that salvation
gotten by the death of Christ, does not pertain to him: Of the same stamp is
that calumny, when he says, that we command wicked men to be secure, as they
that can lose salvation by no evil deeds. Fie on that abominable doctrine.
To say, I am elected, therefore I may be wicked, is the speech of a reprobate
man, who will therefore be wicked because God is good. By this means, that
love wherewith God in Christ has loved us, which is the most vehement
incitation to love God, is turned into a pillow, on which profane security may
sleep. Whosoever God has elected, he has given him, or will give him, the
Holy Ghost, by which he abstaineth from so profane a thought. So him whom he
has appointed to life, he has appointed also to food and to breathing. He
were ridiculous who should say, if God has decreed that I should live till I
am eighty years old, what need I eat, seeing it cannot be but I must live so
long? Surely the destruction of such a man is near; for God has determined to
use this his senseless peevishness to punish him.

XLI. In the mean while we admonish, that the certainty of the election of
several persons, is carefully to be distinguished from that certainty whereby
several men believe themselves to be elected: The former is the certainty of
the decree, the latter is the certainty of faith. For if Arminius could prove,
that piety and the endeavor of good works, is extinguished by the persuasion
of election, yet it would not thence follow, that the decree of God concerning
the election of particular persons, is not certain and precise: But it would
only follow, that this decree is not to be believed by us to be certain.
Whence it appears how ill Arminius and Arnoldus do reason, who thereby
infer that the decree of God, concerning the election of particular persons,
is not absolute nor precise, because the confidence of election, does make some
men more negligent to the works of piety.

XLII. Add to these, those things which we have laid down in the second
chapter, where we have showed how many ways the doctrine concerning election,
is profitable to good manners, and to the discipline of piety, which
notwithstanding we would have thus to be taken, not that every one is to
expect a revelation of his election, but the Gospel is to be heard, and this
promise, whereby God does promise life to them that believe, is thoroughly to be
fastened in our mind, and to be embraced with our whole heart: By which
persuasion, whosoever shall feel himself to be lively affected with the love
of God, and to be driven to repentance, shall easily gather that he is elected,
and that the thing promised in the Gospel does belong to him. For although
election is in nature before faith and repentance, as the cause from whence
these virtues flow, yet faith and repentance is better known to us, and we are
always to proceed from the things that best are known: whence it comes to
pass, that many times we go to the cause, by the effects, which order in the
schools is called Resolutiuus.

XLIII. And if we would imitate Arminius, it were an easy thing to lay these
things upon him, and to teach how many ways his doctrine does offend against
the wisdom and goodness of God, and therefore also against his justice: How
many ways occasion may thence be taken either of distrust or of frowardness,
by what means it does blow up a man while he burst, and lift him up on high,
that it might throw him down headlong; For, one that is filled with Armianisme
may say thus. God indeed is willing to save me, but he may be disappointed of
his will, he may be defrauded of his natural defires, which are far the
best: Those whom God will save by his Antecedent will, he will destroy by his
Consequent will: Also his election does rest on the foreseeing of man's will; I
were a miserable man, if my salvation depended upon so unstable a thing. The
same man will also reason thus; God gives to all men sufficient grace, but he
has not manifested Christ to all men, therefore there is some grace sufficient
without the knowledge of Christ. Also the same man will easily believe that God
does mock men, for he has learned in the school of Arminius, that God does
seriously desire and intend the salvation of all and singular men, and yet that
nevertheless he does call very many by a means that is not congruent, that
is, by a means, in a time and measure, which is not apt nor fit, by which
means, whosoever is called, does never follow God calling. But what do I
know, whether he calls by a congruent and agreeable means or no? Add also
these famous opinions, that unregenerate men do good works; that they are
meek, thirsting after and doing the will of the Father; that faith is partly
from grace, and partly from free will: Nay, what that any maintainer of the
sect of Arminius, shall dare to set laws to God himself, and to say that God
is bound to give to all men power of believing? And that the justice of God
does require, that he may give to man that which is his own, and that man
himself may determine and open his own heart to receive the word of God. O
your fidelity! Are these your famous incitations to holiness of life? Does
Arminius train up men to piety by these instructions? Surely if any one is
stirred up to good works by these things, he is thereby the more corrupted.
For, God had rather have sins with repentance, then righteousness with
pride. God will not stir up men to repentance, with the loss either of our
faith or his glory: Nor are we only to do our endeavor that men be stirred
up to repentance, but we must also see that it be done by means that are
convenient, and not contumelious against God.

CHAP. XXV.
Whether Christ be the cause and foundation of Election.
I. WE say that no man is saved but by and for Christ, and that Christ is the
(...), and price of our redemption, the foundation and meritorious cause of our
salvation: But we do not say that he is the cause of election, or the cause
why of two considered in the corrupted mass, one is preferred before another.
There are not wanting examples of most wicked men to one whereof (God so
dispensing) the Gospel has been preached, whence it came to pass that he
was converted and did believe, but to the other the Gospel has not been
preached: The Scripture does not say that the death of Christ is the cause of
this, but does fetch the cause from the good pleasure of God, who has mercy on
whom he will: For the love of the father does always go before the mediation
of the son, seeing that the love of the father to the world, was the cause
why he sent his son.

Yea truly, seeing Christ himself, as he is man, is elected, and the head of
the elect, he cannot be the foundation and cause of election: For as he is
the head of men, as he is a man; so is he the head of them that are
predestined, as he is a man predestined to so great honor, which came to
him by the mere grace of God.

II. Wherefore the Apostle calls Christ (...), the price of our redemption,
and, (...), the propitiation, Coloss. 1. Romans 3. but he does not say that he is
the cause why some men should be elected rather then others.

III. Reason it self does consent. For as the recovery of the sicke-man does
in the intention always go before the using of the Physician; so it must
needs be, that in the mind of God, the thought of saving men was (not in
time, but in order) before the thought of sending the Savior.

IV. Add to these, that the mediation and redemption of Christ, is an action
whereby the justice of God is satisfied, which is not signified by the word
Election; for it is one thing to be a mediator, and another thing to be the
cause of Election, or of the preferring of one before another in the secret
counsel of God: Whence it is, that Christ is the meritorious cause of our
salvation, but not of our election; which is as much as if I should say, that
Christ is the foundation and cause of the execution of the decree of Election,
but not the cause of Election it self.

V. It is of no small moment that Christ, John 15.13. says, That he lays
down his life for his friends: and chap. 10. v. 11. he calls himself the
good shepherd, that lays down his life for his sheep: And if Christ be
dead for his friends, and for his sheep, it must needs be, that when he died
for them, he did consider them as being already friends and sheep, although
many of them were not then called, as Christ himself does testify, who in the
sixteenth verse of the same chapter does call those also his sheep, who were
not yet converted. And if Christ dying for us, considered us as his friends and
sheep, it is plain, that before the death of Christ, there was already
destinction made between his friends and enemies, between the sheep and
goats, and therefore that the decree of Election was in order, before the
death of Christ, and that the opinion of Arminius, is to be hissed out, as an
opinion subuerting the Gospel, whereby he thinks that the election had not
place when Christ died. Certainly he that died for his sheep, died for the
elect, and not for them who were to be elected after he was dead.

By these things it is plain, that by those friends and sheep for which
Christ died, are not understood those, only, who love God and follow Christ,
but all those whom God loves, and whose salvation he decreed: for whom Christ
died when they did not yet love God, and when they were enemies to him. And
therefore they are called enemies, Romans 5.10. because they did not love God,
but yet even then they were highly loved by God, and were appointged to
salvation in Christ: For in a diverse respect they were both friends and
enemies, sheep and goats: Friends because God loved them, enemies because
they did not yet love God.

VI. Neither is injury done to Christ, if the love of the Father, and his good
pleasure be said to go in order before the decree of sending his son, seeing
Christ himself does witness it John, 3.16. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, etc. where the love of the father is manifestly
set before the sending of the son, which is so to be understood, as that the
son is not excluded from the act of election it self; seeing that he also is
one God with the father, but this was done by him, not as he is mediator, but
as he is God.

VII. Neither is any injury done to Christ, if the will of the father
concerning the saving of men, be said to go before the redemption of Christ,
seeing that this redemption is also after sin: for the disease is before the
medicine.

VIII. Nor is any thing detracted from the greatness of the price of our
redemption, if his will who offered the price, be said to go before it.

IX. The very definition of the decree of election, does prove this thing; for
election is the decree of saving certain men by Christ, in which definition,
Christ is laid down, not as the cause of election, but as the means of the
execution of it, and as the meritorious cause of salvation.

X. It is maruailous, how much the Arminians insult here: For because we make
the love of God to go (not in time, but in order) before the mediation of the
son, they so deal with us, as if we taught, that God loved us without
Christ, and as being considered without faith in Christ, which does differ as
much from our opinion, as that which does differ most. Be it far from us,
that we should say, that God would ever bestow salvation upon us, but that
together and in the same moment he considered us in Christ, as being to be
saved by him: Nor was there any cause why we for that thing should be accused
of Sicianisme; we have nothing to do with that Alastor and hellish monster,
which does altogether overthrow the benefit of Christ: But it is one thing to
say that the love of the father does, in order, go before the mediation of the
son; and another thing to say that God loves us without the son. It is one
thing to dispose the thoughts of God in order, and another thing to separate
them, and pull them asunder. Arminius who in the beginning of his book against
Perkins, calls himself a wirty fellow, does craftily, yea wickedly catch at
and hunt after points of priority in order, to pull asunder those things which
cannot be separated. He does therefore as much as if one should say, that the
thought of creating man, was first in order, in God, before the thought of
adorning him with holiness and righteousness, and would thence inferrre that
God would first create man not just, or first to have considered him as not
holy. If any man says that in the decree of God, the thought of overthrowing
of the world, was before the thought of overthrowing it by fire, he does not
therefore say, that God first thought of overthrowing it without fire. All the
purposes of God are eternal, although there be a certain order and dependency
between them.

XI. That place of Saint John, Chap. 3. vexes Arminius: God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc. where the love of God is
laid down, as the cause by which it came to pass, that he gave the son: He
does therefore endeavor to delude so direct a place by a witless cauell, That
love (says he) is not that by which he will give eternal life; which
appears by the very words of John, who does join faith between this love
and eternal life. The Reader therefore shall observe, that Arminius himself
does acknowledge, that there is a kind of love of God toward men, which does
go before his decree of sending his son. But he says that God by that love
is not willing to give eternal life. What then will he do by it? For this
thing he ought to show. Will God by that love, leave men in death? Is it
possible that God should love the creature, created by him to life, but he must
needs by the same love, will that it should live? I am ashamed of so weak a
subtilty. Yea truly, in that he sent his son, by that love it is
sufficiently manifest, that by that love he was willing man should be restored
to life: But (says he) faith comes between that love and eternal life:
What then? Cannot I will the recovery of him that is sick, although the
Physician come between my will and his recovery. Surely he makes those things
opposite and contrary, which are appolite, and joined together. But I do not
see how he rather favors Socinus, who says that Christ is not the cause of
Election, then he that says that Christ is not the cause of the love whereby
God would send Christ into the world, and provide for us a redeemer: Or why
there should be a greater offense in making the redemption of Christ to be the
medium, and mean between the love of God, by which he elected us, and
between our salvation, then if it be made the medium, a mean between the
love of God, by which he will give Christ for us, and between our salvation:
For on both sides redemption is made the means, and not the first cause. Let
us not therefore envy God the father this praise, that his good pleasure thould
be made the fountain and first original of our Election.

XII. Observe moreover that that Election whereof Arminius will have Christ to
be the foundation, is that general election, whereby all men are conditionally
elected, which seeing we have largely consuted, Chap. 18. whatsoever the
Arminians do bring to prove that Christ is the foundation of election, does
vanish away. Surely there was no cause why they should so earnestly labor to
prove that Christ was the foundation of that election, by which Pharaoh and
Judas were elected: Of which imaginary election, he shall have the true
character and portraiture, who has brought in God speaking thus: I decreed to
send my son to save all men who shall believe, but who and how many they
shall be, I have not determined; only I will give to all men sufficient power
to believe, but he shall belecue who will himself.

XIII. Arminius does defend himself against so evident a truth, by one little
word of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.4. He has elected us in Christ: But it is one
thing to be elected in Christ, and another thing to be elected for Christ, so
that Christ should be the cause why one is elected rather then another. The
meaning of the Apostle is clear: To elect, is nothing else then to appoint to
salvation. Therefore to elect in Christ, is to appoint to salvation, to be
obtained in or by Christ: For whosoever God has decreed to save he has given
them to Christ, and has considered them as joined to Christ. He seeks a
knot in a bulrush, who by far fetched interpretations would darken that which
is perspicuous and plain.

XIV. For a foundation of this their opinion, Arminius, and after him Arnoldus,
does lay this proposition: That Predestination is the foundation of
Christianity. This demand he will have to be granted him, for he does not prove
it; no otherwise then if one in the beginning of a disputation, would obtain
by suite, and would desire that it might be granted him, that a circle has
corners. This is a great demand, and that which I think no man would grant
him, who knows what predestination is, and what is the foundation of
Christian Religion. The foundation, of Christian Religion is, to acknowledge
that Christ, the only son of God, is sent from the father, that whosoever
believes in him might not perish but have everlasting life. It must needs be
that the foundation of Christianity be the rule of faith, on which the faith of
Christians must rest; but predestination is not the rule of faith, but the
action of God, whereby be determined to save certain men by Christ. Far be
it from us that we should say, that the secret decree, by which several men,
as Peter or Charles, etc. are elected, is the foundation of Christianity.
Whosoever would from thence begin to teach Religion, and would begin the
elements of Christian faith at this decree of Predestination, he should
either, by the darkness cast before him, tremble at the very entrance, or
should fall down right, as being taken with giddiness. Whatsoever things
therefore Arnoldus does build on so false a proposition, do of themselves fall
to the ground, so that we need not overthrow those things, which of themselves
will fall down. Further also he does impugn and strive against that thing
which is not believed by us, to wit, that we are loved by God without Christ;
only the ambiguity wherewith he would deceive the Reader, is to be noted, when
he says, Page 171. That Christ is the foundation of our receining into grace,
and into the love of God. If by receiving into grace and love, he understand
the reconciliation by his satisfaction performed for us; I confess that Christ
is the foundation of that receiving into grace, and of that love: But if by
receiving into grace and love, be understood that love of the father, by which
he would send his son to save us (which is the greatest love of all, and the
fountain of all good) certainly Arminius himself would not have Christ to be
the foundation of that love; and yet by that very same love, God chose from
eternity whom he would.

XV. I do not search into that which Arminius boldly and rashly has dared to
say, that God could not save us otherwise then by Christ, nor had he any other
means for the salvation of man. God could not (says he) will eternal life to
any one without the respect of a mediator: And the Arminian conferrers at the
Hage; It is impossible for God to decree salvation to sinners, but that he must
before have decreed the satisfaction of his justice: Now they speak of the
satisfaction of Christ. Surely they do boldly and rashly contain the wisdom
of God within limits, and if this thing were true, yet it were not for man to
speak such things: It is sufficient that God has followed the most convenient
way, and then which none is better. By the way it is to be observed, that this
opinion has not pleased Vorstius. He, Page 33. disput. de Deo, does affirm,
That it was lawful for God to relent or yield somewhat of his own right, no
less then to retain or pursue that which is his right. And Page 399. It is
false to say, that no sin could be let pass unpunished by the justice of God.

XVII. The conferrers at the Hage do thus argue: If the decree of Christ the
Savior, be after the decree of the election of some particular persons to
salvation, then God decreed the salvation of some particular persons, in order
before he decreed the satisfaction of his justice.

Here is a manisold deceit: For the decree of saving certain men, and the
decree of sending Christ to save them, they make two decrees, when it is but
one; for election is the decree of saving certain men in Christ. It is not one
decree by which God has appointed man to life, and another, by which he has
appointed him to breathing. There is another fraud in that they compare the
salvation of several men with the satisfaction of Gods justice, when the
comparison was to be made, of the manifestation of the goodness of God, by
which he does save several men, with the satisfaction of his justice. It is
not inconvenient if God be said first to have decreed the manifestation of his
goodness, before the satisfaction of his justice. Add to these that they do
craftily use these words, the election of some particular persons, to
extenuation and contempt; for these some particular persons, are the Church of
the Elect, whose salvation is of so great account with God, that for the
salvation thereof, he would satisfy his own justice: Whence it follows,
that God, that he might declare his goodness, did first intend their
salvation, before the satisfaction of his justice.

CHAP. XXVI.
The other things which they add, are now to be examined by us.
I. THE doctrine of Reprobation, is so far profitable to the elect, in as
much as by the comparison of the lot of Reprobates with theirs, they are
stirred up to the praise and admiration of the bounty of God toward them. Then
also when the pledges of Election do begin to fail, and the spirit of
adoption is grieved by the lusts of the flesh, it is profitable to the
faithful to be stricken with some horror, and to be stirred up to try
themselves, whether they proceed in regeneration, or whether they grow worse
and fall back, that so pricks and incitements might be put to them that are
sloathfull.

II. The very word election does prove, that there are some that are
reprobates; for there were not some elected; unless the rest were passed by
and rejected. The Scripture makes mention of Reprobates, 1. Pet. 2.8. Which
stumble at the word, being disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. And
Jude 4. Certain men are crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to
this condemnation. These in the Revelation are noted out unto us, by those who
are not written in the book of life, the number of whom Christ does insinuate
to be very great, when he says, Many are called, few chosen. The same is
proved by experience: For not only before the coming of Christ, but also at
this time there are very many nations to whom the name of Christ is not known,
without the knowledge of which there is no salvation.

III. Reprobation is the decree of God, by which from eternity he decreed, not
to give to certain men his grace, by which they might be freed from their
engrafted deprauation, and from the curse due to them, and appointed them to
just and deserved punishments for their sins.

IV. The definition of Thomas does not please me, who says that the decree of
Reprobation is the will of permitting one to fall into sin, and of laying
upon him the punishment of damnation for his sin: For the permission whereby
God does permit, does not belong to predestination, but to his providence,
although it serve to predestination.

V. It is the opinion of the Arminian sect, that Reprobates may be saved: For
(says Arminius) that decree is not of the power, but of the act of saving.
Very ill spoken: For where the act of God is determined by his decree, in vain
is the power by which this act may be resisted. This opinion does draw with it
other opinions no better then it self, for errors are tied together among
themselves like serpents eggs: For if a Reprobate may be saved, he that is not
written in the book of life, may effect that he be now written in, and so the
number of the elect will not be certain, nor the decree of Reprobation be
irreuocable and peremptory (as they speak) unless after final perseverance
in incredulity. Also hence it will follow, that a reprobate may, if he will,
obtain faith, and convert himself: whence it would come to pass, that faith
should not be of the mere grace of God, which we shall see hereafter to be
the opinion of Arminius.

VI. God is, after the same manner, the cause of Reprobation, as the judge is
the cause of the punishment of them that are guilty, and sin is the
meritorious cause. Seeing therefore the consideration of sin does move the
judge, and the judge does condemn to punishment, it appears that sin is
the remote cause of damnation, and not only a condition necessarily
fore-required, and that the judge is the next and nearest cause.

VII. Furthermore although sin be the cause of appointing to punishment, yet
it is not the cause of the difference between the Elect and Reprobate. For
examples sake: Two men are guilty of the some crime, and it pleases the king
to condemn one, and to absolve and free the other, his sin indeed that is
condemned is the cause of his punishment, but it is not the cause why the king
is otherwise affected to the other then to him, seeing the fault on both sides
is alike: The cause of the difference is, that something thing steppeth
between, which does turn the punishment from one of them; which in the work
of predestination is nothing else but the very good pleasure of God, by which
of his mere good pleasure, he gave certain men to Christ, leaving the rest in
their inbred corruption, and in the curse due unto them. For which difference,
it is great wickedness for us to strive with God, seeing he is not subject
nor bound to any creature, and punishes no man unjustly, giving to one the
grace that is not due, and imposing on the other the punishment that is due.

VIII. Here it is demanded what is that sin for which God does reprobate, to
wit, whether men are Reprobated only for the sin which is derived from Adam,
and for that blot which is common to Reprobates with the elect, or whether they
are also reprobated for the actual sins which they are to commit in the
whole course of their life. The answer is at hand: For although natural
corruption be cause sufficient for Reprobation, yet it is no doubt but that God
has decreed to condemn for the same cause for which he does condemn; and
he does condemn the Reprobates for the sins which they have committed in
act: For in hell they do not only bear the punishment of original sin,
but also of actual sins: Therefore also God has appointed them to damnation
for the same sins. Now to Reprobate, and to appoint to punishment, are all
one. God does so execute any thing in time, according as he from eternity
decreed to execute it: Now he does punish in time for actual sins, therefore
also he decreed from eternity to punish for them Thence it is that the
punishments of the men of Capernaum, was to be greater then the punishment of
the Sodomites, and the punishment of him that knew the will of his master,
greater then the punishment of him that knew it not, because there is a great
difference between the actual sins for which they are punished. Nothing
hinders, that God considering a man lying in his natural corruption and
deprauation, should not also consider him as poluted with those sins which he
was to commit by that natural deprauation.

IX. Arminius does not think that any man is Reprobated for original sin,
for he contends that Christ has obtained the remission of it for all mankind.
But he will have man to be reprobated only for the foreseeing of actual
sins, that is, for the breach of the law, and the contempt of grace: In which
thing he does seem not to be constant to himself. For seeing all actual
sins do flow from original sin, it cannot be, that the cause and
fountain of actual sins should be remitted by God, and yet the sins that
flow from thence should not be remitted: As if God should forgive a man
intemperance, but should punish him for adultery; for actions do flow from
habits and natural inclinations, as the second acts do flow from the first.

X. Without doubt incredulity, and the reiection of the Gospel are among the
sins, for which any one is reprobated; For by this reiection we sin against
the Law, by which God will judge us: For the law commands that God be loved
with all our heart, and that he be obeyed in all things, and without exception,
and therefore also that he be believed when he speaks, and that he be obeyed
when he commands us to believe, whatsoever it shall be which he shall either
command or shall say.

XI. That he should be Reprobated for rejecting the Gospel, and despising the
grace of Christ, to whom the Gospel was never preached, is against all reason:
For, whom the Gospel does not save, it leaves under the law, to be judged by
it, which law does then bind a man to believe in Christ, when Christ is
preached to him: Nor is it the School master to Christ, but to them who have
means to come to the knowledge of Christ; After the same manner as the law did
not bind them to belecue the prophecy of Jeremy, who never heard of the name
of Jeremy, nor could it be known to them.

XII. And although reprobation cannot be said to be the cause of sin, because
sin goes before reprobation, yet it cannot be denied but that reprobation is
the cause of the denying of grace, and of the preaching of the Gospel, and of
the spirit of adoption, which is peculiar to the elect: For seeing this denying
is a punishment, it must needs be, that it is inflicted by the will of a just
judge. These are the words of Arminius, Page 58. against Perkins: Effectual
grace is denyea by the decree of Reprobation; and a (...) after, God by the
certain accree of Reprobation, determinea not to give faith an^ repentance to
some, to wit, by yielding them his effectual grace, by which they would
certainly belecue and be conu^rted. There is no cause therefore that we should
be traduced by the Arminians in this respect, seeing that the principal of
their sect does say the same thing.

And it is easy to tell the cause why God should not be bound to give to all
men faith and repentance: For God who has not wrought the disease, is not
bound to give to all men the remedies of the disease, nor to give the ability
of performing those things which are due from man to God. For this impotency
and disability in performing, proceeded from man himself, not from God: And
the fulfilling of the law, is a natural debt; Which law seeing it is violated
by the retection of the Gospel, it is plain, that it is also a natural debt
to believe the Gospel, not before it is preached, Arnold. Page 3.6. Dicat
Arminius grat^am qua^a^u tas cre^e^dida^^ qua^plurimis, d^^at emmbus c^mmun^m
esse ac proinde n^gat gra^iam esse? Et P 262. Respondeo D^um cum n^uum lo lus
gratia pro enit and cultae admistae remissi nem pro^it^^ sub noua obedientiae
condition teneri maxi^^ vires (...) quibus ^^mo condi ton^m stu^ possit
implere, alioqui non p^ssit ^udicars ^st im grati^msincere offerre.
but then when it is preached.

XIII. The Arminians are of opinion, that no man is reprobated, but he that
has contemned that grace which does lead to Christ, and they make incredulity
the special cause of reprobation not only in them to whom the Gospel is
preached, but a so in them who have not heard the name of Christ spoken off.
Arminius makes these guilty of the contempt of grace: For he says that there
is given to all men vnresistab^y the faculty of believing, and the power of
obta^ning faith, if they will: Yea, they say, that sufficient means to be eeue
were administered to the heathen, who before the coming of Christ, lived in the
inmost part of Spain or Scythia: And they lay down a certain universal
sufficient grace, common to all men; but when they come to explain that grace,
sometimes they place it in the common notions, and natural light; sometimes in
the contemplation of the creatures, sometimes in any general knowledge of the
law: Of which cursed doctrine, and how by these things they do not obscurely
pass into the camp of Pelagius, shall be spoken in their due places.

XIV. But here we are every where set upon by their darts, and the Arminians
do abundantly cast reproaches upon us, and do faigne to themselves monsters
which they may kill. The conferrers at the Hage, Page 122. after they have
belched out some calumnies, do thus conclude their speech: These things are
briefly spoken, Collat. Hag Non potuit se conuertere impeditus sciticet a
dinina voluntate.
against that absurd, detestable, and abominable opinion. Good words I pray
you: These terrible vizards do not fright us. They imagine that we teach, that
in fidelity does flow from reprobation, as if reprobation were the cause of
infidelity. The good men sing this Cuckowes song to us six hundred times,
attributing to us the doctrine which we neither believe nor teach: For if one
has not decreed to give to him that is blind the remedies by which he might
recover his sight, he is not therefore the cause of his blindness, nor has
he appointed him to blindness.

XV. They ground on a false foundation, on which they build those things which
are worse. For they thus begin their speech of Reprobation, Page 118. It is
known to the Contraremonstrant brethren, that such as Election is on the one
part, such Reprobation ought to be on the other part. This is the fountain of
their error; this false beginning has led aside those acute men into by ways:
The respect of Election is one, the respect of Reprobation is far other. For
sin and in fidelity is not a condition required after the same manner in the
reprobates, as faith is a condition required in the elect: For sin is a
condition fore-required in reprobates, but faith is a condition following
election. Reprobation is made for sin, but election is made to faith. Sin
is the cause of the appointing to punishment, faith is the effect of election.
God finds sin, but works faith. Sin follows reprobation only in the
necessity of consequence, but not in the necessity of the consequent: But faith
does follow election both ways. By these things that calumny is abundantly
washed off which Arnoldus, Page 228. and in many other places does sprinkle
upon us, that we deny that the reprobates are reprobated for sin.

XVI. It yields an occasion to the Arminians of falsely accusing us, because
we say, that the decree of reprobation is precise and absolute, nor do we
agree to Arminius, who teaches that the reprobates indeed are not saved, but
yet they might be saved, and who denies that the number of the reprobates is
determined by the decree of God. But here is nothing from whence it can be
drawn, that reprobation is the cause of sin, or that any one is reprobated
without the beholding of sin.

XVII. Arnoldus does carpe at our opinion with certain little objections, Page
219. Ye say that the reprobates have been excluded of God from salvation in
his decree for one sin, but that they shall be excluded in time for another
diverse sin. It is a calumny, we neither think nor say it. He does heap up
the same false accusation, Page 229. and 238. where he says that men are
reprobated, as only considered in the sin of Adam.

XVIII. In the same page he does thus vainly argue: It is not the part of
wisdom to be willing that they should hope for good, who are excluded from it
by the absolute decree of God. But I deny, that unbelievers and profane men
are excluded from God, by the absolute decree of God, after that manner as you
take the word absolute, that is, without respect to their sins: Neither does
it favor of folly to command that they who are excluded from eternal life, by
the absolute, that is, by the certain and inevitable decree, should contend
and aspire to eternal life, seeing that they are therefore excluded from life,
because they have not aspired to it.

XIX. The same man, Page 226. Ye determine (says he) that God has prec^sely
reprobated from salvation, some sinners lying in the fall of Adam, without the
consideration of impenitency. Is is a slander: Our Churches do not be^eeue it.
The confession of the Churches of France, of England, of the Low Countries,
does not say it: Indeed in the decree of reprobation is included the will of
not giving faith and final repentance to reprobates; but it does not follow
thence, that reprobation is without the consideration of impenitency.

XX. Arnoldus adds; Your doctrine determines that God does exact faith from
the reprobates, and that he decreed to condemn them if they should not
believe, when yet it is impossible for them that they should believe in Christ
with a sure persuasion of mind, not only because God does not give them power
of believing, but also because if they were furnished with power to believe,
yea, if they should believe in Christ, they would believe that which were
false, because Christ has not died for them: But it is contrary to the justice
of God to exact such an obedience, and then to punish the creature, for not
performing such an obedience, which is absolutely impossible to the creature.
He does abundantly repeat the same thing in other places, but especially, Page
261. and 262. Here are many things faise. First, it is false that faith is
exacted and required of all the reprobates, for it is required only of them to
whom the Gospel is preached. Neither is it true that faith is absolutely, and
without condition required of all those, to whom the Gospel is preached; for
it is required under a condition, to wit, that they be converted and repent:
But if they do not repent, we teach and cry out, that the benefit of Christ
does not pertain to them; and that they hope and believe in Christ in vain,
so long as they are adverse and contrary to God, inuiting them to repentance:
And it is also false, that God is unjust, if he command them to believe and
obey, who for their inbred deprauation cannot believe and obey, and to whom God
does not give power of believing; for man himself has brought this impotency
and disability on himself, and this deprauation, in man, is voluntary; and God
exacting from man, that he should believe him speaking by Christ, does require
nothing which man does not owe: For to obey the law is a natural debt. For
God, speaking by Christ, cannot be refused or contemned, but the law also is
broken, as we have already taught at large in many places, especially Chap. 11.
Where we have taught that the power of believing was given us in Adam, and that
Adam had it before the fall, but an occasion of using it was wanting: And
therefore also this power was lost in Adam. Page 262. in Tileaum.
Nor is God bound to restore it, as Arnoldus (setting laws to God himself)
would have it. By these things also we meet with that false accusation
wherewith Arnoldus does pursue us, Page 230. Ye determine (says he) that faith
is required of reprobates, and yet that the means to perform obedience to
faith are precisely denied: For it is not required of all, but of them to whom
Christ is made known, nor is it required of these absolutely, but with
condition of repentance: Neither is any thing required of them although they be
reprobates, but what they owe.

XXI. But Arnoldus does add to this a foul calumny, wherewith he would
odiously bur^en our cause. Ye will have (says he) faith to be required of the
reprobates, that they might be made inexcusable, and their damnation might be
aggrauated. We say indeed that their damnation is thereby made the greater,
but we do not say that this end was propounded by God. So when we say that one
goes forth to war, that he may be slain, we signify what is to happen,
not what end should be intended. And it is not for us to enquire scrupulously
into the end which God propounded to himself. Yet these two ends are certain,
to wit, to require of man what is due, and also by this mean to bring the
elect to salvation.

XXII. He does bend at us another dart, Page 286. Your doctrine (says he) does
repugne the Evangelical threats: For seeing the intent of God in the
propounding of them is, that men should be driven from impenitency, and so
should be saved. You on the contrary side teach, that God does deny to some men
the means that are necessary to repentance, because he has determined not to
save them. First, it may be doubted whether there are any Evangelical threats;
for the threatenings which are contained in the books of the Gospel, are not a
part of the Gospel. For seeing the word Euangelium, Gospel, does signify, a
good message, I do not see how threatenings can belong to a good message: They
who believe not the Gospel shall be punished, not by the Gospel, but by the
law. But howsoever it be, I see nothing here which does repugne these threats,
by which God does intend to require from man that which is due, and that which
the law it self requires, to wit, that God be obeyed. Seeing that the denying
of grace, and of the restoring of the powers which man by his own fault lost,
does very well agree with such a declaration of threatenings. These things are
not repugnant, to propound life to man on the condition of obedience, and not
to restore to man those powers of obedience which he lost by his own fault.

XXIII. Neither are these things repugnant, to propound life to any one under a
condition, and to appoint the same man to death for his foreseen disobedience.

XXIV. The same man since Arminius, Page 269. (for that which he adds
concerning Infants shall hereafter be handled) does thus inuey against our
opinion. Your opinion (says he) causes that public prayers cannot be offered
to God, as it is meet they should, to wit, with faith and confidence that they
shall profit all them that hear the word, because according to your opinion
amongst them, there are many, whom God not only will not have to be saved, but
whom he will have to be condemned by his absolute, eternal, and immutable
will, which goes before all things and causes: Yet the Apostle commands that
prayers be made for all men, and adds this reason, because it is good and
acceptable to God, who would have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge
of the truth.

XXV. I answer, that it is falsely supposed by Arminius, that public prayers
ought to be poured out with this confidence, that they shall profit all them
that hear the word. This faith were rash, and not resting on the word of God;
especially seeing the ministers of the word, have, for the most part, known
many that are disobedient and openly profane, nor do they doubt, but that
besides these, there are many that are sick, and ill affected with inward and
hidden vices, who yet make a show of piety. Certainly the similitude of the
seed sown into diverse ground, and of a differing disposition, and with an
unlike success, does in this case bring more fear then confidence. And yet
because the secrets of reprobation are unknown to us, we do rightly pray for
all, because we hope well of every one. I do not see whereto this objection
belongs, unless to stop and stay the Reader with a childish declamation,
because this very objection does no less pursue Arminius, who although he will
not have the decree of God to be precise, yet does confess, that God does
certainly foreknow who are to be damned. And to confess this, what is it
else, then to teach that God is willing that we should pray for them, whom he
certainly knows our prayers will not profit? But that which he casts upon
us, that we make the decree of reprobation to go before all things and causes,
and therefore also before sin it self, is plainly contrary to our opinion.:
And if such words have fallen from any unawares, it is not therefore the opinion
of our Churches, we defend those things that are ours, but we do not warrant
other men's.

XXVI. Concerning the place of the Apostle, where he says that God would have
all men be saved, it shall be spoken in his order and place. To will, here, is
no other thing then to inuit, and to call: Also by all men, he understands,
men of every condition and sort: After the same manner that Titus, 2.11. The
grace of Christ is said to bring salvation to all men, when notwithstanding so
many perish. This is a token here, of that in the former place it is spoken of
kings, in this place of servants: Their domination was at that time contrary to
Christ, and the lot and state of these men, was abject and base, the Apostle
would not hinder that they should not be prayed for, and these are thought such
as may be partakers of saving grace.

XXVII. The Arminians seem, to themselves, to deal very acutely, when they
dispute thus: If there be any one (say they) whose eyes have been pulled out
for not keeping his watch well, is it a just thing to command him that
hereafter he should watch and ward? And then if he has not done it, to lay
great punishments upon him because he has not watched? I answer, that this is
an example nothing to the purpose: For they use the example of one that is
blind, who is not bound to see. But man though he be corrupted and wicked, yet
he is bound to obey God, which if he has not done, he is justly punished.
Then also they bring an example of one whose eyes were pulled out, he striving
against it, and being unwilling: But man brought this deprauation on himself,
of his own accord, and was voluntarily evil, and therefore he is justly
punished.

CHAP. XXVII.
How far, and in what sense Christ died for all. The opinions of the parties.
I. THE Arminians are of opinion, that Christ by his death obtained and got
remission of sins, Coll. Page 130. Christut omnibus per mortem impetrauit
recenciliationem and remissionem peccatorum. Collat. Hag. P. 183. Non omnibus
merito suo partam salutem consert etiamsi omnthussit acquisita.
reconciliation, and salvation for all, and particular men: Nor do they doubt
to say, that by the death of Christ, reconciliation was obtained for Pharaoh,
Saul, Judas, and Pilate, not as they were reprobates, but as they were sinners:
For God does equally intend and desire the salvation of all men; and that the
incredulity of man is the cause that remission and reconciliation is not
applied to all.

Yet Vorstius alone, the champion of the Arminians, does stagger in this
question, and does seem to be more prone to the contrary opinion. In the 56.
Page Collat. cum Piscat. He says that Christ was delivered by God to death,
not for the elect alone, but for all men whatsoever, at least for them that are
called.

III. They think that the end which God propounded to himself in delivering
his Son to death, was not to apply this benefit to some certain men; nor do
they think that Christ was appointed to death, by the precise will of God; to
save man, for Christ was appointed to death by his father, before God thought
of saving of men, and therefore that he was appointed to death without that
respect, that they which believe in him should be saved. Greuinchouius, Page
21. does say expressly, that reconciliation being obtained, there was yet no
necessity of application, that is, after salvation and reconciliation for all
men was obtained, there was no necessity that any one should be saved, and it
was possible that no man in act should be reconciled: Because he will have the
decree of sending Christ, in order, to go before the decree of saving those
which believe, and therefore that God determined to send his Son, when he had
not yet determined to save those which believe. But the Arminians would have
this to be the end which God propounded to himself in sending his Son, to
wit, to make the salvation of men possible, and to lay open a way for himself,
whereby he might save finners, without any hurt to his justice. By this
means, they say, God has gotten power of saving man, because without the
death of Christ, Greuinch. Page 15.16.17.
by which the justice of God was satisfied, God could not be willing to save
men.

IV. And if no man had believed in Christ, yet Christ (if these men be
believed) had obtained that end which he propounded to himself in dying: For
they deny that he died to save any man precifely, but that the salvation of
man might be made possible, and a gate might be opened unto him to salvation,
which is left free for man by the help of grace to enter, or not to enter.

V. Vide Collat. Hag. p. 172. Greum. p. 8.9. Deus applicationem reconnliationes
amnibus nec voluit nec noluit, etc.
They distinguish therefore, between the obtaining of reconciliation and the
application of it. They contend that reconciliation and remission of sins, is
obtained for all, which yet is applied only to them that believe: That all men
are given to Christ in the right of salvation, but not in the communication of
salvation: That God has neither willed nor nilled the application of
reconciliation ( that is, faith and salvation) to all men, but he has thus
willed it, if they believe, if they will receive grace.

VI. Armin in Perkins. Page 77. and 78.
The same men also do deny, that Christ on the cross sustained the person of
the elect, or that he died for the elect: Because election had not then place,
for election is something that is after the death of Christ.

VII. They say indeed that Christ offered himself for a sacrifice for all
men, but as concerning his intercession, they are not constant to themselves in
that, Greuinch P. 46. Christus quoad actum oblationis omnium ^m nino hominam
sacerd^s suit etiam Pharaonis, etc Ib^ per oblatione^ vult fi^ri impetration
(...), per intercessionem ^ere applicationem.
sometimes they will have him to make intercession only for the saithfull, as
if something might be obtained without intercession: Sometimes they make two
kinds of intercession, Coll Ha. p. 187. Respondemus dup^^ce^ esse
intercess^onem vnam generalem quae ^otum mundum spectat, alteram particulare^
quae ad sol^s credemtes p^rti^es.
one general and common to all, another particular, which is only peculiar to
the elect.

VIII. We do very much differ from this opinion: We acknowledge that Christ
died for all; but we deny, that by his death salvation and forgiveness of
sin is obtained for all men: Or that reconciliation, is made for Cain,
Pharaoh, Saul, Judas, etc. Neither do we think that remission of sins is
obtained for any one, whose sins are not remitted, or that salvation was
purchased for him, whom God from eternity has decreed to condemn: For this
were a vain purcha^e. We deny that election is after the death of Christ, as
for many other causes, so also because Christ in the very agony of death gave a
notable proof of election in the thief, whose heart he affected, and
enlightened his mind after an unutterable manner; the other thief being left
and neglected. And seeing Christ does every where say that he died for his
sheep, and for those whom his father gave him, he does sufficiently declare
that he died for the elect.

IX. And when we say that Christ died for all, we take it thus, to wit, that
the death of Christ is sufficient to save whosoever do believe, yea, and that
it is sufficient to save all men, if all men in the whole world did believe in
him: And that the cause why all men are not saved, is not in the insufficiency
of the death of Christ, but in the wickedness and incredulity of man. Finally
Christ may be said to reconcile all men to God by his death, after the same
manner, that we say that the Sun does enlighten the eyes of all men, although
many are blind, many sleep, and many are hid in darkness: Because if all
and several men had their eyes, and were awake, and were in the midst of the
light, the light of the Sun were sufficient to enlighten them. Neither is it
any doubt but that it may be said, not only that Christ died for all men, but
also that all men are saved by Christ, because among men, there is none saved
but by Christ: After the same manner that the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 15.20,
that all men are made alive by Christ, because no man is made alive but by him.

CHAP. XXVIII.
That reconciliation, remission of sins, and salvation is not obtained nor
purchased for all, and particular men, by the death of Christ.
I. FIrst, whosoever says, that by the death of Christ reconciliation is
obtained for all and singular men, although he consider Pharaoh and Judas, not
as reprobates, but simply as sinners, yet he says that reconciliation is
obtained for them who have never believed, nor never were to believe. And
seeing it is not equal nor just, that reconciliation should be obtained for
such, the death of Christ is used wrongfully to obtain something that is
unjust, and to do something which is contrary, to the justice of God.

II. And who but he that does willingly shut his eyes, will ever believe that
the reconciliation of Judas, was obtained by the death of Christ, seeing that
the death of Christ, was the very crime of Judas, and by it he was brought to
the halter.

III. And seeing that at the very time in which Christ did die, many were
already tormented in hell, he must needs be of a shallow brain, who thinks
that by the death of Christ, salvation or reconciliation was obtained for them.

IV. Also by this doctrine God is openly mocked: For Christ is imagined to
obtain that from his father, which he knew would never profit; as if God
should grant to his son the salvation of that man which from eternity he
decreed to condemn. For if Christ obtained reconciliation and remission of
sins for Pharaoh and Judas, whether considered as Reprobates, or considered
as sinners, he knew well enough that that obtaining of it would not be for
their good or profit. Christ therefore is brought in asking this of his father:
I pray thee receive into grace those whom I know thou will never receive into
grace, and whom I know certainly are to be condemned: For Christ in his death,
and before his death, knew full well the secrets of election. Surely these men
seem to do their endeavor that Christian Religion should be made a laughing
stock.

V. Also they expose God to derision, while they will have God at the same
time, to love and hate the same man; to love him because he gives his son
for him, and would have reconciliation to be obtained for him, but to have
hated him, because from eternity he decreed to condemn him.

VI. And if Christ obtained remission of sins for Judas; it must needs be that
God granted that to Christ asking it, and that he forgave the sins of Judas:
Which if it be true, it necessarily follows that God does abolish his own
acts; and condemning Judas, punished those sins which were remitted, and so men
should be punished for those sins, the pardon whereof is obtained: and the
testament of Christ by which they will have salvation to be purchased for all
men, should be made void.

VII. Neither is God only thus mocked, but also he is made to mock mankind:
For it is manifest by use, and by the experience of all ages, that the Gospel
is scarce preached to every tenth man, and that the name of Christ is unknown
to the greatest part of the world; which thing that it is done by the
providence of God, so dispensing, there is none that will deny, unless he that
thinks that all things are carried confusedly, and that they do proceed
without reason or order. And if reconciliation and salvation by Christ be
purchased for all men, why does not God publish this benefit through the whole
world? Why does he suffer this reconciliation to be unknown to the greatest
part of mankind? Why does he keep in and hide from so many men the grace
which does belong to them, and which is obtained for them; without the
knowledge of which, no man can be saved? They answer, that God does it because
men show themselves unworthy of this grace. As if any man could be worthy of
it, or could show himself worthy of it. Who knows not that the Gospel is
preached to them that are most unworthy? And where sin has abounded, Romans
5.20.
there grace has abounded? And if God is hindered by the unworthiness of man,
that he should not make known to him the reconciliation obtained, the same
unworthiness could and ought to hinder the obtaining of reconciliation. For
when reconciliation was obtained, God did then foreknow the unworthiness that
would follow, with no less certainty then if it had been present.

VIII. And when they say that Christ died for all, as concerning the obtaining
of salvation, but not as concerning the application of it, they do plainly
confess that Christ did not obtain that this reconciliation should be applied
to all. Whence it comes to pass, that this obtaining of reconciliation, is
vain, yea, and ridiculous: For they speak as much as if they should say, that
freedom was obtained for one, but not that he should be freed; or that food
was obtained for one, but it was not procured that he should be fed with this
food.

IX. And seeing that by faith the application of the death of Christ is made,
if Christ by his death has not obtained for us the application of this
reconciliation, it will follow that he has not obtained faith for us: For they
must needs deny that faith is obtained for us, who will not have faith to be
from grace alone, but to be partly from free will, in whose power they will
have it to be to refuse or admit grace, to believe in act, or not to believe.

X. And surely he that shall more attentively consider what these words mean;
The obtaining of application, and the application of the thing obtained, will
find that it is a mere Meteor, or building of Castles in the air, and that
they are unseasonable trifles, with which they enwrap men's wits: seeing Christ
does obtain nothing which he does not apply, nor does he apply any thing which
he has not obtained: Otherwise in vain were the obtaining of that benefit,
which both he that obtains it, and he of whom it is obtained, knows that it
will never be applied, and that it will never profit him, for whom it is
obtained; Nor is it credible that the remission of that sin which shall never
be remitted, is procured.

XI. Yea, these innouators do so speak, as they that would have by the death
of Christ something to be procured, not for us, but for God: For they say that
by the death of Christ, God obtained power of saving us, but they deny that
the application or conferring of salvation was obtained by the death of Christ
for Peter or Paul, but that only a gate and way was opened for them, by which
they might come to salvation: Wherefore Christ by his death will be said to be,
not the giver, but the preparer of salvation. And certainly the opinion of
Arminius does tend thither, that Christ should be said, not to have obtained
reconciliation for any one, but to have laid open a way for God, by which he
might bestow salvation.

XII. They do no less trifle, when they confess that the fruit of the
resurrection of Christ, Aduer. Walach. P. 51. Non ad eos omnes fructus
resurrectionis extenditor, pr^ quibus m^rtem oppetijt Christ^^.
pertained only to the faithful, but the fruit of his death, that is,
reconciliation and remission of sins, they extend to all and several men.
There fore (if these men be believed) there will be some m^n to whom the fruit
of the death of Christ does pertain, but the fruit of his resurrection does
not pertain. As if they should say that Christ died for some men, for whom he
has not overcome death: And that the fruit of the fight belonged to all, but
not the fruit of the victory. And there will be some men, for whom although he
has offered himself on earth, yet he does not offer himself in heaven. But
the Scripture joins these things, as inseuerable, and inseparable, that he
died for us, and that he rose again for us; Rom 8.34. It is Christ that died,
yea rather, that is ris^n again, who is at the right hand of God, making
intercession for us. And the 2. Co. 5.14. That they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose
again: Because no man is made partaker of the fruit of the death of Christ,
but by his resurrection.

XIII. It is of no small moment, that if reconciliation were obtained for all
mankind, it must needs be that all infants, borne without the covenant, are
reconciled, their sin is forgiven them: Whence it would come to pass that
they could not have a greater benefit bestowed upon them, then if one in a
gentle cruelty should kill them in their cradles: For if they die in this state
of reconciliation, their salvation is certain; but if they live, they shall be
brought up in paganism, which is the most sure way to eternal destruction.

XIV. And seeing no man can be saved, but he for whom reconciliation has
been obtained, and has also been applied: I do not see what the obtaining
of reconciliation does differ from the application of it in infants, which are
taken away by an untimely death: For (by the doctrine of Arminius) they are
saved by reconciliation alone. Here therefore that distinction of the obtaining
of reconciliation and of applying of it, does vanish away: Which distinction,
although it may have place among men, yet with God it cannot have place, who
grants nothing which he does not give, from whom nothing is obtained which
he does not give and confer in act: For to him all things are foreseen
neither can any thing happen, by which he should be compelled to deny what he
has granted, to change his counsel, or to abolish his acts.

XV. And if these two things be compared between themselves, to obtain
reconciliation for his enemies, that they might be saved, and to bestow
salvation on them that are already reconciled, it is no doubt, but that it is
far greater love, to die to reconcile his enemies, then to give salvation to
them that are reconciled. The Apostle teaches th^s expressly. Romans 5.10. If
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. If Saint Paul be
believed, it is an easier and more likely thing, to save him that is
reconciled, then to reconcile him that is an enemy, by dying for him. Seeing
therefore that Christ (if we give credit to Arminius) has performed for all
men that which is far the greatest, and is an argument of his highest love;
it will be said, that Christ in dying for us, loved Pilate, Judas, Saul, and
Pharaoh, no less then Peter and John: But there is no man can make himself
believe, unless it be he that is willing to be deceived, that Christ loved
those with his greatest love, whom his father from eternity hated, and whom the
son himself knew were from eternity appointed to punishment.

XVI. Yea truly, seeing Christ, as he is one God with the father, has from
eternity predestined the reprobates to damnation, it is not likely, yea not
possible, that the same Christ has obtained reconciliation for Judas, as he
is man and a mediator, and has from eternity reprobated the same man, as he
is God. For although these sectaries will have the decree of reprobation to be,
in order, after the obtaining of reconciliation, yet neither of them is in time
before the other, and it must needs be that the desire of reconciling, and the
decree of reprobating were together in one and the same mind.

XVII. Notable is the speech of Christ, John 15.13. Greater love has no man
then this, that one lay down his life for his friends. The meaning of Christ
is, that friends cannot be more loved then by dying for them: For although it
be greater love to die for ones enemies then for his friends, yet it is
certain, that nothing can be performed for thy friends sake, by which thou
may more testify thy love to them, then if thou die for them. Seeing
therefore that this is the greatest love to die for one, whether friend or
enemy, it must needs be that Christ equally loved all men, with his greatest
love: They must therefore affirm, if they will be constant to themselves, that
Christ, in dying, loved with his greatest love, Judas, Pilate, yea Cain and
Pharaoh, who were already in hell.

XVIII. The conferrers at the Hage, do endeavor to quit themselves: If (say
they) to love in the highest degree, is not only to merit salvation, but also
to bestow it, we deny that Christ did generally love all those, in the highest
degree, for whom he died. They therefore condemn Christ, and accuse him of a
lie, who will have this to be the greatest degree of love, to die for one. And
it is impossible that Christ should love any one in the highest degree of love,
but that also he should bestow salvation upon him. And if these things could
be separated, yet this would remain firm and sure, that Christ loved him with
his greatest love for whom he died, although he has not afterward bestowed
salvation upon him, because the greatness of the love of Christ, is to be
esteemed, not by the profit that comes to him for whom he died, but by the
greatness of the sorrows which he suffered for him: Yea, whosoever shall
weigh these things, in the exact scale of judgment, shall find that it is
greater love to suffer death for one, to procure for him some little good, then
to procure great good. So it is more flagrant love to expose himself to death,
that his friend might not be hurt, no not a little, then if he should do it,
that his friend should not perish by being burnt alive.

XIX. Nor do they escape by the distinction of this love, into Antecedent and
Consequent, seeing the Antecedent love wherewith they will have Judas, and
Pharaoh to be loved by Christ, cannot but be the greatest, and that beyond
which (as Christ himself witnesses) none can be extended. These are not two
loves, to be willing to have mercy before faith, and to be willing to save
after faith; but they are two effects of one and the same love.

XX. And if Christ by his death was the pledge, and price of redemption for
Judas, Pharaoh, Saul, etc. The mark of injustice would be set upon God, who
has taken two punishments for the same sins, when the first satisfaction did
suffice, and has twice given judgment upon the same thing: For once they were
dead in Christ, seeing Christ sustained their person upon the cross, and yet
the same men do die the eternal death in their own persons. Thence also it
will follow that Christ did in vain bear the punishments due to Judas and
Pharaoh, and that he in vain made himself a pledge for them: For surely if
Christ on the cross, was the pledge of all and several men, and made himself
for them as a surety, it must needs be, that he supplied their place on the
cross, and sustained their person: And so that may be said of all men without
exception, which the Apostle says, 2. Corinthians. 5.14. If one died for all, then
were all dead. But no man yet, as I know, has dared to say, that the
reprobates died with Christ, or in Christ. And truly the following words of
the Apostle do argue, that he does not speak of all men in the whole world,
but of all those to whom the fruit of the resurrection of Christ does pertain,
and who are become new creatures.

XXI. That reconciliation is purchased only for the elect, the Apostle
teaches, Romans 5.11. We joy in God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, by whom we
have now received reconciliation. Did S. Paul so greatly rejoice in that
benefit, which was common to him with Herod and Pilate? And C. 3. v. 25. God
has set forth Christ to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood. There
is therefore no prop^tiation without faith, and therefore no obtaining of
reconciliation. For hereby it is perceived that God is pacified to a sinner,
and his propitiation is made, because Christ has obtained reconciliation for
him.

XXII. In the eight Chapter, and four and thirtieth verse of the same Epistle,
it is not only said that Christ died for the elect, but because that Christ
died for them; the Apostle does thence infer that no accusation can be laid
against them: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God
that justifies: Who shall condemn? It is Christ that died, etc. Out of which
place we thus argue: They for whom Christ died cannot be condemned, nor can any
thing be laid to their charge: But the reprobates are condemned, and something
is laid to their charge; therefore Christ died not for them; So it be
understood in that sense which I said at the beginning, to wit, that Christ by
his death did not obtain reconciliation and salvation for them.

XXIII. Those for whom Christ obtained reconciliation and remission of sins,
for those he also prayed and made intercession: But he does not make
intercession nor pray for the world, but only for the faithful, as Christ
himself says, John 17.9. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for
them which thou have given me. It is no doubt but that by the world those that
do not believe are to be understood, and those that have not received the
grace of Christ, amongst whom also are refractary persons: For these, Christ
says, he does not pray; Now all men are such by nature, being destitute, not
only of faith, but also of the power of believing. But among these, God gives
some men to Christ, to whom also he gives faith in Christ: For these alone
Christ does profess that he makes intercession to his father.

XXIV. Here the sectaries after their manner do use a slight distinction: For
they make a double intercession; one general, whereby Christ does make
intercession for all, the other particular, whereby he does make intercession
only for the faithful. By the first, reconciliation of sins is obtained; by
the other, the applying of reconciliation and salvation: But this general
intercession is plainly needelesse; for in vain is reconciliation asked,
without the application of salvation. By that general intercession, Christ
either asked salvation for Judas and Pilate, or else he did not ask: If he
asked not, his intercession was to no purpose; If he asked, he suffered the
repulse, and so in vain he made intercession: But he himself says, John
11.42. that he was always heard by his father. But perhaps they will have
Christ to have asked the application of salvation for all men, on a condition,
to wit, if they will believe; and with this respect, that they should believe:
Truly if it be so, then Christ has not made intercession for all. For that
which is asked on a condition, take away the condition, and it is not asked. He
that says to God, I pray to thee for all, so they believe, does plainly
declare that he does not pray for them which do not believe: Wherefore Christ
himself does restrain his sending into the world, and therefore also his
intercession, to the faithful alone, John 3.13. God so loved the world, that
he sent his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life. There you see that not only the fruit or
application of the donation and giving of the Son (that I may so speak) but
also the donation it self does belong only to believers.

XXV. But it is worth the labor to know what that particular intercession is,
with which (as these sectaries do confess) Christ, John 17. does make
intercession for the faithful alone, and to know what it is that he asks by
it. Father (says he) keep them: And a little after, I pray thee that thou
would keep them from the evil. If this intercession be peculiar to the
faithful, I do not see what remains for the general intercession: For
without these things all intercession is vain. And seeing in the Lords prayer
these two things are asked jointly, and together, to wit, remission of sins,
and freedom from evil, who would endure such a bold forgery, whereby the
Arminians do pull asunder these things, and will have Christ to obtain
remission of sins for all, but not freedom from the evil?

XXVI. And if Christ prays for all, he prays also for them whom he knows
do sin the sin unto death, for which Saint John does not suffer us to
pray, John. 5.16.

XXVII. Yea, the Arminians here are not constant to themselves, when they say
that Christ did intercede by a particular intercession for the faithful, and
for those whom the father gave to the Son; for seeing they teach that the
faithful and godly men may fall from the faith and be condemned, it appears
that they will have Christ to intercede for many reprobates by a particular
intercession, if many of the faithful are reprobates.

XXVIII. Arminius, p 70. against Perkins, does bring for this purpose many
things, which I do not know whether they will be allowed by his followers.
First, he thinks that Christ does sacrifice himself for many, for whom he does
not make intercession: because his sacrificing was before his intercession: For
he will have the sacrificing of Christ; to pertain to his meriting, and his
intercession to pertain to the application of his merit. These things seem to
me to be repugnant, not only to the truth, but even to common sense: For
whosoever does prepare himself to be a purging sacrifice for another, does
necessarily pray that the sacrifice which he is to offer, may be pleasing and
acceptable for him for whom he does offer himself for a sacrifice. And
whosoever does offer a price of redemption, does first entreat this price may
be received, as that Chryses in Homer speaking thus: Iliad. ^.
(...).
Release to me my loving daughter, and accept the gifts.


See in the first place his prayers, and then the offering of the price:
Therefore intercession does necessarily go before the sacrifice. Arminius
adds. It is true indeed that Christ, in the days of his flesh, offered up
prayers and tears to God the father; but those prayers were not made for the
obtaining of those good things he merited for us, ( that is, for the obtaining
of salvation) but for the assistance of the spirit, that he might stand in the
combat. An impious and wicked opinion; for by it, it is denied that Christ
prayed for our salvation before he died; when yet, John 17. he prays thus
before his death: Keep them in thy name. And, Father, I desire that those
which thou have given me, may be with me, that they may see the glory which
thou have given me. Arminius himself is ashamed of so false a doctrine; for by
a certain doubtful Epanorthosis, or correction, he does seem to condemn
that which he said; for he adds. But if he did then offer prayers for the
obtaining of this application, they did depend on his sacrifice that was to be
finished, as if it were finished. That speech, But if, is the speech of one
doubting, when yet it is a thing most certain. But what is this against
Perkins, who says, that Christ does not sacrifice himself for them for whom
he does not pray? Surely these things which Arminius does heap up, are
nothing to the purpose, nor do they touch the matter: For although the prayers
which Christ offered up for our salvation before his death, are grounded on the
merit of his death that was to come, yet that remains which Perkins says,
that Christ does not sacrifice himself for them for whom he does not pray:
For the death of Christ had not been a sacrifice, unless he had prayed that
it might be accepted of the father, for their life for whom he died: For grief
and torment is not of its own nature a sacrifice, unless there be also such a
petition.

XXIX. I do not deny, but that Christ in his death prayed for them that
crucified him: But I deny that he prayed for all without exception, but for
them alone who did it by ignorance; for he says: Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do, Luke 23.24. Whom a little after, as Saint Luke does
testify, were converted to the faith. Act. 2. and Chap. 3.17. Does not Christ
say this with an humane affection, and not as the redeemer? For, as he was man,
he might wish well to those, whom as he was God, he knew were reprobates: Thus
he wept over the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the fall and reiection of which
City, as he was God he had decreed.

XXX. And when the sectaries do deny, that Christ on the cross sustained the
person of the elect, they do openly impugn that speech of Christ, John 10.11.
I am that good shepherd, the good shepherd gives his life for his sheep.
And John 15.13. Greater love then this has no man, that one should lay down
his life for his friends. And Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved his Church and gave
himself for it. Christ therefore died for his sheep; for his friends; for his
Church; and what are these but the faithful and elect? Can Pharaoh, Judas,
etc. in any respect, be called the sheep of Christ? The Arminians answer,
that they are called sheep, not in respect of the present condition, but of
that to come. A vain thing: For the condition to come, was already present in
the decree of God, in respect of which decree, they are called sheep before
their conversion, John 10.16. For they are called sheep, not only because
they were to gather themselus to the fould of Christ, but because God in his
eternal counsel, decreed to give them faith, by which they might gather
themselves to the fould of Christ: For if they had not been given to Christ,
until they had joined themselves to Christ by faith, they had given themselves
to Christ, before God had given them to Christ.

XXXI. In the mean time it is to be observed, with what fidelity these
sectaries do deal here: For they will have God to have chosen those that
believe: Neither do we deny it, so that by believers, those be understood, who
are to believe by the gift of God, and those to whom God has decreed to give
faith: For we say that faith is considered as a thing to be performed, and not
as a thing present and already performed; and when we speak of Election, we
say that believers are called, not in respect of present condition, but of that
to come. This thing although it be agreeable to reason, and to the word of God,
yet it is rejected by these sectaries, as absurd: And yet the same men a little
after do use the same thing, and yield to our part: For they will have that
speech, I give my life for my sheep, to be taken in respect, not of the
present condition, but of the future; and that they are called sheep, because
they shall gather themselves to the fould of Christ. There is no cause therefore
why they should so much be moved, when we say, that believers are elected, not
in respect of the present or past, but of the future condition, and by the
beholding of that faith, by which, by the gift of God, they are to come to
salvation. That which pleases them, when themselves say it, ought not to
displease them when it is used by us: Especially seeing the Scripture does
never expressly say, that believers are elected; but does clearly pronounce
that Christ died for his sheep, and for the Church.

XXXII. For these causes the holy Scriptures, which does sometimes say that
Christ died for all, in that sense which I have said, does oftentimes shorten
and restrain that general speech, laying, that the blood of Christ was shed
for many, Matthew. 26.28. And that the son of man came, that he might give his
life, a redemption for many. And, that he was offered once for the sins of
many. Heb. 9.28.

XXXIII. And if you would fetch the matter from the beginning, and from the
covenant which God made with Adam, you shall find that this covenant does
belong only to them alone, whose heel the Serpent bruiseth, and whom he
hurts with a light wound, and therefore only to the faithful, and the
elect; for the rest, the serpent infecteth with his poison, kills them with
his biting, and takes them away with a deadly wound.

XXXIV. And if Christ by his death obtained reconciliation for Cain, Pharaoh,
Judas, etc. It must needs be, that Christ redeemed them: But he has not
redeemed them, because they always do and shall remain captive: Nor is it
credible that Christ would pay the price of redemption for them, whom he knew
were never to be freed; or that Satan could take away those souls, redeemed
by Christ with so great a price.

XXXV. Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5.20. says, That God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself. If by the world, are understood all and several men
without exception; it must be believed, that not only reconciliation was
obtained for all and several men, but also that they are reconciled in act;
and that Judas and Pharaoh were sometimes among the friends of God: which
thing, Arminius himself does not dare to say.

XXXVI. Finally, if Christ has obtained reconciliation for all men, even for
them who are without the covenant, then no man shall be borne without the
covenant of Christ, and that will be false which Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.3.
where speaking of the condition in which we are borne, he says, that by nature
we are the children of wrath, that is, borne subject to the curse: For how can
any one be borne subject to the curse, if reconciliation is obtained with God,
for all men, without exception.

CHAP. XXIX.
The objections of the Arminians are dissolved, by which they endeavor to
maintain and confirm the obtaining of salvation for all men.
THE Arminians make many objections against these things, but prevail nothing.
First, they flourish with places of Scripture, and then they handle the matter
with other reasons.

I. They bring that place of Saint John, Chaper 3. Verse 16. Where God is said
to have so loved the world, that he gave his Son: which place we have
already taught, does hurt Arminius; and that the sending of the same, is in the
following words, restrained to the believers alone. Whence it is manifest, that
Christ was not sent, but to save them who were to believe. I might say that the
world is here taken for the faithful alone; as, John 6.33. and 1 Timothy 3.16.
and H^b. 2.5. But although we grant, that by the world all mankind are
contained in the whole, yet it will not thence follow, that Christ purchased
salvation for all, and particular men: for the obtaining of the salvation of
some men, does abundantly testify, that mankind is loved by God.

II And it is worth the labor to know what meaning the Arminians apply to
Christ, and what according to the Arminians is the sense of these words of
Christ. God so loved the world, that he gave his only bego^ten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
According to the doctrine of Arminius, this must be the sense of these words;
God so loved all mankind, with a love wherewith he has not willed their
salvation, that he decreed to send his son, before he thought of saving man,
to purchase for himself the power of saving man, and afterward he decreed to
give every man power of believing, if he himself would, that so he might have
eternal life. A monster of Doctrine, and a new Gospel.

III. They assault us also with the words of Saint John, 1 Epist. 2. Chap. 2.
v. where Christ is said to be the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world. And out of the first Chapter of Saint John; where he is called the
Lamb, taking away the sins of the world. But by these, they effect nothing;
for this is said, because in the whole world no man's sins are remitted, but
by Christ. In the same sense that 1 Cor. 15.22. Saint Paul says, In Christ all
men are made alive; because no man is made alive, but by him. So he that
should say, that Hypocrates taught all Graecia and Italy the art of Physic,
did not say that all and several men of Graecia and Italy learned Physic of
him, but that no man learned Physic but from him. For it is manifest, that
Christ has not taken away the sins of all and several men, because very
many remain in sin, and are condemned for their sins.

IV. They do colourably boast of that place, 1 Timothy 2.4 God would have all men
to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. And, Verse 6. Christ gave
himfelfe a ransom for all. Also that to Titus, Chap. 2. The grace of God, that
brings salvation unto all men, has appeared: But that here, by all, are
understood any; and men, of whatsoever state and condition, the very context
and coherence of the place does prove. In that place to Timothy, the Apostle
would have Kings to be prayed for; in that place to Titus, he commands
servants to be faithful, and not to purlome. Of this exhortation, this is the
cause and reason; because the promise of salvation did belong to Kings,
although at that time they were strangers from Christ; and to servants,
although they were of an abject and base state; neither is any condition of men
excluded from salvation. Saint Austin does thus take this place of the first to
Timothy, Enchirid. ad Laurent. Cap. 103. And Thomas in his commentary upon this
Epistle. And this thing is confirmed by the very words of the Apostle; for he
says, God would have all men be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth:
Now it is manifest by experience, that God does not give, yea, nor does not
offer to all and particular men the knowledge of the truth.

V. It is frequent in the Scripture, to take the word all, for the word any, as
Luke 12.42. Ye tithe Mint and Rue, and omneolus, and all manner of herbs. And
Mat. 9.35. Christ healed, omnem morbum, every disease, for every kind of
disease. You have the like example, Colos. 1.28. In this sense, Heb. 2. Christ
is said to have dyed for all.

VI. Furthermore, there is no doubt, but that the Apostle commands us to
pray, not only for Kings in general, but also for all several Kings. For we,
to whom the secrets of Election are unknown, ought to hope well of every one:
But he that commands us to pray for Nero, does not therefore determine that
God will save Nero, but only forbids us to despair of him.

VII. The sense therefore of these words, God would have all men to be saved;
is this: God does inuit men of all sorts to salvation, and does exclude no
condition of men from salvation. For if God should absolutely will, or should
seriously desire all and particular men to be saved, there would not be wanting
means to him, whereby he might effect what he would, and be made partaker of
his desire, his justice yet remaining entire, and man's liberty being not
touched, nor infringed.

VIII. That place makes no more to the purpose, which they bring out of Romans
14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed: For to destroy
there, is not to condemn, but to scandalize and to offend the conscience of
any; by which deed, as much as is in us, we would lead him to destruction: For
to destroy any one absolutely, is not in our power. So with the Apostle, 2 Cor.
10.8. to destroy, is the same thing, as to offend with scandal, and to slacken
him that is doing the works of piety.

IX. In the second Epistle of Peter, Chap 2. Verse. 1. Christ is said to have
redeemed the false Prophets, who denied him: but there it is not spoken of
redemption from eternal death, but of the freedom from ignorance and error,
and the darkness of that age, by the light of the Gospel, which those false
Prophets did corrupt, by the mingling of false doctrine: For to take redemption
for any kind of freedom, is usual in the Scripture; insomuch, that
resurrection is called the redemption of our bodies, Romans 8.22. Ephesians. 4.30.

X. In the same Epistle, Chap. 3. ver. 9. Peter says, God is not willing that
any should perish: to wit, because he is not the cause of the perishing of any
one; and because he admits all who are converted, neither does he reject any
one: But he is not bound to restore to all, those powers which were lost by
man's fault, nor to give faith to all, seeing man by his own fault brought upon
himself the inability of believing, as we have proved at large in the
eleauenth Chapter.

XI. Ezechiel 18.23. God says these words; I am not delighted with the death
of a sinner, but that he should be converted, and live. These words say nothing
else, then that God will not the death of that sinner who is converted: But if
he be not converted, Arminius himself will not deny, but that God does will
his death; as the Judge does will the punishment of him that is gui ty. God is
not delighted with the death of a sinner, as he is a man, but yet no man can
deny, but that God loves the execution of his justice.

XII. Indeed in the 1 Timothy 4.10. God is called (...), the savior of all men.
But the Apostle there speaks of the preservation in this present life, and of
the providence of God, which is extended to the preservation of all men: which
care, David, Psalm. 36. does extend even to the beasts, for there God is called
the preserver of men and beasts. The precedent words of the Apostle does
declare this: We hope in the living God; for he speaks of God, as he does
give life to things created by him. Alike place you have, Act. 17.25.

XIII. Arminius, page 220. against Perkins, does bring the promise made to
Adam, concerning the seed of the Woman, which says he, does belong to all
particular men. I answer, that by this promise it is only promised that
Satan shall be overcome, by the seed of the Woman; but that it belongs to
all and particular men, it is no where said. The doctrine of the Gospel
preached to Adam, does not so pertain to all his posterity, as the precepts
of the natural law; because the obedience of the law is a natural debt; but
the doctrine of the Gospel is a supernatural remedy. Thence it is that the
sin of Adam against the law of God, is imputed to all his posterity; but his
faith, by which he believed the Gospel, is not imputed to his posterity. Nor
if Adam, by his incredulity, had refused the promise of the seed of the
woman, had therefore his posterity fell from the hope of salvation: Nay, what
that this promise of the seed of the Woman, to break the Serpents head, is
manifestly restrained to the faithful alone? For Satan does bruise the heel
of the children of God alone, seeing he kills the rest with a deadly wound.

XIV. The Arminians being driven from the holy Scripture, fly to their
reasons: and as they use the Scripture without reason, so they urge reasons
without Scripture. They charge upon us this syllogism, as it were with a great
dart, when yet it is but a slender twig.

Whatsoever all men are bound to believe, is true.
But all men are bound to believe that Christ dyed for them: Therefore that is
true.
The minor part of this Syllogism is false, and does bear many exceptions For
they to whom Christ has not been preached, and who have heard nothing of the
death of Christ, are not bound to believe that Christ dyed for them, which yet
are the greatest part of the world: Neither are they, to whom Christ is
preached, bound to believe absolutely and without condition that Christ died
for them, but on this condition, if they be converted: For if they shall
persevere in impenitency, they are bound to believe that the death of Christ
does nothing pertain to them.

XV. Arminius, page 77. against Perkins, and his sectaries, do repeat and
heap up these things, even to tediousness. If there be any, for whose sins
God would not have satisfaction to be made to himself by the death of Christ,
then in no right can faith be required of them, nor can Christ be made their
judge, neither can the reprobate be blamed for refusing the grace of
redemption, because it did not pertain to him. I answer, all these things are
grounded on this false supposition, that faith is required of all men: for we
have already taught, that it is not required of them who never had any means
to know Christ; as also that they to whom Christ is preached, are not bound
absolutely and without condition, to believe that they are redeemed by the
death of Christ, but on this condition, that they be converted. They to whom
the Gospel has not been preached, shall not be condemned for the reiection
of the Gospel, but for the breach of the Law: of which judgment, Christ by
his father is appointed to be the Judge; who does leave under the Law, those
whom he does not save by the Gospel. But they who by their incredulity, have
refused the grace offered them by the Gospel, are justly condemned for refusing
that grace, not because they have rejected that which pertains to unbelievers
and impenitent persons, but because having despised the condition, they have
neglected that which was offered to them under the condition of believing;
which condition, although they cannot fulfill by their natural powers, yet it
is their debt, for man himself, by his own fault, brought upon himself the
disabilitie of believing, which disability God is not bound to cure in all: Of
which thing it is largely spoken, Chap. 11. But (say they) Reprobates cannot be
blamed for despising that grace which does not belong unto them. But they are
quite out of the way: For reprobates cannot be accused for despising grace, if
they did despise it, because they knew it did not belong unto them: But they
therefore reject it, because they love not Christ, and they are led to the
contempt of it by their own will: For Reprobates do not therefore believe,
because salvation does not belong unto them; but rather, salvation does not
belong unto them, because they do not believe, and they draw destruction to
themselves, by their own incredulity and impenitency. It is true indeed, that
reprobation is the cause why God will not give faith and repentance to this or
that man: But it is not the cause which does put in and bre^de impenitency, and
incredulity in man: Wherefore that speech of Christ, John. 10.16 Ye believe
not because ye are not of my sheep, is so to be taken as if he had said,
Therefore God does not give you faith, which is peculiar to the elect, because
ye are not elected.

XVI. This is the objection of Greuinchouius, P. 19. If election be before the
obtaining of salvation, then God first decreed of the communicating of
salvation, before he decreed of the obtaining of it. But I am so far from
thinking this to be absurd, that I believe it is plainly necessary: For it is
always first thought of the end, before of the means to the end. The
salvation of man was the end God propounded to himself; that this was the end
is hence manifest, because this is last in execution: Therefore God first
thought of giving salvation, before he thought of the obtaining of salvation by
Christ, because this is the means by which he does lead us to salvation.

XVII. The same man, Page 87. does thus dispute: They to whom this price (being
fit to save them) is offered, if they themselves will embrace it, for them also
it is paid by the purpose of God: But it is offered to Reprobates on this
condition, if they will embrace it; therefore it is paid also for them by the
purpose of God. I answer, that the minor part is not universally true; for
this price is not offered for all the Reprobates; and the mayor part does
offend against the rules of precognition or supposition, which will have the
subject of every Axiom or sentence, to be, or to have being. For examples
sake; this sentence, Whosoever fulfilleth the law is saved, is not false: But
the falsehood of it is in the presupposition, whereby it is presupposed, That
some men fulfill the Law. The Mayor of this Sylogisme has the same fault: For
the subject of it, is imaginary and not existent: For the subject is this, They
to whom this price is offered to embrace it if they will; I deny that there are
such men to be found: For this price is not offered to the Reprobates, if they
will embrace it, seeing it is most certain that they will not, and that they
cannot will; of which disabilitie man himself is the cause: Neither is this
price offered to the Elect if they will, but God in offering that price, does
work in them that they should will.

XVIII. And when they speak of the sufficiency of the death of Christ, as they
extol the efficacy of it, so they say that it is sufficient, not only for
men, but also for the devils. Which if it be true, it must needs be, that God
does take away and cut off something from the price of the death of his Son;
and does shorten the efficacy of it. But although I know that the price and
dignity of the death of Christ, does not depend on his humane nature, but on
the infinite excellency of his divine nature, yet I deny that his death is fit
for the redemption of devils, because the justice of God requires, that man
who sinned, should bear the punishment, and it was needful that the mediator
between God and man should have reference to both, in the communion of his
nature: Therefore to save man, he took not the Angels, but the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2. And if the death of a man is sit to satisfy for the sins of
Angels, then the torments of an Angel, if Christ had taken the nature of
Angels, had been fit to satisfy for the sins of man. Finally, when it is
spoken of the fitness, is not to be disputed of the sufficiency: For
otherwise, it might also be disputed whether the death of Christ be sufficient
to save Horses or Beetles, and to give them immortality; which surely is not
without impiety.

XIX. These in a manner are the arguments wherewith these innouators do defend
themselus: But they do exagitate and wrong our opinion, after their own
manner, which is evil; for they change it before they impugn it: By this
means they do not refute our opinion, but their own forgeries. For examples
sake, Christ, John 3.17. speaks thus: God sent not his son into the world,
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
Greuinchouius, Page 21. does faigne that we thus interpret this place: God
sent his Son into the Elect; When notwithstanding there, by the world, is
manifestly understood this region of the earth, and his habitation among men.
He, wantonly sporting with an unconstant licentiousness, does attribute many
such things to us. This one example which I will add shall be instead of many,
Page 76. he does bring us in thus speaking: Ye Reprobates, why do you cease;
Having gotten so fit a price of redemption, that if ye will believe, or eat
through a Rock, ye may go right from hence into the kingdom of Heaven? And a
little after, He has also vouchsafed you, to wit, the Reprobates, his
calling, although ye are appointed to eternal punishments, for no desert of
yours, that being more blinded and stupefied, ye might procure to your selves a
greater judgment. Behold the man's pastime, and his Theological spleen. I do
not doubt but his heart leapt for joy when he writ these things, as a thing
bravely carried: But the good man does trifle, and fight with his own shadow,
for these things do quite differ from our opinion. For we do not command the
Reprobates, that is, they that persevere in impenitency and unbelief, to
believe a lie, or while they persevere in impenitency, to flatter themselves
with a vain hope, under the pretense of faith in Christ: Nor do we say that
they are appointed to eternal punishments for no desert of theirs, seeing they
have procured this destruction to themselves by their own sins: Nor do we
teach that any one is only therefore called by God, that he might procure to
himself greater judgment, although oftentimes, men by their calling are made
inexcusable, because by the knowledge of their duty, the fault of the neglect
of their duty is made greater, and it is a greater fault, not to do what you
know. then not to know what you should do. The scope and intent of God calling
to the Reprobates, is to require of them that which they owe; to the elect is,
to give the efficacy of their calling, that they might be saved; to them both,
that he might make known what is acceptable to him, and what obedience is
pleasing to him.

XX. But Greuinchouius shall not go scot-free, it seems good to lay these
things upon him, and to present to your view the prodigious doctrine of the
Arminians, the curtain being, as it were, drawn aside, and that without any
false accusation: For putting on the person of an Arminian, I may thus speak
to the Reprobates. Be of a good courage ye Reprobates, for although ye are
reprobates, yet ye may be saved. It is true indeed that no reprobates are
saved; but yet there is none of them who may not be saved. For Christ has
obtained for you salvation, but not the application of salvation: He has
obtained good things for you, but he has not obtained for you, that you
should ever possess those good things in act: For he has obtained that
reconciliation, which in the very moment wherein he procured it, he certainly
knew would not profit you. He has obtained for you the remission of those
sins which he certainly knew were not to be remitted: For this
reconciliation is not applied but on a condition which he knew was not to be
fulfilled. And that ye may know how well Christ wishes you, I tell you that
he does intercede for you with a general intercession, but not with a
particular, without which no man is saved. For by the death of Christ,
reconciliation is obtained for you, but not the communication of the
reconciliation: Neither is the application of the obtained reconciliation
procured for you; but God by it has gotten to himself liberty and faculty to
save you: By which death, Christ is made a redeemer, without any certain
purpose of God who were to be redeemed, and is made the head of the Church,
without any members that are certain. God indeed sending his Son into the
world, was moved with some inclination and affection toward men; but without
any certain will of saving men: For the decree of sending his Son, went in
order before the decree of saving. By which decree, all men are elected,
although many from eternity were reprobated. God indeed did desire to save all
and that seriously, but he is disappointed of his end by you, neither has he
attained to what he did desire, which does very much grieve him. Know also
this, O reprobates, that Christ procured and purchased salvation for you all,
but he is not willing it should be known but to some few, when yet without
this knowledge no man can be saved. Also although he has obtained
reconciliation for you, yet he has not obtained faith for you, without which
there is no salvation: Wherefore God calls you to salvation, but not after a
congruent and agreeable manner, whereby they that are called do not follow.
And yet be not out of heart, God gives to you all the power of believing, that
you may beleeu in act, if ye will, for it is in the power of your own free will
to use grace, or not to use it, that ye may be saved, although certainly you
are to be damned. Kindly spoken; yea, rather wickedly spoken, and to the
scorn of God and men: For who does not tremble at the shape of so prodigious a
doctrine? Who does not grieve at the case of the Christian Church, to the
deforming of which, and to the turning of it into a monster, no slow wits have
converted all their subtlety? When therefore Greuiuchouius, Page 70. being
touched with pity toward us, does profess that he is ready to help our
infirmity and ignorance, it is a doubt whether he be worthier of laughter, or
of pity.

CHAP. XXIX.
That it was long ago disputed whether Christ died for all, but in a far
diverse sense.
SAint Austin being dead, his wrightings of Predestination, of Grace, and of
Free will were diversely received by diverse men. This disease especially
possessed Aquitania. Amongst these contentions issued out the heresy of those
that were called Predestinati, whereof Sigebert in his Chronicle to the year
415. does make mention. These taught, that the endeavor of good works did
nothing profit a reprobate man; and again, that wicked deeds did nothing hurt
the man that was elected, although he gave himself over to lust, gluttony,
and rapine. Lucidus, a certain priest of Aquitania, was infected with this
error, to whom there is extant an Epistle of Faustus, an Aquitan, Bishop of
Rhegiu^, whereunto are subscribed the names of eleven Bishops of the Arelaten
counsel: In this Epistle an Anathema is laid upon them, who say that Christ
died not for all; also on them who say that God would not have all men to be
saved: Which that it was truly spoken by Faustus, and according to the
Catholic faith, the Arelaten Synod has rightly judged: For the Synod
believed that this was spoken by Faustus, against Pelagius, who seeing he
denied original sin, and thought that a man might perfectly fulfill the law
by his own free will, it is no marvel if he said that Christ died not for
all; for why should Christ die for them that were not sinners? Or what need is
there of Physic where there is no disease? Or what need of the Gospel to
him who has fulfilled the law? But Faustus a crafty and subtle man, imposed it
upon the Arelaten Synod, with ambiguous and deceitful words, wherewith that
Epistle was clothed, which he offered to the Synod. For afterward he
explaned his meaning in the book which he writ, De gratia qua saluamur, where
he does more incline to Pelagius, which book Gennadius, Gennad lib de
Scriptor, Eccles. cap. 85. Sydon. Apol. lib 9. Epist 9.
and Sydonius Apollinaris do so mention, that they seem to think honorably
of it: But at the same time, Caesarius Bishop of Arles, and Auitus Bishop of
Vienna, writ against this Book, as Ado does testify in his Chronicle, to whom
Fulgentius Bishop of Ruspe in Africa joined himself: Whereby we may see that
the authority of Faustus is not so great, that it ought to be of any estimation
here: Neither was this question ever handled in that sense that now it is; for
there was never question made (as far as I know) before this age, whether
Christ by his death purchased salvation for all and several men, or whether by
his death he obtained reconciliation as well for Pharaoh as for Peter.

CHAP. XXXI.
Whether God love all men equally, and does alike desire the salvation of all.
I. THe question whereby it is demanded whether God does equally love all men,
and so desire their salvation, is an addition to the former question, and does
depend on it: For if remission of sins and salvation are not purchased for
all men by the death of Christ, it is plain that all men are not equally loved
by God: wherefore these innouators do defend themselves in either question, by
the same places of Scripture. These are the words of Arnoldus, page 379 God, in
a general will and affection, does equally desire the salvation of all men.
Greuinchouius, page 335. does consent to this: The will of God, and his
affection of saving men, is equal toward all. For in that series and order of
the four decrees, in which they comprehend the whole doctrine of
Predestination, this is the third; that God decreed to administer to all men
sufficient means to faith and repentance.

But I suppose that these things are affirmed by them, not because they
believe, and seriously think so, but that they might maintain their other
opinions, which cannot stand, if this opinion fall: for they do openly repugne
the Scripture, experience, yea, and themselves.

II. Which before we demonstrate, the reader is to be admonished, that love in
God is not an affection, nor passion, nor inclination of the mind, nor any
desire; for God is not touched by these passions, as being impassible, and not
subject to affections: But as God is said then to be angry or to hate, when he
will punish or destroy; so love in God is a eertaine and sure will of doing
good to the creature. Whence it comes to pass, that he may rightly be said
to be loved by God, to whom he has given or has decreed to give more and
better good things.

III. This difference is manifestly seen, not only between the good and the
evil, but also between good men themselves, to some one of whom God has
given more understanding, and does measure out his spirit in a larger and
greater measure; but to another more sparingly, and as it were with a striked
measure: to one he gives two talents, to another five, according to his own
good pleasure: Not only giving many things to the best men, but also making
them better, while he gives them many things.

IV. And here I cannot but marvel, with what face Greuinchouius, page 335.
dares to say, that God gave fi^e talents to one, in the hope of receiving more
gain from him then the other; as if hope, or fear, or gain, could happen to
God: or as if he, who so carefully increased his estate by the five talents put
out to usury, had not from God the will and power of employing them so happily.
God is unaptly said to hope for that which himself is to work. These subtle
men are wont to say, when they are urged, that these things are spoken by an
Anthropopathy to man's capacity; but in the mean while, they abuse these
improper words, to bring in their own speculations, and to build up their own
opinions. In preaching and speaking to the people, this impropriety of speech
is to be borne with, but not in disputing, and when the importance of truth is
to be considered and weighed.

V. Concerning this inequality of the gifts of God, I would have the Arminians
show me, why God has given more gifts to Paul, then to Mark or Cleophas, that
were otherwise holy and good men: Was it because Saint Paul before his
conversion, was more inclined to the faith of Christ, and better affected then
they? Or because Paul used that common and general grace, which happens even
to the reprobates, better then Mark? These are trifles; for there was then
none more deadly enemy to the name of Christ, then Paul. What then was the
cause? why, because it so seemed good to God, who does with his own what he
will; and who in distributing the gifts of the holy Ghost does not follow an
Arithmeticall or Geometrical proportion; for he does give unequal good things
to them that are equally evil, according to his own pleasure, as being a
debtor to no man, nor subject to any Law.

VI. But the difference and inequality of the love of God, will more clearly
appear, if those whom God does call by his word, and to whom he does give the
spirit of adoption, and faith, and by them salvation, be compared with other
men: Many (says Christ, Mat. 22.4.) are called, few chosen. Behold here three
sorts of men: some that are not called; some that are called, and not elected;
some that are called and elected: all which, that they are confusedly and
equally loved, and that God does alike desire their salvation, cannot be said
or thought.

VII. Christ, John 6.44. says: No man can come to me, unless my father which
sent me, draw him. Where that it is spoken of the drawing to faith, and by
faith to salvation, no man does doubt. Secing therefore by these words it is
manifest, that all are not so drawn; it is certain that they are most loved,
who are so drawn. Faith is the gift of God, but all men have not faith, and it
is given but to few; therefore these are more loved: So the spirit of Adoption
is a prerogative of the sons of God, therefore also these are more loved.

VIII. Does not God visit some people from on high, and does vouchsafe them
the preaching of his word, others being neglected? as Saint Paul teaches, Acts
14.16. saying, God in times past suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own
ways. At this time also there are very many nations drowned in deep
darkness, to whom, not so much as the report or name of Christ has come.

IX. Were the Corinthians and Philippians, who lived before the time of the
Apostles, so much loved by God, as their posterity was, who by the preaching
of Saint Paul, were converted to the faith? Can it be said, that God did alike
wish the salvation of them, as of these?

X. What should I speak of the men of Tire and Sydon, whose salvation, if
Christ had wished, as well as he did the salvation of the Jews; it were a
marvel why he would not make known the Gospel to them, especially seeing he
gives them this testimony, that they were more prone to repentance, then the
men of Capernaum?

XI. Acts 16.6.7. Paul endeavoring to preach the Gospel in Asia and Bythinia,
the spirit of God forbids him, and commands him to pass over into
Macedonia: Certainly it appears, that God did not equally will the salvation
of the Bythinians, and the Macedonians, seeing he would have the Gospel rather
to be preached to these, then to them; and presented the necessary means of
salvation to these, when he denied it to them. I confess indeed, that after
some years the Gospel came into Bythinia, but in the mean time, many dyed in
Bythinia, who had not the means of coming to the knowledge of Christ: whose
salvation that God did equally desire, as he did the salvation of the
Macedonians, to whom he commanded Paul to hasten, there is no man will believe,
but he that does willingly harden his mind to resist the truth: No otherwise,
then if I should say that the Physician does equally desire the recovery of two
that are sick of the same disease, and yet does provide physic for the one,
and will not provide for the other.

XII. When Christ says, John 10.16. that he has other sheep which he has not
yet gathered: did he love those sheep which were not yet gathered, but were to
be gathered in his time, no more then other men, whom he has not only not
drawn by his word, but not so much as vouchsafed to call? Surely if God did
equally will the salvation of all and singular men, he would equally supply to
all men the means of salvation: and he would not give to many people only a
shadowed light, and such means, by which being alone, the Arminians themselves
have not yet dared to affirm that any man has come to salvation.

XIII. Notable is that of Christ, Mat. 11.25. where he gives thanks to his
father, that he has hidden the doctrine of salvation from the wise, and had
revealed it to babes. But why? did he as much love them from whom he had hid
the doctrine of salvation? Arnold. page 413 and 414. does deprave and corrupt
the words of Christ: For he will have Christ to give thanks, because his
father had revealed to babes those things which were hidden from men of
understanding: But Christ does not only say, that these things were hidden
from the wise, but does expressly say, that God hid these things from them.

XIV. That place of Saint Paul, Romans 9. does trouble the Sectaries, where it is
said, that God loved Jacob, and hated Esau, before they had done good, or
evil. We have therefore God himself professing that he does not equally love
men that are equal by nature, and whereof neither is better then the other;
and that not because any one has done any good, or shall do any good, but of
his mere good pleasure, whereby he has mercy on whom he will: For although
Malachie says, that the dominion of Jacob over his brother was an effect of
this love, and hatred; yet the Apostle conscious and privy of the mind and
meaning of God, will have this to be an example, or a type of Election,
according to his purpose, and does extend the words of God to the work of our
salvation. We need not be diligent in so cle^re a matter.

XV. The Arminians do cover themselves against this shower of Arguments, with
that their distinction of the antecedent and consequent will of God. They say
that God does love some men more then other by his consequent will, that is, by
that will which is after the faith and repentance of man: For God does love
them most, whom he fore sees will believe, and by their own free will, are to
use grace well. But by his primary and antecedent will, God does alike love all
men, and does equally desire the salvation of all; and therefore he does give
to all men sufficient grace for faith, and so for salvation. And the cause why
the Gospel is not preached to all, they say, is not the will of God, but
either the negligence of Christians, or the indignity and unworthiness of the
people, or else the sins of their ancestors, who have rejected grace, being
offered.

XVI. Certainly this is a deadly speech, and is directly contrary, not only
to the Scripture, but also to it self. For while they bring reasons, why God
does not offer his Gospel to all, unawares they yield to our party; for they
lay down the causes, why God does not equally love all: But the question is
not, why God loves some men more then others, but whether God does love all
men equally; therefore they entangle themselves. And how absurd that
distinction is of the will of God into antecedent and consequent, how
contumelious against God, in that sense in which it is taken by the sectaries,
we have taught at large, Chap. 5.

XVII. Moreover, they teach, that God is often disappointed of his antecedent
will, and that the love of God to us is then mutable, if he love us with his
consequent will, that is, by his will which is after our love and faith, and
our own will. It is a wicked thing to desire, that the immutability of the
love of God toward us, should be after our love, and should depend on our
will; for the love of God cannot be certain, if it be grounded on the love
wherewith we first love him. That therefore the love of God to us might be
certain and immutable, it must needs go before our love, as Saint John
teaches, 1. Epist. 4.19. Ye love him, because he loved you first.

XVIII. And if God by his consequent will loved one man more then another,
because he foresaw he would believe, and use grace well; then God shall not
s^perate man, but man separate himself; contrary to that of Saint Paul 1 Cor.
4.7. Who seperateth thee, etc. And this man shall be loved more by God then
another, because he loved God more.

XIX. Then also that speech of the Apostle will fail, Romans 9. It is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; if the
will of man does go before the will of God, whereby he will certainly and
immutably have mercy upon us. For the Arminians teach, that the antecedent will
of God may be resisted, but his consequent will cannot. It must needs be
therefore, that they say that the Apostle speaks of the consequent will, and
of that love whereby God loves us by his consequent will, seeing that the
Apostle does there add, Who has resisted his will? And truly here the good
men are held, entangled with a knot, from which they will never unloose
themselves. For if they say that the Apostle in this place does speak of the
antecedent will of God, which may be resisted, then they fall foul upon that
which is there said, Who has resisted his will? But if they will have it to be
spoken of the consequent will of God (which is grounded on the will of man, and
the right using of grace, and is after our will) they are refuted by that other
speech of the Apostle, It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy. But Saint Paul, does directly teach here, that
the will of man, and the foreseeing of the right use of grace and of faith
(which the will of having mercy should follow) is excluded by this will of God
which cannot be resisted.

XX. Let the Arminians tell me why God loved Jacob and hated Esau before they
had done either good or evil: Surely he was not preferred before him by the
Consequent will of God, and which was after the faith or works of Jacob;
seeing that Saint Paul does directly remove from the election according to the
purpose of God, the consideration of all good which they either had done or
were to do; for the Apostle should speak improperly if he should exclude only
the consideration of the good done before his birth, and not the consideration
of the good which Jacob was afterward to do, seeing no man was ignorant that
Jacob could not do any good before his birth: Yea, if he could have done, yet
the foreseeing of the good to be done after his birth, would no less derogate
from the election of free grace, then the foreseeing of the good which should
go before his birth. And if God electing had had respect to the good which
Jacob was to do, Saint Paul would not have appeased him that pleads with
God, and does scrupulously enquire; seeing that the reason had been ready, to
wit, that the one was preferred before the other, because God foresaw the
faith and works of the one. Finally that speech, It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, does exclude all endeavor and help of man
from the causes of election, and of the good will of God, by which he
unchangeably has mercy upon man.

XXI. But those examples and testimonies which we have brought out of the
Scripture, do no less establish the inequality of the love of God, by his
antecedent will, then by his consequent will. For when Christ says, John 6. No
man can come to me, unless my father draw him, he speaks of the calling
which goes before faith, and which is peculiar but to some men. The same is to
be judged of the other examples. For what? Did God, preaching to the Jews, and
not to the men of Tire, less love the Tyrians then the Jews, by his
consequent will, that is, because he saw that the Tyrians were worse affected,
and that they were less disposed to believe, then the Jews? No sure, for
Christ does contrarily testify that the Tyrians were more prone to repentance
then the Jews.

XXII. Had the Corinthians or Romans that lived in the age of the Apostles,
more inclination to faith then their ancestors that lived an hundred years
before? Did God not vouchsafe the doctrine of salvation to the Corinthians and
Ephesians, who lived a little before the birth of Christ, because their
ancestors had refused it? But if this were the cause, why then did he inlighten
with his saving doctrine their children, which proceeded from the same
ancestors? Surely because it so seemed good to God, who for his own goodness
does bestow more benefits upon them whom he loves mo^^ although they are
never a whit better disposed to ^^ith and Repentance.

XXIII. But why did God call Paul with so effectual a calling, in the very
height of his hatred against the Church, and of a wolf made him a sheep, of a
sheep a shepherd? was it done because God perceived in him some inclination to
faith in Christ? Or because he did well use universal grace? No sure: For at
that time, like a Tiger, he raged against the fould of Christ. But God did not
love him any whit the more by his consequent will, that is, for the foreseeing
of faith, seeing that the faith of Paul was an effect of the love of God: Nor
was he loved because he was to be faithful, but that he might be faithful; as
he himself witnesses, 1 Cor. 7. where he says, That he obtained mercy, that
he might be faithful.

XXIV. And seeing as it comes to pass, that God does bestow upon a man that
is evil, and borne of bad parents, more of his grace and gifts, and does
effectually convert him, that where sin does abound, there grace might
abound. Romans 5.20. I would know whether God would be more liberal to an evil
man, by his antecedent, or by his consequent will: If by his antecedent will,
we have overcome; if by his consequent will, let the Arminians tell me, what
will of the evil man went before his effectual calling, which could not be
found in another which is less evil? Will they say, that he that was more
evil before his conversion, did thirst, was but a little evil, and did the
will of his father, as they speak? They shall more easily draw oil out of a
pumise stone, then they shall find in Saint Paul before his conversion; in the
thief before his crucifying; or in them to whom, for a heart of stone God
gives a heart of flesh, any such dispositions, before regeneration.

XXV. Add to these, that the Scripture says, Act. 14.16. God in times past
suffered all nations to walk in their own ways. Here I demand whether God
did so much love these nations, and did alike wish their salvation, as he loved
their posterity, whom he afterward called with an effectual calling by his
Gospel. I suppose, that no man has so brazen a face, that he dares affirm
it: Neither do the Arminians deny, but that the saving calling by the Gospel,
is a very great argument of the love of God to any nation: But having bent
their disputation another way, they do search into the causes, why God does
more vehemently love some then others, which is that very thing which we would
have.

XXVI. Finally, if God does equally will to all men the end, that is,
salvation, then also he will equally suggest unto them the means to the end,
to wit, the word, faith, and the spirit: But he does not suggest these things
equally to all; neither can any thing be imagined more absurd, then that God
should equally will, that all particular men should believe, and be saved, and
yet suggest to some men the means that are congruent and fit, and will
certainly profit; but to others, means that are not congruent nor fit, and
that certainly will not profit, which yet is the doctrine of Arminius.

XXVII. And in setting down the causes of the greater love of God toward some
one nation, and his less love toward some other, it cannot be said how coldly
they deal: Sometimes they make the disposition of the one, which is better
then the other, to be the cause; which we deny. For Rome, or Corinth, or
Ephesus, were not more prone to piety a little before the light of the Gospel
was brought to them, then they were some ages before: Yea, at that time,
prodigious lust, riot, pride, and rapine, had so immeasurably increased, that
they could go no further. At the same time there were many nations even stupid
with their barbarous lewdness, and seemed more worthy of pity, if the
heavenly calling were governed by man's reason, and not by the secret purpose of
God. Surely before the coming of Saint Paul, God had much people at Corinth,
as God himself says, Acts 18.10. and that among the most foul and common
lusts of that most impure city: For which elects sake, God in his appointed
time, sent to Corinth such an excellent Apostle, so clear a trumpet of the
Gospel, whose preaching and miracles he used, to the conversion of them who
belonged to his election.

XXVIII. Finally, seeing that there is no man, who by himself, and of his own
nature, is not undisposed to faith and conversion, no man that is not dead in
sin; no man that is not unable to follow God calling: He is ridiculous, who
in the work of regeneration and spiritual resurrection, does seek for
dispositions and inclinations to life, among the dead, and who does faigne that
God has a will of saving us, which does follow man's free will, and does depend
on it.

XXIX. But to make the fault of their ancestors to be cause of this, and to
think that God therefore would not have his Gospel to be preached to this
nation, because their ancestors, a thousand, or two thousand years before,
refused the grace of God, is absurd, and nothing to the purpose: For the
Romans and Corinthians, that lived in the time of the Apostle Paul, were
sprung of the same ancestors which the Romans and Corinthians were, which
lived thirty or forty years before the preaching of Saint Paul: Nor is it
equal that the offspring should be punished for the sins of their ancestors:
The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, Ezechiel 18. Nor does the
law extend the visitation of the fathers upon the children, beyond the third
and fourth generation, although also there it is spoken of children that shall
walk in the steps of their fathers, and do imitate their fathers
wickedness. Further also by wars, by colonies and companies, by banishments,
and by marriages, there is a maruailous permixtion and mingling together of
mankind, and in one and the same nation, there are some who have proceeded
from other ancestors, whose manners were diverse: Yea, one and the same man has
proceeded from ancestors, whereof some have refused the grace of God, and some
have not: Of all which, if regard is to be had; and if God will have his
Gospel preached, or not preached to a nation, according as their ancestors
have behaved themselves, it will be impossible but that he must be distracted
with diverse and contrary thoughts, and that his wisdom must be bound with
ridiculous bonds, and contrary purposes.

XXX. Yet the Arminians do obstinately persist in their opinion, and although
they know, that in all ages, and see that in this our age, the name of Christ
is unknown to many nations; yet they do harden their mind, and do contend,
that God would have the Gospel to be preached to all. Arnoldus, Page 97. does
deny that it may be said, that God would not have the Gospel to be preached to
all. And, Page 397. It is true indeed (says he) that the Gospel is not every
where preached to all, yet it does not thence follow, that God will not bring
all men to faith, but this happens because by their own affected malice and
peruersity, they make themselves unworthy of that Grace: Which words do seem
to me to imply a contradiction, for if the cause why the Gospel is not
preached to a nation, is the wickedness and prauity of it, it is plain that
God will not have his Gospel preached to that nation, because by this
punishment he would revenge the stubbornness and obstinacy of it. And to think
that any punishments are inflicted on any nations, God being unwilling,
especially in the work of our salvation, is to accuse God of cruel
negligence, and to desire to put out the eyes of his providence: Also we have
largely taught that all men are unworthy, and that, (God so dispensing) the
Gospel is preached to the most unworthy, and to the worst nations: According
to that, Romans 10.20. I was found of them that sought me not, I was made
manifest to them that asked not after me.

XXXI. Being driven therefore from hence, they have devised another thing, then
which, nothing is more weak. They say that it cannot be said, that God is
unwilling that the Gospel should be preached to all nations, but that many
nations sit in darkness, because there are wanting those who will preach to
them, and that this comes to pass, because the zeal of Christians does grow
cold, and because of the sloathfulnesse of the pastors of the Church, who will
not go thither to preach: But if all Christians were affected as it is meet
they should, and were touched with a zeal of the house of God, the preaching
of the Gospel would be wanting to no people. I answer, that I am not he who
will affirm that Christians are altogether faultlesse in this thing: Yet
notwithstanding it cannot be doubted, but that these things are governed by the
counsel and providence of God. For if God would have brought the light of the
Gospel to the people of America, who have lain for many ages in the thick
night of ignorance, be had not suffered them for so many ages, to be unknown
to the Christian world. For how can they be accused for not preaching the
Gospel to the Americans, who did not know that there were any such people, or
that that prat of the earth was inhabited? Neither is it credible that God can
be disappointed of his intent, and of his desire of saving any Nation, by the
negligence of some Ministers: Nor is it equal, that enumerable people should
for ever bear the punishment of others negligence. Also if God would have his
Gospel preached to people, who are divided from us in land, climate, and
language, he would have infused into some of us, the gift of tongues, that they
might be understood by the Barbarians: But at this day, the Americans are
instructed in Popery, in the Spanish tongue, to the learning of which, they are
compelled by force: therefore they have unwillingly received religion with the
language; so that to know Christ, is to them a kind of punishment, and a part
of their bondage, which the calling of God does abhor. But it is an easy
thing for these inuouators (while in this great peace and quietness, they make
work for themselves and others) to talk of these things in corners; who if
they spoke seriously, would forthwith in companies sail into America or
Florida, or would go to the inhabitants of the South continent, and would have
instructed them in the faith of Christ; and would not (being forgetful of the
cross of Christ, and being overtaken with the itching of their own wit) have
made so many troubles, nor have torn the bowels of their own Church.

XXXII. But it is wont to be disputed, whether the Apostles preached to all
men: Surely it does not seem to me to be likely, that the Apostles passed
beyond the Aequinoctiall, into the inmost parts of Affricke, or that they came
into America, or any other part of the world which is unknown: The short life
of the Apostles was not sufficient for that work, neither was the way known
to these places; also some prints and signs of Christianity would be extant
there. Saint Paul, whose iournyes and courses were well known, had falsely
said, that he had labored more then all the Apostles, 1 Cor. 5.11. if the
other Apostles had gone to the Antipodes, or to the Articke and Antarticke
Pole. The memory of all ages does witness, that there has been more Heathens
then Christians, and that the Christian Church, where it was most flourishing,
scarce possessed the tithe or tenth part of the earth. The Apostles indeed
were commanded to preach the Gospel to every creature, but this commandment
does not belong to the Apostles alone, but also to their successors, who have
or shall carry this lamp of the Gospel, delivered to them by their
predecessors, through the whole world. For the Gospel must be preached to all
nations, yet not together, and at the same time, but successively. If that
speech, Psalm. 19. Their sound went through the whole earth, be applied to the
preachers of the Gospel, yet it will not necessarily follow, that this must be
at once, and at the same moment, rather then by parts, and successively: God,
as it were viewing and going about the Nations, until there shall be none, to
whom the doctrine of salvation has not at length come: no otherwise then the
Sun in the Aequinoctiall day, does not enlighten the whole Globe of the earth
at one time, but by parts, until he has finished his course. For then shall
the end of the world be near, when the Gospel has come to all people; as
Christ himself witnesses, Mat. 24.14. And the Gospel of the kingdom shall
be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall
the end be: which words of our Savior do cut this knot; for it is manifest,
that in the time of the Apostles, the Gospel was not preached to all Nations,
because at that time the end was not near.

XXXIII. But (say you) Saint Paul, Col. 1.23. does say, that the Gospel was
preached to every creature which is under heaven. I answer: The Apostles uses
a kind of speech usual in the Scriptures, which by all that are under heaven,
do not understand all and every particular creature, absolutely and without
exception, but very many of them: So, Acts 2.3. And there were dwelling at
Jerusalem Jews, out of every nation under heaven. For what? were there some
out of America, or out of the Molucoes, or the South contenent, the names of
which places were not then known? much less, that they should come from
thence to Jerusalem: So, Eccles. 4.15. I saw all the living, which walk under
the sun; When yet Solomon saw only a little part of the earth. See also,
Ezech. 31.6. and 13. and Chap. 32.4. and you shall know, that the word all, is
not frequently so taken, that none is excepted, but that it is very oftentimes
used for many.

XXXIV. That I may not say many things: In this question, whether God does
equally desire the salvation of all men, and whether he does love all men with
an equal love; the truth is so evident, that the Arminians sometimes are
ashamed of themselves, and unawares do come to our side. Arminius against
Perkins, p. 2.4. has these words: If any one, by the help of peculiar grace,
has apprehended grace offered; it is thence manifest, that God does love him
with a greater love then he does another, to whom he has only made his grace
common, but has denied his peculiar grace. Arnoldus, page 380. does confess,
that Arminius does acknowledge, that the means to faith, are not sufficiently
offered to all men; all men therefore are not loved alike: Neither is any thing
so frequent with the Arminians, as to say, that God calls some men in a
congruent and fit time and manner, by which, they that are called, do
certainly and infallibly follow him calling; De vocatione qua sit pro vt Drus
mouit esse congruum. Vide Arno. page 73. etc et Arminan Perk. page 245.
but some he calls by an incongruent and unfit means, by which they that are
called, do never obey God calling: But it is no doubt, but that they to whom
peculiar grace is given, are more loved then they to whom it is denied; as also
they to whom sufficient grace for faith is given, are more loved, then they to
whom it is not given: and they who are called by a means which God knows to
be congruent, and which will certainly profit, are more loved then they whom
God calls by an incongruent, and which he knows will never profit.
Arminius, against Perkins, pa. 16. has these words: God by a sure decree,
determined not to give faith and repentance to some men, to wit, by yielding
them effectual grace, by which they would certainly believe and be converted.
And it is the constant opinion of the Arminians, that God does give that
effectual grace to all, which may be effectual in act, without which no man
believes, nor no man is saved: and that God does give but to few that grace
whereby he gives, not only to be able, but also to will, and to desire to be
converted and believe. God therefore does more desire the salvation of these
men, then of others, to whom he does not vouchsafe this benefit.

XXXV. Notable above the rest, are the words of Greuinchouius, p. 342.
Sometimes (says he) he does sooner help by his grace greater sinners then
lesser: for who shall prescribe a measure to God, that he should not sometimes
beyond the law, made by himself, give according to his liberality, greater
gifts to the worse men? This confession I think is clear enough: for if these
things be true, it cannot be denied, but that God by his antecedent will may
most love the worst men, seeing that by that antecedent will, he does give more
good things to them, and does bestow on them that grace which he does deny to
others that are less evil. For it cannot be said, that this grace is given to
the worst men, by that will which does follow man's will: seeing that no will of
man that is good, but even a most wicked disposition does go before the giving
of grace. But perhaps God does this seldom, and as Greuinchoutus says,
besides the law that he has made. Nay, he does this very often, and according
to the rule declared in the Gospel, Where sin abounded, there grace
abounded, Romans 5. For so the glory and power of God does more clearly shine
forth, by which he does break the most hard things, and does rush through all
obstacles; and where seeming and conceited wisdom, or most desperate manners,
did seem to hinder the proceedings of the Gospel, there he plants the
Gospel, and does propagate it with a more happy success, and greater efficacy.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Free Will: The opinions of the parties.
I. HOw much that purity and integrity in which man was at the first created,
is deformed by sin, and how the image of Satan is drawn over the image of
God, we have taught, Chap. 7. Yet a liberty from constraint, and physical
necessity has remained to the will: for if the will could be compelled, it
were not voluntas, a will, but noluntas, a nill and unwillingness. Or if by an
external principle, by a natural and immutable law, it should be necessarily
determined to one thing; it were not a will, but either a violent impulsion, or
a natural inclination and propension, destitute of knowledge and judgment,
such as is the inclination of all heavy things to the center of the world. For
seeing there are three kinds of liberty; the first is from constraint, and
physical or natural necessity; the second from sin; the third from misery:
Man, while he is in this present life, shall never be fully free from sin and
misery; but to these two liberties he shall come in the life to come: The
liberty from constraint and physical necessity is essential to the will, and
inseparable from it.

II. The seat of this liberty, is in the will; because it has gotten the
dominion, concerning voluntary actions: For although the will in particular
actions does follow the persuasion of the understanding, yet the understanding
does not judge nor deliberate, unless it be commanded by the will; for the
dominion whereof man does apply himself to deliberation and searching out of
the truth: After the same manner that a blind Master does in every thing obey
his servant, leading him and persuading him; which servant, notwithstanding,
does it that he may obey his Master, who will have himself led, and admonished
by him.

But seeing the Scripture says, that man is the servant of sin, Rom 6.17.
and sold under sin, Romans 7.14. And dead in sin, Ephesians. 2.1.5. and Colos.
2.13. it is worth the labor, to know how far this liberty of man's will does
extend it self, as well under the estate of sin, and before regeneration, as
under the estate of grace and regeneration.

III. The will is the reasonable appetite, which of his own nature, is always
carried to good, whether it be good truly, or in appearance: for it is
impossible that one should desire evil, as it is evil, and not under the
respect of good.

IV. The liberty of the will, whereby it may will something, or not will it, is
called the liberty of contradiction; but the liberty whereby it may will some.
thing, or the contrary of it, is called the liberty of contrariety.

V. Now there are only two things, which we can will, for we either will the
end, or the means to the end; the first whereof, is called by Aristotle, Ethi.
3. cap. 4. (...), the will; the other, (...), the choice. We do absolutely
desire the end, we choose the means. And if any one does absolutely, and
without deliberation will some means to obtain the end, he does will that
means, not simply as a means, but as the end; and that he might obtain that,
he does choose other means: Now in choosing, the will does follow the
judgment of the practical understanding; unless when the vehement and
inordinate actions ouer-ruling, do darken reason, or do resist the judgment
of it. Arist. Eth. 3. c. 3. (...).


VI. We call that vnvoluntary, which is not only strained, and to which we are
compel^ed by force, but also that which is done by ignorance.

VII. That which is voluntary, diffreth from that which is spontaneus, and done
of its own accord, because that which is spontaneus, does extend it self
further then that which is voluntary: for every thing which is voluntary is
spontaneus, but not contrarily: For even cattle are m^ued of their own
accord, and they have their spontaneus appetites and inclinations; but those
are done voluntarily, which are done with some knowledge and reason: whether
the reason be right, or only have a show of right and truth.

VIII. Arist. Eth 3.1. (...).
And of those things that are done voluntarily, some are more voluntary then
others: For there are some things which one does (...), willing and nilling,
and slowly, as loath to do them; as when the sick man stretches forth his
arm to be cut off, that the Gangrene might grow no further; or as when the
Merchant casts his goods into the sea, with his own hands: which actions are
yet more willingly done, because they are done for their good: For the less
evil by, which men come to a greater good does put on the form of good.

IX. We all do necessarily will the last and chief end, to wit, felicity;
neither does the desiring of the last end fall into deliberation: For no man
can procure from himself, that he should will himself to be miserable: But
yet we will that end freely, because we do will it without constraint, and
with knowledge and judgment; whence it comes to pass that this desiring is
not only spontaneus, but also voluntary, and therefore free.

X. Furthermore, there are many kinds of humane actions: For some are merely
natural, as the contrary motion of the Arteries, and beating of the pulse, the
digestion of nourishment, etc. Which because they are not in our power, nor at
man's pleasure, the will is neither occupied about them, nor do they fall
within the compass of Election or deliberation.

XI. Some actions are partly natural, and partly voluntary, as to eat, to
walk, etc. Which although they be natural, yet they are governed by the will.
In these actions the will is free, unless when some external force compels,
or some unavoidable necessity does urge, men being unwilling.

XII. There are also some actions that are civil, as to sell, to buy, to
bargain, to play, to build, to paint: In these things the will of man is free,
and does freely incline it self to one or other: For he that does these
things at the command of another, yet is willing to obey him that commands,
and therefore is driven to do it, not only by another will, but also by his
own. Of this liberty the Apostle speaks, Corinth. 7.37. He that stands
steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will,
and has so decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgin, does well: For
in this place the Apostle understands, by that which is done well, not that
which is done agreeable to Gods law, but that which is done prudently, and
fitly, to the present time and purpose.

XIII. Also in actions that are ciuilly honest, the will of man is moved by its
own pleasure, as when a heathen man helps up him that is fallen, or shows
the way to him that is out of it.

XIV. The like liberty is in the observation of Ecclesiastical policy, and in
those works commanded by the law of God, which do belong to an outward
operation; for the most wicked men, do perform holy rites and religious
ceremonies, do bestow alms, do hear and read the word of God.

XV. But especially in evil actions man is free. For he is not only of his
own accord carried to sin, but also of two or more evils, most freely he
does choose either, and does voluntarily apply himself to that, to which his
mind leads him. Wherefore seeing man, that is naturally evil, is governed by
his own evil will, and that one is for that cause said to be free, because he
does what he lists, it is manifest, that man is therefore the servant of
sin, because he is in subjection to his own will, and because he does sin
voluntarily and freely, and that man is therefore a servant because he is free.

XVI. They that say that an unregenerate man by this servitude and natural
deprauation does necessarily sin, ought not to be reprehended; for an
unregenerate man must needs sin: Thus the devils do necessarily sin, but
yet freely; for they sin being not constrained, nor determined and appointed
to any one thing only, by any outward cause forcing them: But they are led by
their own motion, by their ingrafted wickedness, and with their knowledge;
after the same manner that the Saints that are glorified, are necessarily and
immutably good, but yet voluntarily and freely: For it is not credible, that
the Saints have lost their liberty by their glorification. There is a kind of
necessity which is voluntary; neither is liberty contrary to necessity, but to
constraint and servitude. Wherefore Saint Austin, Enchirid. Chap. August. lib.
22. de ciuit. Cap. 30. Nec ideo liberto^ arbitrium non habebunt quia peccata
eos delectare non poterunt, etc. Enchirid. cap. 105. Multo liberius^ erit
arbitrium quod omnino non poterit seruire peccato.
105. and ciuitat. lib. 22. Cap. vlt. does teach, that by the necessity of not
sinning, which shall be in the Saints, their free will shall be rather
increased and confirmed then diminished. What is more free then God? And yet he
is necessarily good and does good things: For as Thomas says, Tom 8. De libro
arbitrio. Quest. 24. Art. 3. It is no part of free will, to be able to choose
evil. The same man does in many places say, that constraint, and not
necessity, is contrary to the liberty of the will, but especially in the same
Tome, Quest. 10. De process. divine. personaru^. Art. 2.

XVII. There are moreover, habits and actions, that is, virtues and works,
which do help forward to salvation, and which are proper to the faithful.
Such as are the true knowledge and fervent love of God, says and repentance,
and holy actions flowing from these virtues. In and about these things, the
will of a man that is unregenerate, and standing in his pure and mere naturals
is not free; here is no freewill of man, no inclination, no disposition: Surely
it had been a very hard thing to find in Paul, raging against the Church, and
in the thief, crucified for his robberies, whom Christ converted in the very
agony of his death, any dispositions or preparations to repentance.

XVIII. I do not deny, but that there are memorized many things of heathen
men, which were done honestly, and profitably for civil society, for concord,
and for the defense of their country: But seeing, Without faith we cannot
please God, Heb. 11.6. And seeing that that action alone is acceptable to God,
which is done with Faith (for, Whatsoever is done without faith is sin, Romans
14.23.) and which is referred to the glory of God, as the Apostle commands,
1. Cor. 10.31. It is plain, that those honest deeds of the heathen were not
without fault, and that they could not come to salvation by such civil
virtues, nor that any one could by them be disposed to faith or true
repentance. The right outward duties of civil virtues, are of one sort, the
duties of faith and Christian piety are of another sort. And truly in my
judgment, the heathen judge, who in giving sentence, and in dividing
possessions does judge equally and well, is no more just before the tribunal
of God, then the thieves who equally and justly divide the pray among
themselves: For whosoever does want faith in Christ, is not the Son of God,
and therefore cannot be an heir and just possessor of worldly goods, although
he excel in civil virtues. For a kind of doubtful light, and some seeds of
equity are left in man for civil society: And they to whom the light of the
Gospel does shine, if they give themselves over to vices should be confounded
with shame, being urged by these examples.

XIX. But after God has enlightened the mind of any one with his light, and
has touched his heart with repentance, and has wrought in him faith in
Christ, then the will of man begins to move it self willingly and freely to
holy actions, to which it is not forced by physical or natural necessity, but
it is so turned by a mild and effectual, either persuasion or influence, that
the will may freely and willingly follow God calling: For otherwise that were
not a good work, whereunto one should be drawn by constraint, or should be
compelled by a natural necessity. He that does good unwillingly, does
wickedly: Such a man is sufficiently rewarded, if God pardon his obedience; for
although God hate evil, yet he will not therefore compel to good: Because a
good work is not good, but when it is voluntarily.

XX. And although man is freely moved to the works of piety, yet the whole
praise of the good work is due to God, who works in us to will, and to do,
of his good pleasure, Phil 2. So, although the infant in the mothers womb does
move it self, and does help forward his own nativity, yet it has that power
of moving from God: Therefore, even as if any one does ascribe the whole praise
of the forming of the infant, the generation and birth of it to God alone, he
does not thereby hinder the birth of the infant, or diminish the vigor of it:
So he that does ascribe to God the whole praise of our regeneration and holy
actions, does not thereby hinder the endeavor of good works, nor weaken the
will of man, or bind it with the bonds of natural necessity.

XXI. Here therefore a distinction is to be used: For if it be spoken of the
beginning of conversion, and of the first entrance of regeneration and faith,
that is, of the procuring or forming of faith and repentance in our souls, we
contend that free will does nothing here, and that our souls in the very
beginnings are, not only merely passive, but also that they do with their
greatest endeavor resist the work of God, forming in us the rudiments and
draughts of the new man, so that man in this case is not free, unless it be to
resist God. But after regeneration begun, and after God has given to man a
heart of flesh for his heart of stone, then man does freely move himself to
those works which are acceptable to God. And as there are secret, but yet
certain increasings of regeneration, so this liberty does increase by little
and little, fainting every day with the resistance of our lusts. By this means
man's will does cooperate and work together with God, yet so, that whatsoever
good is done, is due to God alone: No otherwise, then as when a scriuener does
guide the shaking hand of the child, and does at the first frame it to make
letters; the child indeed does endeavor to form the letters, and does
strive with all his power, yet the right forming of the letters is not to be
ascribed to the child, but to the scriuener: This example seems to me to be
most fit, because it teaches that God does not only work with our will (as
the Semipelagian Synergists, or maintainers of our cooperation with God, of
this our age, would have it) but also that God does work by our wills, and
does bend them by an effectual motion, which motion after what manner, and how
far man may resist, shall hereafter be taught.

XXII. We therefore say that the act of believing and repenting, is so far
the act of man, in as much as man himself believes and repents, and not
God; and in as much as no man believes and repents, but he does it
willingly. But we say, that the grace of God alone, does create and give the
first being to faith in us, and that it is the gift of God, and by the power of
the regenerating spirit, that we do willingly and freely believe and repent.
For the question is not who believes, whether man or God; but what does bring
forth faith in man, and whether it be in the power of free will, helped with
grace, to believe or not to believe, and to use grace or not to use it.

XXIII. From this doctrine (the foundations and proofs whereof shall be
brought out of the holy Scripture in the next chapter) Arminius, and his
Sectaries do infinitely and exceedingly differ: For, they are of opinion, that
an unregenerate man has power of believing and repenting. The Arminian
conferrers at the Hage, Page 272. do affirm, that conversion does go before
faith, and that man does help somewhat to his own conversion before he has
faith. And turning over the writings of these Sectaries, I find that they
determine, that by the corruption of nature, man's understanding is darkened,
and his affections are depraved; but I no where find in their writings, that
his will is of its own nature depr^ued, and prone to sin: But they attribute
to it, pronenesse either to good or evil, and an equal in^anation to either
part: Wherefore in the regeneration of a man, they will indeed have his
understanding to be enlightened irresistably, and his affections to be drawn
(for so they speak) but they say, that the will keeps her own liberty of
believing, or not believing, of repenting, or not repenting. And they will not
have the vivification and reviving of the will in our regeneration, to consist
in this, that of being naturally evil, it is made good by the infusion of some
virtue, but that by the illumination of the understanding, the amend^ment of
the affections the will is made able to put forth that faculty of willing or
nilling, which is ingrafied in it. This the Arminians of the conferrence at the
Hage teach, Page 25. And also the same men, a little after, say these words: In
our spiritual death, the spiritual gifts are not properly separated from the
will of man, because they were never engrafted in it. Surely those men are of
opinion, that the will of Adam, before his fall, was not furnished with
righteousness and holiness: For it cannot be denied but that these virtues
are spiritual gifts; which certainly is a prodigious and monstrous divinity.

XXIV. The same men do affirm, that sufficient grace is given to all men,
even to unregenerate and heathen men, to whom the name of Christ has not come,
whereby they may obtain faith, if they will: And that an unregenerate man is
not altogether dead in sin, Arnold. p 403. Home corruptus potestlumine natura
recte vti: et habet aliquas reliquias vite spiritualis.
but that there are in him relics and remainds of spiritual life, and power
of fulfilling the law of nature: for they think that God does exact and
require nothing from man, to the performing whereof he would not give him
sufficient power: otherwise (say they) God should gather, where he has not
scattered: They say therefore, that God is bound to give to all men the power
of fulfilling that which he commands, and of believing in Christ.

XXV. Notable are the words of Arminius, pa. 244. against Perkins. Do thou
(says he) deny that free will is flexible and pliant to either part? I add
further, and that also without grace: for it is flexible of its own nature,
and as it is addicted to evil in the state of sin, so it is capable of good,
which capablenesse, grace does not give it, for it is in it by nature. He
therefore does differ from himself, when he adds, that free will is not
bowed to good, without the grace of God. For how do these things stand
together? that free will is flexible to good, without grace; and yet it is not
bowed to good without grace? In vain is that power which is never brought into
act: For whence does he gather that that thing may be done, which he himself
knows never was done, nor never shall be. Hitherto pertains that which he
says, page 257. To be able to believe is in nature, to believe is of grace:
therefore to be able to believe is not of grace. There is indeed naturally in
man a possibility of having or receiving faith; but it is not in him by nature
to be able to believe; for these things do very much differ. The first notes
the susceptability and possibility of receiving faith: the other signisieth the
active power and faculty of believing, which surely is not in man by nature,
but is only from grace.

XXVI. Arnoldus, page 271. lays this to our charge, as a very great error,
that we say that the regenerate man cannot do any good, unless he be moved
by grace. Truly a great crime, and that which is common to us with the
Apostle, who does pronounce, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think
any thing, as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God. 2 Cor. 3.5. The
same Arnoldus, page 447. does make the use of grace subject to man's will: It is
determined, says he, that the use of grace is subject to man's will, that man
may use it, or not use it, according to his natural liberty: And a little
after he does confess, that the effect of the mercy of God, was made by
Arminius to be in the power of man, but such a man as is already strengthened
with grace. To use which grace, or not to use it; to believe, or not to
believe, he thinks is in the power of man's freewill. Finally, the Arminians
will have the efficacy, that is, the efficiency and working power of it, to
depend on free will. Arnoldus against Bogermannus, page 263. and 274. All the
operations of grace, which God does use, to work our conversion being granted,
yet the conversion it self does remain so free in our power, that we may not
be converted, that is, that we may convert, or not convert our selves.
Greuinchouius, page 198. I say, that the sffect of grace, after the ordinary
and usual rule, does depend on some act of free will, as on a foregoing
con^ition, without which, it is not. The same man, page 203. and 204. does say,
that there c^n no other common cause be guten of the whole (why this grace
should be^essectuall, rather in Paul or Peter then in another) then the liberty
of the will. Perkins said; As there can no good either be, or be done, unless
God does it; so there can no evil be avoided, unless God hinder it. This true
and holy sentence, Arminius carpeth at and does deprave. page 113, and for the
words, can be avoided, he puts, is avoided: for he says, that there is in all
men power of doing good, and avoiding evil, and that a man may avoid evil,
and abstain from sin, although God does not hold him from it; but that the
act it self, is partly from grace, and partly from free will, which as it
pleases, does either admit, or refuse grace. Here the words of Arnoldus, page
381. The good using of freewill, is principally from grace, but yet so, that
man himself does use well his own free will: and the liberty of using, or not
using grace is left to him. For these sectaries are of opinion, that the power
of believing is irresistably given to all, and that the act of believing is so
helped by grace, that it is left to man's free will to believe in act, or not to
believe, and to use grace either well or ill.

XXVII. And they deny that faith is from grace alone, but that it is partly
from grace, and partly from free will. Greuinchouius, page 208. and 210. It is
manifest, that free will and grace are together causes in part: And page 211.
We join grace and free will together, as causes in part: He must so speak,
who says that Election is for faith foreseen: For God would be very unfitly
said to foresee that which he alone is to do; for this is not to foresee, but
to decree: Hitherto also pertains that conditional decree of saving men, if
they shall believe; for by this it is placed in the power of man to believe: For
this were a foolish decree; I will save him, if I shall give him faith.
Arminius against Perkins, pa. 223. and 224. says, that the total cause why
one believes, and another not, is the will of God, and the free will of man.
Arnoldus, page 228. says, that Arminius gave the chief part of the working of
faith, to grace. viz. because in the working of faith, he will have free will
to have a part; which part, that it is not the least, yea, that it is the
greatest, in the sense of the sectaries (although they would make another show)
Arminius, and after him Arnoldus, page 125. does sufficiently acknowledge: We
deny (says he) that this difference of calling grace, is not placed so much in
man's free will, as in the will of God. And truly in the conversion of man,
free will must have the chief part, if it be true that the Arminians contend
for, to wit, that the efficiency and working power of grace, does depend on
free will, and that the right use of grace is made subject to man's will. And
that which Arnoldus says, page 444. That God does so work in man, that in the
mean while man is not wanting to himself, he can convert himself. And
Greuinchouius against Ames, page 205. Grace does not determine and conclude,
unless free will work with it: in which respect and manner, what if we should
say, that the efficacy of grace, does after a certain manner depend upon
free will, as concerning the event? If therefore the efficacy of grace, as
concerning the event, that is, the effect, does depend on man's free will; it
must needs be, that free will has far the greater part in our conversion
and regeneration. The same man, pa. 214. In comparing between themselves,
Arnold pa. 234. and 235.
the effectual help of God, and the insluence of free will, there is no
priority between them both. And seeing it is in the power of freewill, so to
use grace that he may believe, and obtain faith, we being by faith the sons
of God, Gal 3.26. It appears (if we may credit Arminius) that to be made the
sons of God, is a thing proper to free will, and although it cannot be done
without the help of grace, yet the effect does depend on man's will: So that
God is willingly indebted to man; for he is beholding to free will that he
has sons.

XXVIII. This is the malicious and black juice of the fish Loligo; and this is
their most pestilent doctrine: of which, what is to be judged it is easy to
conjecture by those speeches which every where meet us in the books of these
sectaries. That Lydia opened her own heart, when yet, as Luke witnesses, Act.
16.14. God opened the heart of Lydia: And that a man does separate himself,
although Saint Paul says, who seperates thee? 1 Cor. 4.7. And that an
unregenerate man is not altogether dead in sin: and that God does give man
power of believing, if he himself will: when yet God gives both to will, and
to do, Phil. 2.13. And that sufficient grace which is given to all men, yea,
to the reprobates, does take away the impotency, and does stablish the liberty
of free will; as Arminius against Perkins, page 245. and 246. teaches. Let us
hear the proud words of Greuinchouius, p. 253. I separate my self: for when I
might resist God and his predetermination; yet I have not resisted, and
therefore why may it not be lawful for me to boast in that, as of my own? For
that I was able, it was of God showing mercy, but that I was willing, when I
might have been unwilling, it was my own power. It is a venture, but this
little worm will swell so big, that he will break. O it is the part of a
magnanimious and great minded man, to be unwilling to owe too much to God, and
not to be ouercharged with his benefits. Those things which the same author
says, page 279. savor of no less pride: You will say that in this manner of
working, God does after a certain manner, depend on the will of man: I grant
it, as concerning the act of free determination. Indeed this one thing was
wanting, to the very height of pride, that God should be said to depend on man.

XXIX. There meet us in the writings of these innouators, some places, in
which they say, that man in his corrupted state was altogether dead, and that
of himself, he can neither think, nor will, nor do, any thing that is good.
But these things are said but for a color, and that they might deceive the
unwary reader: For they say, that a man is able to do no good without grace;
but by this grace, they understand universal grace, which is common to all
men, and sufficient grace, which is given, even to them to whom Christ was made
known, and which does extend it self as far as nature: They say indeed,
that grace is the cause of believing, but they never add, that it is the cause
alone. The Arminian conferrers at the Hage, in the third and fourth Articles,
do so speak as if they were of the same opinion with us: For there they
profess, that man has not saning faith from himself; and that the grace of
God is the beginning, the proceeding, and the finishing of all good, and that
all good actions are to be ascribed to the grace of God in Christ: But the
subtle men, when they say that a man has not faith from himself, they
understand, that he has it not from himself alone: And when they say, that
every good work is to be ascribed to grace, they are very wary, least they
should say to grace alone. Then also in the word grace, they lay a snare, and
being the Apes of the Pelagians, they faigne a certain grace, which is common
to all, which does extend it self as far as nature: Also they distinguish
grace from the use of grace; for indeed, they will have grace to be from God,
but the use of grace to be in the power of man's free will: With the like craft,
they say, that the power of believing is from grace: for they presently draw
back what they have reached forth, while they say, that to believe it self,
is of man's freewill; and that grace is given to man to believe, if he will. But
whenever they will have a kind of special grace to come to that general
grace, they make the use of this special grace to depend on free will; and
they roundly, and without any circumstances affirm, that the efficiency, and
working power of grace, does depend upon it.

We shall also see, that by that universal and sufficient grace, common to all
men, is understood natural gifts, and notions that are naturally engrafted,
and that they cloth nature with the goodly name of grace; (which thing also
Pelagius did:) Which thing, when they do with their greatest cunning, yet
their dissembling is never so wary, but that their Pelagian ears and error
do appear: and although they do imitate the speech of truth, yet their
vizard does often fall from them unawares; and their ulcers being pressed, do
presently cast forth stinking corruption.

XXX. Yet Vorstius here does differ from his Master: For when Arminius says,
that no man is converted, and does believe in act, by that vniuer sall grace
alone, which is common even to the reprobates, but that there is also some
special grace required: Vorstius on the contrary side, does affirm. Collat.
cum Piscat. page 57. that some are converted by universal grace (which he
calls the lesser mercy) that is, without special grace, which he calls
grace more then sufficient, and super abounding help: Therefore if this man be
believed, some men come to salvation by that grace alone which is common to all
heathen men.

CHAP. XXXIII.
It is proved out of the holy Scripture, that an unregenerate man, is
altogether destitute of the power and liberty of his will, in those things
which pertain to faith and salvation.
I. IF they stand here to the judgment of the holy Scripture, there will be no
place of doubting. Of a man that is unregenerate, and in his mere naturals,
the Scripture speaks thus. Genesis 6.5. Every thought of the heart of man is
only evil continually. The same is repeated, Chap. 8. Ver. 21. Jeremy in his
seventeenth chapter consents to this; The heart of man is wicked, and
unsearchable. And Romans 3. There is none righteous, no not one: They are all
gone out of the way, and are become unprofitable: there is none that does good,
no not one. And Rom 7.18. I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no
good thing. And Chap. 8. ver. 8 The wisdom of the flesh, that is, whatsoever a
carnal man understands or perceives, is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. Compare these things with
the doctrine of Arminius, who is of opimon, that a man that is an infidel and
unregenerate has sufficient power to believe, and to fulfill the law: For the
Apostle is of opinion, that our flesh, not only is not subject to the law of
God, but that it cannot be. The same Apostle, 1. Cor. 2.14. says, that the
natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them. Hitherto pertains that which
the Scripture says, Ezech. 36. That the heart of man is stony, and therefore
of its own nature unapt and incapable to receive the impression of the law of
God, unless God (as he did of old) write it on that stone with his finger.
Also that which Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 2.1.5. that not only the Ephesians
before their calling, but that all of us were dead in sins. He has the same
words, Coloss. 2.13. And that which Christ says, John 14.17. The spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows
him. Christ in these words does plainly acknowledge that there is no free will
of man, no power to receive the spirit of truth, but a natural auersion and
disability.

II. Wherefore the Scripture does call the change of man, by the spirit of
regeneration, sometimes another birth, John 3. sometimes the creation of the
new man, Ephesians. 4.24. It calls it, another resurrection from the dead, Reucl.
20.6. Luke 15.32. John 5.25. Not that creation and resurrection is in all
things like to regeneration and the change of the soul; but only in this thing
of which it is here spoken, to wit, as the Carcass cannot dispose nor prepare
it self to the resurrection, and a thing that is not created, cannot further
any thing to the creation of it: So man in the state of sin, and before his
regeneration, has nothing whereby he may dispose himself, or further his
regeneration and spiritual new birth.

III. The Arminian conferrers at the Hage, Page 279. do roundly confess, that
by our spiritual death, the liberty of doing well or ill, is separated from
the soul. I demand therefore whether an unregenerate man, furnished with that
sufficient and universal grace, which is given even to Reprobates, has
free will of doing well or ill in those things which belong to salvation? If he
have not, why do the Arminians contend he has? If he has it is plain by
their own confession, that he is not dead in sin.

But there is a special force in the word borne: For if there were any seeds
and relics of spiritual life in an unregenerate man, as Arnoldus is of
opinion, there were no need to be borne again, and that the new man should be
formed, but God were to be prayed to, that he would again raise up those
sparks and relics of spiritual life, and would vouchsafe to kindle and
increase it, as it were, by adding fuel to it.

IV. Add to these, those places which teach us, that without faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11. That all men have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
because it is the gift of God, Philip. 1.19. Ephesians. 2.8. Seeing therefore what
soever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.25. it is plain that in things which
belong to salvation and to the worship of God, he does nothing but sin that
wants faith, such as are all the heathen and unregenerate men. In which place
to the Romans, it is to be noted, that the Apostle speaks of the use of
meats, which he will have us to eat with faith, that is, with a certain
knowledge that the use of meats is allowed by God, and is agreeable to his
word. Seeing therefore that, even in things which are of their own nature
indifferent we sin, when we use them without such a faith, how much more are
we to think that the heathens sin in every action that pertains to
salvation and the worship of God, because they are altogether destitute of this
faith?

Hitherto pertain those places which teach us that God is the author of every
virtue, and every good work that is done by us. We are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing, as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God, 2.
Cor. 3.5. And Christ himself, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing. And in
the same place, we are compared to branches cut off and appointed to the fire,
unless we have been engrafted into Christ, by whom we live and bear fruit.
The Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8. does teach, that salvation and faith is not of our
selves, but of the gift of God: For by grace ye are saved through faith, and
that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. How far is this from
Arminius, who will have the total cause of faith, not to be grace alone, but
grace and free will. And least any of Arminius followers should seek a refuge,
and should say that the power of believing is given to all irresistably, but
that the act of believing is so helped by grace, that it is also from free will,
the Apostle does fitly prevent such a weak subtilty, Phil. 1.29. where he
says, It is given to you, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake. You see that not only the power of
believing is given us; but also the act it self, to believe. Agreeable to this
is that, John 6. No man can come to me unless my father draw him: Where to
come, is to believe in act, and not to have the power and faculty of believing
which is brought into act by free will. No less direct is that of the Apostle,
Philip. 2.13. It is God which works in you both to will, and to do, of his
good pleasure. Now to will, is to will in act, and not to have the power of
willing. God himself, Ezechiel 36.27. says, I will put my spirit within you,
and will cause you to walk in my statutes. Therefore he does not only give
the power of walking in his statutes, but also does cause that we really walk,
and does work in us the very act. After what manner and how far the elect
may resist the efficacy of the spirit shall hereafter be seen. It is
sufficient to the present question, if we win this of them, that God does not
only give the power whereby we may believe, but also that he does give and
work in us the act of believing, to believe it self.

We meet sometimes with places where the Arminians say that not only the
power of believing, but that also the act of believing, to believe it self, is
given by God. But they will have this act so to be given by God, in as much as
he gives knowledge to the mind, and does raise up the fainting affections
which do put forward the will to believe, and that this is done by a moral
persuasion, and after the same manner that we are moved by objects: But this
is not to give faith and the act of believing. For surely he that does
persuade, that does propound objects, and does inuit the appetite to run,
does not give the act of running, to run it self: Wherefore the Arminians
do deny that faith it self is infused, or imprinted on the heart by God, but
that the will is invited to believe only by a moral persuasion, and by a
courteous allurement.

With a like fraud (that they might seem to attribute some great thing to God)
they say that God does give the power of believing, and that irresistably: But
when they come to explane the manner whereby these powers are supplied, it is
manifest that they deny that the power of believing is given to man by God: For
they think that God does give these powers no otherwise then by enlightening
the understanding with knowledge, and by stirring up the appetites, which
certainly is not to give the power of believing: For he which in the dark
does with a torch give light to the wandering traveler, and does stir him up
to go, does not thereby give him the power of going.

VI. And least any man should in any part arrogate to himself the praise,
either of that knowledge which he has obtained, or of that love wherewith he
feels himself to be affected, Christ does beat down all pride, in speaking
thus to Peter, Matthew. 16.17. Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona, for flesh and
blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. And,
Chap. 11.25. he does give thanks to his father, that he has hidden these
things from the wise and men of understanding, and has revealed them to babes.

VII. And especially when it is spoken of the love of God, and of obedience to
his commandments; the Scripture will have us to acknowledge that whatsoever is
done well by us, is received from God: We love God because he has loved us
first, John. 4.19. For this is one of the effects of the love of God toward
us, that it does put into our hearts a love of him: God himself thus speaks,
Ier. 31. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.
And Chapter 32. I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. And Moses brings this reason, as the cause why the Israelites
did not repent at the law of God, ratified with so many threatenings, and
confirmed with so many miracles, Deuteronomy. 29.4. The Lord has not given you a
heart to perceive, nor eyes to see. Let Arminius tell me whether these men had
sufficient power to believe, or sufficient grace, which with the help of
free will, they might have rightly used if they would. Fie on this forgerie.
And yet was not God the cause of the impenitency and blindness of that people:
For he that will not heal him that is blind, is not the cause of his
blindness: God did not put this wickedness in man, but he knows who they
are on whom he will have mercy, and he has reason for his actions, to enquire
into which were not only rash, but also dangerous.

VIII. Saint Paul, Galath. 3.26. says, That we are the sons of God, by
faith in Christ. If therefore it be in the power of man's free will, being
helped with grace to believe, or not to believe, to use that grace or not to
use it, it must needs also be in the power of free will, helped with grace, to
effect, that we may be the sons of God, or may not: Which is contrary not
only to piety, but also to common sense; for who ever effected that he was the
son of his father? or who is beholding to himself for any part of his
generation?

IX. The same Apostle says, Romans 9. It is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of him that shows mercy. By him that wills and him that
runs, he understands him that works, for the consideration of works is
excluded from the election, or (as Arminius had rather) from the justification
of man, that this benefit might be acknowledged to be received from the mercy
of God alone. Arminius offends against this rule: For by his doctrine, the
conversion of a man by faith, and therefore both his righteousness and
salvation, is of him that wills, and of him that runs, and of him that
works, that is, of him who by the help of his free will, does use universal
grace well, and who does therefore believe, because to the help of grace, he
has brought the power of free will, by which he has obtained Faith. For (as
I have said) the Arminians make the cause of faith, to be these two joined
together, to wit, grace and free will; to use which free will to the obtaining
of says, and to the converting of himself, is certainly to will and to
run: The Apostle therefore ought to have said, It is of man that wills and
runs, and of God which shows mercy, that free will might be joined with
the mercy of God. And if (as Saint Austin says fitly, Lib. 1. ad Simplic.
Quaest. 2. It may be said, That it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, because conversion and salvation, is not by the free will of man
alone; why may it not also be said, that it is not of God that shows mercy,
because conversion is not made by the grace of God alone, but also by
free will? It skilleth nothing that Saint Austin used this argument against
Pelagius, who denied that we were prevented by grace, for it has the same
force against the Semipelagians, who join free will to grace: Seeing that
Saint Paul does not say, That it is not alone of him that wills, but does
altogether exclude free will.

X. Finally, this argument has so tormented Arnoldus, Page 445. that he would
seem to yield to our part; for he says, It is not placed in our will, that we
should obey the calling of God, but this thing it self is also from the mercy
of God. But the scoffing and crafty man, is very wary least he should say
somewhat that should hurt his own cause: For when he says that it is not
placed in our will, he understands alone: Therefore he would not say, that
this is wholly placed in the mercy of God alone, but tenderly and with a
flouting speech he says, that it is placed in the mercy of God: He might, yea
he ought to say so much of free will, that he might agree to himself; for he
thinks that it is not placed in the grace of God alone, nor in freewill alone.

XI. That man cannot be converted unless God convert him, and that the whole
praise of our conversion is due to God, Jeremy teaches, Chap. 31. v. 18.
Convert me, and I shall be converted; which is also repeated in the last
Chapter of the Lamentations. I am ashamed of the weak interpretation of the
Arminian conferrers at the Hage, who page 266. by converted, would have
corrected to be understood: There is nothing so clear and direct in the holy
Scripture, which may not be corrupted with a foolish and rash interpretation:
who having but little skill in the Hebrew, is ignorant that the Verb shub,
signifies to be turned, and not to punish; and therefore in the contugation
Hiphil, it is to cause that one be converted, and not that he be punished. Or
who does not see how ridiculous a thing it were, if men bruised with
afflictions, should pray that they might be still afflicted? As if any one that
were grievously whipped, should desire moreover that he might be buffeted? But
Jeremy expounds himself, and does teach what it is to be converted: for he
adds, being converted, I will repent and acknowledge my self: this indeed
is to be converted. Seeing therefore that men, who are already converted, say;
Convert me, and I shall be converted, Ier. 31. Draw me, and I will run, Cant.
1. And do ascribe the progress and the proceeding of their conversion to God
alone: how much more is the beginning of our conversion to be attributed to God
alone? For if they that are already willing, do confess that they owe to God
whatsoever good they do, and that without his grace, they cannot move a foot
further; how much more is it to be determined, that of being unwilling, we
cannot be made willing, of dead, alive, unless God draw us, and make us alive?

XII. And to overthrow those preparations, by which the sectaries think, that
an unregenerate man well using universal grace and natural light, does
dispose and prepare himself to regeneration; that which God says, Ezech. 36.
does greatly prevail; I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of you, and I will give
you an heart of flesh; I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk
in my statutes. For seeing that God himself witnesses, that in those things
which belong to the worship of God and to salvation, man has naturally a stony
heart, which has need to be taken away, and another to be given by God, in
which God should imprint the character of faith and repentance: it manifestly
appears, that an unregenerate man cannot prepare himself to his
regeneration: For that which must be taken away, and must be changed for
another, that we may be regenerated; certainly, that does not further
regeneration, nor does prepare us to it, for otherwise we should be helped by
the impediments themselves.

XIII. Arnoldus, page 461. does answer, that this phrase of a stony and
fleshly heart is figurative and Symbolicall divinity cannot prove any thing. I
answer, that figurative speeches have the force of those that are properly
spoken, when they are expounded by the Scripture it self; and when it is
evident to what end, and in what sense they are used: Now in the same place of
Ezechiel, there are many words that are plain, and not figurative, which do
make clear this figure; for in the same place, God does promise that he will
give them a new spirit, by which he would cause that they should walk in his
ways.

XIV. Wherefore Arnoldus with a superfluous diligence, and nothing to the
purpose, does heap together the differences between the heart and a stone. A
stone has not life, the heart has; a stone cannot be softened without the
taking away of the substantial form, the heart may; the stone cannot resist
his own softning, the heart may: All besides the matter, for in that one thing
of which it is spoken here, the comparison is most apt: For even as the stone
cannot soften it self, but it is softened only by the power of an outward
agent: so the unregenerate heart cannot convert it self, or dispose it self
to regeneration, but it is done only by the efficacy of the spirit of God: He
that without this shall seek comparisons, shall find infinite differences; as
that a stone may be engraven, and broken, may be taken out of the quarries, and
be laid on the building, etc. but the heart cannot.

XV. The words of Saint Paul do vex these Semipelagians, when he says, that
man is dead in sin, and he speaks of the unregenerate man: The point of
which dart, that they might avoid and make frustrate, they do laboriously
heap together differences between a dead corpse, and an unregenerate man;
which do tend thither, that they might prove that an unregenerate man, is not
altogether dead in sin, and as Arnoldus says, has some relics of the
spiritual life: To which natural relics and remainds of universal and
sufficient grace, he added, which they say is given to all men, even
vnregenerates and reprobates, by which there is no man, but may fulfill the law
and obtain faith; certainly, there will be found in an unregenerate man, very
much life, and there will be none or very little conueniency or similitude,
with him that is dead. It is well therefore, that these sectaries do thither
apply all their force, that they might show that Saint Paul does not speak so
properly as he should. Arnoldus lays down these differences, page 466. and
468. In resurrection the soul is insused, in regeneration it is only changed:
in resurrection there does no dispositions and preparations go before, but
regeneration is made after some foregoing dispositions: Also our resurrection
is done in an instant, but our regeneration by degrees. Resurrection is done
necessarily, but regeneration is wrought, our free will remaining. In the dead
carcass, there are no relics of life, but in an unregenerate man, there are
some relics of spiritual life: God does not speak to a dead carkas, but he
speaks to them that are dead in sin, and does propound his word to them. He
that is dead, cannot resist his resurrection, the unregenerate man may. I do
not deny, but that this similitude does not square in all things: there is no
doubt, but that Arnoldus could have found many other differences: as that the
resurrection of the body shall not be till the last day, that it shall be at
the trumpe of the Angel. etc. But it is sufficient, that this similitude does
well square in that which is the principal of the matter, and in that,
concerning which the controversy is between us: to wit, in this, that as the
dead corpse is altogether unapt to motion, and cannot dispose nor prepare it
self to the resurrection; so the soul of a man that is unregenerate and dead
in sin, does want in things spiritual and pertaining to sa^uation all sense
and motion, and cannot prepare, nor dispose it self to regeneration, until
the spirit of regeneration descend into the heart, stir up new motions, and
does work the first beginnings of the new life: By sense in spiritual things,
I understand zeal, by motion, good works. And surely, these things seem to
me to be repugnant; v^z. to be dead in sin, as Saint Paul says, and to have
relics and remainds of spiritual life, as Arnoldus says. For death in
spiritual things, does altogether exclude spiritual life: I willingly
acknowledge, that there are some motions of truth, and spurkes of light in an
unregenerate man, and some obscure prints of the Image of God: But these
relics are not any part of spiritual life and regeration: the devils
themselves have much more light and derstanding, and yet they are altogether
dead in sins.

XVI. Neither are all those differences true, which they do bring! First, we
deny that God has respect to the dispositions of free will, or that a man by
freewill can prepure himself to regeneration. God indeed, does by a man's
calamities, and by his freedom out of them, and by the examples of the
vengance that he takes of the wicked, sometimes make way to himself for his
regeneration: Also a man by a servile fear, and dread of punishment, may
profitably be troubled: but I maintain, that those inward motions do then
begin to be laudable and acceptable to God, when they are produced by the holy
spirit, and not before: which when it is done, then I say, such morions are a
part of regeneration, and the first motions and pulses of the new man, and
although weak, yet sure beginnings of the new life; and not preparations of
the free will, which go before regeneration, and by which God is moved to gine
a greater measure of grace: But it is so far, that God in beginning
regeneration should have respect to foregoing dispositions; that on the
contrary, they are called, who are the greatest strangers from the kingdom of
heaven, and who are over whelmed in greatest darkness. Let the Thief on the
cross be an example, also the Romans, the people of Alexandria, of Antioch,
the Corinthians, and the Ephesians, then which people, there were never any
more wicked in lust, nor more effeminate in luxury, of greater ignorance, or
of more prodigious idolatry; whom yet so evil affected and dispoled, God
called by an effectual calling, and having sent his Apostles to them, gained
them to Christ, that where sin did more abound, there grace also might more
abound.

XVII. And that regeneration is not always wrought by degrees, the example of
the converted Thief does show, who in the extreme invasion of spiritual
agony, in one moment passed over an unmeasurable space: and o^ the contrary,
that the resurrection of the body may be done by degrees, Ezechiel teaches,
Chap. 37.

XVIII. That is no truer which they say, that regeneration is wrought,
free will remaining. For if free will does remain in regeneration, it must
needs be, that it goes before regeneration: but in things that are
spiritual, and which belong to salvation, there was no free will before
regeneration.

XIX. It is of the same sort, yea far worse, which they add, that in an
unregenerate man, there are some relics of the spiritual life: for so they
ask that to be granted to them, which is the question, and which we have
already proved to be false.

XX. Neither yet is that true which they say, that God does not speak to a
dead corpse; for Christ spoke these words to Lazarus that was dead, Lazarus come
forth, Luke 11. And Eze. 37.4. God does thus speak to the bones that were long
before withered: Oye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. God calls those
who are not, as if they were; but in that he calls them, he causes that they
may be: The words of Christ, John 5.25. are direct to this purpose; The dead
shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear shall live. For
as God with his light, does so enlighten the blind, that he also gives them
eyes; so by his word, he does so speak to the dead, that by that word he does
make them alive.

XXI. Maruailous is the wittiness of the Arminian conferrers at the Hage, who
do thence prove, that there is some ability left in man, that is spiritually
dead: because we acknowledge that man may resist grace. Passing well spoken;
for they prove, that a man is not dead in sin, because he can resist the
spirit of God; as if the remainds of our spiritual life were placed in the
faculty of resisting God; when on the contrary, a man is therefore dead in
sin, because he can do nothing but resist. They do therefore as much as if
they should say, that a man is not therefore dead in sin, because he is dead
in sin.

XXII. And that which they say, that he which is dead, cannot resist his
resurrection, but he that is unregenerated, may resist his vivification;
makes for us, and does burden the cause of these innouators: For thence it
follows that the death in sin, is far the worse death, and that he that
is dead in sin is bound with stronger bonds, if he resist his own
resurrection, not only in the beginnings of his regeneration, but also in the
progress of it: Yea, that very inclination to resist God, is the chiefest part
of that death and natural corruption.

XXIII. In the mean while, the Reader shall observe, how artificial a covert
Arnoldus does use, while he says, that he which is dead, cannot resist his
resurrection, but he that is dead in sin, may resist his vivification. The
opinion of the Arminians is, that an unregenerate man has free will, by which
he may use sufficient grace, or not use it, believe, or not believe. Arnoldus
therefore ought thus to have framed his comparison, saying, he that is dead,
cannot hinder or further his own resurrection: but he that is unregenerate,
may hinder or further his regeneration. But Arnoldus does not here make mention
of that help, that he might put by the envy and susp^tion of
Semipelagianisme. Thus they are wont to do that are ashamed of their own
opinion.

XXIV. That is not to be passed over with silence, which the Arminians of the
conference at the Hage, page 81. do say. For there they make two kinds of
unregenerate men: some, who being left without any calling of God, do walk in
the vanity of their mind and thoughts. These they confess are dead in sin;
but there are some, who are already called and stirred up by the grace of God,
whose understandings being enlightened, and their affections being enflamed, do
stir up the will to the apprehension of the truth. They deny that those are
dead in sin, because their understandings and appetites are viuified,
although the will is not yet drawn; here are many absurdities. First, because
they think that some are unregenerate, who are already viuified and made
alive, when yet vivification and regeneration are the same thing. For if ones
mind be quickened, it must needs also be regenerated. Secondly; With the like
error they place vivification there where there is not faith, seeing (as the
Apostle witnesses) the just does live by faith, and it is impious to
acknowledge any vivification to be in an infidel and unregenerate man.
Thirdly; And they dispute untowardly, when they judge it to be possible, the
understanding being enlightened with the knowledge of the truth, and the
appetite enflamed with the love of it, that the will should be auerse from this
truth. And that a man may be quickened in his mind and affections, and yet his
will remains without life. For what should turn away the will when they two
do instigate and stir it up, seeing that the will is moved by these two
alone? Nor does the will ever stand in doubt, but when reason stirs it up
one way, and the appetites draw it another way, and the will is forced hither
and thither, by the contrary suggestions of the mind and the appetites.
Fourthly; Nor do they agree to themselves, when they say that there are some
left without any calling of God, seeing that they maintain with great
contention that all men are called to salvation, not only by an outward, but
also by an inward calling, and that sufficient grace is administered to all.
Fifthly; Finally I demand whence they have these two kinds of unregenerate
persons; If out of the Scripture, let them show the place; If out of their own
conjecture, we do not believe them.

XXV. Arnoldus against Tilenus, Page 134. does say that it may come to pass,
that of two men furnished with an equal help of grace, one may be converted,
one not: But he ought also to show whether it may come to pass, that of two
that are equally evil, and furnished with the like help of grace ( that is,
having alike sufficient and universal grace, and being alike called by the
Gospel) whether it can come to pass that one should be converted, and another
not. If it can come to pass; I demand whence is the difference? Was greater
grace given to the one? No, he said the grace was equal: Or is it because one
is better then another? No, the question is, of them that are equally evil:
Also if it were so, the conversion of the one should not be of grace alone, but
of free will: Neither is Arnoldus unwilling to this, for he adds, Although
God, who does principally work faith in man, does separate the faithful man
from the unbeliever, yet because he does not work faith and conversion in man
without the will of man, he does not separate man without man. And a little
after he adds, That man does separate himself by his own will. You hear
that God is the principal cause of faith, but not the total, and that man
does separate himself by his own will, when yet the Apostle says, Who
separates thee? attributing this praise to God alone: And that the cause why of
two that are alike called, one follows, the other refuses, is in the one
free will, in the other grace indeed, but yet so that the use of it depends
on man's free will, in the power whereof it is to use grace or not to use it. So
that in the one, free will is the total cause of incredulity, and in the
other, it is the part-cause of faith and conversion: So that now man has
whereof he may boast; it is he that separates himself, and salvation is of man
that wills and runs, and of God that shows mercy.

These innouators, that they might defend themselves against that saying of
Saint Paul; Who separateth thee? do contend that Paul speaks of that
separation, by which they that have received many gifts, are separated from
them who have received fewer, which I willingly receive: For if by the grace of
God alone, they which are endued with greater gifts, are separated from the
faithful, who have received fewer gifts, how much more are they who are
furnished with many gifts separated, by the mercy of God alone, from them who
are altogether void of Faith, and of the knowledge of God?

XXVI. That therefore of Saint Paul, Tit. 3. stands immovable: Unto them
that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their mind and
conscience is defiled. And he speaks not only of meats, but also of the
use of meats, which is pure according to the purity of conscience; least any
one should think that it is here spoken of the purity of meats, and not of
the purity of actions.

XXVII. Finally, all Christian virtues, Faith, Charity, etc. are either in us
by nature, or are obtained by use and diligence, or they are put and wrought in
our hearts by God. That they are naturally ingrafted, Pelagius himself has
not dared to say: That they are not obtained by use and diligence, the example
of the thief does prove, who in one moment, without use or exercise, obtained
faith. It remainteth therefore, that they are put into us by God, and that
faith is from the mere gift and grace of God, and not from free will.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The reasons of the Arminians are examined, by which they maintain free will
in an unregenerate man, concerning things that are spiritual, and belonging to
salvation.
I. AGainst the doctrine of the Orthodoxe Church, which does put away from man
all free will in the work of salvation, being vpholden by the word of God, and
proved by sense it self, and experience, the Arminians do oppose themselves
with great diligence, and do patronize free will in those that are
unregenerate.

II. They do every where object and reckon up that of Saint Paul, Romans 2.14.
The Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature those things contained in
the Law. I answer, that by the Law it is commanded to love God with all the
heart, with all the strength, which cannot be done unless you direct all your
actions to his glory, and unless you be endued with faith, because whatsoever
is not of faith is sin: Whosoever shalexamine the virtues of heathen men, by
the line of these rules, shall find that in their most honest deeds, there
were many things wanting, and much sin in them: Hence it appears that the
Gentiles indeed, in an external work, do those things which are of the Law:
The words of Saint Paul are not to be extended any further: But the form of a
right work, which is placed in the inward conueniency and agreement of the
mind with the law of God, was always absent from infidels and heathen men. It
is one thing to do those things that are of the law, it is another thing to
fulfill the law: The one is to obey the law, as concerning the external matter
of the work, the other is to be obedient to the law, after that manner, with
that mind, and to that end, which is commanded by the word of God.

III. They scatter some little motives, as that, Esaias 55. v, 1. They that
thirst are invited by God, that is, those that are desirous of reconciliation
with God, and of salvation. And that Matthew. 11. They that are heavy laden are
called, Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden: By those that are
laden, are noted our, those that are pressed down with the conscience of their
sins, and sighing under the burden of them: Therefore (say they) they were
already desirous of salvation, and were pressed down with the conscience of
their sins, before they were called, and regeneration is after calling: And
therefore in the unregenerate there may be a saving grief, and a desire of
remission of sins; but I affirm that those men so thirsting, and so laden,
were not unregenerate: For that very desire of salvation and the grace of God,
and the sighs of the conscience, panting under the weight of sin, by which
we are compelled to fly to Christ, is a part of regeneration: And that
beginning of fear (if it be acceptable to God) is an effect of the holy spirit
moving the heart: For what hinders, that he who thirsts after the grace of
God, has not already tasted of it, and as it were licked it with his lips?
What hinders that he who is commanded to come to Christ, should not already
move himself and begin to go, although with a slow pace? Does Christ as
often as he commands men to believe in him, speak only to unbelievers? Yea,
this exhortation to believe, and to come to him, does especially belong to
them, whose faith being new bred, and weak, does strive with the doubtings of
the flesh.

IV. It is familiar to the Arminians to cite the words of Christ, John 7.17. If
any one will do the will of him that sent me, he shall know of my doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self. Hence they would prove,
that one may do the will of God, before he know Christ and his doctrine. This
is to delude the Scripture, and to wrest it at their pleasure: For they speak,
as if Christ had said, He that does fulfill the commandments of God, shall
afterward know of my doctrine, whether it be of God, etc. Also by the words, to
do the will of God, they understand, to acknowledge their sins, to fear God
with a servile and slavish fear, seriously to wish the grace of God, and
remission of sins, to do those things which are of the law, etc. All false:
For to do the will of God, in this place, is nothing else, then to believe
Christ speaking; for this is that which Christ does urge, that this is the will
of the father, that we should believe on the Son: Whose words if any man
believes, he thereby knows that his doctrine is heavenly and divine,
wherefore we are not to think that we do the will of God before we believe in
his Son. Thus, although it be true that he who is moved does live, yet it
does not thence follow, that motion is before life: So in that Christ says,
Whosoever will do the will of the father, shall know that my doctrine is from
God: It does not thence follow, that the will of the father must be done before
it can be known that his doctrine is from God: But if there is any order of
time here, it must needs be that the doctrine of Christ be first known to be
from God, before he can be believed, or obeyed when he speaks: For no man does
believe that which he does not in some part know. Christ follows this order,
John 17.8. They have known that I came out from thee, and they have believed
that thou did send me. And, Chap. 14.17. he says, that the spirit of truth
is not received by the world, because the world does not know him: To know
therefore is before to receive.

V. That is no better which Arnoldus does add, Page 409. The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom, Prou. 1. And, The Lord reuealeth his secrets to
them that fear him, Psalm. 25. But I deny that the fear of the Lord, of which
it is spoken here, can agree to unbelievers and unregenerate men. Solomon
says, that the fear of the Lord, is the head of wisdom, that is, the chief
part, and that wherein wisdom does chiefly consist, for this the Hebrew
word, Reshith, does plainly signify: And those that fear God, to whom he
reuealeth his secrets, are not unregenerate persons, but those which are truly
godly, to whom he does daily give increase of wisdom, and of the true
knowledge of God.

VI. To the same end Arnoldus, Page 397. does bring the words of the 51.
Psalm, A contrite spirit is an acceptable sacrifice to God. And, Esaias 66. God
will dwell in a contrite spirit. Arnoldus thinks that these things are spoken
of an unregenerate man, but yet such a one as does confess his sins, does
grieve, has the beginning of fear, etc. But he either deceiues or is
deceived: For there David lamenting his sins, with a large confession, does
comfort himself with this hope, and does promise to himself that his
contrition will be an acceptable sacrifice to God. Whosoever therefore does say
that David there speaks of the contrition of an unregenerate man, does
affirm that David himself was unregenerate: And there is no man but sees,
that Esaias does speak of them that are truly faithful, and of a filial fear
and contrition, and not of that fear which may be in the unregenerate, and in
the heathen, who have not heard the word of God. For the Prophet says, To whom
shall I look? To him that is afflicted and of a contrite heart, and trembles
at my word: He speaks of the man who is instructed in the word of God, and
who with a holy fear is moved to the hearing of it.

VII. Arnoldus, a little before, had reckoned up the good works which may be
done by an unregenerate man, viz. To do those things which are of the law, to
have some sparks of light and knowledge engraven on his heart, to grieve for
his sins, to implore the grace of remission of sins, and of the new spirit:
But how many nations are there, who do not know what this new spirit is, nor
have ever heard any thing of the grace of remission of sins? Also I would know
whether such things that are done by the unregenerate, without faith, are
truly good: If they be truly good, then we can do that which is truly good
without Christ, without his spirit, and without faith: If they are not truly
good, how can that not be truly good and just, which God alone intends, and
which alone, nothing more (if Arminius be believed) he does require from the
unregenerate man as long as he is unregenerate?

VIII. A little after, he says, that the same work cannot be performed as
perfect in its essence, without the faith of Christ; and he does put this
difference between works which are done before regeneration, and they which
are done after regeneration; to wit, that they are imperfect, these are
perfect. These are the two kinds of merits, with which, in the Schools of the
Papists, make such a noise, merits of congruity, and merits of condignity, but
new dressed and clothed with other names. The Reader therefore shall note,
that the Arminians place in a regenerate man perfect works, and a perfect love
of God: For they think that the regenerate, may by the spirit of Christ so
conform their life, according to that law, that they may come to that degree
of obedience which God does require of them. These are the words of Arnoldus,
page 492. and page 399. according to Arminius, he says, that there is a double
spirit, one that does go before regeneration, and does tend to it, which is
the spirit of bondage to fear, the other which does regenerate, and does
perfect regeneration. Arminius, Resp. ad. 31. Art. pa. 164. and 165. I do not
repugne that opinion of Austin, whereby he determines, that man may be without
sin in this life. Truly it is boldly spoken: The Arminians then are better
then the Apostle James, who speaks thus, Chap. 3. In many things we offend
all. In which speech, he does account himself among them who offend in many
things: Better then Saint John, whose confession is this; If we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: Yea, better then all
the Apostles, who did daily say, Forgive us our trespasses. Neither is it to be
maruailed at, if the Arminians think that the regenerate can fulfill the Law,
seeing they also say, that the Law of nature may be fulfilled by the heathen
and unregenerate: Now the Law of nature is that, to which Adam before his fall
stood bound, which bond passed to his posterity: This Law forbids a man to
lie; but the Scripture, that cannot lie, says, that every man is a liar: The
same Law, commands that God be loved withal our heart, and all our strength;
which thing, how can it be performed by the unregenerate, seeing it was never
peeformed by the regenerate themselves? That which a living man never
performed, how can it be performed by him that is dead? Finally, we must bid
Christian religion farewell, and another Gospel must be coined, if this
prodigious doctrine be admitted.

IX. But that we may come to that double spirit of God. Arminius, and according
to him Arnoldus, page 399. do devise two spirits, or rather two acts of the
same spirit: The one of these spirits, they will have to be common to all men,
even to the unregenerate, yea, and to heathen men, to whom the Gospel has not
come; by which spirit, they think that God does work in all men, and is idle
in none: This is that spirit, which they call the spirit of bondage, of which
it is spoken, Romans 8.15. which is opposed in that place to the spirit of
Adoption, which is peculiar to the true faithful. This spirit of bondage, the
Arminia^s will have to be effectual in the law, not only in the written law,
but also in that which is naturally imprinted in men's hearts: By this spirit
they think that unregenerate men do tremble with a saving fear, do
acknowledge and confess their sins, do implore the grace of God, and apply
themselves to the obedience of the law of nature: these they think are
preparation and dispositions to regeneration, if so be that free will does use
well that universal and sufficient grace which is common to all men: These are
the decrees of this new sect, full of many perplexities, and filled with nice
and slender points.

X. I find in the holy Scripture the spirit of adoption, the first fruits of
the spirit, the spirit of sanctification; but I no where find a spirit of God,
that is tied to the law, and common to all men: Nor can the spirit of God,
working in our hearts, be without very great wickedness, separated from the
knowledge of Christ: 2 Cor. 3.6. Ministers of the new Testament, not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life.
Nor do I see how there can be in them whom Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2. says, to be
dead in sin, strangers from the life of God, and without God in the world,
either any spiritual life, or the spirit of God dwelling in their hearts, and
sauingly moving and affecting them: Certainly, the Apostle had never called
the Law, separated from the Gospel a killing letter, nor had opposed it to the
spirit, if the spirit of God were always joined to the law, or if the spirit of
God did work in men's hearts, and dispose them to faith and conversion, without
the knowledge of the Gospel: Nor is the Law a Schoolmasters unto Christ,
until the grace of Christ is offered to us: for then the Law, with terror and
threats does compel us to embrace the grace offered.

XI. But that is most dangerous, which the Arminians press down and hide, but
dare not utter, to wit, that the holy spirit is naturally in every man. For if
the spirit of God be effectual in the law, and the law be naturally engraven
in every man, it must needs be, that the spirit of God is naturally in every
man. And so, whatsoever the Scripture speaks of the second birth, by the
spirit, of the creation of the new man, and of the spiritual resurrection,
will fall to the ground, yea, will be ridiculous: For, what need were there to
infuse a new spirit for regeneration, if the same spirit of God did already
dwell in the hearts of the unregenerate?

XII. And that place of Saint Paul, Romans 8. Ye have not received the spirit of
bondage again to fear, they do falsely, and against the Apostles will, draw
to this matter. For Saint Paul never called the spirit of God, the spirit of
bondage; for so he had reproached the spirit of God: but he only says, that
the spirit that was given to them, was not servile, and such as should strike
their hearts with a slavish fear: For, where the spirit of God is, there is
liberty, 2 Cor. 3. If I should say, that we have not received from God the
spirit of lying; should I therefore say, that there is a spirit of God that
compels to lying? Is the spirit of God contrary to it self; that one spirit of
God, should be called the spirit of bondage, and another the spirit of liberty?
The plain and simple meaning therefore of the words of the Apostle, is this;
Ye have received the spirit of God, not that which should terrify your
consciences with a slavish fear, which made you uncertain and doubtful,
before the grace of God, and the adoption of Christ was reueiled to you, etc.

XIII. And they do extremely dote, when they put the fear and terror,
wherewith the law (destitute of the spirit of regeneration, and the knowledge
of Christ,) does strike men's hearts, among the effects of the spirit of God:
For the law thus received, can only restrain the raging affections with the
fear of punishment, and frame a man to certain outward obedience: but it will
never purge the inward filthiness, or instill any one drop of true repentance:
yea, rather it will stir up the inward lusts, by the resistance of it, as it
is engrafted in every man, to incline to that which is forbidden, and
wheresoever hope of impunity is propounded, men having broken their bars, do
so much the more outragiously riot, by how much they were straightly bridled
in. This is that which the Apostle would express, Romans 7.5.8. The motions of
sins by the law, did work in our members, and sin taking occasion, by the
commandment it self, wrought concupiscence. And that until the spirit of
life, which in Christ frees us from the law of sin and death, as it is said,
Chapter 8.2. that is, until the powerful efficacy of that quickening which we
have from Christ, free us from that bondage of deadly sin.

XIV. It is vain and idle which they object, that the corruption of an
unregenerate man, is compared to sleep, and to an Ulcer. I confess it is
compared to a sleep, but to a deadly one, and such a one, out of which, man
cannot awaken and raise himself: That Ulcer and scarre which is spoken of,
Esaias 53.1. and 1 Pet. 2. does not signify sin it self, but the punishment
of sin. This therefore is nothing to the relics and remainds of spiritual
life, in an unregenerate man.

CHAP. XXXV.
The Objections which the Arminians borrow from the Pelagians and Papists, are
answered. Whether an unregenerate man does necessarily sin; and whether
necessity excuses the sinner: Also whether God does command those things
which cannot be performed by man.
I. THese thorns and difficulties being taken away, we are to come to the
Arguments, or rather Declamations, with which they would odiously burden our
cause. They say, that by our doctrine, an unregenerate man does necessarily
sin, and nothing but sin: That it is not sin which is committed
necessarily, and cannot be avoided. Arminius against Perkins, page 106. The
necessity and immutability of sinning, does excuse the sin, and does free
from punishment the committing of that act. And Arnoldus, page 188. Necessity
does excuse the sin. It is in vain commanded, if it be impossible to be
obayed. God, (says Arnoldus) does require nothing of us, to which he does not
give us sufficient power: yea, (says he) if God should require of man any
thing, and should not give him sufficient power to do it, he should gather,
where he has not scattered. The same things does Vorstius reckon up, page 28.
Collat^ in Piscat.

II. This Pelagian Colewort, these Sectaries do again set before us, and a
thousand times they sing one and the same song, which we must needs exactly
consider of, although they boast of these things, rather for ostentation and to
trouble weak wits, then that they think as they say.

III. First, we say that necessity of sinning does not excuse sin, if it be
voluntary, and if this necessity be procured by his own fault. So Arist.
Ethic. (...), etc.
3.7. says, that at the first, unjust and intemperate men had power not to be
such; but after that by their own will they were made such, they cannot but be
such; nor are they therefore to be excused: Also he says, that it is a
shameful thing, if one by his drunkenness, should bring blindness upon
himself. And if it be so in the vices of the body, into which, when any one
has fallen by his own fault, he does wish he had not fallen into them, and
would redeem it with a great price; how much more is it in the vices of the
mind, which seeing they are procured by habit and generation, are loved by him
who is voluntarily evil? For herein is placed the greatest part of the
disease, that he which is vicious does love his vices, and will not be amended;
for there is a necessity which is voluntary, and therefore free; Nor is it
sufficient, to say that such a necessity is spontaneus, and of a man's own
accord, seeing even beasts, led by instinct, are carried of their own accord,
and without knowledge: but he that is necessarily evil, is evil, not only of
his own accord, but also voluntarily, because it is with ludgement and
knowledge: So God is necessarily good, but yet freely: and Satan is
necessarily evil, but with a most free will; and the Saints in heaven are
freely good, and yet necessarily; for it is not credible, that they have lost
their liberty by their glorification: Nor can it be said, that the Saints in
heaven therefore cannot sin, because there is no occasion of sinning, and no
temotation; for the Angels before their fall, had no more occasion of sinning:
By the very gifts of God wherewith they were abundantly furnished, they took
occasion of too much loving themselves, and by it were made more slack to the
contemplation of God, staying in the admiration of themselves; whence came
their pride, and from their pride, their rebellion. It must needs be, that the
necessity of the perseverance of the Saints, does rest on another foundation,
to wit, the election of God; who does furnish those whom he predestined from
eternity, and gave to Christ, with gifts and necessary means to persevere in
that state, whereunto they were appointed. Further also, there is a certain
vision and beholding of God, to which, when the creature is admitted, he is
necessarily transformed into the likeness of God; no otherwise then the glass
does burn at the sun: Of which vision it is spoken, 1 John 3. We shall be
like him, because we shall see him as be is. and Psalm. 17.15. Finally, if he
is unjustly punished who does sin necessarily, although he sin voluntarily,
and has brought upon himself the necessity of sinning by his own fault; then
he also shall unjustly have benefits and glory bestowed and heaped on him who
cannot sin, and who is necessarily good; such as we have proved the Angels
and Saints in heaven to be.

IV. Wherefore Saint Austin in many places has not doubted to say, that there
is in man a necessity of sinning; So Disput. 2. contra Fortunat. After that man
sinned by his free will, we who descended from his stock, are necessarily
fallen into a necessity of sinning. And in his book, de perfect. iustitiae.
Ratio. 9. Because the will sinned, there followed the sinner a hard and
forcible necessity of sinning. Arminius differs from him, whose words against
Perkins, Page 106. are these: It is impossible that that which one does freely,
he should do necessarily. Yea, Page 144. he is bold to pronounce, that God by
all his omn^potency cannot make that that which is done necessarily, should be
done freely: For it is familiar to this man, as to make laws to Gods justice,
so to set bounds to his omnipotency.

And if God is necessarily good and not freely, Page 106. in Perkit^^.
as Arminius is of opinion, and it be far more excellent to be good freely
then not freely, without doubt man shall be better then God, and the blasphemy
of Seneca is to be subscribed to, who in his 53. Epistle says, that a wise man
does go before God himself, because man is wise by the benefit of nature, but
God by his own. Therefore as God is freely good, and yet cannot but be good;
and as Satan is necessarily evil, but yet freely and voluntarily, so also a
man that is dead in sin, does necessarily sin, but yet voluntarily, and
therefore freely.

V. In which thing, so great is the force of truth, that it often falls from
them unawares; for Arnoldus either unwittingly or else on purpose, does
acknowledge this necessity of sinning, Page 394. where, according to Arminius,
Idem habet Page 398.
he says, That man, under the state of sin, can understand, will, or do
nothing that is good: And hence it is that he does necessarily sin, unless
God graciously take away that necessity. He does therefore confess that man
sins necessarily, before God takes away that necessity of sinning; and that
man sins necessarily, even then when he sins freely. For (as Arminius
confesses) it were not sin, unless he sinned freely. But perhaps Arminius
and Arnoldus are of opinion, that God takes that necessity of sinning from all
men: Let us therefore hear what Arnoldus in the same place does add: Arminius
(says he) does determine that God is prepared, for his part, to take away that
necessity of sinning. In which words he does not obscurely confess that God
does not take that necessity from all, but that he is prepared to take it away,
if themselves will; but that he does not take it away from all, is our own
fault; as Arnoldus himself does acknowledge, Page 398. The same man, Page 399.
according to Arminius does say, That God by little and little, by the grace of
his spirit, does free men from this necessity of sinning: It is not therefore
presently taken away; yea it remains always in them in whom the grace of the
holy Ghost, either does not work, or does not prevail. The same man, Page
406. does acknowledge that there is in man an impotency and disability of
resisting sin, and this impotency, what is it else then the necessity of
sinning.

VI. Nay, more then this, the Arminians do say, that God does irresistably
harden some men? For I use their own words. Now there is nothing more evident,
then that he does necessarily sin, who is irresistably hardened: We have
therefore the confession of these Sectaries, that there are some who sin
necessarily, and whom the necessity of sinning does not excuse from their
sin, because they have contracted this necessity to themselves by their own
fault.

VII. It is a marvel therefore that the Arminians, who are otherwise
ingenious, do stumble at this straw, and had rather patronize and maintain
Pelagius, and borrow weapons from him, then yield to the Scripture, and to the
evidence of truth: For after the same manner does Caelestius, a Pelagian,
dispute, in Saint Austins book, de perfect iustitiae-Ratio. 2. Again (says
he) it is demanded, whether sin be of the will, or of necessity? If of
necessity, it is not sin: If of the will, it may be avoided. In Arminius
therefore we have Pelagius raised to life again.

VIII. We determine therefore, that the necessity of sin does excuse from
sin, if he that sins has not procured this necessity of sinning by his
own fault. As also if by necessity, constraint and a greater force of the
outward agent be understood, or a natural necessity appointed to some one
thing by the creator, and being void of knowledge, such as is the natural
inclination of heavy things to the center of the earth. But necessity does not
excuse sin, if he that sins has procured on himself that necessity of
sinning, and if he sins wittingly and willingly, and is delighted with that
inclination to sin.

IX. And that which the Sectaries say, that there is no place for punishment,
if man want the liberty of his free will, may be admitted, if by liberty of
free will be understood, (...), that which is of ones own accord; In which
sense many of the ancients, especially before Saint Austin, do defend the
liberty of free will: For, whosoever sins, sins of his own accord. But
if by the liberty of freewill be understood, (...), an inclination, which is
alike free, either to good or to evil, in those things which belong to faith
and salvation, I constantly affirm, that man is worthy of punishment, although
he want this liberty. It is sufficient to punishment, that he does not only
sin of his own accord, but also voluntarily, and that he himself is the
cause of his necessity of sinning, and that he does applaude and please
himself in this voluntary necessity.

X. Yet the Arminians do obstinately persist, and do maintain, that it is in
vain commanded, if we baue not power to obey: That exhortations, promises,
threats, and counsels are in vain, if none of them can be neither perceived
nor performed by man; for that were as much as if a song should be sung to a
deaf man; or as if one should command a blind man to see; or one that is
fettered to run; or as if one should thus speak to the dry bones of them
that are dead, be ye converted, be ye converted, and see. This is an old
objection of the Pelagians, as may be seen in Saint Austin, lib. de perfect.
iustitiae. Rat 6. and 11. Where Caelestius the Pelagian does thus dispute:
Again, it is demanded, whether man be commanded to be without sin: For
either he cannot, and it is not commanded, or because it is commanded he can:
For why should that be commanded, which cannot at all be done? And Rat. 11.
Certainly all those things which are forbidden, can as well be avoided, as
those things which are commanded can be done: For that in vain would be
forbidden or commanded, which cannot be avoided nor fulfilled. Here is very
stark Arminianisme. Caelestius took this argument from Cicero, as Saint
Austin witnesses, lib. 5. de ciuitate Dei, Cap. 9. where he says, That
Cicero whilst by the denying of the foreknowledge of God he would make men
free, made them sacrilegious.

XI. I answer to these things, that precepts, threats, and counsels, etc. are
in vain, if man wanted the faculty of understanding, and of willing or nilling
something of his own accord, and with reason and judgment. But an
unregenerate man is endued with understanding, and has a will which is moved
of its own accord and incitation, and after foregoing knowledge and
practical judgment. Nor is it always true, that those precepts are given in
vain which cannot be fulfilled: For the intemperate man, who by custom has
brought on himself insensiblenesse, and cannot temper himself from lust and
surfeiting, is yet tied by the laws of sobriety and temperance. Neither is it
any doubt, but that the devil, who is necessarily evil, and unfit to yield
obedience to God, is bound to obey God; for otherwise he should not sin in
being an enemy to God: So from a debtor, which has consumed at dice a great
some of money which he took up at use, that which he owes is not in vain nor
unjustly required, nor can the creditor lose his right by the wickedness of
the debtor. Seeing therefore, that man by his own fault procured on himself
the disability of performing that which God would have done, God does not
vainly and unjustly require from him the obedience which he owes: For it is
not equal that the sin of man should profit him, and that therefore he
should be lawless, because he corrupted himself with his own wickedness,
and brought upon himself the disability of paying to God the debt of nature,
which God does require of man, considered not as a sinner, nor yet as just, but
simply as he is a debtor, and in as much as he is a creature subject and bound
to obedience. After the same manner, that a creditour requiring his debt, does
not consider the debtor as he is poor, or as he is rich, but simply as he is a
debtor: God making his law, does consider man after this manner, and so he does
consider him, when he does add promises and threats to the Law, saying, Do
this, and thou shall live. And choose good, that thou may live, etc. And make
ye a new heart, for why will ye die O house of Israel? Ezech. 18. He is
deceived, surely he is deceived; who thinks that the commandments of God are
the measure of our strength, seeing they are the rule of our duty: For in the
law we do not learn what we are able to do, but what we ought to do; nor
what now we are able, but what heretofore we were able to do, and from what a
height of justice we fell by the fall of Adam.

XII. The Scripture does supply most forcible proofs for this thing. Saint
Paul, Philip. 2.12. does command us to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling; but presently after lest it should be thought that this can be
performed by us, because it is commanded, he does add; It is God which works
in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure. Thus Ezech. 18.31. Make
you a new heart, and a new spirit. But lest any should think that this is a
thing of our free will, in the thirty sixth Chapter of the same Prophecy, God
speaks thus: I will take away the stony heart out of you, flesh, and give you
a new heart. Thus Joel 11. Be ye converted to me with your whole heart; yet
Jeremy, Chap. 31.18. does acknowledge that the conversion of a sinner is the
gift of God; Turn me O Lord, and I shall be turned. And the last of the
Lamentations, Turn us O Lord, and we shall be turned. So Deuteronomy. 10.16. God does
thus speak to the people: Circumcise the fore-skinne of your heart; yet
Chapter 30.6. it is declared who does work it: The Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart. Thus Christ, John 14.1. commands us to believe in him,
and yet he says, no man can come to him, except the father draw him, John 6
44. and that by coming he means believing, he himself teaches, v. 35. He
that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall never
thirst. And, Phil. 1. Ephesians. 2. we are taught that faith, and the act of
believing is from God. Finally, the Scripture will have men to gain their
bread by the sweat and labor of their hands, and yet nevertheless, we are
commanded to ask our daily bread of God, because the food of the body, is the
gift of God, but that which he does give to him that works: For the blessing
of God does not come on idleness, but on labor. That I may not say many
things: Does not God require perfect obedience from the unregenerate? Yes, and
from the heathen, to whom Christ was never known: And yet if one should say
that they might be perfectly just, and altogether without sin, he should
attribute that to unbelievers, which never happened to any faithful man. Does
not Arminius himself acknowledge that some are irresistably hardened, from whom
yet God does require perfect obedience?

XIII. Neither does God therefore command in vain, or are his precepts to no
purpose: For God in commanding, exhorting, threatening, etc. does affect man
with the sense of his sin; he does teach man his debt; what once he could
do, and whence he fell: Also he does propound a rule of justice, lest any one
should pretend ignorance for his sins: Finally, he does join to his word the
efficacy of the spirit, and he does, as it were, arm and head it, and make it
sharp and effectual. It is not in vain to command him that is fettered to
run, if by that commandment his fetters are loosed. It is not in vain to
command a blind man to see, if by those words wherewith this is commanded, the
eyes of him that is blind are opened: For the words of God do work that in
us, which they command us to do: They do so command that they do also work;
as his words in the creation: God commands that which he would have done, but
he gives also that which he commands: and it is profitable for man to be
pressed down with the intolerable burden of the Law, which does exceed his
strength, that he might the more couetously embrace the remedies offered in
Christ. Excellently to this purpose Saint Austin, lib. de corrept. and gratia.
cap. 3. O man, in the commandment know what thou ought to do: in the word
of correction and reproof, know that by thine own fault thou have not that
thou ought to have: in prayer, know whence thou may receive what thou
would have. And in his book, de spiritu and litera. God does not measure his
precepts by the strength of man, but where he commands that which is right, he
does freely give to his elect ability of fulfilling it.

XIV. The similitudes which these Sectaries use to procure envy to us, are
plainly contrary, and nothing to the purpose: They say, it is to no purpose to
blame the blind man, because he does not see, although he has pulled out his
own eyes; or to urge him to work, who has cut off his own hands. Concerning
him that is blind, I answer, that this example is brought by them improperly;
for no blind man, whether he is blind by his own fault, or by another, is
bound to see: But he that by his own fault, is made wicked, and unable to
obey God, is yet bound to obey him: No man is bound to exercise natural
functions after they have ceased; but the bond whereby the creature is bound to
the Creator, can be wiped out by no occasion, much less by the wickedness of
man. But if any blind man, had rather be blind, then see, and should refuse
the remedies offered, should he not justly be blamed? Such is the condition of
man in the state of sin; for he is not only necessarily evil, but he will
not be good, and he is delighted with his wickedness.

XV. The similitude of him who has willingly cut off his own hands, has the
same defects; Whereunto this is to be added; that the hands may be cut off, but
the will, which is here signified by the hands, cannot be cut off: For every
most wicked man, is endued with a will, by which he is always bound to
worship and love God, although he has corrupted it. Finally, the similitudes
of natural and civil things, are for the most part very unfitly and absurdly
drawn to moral things, and to religion. By the like reason, that ridiculous
similitude of a man speaking to dry bones is dis^olued; for these bones are not
bound to move themselves, but an unregenerate man is bound to believe, and to
obey.

XVI. Arnoldus, page 136. has these words; We see (says he) that the
Scripture does often say, that he which does believe and is converted, does
separate himself from evil, does purge, quicken, sanctify, save, and
circumcise himself, does make him a new heart, does put on the new man, etc.
Whence he does gather, that it may be said, that man does separate himself,
although the Apostle says, Who seperateth thee? understanding none but God.
The places noted in the margent, whereby the proves these things, are these,
Ezech. 18.31. Make you a new heart, and a new spirit. Iam. 1.27 Pure religion,
is to keep himself unspotted from the world. 1 Pet. 1.22. We are commanded
to purify our souls. 2 Timothy 2.21. If any one purge himself, he shall be a
vessel unto honor, sanctified, etc. Luke 17.33. Whosoever shall loose his
life, shall preserve it. Deuteronomy. 10.16. Circumcise the fore-skinne of your heart.
All which places are besides the purpose, for they do not say, that which
Arnoldus does apply to them, to wit, that these things are done by us, but they
only commanded them to be done: and I marvel how so great a negligence has
crept on a man of a sharp and acute wit: Yea, if these places should say that
man gave himself a new heart, that he did sanctify, and quicken, and save
himself, yet it would not thence follow, that these things are done by our
free will; for it is familiar to the Scripture to say, that those are done by
us, which God does work by us: Thus man opens to God, knocking, Revel. 2.20.
Thus the Apostles raised the dead: Thus the Pastors of the Church forgive sins,
Mat. 18. John 21. Thus they save souls, 1 Timothy 4.16. When yet without
wickedness, they cannot arrogate to themselves the title of the Savior of
souls.

XVII. And whether this doctrine tends of the concurrence of free will with
grace, and of the faculty whereby man may believe, and use grace if he will, or
not believe and refuse grace, and the total cause of faith is assigned not to
grace alone, but to grace with freewill; whether, I say, this doctrine, drawn
out of the ditches and puddles of the Semipelagians, does tend, it is easy to
know: For it tends thither, that man's merits might closely be brought in, as
it were by undermining ways: For a though these Sectaries do at the first
view, seem to bear a hatred to merits, yet in many places, they do establish
them. The Epistle against the Walachrians, has these words, page 44. Those
whom God calls, and to whom he does before hand vouchsafe the grace of
preaching, we confess for the most part, to be such men, that their virtues
do deserve no less then this free bestowing of gifts. Behold then, some men
who deserve the bestowing of the gifts of God, and that before regeneration.
Arnoldus, page 328. God gives to the creature, performing obedience, that
which is theirs of due. Arminius against Perkins, page 218. God, of his
promise, and of due debt, does give life to him that works. And Arnoldus,
page 433. does speak of some, who by the help of grace, do not make
themselves unworthy, and do not deserve that the spirit should cease to work
in them.

XVIII. It likes me well, for a corollary, to set down here the famous
sentence of Saint Austin, ad Simplicium, quest. 2. This is manifest, that we
will in vain unless God show mercy; but I do not know how it can be said,
that God shows mercy in vain, unless we do will; for if God has mercy, we
are willing, because it belongs to that mercy, that we should be willing: for
it is God that does work in us to will and to do, of his good will. And in
the same place; The effect of the mercy of God cannot be in the power of man,
that he should in vain have mercy, if man be unwilling, because if he will
have mercy on them, he can call them after that manner that is fit for them
that they should be moved, and understand, and follow.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the outward and inward calling, and whether the one be without the other.
I. ALthough the works of God, which are every where before our eyes, do
abundantly testify, and even against men's wills, do show the infinite power,
goodness, and wisdom of God: yet this light is but dim, and nearer to
darkness, in comparison of the light of the word of God, whereby he does not
only give us assurance of his omnipotency, majesty, and providence, but does
also reueile to us his will: For surely the contemplation of the creatures does
not touch men with the sense of sin, nor does show to a man the way of
salvation and reconciliation with God: yea, there can be no profitable and
saving contemplation of nature, unless those things, which in a doubtful
light, and in worne-out letters are hardly read, do by the word of God, as it
were through spectacles, appear plain and distinct to us: Then at length do
we contemplate heaven with filial eyes, as the entry of our fathers house,
when God by his word has dispelled this mist from our minds, and has
declared sure tokens of his fatherly love.

II. Furthermore, although the knowledge of the creatures does not suffice to
salvation, yet the Gentiles, who were instructed by no other teacher then
nature, are therefore inexcusable, because they do not use these (although
small) helps, to as good purpose as they might: and because they endeavor to
choke or deprave those natural good notions, and sparks of goodness and
equity, which are put into them by nature: Therefore they alone do profit in
piety, by the teaching of the creatures, and are by the pricks of conscience
stirred up to the fear of God, to whom God has vouchsafed the prerogative of
his word.

III. But yet not all they that hear the word of God, do come to salvation;
but those in whom the preaching of the Gospel piercing deeply, and being
admitted into them, does change their hearts, and shed in their minds a
heavenly light: And these saving effects, are not to be ascribed to the
eloquence of man, obtained to persuade, but to the secret efficacy of the holy
Ghost, which is the true doctor of our souls, and that singer of God,
engrauing the law on the stony tables of our hearts. Thence it is, that the
Gospel is called in the Scripture a two-edged sword, a hammer breaking the
stone, the arm of God, and the power of God to salvation: Without which
efficacy of the holy Ghost, preaching is but a dead letter, and a vain sound
striking men's ears; effectual only to this, that the condemnation of the
stubborn and rebellious hearer, should be the greater.

Hence arises a double calling, one outward, which is wrought by the outward
publishing of the Gospel; the other inward, which is wrought by the powerful
drawing and change of the heart by the Holy Ghost, by whom the word is made
effectual. This inward change does consist of two parts, viz. The enlightening
of the mind, and the change of the will, which change of the will, though it
be latter in time, yet it is worthier in dignity: In so much that the
enlightening of the mind, without the renewing of the heart, does turn to our
greater condemnation. This inward change is in the Scripture called conversion,
regeneration, the new birth, creation, and resurrection.

IV. Here we have somewhat to do with the Arminians, and there is no small
controversy between us: For they say, that the word of God, whenever, and
amongst whomsoever it is preached, is never destitute of its quickening power,
neither is any one outwardly called, but he is also inwardly drawn: And
therefore they refuse the distinction of vocation or calling, into outward and
inward. These are the words of Arminius against Perkins, Page 57. The word is
unprofitable without the Holy Ghost, wherefore it has the cooperation of the
Holy Ghost always joined to it: And this he says being unmindful of that
which he had said a little before, where speaking of the word, and of the
cooperation of the holy spirit, he says; these two are almost always joined
together, therefore not always: Neither is Arnoldus unwilling that Arminius
should doubt in that thing; for, page 432. he speaks thus; It may be doubted
whether Arminius thought that the inward succor of the spirit was always, and
in all men, joined with the outward preaching: But that which the Master
speaks fearfully and doubtingly, is openly and without any circumstance
affirmed by his scholars. For Arnoldus, Chap. 4. would draw Arminius into this
opinion, that the outward calling does happen to none, without the inward: and
page 433. The opinion of Arminius is, that the efficacy of the holy Ghost is
present with all them, who at the first are called. The Arminians in their
Epistle against the Walachrians, page 49. do labor much to teach, that in
those who are not converted, the word is not destitute of the quickening spirit.
Arnoldus, page 464: teaches, that this quickening force is joined, not only to
the preaching of the Gospel, but also to the preaching of the law, and that
this change is made by the spirit, by the word of the Law, preparatorily, and
by way of preparation; by the word of the Gospel, consummatorily, in respect
of the finishing of it; and that so, as man cannot but receive that sense, and
be affected with it, and in this action the spirit carries himself altogether
pass^uely: By which feeing, he says, the spirit does allure the assent, the
liberty of the will yet remaining safe and whole. This holy spirit working in
men's hearts, by the knowledge of the law, Arnoldus does put, even in Infidels
and those that be not regenerate; which although it is not the spirit of
regeneration, yet it does dispose to regeneration.

V. This doctrine is repugnant, not only to the holy Scripture, but also to
experience and common sense: For we see many hearers of the word, that are no
more affected with the preaching of it, then if lessons should be sung to them
that are deaf; those whose minds does wander other-where, and does never
return; besotted with such a stupidity, that they have no relish of the
Gospel, no feeling of it, nor assent unto it, although to other things they
are not slow: Also there are very many, who when they hear the Gospel,
receive it with gibing and laughter, as an absurd thing, as the Athenians, Acts
13.32. For Christ preached is an offense to the Jews, and foolishness to the
Greeks, because they are offended, and these mock at it. I have seen those,
who being asked what they brought from the Sermon, and what they remembered,
have seriously answered, they could not discern whether the Preacher spoke
French or Latin.

VI. In such men, yea, and in Infidels, instructed in the law alone, the
Arminians say, that the spirit of God does work, and does necessarily, and (as
they speak) irresistably, give the sense and feeling of the true doctrine,
although he does not give the assent and agreeing to it, but by the help of
free will. Much more therefore among the Arminian multitude, there will be
none, who is not drawn with the holy Ghost, and who does not feel in him the
quickening spirit: This flying in the air, does not much disser from the
fanaticall enthusiasme and inspiration of the Anabaptists, but that the
Anabaptists will have this sense and feeling peculiar to themselves; but these
innouators will have it to be common, both to the faithful and to Infidels,
yea to all, to whom either the Gospel is preached, or the Law without the
Gospel.

VII. It is to no purpose, to reckon up places of Scripture, to overthrow this
opinion: For hitherto belong all those places which we have brought, Chapter
34. to prove that an unregenerate man, and an infidel, is unable and unfit to
every work that is good and profitable to salvation: All which were false, if
the quickening power of the holy spirit, did dwell in infidels, and unregenerate
persons, and if all men were drawn inwardly, and by an internal calling.

VIII. To this purpose are those places which teach us, that they alone come to
Christ whom the father draws, John 6.44. But according to Arminius all men
are drawn, and are inwardly affected, by the holy Ghost: As the wind blows
where it lists, so also the spirit, John 3.8. Therefore he does not breath
every where. In the multitude of people God opened the heart of Lydia before
the rest: When the Apostles were astonished, the thief believed among the
cries of the raging people, and so many impediments of believing: One little
call of Christ moved Matthew, that leaving the receipt of Custom he followed
Christ; when the men of Capernaum, among so many miracles and good lessons,
were hardened at the preaching of the Gospel: Whence it appears, that some
men are drawn by the efficacy and power of the spirit, and some men are left
in their natural wickedness. Whence is this difference? If dignity be
respected, who among the unregenerate is not unworthy of the grace of God,
seeing all men are of a stony heart, and are dead in sin? But if the
precedent disposition be respected, why are the men of Capernaum rather called
by the Gospel, then the men of Tire, seeing that Christ does witness that the
men of Capernaum were worse affected, and less inclined to repentance.

IX. Arnoldus, Page 445. does contend, that the heart of Lydia was therefore
opened, because she was well affected and disposed, and that God therefore
opened her heart, because she opened it her self: For in that place she is
called, (...), one that was addicted to the worship of God, before she believed
Paul. I might say that there are many who worship God with a wicked and
unlawful worship: But I am more prone to this opinion, that I should believe
that Lydia, a Jewish woman, was endued with the spirit of regeneration, and had
received true piety, and believed in the Messiah promised, although she did
not yet know that Jesus the Son of Mary was the Christ, because he was not
preached to her. Such a one was the Eunuch of Candaces, and Cornelius, who,
Acts 10. is called a devout man, whose prayers, and alms, and piety, was
praised, before he had heard any thing of Christ: These were some of those
men, who as Saint Luke says, Chapter 2.25. Did expect the consolation of
Israel. I think it were wickedness to account these among insidels, and
among the rest of the Jews, who did blaspheme Christ, and despise him
preaching. Seeing therefore that Lydia was such a one, God opened her heart,
that she might attend to the words of Saint Paul, and might learn from him,
that Christ, whom she did expect, was already come, and that those things
were fulfilled, which were foretold of him by the Prophets.

X. Against these things, the Arminians bring some arguments, but so light,
that they are dispearsed only with a breath. Arminius against Perkins, Page
57. does say, that Stephen, Acts 7.51. does vpbraide and reproach the Jews,
that they did always resist the Holy Ghost. Hence the accure man does gather
that these rebellious Jews, were inwardly affected with the Holy Ghost. But
the following words do declare what it is to resist the Holy Ghost; for
Stephen adds, Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? to wit,
to persecute the Prophets, speaking by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and
to resist the spirit speaking by their mouths, this was to resist the
Holy Ghost.

XI. I confess that there are some men, who do resist the spirit of grace, of
whom the Apostle speaks, Hebrews 10.29. and who do strive against the
inward suggestion of the Holy Ghost. But there the Apostle speaks of some
few, who having embraced the Gospel with joy, and having received some taste of
the word of God, do a while after, with an obstinate mind, and on set purpose
turn their back to God, and do cast out his grace, with indignation, and do
sin wilfully, after they have received the knowledge of the truth, as it is
said, verse 26. who, that they are the same with them who sin against the
Holy Ghost, does hence appear, in that the Apostle in the same place does say,
that their s^luation was past hope, and does say, that there remains no
sacrifice for their sins, and that there does rest no hope of reconciliation
for them. But this does agree but to some few, and not to all; to whom either
the law alone, or the Gospel with the law, has been made known: All which
these Sectaries teach, are moved inwardly by the Ho^y Ghost, and have a feeling
of the true doctrine imprinted in them. Neither do I think that the gifts of
the spirit, which such men as these have received, are the gifts of
regeneration, or the spirit of adoption, or the true, proper, and justifying
faith, but only some assayes of the spirit moving the heart, at whose
suggestion the will (being warmed with some slight hear, rather then enflamed)
does cleave to the Gospel, until the benumbed appetites, perceiving war to
be intended against them, have raised themselves with greater force, and having
shaken out of the heart that superficial piety, have turned it into hatred,
and by the very incitations of piety, their hidden poison has more vehemently
burst forth.

XII. Arminius in the same place does hold up, and as it were underprop their
tottering cause with that place of the Prophet Esaias, Chapter 55.11. where he
has these words: So shall my word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it
shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish that which I please, and
it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sen^^. Surely this is to hit the nail
on the head: The meaning of Esaias is plain, for he says, that the promises and
threats propounded in the word of God, shall be executed, and that nothing was
said in vain, and which should not be fulfilled. Here is no mention of the
quickening efficacy of the spirit affecting men's hearts; nor if there were,
could it thence be proved, that the spirit of God did work in all, but in them
alone whom he decreed to save.

XIII. Arnoldus, Page 443. does pour out a shower of places of Scripture, and
yet he does not prove by them that which he does intend. That place, Matthew.
23.37. does not prove it. How often would I have gathered thy children? etc. For
we have showed in the fifth Chapter, that these children were gathered together:
Also if they were not gathered together, it would not follow that they were
called any otherwise then by an outward calling.

XIV. That place, Esaias 65 2. does not prove it: I have spread out my hands all
the day to a rebellious people: Nor that, Prou. 1.24. I have called and ye
refused. For there it is spoken of the outward calling, and not of the efficacy
of the spirit working in men's hearts.

XV. Nor that place, Psalm. 81.14. O that my people had hearkened, that Israel
had walked in my wates; I would soon have subdued their enemies: For these
words mean nothing else, then what they plainly found forth, to wit, that God
would have laid flat the enemies of Israel, if Israel had obeyed God: Here is
no mention at all of the inward efficacy of the spirit.

XVI. Nor that of Ezechiel, Chapter 18. v. 31. Make ye a new heart, and a new
spirit: For it is not proved by this place, that man does make himself a new
heart; seeing God in the 36. Chapter of the same Prophecy says, I will give
you a new heart, and a new spirit: Much less is it hence proved that the
Holy Ghost does work in all men.

XVII. Nor that of Saint John, Chapter 5.34. I seek not the testimony of men,
but these things I say that ye might be saved. And verse 40. Ye will not come
to me that ye might have life. By which words, how it can be proved that the
quickening power of the Holy Ghost does work in all men, I confess (and it is
my dullness) I cannot conceive.

XVIII. It is not proved by those words of Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 2.4. God would
have all men be saved: Of which words we have at large proved, Chapter 29.
that this is the sense; God does inuit to salvation, men of any sort, and of
every condition.

XIX. Nor by that place of Peter, Epphes. 2. Chap. 3. v. 9. God is not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance: For it cannot
be drawn out of this place, that the Holy Ghost does inwardly work in all
men, even in those to whom the Gospel is not preached; but only that God is
not the cause of the overthrow of any one, and that he does not rejoice in the
destruction of man, as he is man: For otherwise, as the same man is a sinner,
God does love the execution of his justice.

XX. Nor is it proved by that place of Ezechiel, Chapter 12.2. Son of man,
thou dwell in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes to see and
see not, they have ears to hear and hear not: For there by eyes and ears,
is not to be understood sufficient grace to salvation, either mediately, or
immediately, nor the operation of the Holy Ghost working in the reprobates, but
a knowledge in the heart, by which even against their wills they did
acknowledge that those things were right which were taught them by the
Prophets; for they were admonished by so clear instructions, and stirred up
with so severe threats, that they could not pretend ignorance. This knowledge
was given them, not by supernatural grace working inwardly, nor by sufficient
grace common to all men, by which they might have believed and been converted,
if they would; but by the instructions and documents of the Prophets, and by
the law of God, known and perceived in their mind, against which they did
willingly harden their heart.

XXI. To the Scripture thus corrupted and depraved, he does join reasons that
are no better: God (says he) should delude and mock men, if he should offer
them salvation, and should say that he desired their salvation, and yet does
not call them to that end that they should be saved. I answer, the end
propounded to God, in calling by the Law, or by the Gospel, those whom he
knows will not follow, is not that those whom he calls should not be
saved: But Gods end is to require of man, that which he owes, to wit, to obey
God commanding obedience, and to believe him promising. Nor is it any doubt but
that God does seriously call men: For in calling men, be does seriously
declare what is acceptable to him, what man does owe, and what he will give to
them that believe and obey. But we do not say with Arnoldus, that God is
bound to restore to man those powers which he lost, and to cure that disability
of man, which man brought upon himself. Furthermore, it is wicked audacity to
go about to prescribe means to God, which unless he follow, he has no way
to escape the crime of injustice, as if he should be compelled to plead his
cause before the tribunal of man.

XXII. Arnoldus proceeds. The same thing (says he) God does teach, when he
does expressly declare, that he will not be laden with this unjust suspicion;
that he should require any thing of us, to the performance whereof he would
not give us sufficient power. I omit that rude kind of speaking, and which is
not agreeing to God, when he says, that God will not be laden with that
unjust suspicion; as if God feared the unjust suspicions of men. To the thing
it self therefore I say, that this doctrine is most wicked, and there is
scarce any that is worse: For seeing God does require from unregenerate men and
Infidels, their natural debt, that is, the perfect fulfilling of the Law; it
follows by this speech of Arnoldus, that the unregenerate, and infidels
themselves have power, by which, without the knowledge of Christ, and without
faith, they may perfectly fulfill the Law, and be without sin. The Arminians
themselves, do say that God does irresistably harden some men; who although
they cannot but sin, yet from them, being hardened, God does not less require
perfect obedience, then before their hardening: For the creature is by no means,
no not by the eternal punishments, exempted from his subjection to his
creator. Nor is it to be doubted, but that the Devils themselves, who are in
eternal torments, are bound to believe God; for they are therefore punished,
because they do not love him. Also, if any one be punished for disobedience
past, he is not therefore freed from the obedience that is due for the time to
come.

But this perverse doctrine, which does gather by the commandments of God,
what are the powers of men; and does think that there is nothing commanded by
God, to the fulfilling whereof powers are not supplied to man, is at large
confuted in the 35. Chapter.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the distinction of grace, into sufficient, and effectual grace.
I. THe distinction of grace into sufficient and into effectual grace, is an
old and worn distinction in the Schools: But effectual grace is taken two
ways. For it does either signify, that grace which is apt and fit to effect
and work; as when we call that medicine effectual, and that remedy forcible,
which although it be not taken by the sick man yet is apt and fit to heal: Or
we call that grace effectual, which does effect and work in act; in which
sense, effectual is used for efficient, and the efficacy is used for the
effect, or for the efficiency. The Philosophers say, that there is a double
efficient cause, one in power, as the Architect and the Physician; another in
act, as he that builds, and he that cures: Hence proceeds that double
acceptance of the word, efficacy.

II. The Papists think, that there is sufficient aid to conversion given to
all men: with which aid, they may so cooperate with the help of their
free will, that they may be converted, although there come no other effectual
aid: And by effectual grace, they understand that grace which is efficient,
and does bring forth its effect.

III. The Arminians, who in the question of grace and free will, do so dress
and trim up Popery, as the Papists do Pelagianisme, do often use that
distinction of sufficient and effectual grace; but with such a floating
speech, and affected ambiguity, that it is hard to know what is effectual
grace with them. Arminius against Perkins, page 245. does say, that that is
effectual grace, which does in very deed work the effect; and he does bring
these examples: God was able to make many worlds, but he did it not
effectually; Christ was able to save all men, but he did it not effectually:
Which speech is certainly absurd, and deserves to be laughed at; for he
speaks, as if God did something not effectually, or as if he had created
many worlds ineffectually: For in stead of to do effectually, he ought to
have simply said, to do, or to make.

IV. But Arnoldus being as Diomedes, melior patre, better then his father, does
forsake Arminius: For he, page 397. has these words; That thing is said to be
effectual, not which does effect any thing, but which is so powerful to do
something, as is an effectual remedy, and forcible means. Thus the Patrons of
error, are fallen out between themselves. But here I am bound to patronize
and maintain Arminius against his Scholar: For if effectual grace be taken
for that which does effect and work in act, then this distinction of grace
into sufficient and effectual may be admitted; because there are many things
of sufficient power to work, which yet do not work in act; as the absent
Physician, and the sleeping Philosopher: But it cannot be said, that one grace
is sufficient to work, and another is fit and apt to work, for these two are
both one; neither can any thing be spoken more absurd^y, then that there is
some grace sufficient, which is not fit to work: That cannot be an efficient
cause, which is not of sufficient power.

V. Therefore according to Arminius, the means to faith and salvation are
administered to all sufficiently, but not effectually and efficiently. But
according to Arnoldus, God does administer these means to all men, both
sufficiently and effectually; for he had rather take efficacy for aptitude and
fitness to work, then for efficiency and the working it self; that he might
say, that the efficacy of grace does not depend on free will: For if he had
taken efficacy for efficiency, then he must have said, that the efficacy of
grace does depend on free will: For the School and followers of Arminius, do
hold this by the teeth, and do cry out with one mouth, that the effect or
efficiency of grace, does depend on free will. God indeed does give grace and
sufficient power to conversion, but that man is converted, or not converted in
act, is in the power of free will. Arnoldus does teach this at large, 447. We
determine (says he) that the use of grace is subject to man's will, so that
man may use it, or not use it, according to his natural liberty: And a little
after, speaking of a man furnished with the power of grace, he says, that the
effect of the mercy of God, is in the power of man. And page 448. he teaches,
that if efficacy be taken for efficiency, man makes grace ineffectuall: For
Arnoldus was ashamed to add the other member, and to say that man made grace
effectual or ineffectuall; and yet there are other places brought by us out of
their writings, which are equipollent and of like force with this speech: as
also that which he says, page 449. Man, if he be not wanting to himself, may
convert himself. The Reader therefore shall mark how pestilent this doctrine
is (which the ARminians, restrained as it were with shame, do scarce at any
time utter without ambiguities;) That the grace of God is effectual (that is,
efficient and working,) it is to be attributed to free will, and the efficiency
of the grace of God is subjected to the will of man. By which speech they mean
this; that God does save man, if man himself will, for this it is to depend on
man's will.

VI. The Orthodoxe Churches do much differ from this doctrine: For how can we
be converted by the grace of God, if we will, seeing that this very thing that
we are willing, is the grace of God, yea, it is conversion it self? For he
that does seriously desire to be converted to God, is already in some part
converted. But of these things we have already spoken much, and more shall be
spoken, when we treat of the manner by which the grace of God does certainly
work conversion in us, which manner, the Arminians call (by an odious and rude
word) irresistibilitie.

VII. But in the term of sufficient grace, they do not only differ one from
another, but every one of them differs from himself: For they will have
sufficient grace to believe, and power of believing to be given to all
particular men. Arnal p 405. Licet sit generalis gratiae quod homines dons
istis pessint recte vti. tamen quod actu recte ijs vtantur a speciali gratia
est. Potentia eniminactum non producitur nisi per auxilium alterius gratiae
subsiquentis, quae specialis est quia non omnibus contingis.
And yet the same men say, that no man can believe in act, and use well this
universal grace, without special grace. O your faithful stability! Can that
be called sufficient grace, which does never bring forth that effect for which
it is given, unless some other special grace come to it? Is that a sufficient
cause, which does never work alone? Or is any thing less agreeable to reason,
then with Arminius, to make one kind of grace, which is sufficient, by which
the sinner may be converted, but is not converted, and another which is
effectual, by which the sinner is converted? Is it not of the same power and
faculty to be able to do, and to do? to be able to see, and to see? Surely, a
giddiness has ceased on these men, while they study for subtlety.

VIII. I am deceived, if Vorstius did not discern this; and therefore in the
twenty and twenty one sections, Collat. cum Piscat. he does make two kinds
of grace, one sufficient and altogether necessary, which God does give to all
them that are called: the other extraordinary, superabounding, and singular, by
which men are indeed converted; and he does reject them that say none at all
are conuetted by that former grace: For (he says) that God has not promised
to convert all that are converted, with this more then sufficient help, and
superabounding efficacy of grace.

IX. But we taking the term of effectual grace, for that grace which is apt
and fit to work that for which it is given and appointed, do acknowledge no
sufficient grace which is not effectual, that is, apt to work that for which
it is given and appointed, whether it does effect and work alone, or with
others; which I do purposely add, because oftentimes to one effect and perfect
action, many causes do concur; as to Learning, Nature Art, and exercise do
concur; to the fer^i^ity and fruitfulness of the field, the goodness of the
soil the sun, rain, and convenient manuring do concur.

X. And seeing that in the concourse of causes, to the producing of one effect,
there are certain causes, that do not only work with others, but which do
also work by others, and do give efficacy and power to the adjoining causes:
So in the conversion of man, the holy Ghost, and the preaching of the word, do
concur, but the spirit does give efficacy to the word: For in vain are the
ears beaten on, unless God open the heart, and with the word, does inspire
his secret power.

XI. And we acknowledge that there is no grace absolutely sufficient, either to
conversion, or to faith, or to salvation, without the spirit of regeneration,
and knowledge of Christ. And we condemn the school of Arminius, teaching that
all men, even the heathens, to whom the name of Christ has not come, are
endued with sufficient and saving grace, to come to faith, and by it to
salvation.

XII. Yet the outward means to salvation, that are largely administered without
the inward efficacy of the holy Spirit, may in some measure be called
sufficient grace, not only because they suffice to make them inexcusable, but
also because these means ought to suffice to come to salvation, if man were
such as he ought to be. For if any thing is wanting to that grace, the defect
is bred on his part who is called, not on his part who calls, who, by the
rule of justice, is not bound to supply inward dispositions, because man is
bound to give them of his own, and to bring them of himself: Nor is God bound
to restore them to man, after man has lost them by his own fault: Therefore
God does justly say, Esaias 5. What ought I to have done more to my vineyard,
that I have not done to it? For, speaking after the manner of men, God is said
that he ought to do that which his justice does require, and which if he
should not do, there would seem to be cause of expostulating: But that God
does there speak of the outward means, does hence appear, because he
compares the benefits bestowed upon Israel, to a planting in a fruitful
place, to a digging, to fencing with a hedge, to gathering out stones, and to
the building of a Tower: But there is no mention of the secret vegetation and
growth of it, of the favorable fitness of the air, of the seasonable rain,
which are things rather of an inward and secret power. Furthermore to that
question whereby it is demanded, whether God does give to several men
sufficient grace, this place of the fifth of Esaias is not properly brought; where
it is not spoken of that sufficient grace which God does offer or give to
several men, but of that which he gives to a whole nation: For the gift of
the spirit and the power of believing, which Arminius will have to be given to
several men, is a gift which is given to particular men severally, and not to
a whole nation taken together. But concerning this sufficient grace, a
particular Treatise is to be made.

CHAP. XXXVIII
The opinion of the Arminians concerning universal grace, which is also called
sufficient grace.
I. IN that Series, and rank of the four decrees, in which the Arminians do
comprehend their whole doctrine of Predestination, the third decree was this,
whereby they say, that God decreed to administer and supply the means
necessary to faith and repentance, sufficiently on all and several men.
Arnoldus will have these means to be effectually administered to all, because
by efficacy he understands aptitude and fitness to effect and work.

II. Not that these Sectaries will have the means to faith and salvation to be
equally administered to all: For they will have them to be supplied to some more
sparingly, to some more liberally, yet to all, in that measure that may suffice
to believe, if they will, and by which all men are disposed to vivification, so
that it is not hindered by God, but that all men may have faith, and by
believing be saved.

III. And they think that God does irresistably give to all men the Arnold
page 407.
power of believing: But not the act of believing it self, whereunto although
God does give sufficient grace to all men, yet they will have it to be in the
power of free will to use this grace, or not to use it, to believe or not to
believe: For God does not Arnold page 336. Di^at Arminius gratiam quia facultas
credindi datur quam plurimis, dicat omnibu^ commun^m esse, an proinde nega^
gratiam esse? Arminius in Perkins. p. 256. 257. Quanti refutatio tu^? Quid enim
si quis dicat omnes in vniuersum homin^s habere potentie^ credendt and salu^m
consequ^ndi s^ velint? Et hanc ipsam potentiam esse naturaeh minum dium ^as
collatam, quo tuo argumento confutabis illum.
supply these sufficient means by a precise intention of saving any particular
person; but he does minister to all and particular men, those means which
suffice to show that God does seriously, and from his heart desire the
salvation of al men, and that it is not hindered by him, but that all men should
be saved.

IV. They say moreover, that there are some men to whom this sufficient grace
is administered more sparingly, to whom, notwithstanding, God is prepared to
give more means, if they will use those well which they have; according to
that speech, To him that has it shall be given. These are the words of
Arminius against Perkins, Page 259. and 260. The Gentiles while they were made
destitute of the knowledge of God, yet God has not left them without a
testimony, but even at that time, he made known to them some truth concerning
his power and goodness, he also preserved the law engraven in their minds,
which good things if they had rightly used, at least from their conscience, he
would have given them greater grace, according to that saying: to him that has
shall be given. Neither do they doubt, to say that the Gentiles, destitute of
the knowledge of the Gospel, may as well come to those good things which are
offered in the Gospel, as those to whom the Gospel is preached. Hear the
words of Arnoldus, Pa. 105.106. which when I read I trembled at: Although
(says he) many nations are destitute of the ordinary preaching of the Gospel,
yet they are not precisely excluded from the grace of the Gospel, but always
the good things which are offered in the Gospel do remain equally propounded
to them as to the rest, who do enjoy the privilege of the preaching of it, so
that they perform the conditions of the covenant. Oh Arnold. page 360. Deus
indiscriminati^^ statuit media ad finem administrare. Et page 372. Etiam
Ethnicis ante adnentum Christi media ad fidem in Christum sufficienter and
efficaciter administrata. Et page 443. Deus nihil a nobis exigit ad qued vires
sufficientes non det. Ibid Si peteres ab homine aliquid nec daret ad
obliquendum colligeret vbi non sparsit.
the faith of God and men! Has Satan so much liberty, that in this light of
the Gospel he should stir up men, who should openly teach and write, and
that under a pretense of piety, that an entrance into heaven does lie open, and
that salvation is propounded as well to heathens and infidels, to whom not so
much as the name of Christ is known, as to those to whom Christ is preached?
But of these things hereafter. But by the way it is to be observed, how this
man does confute those things which himself has laid down, and by the adding
of an absurd, and impossible clause, does destroy those things which he had
builded up: For he says that salvation, is no less propounded to heathen men,
then to Christians, so that they fulfill the conditions of the Covenant: These
conditions are, Faith, and Repentance; but how should he believe in Christ, who
is ignorant of Christ? how should he repent to whom God has not given the
spirit of regeneration? Thus is the Reader openly deluded.

V. Nay what shall we say to this, that they do not only affirm, that God
does give sufficient grace and power of believing to all men, but that also
they contend, that God is bound and tied to give this grace, and they make
laws to God himself. That there is danger lest an action of injustice should
be entered against God, or that he had no reason of his justice, unless some
one of the Arminian sect, had helped him with profitable counsel. Arnoldus,
page 262. has these words: God when he does propound the new covenant of
grace, and does promise remission of the fault committed, under the condition
of new obedience, he is most of all bound to give power, whereby man may
fulfill that condition: For otherwise it cannot be judged that God does
seriously offer this grace. Boldly, and imperiously spoken. His affinia habet
Vorstius, Collat cu^ Piscat. Sect. 19. Vuelferi verba hac sunt, lib de offici^
hominis Christiani. F. 3. Causa huius erroris est quod creditum fuit nullum
salutarem and iustificantem fidem vnquam suisse nisi fidem in Christum. Vide
Bertium. Discept. Epist. 73. and 67.
The cause of this assertion he does render, page 443. God (says he) does
show that he will not be laden with this unjust suspicion, that he should
require any thing from us, to the performing whereof he will not give us
sufficient power. And this he says is showed by God, when he teaches that
he does not gather where he has not scattered.

VI. Nor is the audacity of Verstius less, Collat. cum piscat. Sect. 8. God
(says he) by the law of his nature, that is, of his natural justice,
goodness, and providence, is always bound, at the least to will those good
things to men, without which they cannot either be men, or simply attain to
that end which is propounded to them by God. Behold men that are ready to give
sentence upon God himself, if he shall do any thing that is not equal, or is
against that rule of justice laid down by them. It cannot be said how much
these things do differ from Christian modesty: Surely if those things were
true which they affirm, it were the part of pious and prudent men to keep in
these things, lest they should seem to go about, either to prescribe
something to God in the work of salvation, or to put God in mind of his duty.

VII. This doctrine does rest on two false principles. First; that God does
require nothing of man, which cannot be performed by man. Secondly; that the
condition of the new covenant, that is, Faith, is not commanded by the law, nor
is a natural debt, and that the power of believing is not lost by the fall of
Adam: The former of which principles is drawn out of the dregs of
Pelagianisme, and is refuted by us, in the 44. and 35. Chapter: The latter we
have overthrown in the whole eleauenth Chapter. The law is the natural debt
of man: This law commanding that God be loved and worshipped, does command also
that he be believed, speaking and promising: Therefore when man by the sin
of Adam, lost the power of obeying God, and of loving him, he lost also the
powers of believing his promises. When God does require this faith of man, he
does require nothing but what man does owe, and he is not bound to restore to
man those powers of be^eeuing, which he lost: Neither can he be accused of
injustice, if he do not restore them; nor in this thing is he subject to the
laws of the Arminians, or does fear their adverse and contrary judgments.

VIII. But when they come to explain the nature of this universal grace, they
do very little differ from the Pelagians: For Pelagius, lest he should seem
to be an enemy to grace, does ascribe to it every good work that is done by
man: But by grace he did understand nature it self, because it had been made
and created by God: But according to Arminius, nature is one thing, universal
Grace is another: Nevertheless he will have sufficient grace to be given to
all and particular men, and that nature is in no man to whom God does not give
sufficient grace to obtain faith, and by faith salvation; whence it comes to
pass, that according to Arminius, sufficient grace does extend it self as
far as nature. Pelagius does confound nature with grace; but Arminius does
join nature and grace together, so that nature is in none, to whom grace is
not given; which grace how little it does differ from nature, does hence
appear, in that the Arminians will have the right use of this grace to be
nothing else then the right use of that natural light and knowledge which is
engrafted in every one, by the contemplation of the creatures, and by the law
of nature; so that the use and office of grace and nature is altogether the
same; when rather the Scripture teaches that the right use of grace,
consists in the change of nature. If these things are true, all the arguments
both of us and of the ancients do fall to the ground, by which they do prove
that the grace of God is a thing diverse from nature, and that because nature
is given to all, and the grace of God is the privilege but of some: For
Arminius will have sufficient grace to faith, and by faith to salvation, to be
common to all men.

IX. Arnoldus, page 418. does call that sufficient grace which is given to all
men supernatural grace, lest he should seem to confound it with nature; but
a little after he adds; It is demanded, whether that grace be not present to
all men, by which they may rightly use that light of nature, not yet restored
to the integrity thereof, as relics and remainds of that light, that is, may
worship God according to the measure of those remainds. Do you hear that all
men have that grace whereby they may rightly use nature, and worship God; and
that that grace is present with all men, and therefore also to Infidels, and to
the unregenerate, and to them that know not Christ: and that the power of that
grace which is common to all men, is placed in the right use of nature? The
same man, page 405 does say, It is the property of general grace, that men
should be able rightly to use those gifts: And he speaks of the gifts of
nature.

X. The same man, page 112. speaking of universal grace, does say, that there
is a certain calling which is common, and that there are common documents and
instructions of nature, by which God does call all men whatsoever, to some
measure of the knowledge of himself, and does leave them gifts according to
the measure of the calling.

XI. Yet he denies, that of this common grace, which is given to all, by which
all men may rightly use the gifts of nature, that it will follow he reof, that
grace and nature are of an equal extent: For (says he) although it be in the
power of general grace, that all men may rightly use those gifts, yet it is
from special grace that they may rightly use them in act: For that power is
not brought into act, but by the help of another subsequent and following
grace, which is special, because it does not happen to all. This learned man,
surely has assigned and set down, a fo^nd and unfit cause why this common and
sufficient grace is not equally extended as far as nature, to wit, because
this common grace has need of the help of special grace. Which is as much
as if I should say, that the seeing faculty in man does not extend as far as
man's nature, because it has need of the light of the sun, that it may see
in act, as if that which does want the help of some thing, may not extend it
self as far as nature: There is scarce any natural faculty, which can work
without the help of some other faculty, or of some inward or outward aid; and
so there will be nothing at all natural in man. I omit that Arnoldus does
strike himself with his own sting; for while he says, that sufficient grace
does not work without the help of some other special grace, he does plainly
deny it to be sufficient.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Universal sufficient Grace is confuted by sundry places of Scripture.
I. THis doctrine which does place in an infidel and unregenerate man grace,
which either mediately or immediately may suffice to the obtaining of faith or
salvation, without any knowledge of the Gospel and faith in Christ, does pull
up Christian Religion by the roots, and is contrary to Scripture and
experience.

II. First of all, it must needs be that all doctrine in matter of our
salvation, which does not rest it self on the testimony of the scripture, must
fall to the ground: But the Scripture does no where say, that God is bound to
give increases of grace to them who have rightly used natural light and
understanding. It does no where say that a man without faith can rightly
worship God. It does no where say that God is bound to give to all men,
mediately or immediately, power to believe and fulfill those things which are
commanded in the Gospel: It does no where say that supernatural grace is
given to all men, by which they may rightly use natural light: It does no
where say, that the Gentiles who are ignorant of Christ, are led by the holy
Ghost. These are the forgeries of idle men, whom an evil itching of wit, and a
bad custom of disputing has ceased on.

III. This doctrine is confuted by all those places of Scripture, by which we
have proved that an unregenerate man does want free will in those things which
belong to salvation: For thereby it is proved, that an unregenerate man has
not power of believing, and cannot worship God with that worship which is
pleasing to him, nor dispose himself to regeneration.

IV. Add to these the testimony of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.12. where speaking of
the Gentiles, before the word of God had been made known to them, he says,
that they were without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the world.
You see that they who are without Christ, have not God; and how can they be
said to be without God, whom these Sectaries say, have sufficient grace by the
help whereof they may believe, and worship God, and use rightly the light of
nature? Surely these things cannot stand together.

V. The same Apostle, Romans 10.14. says, How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? By these words, he does plainly enough teach, that the
Gentiles, to whom Christ was not known, could not believe: But Arminius will
have the power of believing to be given mediately or immediately to every man.

VI. The Apostle proceeds: How shall they believe in him, of whom they have
not heard; and how shall they hear without a preacher: and how shall they
preach, except they be sent: Let these words be weighed and considered of.
Saint Paul is of opinion, that Christ cannot be believed in, unless the
Gospel be heard; and that the Gospel cannot be heard, unless preachers be
sent: This being laid down, I say, that God does do nothing in vain; but he
should in vain give power of believing the Gospel to all, unless he should
send those who should preach the Gospel: now to the greater part of men, he
does not send the preachers of the Gospel; therefore he does not give to them
all, the power of believing, nor sufficient grace to believe.

VII. The same Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. says, that God has called us with a holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace. The Arminians therefore do falsely think, that God does give
supernatural light, and the knowledge of his Gospel, to them who by free will
have rightly used sufficient grace, and the light of nature: For if this were
true, our calling should be altogether for works, and according to works: For
the good using of sufficient grace, and of that light which is naturally
engrafted in man, is a good work; for the beholding of which, the Arminians
will have God to call man by the Gospel, and to enlighten him with greater
understanding. The Arminian conferrers at the Hage, page 86. do say, That God
does send his word, whether it seems good to him, not according to any
decree, but for other causes, lying hid in man. These men will have the cause
why God should send his word to some rather then to others, to be in man
himself, and not in the good pleasure of God: Which speech does plainly make
man to be called, in respect of works, and according as man is affected, and
fitted to obey him calling; when yet it is manifest by experience, that the
most unworthy, and worst affected men, are often called by the word of the
Gospel, as the Romans, the Corinthians, etc. And where sin abounded, there
grace abounded, Romans 5. That it might not be of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9.

VIII. Christ says, John 15.5. Without me, you can do nothing. That which is
said to the Apostles, is said to all; for as many of us as are without Christ,
can do nothing. These Sectaries do offend against this saying of Christ, when
they teach that they who have not known Christ, and who do want faith, may
believe, and worship God with a worship pleasing to him, and may do the will
of the father.

IX. Whom God hates from the womb, to them he does not give sufficient and
saving grace; for this were to love them: But God hated Esau from the womb,
Romans 9.13. therefore he did not give him sufficient and saving grace. For
although Malachy speaks these things of a temporal reiection, yet it
suffices to the present matter, that this reiection (as Arminius confesses)
is laid down by Saint Paul, as a type of the spiritual reiection. So that
there are some whom God has rejected with a spiritual reiection, before they
have done either good or evil; therefore he does not give them sufficient
means to faith, or to salvation: for this cannot be made to agree with hatred.

X. Were those Israelites furnished by God with sufficient grace, to whom God
himself, Deuteronomy. 29.2. does say, that among so many miracles he did not give a
heart to understand, nor eyes to see? God has not given you a heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. This place has
driven Arnoldus to his shifts, therefore he seeks for help from his
audacity: For those words, I have not given you a heart to perceive, he says,
have no other meaning, then that ye have not a heart: And these words, I have
not given you, he does quite blot out; yet a while after, by the weakness of
his forehead, as being ashamed of it, leaving this exposition, he does add;
Although God has not given them such eyes and ears, it does not follow, that
God was unwilling to give these things to them; but God was willing to gine
these things to them, and they were wanting to themselves, by their pride,
ignorance, and sluggish dullness: But he does not clear himself by this;
yea, rather he does more entangle himself: For I demand, whether they had an
heart to understand, and ears to hear, before they had showed themselves
refractory and rebellious? If they never had, then we have overcome; for then
we have a clear example of some men to whom a heart and eyes were never given,
and therefore not sufficient grace: But if Arnoldus says, that they had these
things at the beginning, but they afterward lost them; then he will accuse God
himself of a lie, who does directly say, that he never gave them a heart, nor
eyes to this day.

XI. Was sufficient grace given to the men of Tire and Sydon, to whom Christ
would not have his Gospel preached, although they were not so far from
repentance, as the men of Capernaum, to whom Christ himself did preach the
Gospel?

XII. In the mean while the reader shall observe the ridiculous wit of this
man, flying the encounter. He says, that God was willing to give to the
Israelites a heart to understand, and eyes to see, and that he was prepared to
give them, but was hindered by the Israelites that he might not give them:
Therefore (if this man be believed) they were able to obey God, before he had
given them a heart; but to obey, is it self to have a heart, therefore they might
have had a heart, before they had a heart; which are things which cannot stand
together: he does therefore as much as if he should say; God has not given them
a heart, because they were without a heart: as if the Physician would not heal
the blind man, because the blind man would not see the Physician coming.

XIII. And if, as the Arminians do think, God does command nothing, to the
fulfilling whereof he does not give sufficient grace; I would have them tell
me, whether God commanding Pharaoh to send away the people, gave him sufficient
grace, by which he might obey the commandment of God: when on the contrary,
the Scripture does witness, that God hardened his heart, that he might not send
away the people.

XIV. And seeing there are some whom God does harden, and that (as the
Arminians say) irresistably; does God give to those men so hardened, sufficient
grace of fulfilling the Law, to the fulfilling whereof every man is bound? does
he give to every man sufficient grace to the perfect fulfilling of the law? No
truly; for why did Christ make himself obnoxious and subject to the law, but
that he might fulfill that for us, which could not be fulfilled by us? Rom 8.3.

XV. Christ, Mat. 11. does thus speak to his Disciples; It is given to you to
know the secrets of the Kingdom of heaven, but it is not given to them: Does
he not say that the grace of knowing the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, is
not at all given to some? and yet without this grace, all other grace is
unprofitable to salvation. Here therefore I demand, whether they, to whom it
was not given to know these secrets, could know them? It appears by the words
of Christ, that they could not; and yet the same men are commanded to learn
and know these secrets, and to believe them: For here it is spoken of those to
whom the Gospel was preached: And if they could not know them, because it was
not given to them, it appears that sufficient grace to know and learn those
things was not granted to them.

XVI. The Apostle, Acts 14. says, that God in times past, suffered all nations
to walk in their own ways. And, Psalm. 147. it is said, He showed his
Statutes to Israel; He has not dealt so with any nation; And therefore they
have not known his Statutes. And Matthew, Chap. 4. says, that the Gentiles, to
whom the Gospel had not yet shone, sat in darkness, and in the shadow of
death. Who dares say, that sufficient grace to obtain faith, was given to
these men? For example sake, did God in the time of the Machabees, give
sufficient grace to the Mores and the Americanes to believe in Christ, and to
obtain salvation: By what testimony, or by what reason shall it at length be
proved that these Nations were furnished with sufficient grace, and were called
with a saving calling? The book of nature was before their eyes, they had some
notions of that which was right and good imprinted on their hearts, but
darkened with a great mist: Yet neither by these things, nor by that sufficient
grace, destitute of faith, did ever any of them come to faith or salvation: Nor
could the Arminians yet bring an example of any one, who by these helps have
come to faith? Yet Vorstius is shameless, for, in the six and twentieth
Section. Col. cum Pis. he says, that these people were not simply destitute of
necessary help, and that God vouchsafed them some crummes of the heavenly
bread, which were mediately sufficient. This man of a prepostrous wit, does
strew us here the crummes of his small eloquence, and does cloth his new
doctrine with unusual terms, which because he does so proffer, that he will
have them to be believed without proof, it is as easily rejected by us, as it
is affirmed by him.

VII. That speech of Christ, John 6.44. is of no small moment, nor carelessly to
be read. No man can come to me unless the father, who sent me, draw him.
Whereunto that, verse 65. is agreeable; No man can come to me, except it were
given unto him of my father. Out of which places we thus reason: Whosoever is
not so drawn that he come, is not furnished with sufficient grace to come: But
many are not so drawn; Therefore many men are not furnished with sufficient
grace to come. The Mayor is proved by the words of Christ; No man can come to
me, except the father draw him: For i^ thou must be drawn that thou may
come, it is plain, that they that are not drawn do want grace and power
whereby they may come; and therefore that they are not furnished with
sufficient grace; and that there were many that were not drawn, is proved by
the same words of Christ: for he sets down the cause, why the men of
Capernaum could not come, nor believe, to wit, because they were not drawn:
Therefore Arminius against Perkins, page 219. does wrongfully demand, as one
doubting; What if all men are drawn? To devise many kinds of drawing, is
nothing to this matter; for it suffices to the present question, that it is
spoken in this place of such a drawing, without which, no man does come to
Christ. Let these Sectaries faigne whatsoever kind of drawings they will, so
long as it is manifest, that by them no man ever came to Christ, and that he
that is not drawn by that drawing whereof Christ speaks here, is not
furnished with sufficient grace; which the Arminians themselves do
acknowledge, while they confess that by that sufficient and helpefull grace,
no man is converted, unless another special grace has come to it: Whence it
follows that that general grace is not sufficient.

CHAP. XL.
The same sufficient and universal grace is impugned by arguments and reasons.
I. FIrst of all, this opinion of sufficient grace, does manifestly delude God,
while it does faigne, that God seriously and from his heart does desire to save
all men, and to that end does give all men sufficient grace by which they may
be converted, and believe: but he does so sparingly administer this grace, to
the greatest part of mankind, that no man can be named in the whole world who
has been saved by this sufficient grace, seeing that no man, destitute of
faith, and of the knowledge of the redeemer, has ever rightly used those
natural gifts, or has worshipped God with a worship that is pleasing to him:
Neither could the Arminians yet bring any example; nor if they could bring one
or two examples, they could not thereby wipe away that blot which they set upon
God. For he thinks but ill of God, who teaches that God does seriously
desire all men to be saved, and to that end does give to all men sufficient
grace, whereby they may be converted and believe, but he does so sparingly
administer this grace, that of infinite millions, scarce one or two has by
this sufficient grace, converted himself and come to faith.

II. Nay what? That this doctrine with a rash boldness does set laws to God
himself, and does prescribe to him the manner and measure whereby he ought to
bestow his gifts, and to give the increases of grace? For if any one by the
help of sufficient grace, has righ^ly used the gifts of nature, the Arminians
say, that God is bound to give to that man greater grace, and because he has
well used the light of nature, he is bound to give him supernatural light, and
the knowledge of the Gospel: But I think that the creator is by no bond tied to
the creature; yea, if he were bound, yet it were not our part, audaciously to
tell him to his face what he ought to do, nor to admonish him of his duty, as
if there were danger that he should not keep his credit, or should sin against
those laws by which he is bound. Also by this means the benefits of God are
lessened, and made very small: For (if these sectaries be believed) God gining
to a man the power of believing, does do nothing but what he ought to do,
and does give nothing but what he is bound to give.

III. The same doctrine determining that sufficient grace is given to the
Gentiles which have not known Christ, that according to the measure thereof
they may worship God, does plainly say, that there is a worship which may be
acceptable to God without Christ, and without faith. Neither does Arnoldus say
this thing obscurely, but Page 409 speaking of the heathens, who followed an
austere kind of life, that they might serve God: Whence will ye prove (says
he) that such men do either perish, or remain void of Christ? This man,
while he would have us hope well of the salvation of the he then, who followed
an austere kind of life, although they were altogether ignorant of Christ,
does in the mean while vilify and lightly esteem of Christian faith, as not
necessary, and does secretly insinuate, that one may be saved by Christ,
without the knowledge of Christ: For although these Sectaries cry out that they
are wronged as often as the corrupt matter is pressed out of their Ulcers, yet
he shall easily perceive whereto these things pertain, who will exactly
read that whole disputation of Arnoldus, contained in some Pages.

IV. With a like error do the Arminians think that the power of believing and
obtaining faith, is given to man without the spirit of regeneration and
adoption: And seeing that by faith we are the sons of God, if man, without
the spirit of regeneration, has power of believing, then without the same
spirit he has also power of effecting or causing that he be the son of God.

V. Also it is absurd, and deserves to be laughed at, to say that the power of
believing in Christ is given to a man without the spirit of regeneration, but
that to believe it self, is not given without the spirit of regeneration; as
if the powers of believing were from one cause, but the using and excution of
those powers were from another cause; and as if it were not of the same saculty
to be able to do, and to do; to be able to run, and to run: For they say
that another special grace is required to believe, and therefore that
sufficient grace is not sufficient to believe in act. These things seem to me
to be like the dreams of sick men.

VI. But how absurd, and how contrary is it to the wisdom of God, to say,
that God is prepared to give greater grace, and the light of his Gospel, to
those who have well used the light of nature? For, so God is said to be ready
to do that which he knows he shall not do, and to be prepared to bestow
upon man new and greater grace, under a condition which no man has fulfilled,
nor shall fulfill: For no man, that is destitute of faith, of the knowledge of
the redeemer, and of the spirit of regeneration, has rightly used the light of
nature, nor has worshipped God with a worship which has been pleasing to
him, because whatsoever is without faith is sin; and whosoever has not the
Son, has not the Father; yea, he is without God in the world, as the
Scripture teaches.

VII. Yea, whosoever shall look over the records of all histories, shall find
that the most wisest amongst the heathen, whose lives were more temperate,
whose appetites were less violent, and who loved justice, and said or writ
many famous things concerning God, were yet very far from the kingdom of
Heaven. Experience has proved this; for when the Gospel began to be
published through the nations, Christian Religion endured no greater enemies
then the Philosophers: These turned the subtilty of their wit to defame the
cross of Christ, and held out to others fierce firebrands to cruelty and
persecution: For the more any one does affect the praise of civil virtue, and
has his wit practiced with much learning, so much the more base does the
simplicity of the Gospel seem to him, and he is the more offended with the
scandal of the cross of Christ.

VIII. But it is a marvel by what means any man can be prepared to says and
regeneration, by natural instructions, and by the light of nature; seeing that
man by the instinct of his corrupt nature, is stirred up to idolatry: For it is
ingrafted in man to desire to have some present and visible object, on which he
may setle his eyes, while he pours forth his prayers, and man's wisdom has
oftentimes troade Religion under foot.

XIX. Arnold. page 404. Deus primo h^^ agit, vt home intelligat se in precatis
mortuum.
Furthermore seeing that (as Arnoldus confesses) the first effect of grace is,
for a man to know that he is dead in sin, and that naturally he is subject
to the eternal curse, neither can any one know this except he be instructed by
the word; seeing I say, it is thus, whatsoever the Arminians do tattle of
universal and sufficient grace does fall to the ground, seeing that by it a
man cannot attain to that which is the beginning and first element of
conversion, and that from which grace does necessarily begin; certainly, he
that shall turn over the writings of the heathen, shall find nothing of the
death in sin, nothing of the vivification and regeneration, nothing of the
necessity of supernatural grace. The best of the heathens set this as the
Cynosure and star by which they would direct the course of their life, viz.
to follow nature: when on the contrary, this is the office and work of the
grace of God, viz. to restore and change nature.

X. But in setting down the time wherein this sufficient grace is at the first
given to every man by God, they do not explain themselves: For if all men
have this grace from the womb, then it is not rightly distinguished from
nature; seeing that that is natural which is ingrafted in every man from his
birth and nativity: But if this grace be given only to them that are grown in
years, in what year of their age is it given? Is it given to all at a
certain and equal age? or is it given to some sooner, and some later? And if
it be given in the tenth or twelfth year of the life, what shall be done with
those who dye in the seventh or ninth year? what shall be done with them whom
death does take away a day or two before that grace is bestowed? Also if one
dye presently after that sufficient grace is given, before he has time of
well using this grace, what shall become of this man? Being excluded from the
right using of grace, by the shortness of the time, shall he be excluded
therefore from the kingdom of heaven? Surely while they tie God to laws, they
do entangle themselves in bonds which cannot be shaken off.

XI. And when the Arminians say that sufficient grace, which is common to all
men, even to unregenerate men and in fidels, is supernatural, it is a hard
thing, that he who is at the first touched with this supernatural and
helpefull motion, should not feel it: Or if the beginnings of it are doubtful
and uncertain, at the lest it must needs be felt in progress of time: But
never any of the heathen has professed that he has ever felt this grace, nor
is there any mention of it in their wrightings.

XII. Also it would be worth the labor to know, by what degrees the heathen
man, dwelling in the south country, or in the inmost part of Tartaria, well
using natural instructions, may at length come to faith in Christ: For these
Sectaries must needs faigne many things here, and wantonly play with bold
conjectures, and with unconstant rashness: For they must faigne that either
Oracles were poured on that man from heaven; or that Angels were sent to him;
or some Prophet, lifted up by the hair, has been carried thither from some
other place, that he might instruct that man in the Christian faith: For where
the Scripture is wanting, audacity must needs supply the place of the
Scripture.

XIII. Finally, what is to be thought of this sufficient grace, may hence be
judged, in that the Arminians themselves, are not constant to themselves, and
they do so build it up, that they pull it down: For they which say, and do
maintain with great force that God does give sufficient grace to all men, do
afterward say that God is ready and prepared to give it to all; as if he
indeed were willing to give it to all, but it was hindered by man that it was
not done. Also, the same men teach, that no man is converted without special
grace, by which speech they confess that general grace is not sufficient.
Finally, when they divide that grace, into grace which is sufficient mediately;
and grace which is sufficient immediately, they do confess that some grace is
sufficient mediately, which is insufficient immediately, and they make many
degrees of sufficient grace, which degrees how many, and what they are, none of
them has explained.

CHAP. XLI.
The Arguments whereby the Arminians do maintain universal sufficient Grace,
are refuted.
I. THE arguments of the Arminians for Universal, Sufficient, and Helpful
Grace, are almost the same with them, which they are wont to bring for the
liberty of free will in an unregenerate man, which seeing they are abundantly
confuted, Chapter 34. there will be no great labor in examining some few,
which they most frequently use, to prove sufficient grace common to all men.

They maintain it by that place of the Apostle, Romans 1.19. where Saint Paul
does thus speak of the Gentiles: That which may be known of God, is manifest
in them, for God has showed it unto them. Surely here is no mention of
sufficient grace, which the Arminians think to be supernatural: For here the
Apostle speaks of the light of nature, and of any sort of the knowledge of
God, by the creatures, which may be had without supernatural grace; by which
the Apostle does not say, that man has power of believing in Christ, or that
he can dispose or prepare himself to regeneration; but he only says, that
the power, and that the deity of God, was seen of them by the creation, that
they might be inexcusable. And they are inexcusable, not because they have
abused that grace which was mediately or immediately sufficient to salvation,
but because they have not used the light of nature as far as they might; and
have endeavored to choke that light engrafted in them.

II. They pretend the words of the same Apostle, Chapter 2.14. The Gentiles
which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law: But
neither can this place be drawn to stablish sufficient grace, which these
Sectaries will have to be supernatural: For it speaks only of natural
impressions of equity and goodness, and of outward actions that are ciuilly
honest, which are done by the guidance of nature; for Saint Paul does here make
no mention of grace. Furthermore, those things contained in the law, may be
done by him who does violate and break the law: for in the external work, he
may do the things commanded by the law, and yet not do them after that
manner, and to that end which the law does require; that is, with faith, and to
the glory of God.

III. That which they object out of the foureteenth Chapter of the Acts, Verse.
17. is nothing to the matter, where Saint Paul does thus speak of the heathen
people; Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness: They do falsely
think, that this witness was some sufficient saving and supernatural grace,
and the law naturally engraven in their hearts, which should be a
Schoolmasters to Christ: For the Apostle in the following words, does explain
what manner of testimony this is; saying, that God gave them rain from heaven,
and fruitful seasons, and filled their hearts with food and gladness; no
mention of supernatural grace: And I deny that the law written or printed on
the heart, can be a Schoolmasters to Christ, to those who are altogether
ignorant of Christ; for the law does not lead us to a thing unknown; but after
that the grace of Christ is offered by the Gospel, the law, by threats and
terrors, does compel to the embracing of it, that what we cannot attain to
in the law, we might find in Christ: Therefore the moral Law might be to the
Israelites, a Schoolmasters to Christ, because Christ was shadowed to them by
the ceremonial law, and was foreshewed by Prophesies.

IV. And in what sense that of Esaias, Chap. 5.4. What was more to be done to my
vineyard, that I have not done? ought to be taken, we have taught in the thirty
seventh Chapter. Surely, nothing can be pulled out of this place for
sufficient grace, which is common even to them to whom the word of God was
never preached; seeing that by this vineyard, the jews were understood, to
whom the word of God was preached, and the means to salvation were abundantly
supplied: Nor does Esaias speak of the grace which is given to particular men,
but that which is given to a whole Nation, taken together: and that the means
which Esaias does number up are external, and not internal, does appear by the
same place where God is compared to a Vine-dresser, which planted a Vineyard in
a fruitful soil, he made a trench about it, he set up a hedge, and built a
Wine Press, and a Tower; but he does not infuse the groath and vital juice,
nor does send the sun, and the seasonable rain: God therefore says, that he
outwardly supplied whatsoever things could be administered to conversion; for
man ought to bring inward dispositions of his own: Neither is God bound to
restore to man these dispositions which he lost by his own fault; Indeed, God
in that place says, that he looked for grapes, and behold wild grapes: But
this expectation is attributed to God, after the manner of men: God is said to
expect something from man, when he does require something from him; and when he
does defer the punishment, if at any time due fruits are not brought forth,
and does not presently with the Axe cut up by the root the unfruitful
fig tree: as Christ teaches, Luke 13. Verse. 7.8. and 9.

V. They do often reckon up that old and worn out argument: To him that has,
it shall be given, Mat. 25.29. By which words, they say, Christ does insinuate,
that God will bestow greater grace upon him, who has well used the light of
nature: Thus they lay the Scripture on a rack, that they may wrest any thing
from it, whereunto it is unwilling. Christ does there bring the parable of the
Talents, and says, that the talent which the wicked servant had hid, was taken
from him, and given to the servant who had increased his Masters estate, by
doubling the five talents: For (says he) to him that has shall be given, and
he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall be taken away, even
that which he has. By the talents, are the gifts of God understood, and
especially the knowledge of God by the Gospel; which knowledge he is said to
hide, who does detain the truth in unrighteousness, and does keep in the
known truth: This talent therefore cannot be that sufficient grace, which does
happen to infidels and unregenerate persons; but that grace which God does
bestow on his domestical servants: Neither by him that has, is understood a
man in his mere naturals, or some heathen man furnished with sufficient grace,
but a man furnished with the knowledge of the Gospel, which is given to one
for that end, that by edifying his neighbor he might spread the knowledge
far abroad, and like money put out to use, it might be increased with daily
additions.

VI. Arnoldus, page 368. has these words; It is connenient to the justice and
goodness of God that he should give, or be prepared to give means necessary
to faith, to all them for whom he gave Christ to death, and of whom he
requires faith; so that on his part nothing hinders that all men should not
come to faith. Now we answer, that God does not require from all men faith on
Christ, but only from them to whom the Gospel is preached; and he is not
bound to give means necessary to faith, to all them to whom the Gospel is
preached, because man lost those means by his own fault: For God requiring of
man what he owes, is not bound to restore to man the power of fulfilling that
which he commands, seeing that man lost these powers by his own fault.
Indeed, the anger of God does remain on unbelievers, as Arnoldus adds, but
there is no man that would not be incredulous, if God should change his heart
by the spirit of regeneration. Surely Arnoldus does coin a new Gospel, while
he does think that any one may believe the Gospel, without the spirit of
regeneration.

CHAP. XLII.
The consent of the Arminians with the Semipelagians, is declared.
SAint Austin writ books against Pelagius, Coelestius, and Julian, wherein he
maintained the sound faith, concerning Original sin, Predestination, Grace,
Freewill, and Election, according to the purpose of God. Pelagianisme being
shaken by his Arguments, taken out of the holy Scripture, as it were with most
strong battering Rams, and at length being overthrown, never after lifted up
the head: Therefore next to God, we are indebted to the industry and wit of so
great a man, that this deadly plague was driven from the bowels of the Church.

But Satan being shaken off by his labor and diligence, devised other
practices, by which he does so fight for grace, that he does secretly fight
against it: For there were not wanting men in diverse places, especially in
Aquitania, and in the region of Massilia, who although they professed
themselves to differ from Pelagius, yet they carped at the writings of Saint
Austin, and do thus inveigh against his doctrine of absolute Election: That by
it men's consciences are made sluggish, that they might sleep in vices; by it
the raines are losened to al wickedness; by it men are driven headlong to
desperation. That Precepts, Exhortations, and threats, are needelesse, if the
number of the elect be determined by the purpose of God, or if by the immutable
decree of God some men are elected to faith and salvation, and some are
appointed to damnation. Finally, free will is tied by the bands of necessity,
in as much as they who are so elected, cannot but persevere. They thought
therefore that the middle way between Pelagius and Saint Austin, was to be
gone in. For they taught that the sin of Adam flowed into his posterity:
That man's nature was corrupt, and that by the powers of nature he could not
come to salvation: But they taught that the grace which should cure nature, is
present with all men; and that all men, either by the natural law, or by the
written law, or by the Gospel, are so called, that it is free for every man to
embrace or refuse the offered grace, to believe, or not to believe: For (they
say) that Christ obtained reconciliation for all men; and that God from
eternity elected those whom he foresaw would believe in Christ, and persevere
in the faith: And therefore that the number of the elect is not determined by
the decree of God; but that our election is then certain, when the course of
our life is measured out.

These are they who are commonly called Semipelagians: Differing from Pelagius
in this, that they acknowledge nature to be depraved with Original sin, and
that they distinguish nature from grace; but yet by a secret agreement, they
do favor Pelagius; because they will have nature so to be a diverse thing
from grace, that yet they will have grace equally to extend it self as far
as nature: Also they make such a grace, the use whereof does depend upon
free will.

He that would thoroughly know the meaning of these men, let him read the
Epistle of Prosper to Saint Austin, inserted into the Seventh Tome of the
works of Saint Austin, most worthy to be read with care: For he being a very
great admirer of Saint Austin, and being for this cause accused by these
Semipelagians, he requires the help of Saint Austin, and does desire to be
furnished with arguments, whereby he might defend himself against them.
Surely, there you shall plainly know the Arminian vain, and you shall see
Arminianisme graphically and lively painted out: And but that the title of the
Epistle, and the Epistle it self, did testify, both the Author and the age,
you would swear, it were the Epistle of one, who being provoked by the
Arminians, and being ill entreated, does implore the help of one more learned.
That now it cannot be a doubt, out of what puddles they have drawn their
opinions, and which of the ancient Heretics they have propounded to
themselves to imitate; I shall not much stay the hastening Reader if I lay
down the words of the Semipelagians themselves, as they are recited by Prosper
himself. This is (says Prosper) their declaration and profession, that every
man sinned when Adam sinned, and that no man is saved, in regeneration, by his
own works, but by the grace of God, and yet that the propitiation which is in
the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, is propounded to all men without
exception, that whosoever will come to faith and baptism may be saved: And
that God fore-knew before the making of the world, who were to believe, and who
would continue in that faith, which afterward should be helped by the grace of
God: And that he Predestined those to his kingdom, whom he having freely
called, he foresaw would be worthy of Election, and would depart out of this
life with a good end: And therefore that every man is admonished by the
ordinances of God to believe, and to work that no man might despair of
obtaining eternal life; seeing that the reward is prepared for voluntary
devotion. But this purpose of the calling of God by which the difference of
them that are to be elected, and of them that are to be rejected, is said to
have been made, either before the beginning of the world, or in the very
creation of mankind, that according to the pleasure of the creator, some
should be created vessels of honor, others vessels of dishonor, this (they
say) does both take away from them that are fallen the care of rising again,
and also does yield occasion of sluggish drowsinesse to the Saints, because on
either side labor is superfluous, if neither he that is rejected, can by any
industry and diligence enter, nor he that is elected can by any negligence fall
away: For after whatsoever manner they shall behave themselves, nothing can
happen to them, but what God has determined; and under an uncertain hope, the
course cannot be constant, seeing that the intention of him that does
endeavor, is vain, if the Election of him that predestinateth has appointed
anther thing: Therefore all industry is removed, and all virtues are taken
away, if the appointment of God do prevent the will of man; and a kind of
fatal necessity is brought in, under this name of predestination. These were
the words of the Semipelagians, altogether like Arminianisme, and of the same
stamp.

Let those things also which follow be pondered and considered of: They
determine, that to this gift of salvation, all men universally are called,
either by the natural law, or by the written law, or by the preaching of the
Gospel, that both they that will, might be made the sons of God, and that
they might be inexcusable, who will not be faithful; because herein is the
justice of God, that they who will not believe should perish; and his goodness
appears herein, that he will put back no man from life, but indifferently
would all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth: And that
our Lord Jesus Christ dyed for all mankind; and that no man at all is excepted
from the redemption of his blood, although he pass through his whole life in a
far other opinion. And a little after; They do not consent, that the
predestined number of the elect, can neither be increased nor diminished,
least the incitations of them that exhort men, should have no place with
infidels, and those that neglect predestination, etc. They have received the
election of God, according to foreknowledge, to wit, that therefore God has
made some men vessels of honor, and some vessels of dishonor, because he
foresaw the faith of every one. Truly this is mere Arminianisme, but that
the Arminians do clothe their opinions more gloriously, and do paint them
with exquisite colors, and do more sparingly use the word Merit, which not
only the Semipelagians, but also the Orthodoxe writers (but in another sense
then the Papists at this day do) did often use. Finally they do, as they do
who set before their guests old and rejected dainties, by putting to them new
sauce.

To this Epistle is added another of the same argument, of Hilareus Bishop of
Areles, to Saint Austin, where he does attribute these things to the
Semip^lagians: God in his foreknowledge does elect faith, that whom he
fore-knew would believe, him he elected, to whom he would give the holy Ghost,
that by working good, they might obtain eternal life. This foreknowledge
they thus understand, to wit, that men are said to be fore-knowne for faith
which is to follow, and that such a perseverance is given to no man, from which
he is not suffered to swerue, but that he may fall from it, and be weakened by
his own will. Whatsoever is given to those that are predestined, they
contend, that they may loose it, or keep it, according to their own will.
Which then were false if they did think it true that some men have been made
partakers of that perseverance that they could not but persevere: Thence it is
that they will not admit of this, that they should allow, that the number of
them that are predestined, and the number of them that are rejected is
determined. These are they whose authority was more to Arminius, then the
authority of Saint Austin, yea, then of Saint Paul himself: For they have
liberally and manifestly borrowed all their opinions from the Semipelagians.

CHAP. XLIII.
The opinion of the Arminians, of the manner of the operation of Grace, and of
that power which they call irresistable. Also of moral persuasion. And of the
power and act of believing.
WHat the secret motions of the Holy Ghost are, what the efficacy of it is, by
what degrees it does further regeneration, what impediments are cast in the way
by man, what is the conflict of the flesh with the spirit, and the strife of
the new man with the old, who as another Esau, does at length shake off the
yoke, and does hinder the work of God as much as it can, I think cannot be
thoroughly known by any, nor can that little which we know by experience, be
explained in fit words. Surely Christ, John 3. does rightly compare the spirit,
the author of regeneration, to the wind, which blows where it lists, and
whose sound is heard, but men know not whence it comes, nor whether it goes:
It is a thing therefore whose experience is rather to be wished then the
efficacy of it to be explained. There are many who while they peer into the
nature of the operation of the holy-Spirit, are themselves led by a reprobate
spirit: And while they discourse concerning the efficacy of the spirit of
peace, they themselves being prone to discord, and puffed up with pride, do
sufficiently bewray that they are led by that spirit which does effectually
work in the sons of rebellion, Ephesians 2.

These things although they be thus, and that it be safer to follow God
calling, then to enquire by what power he does call and draw us, yet the
obstinate rashness of those men, with whom we have to do, compels us to
descend to these things: For these innouators have drawn out of the puddles of
the spanish Jesuits, I know not what words of resistability and
vnresistability, with which they entangle men's wits; The scope whereof is to
furnish the will of man, with powers wherewith he may resist the Holy Ghost,
with how great efficacy soever he should work in men's hearts, that by this
means man might owe his conversion to his own strength and power, and the
confidence of our salvation resting on a weak supporter, might stagger and
fall into desparation.

The words of Arnoldus against Tilenus, are direct, page 125. Collat Hag page
304. Negat propositum Deo decretumque esse absolute hunc vel ^lum conuertere.
Armin. in Perk. 199. Falsum est Deum simpliciter and absolute velle vt alij
credant and perseuerent, etc Qu^st Arti^ Rem^nst. i^ Collat. Hag. Modus
operati^nis gra^^^^ non est resistibilis.
We deny that the difference of Grace calling, is not placed as much in the
free will of men, as in the will of God: And they all affirm, with one mouth,
that God does not absolutely will that this or that man should believe, but
that he indeed does give sufficient grace and power of believing, which man
may use or not use, according to his own free will: And that grace, and the
power of the holy Ghost working in the heart is resistable, even in the most
holy men, and in the elect, and that the final effect thereof may be hindered
by man: Whence they gather, that those who are elected, may be reprobated.
Indeed (say they) the power of believing is given irresistably; and the
understanding is so instructed in knowledge, and the affections stirred up,
that it cannot be resisted; but they contend, that the act of believing it
self is given resistably, and that it is in the power of free will to use
grace or not to use it, to believe or not to believe: For they do not think
that the liberty of free will can stand, unless he that is elected may sinally
resist grace, and so be reprobated. Arnoldus against Bogermannus, page 263. and
274. All the operations of grace being granted, which God does use to the
working of conversion in us, yet conversion it self does so remain free in
our power, that we may not be converted, that is, we may convert, or not
convert our selves. For they teach, that the effect of grace does depend on
man's free will, and that free will is a part-cause of our conversion; in so
much, that Greuinchouius against Ames, Greuinch. page 198. and 204. and 208 and
297.
is bold to write these things: You will say that in this manner of operation,
God does on a sort depend on the will of man: I grant it, as concerning the act
of free determination. Truly this is to disgrace God, and to make him subject
to man's free will: Nor do they doubt to say, that God seriously desiring that
this or that man should be saved, is disappointed of his wish and desire, and
that therefore he does grieve, and bear it heavily, and does not do that
which he had sworn he would do, as before we have proved: Even with these
shores do these good men underprop Christian faith, being about to fall.

And the manner whereby the grace of God, and his Spirit does work in us, they
determine to be this: They say that the understanding of man is irresistably
enlightened, C^^lat. Hag. p. 272. Illuminat^^mint ellectus (...) p. ^6.
and that his affections are irresistably stirred up, but the assent of the
will does remain free. The same men think, that God does irresistably give to
man the power of believing, and of converting himself, but the act it self of
believing and converting himself, may be done, or hindered, by man's will; and
that the feeling is vnresistibly given, but not the assent: For they say, that
there is in the will an essential indifferency and indetermination, to receive
or refuse grace, and as being put in an equal balance, does turn to neither
part; for it lost no spiritual gifts by the fall of Adam, because it had not
these gifts before the fall. The conferrers at the Hage, page 307. Although it
is to be determined, that the infusion of abilityes, is done by an irresistable
power (that the matter become not infinite) yet it cannot come to pass that
the act it self, that is, to believe and be converted, should be wrought
vnresistibly.

And they do plainly deny, that actual faith, and the act of believing is
the gift of God: For although they do sometimes make show of this, and do
thunder out with full mouths that faith is from God; yet in the whole thread of
their disputation, they do openly bewray that they are verry far from that
opinion: For they deny that faith is iufused by God into the hearts of men, but
that God does give power and faculty of believing; Nor does God otherwise give
the act of believing, then as the mind is endued with knowledge, and the
affections being raised, do put forward the will, which is not to give faith,
but to incite to faith: Yea, by their opinion, it is certain that God does not
give the power of believing in Christ, but does only enlighten the mind that
it may know Christ, and allure the appetites with a gentle persuasion: For he
that does only show the light, and exhort the traveler to go, does not give
him power of going. These are the words of the Arminian conferrers at the Hage,
p. 275. We deny that faith is the gift of God, in respect of the actual
infusing of it into our hearts, but it is so called in respect of the power of
coming to it. This indeed is to use no circumstance, but to speak it
plainly enough. For, they say that God does not infuse faith into our hearts,
but that he does give the means to come to faith, which means we may use, if
we will, for this is in the power of free will.

The same men, page 306. do profess that they believe that the very act of
believing is from God, and yet a little after they do retract what they had
granted; for they do overthrow all those places of Scripture, by which we
endeavor to prove that faith, and the act of believing, is from God. The men
of our party, did prove this by the words of Christ, John 6.65. No man can come
to me, unless it be given him by the father. The Arminians answer, that that
place of John, speaks of nothing but of that faculty whereby one may believe,
and therefore it does not make to the purpose, in as much as it is to be proved
that the very act of believing is the gift of God. Would they have it to be
proved by us, and to be euinced by argument, if they did believe it, and did
seriously profess it? Surely, that their confession was dissembled, and
therefore a little after they do alter and revoke it: In the same place they
do peruersly corrupt that famous place of S. Paul, Ephesians. 2. By grace ye are
saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. In
which place both salvation and faith, are called the gift of God. For they deny
that faith is there called the gift of God, but salvation. O your fidelity ye
Sectaries! What does this concern you, or why do youso much fear lest faith
should be called by the Apostle the gift of God? This indeed is a very great
malignity, and an open confession, whereby they disclose that they think that
faith is not the gift of God. With a like licentiousness do they sport
themselves, in deprauing the words of the Apostle to Timothy, Epist. 2. Chap.
2. v. 25. If God will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth.
The men of our party brought this place, that they might prove conversion and
the act of repentance to be from God: But these Sectaries, as it were in a
mockery do reject this place, as that which speaks of repentance, as of a
thing that is uncertain, and which may happen: Doubtless it does not please
the Arminians, that the act of conversion is the gift of God. And although they
say in ambiguous and deceiptfull words, that repentance is the gift of God, yet
they think that it can be proved by no place of Scripture; when yet the
Scripture says: It is God which does work in us effectually to will and to
do. Philip. 2. And that It is given to us to believe in Christ. Phil. 1.
Surely these words, to will, to do, and to believe, do note out the very act
of willing and believing, and not the power whereby we may be willing or not be
willing, believe or not believe.

But they do in no other thing more open their meaning, then while they deny
that faith is infused into our hearts by God, but that only men are stirred up
to faith, and allured with a gentle persuasion and invitation, which they call
moral and resistible; after the same manner that a boy is drawn by an Apple
offered him, or a hog by bran laid before him. If this be true, and if the
efficacy of the holy-Spirit does no otherwise imprint faith then by persuading,
it is plain that faith is not the gift of God: For he that persuades to
believe, does not give faith, but does persuade. Arminius against Perkins, page
57. has these words: That faith and repentance cannot be had but by the gift
of God, is most plain in the Scriptures. But the same Scripture, and the
nature of the gift of either of them, does most clearly teach, that that gift
is given by the manner of persuasion. These are things that cannot stand
together, for nothing is given by the manner of persuasion: He that stirs
me up to running, does thereby neither give me the running it self, nor the
power of running. The same man, page 211. says, God has determined to save
them that believe by his grace, that is, by a mild and sweet persuasion,
convenient and agreeable to their free will, not by an omnipotent action or
motion, which they neither will nor can resist, nor can be willing to resist.
Vorstius, Parasc. ad Piscat. page 4. says: What things God will have us to do
altogether freely and contingently, he cannot desire th^se more powerfully or
effectually then by the manner of a wish or desire. Indeed the Arminian
conferrers at the Hage, in the defense of their fourth Article, do profess
that they will not define how God does work in us, and that they will not
break into these secrets, yet the same men do restrain all those places of
Scripture, which say that we are drawn by God, and that God does effectually
and mightily work in us, to a mere persuasion and an allurement, by the
manner of an Object. And Greuinchouius, page 232. and 233. does acknowledge no
other, then a moral motion.

This is also among the decrees of the Arminians, Collat. Hag. page 283.
that a man is quickened first by the ministry of the law, and afterward by the
ministry of the Gospel; for they think that there is a kind of quickening,
which is without faith in Christ; they also piece upon it this guard, that no
man is called outwardly, who is not called in wardly, and that there is
free will in man to open to God knocking, or not to open.

And although they think that there is no grace of God, which may not be
resisted by man, yet they confess, that God does so certainly call some men,
that they must infallibly follow; to wit, them whom he does call in such a
congruent and agreeable time and manner, and with such efficacy and measure of
light, that they are most certainly converted. Arminius against Perkins, page
67. does say, that the inward persuasion of the holy Ghost is in all them, to
whom the word is preached: And that this persuasion is twofold, one
sufficient, the other effectual; as if that persuasion could be sufficient,
which is not of sufficient efficacy. He proceeds: Sufficient persuasion is
that, whereby a man may will, and believe, and be converted, when it is used;
effectual persuasion is that, whereby he to whom it is applied does will, does
believe, and is converted: For he thinks, that he in whom the spirit of God
does not work effectually, may yet believe and convert himself, although he
never be converted. He adds; The first of these persuasions is applied in the
decree of providence, with a certain and sure foreknowledge, that it shall be
rejected by the free will of man: The other is administered by the decree of
predestination, with a certain and sure foreknowledge, that he to whom it is
applied, shall both will, and belecue, and be converted; because it is so
applied, according as God knows it to be congruent and agreeable, for the
persuasion and the conversion of him, on whom it is bestowed. He has the same
words, page 245. As also Arnoldus against Tilenus, page 79. Finally, it is
familiar to the Arminians to teach, that some men are called by God, after an
incongruent manner, whereby they that are called do never follow, although
they are able to follow; and that some are called in a congruent manner and
time, wherein they that are called do certainly follow, and that by the
decree of predestination, which cannot be deceived. By which opinion, they
undo again that which they had begun, and do manifestly stablish that
vnresistibility, which they impugn with all their forces.

This is rending and tearing of wits, and that torment wherewith these men,
unhappily witty men, do so torture both themselves and others, that now, not
only the Schools of the Low Countries are filled with the noise of the
terms of vnresistibility, of natural necessity, and of moral persuasion,
but also the Streets, Barbers shops, and Tauernes. You may with less labor,
purge the Stable of Angia, then this venomous spaune of errors; whereof yet
we have examined a good part in the former Chapters: That which remains
shall, by the goodness of God, hereafter be examined.

CHAP. XLIV.
The opinion of the Orthodoxe Church, concerning the conversion of man, and of
the manner and certainty of Conversion.
Our opinion is not that which these Sectaries do fayningly apply to us, whom
it troubles, that we do not speak absurd and impious things, that a larger
field might be opened to them of inveighing against us.

The Arminians at the Hage, in the defense of their fourth Article, do fasten
these things upon us; That God is willing to save some men, whether their
free will assent, or not assent thereto. This is a foul calumny: For whosoever
God does save, he bends his will, that he might work of his own accord,
and might obey God. The same men, page 268. do so deal with us, as if we
taught, that faith is wrought in us by God without us, and as if we taught
that our wills were compelled, and we drawn in our conversion, as blocks.
These things (according to their custom) they attribute to us, and that
liberally enough: They change the gennine and proper state of the question,
because they know that our opinion cannot be overthrown, unless it be first
changed.

Thus therefore we determine: That the election of God is immutable, and those
that are written in the book of life, cannot be put out, nor the decrees of
God be broken: Wherefore, whosoever God has elected to salvation, he has
necessarily elected to faith and repentance; in as much as without these there
is no salvation. Whence it comes to pass, that it is impossible but that the
elect should obtain faith, and be converted; which thing, seeing it is done in
some sooner, and in some later, and that the workmen are called into the Lords
Vineyard at diverse hours of the day; yet it is certain, that he was not
elected, who has not at the least believed in Christ, in the time of death.
This is to us the ground and foundation of truth, which can be overwhelmed by
no Art, nor shaken with any force. Whosoever are called by the purpose of God,
do necessarily follow, least God should fail of his purpose: And whosoever
God has predestined, them he called, and whom he called, he justified, and
whom he justified, he glorified, Romans 8.

If therefore it must needs be, that all they that are elected, must come to
faith in Christ; the foundation of this certainty, is not man's free will, but
the will of God. For an immutable, and an eternal thing, cannot rest on a
flitting and unstable foundation. Yet we do not say, that man is drawn of
God, by an irresistable force; For that is an irresistable force, which though
you would resist, you cannot: For how can we be drawn by the irresistable
grace of God, seeing that this very thing, that we will not resist, but yield
obedience to him of our own accord, is the grace of God it self? So when all
of us desire to be happy freely, and yet necessarily, there is no man but he
that is mad, will say that we are compelled to it by any irresistable force: we
do not say that the elect, although they would resist the calling of God, yet
could not: but we say, that the elect do at length certainly and infallibly,
and of their own accord, follow God calling, that the Election of God might be
fulfilled: For this is the state of the question; Whether it may come to pass,
that he who is elected, may never be converted, and may even to the very end,
resist God calling, or may so resist the grace of God, that he may finally fall
from it.

Neither is there any need, here carefully to dispute, whether he that is
elected can resist grace, seeing he cannot resist grace, and whether he is
unwilling to that which he wills. We have no leisure to be so acute: For it
suffices to the defense of the certainty of election, to determine that it is
impossible, that he who is elected should not be converted, and should finally
resist. If we get this granted, we will easily suffer the Arminians to skirmish
and flourish at leisure, and to dispute whether that may be done, that never
has been done, nor never shall be done; and whether the tormentours could
break the thighs of our Savior, which were impossible to be broken, because
the decree of God did hinder. These are the wranglings of idle men, who make
work for themselves, that they might procure molestation and trouble to
others. The wills of men are after a maruailous and secret manner so turned by
God, that it is impossible that man should will to do those things, to the
doing whereof their natural powers have ability; and although man may
naturally resist, yet it is impossible that he should will to resist finally:
And those things may certainly and vnavoidably happen, which are done by men
willing and witting, and having naturally power of resisting. We do not
therefore despute of the powers of resisting grace, which we find by
experience, to our own loss, to be in the godly and faithful: But we dispute
of the impossibility of the event, and we earnestly affirm, that it cannot be,
that he who is elected, should finally resist, and by his incredulity strive
against God to the end of his life.

And that those things which are done by men willingly without constraint,
without natural necessity, and without the impulsion of any external cause
forcing man's free will, do happen necessarily, and the providence of God so
decreeing, the Scripture does affirm, and experience does witness: For the
Arminians do acknowledge, that the death of Christ was decreed by God, and
that it could not be but the decree of God must be fulfilled; when yet that
death happened by the wickedness of the Jews, who were led to this naughty act
of their own accord. Prou. 21. God does turn the hearts of Kings, and does
lead them whither he will; even as the conueyer does guide the river, whether
he pleases. God without constraint, did suddenly change the mind of Esau,
Genesis 33. and of Saul, 1 Samuel 19.23. and of the Egyptians, Psalm. 105.25. Which
although they came to pass unavoidably, yet they were done of their own
accord, and not by an irresistable force, but the liberty of man's free will
remaining untouched. And if this be true in wicked men, how much more in good
and faithful men? Are they drawn unwillingly, to whom God does give a heart
of flesh, for a stony heart? Or those to whom God promises that he will cause
that they shall walk in his ways? Ezech. 36.37.

And we would easily admit of the words resistibilitie and vnresistibilitie,
although they are rode and unhandsome, if they were not wrested otherwise then
to that which they signify: For they call that resistible which may be
hindered, auerted, and overcome; when yet it is one thing to resist, and another
thing to overcome. Irresistable force is that which cannot be oppugned nor
resisted, and not that which cannot be overcome; resistance notes out the
fight, not the victory: For no man (as I know of) has ever denied, that the
efficacy of the spirit may be resisted by man: Nor is there any one, in whose
mind piety is so deeply seated, who does not feel an inward wrestling, and
is often destracted with contrary desires: But that he that is elected, may so
resist grace, that he may never admit it, or being once admitted, he may
altogether and finally shake it off; there can nothing more be done to abolish
the decrees of God: for we do not place the invincible power of that faith
which God does give to his elect, in the decree of faith, and in the perfection
and strength of that virtue; but in the certain and sure help of God, which
he does supply to his elect, according to his purpose: For there is no faith
so well grown, or so well strengthened, which would not fail, if God shall
never so little withdraw his aid; even as the child of two years old, at the
first taking of his steps, is held up by the hand of his father; although the
child be fearful, yet certainly he shall not fall, because his father does
strongly hold him up. And if God does sometimes suffer his elect to stumble and
fall, he does forthwith raise them up: Whence it comes to pass, that they are
made more wary, and do more acknowledge the care of God over them, and by
their very fall, do gather strength; even as when the parts of a broken bone
do so grow together again, and are covered with a hard skin, that that part
which was broken, is grown stronger then it was before. Also if our faith be
weak, but yet serious and wrestling with doubtings, our bountiful father does
help our infirmities, and does not break the bruised reed. For as they that
were bleare eyed, and blind of one eye, beholding the brazen Serpent, were no
less healed, then they that had both their eyes, and did see clearly; because
they were not healed by the power of their seeing faculty, nor by the
clearenesse of their eyes, but by the divine power which God did exercise by
this image of the Serpent: So we are not saved by the merit of the perfection
of our faith, but by the bounty of God in Christ our Redeemer.

But what and how great that soul bending and persuading power of the holy
Ghost, working in the hearts of the elect is, and by what means, occasions,
and degrees he does further his work, they themselves cannot express who do
feel it: Even as the Woman with child, does not know after what manner the
living fruit is formed and does increase: But that the power of the holy Ghost
is very great, the Scripture does witness, as hereafter shall be proved.

But how great soever this efficacy is, yet God does not draw us as logs, but
as men. He does draw us being unwilling, that we might be willing; he does
follow us being willing, that we might not will in vain: And when, of being
unwilling, he does make us willing, he does not only not take away the
liberty of the will, but he also restores it, because to serve God willingly
and with joy, is liberty. And he does so further the increases of faith and
regeneration, that for the most part we do not perceive that we do grow, but
after some space of time, we know that we have grown: Even as we do not see
plants as they grow, but we see they have grown. The word of the Gospel
received into the ear, and conceived in the heart, is the ordinary manner
whereby God does affect men's hearts, and does begin, and further
regeneration, he inspiring into it hidden powers toward them whom he decreed
to save. Therefore it is called by Saint Peter, the incorruptible seed, 1. Pet.
1. By Saint Paul, the power of God to salvation, Romans 1. By the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Chap. 4. and in the beginning of the Revelation, a two edged and
sharp Sword. By Jeremy, Chap. 23. v. 29. fire, and a hammer breaking the
rock, because it breaks the hardenesse of our hearts, and does lead our
captiued cogitations to the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10.5. The sparks of
which new life, fallen from heaven into our hearts, the Spirit of God does
stir up, and further as it were with bellows, and does draw out groans that
cannot be uttered, striking, and wounding the heart with secret pricks,
enlightening the mind, governing the appetites, bending the will, which
(whether Arminius will or no) must also be framed again, and as a crooked
piece of wood, be bowed to the contrary part, because it is not equally
inclined to good and evil (as these Sectaries would have it) but does wholly
lean and incline to evil in men unregenerate.

This change, seeing it cannot be made but by contrary habits, it must needs
be, that instead of those vices which are naturally engrafted, the contrary
habits of faith, hope, charity, humility, patience, etc. should succeed: Which
habits are not obtained by use and by actions, as the Arminians think, page
Per spiritus sancti operationem vires homini dantur ad eliciendos actus
conuersio^^s, concomitante porro spiritu credit and be^^agit home: crebris
fid^^ charitatis patientiae actibus habitum spei fidei, etc. sibi comparaet.
65. against the Walachrians, but are imprinted, and infused by the Spirit of
God, who does stir up holy actions and motions, which do strengthen faith
and charity, and increase it by exercise: For man, helped by the spirit of
God, does not give himself faith or charity, or obtain them by exercise and
industry, but they are given by God, and are nourished and increased by
voluntary and spontaneus actions, inspired by God.

And that the will is rather the seat of virtues, then the sensitive
appetites, reason it self does prove: For it is more like that the reasonable
appetite, which is peculiar to man, is adorned with virtues, rather then the
appetite which is common to us with beasts, which if it were the seat of the
virtues, of righteousness, holiness, and charity, the sensitive faculty
ceasing after death virtue also would cease, and the will of the separated
soul, would be altogether void of righteousness and holiness: And if any
one does suppose that the appetites may be called just subiectiuely, and that
they are the subject of righteousness and holiness, because they obey the
mind enlightened by God, there is no cause why the will, freely subiecting it
self to that persuasion, ought not also after the same manner, be called just
and holy, and the subject of righteousness and holiness. And seeing that the
rectified will of a wise and pious man is wont to rule over the affections, and
to compel them into the compass; who does not see, that virtue is rather in
that part, which being rectified, does rule over the affections, then in the
affections, which do for the most part slackly obey this holy command? I
confess indeed that Christian virtues do in some part pertain to the
sensitive appetities; But after the same manner that the art of training up a
horse, which does properly reside in the horseman, does in some part belong to
the horse, whom the industry of the rider has broake to the circuits and
compass, and has taught to move himself with an ordered motion. Could there
be none more commodious means invented of maintaining the liberty of the will
of man, then by depriving it of all virtue? Surely the Arminians show
themselves stout patrons of the liberty of free will, if they spoil the will
of virtues, that it might be free, and do shake off the bonds of holy habits
from the will, lest it should be too much bound. For as they teach that the
will, before the fall, was not endued with spiritual gifts, lest it should be
thought by the fall to be defiled with vices, and lest contrary vices, and a
natural deprauation should be thought to have succeeded in the place of those
spiritual gifts which were lost: So they also deny that the habits of faith
and charity, etc. are infused into the will by God, lest the will being changed
by that infusion should lose the power of finally resisting the Holy Ghost. For
they think that injury is done to the will, if the liberty of casting it self
headlong into hell be taken away, which surely is an unhappy liberty, and for
the defense whereof these Sectaries ought not to apply themselves with all
their strength, as if it stood us so much upon so to be free that we might
resist God to the end, and destroy our selves: Neither was this a fit cause of
making the will such a silly and single thing, naturally endued neither with
vices nor virtues, but a thing that may be turned and winded every way, and
like the prime and first matter, capable of every impression; seeing that on
the contrary, the will of man is naturally evil, and even incorporated in
vices, as we have abundantly proved, Chap. 33. and men according to their will,
especially, are either good or evil.

We determine therefore, that Christian virtues are not obtained by use and
industry, but are infused by God into the mind, and into the will; who does
not only give power of believing, but also to believe in Christ it self, and
does work in us actual faith: As he who by his certain and absolute purpose
has decreed to give faith to them whom he decreed to save, whereby they might
be saved: The effect of which grace we determine does not depend on man's
free will, and that it is not in our power to believe, and to be converted if
we will, seeing that on the contrary God gives to the elect, that they might
will to be converted, and to believe, giving them both to will, and to do,
according to his good pleasure.

CHAP. XLV.
The question of moral persuasion is sifted and discussed, and whether every
persuasion may be resisted.
THE Arminians determine that the efficacy of the spirit of God, working in our
hearts, is in a moral persuasion: For they deny that those habits of Faith,
Hope and Charity, are infused into men's hearts by God, lest the liberty of
free will should be violated, and lest conversion should be made by an
irresistable and unavoidable necessity, but rather by a gentle invitation,
which man may either resist or obey.

This their opinion does rest on this false principle, that there is no
persuasion which may not be so resisted that the effect thereof may at length
be hindered. We contend, that this principle is false: For there is a persuasion
so effectual that it does necessarily draw a man to ascent; which although
thou may resist, if thou would, yet thou can not be willing. If one, in a
scorching drought, should offer sweet and wholesome drink to him that is a
thirst, and should, with a friendly persuasion invite him to drink, and should
dissuade and hinder nothing on the contrary, I say that it cannot be, but that
he who is thirsty should take the drink offered him. A man has fallen into
the hands of enemies, who load him with chains, and cast him into prison, and
bring him near the punishment: Now, if one should enter the same prison, who
should loosen the chains, open the gate, and show him a sure way of escape,
and should exhort him that he should fly, and free himself from the present
danger, I do not think that such a man could obtain of himself, that he
should not obey such persuasion: And if in humane things there are many such
like persuasions, which you cannot be willing to resist: How much less can
that persuasion be resisted, when to the evidence and certainty of the
persuasion, and to the excellency of those heavenly good things which the
Gospel does offer to us, and to the knowledge of the present danger, the
divine power has also come, and that heart-turning might of the Holy Ghost,
whose efficacy cannot be explained. Surely there is a certain perswasiue
necessity, and a persuasion more mighty then any command, which does so bend
those that are willing, that they would rather endure any thing then not to
will what they desire.

Reason it self does add credit to these things, and the nature of man's will,
in which it is engrafted to move it self to the prescript and persuasion of
the mind, unless when the indocible affections do resist reason. But as
often as reason does conspire and agree with the affections, it is impossible
but the will should move it self thither whether the mind does persuade it,
and the appetites do incite it; for what should call it away, seeing it can be
moved with no other impulsion?

Nor is it any doubt that God, who does thoroughly know our souls, and the most
fit occasions by which the soul being apprehended cannot resist him calling,
and does know in what part it is more flexible; should not be able so to
enlighten the mind, and imprint on the fancy (which has the natural command
over the appetites) so clear an image, so terrify the conscience, by the
propounding of punishments, so stir it up, by laying before it the eternal
rewards, so gently inuit, and so fitly persuade, that presently all resistance
should cease, and all contrariety fall to the ground.

Wherefore Arnoldus against Tilenus, page 251. spoke inconsiderately, when he
said that the liberty of the will consisted in this, that all things which are
required to an action being granted, and being present, the will might suspend
and stop the action. He ought to have said, that the liberty of the will
consists in this, that it does with a free and spontaneus motion, apply it
self to those things which the understanding and the appetites do persuade,
or if the appetites do disagree with reason, and diverse objects are
propounded, that the will may, by a free election, move it self to what part
it will. Let the souls which do enjoy the sight of God in heaven be for an
example; to whom all things are fully supplied, which are required to stir up
the will to love God, yet their will cannot suspend that action, nor forbid and
auert that act of love, wherewith they love God: Neither can it be said
(although it makes little to the present matter) that the cause why they
cannot hate God is, because occasions of hatred, and incitations to sin are
wanting: For the Angels before the fall had no greater occasion. The same
occasions of sinning which overthrew the Angels, were never wanting. The too
much admiration, and too great love of themselves, and by it a more slack
contemplation, and a more backward love of God, carried those most excellent
creatures headlong, and stirred them up to rebellion.

The will indeed is affected to two or more things, and between two
propounded objects does freely choose, unless when the last and best end is
desired: But it does often so strongly apply it self to some one thing, that
it cannot resist it self. And if the efficacy of the Holy Ghost, turning the
heart, working in the elect, shall also come to it, which does so draw and
govern the raines of the affections, that it may bend and turn the will
following of its own accord; what marvel is it, if such a rider cannot be
finally shaken off, although the appetites do so much resist, and do hardly
give over that rule and command which besides right and equity they have ceased
on?

All these these things pertain thither, that we may teach, that the event of
conversion is not thereby uncertain, or (as these innouators speak)
resistible, although God should move the heart by a moral persuasion, and
should allure the will by a congruent and meet invitation.

But yet whosoever shall hear the Scripture, or shall descend to examples and
to experience, shall find that the efficacy of the Holy Ghost, working in men's
hearts, ought not to be restrained to moral persuasion: For it is a hard thing
to conceive in ones mind, what persuasion God used in the conversion of Saint
Paul, who was cast down, as it were with lightning, and whose stubbornness
kicking against the pricks was broken.

The same may be said of the Thief, into whom in the midst of torments, and in
the very agony of death, God did infuse faith after an unutterable manner: For
what? Do these Sectaries think, that he obtained faith by use, and by the
frequent actions of piety? Surely that cannot be said, seeing that in one
moment he came from the height of incredulity, and from most desperately
wicked manners, to a most strong faith. Was he invited by a gentle persuasion?
No surely: For whatsoever things were present before him, were so many
disswasions, and they so powerful, that the faith of the Apostles themselves
did then fail: The very torments which the miserable man did then suffer could
easily have taken away the sense of that allurement and persuasion, unless the
secret power of the spirit of Christ had broken through all obstacles.

Would the Apostle Paul, Ephesians. 1.19.20. and Coloss. 2.12. say, that that power
of God, whereby he does effectually work in the hearts of believers, is the
same with that whereby he raised Christ from the dead, if he should only
convert men's hearts by a moral persuasion, and by a gentle invitation?

Saul being fully determined to kill David, came to Naioth, whither David was
fled, 1 Samuel 19. but as soon as he came thither, unmindful of David, he is
catched with a prophetical inspiration: Where is there here any moral
persuasion or invitation? If therefore God changes the minds of wicked men,
without any moral persuasion, why shall he not exercise the same power
toward his elect.

And I do not see how those speeches, of creating a new heart, of raising man
from the dead, and of giving new life, by which the Scripture does express our
conversion, may be applied to note out moral persuasion. The new man is not
created by persuasion, but by the infusion of new life; and it must needs be,
that some supernatural thing must come, which cannot be explained by man.

And if God should allure men to believe by a mere persuasion and invitation,
God should not be the efficient cause of faith: For he that does only exhort
and persuade that we may believe, does not give believing it self; no, nor he
who does suggest the powers of believing, as we have said before; but he does
move metaphorically and intentionally, as we are moved by Objects, and by a
known end.

And that here is something else beside persuasion, may hence be gathered, in
that you see some men are vehemently set on fire by a small persuasion, some on
the other side, who know the truth, are yet in the midst of some evident and
most certain persuasions cold, and not at all affected. Former times, and our
own age, has brought forth many Martyrs, who have been unlearned, and but
lightly instructed in the doctrine of the Gospel; but that strong natured and
laborious Origin, who had the Scripture at his fingers ends, being unable to
endure Martyrdom, chose rather to burn incense to the Devil. Many among
miracles, and in the midst of the light of the Gospel, are incredulous, as the
men of Capernaum; or else are given to their belly and gluttony, as daily
experience does witness. Neither does this therefore come to pass, because
some of the unregenerate are more capable of moral persuasion then others,
seeing all men are altogether auerse from God, and dead in sins: Also you may
see the most wicked men and worst affected, to be converted to the faith of
Christ, as the Romans, the Corinthians, etc. that God has chosen the foolish
things of the world, and where sin has abounded, there grace has abounded. On
the other side, you may see many not so euilly disposed, as the men of Tire and
Sydon, that are not called by the preaching of the Gospel, then which, there
is no other persuasion more wholesome. There are some ages, in which the gate
of the Church is wide open, and there is a great concourse of people in it, as
the Apostle teaches, 1 Cor. 16.19. A great door and effectual, is opened to
me. And 2 Cor. 2. When I came to Troas to preach the Gospel, a door was
opened to me of the Lord. On the contrary, there are some times, in which the
passage to the Church is as it were stopped up, and the efficacy of the Gospel
does seem to be diminished; when the Pastors of the Church do find much
stubbornenesse in the people, and a brawnie skin drawn over their consciences,
the hardness whereof does turn and blunt the edge of preaching. This does not
happen, because in some ages men are borne better, or because God does use
other means and instructions to the teaching of them, then of others; but
because it seemed good to God to soften the hearts of these, and to reveal to
them his arm and his power of salvation, and to fasten the sword of the word
of God with greater force into their minds, and that according to his good
pleasure and election of grace, E^^y ^3. Romans 1.
by which as many as are appointed to eternal life, do believe, Acts 13. By
this motive, God himself did stir up the mind of Saint Paul, being at
Corinth, and did exhort him to speak freely: Fear not, (says he) but speak,
and hold not thy peace; for I am with thee, and no man shall set upon thee to
hurt thee; for I have much people in this City.

CHAP. XLVI.
The certainty of the conversion of the Elect is proved, and that Grace cannot
be overcome.
I. THe chief foundation of our opinion of the certainty of the conversion of
the elect, and of the inseparable grace of God, we place in the immutable
certainty of the election of God: For seeing that God by his certain and
determined decree, appointed some certain men to salvation, as we have at
large proved, it must needs be, that they whom he appointed to the end, he
appointed also to those means, without which no man is saved, to wit, Faith
and Repentance. This decree, seeing it cannot be hindered, it is certain that
the faith of the elect cannot so be hindered, that they should finally fall
away: The truth of which doctrine while these Sectaries do oppugn, they do
cast themselves into absurd and enormious opinions, such as are these; That
Election is not irreuocable, nor peremptory, before death: That those that are
elected, may be reprobated: That the number of the elect is not certain, and
determined by the decree and will of God, but that their number may be
increased and diminished: That all men are conditionally elected: That God is
often disappointed of his intention, wish, and desire. Which dreams, full of
feuer-like subtlety, and vain dotages, (that I may speak no worse of them)
are, as I think, abundantly confuted by us.

II. We have heard Saint Paul, Ephesians. 1.3.4. teaching that the grace of God is
given according to election: Hence it appears, that the grace of God which is
given to the elect, can no more be hindered, then election it self: For the
effects of an immutable cause cannot but be most certain. Vain and void were
that election, which should be made destitute of those means, without which
there is no salvation; and observe that Saint Paul speaks of the holy and
faithful Ephesians, least any Arminian should say, that the Apostle speaks
of vniuer^all Election. Finally, as many places of Scripture, as there be which
teach that they do believe that are ordained to eternal life, Acts 13. that
they alone come, that is, do believe, who are given to Christ by the father,
that is, are elected to sa^uation in Christ, John 6. and that all that are
predestined are called, justified, and glorified, Romans 8. and that God has
elected us to holiness, Ephesians. 1. and not by holiness, or for holiness; they
do all plainly prove, that faith and holiness do so depend on Election, and
so ^leaue to it, that it cannot be but that he who is elected, must at length
be converted: The faith of the elect cannot altogether be blotted out, and
finally be extinguished, but the election of God must also be wiped out, and
must perish: Whosoever God calls by his purpose, shall certainly come,
because God never fails of his purpose.

III. Agreeable to these things are the words of the same Apostle, Romans 8.14.
As many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God. Here I demand,
whether it is possible that he who is the son of God, should be made the
son of the devil? If there is any modesty left in them, they dare not say
this openly, although it does plainly enough follow from their opinion, by
which they determine, that the elect may be reprobated. This therefore being
laid down, that the sons of God cannot be made the sons of the devil; I
demand, whence is this impossibility of falling away, and why cannot he who
is led by the spirit of God, which is called the spirit of adoption, be made
the child of the devil? The cause of this impossibility must either be the
election of God, or man's free will; but not man's free will, as we have at large
proved; therefore it is the election of God, by which it comes to pass, that
it is an impossible thing that the faith of the elect should be finally lost
and extinguished.

IV. And with what great efficacy God does work in men's hearts, the Apostle
teaches, Ephesians. 1.19. where he wishes that it were made known to the
Ephesians, What is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward, who
believe, according to the working of his mighty power. The Apostle does
purposely heap up emphaticall and significant words, whereby he might declare
that power and effectual strength, far differing from the phrase of Arminius,
in whose writings, these speeches are often found; that God will not use his
omnipotency to the conversion of man, but a gentle invitation, which is
agreeable to free will. And least any one should seek a refuge in the word
Power and Strength, restraining this power to an effectual persuasion; the
same Apostle does in the same Epistle teach, that this power is the same with
that whereby he raised Christ from the dead, where persuasion has no place:
for he presently adds; according to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. So Colos 2.12. speaking of
our regeneration by faith; With Christ (says he) ye are risen, by the faith of
the operation of God, who raised him from the dead; Insinuating, that the
resurrection of Christ, and our regeneration were wrought by the same force and
power.

V. The same Apostle, 2 These. 1.11. does pray that God would fulfill the work
of faith, with power, in the Th^ssalonians. And Romans 1.16. the Gospel is
called, the power of God to salvation, because by the Gospel God does show his
saving power. And 2 Cor. 10 4. he says, that our weapons, that is, the word of
God, whereunto is joined the efficacy of the spirit are mighty, to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing which
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought, to the obedience of Christ. Behold how often, and how diligently
the Apostle does extol that power which God does use to the conversion of a
man; what choice and forceable words he does reckon up, with which he would
draw our minds into the admiration of that wonderful and secret power.
Agreeable to this is that of Christ, Luke 11.22. where he does describe, in
these words, the casting out of Satan obtaining the rule in man, and the
greater power of the spirit of God thrusting him out: When a strong man armed
keeps his palace, his goods are in peace; but when a stronger then he shall
come upon him and overcome him, he takes from him all his armor, wherein he
trusted, and divides his spoils.

VI. These Sectaries here do allege and feign many things: First, they say
that this power, how great soever it is, is resistible, neither do we deny it;
but the question is, whether it may finally be overcome: For it is not likely,
that God will exercise that mighty power and efficacy toward that man whom he
will save, that he might be overcome by man, and that man at length might be
more powerful then God: Yea truly, in that very place of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
10. where he does extol that power with a goodly speech, he makes mention of
the resistance which does rise against the knowledge of God, and does resist
it; but yet at length being broken, it does yield, and is willingly bound with
happy bonds.

VII. To that place of Saint Paul, 2 These. 1. where he prays that God would
powerfully finish the work of faith in the Thessalonians, they of the Hage,
page 295. do answer. That the Apostle does not speak of the beginning of
faith; but of the complement in the increase and perseverance of faith: By
which speech, they cut their own throats; for if there be need of so great
strength and power of God, to further the increases of faith, how much more
power is there need of, for the beginnings of faith, and to put faith in an
unbelieving man, in whom there is nothing which does not resist God?

VIII. They add, that by the work of faith, is understood patience, but
unfitly; for the work of faith is not finished only by the tolerating and
bearing of afflictions; also the words of the Apostle going before, do reject
this interpretation: For he says, We pray always for you, that God would
count you worthy of this calling; and fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of faith with power: He does wickedly, who restrains
the calling of God and the effects of the good pleasure of his goodness to
patience alone.

IX. In the same place they guess, that this fulfilling, is the obtaining of
glory. But in vain, for glory is not the perfection, nor the fulfilling of the
work of faith, but the fulfilling of the reward which we apprehend by faith;
yea, the work of faith is so far from being there perfected, that it will
then cease.

X. The men of our party proved this by that place of Saint Peter, 2 Ephesians.
Chap 1. Verf. 3. The divine power has given unto us all things which pertain
unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who has called us to
glory and virtue. If God does give us all things which pertain to life and
piety, then he gives us that we shall not resist finally, but obey God
calling. The Arminians answer, that Peter here does not speak of the
bestowing of faith, and that he does not teach that faith is given to us by
God, but only of those things which he gives to them that do already
believe. This answer is besides the matter, and it does not touch any part of
our argument: Yet when Saint Peter says, that all things, are given us by God,
which are necessary to salvation, they deal sincerely and faithfully, in that
they will not have faith to be comprehended under this word, omnia, all things.
For they which say in other places, that faith is the gift of God, do here
plainly enough witness that this was not seriously and in good earnest spoken
by them. And truly, the men on our side do bring no place out of the
Scripture, to prove that faith is the gift of God, which the Arminians do not
corrupt and darken; because they deny that the habit of faith is infused into
man, or imprinted on men's hearts by God: but they contend, that it is given to
us by God no otherwise then by persuading, and by giving powers by which we
may believe, if we our selves will. Which truly is not to give faith, but to
give helps and incitations, to obey which, and to turn them into use, is in
the power of free will. To add to their fraud and deceit, they do corrupt the
words of Saint Peter: Saint Peter says, That God has given us all things that
are necessary to life and godliness: They, by giving, would have offering and
propounding to be understood, which do very much differ: For seeing that (as
the Arminians confess) eternal life is propounded even to reprobates, it will
be said, that eternal life is given to the reprobates, if to propound and
offer be the same that it is to give.

That faith and repentance is from God the Scripture proves. That faith is the
gift of God Saint Paul teaches, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. That gift of which
Saint Paul speaks here, is neither salvation alone, nor faith alone: But this
is the gift, To be saved by grace through faith. Whence it appears that faith
is as well comprehended under this gift, as salvation. But if salvation alone
were here called the gift of God, yet it would thence necessarily follow, that
faith is the gift of God: For he that gives salvation, must needs also give
the means, without which there is no salvation. The same Apostle, Phil. 1.29.
says, It is given to you in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake. Do you see that it is given to us, not
only to be able to believe, but also the act of believing, and to believe it
self? That repentance is the gift of God, Saint Peter does witness, Acts
5.31. God has exalted Christ with his right hand, to be a prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And 2 Timothy 2.25. If God will at any time give them repentance. Saint Paul, Romans 5.
does say. That the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost,
who is given us; To wit, because the Holy Ghost does imprint that sure
confidence in our hearts, that we are loved by God. Here you see that not
only the powers, of willing and doing, are given by God, but also to will and
to do it self. Seeing therefore that as many Christian virtues as there are,
there are so many gifts of God, and the same virtues are habits, it must needs
be, that those habits are from God, and therefore not engrafted by nature,
which Pelagius himself has not said; nor obtained by use and actions, the
grace of God helping* as the Arminians will have it, for so man himself should
give either all faith, or at the least some part of faith to himself, and
should owe it to his own labor and industry. For truly, if God does give the
power of believing, and does not give the act of believing after the same
manner as he gives the power, because (as these Sectaries think) God does
give the power of believing vnresistibly, but he gives the act of believing
only by persuading and inuiting, and that by a persuasion which we may obey or
resist; consent to, or refuse: There is nothing so clear, as that the very act
of believing, and therefore faith it self, is not from God alone, nor from the
mere grace of God, but is due, partly to God, and partly to man's free will.
Which that it is the opinion of the Arminians, and that they think that grace
is not the total, but part-cause of faith, we have proved before. Whereunto
add that which they say, that God does give faith no otherwise then by
persuading, and by a gentle invitation: Which if it be true, it will be said
that God does give neither the power nor act of believing. For he that does
only persuade and exhort to run, although he set on fire all the brands of
his oratory Art, yet he will never be said to give the power of running, nor to
run it self.

XII. Seeing therefore that the habit of faith, is the gift of God, it must
needs be, that it is infused and imprinted on our hearts by God himself;
which if it be so, it is impossible that this infusion can be hindered in the
elect; For what should hinder it? Does the mutability and instability of the
decree of God hinder it? No; His decrees can neither be abolished nor changed.
Does the evil affection of the heart of man hinder it? No, every man is ill
affected before he has received faith from God. Does the obstinate hardness
of some men hinder it? No, this hardness is softened by faith being received:
Which also God promises that he will do, Ezech. 36.26.

XIII. This promise of God, and others of the like sort, by which God promises
that he will give a heart of flesh, and will write on it his law, and that he
will cause that we should walk in his ways, do promise an infallible
certainty of the conversion of the elect, and the grace of God, which is
impossible finally to fail: For what can hinder that God should not stand to
his promise, and should fulfill that which he has certainly and absolutely
promised? Does the hardness of man's heart hinder? No, this is that which he
does promises, to wit, that he will soften the stony heart. Does the
wickedness of man hinder? No, there is no man but he is wicked before God
conuerteth him. Is it the stubbornness which is in some men more then
ordinary? No, Where sin abounded, there also grace abounded. Finally, there
can no impediment be objected, which God cannot put away and remove. There is
nothing so intricate, out of which the wise goodness of God cannot clear
himself; and therefore to whom he promised he would give a new spirit, that
he would take from them their stony heart, that he would cause that they
should walk in his ways, it is impossible that these should not be converted,
or should finally fall away. Neither do the Arminians themselves deny it,
although they seem contentiously to strive against it. For, in the 286. page,
of the conference at the Hage, they do confess that these words of God in
Ezechiel, It is declared that God will so effectually work, that actual
obedience must follow: But (say they) is that done vnresistibly? As if the
controversy were in that: It is sufficient that it is done most certainly,
infallibly, and unavoidably, although man should for a time resist, and should
be adverse and contrary to God calling, that is, to his own salvation: For the
works of piety, which are adjoined to follow this change of the heart, are not
laid down as conditions, on which this change is to be, but as fruits and
effects which are to follow this change of the heart.

XIV. These Sectaries do devise another hiding hole, in saying that this
promise of giving a new heart, was made to a whole nation, not to several men:
But these are vain things. For, Regeneration, and the change of the heart, is
a gift which is given to particular men: Neither were this promise true, if it
were to be performed to a whole nation, in which there have always been very
many that have been stubborn and rebellious: Therefore this promise
pertains to those alone who were to be truly faithful.

XV. They dispute never a whit more wittily, when they say, Collat. page 269.
that by these places is promised, not the first beginning of preventing grace,
but a greater plenty and progress of grace. I do not deny but that even the
progress and proceeding in grace is promised here; but I earnestly affirm,
that here the beginnings also of conversion are promised: The very words a new
heart, do prove this: For then truly and properly is the heart new, when it
begins to be changed: Nor is it credible, that the increase of grace is
promised without the beginning of it.

XVI. I further demand, whether that promise whereby God promises that he will
cause that we shall walk in his ways, is extended to the end of the life, or
for a short time: If not to the end, then this promise is in vain, yea, and
absurd, because by it God should promise that he would so long give them his
grace, until he should again take it away, and destroy them for ever. Also
the words themselves do witness, that it is spoken of a perpetual grace. For
God does promise, that he will cause that they should not depart from his
ways; in which words, final perseverance is promised.

XVII. And if the grace of God may be finally hindered in all and particular
men, it might come to pass that it should be hindered in all men; and so there
would be none elected, there would be no church, and Christ should have dyed in
vain. For nothing can be imagined more absurd, then to suppose that God
decreed that some men should believe and be saved, and that that should be done
vnresistibly; and yet that he did not decree of any one man, nor of any
particular person: There is nothing more absurd, then to determine, that it
must needs be that some be saved, and yet that there is no man who may not be
damned. By what means can any certainety be made or concluded out of many
uncertainties? Or is it credible and likely, that the decree of God as
concerning the whole Church, cannot be deluded, and yet may be made frustrate
in the several members of the Church?

XVIII. Nor does the truth find any small refuge in the words of Christ, John
6.44.45. No man can come to me, except the father, who has sent me, draw him;
and I will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the Prophets; They
shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has heard, and has
learned of the father, comes to me. Every word is a thunderbolt. The
Arminians think, that there are many that hear and learn of the father, who
do not come, nor follow. This is diametrically and directly contrary to the
words of Christ; Every man that has heard, and has learned of the father,
comes to me. For he speaks of a certain manner of hearing and learning,
which is peculiar to the elect, and which does work in their heart what he
commands. The same Arminians do affirm, that many are drawn, who
notwithstanding do not come. But here also they offend against the words of
Christ, where he says, No man can come to me, except the father draw him, and
I will raise him up at the last day. For he speaks of a certain sure kind
of drawing and obedience, by which whosoever are drawn, and do come, shall be
raised up by Christ at the last day. He speaks therefore of a kind of
drawing which cannot finally be resisted.

XIX. Out of the same place of Saint John, this argument is framed: Whosoever
has heard, and has learned of the father, does come: Whosoever is drawn has
heard and learned: Therefore whosoever is drawn, does come.

XX. By the same place, the opinion of the Arminians is refuted, whereby they
teach, that all men are drawn, and that sufficient grace is given to all: For
the scope of Christ is to set down the cause, why the Jews of Capernaum could
not come, to wit, because they were not drawn by the Father; that on the
contrary he might teach, that they would have come if they had been drawn: by
which words, he does not obscurely teach, that all who are drawn do come.

XXI. These proofs, brought out of this place, are not grounded on the word
drawing, which we know to be many times taken more largely, and to be
sometimes used for an invitation which is not obeyed; but they are grounded on
the whole coherence of this place, and on the course of the speech, which does
more then certainly demonstrate, that it is here spoken of a kind of drawing,
with which whosoever are drawn, do come. In which sense, the word drawing is
used, in the beginning of the Canticles; Draw me, and we will run after
thee: Which also Saint Austin does acknowledge, Lib. 1. against the two
Epistles of the Pelagians; where when he had admonished the Reader, that
Christ did not say, lead, but draw, he adds: Who is drawn, if he be already
willing? And yet no man comes, unless he be willing: He is therefore after a
marvelous manner drawn, that he should be willing, by him who knows to
work inwardly in the very hearts of men, not that men unwilling should
believe, (which cannot be) but that of unwilling, they might be made willing.

XXII. Nor is it credible that that grace is finally resistible, whose chief
office is to take away final resistance; for so it should not do that for
which it is ordained; especially seeing that Christ says, John 4.14. Whosoever
drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but the water
which I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up to
everlasting life. For it does manifestly appear, that it is here spoken of a
kind of grace, which being once well admitted and received into the heart, is
never lost, but does remain to eternal life, and like an everlasting
fountain, is never dried: No less direct are the words of Christ, John 6.35.
He that believes in me, shall never thirst: and Verse. 51. He that shall eat
of this bread, shall live for ever: All which were false, if true faith, which
does seriously apprehend Christ, might be shaken off, and be finally lost: For
then there would be some, who after the eating of the heavenly bread, should
perish for ever.

XXIII. And if there be any certainty of salvation, or any full persuasion of
the Saints, it must needs be, that the grace of God in them cannot be overcome,
nor finally extinguished; for otherwise, this certainety were vain and
deceitful: For how can he be certain of his salvation, who does believe that
the grace of God may be hindered and abolished by a final resistance? And that
on Gods part there is no absolute and peremptory election, but when the course
of our life is finished? And that on man's part, the free will of man in most
holy men is furnished with power whereby it may altogether drive away the
spirit of God?

XXIV. But the Scripture in six hundred places, does teach and command
certain and sure confidence of our salvation. Saint Paul says, Romans 8.16. The
spirit does witness together with our spirit, that we are the sons of God:
Can there be any more certain witness, and more worthy of credit, then the
spirit of God? Surely the Scripture does teach how certain this inward
testimony is, while it calls the spirit, a seal deeply imprinting the
promises of God on our hearts, and the pledge of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13.
and Chap. 4.30. and 2 Cor. 1. So also 1 John 5.10. He that believes on the
son of God, has the witness of God in himself. This testimony is beyond
all exception; which testimony whosoever does not feel in himself, he ought
rather to think ill of himself, then to measure other men by his own foot,
and to judge of others confidence, by his own incredulity.

XXV. The Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 3. Verse. 6. does command us to hold
fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope, firm unto the end. And Cha.
10. Verse. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith.
And Ephesians. 3.12. In Christ we have boldness and access with confidence, by
the faith of him. And 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you, that
believe on the name of the son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal
life.

XXVI. Our Savior himself does promise, that he will give us all things
which we shall ask in his name, John 14.13. If therefore we ask grace which
cannot be overcome, nor extinguished, and perseverance in the faith, Christ
promises that we shall receive what we ask.

XXVII. Does David speak as one doubting of his salvation, Psalm. 17. I shall
see thy face in righteousness, and I shall be satisfied with thy likeness? Or
Simeon speaking thus, Luke 2. Now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
according to thy word? Or Stephen, who, his enemies gnashing their teeth at
him, and being certain of death, did cry out, I see the heavens open, and the
son of man sitting at the right hand of God? Could the grace of God be
overcome by free will in those men? Or was their confidence deceitful and
failing, and the decree of God concerning their salvation yet reuocable, as
these Sectaries speak?

XXVIII. Why should I speak of Saint Paul? who desiring to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, being full of faith, speaks thus, 2 Timothy 4.18. The Lord
shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly
kingdom: And in the same place, after he had endured so many labors, he does
utter this as his victorious song: I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, etc. With no less confidence does he speak both in his
own, and in our name, long before the end of his strife, Romans 8.38. I am
persuaded, that neither death nor life, etc nor any other creature, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

XXIX. But the doubting of our salvation does please these Sectaries, who are
stuffed and strouted out with pretended modesty and humility. Their words
against the Walachrians, page 76. are these: Whether any one can be certain
that he shall persevere in the faith; We will not say, yea, we suppose it to
be very profitable to doubt of these things, and that it is laudible for a
Christian Soldier, to the shaking off the sloathfulnesse and the drowsinesse
of the soul in the work of Religion: In the same place they admit only that
certainetie, whereby one does know that God, and sufficient help, shall not be
wanting to him, so that he be not wanting to himself; which certainty surely
may be in any reprobate. They do instill these things with a goodly show,
under the pretense of instigation to good works, that they might secretly
ouerturne the foundation of faith, as it were by undermining it; and as if
there were no way of stirring up sluggishnesse, but by the damage of Faith. It
is profane modesty which makes men incredulous and unbelieving; and under a
show of humility, does teach them to distrust God. But they themselves, who
teach these things, do boast, that God has given them what he ought, yea,
and that God is bound to give them sufficient grace; that it might appear,
that under this affected humility there is much pride.

CHAP. XLVII.
The judgment of Saint Austin concerning this controversy.
I. THe certainty of perseverance may be taken two ways: Either for the
certainty of the decree of God, by which God decreed to give perseverance in
faith, to them whom he elected to salvation: Or for that confidence, by which
one does certainly persuade himself, that he shall never be forsaken by God.
The first certainty is necessarily drawn from that election which is absolute,
and is not for faith foreseen, but not the latter: Because God has decreed
many things concerning us, whereof he has not yet given us the full knowledge.

II. The full persuasion of the faithful does not rest on any revelation,
whereby God has laid open to us the secrets of his counsels, but on the
promises of the Gospel, and on the inward feeling, whereby one searching
himself, does feel that he does seriously believe in Christ, and on the
inward testimony of the spirit, witnessing in our hearts that we are the sons
of God: Yet there may be many, and those good and godly men, who although they
belong to the election of God, have not come to this full confidence.

III. Saint Austin, being beaten in this question, and exercised in often
contentions of the Pelagians, is a most earnest maintainer of the former
certainty; and does gather from the election of God, according to his purpose,
that the elect can never be forsaken by God, and that grace is given which can
never fail, and by which they shall certainly persevere. There are many
excellent things in his works to this purpose, but he does no where speak
more plainly then in his book, de correp. and gratia. which he writ when he
was very old. In the twelfth Chapter he has these words: There is given to
the Saints that are predestined by the grace of God to the kingdom of God,
not only such help of grace, but also such a help, that perseverance it
self is given them, not only that without that gift they could not persevere,
but also that by this gift they cannot but persevere. For he has not only
said, without me ye can do nothing, but he has also said, ye have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you, and have appointed you that you might go on, and
might bear fruit, and that your fruit might remain: In which words he
declares that he has given them not only righteousness, but also
perseverance in righteousness. For Christ so appointing them, that they should
go on and bear fruit, and that their fruit should remain, who dare say that
perhaps it shall not remain? For the gifts and calling of God, are without
repentance, that is, the calling of them who are called according to his
purpose. Christ therefore making intercession for these, that their faith
should not fail, without doubt it shall not fail to the end, and by this it
shall persevere to the end, and the end of this life shall find it remaining.

And a little after, The will of them is so much enflamed by the Holy Ghost,
that they therefore are able, because they so will, and they do therefore so
will, because God works in them that they may will: For if in so great
infirmity of this life (in which, notwithstanding it was necessary that virtue
should be wrought for the repressing of pride) men's wills should be left to
themselves, that if they would they might remain in the help and assistance
of God, without which they could not persevere, and God should not work in
them that they might will: The will it self, by its own infirmity, would
fail among so many and so great temptations, and they could not therefore
persevere, because failing by their infirmity they could not be willing, or by
the infirmity of their will they could not be so willing that they might be
able: Therefore the infirmity of man's will was helped, that by the grace of God
it might be driven unavoidably, and inseperably; and therefore, although weak,
yet it should not fail, nor be overcome by any adversity. He suffered and
permitted Adam, the strongest man, to do what he would, but he has preserved
to the weak, that they should will inuincibly, by him that gives it, and
inuincibly should not forsake it.

Observe the words, unavoidably, unseperably, and inuincibly: he used not the
word irresistibility, which the Jesuits had not yet coined: But he used words
which have no less force to set out the power of the most certain, and
finally, insuperable and unconquerable grace of God, in them who are elected
according to the purpose of God. And yet he does use the word resisting, Chap.
14. where he thus speaks: No free will of man does resist, God being willing
to save. For to will or nill, is so in the power of him that wills or
nilleth, that it cannot hinder the will of God, nor overcome his power.
Excellently spoken, although Arminius cry out against it.

CHAP. XLVIII.
That the Arminians do plainly stablish that vnresistiblenesse which they
impugn.
I. VNresistiblenesse is painted, by the Arminians, as a monster, whose beard
they pluck, and whom they prick with needles and goades. We have already
taught, that they do build castles in the air, and paint gourdes and vain
conceits, and do impugn their own dreams: For we acknowledge no such
vnresistiblenesse as they faigne.

II. But this is the greatest marvel, that they themselus do build up, and
do every where stablish that vnsistiblenesse which they do falsely attribute
to us, and do impugn with all their forces. You may say they are
blinde-folded fencers, who fighting with their eyes shut do beat the air
and wound themselves.

III. The Arminians against the Walachrians, page 68. Do deny that they say,
That the Holy Ghost does work upon the will by no other means then such as
may be resisted. But (say they) we would have these things restrained to none,
but to that ordinary manner of conversion, which the spirit for the most part
does use, not doubting but that the conversion of some one or other, is
sometimes wrought by an extraordinary means. Here we have them confessing
themselves guilty: For by this saying, they overthrow from the foundation
whatsoever they have builded up. For if God convert some men vnresistibly, and
does give them faith by his precise and absolute will, it is impossible that
these should be elected for faith foreseen, and by an election which does
rest on the foreseeing of faith. For he who is absolutely and vnresistibly
appointed to faith, must needs be absolutely appointed to salvation. He should
do foolishly, who should faigne God decreeing thus; I indeed decreed to save
this man, if he will believe: But I will give him faith vnresistibly. Election
cannot depend on the foreseeing of that condition which God has decreed
certainly and infallibly to do. Thus God did not decree that Philip should
live if he had breath; but he has certainly decreed to give him breath,
that he might live.

IV. Hence it appears, with what equity these Sectaries deal with us: For
falsely attributing vnresistiblenesse to us, they cry out, that thereby men's
wills are compelled, and that it cannot be called obedience, to which man is
vnresistibly compelled; yet the same men do think that there are some who are
converted vnresistibly, and after an extraordinary manner, and whose conversion
they do not deny to be obedience.

V. Add to these, that old and worn opinion among the Arminians, which we
every where meet in their writings: That God does call some man after a manner
that is not congruent and agreeable, whereby they that are called do never
follow, although they be able to follow: That some again are called in that
manner, state, measure, and time, which is congruent and agreeable, by which
means whosoever are called, do certainly and infallibly follow God calling.
Also we have before in the 44. Chapter, brought the words of Armini us
himself, whereby he determines that such a calling is made by the decree of
God, and administered by his certain and sure predestination: And justly; For
why should God choose this apt state, this fit time, and this congruent manner,
whereby they that are called do certainly and infallibly follow, unless
because he will have them certainly and infallibly to follow? Surely these
things maintain the same vnresistiblenesse which is believed by us, that is, a
certain and infallible event from the preordination of God. They endeavor
indeed to qualify their opinion, by peecing to it this clause: Those whom God
does call after a congruent manner, are indeed certainly and infallibly
converted, but so that they may not be converted. For (if Arminius be believed)
they may do that which never has been, nor never shall be; which God
certainly fore-knew should not be; and which if it should come to pass, the
purpose and preordination of God (which Arminius does here acknowledge) should
be made void.

VI. The same men do stablish vnresistiblenesse by that their old opinion,
whereby they teach, that God in our conversion does vnresistibly enlighten the
understanding, and stir up the affection. It is something, that they confess
that part of our conversion and regeneration is wrought vnresistibly, to wit,
the enlightening of the mind and the raising up of the affections. But I
further affirm, that by that irresistable enlightening of the mind, if it be
clear and evident, and by that raising of the affections, if it be vehement,
the will is necessarily affected, and drawn to a spontaneus assent, as we
have at large proved.

VII. They do no less hurt and wound themselves, when they teach that the
power of believing is given vnresistibly: For, what powers of believing are
there but by faith? For, habits are the efficient causes of operations, as the
first acts are the causes of the second. Or what powers of believing can there
be without faith? If therefore the powers of believing are given vnresistibly,
it is plain, that faith also, and therefore the assent of the will, is given
irresistably, seeing that the power and faculty of believing is placed formally
in faith it self.

The Arminians of the Hage, Collat. page 269. do grant, that God does
vnresistibly cause, that always there are some who believe: By which grant they
do plainly disturb their own matters. For who are these some? Are they not
some certain persons? Therefore God does vnresistibly work, that certain
persons should believe. Is it likely that God does vnresistibly cause that some
should believe, and has not appointed who they should be? For so it would come
to pass that God predestined some men to believe vnresistibly, and that he
predestined none. Is it possible that God should cause, that some men should
believe vnresistibly, and yet tbat the same men should not believe
vnresistibly? As if I should say, that God does cause that some should die, who
yet certainly do not die. And seeing by the opinion of Arminius, there is
none of the elect, who may not be reprobated, and cause that God should be
disappointed of his intention, it is a marvel how God should cause
vnresistibly that some should believe, when there is none of them who believe
and are converted, but many finally resist, and so perish. Whatsoever may
happen to several men, may also happen to all. Nor can the purpose of God be
certain, of causing vnresistibly that some should be converted, unless some
be vnresistibly converted. Even as the purpose of God, of causing some to be
drowned cannot be certain, unless some be drowned.

The same men, Collat page 292. say; That to conversion there is required a
power which must in many parts exceed every created power, although it should
not work vnresistibly: For that nature may be effectually converted, something
is required that is more powerful then it self. These things seem to me to
be such as cannot stand together; that the power of the spirit, by which we
are converted, does in many parts exceed the power of nature; and yet that it
may be so resisted by nature, that it may be overcome, and may finally be
hindered: for of such a resistance is it spoken here.

There is no cause therefore to fear lest irresistibility, being thrust at by
the Arminians, should fall down, seeing that on the one part they do hold it
up, and underprop it from falling, yet it is worth the labor to know with
what objections they do enforce it.

CHAP. XLIX
The weak objections of the Arminians against Irresistibility (that is, the
infallible certainty of the conversion of the elect) are answered.
I. THese Sectaries do lay the chief foundation of their cause, in that their
false opinion, and already confuted by us. That God does not administer and
supply the means to conversion and faith, by any absolute and precise decree:
For if God calling men, does precisely and absolutely intend the conversion of
no one man, it is not needful that the conversion of any one should precisely
follow the supplying of those means. This their foundation, seeing it has
been overwhelmed and cast down by us, the other things which they would build
upon this must needs fall.

II. The Arminian conferrers at the Hage, do very ill heap together many
things, to the overthrowing whereof there is need of no great contention. In
the front of the battle, they set that place in the Acts, Chapter 7.15. Where
Stephen does lay it to the charge of the rebellious Jews, that they have
always resisted the Holy Ghost: Whence they infer, that the Holy Ghost, when
he works in man, does not work conversion vnresistibly.

III. But they do unwisely prove that which is not in controversy. For we do
not teach, we do not acknowledge that irresistibility which they attribute to
us. This conclusion therefore does not hurt us, who do willingly confess that
the Holy Ghost does not always so work in men's hearts that he takes away
all resistance. Furthermore, they suppose a thing which is most false, as a
thing true and granted, to wit, that the Holy Ghost wrought in those Jews, and
that they resisted the inward operation of the Spirit. Stephen charge the
Jews, that they always resisted the eu dent testimony of the Holy Ghost,
speaking by the Prophets. This the following words of Stephen do declare:
Which of the Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? etc. Nor if Stephen
should speak of the Holy Ghost dwelling in the impious, and unbelieving Jews
(which yet is very false) would it thence follow that he spoke of the spirit of
Adoption, and of the grace peculiar to the elect, which does certainly and
infallibly work faith and conversion in them alone?

IV. With this place, there likewise fall to the ground those places in which
the Scripture, Psalm. 78. Esaias 63. Matthew. 23.37. Prou. 1.24. etc. says, that
the Jews tempted God, and stirred him up to wrath, and made sad the spirit of
his holiness; that the chickens would not be gathered; that they who were
called refused; etc. All these (say I) are nothing to the purpose. The
Scripture there speaks of ungodly and rebellious persons; but in this
question it is spoken of the faithful and the elect; and the question is,
whether it may be that they may never be converted, and may finally resist the
spirit of adoption. To the proving of this, the places which speaks of
Reprobates, which we confess do finally resist God calling, and do want the
spirit of adoption, are plainly besides the purpose. Finally, these Sectaries
do not prove, that in all these places it is spoken of a final resistance, of
which alone it is spoken here.

But (say they) God, Ezechiel 18.31. does command the Israelites to make them a
new heart, and a new spirit. Whence they gather that man may perform what he
is commanded, or resist God commanding. I am ashamed of this old trifle and
Pelagian colewort, so often brought again, and as often rejected. First of
all, what need is there to prove that an unregenerate man is able not to obey
this commandment of making him a new heart, seeing this alone he is able to
do, to wit, nor to obey; and he cannot obey? And that man can do whatsoever
God commands is an heresy of the Pelagians, already confuted by us The
precepts of God are not the measure of our powers, but the rule of our duty,
the sum of our debt, the matter of our prayers, the scope of our strife. But
of these things more then enough.

VI. Fourthly, they pretend that place, Esaias 5. What could more have been done
to my Vineyard, which I have not done to it? Whence they infer, that the
grace of God does not work conversion in man vnresistibly. This is a
prodigious consequence; and if it were good, yet the conclusion would touch
neither the question, nor us; who confess that in the elect themselves,
conversion is not wrought without some resistance. Add to these, that to the
question wherein it is spoken of the conversion of several men, a place
speaking of the calling of a whole nation is unwisely brought. When it is
spoken of the certainty of the conversion of the elect, they ought not to bring
a place speaking of the rebellion of an incredulous and unbelieving nation.
Finally, they deal so as they who are very careful, lest they should say any
thing that should make to the purpose.

VII. By the way, the Reader shall observe, that improper phrases, and spoken
after the manner of men, ought not to be taken as properly spoken. God is
figuratively said to have wished and expected fruit from his vine. Desires, and
grief, as if having spent his labor in vain he had failed of his propounded
end, cannot happen to God: When God does wish the conversion of men, as Psalm.
81.14. he does insinuate nothing else, then that the conversion of man is
acceptable to him: So when he is said to expect fruit from the Vine, or from
the Fig Tree, that is, from the Church, or from particular men; and when the
Vine disappointed his hope, not presently to pluck it up by the roots;
understand, that God does require and demand obedience, and that when that
which ought to be done is not done, he is not presently ready to punish, but
does defer it, Luke 13.9. God does not expect those events which he
fore-knoweth will not come to pass: Much less does he expect those events in
the godly, which he himself is to work.

VIII. They stumble at the same stone, when they cite that of Ezechiel, Chap.
12. Verse. 2. Son of man, thou dwell in the midst of a rebellious house,
who have eyes to see, and see not, etc. Whence they infer that man indeed
has eyes, and ears, and power of converting himself, but he is able to
resist. Unwisely spoken; for who does deny that man is able to resist? yea, of
his own nature he can do nothing else. Why do they heap up to us the
examples of reprobates and wicked men, in the question whereby it is demanded
whether it may come to pass that he who is elected can finally resist grace,
and fall from it? By the way, the Reader shall remember, that of the same
people to whom ears and eyes are here attributed, God does thus speak, Deuteronomy.
29.4. The Lord has not given you a heart to understand, nor eyes to see, nor
ears to hear, to this day. For there are two kinds of eyes, some, which
only the faithful have, to wit, the eyes of faith; some, which reprobates may
have, who seeing and willing do perish; who seeing do not perceive, and do
hear heavily with their ears, Mat. 13.26.27. these men's eyes are carnal and
cloudy; these men, natural reason being their guide, have a superficial
knowledge which does not affect the heart, or if any divine light has risen to
them, it does rather dazzle their eyes then enlighten them; yea, that knowledge
which they have, they endeavor to choke, willingly groping at noone day.

IX. The places of Scripture which they add, they do in the same manner
mis-alleadge, Zach. 7.11. Esaias 6.9. Mat. 13.4. Acts 28.25. and 26. By which
places, no other thing can be proved, then that reprobates and rebellious
persons may refuse the grace of God, and resist his admonitions; which we
willingly confess: But what is this to final resistance in the Elect?

X. They do gloriously boast of the words of Christ, Mat. 11.21. Woe unto thee
Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works which were done in
you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they would have repented long ago in
sacke-cloath and ashes. The like place you have, Ezech. 3.6. Out of the place
of Matthew they thus dispute.

That grace by which some men, to whom it is given, have not been converted,
and others had been converted if the same had been given to them, is
resistible.
But the grace of conversion is such.
Therefore the grace of conversion does not work vnresistibly.
There was no cause that they should so labor in the proving of either
proposition, seeing we willingly admit of the conclusion: We know that the
elect themselves do resist the grace of God, although not perpetually, nor so
that the grace of God should be finally hindered. The question is, whether it
may come to pass, that the elect may so resist the grace of God, that they may
never be converted, or that they may extinguish it, and finally hinder it. The
good men do not touch this question, but do wander other where.

X. Yet do they not uphold those two propositions with fit proofs. The Mayor
and first proposition they thus prove: If Grace work conversion in man by an
irresistable force, it should always and every where work with the like
efficacy. But I deny that that will follow: For although grace should
vnresistibly work conversion in all men that are converted, yet it might come
to pass, that it should work in some men with greater efficacy, to wit, in
those who are so affected that they do presently and without delay follow God
calling, and are inflamed with greater zeal and feruency then others, who obey
more slackly and slowly.

XII. They prove the Minor and second proposition, by the example of the men of
Tire: But they suppose (without any proof) that Christ in this place does
speak of true conversion, by which they are converted to whom God does give
true faith and repentance: Which surely is a great demand. For seeing the men
of Tire and Sydon did not pertain to the election of God, because they never
were converted, if the miracles had been done amongst them, which were done
amongst the men of Corazin, they might have been touched with a reverence, and
have been affected with the sense of their sin, and have been cast down
with that repentance which is bred by the fear of punishment; such as was the
repentance of Ahab, 1 King. 21. and of the greater part of the Ninevites, as
the ruin of Niniuie a while after does declare, as we learn, Neh. 1.1. and
out of the last Chapter of Tobias. In which thing, the men of Tire had been
more praiseworthy, then the men of Corazin, who among so many miracles did not
feel the least touch of grief, nor gave any signs of repentance. But I deny,
that it was in the power of the men of Tire to obtain true faith, and to
persevere in it: without which yet there is no true repentance. And truly the
Arminians seem to me to accuse God of deceitful envy, and ill will, because
he knew that the men of Tire were so affected, that if those miracles had come
to them, they had seriously repented, and come to salvation; and yet he envied
this benefit to them, which notwithstanding he bestowed on a people whom he
knew would neither be converted by miracles, nor by preaching.

XIII. In the seventh place they thus dispute:

They who may resist the word of Grace and salvation, may also resist the
spirit of repentance. But men may resist the word of grace and salvation:
Therefore the same men may also resist the spirit of repentance.

We admit of the conclusion in that sense which I have often said. They prove
the Minor by the examples of reprobates, whom we know do finally resist: But
here it is spoken of the elect, and the question is, whether they may so resist
grace that grace may be overcome and finally extinguished. This which is the
thing to be proved, and is the state of the question, they leave untouched.

XIV. Being driven from the Scripture, they fly to Reason, and thus frame a
Syllogism: That which is required of us in the Gospel for due and filial
obedience, that is not wronght in us by an irresistable power. But faith and
repentance are required of us in the Gospel for due and filial obedience:
Therefore they are not wrought in us by an irresistable power.


The Minor has no need of proof. The Mayor they prove thus; because that
which is only done in man by another, so that he only behaueth himself
passiuely in it, cannot be called obedience.

All these things are grounded on a double calumny: The first is, whereby they
faigne that we teach that conversion is wrought in us vnresistibly: The other,
whereby they attribute to us, that we say conversion and faith is wrought by
God without us; and that men in conversion behave themselves only passiuely.
Truly we acknowledge no such conversion, in which man should do nothing but
only suffer; we know that man is so drawn by a sweet and effectual motion,
and that his will is so bent and turned, that of unwilling he is made willing,
and does work, and is moved of his own accord: We know that it is man
himself that does believe and repent, and not God. But we say that God does
give to man, that he may be able to believe and repent: No otherwise then the
fruit does move it self in the womb, and yet the motion it self and the
power of moving, it has from God: It is sufficient to obedience, that man does
voluntarily obey God.

XV. And here we entreat the Reader that he would stay a little, and take
notice, how inconsiderately the Arminians deal here, and how adverse and
contrary they are to themselves. They deny that conversion can be called
obedience, if man do only behave himself passiuely in it: But they
themselves teach, that man does only behave himself passiuely, in the
beginning of his conversion, which yet all the Arminians acknowledge to be
obedience. Their words are these in their Epistle against the Walachrians, page
69. and 70. Whether we say that the will is moved by the spirit only by the
foregoing operations of the understanding or that there is a certain new
energeticall and operative quality infused to it, we always determine that the
will is first moved, that is, behaueth it self passiuely, before it does
actiuely move it self to that which is good. This they say, but that is
especially to be noted, that the Arminians do with one mouth teach, that the
understanding is vnresistibly enlightened by God; that is, that knowledge is so
given by God that it cannot be resisted, when yet that knowledge is a kind of
obedience. For the Scripture does every where command us to know and
understand, Psalm 2.10. Mat. 15.10. and 2 Timothy 2.7. Is not the earnest
alacrity of the Angels, to fulfill the commands of God, obedience? yet they
cannot resist God commanding, nor can they desire to resist.

XVI. Lastly, they heap together absurdities, which they think may be drawn
for that power which they call irresistible: They say that it does follow from
thence, that no other can be converted then they that are indeed converted:
And that no man can be converted, before he be converted indeed. But this
ought to be so far from seeming absurd, that on the contrary, it is impious
to believe that any one may be converted and regenerated, but he whom God does
convert and regenerate, and to whom he gives faith and the spirit of adoption;
or that any one can be converted before God convert him. For if we be all by
nature dead in sin, it is certain, that there are no other that can rise out
of that spiritual death, then they that do indeed rise. And if faith and the
spirit of adoption is a gift of God proceeding from his mere grace; it is
plain, that they at length can be converted to whom God does give grace,
whereby they may be converted in act. And seeing we are brought to that pass,
that there is no man who does not resist God calling, it appears that no man
can be converted, but he from whom God has taken away this resistance and has
broke his hardness. Let these new Semipelagians look to it and consider with
what face they dare maintain, that an unregenerate man has power of
converting himself, before God convert him in act, and how they can defend
themselves against so many places of Scripture, and so many reasons and
proofs, which we have brought in the three and thirty Chapter. Can they bring
an example (out of all records of Stories) of any one who has obtained faith
and salvation, by those gifts which do happen to all men, even to Heathens and
unregenerate persons?

XVII. That no man can convert himself before he be converted and drawn by
God, the Scripture does every where witness: Convert us, and we shall be
converted, Ier. 31.18. Lament. 5.21. Draw me, and we will run after thee,
Cant. 1.4. Could the Thief convert himself, before Christ after a marvelous
and vtterable manner changed his heart, among so many occasions of doubting,
and in the flight and fear of the Apostles themselves? Could Paul convert
himself before he was called from heaven by Christ? Surely godly men's ears
are unacquainted with this opinion, and it is of the Pelagian vain. By this
means the decree of God is abolished, by which he determined to use the
miraculous confession of the Thief to show the efficacy of the death of
Christ, and his divine power in the very height of griefs and reproaches, and
for a notable evidence of the election of grace. God might have been
disappointed of these ends, if the Thief might have converted himself some
years before. God indeed did not hinder that he should not be converted: but
whereas all men of themselves and of their own nature are unable to convert
themselves, concerning those whom he decreed to convert, he determined with
himself in what time and manner he would convert them.

XVIII. But (say they) if no man can be converted, but he whom God does convert
in deed and in act, it will thence follow that the rest who are called, are
called in vain, and that God should deal dissemblingly and unwisely, who
should call them to salvation, and yet withdraw the means necessary to obtain
salvation.

I answer, that this word withdrawing, does sufficiently prove how
unfaithfully they deal. For there is none of us thinks that God does withdraw
from them who are not converted, the means necessary to salvation: For if he
should withdraw those means from them, he should take from them that which
they had: But no unregenerate man ever had all the means necessary to
salvation. It is one thing to withdraw the means necessary to salvation, and
another thing not to give them. It is one thing to pull out the eyes of the
blind, and it is another thing not to cure him that is blind. It is
sufficiently manifest that God does not give to all men, all the means
necessary to salvation: For there are infinite people, to whom he does not send
preachers of the Gospel: And to very many, to whom the Gospel is preached he
does not give faith and the spirit of Adoption. But they alone believe, who are
foreordained to eternal life, Act. 13. All which things are abundantly
proved in the former Chapters. Neither yet can God therefore be accused of
folly or dissembling, who does call those whom he knows will not follow, and
to whom he does not give the power of coming. For he does not deal
dissemblingly, nor unwisely, who does require from man that which he is not
able, if he owe it, and if man himself is the cause of his disability. For God
has not lost his right by the wickedness of man; nor is he bound to supply to
all men the means of paying what they owe, and of performing what they are
commanded. Nor does he unwisely or dissemblingly call the virgins who wanted
oil, although he would not administer oil to them, of which they themselves
ought in time to have had a care. Neither is it any doubt but that God does
require from every man, yea, from the heathen themselves the perfect obedience
of the law, which notwithstanding that it can be perfectly fulfilled by them,
the Arminians themselves, unless it be fearfully and doubtfully, dare not
affirm. God does not in vain call those whom he knows will not follow,
because he does not deal vainly, who does exact that which justice does
require. Nor is it equal that although in a promiscuous and mingled multitude
there are many reprobates, the word of God should therefore not be preached to
that multitude, and the naughtiness of wicked men should defraud the good, and
that thereby something should be taken away, and detracted from the commodities
of the elect. Nor is the Gospel preached in vain to those that are obstinate,
seeing that by their obstinacy, and by the punishments that follow it, the
godly are brought to a wholesome fear, and are turned and drawn to prayer,
and to the acknowledgement of the mercy of God to them. God did not in vain
send Moses to Pharaoh, ^ Z^ch. 3.
and Ezechiel to the Jews, although God himself forewarned that Pharaoh
would not obey Moses, nor the Jews Ezechiel. Therefore here is no absurdity,
how odiously soever they cry out upon it. These scoffing men, that they might
procure envy to us, do boastingly cast out these things among the unskillful
common people, and do raise bubbles in a shell, which are blown away with the
least breath.

XIX. They also heap together reproachful calumnies, falsely attributing
those things to us which we do not believe: To wit, that God calls those who
are not converted, purposely and only for this end, that they might be
inexcusable: Which thing, far be it from us that we should say. We say
indeed that this does happen, but we do not say, that this is the only end
propounded by God. We do not think that the reprobates are only therefore
called that they might be made inexcusable, although by despising that calling
they bring greater damnation upon themselves. God indeed does offer his
Gospel to those that will reject it, but not to that end that they might
reject it. The end propounded to God in calling those whom he knows will not
obey, is to require that which they owe, and to declare what is acceptable to
him. Does he not also call, warn, and threaten them, that at the least they
might be so much constrained by fear, that they might not hurt those that are
good; And that by the example of their stubbornenesse, which goes not
unpunished, the godly might learn to fear, and by comparing their condition
with those to whom God has not vouchsafed the like grace, they might more
earnestly love God for the prerogative granted to them?

XX. These Sectaries object again, That by this means, some men have matter
and cause of security ministered to them, and of the contempt of those means
which God is wont to use to work conversion, such as are the preaching of the
word, etc. For if no man can convert himself before this irresistable drawing,
and as soon as he is vnresistibly drawn he must needs be altogether
converted, then all our care and diligence is void and unprofitable: And to
others there is matter of perpetual doubtings ministered as long as they feel
no such drawing.

We have already advertised that this opinion is falsely laid upon us. That God
does draw a man vnresistibly. We only say, that the elect, although they may
resist a long time, yet at length they obey God calling, and their voluntary
conversion is wrought certainly and infallibly, and that it cannot come to
pass that they should never be converted, or being converted, that they should
finally fall away, and the grace of God should be at length extinguished, and
be finally overcome by the resistance of the flesh.

XXI. We deny, that security or contempt of the word can follow from such
drawing, seeing that that grace it self does create in us care and diligence.
See I pray, how ill these things square together, and how unfitly it is said
that the grace of God does hinder godly carfulness, seeing that this
carfulness it self is a part of grace: For how should grace, by which a man
is regenerated, corrupt him? Or how should grace, by which he is stirred up and
pricked forward, give him over to a languishing idleness? Therefore they do,
as if I should say, that a man is killed by the resurrection, or that he is
blacked over with a white color: For they say that negligence is brought by
that grace which does beget godly care.

XXII. And there is no doubt but that the same absurdity may be drawn from the
opinion of Arminius, whereby he thinks that some men are drawn of God by a
congruent and agreeable manner and time, by which, they that are called do
most certainly follow. For I may say that by this doctrine men's consciences are
cast into a deep sleep: for there will be some men who will speak thus: To what
purpose is it to be careful? Our endeavor is in vain if we are not drawn
after a congruent manner. And I doubt whether I am drawn after a congruent
manner, or no. Hence comes negligence, and a faith floating in uncertainty.

XXIII. That is no better which they add, That to some men there is matter of
perpetual doubtings so long as they feel no such drawing. This absurdity is
very absurdly urged by the Arminians, who, with all their power, do impugn
the certainty of salvation whilst they command men to doubt of perseverance.
For let us imagine that doubtings of salvation are bred by this our doctrine:
Do they condemn that in us which they allow in themselves? We do not deny
that doubtings do sometimes creep on godly and good men, but yet those
doubtings must needs diminish little by little, as they are more affected with
the sense of the grace of God, and as their faith is increased. But it is not
needful that he who is already converted and does believe, should feel
himself to be drawn vnresistibly, that is, to be so drawn as he cannot
resist. For we place the infallible certainty of conversion not in the sense
of man, who does feel that he cannot resist, but in the decree of God, by
which it must needs be that they come to Christ whom he has elected to
salvation. So the cause that the bones of Christ could not be broken, was not
in the hardness of those bones, but in the purpose of God, who forbad they
should be broke. And therefore it may come to pass, that they who shall
certainly be saved by the decree of God, do not certainly know of their
salvation, and are often troubled with rising doubts. There are some to whom,
after many years of their life led soberly and godly, the confidence of
salvation is at last given them at their death. Nor is it needful that the
faithful man should try himself whether he be drawn with an irresistable
power, but whether after serious and earnest repentance he does so wholly rest
himself in the death of Christ, and in the promise of God, that thereby he
might be stirred up to piety, and to the fear of God. Whosoever does feel
himself to be thus affected, ought not scrupulously to weigh and examine the
poyses and drammes of the efficacy of the spirit of God, and of unconquerable
grace, but so to order himself, that he may repress his rising doubts by
prayer, and by the remembrance of the promises of God, and that he may break
and bruise the serpentine power of his lusts resisting the Spirit.

XXIV. And if any one does otherwise, we are not they who can prevent all
evils, or cure vices; knowing that by the best documents and lessons, the
occasion of sinning may be taken, and that the best things may be wrested to
the worse part.

XXV. I omit, that these Sectaries join those things which cannot be coupled
together, and do make those things apposite and agreeing, which are opposite
and disagreeing. For they faigne, that he that has true faith, may doubt
whether he be seriously and indeed converted. Which surely is impossible: for
true faith does stir up in man, serious and true repentance, and the love of
God, which cannot be in man but it must be felt.

XXVI. Finally, the discommodities which these Sectaries do pick out of our
doctrine may be avoided: but the doctrine of the Arminians does enwrap men's
consciences, in unavoidable evils. For hereby is man puffed up with pride,
teaching, that man can separate himself: that he can convert himself: that he
can convert himself before he be converted in act by God: that man has whereof
he may boast: that God is bound to give him sufficient grace: that God does
give to man, what he is indebted to him: that the grace of God is not the
total cause of faith: that the grace of God is subjected to man's free will.
And on the other side Arminianism^ does vex men's consciences with a careful
doubting. For who can be certain of his salvation, if our salvation is not
certain by the election and decree of God? And if the number of the elect be
not certain by the will of God? Or if God has elected no man, but being
considered as already dead? Or if the certainty of salvation does rest on the
strength of free will, in the power whereof it is to persevere, or not to
persevere? to believe or not to believe? to cause that God should be partaker
of his desire, or should fail of his propounded end? Surely if there be place
given to this deadly doctrine, faith and Christian humility is lost. For it
must needs be that they must be most doubtful, who are most proud. It must
needs be that the expectation of those men must hang in suspense, who make the
will of man, a floating and unstable thing, the foundation of their hope.
Surely Satan does therefore puff up these men with pride, that they might be
burst in pieces, and does lift them up on high, that being cast down from on
high, he might more grievously break them and crush them to pieces.

XXVII. But to that our objection, by which we said, That if God does work in
us only by the manner of persuasion, he is not the efficient cause of faith,
but only the stirrer up thereof by the manner of an object; as Satan himself
does make it manifest, who is not the efficient cause of the sin of man,
although he does stir up and instigate, and work effectually in the sons
of rebellion; to this objection the Arminians answer nothing: But they object
on the contrary side, If God (say they) does convert those which are his (which
are far the lesser part) vnresistibly, and Satan does auert and turn away
the greater part resistibly, therein Satan is of more power then God, who by
less and inferior helps can execute his purpose in many more men. These good
men do always put that their word vnresistibly, for certainly and
infallibly. But to the purpose, I deny that they whom God does draw and
effectually convert, are fewer then they whom Satan does auert and turn away.
Indeed it is not to be doubted but that some in the beginnings of their
conversion, are removed from that beginning by the subtlety of Satan; But these
are but few in comparison of them who never felt any assaults, or pricks of
repentance: Satan does not auert these, seeing these are auerse by their own
nature. And whatsoever Satan does is but small in comparison of the efficacy of
the spirit of God in the elect. For Satan found men prone to sin, and thrust
them foreward that were falling; nor is it any doubt but that the reprobates
are not carried so much by the impulsion of Satan, as by their own. Certainly
it is a greater thing to heal a few that are deadly wounded, then to
exacerbate and make more angry and grievous the wounds of many, and to pour
vinegar on the Ulcer: It is far more easy to thrust them forward that are
falling, then to raise them that are fallen: to kill ten that are about to die,
then to restore one to life that is dead.

XXVIII. And here they exclaim, that man's nature is auerted and overthrown,
while it is necessarily determined and limited to one thing. I answer; If by
the word necessity be understood not constraint nor natural necessity (such
as is the poise and inclination of all heavy things to the center of the
world,) but an infallible certainty, and that voluntary and spontaneus, by such
a necessity nature is not overthrown. The nature of Angels is necessarily
determined and limited to that which is good, and yet it is not therefore
overthrown. Our nature is necessarily determined and directed to the desiring
of felicity, and yet it is not therefore destroyed. The will of the Israelites,
whose hearts God touched, that they should cleave unto Saul, 1 Samuel 10.26. The
will of Esau yielding with a sudden change to the embracing of his brother,
Genesis 33. The will of the Thief crucified with Christ; and of Paul, in the very
point of conversion, were determined and limited to one thing; and yet force
was not therefore offered to their free will, or their nature destroyed. The
vehemence of him that is thirsty moving him to the drink that is offered, is
determined and limited to that one thing, and yet he does not therefore cease
to be a man, nor is his nature therefore overthrown. God has some secret and
vnperceiueable means, by which he can bow man's will, the liberty thereof being
untouched.

An addition to the thirteenth Chapter, containing some places that are taken
out of the confession of the Churches of France, and out of the chiefest
Doctors of this age, concerning the object of Predestination.
THe twefth Article of the confession of the Church of France, is this; We
believe that God out of that corruption and general curse into which all men
were plunged, does free those whom in his eternal and immutable counsel he
elected, of his mere goodness and mercy, in our Lord Jesus Christ, without
the consideration of works; leaving the rest in the same corruption and
damnation, to show forth, in these his justice; and in them the riches of his
mercy: For none of them are better then others, before God has separated them,
etc. John Calvin in his Comentary upon the ninth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, speaking of Jacob and Esau in the womb, has these words; God in the
defiled nature of man, such as was in man, could consider nothing whereby be
might be induced to do good to it; when therefore he says that both of them
had done neither good nor evil, that also is to be added which he does
presuppose, to wit, that they were both the sons of Adam, by nature sinners,
endued not with a mite of righteousness. Esau was justly rejected, because he
was naturally the child of wrath; yet least any scruple should remain, as if
his condition had been the worse for the beholding of any sin or vice, it
was expedient that his sins should be no less excluded then his virtues. It
is true indeed, that the near cause of reprobation is, because we are all
cursed in Adam.

The same Calvin in his Book of the eternal predestination of God, in the
beginning of the Epistle, which is set before the book. The free Election of
God (says he) is, whereby he adopted to himself out of mankind lost and
condemned, those whom it seemed good to him. Page 955. He does allow the
opinion of Saint Austin, speaking thus; They that are not to persevere, are not
separated by the Predestination and foreknowledge of God from that mass of
perdition and destruction, and therefore are not called according to his
purpose.

Page 691. I would know if Esaias and Jacob should have been left to their
common nature, what good works God should have found in Jacob, more then in
Esau. Surely they both by the hardness of their stony heart, would have alike
refused salvation offered.

In the same place; When Paul took that for granted, which is incredible to
these good Divines, that all men are equally unworthy, that alike corruption of
nature is in all men, he thence safely determined that God does by his free
purpose elect whomsoever he electeth.

In the same place that of Austin is most true; That those that are redeemed
are separated from those that perish, only by grace, whom the common Mass,
derived from the same original, had joined together to destruction.

Page 965. He does witness, that God prepared the vessels of mercy for his
glory: if this be special to the elect, it is manifest that the rest are
sitted to destruction, because being left to their nature, they are certainly
devoted to destruction.

Page 970. The Readers are to be admonished, that both these are equally
condemned by Pighius, viz. That God from the beginning when yet the state of
man was entire, decreed what afterward should come to pass; and that now he
chose out of the perished Mass whom he would. He mocketh Austin, and all that
are like him, that is, all the godly, who do think that God after he
fore-knew the universal ruin of mankind in the person of Adam, appointed
some to life, and some to destruction.

The same man in his Institutions, Lib. 3. Chap. 22. Sect. 1. When Paul
teaches that we were elected in Christ before the creation of the world,
certainly he does take away all respect of our own worth; for it is as much as
if he should say: Because our heavenly father found nothing worthy of Election
in the whole seed of Adam, he turned his eyes upon Christ, that as it were out
of his body he might choose members whom he would after take into the
fellowship of life. Therefore let this reason prevail with the faithful, that
therefore God adopted us in Christ to his heavenly inheritance, because in our
selves we were not capable of this excellency.

And Section 7. If any one ask from whence God elected, he in another place
answers, out of the world, which he excludes from his prayers, when he does
commend his Disciples to his Father.

And Chap. 23. Sect. 3. If any one should set upon us with these words; Why God
from the beginning predestined some men to death, who when they were not,
could not deserve the judgment of death: Instead of an answer, we may again
ask them; What they think God is indebted to man, if he will esteem him
according to his own nature? As we are all defiled with sin, we cannot but
be odious to God; and that not in a tyrannical cruelty, but in the most equal
respect of justice: And if all they whom God does predestinate to death, are by
a natural condition obnoxious and subject to the judgment of death; of what
injustice (I pray you) of his toward them can they complain? Let all the
sons of Adam come, let them contend and dispute with their Creator, because
by his eternal providence they were appointed to perpetual calamity before
their generation: What could they speak against this defense, when as God
shall on the contrary side call them to the knowledge of themselves? If all are
taken out of the (corrupted Mass) it is no marvel if they lie under
damnation.

Hieronymius Zanchius. Miscellan. Lib 3. In his Treatise of the Saints, at the
end of the first Chapter, has these words; General Predestination, (that is,
the predestination of all men) is the eternal, most wise, and immutable decree
of God, by which he determined with himself from eternity; first, to create
all men just and wise, according to his image and likeness, and to permit that
they being tempted by Satan, should of their own free will fall into sin,
and should fall into the pit of eternal death, as the most just stipend of
their sin: Secondly, of his grace by Christ, to free some of them out of the
pit of sin and death by certain means, and to accompany them with his
spirit whom he freed, and at length to give them eternal life; and to others
(he decreed) not to vouchsafe this grace, but rather to blind them and harden
them with Satan, and to destroy them with eternal destruction, etc.

The same man in the same place: The special predestination of the elect, is
the eternal, most wise, and immutable decree of God, whereby he determined
with himself from eternity, according to the good pleasure of his will, freely
to deliver by Christ, some certain and set men, fallen with all the rest into
the deep pit of sin and death.

The same man lib. 5. de Natura Dei, cap. 2. quest. 4. By ascending after this
order from the effects to the causes, and by descending from the causes to the
effects, Election and Reprobation may and ought to be considered by us; to wit,
that God from eternity determined by a firm decree, first to create all men,
then to suffer them to fall into sin, and for sin to be obnoxious to
eternal death; Lastly, to free (by that means which he has freed) some men
by Christ, and to give them eternal life, but to reject the rest from this
grace, and being left in their sins at length to punish them eternally for
their sins.

Bucer upon the ninth Chapter to the Romans: They that will plainly and simply
follow Gods word may easily free themselves from these things, for they stick
fast to this that God does witness of himself, viz. that he out of mankind,
destroyed by their first father, chose some men to be framed by him to a new
and blessed life; and he accounted the rest the vessels of his wrath.

Philip Melanchton, in his Theological Common places, loco de Praedestin. does
repeat these words more then once: It is certain that this is the cause of
Reprobation, to wit, sin in man.

Vuolfangus Musculus, loco de Elect. Chap. 5. It is manifest that our election
is not made for any respect of our quality: It must needs be therefore that we
seek the respect of our election in God electing. For the sense of our own
baseness and deprauation does drive us thither. David said; What is man that
thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou did predestinate him
when thou did foreknow that he would be evil and depraved?

David Paraeus in his commentary on the ninth chapter to the Romans, Page
eight hundred and sixeteene, will have Jacob and Esau to be considered as
sinners by God electing. The cause (says he) was the eternal purpose of God,
whereby he determined to make such difference of them. Esau was wicked, and
Jacob was no less wicked; for they were both conceived in sin: and yet God
loved the one and hated the other: not for any inherent or foreseen
difference, but (...). according to election, whereby he elected one but not
the other.

The same man, page 819. The pleasure or will of God calling, is his purpose
according to election in Christ: that is, the purpose of God, whereby out of
the perished mass he separated some from others, by choosing these and leaving
the rest: which purpose is called Predestination, containing under it, Election
and Abiection.

The Pastors of the Walachrian Churches, in their Epistle, do with one consent
thus define Predestination This is the opinion of them who cleave to the old
and received confession of our Churches. That God from eternity according to
the immutable good pleasure of his will, decreed to save some men, whom by his
mere bounty in Christ Jesus, he severed out of corrupted mankind, etc.

John Piscator, a most rigorous maintainer of Predestination out of the entire
and uncorrupted Mass, and of reprobation without the beholding of sin, has
very lately set forth a treatise digested into ten Aphorisms, the second
whereof is conceived in these words. This Predestination has two species or
kinds, the one whereof is called Election, the other Reprobation, by a
Metonimy of the effect. For election and reprobation are properly referred to
mankind already made and fallen, but Metonimically the decree it self of
Electing or Reprobating is so named. The learned man does at length see that it
must needs be, that in election and reprobation, man be considered as already
fallen, and in the corrupted Mass: But he has devised another higher decree,
whereby God does neither elect nor reprobate, but does only decree to elect and
reprobate. Of which decree there is no mention made in the Scripture.

Finally, the Synod of Dordt, in the seventh Canon does thus define election.
Election is the unchangeable purpose of God, by which, before the foundation of
the world, according to the free good pleasure of his will, of his mere grace
he has chosen out of all mankind to salvation in Christ, a certain and set
number of men, neither better nor more worthy then others, but lying in the
common misery with others, and fallen from original righteousness into sin
and destruction by their own fault, etc.

The same Fathers in the 15. Canon of Reprobation do thus speak. The holy
Scripture does manifest and commend unto us this eternal and free grace,
especially when it does further witness that not all men are elected, but that
some are not elected, or are passed by in the eternal election of God. To wit,
those whom God according to his free, just, unreprovable, and immutable good
pleasure decreed to leave in the common misery, into which they had cast
themselves by their own fault, and not to give to them saving faith, and the
grace of conversion, etc.

FINIS.

