A CONFVTATION OF ATHEISM By John Dove Doctor of Divinity. The Contents are
to be seen in the Page following.

Psalm. 68. God will arise, and his enemies shall be scattered: they also that
hate him shall fly from him. AT LONDON Printed by Edward Allde for Henry
Rockett, And are to be sold at the long shop under S. Mildreds Church in the
Poultry. 1605.

The Contents of this book.
WHat Atheism is: Chapter, 1. The cause of Atheism. Chap. 2. How Atheism may
be rooted out of all Christian lands. Chap. 3. That there is a God. Chap. 4.
What God is. Chap. 5. That there is but one God. Chap. 6. The books of the
Bible, are the word of God. Chap. 7. Of the will and sufferance of God. Chap.
8. The world had a beginning. Chap. 9. The soul of man, what it is, whence it
comes, how it is infected with sin, and the immortality of it. Chap. 10.
Of Noah his Arc, and the Deluge. Chap. 11. Of the destruction of Sodom. Chap.
12. Of Christ. Chap. 13. The world shall have an end. Chap. 14. There is hell
fire. C(...)
TO THE MOST HIGH and Mighty Prince, James by the grace of God, King of Great
Brittanye, France, and Ireland: Defender of the Faith.
MOST dread Sovereign, your Majesty's gracious acceptance of my late Treatise
against Recusancy, causes me to present unto your Highness this poor Mite,
which out of my penury I offer into the treasurye of the Church: being no way
comparable to the Talents which others out of their great plentye, Luc, 21, 2.
have cast into the offerings of God. Albeit the right worshipful Sr. George
More knight, has learnedly and religiously handled the same subject, yet may
I tread the same wine press again, by the example of Saint Augustine, which
confuted the Arrians whom Athanasius had confuted before him, and the learned
of our age which daily write books, notwithstanding others before them have
written books of the same argument. And as S. Augustine in his time, because
there were many haeretikes, wished that all men which were able to write, would
write against haeresie: so because now Contra menda: Chap, 6. De Trinitat: Lib.
1. Chap, 3.
(...) many Atheistes, it is to be wished that many would write (...) Atheism.

The state of religion depends upon the state of the Pastors and Ministers.
And therefore S. John prophesying of the decay of it, first discovers the
defects of them, as the cause thereof: That he of Ephesus had left his former
love: he of Pergamus had them which Apoc, 2, 4. and 14, 15. and 20.
maintained the doctrine of Balaam and the Nicholaitans: he of Thyatira
suffered Iezabell to make the people commit fornication, and eat meat
sacrificed to Idols: he of Sardis had only a name that he lived, but was dead:
he of Laodicia was neither hot nor cold, Apoc, 3, 1. 15, and 16.
but such a one as the Lord would spewe out of his mouth, that he which took
upon him a greater charge then all they, should have only horns like the
lamb Christ Jesus: but as for his doctrine, he should speak like the dragon
Satan. And S. Paul prophesying of Apoc, 13. 17
that great Apostasy and reuoliment from true religion through the world,
showed the cause to be in him which took upon him to be the universal Pastor
of the world, That he should be an aduersaerie, exalting 2, These, 2, 39.
himself above all that is called God: that sitting in the Temple of God, he
should not show himself as the minister of God, but as God. The holy Ghost
derived the corruption of religion, and calamity of the Church of Israel, from
the base condition of the Priests in the days of Jeroboam, saying: that he
made Priests of 1, King, 12, 31
the lowest of the people. And it is a curse denounced against them from God by
the Prophet Malachye, that their Priests should be Mal, 2. 9.
despised and vile before the people.

Your Highness under the Majesty of Almighty God, now sits in the seat of
David, and upon the throne of Salomen: You have the same authority over us,
which Josias, Iosaphat, Ezechias. and the other Godly Kings had over Judah.
The Lord therefore of his infinite mercy toward you his anointed, and us your
people, continue in your Princely heart this your zeal of his house, and great
care of the advancement of the state of the ministry for the advancement of
the Gospel, the increase of Godliness, the subversion of Atheism Act, 13, 22.
and all Impiety. The Lord make you such a King as David was, a man according
to his own heart, that your Highness may reign over us religiously, peaceably
and happily, to his glory, our comfort, and the salvation of your own soul.
The Lord grant to our noble Queen that she may be an ancient Mother i^
Is^^^^^ to Prince Henry a large heart as he did unto Solomon. (...) bless all
your posterity, that they way continue in his* (...) the worlds end.

Your MAJESTY'S humble and obedient Subject: JOHN DOVE,

A CONFVTATION of Atheism.
Chapter 1.
What Atheism is:

SOmetimes under the name of Atheists are comprehended Pagans, Infidels and
Idolaters, all such as are ignorant of the true God, albeit in their kind they
be very devout, religious and godly. So says the Apostle: Wherefore remember
that ye, Ephe, 2.
being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, and called uncircumcision, of them
which are called circumcision in the flesh made with hands, that ye were I
say, at that time without Christ, aliants from the common wealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of promise, and had no hope, and were without God
in the world. But what it was to be without God in the world, he expresieth in
an other place, saying: Even then when ye knew not God, ye Gal, 4. Rom, 1.
did se^^ce unto them which by nature are not Gods. That is, they worship the
Sun and Moon, and carved idols, the creature in steed of the Creator, which
is blessed for evermore, Amen. These be not the Atheists which we are to treat
of.

Other Atheists there be, which have a knowledge of the true (...) and how he
is to be worshipped, and are in name Christians: (...) a continual habit and
custom of sin, have so hardened (...) ^durated them selves, that they have no
sense or feeling of the judgment of that true God which they know and
profess, and would be thought outwardly to serve. And therefore they are bold
to commit sin against him, because they presume upon his mercy, or at the
least his conniuencye and negligence in punishing, as if they were persuaded
God did not see them, or he would not punish them. Of such says the Prophet:
The fool Psalm, 14.
has said in his heart there is no God. And of such fools he speaks
elsewhere more plainly, saying: Wickedness says to the Psalm, 36.
wicked man, even in mine heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes.
And what it is to cast away all fear of God from before his eyes, he shows
more plainly, saying: He has said in his heart: God has forgotten, he hydeth
away his face, and will Psalm, 10.
never see. And this kind of Atheist is in state of damnation as well as the
other, but is not the subject of my Treatise.

There are other sorts of men (or rather beasts) I mean such beasts as S.
Paul strove with at Ephesus in the shape of men, far 1. Cor. 15,
more abominable then the other two, of which so often I spoke: I may justly
say with Eliphas, Fear comes upon me and dread, which makes all my bones
to tremble, and a wind passes before Job, 4.
me, which causes the hayres of my head to stand up, and (that I may use the
words of the Lord to Samuel) such a wickedness as shall not be purged by
sacrifice nor offering for ever. 1. Sam. 3.
Such a slander to States and Kingdoms, so offensive to all chaste and
religious ears, that whosoever shall hear of it, his ears shall tingle.
These beasts hold there is no God, and they are of four sorts:

The first says in broad terms without blushing, Non est Deus, there is no
God: of that brood, were not only the old Philosophers Diagoras, Lucretius,
Epicurus and others, but also since the Gospel was published to the world,
many of them have been known, of whom Theodoret (an ancient Father) has
written, as also Prateolus, and other writers of later times, and especially
Lilius Grigorius, Giraldus Ferrariensis makes mention Libro de cuuatione
Graecaru^ affectionu^. Eleuch: alphabet: C, 1. De ^isto: pretarum, Dialo: 6.
of a whole Island lately inhabited by such as deny God. And I wish all Atheists
were banished out of Christian States and Kingdoms, and sent into that Island,
that other places might not be infected by them.

The second, does scoff at God and deride him, (...) his name, and make open
profession of contempt against him and all Religion. Such an Atheist was
Holophernes, which said unto Achior, Because thou have prophefied amongst us to
day, and have Judith. 6.
said that the people of Israel is able to sight, because their God will
defend them: and who is God but Nabuchodonozor? he will send his power and
destroy the face of the earth, and their God shall not deliver them. Such an
Atheist was Pharao which said: Who is the Lord that I should hear his voice,
and let the people Exodus, 5.
go? I know not the Lord neither will I let Israel go. And Senacherib who
said by the mouth of Rabshakah: Let not Ezekias 2 Reg, 18.
deceive you, for he shall not be able to deliver you out of my hand, neither
let Ezechias make you to trust in the Lord, saying: The Lord will surely
deliver us, and this Land shall not be given ever into the hand of the King of
Ashur; Ezechias does deceive you, saying: The Lord will deliver us. Who are
they among all the Gods of the nations that have delivered their Land out of my
hand, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? Such Atheists were
Lucian, which in his writings, that he might Vide Suide Hist: Sozom. l. 6, c 7.
et. 10. Tripartit, hist.
be thought to confess no God, mocked all Gods: Julian the Apostata, which
scoffed at religion: Olimpius the Arrian, which as he was washing himself in
his Bath, spoke blasphemy against the Trinitye. Doletus which called Moses,
Helias, and Christ, the three deceivers of the world. And such Atheists are
the Theodore, l. 5. Hist. C. 25.
swaggerers of our age, which are not ashamed to call them selves The damned
crew: Of the salvation of such there is no hope, whose God is their bellye,
whose glory is their shame, and whose end is Phil, 3.
damnation, as the Apostle speaks: Their damnation sleeps not, nay they are
condemned already, because they speak blasphemye against the Holy Ghost. Of
such as offend God upon weakness, there may be some hope that they will come to
repentance, because their sin is against the Father, which is strength. 1 Samuel, 17.
Concerning them which offend him upon ignorance, there is also hope of their
conversion, because they sin against God the Son, which is wisdom. But as
for these, they mock God in Prou, 8.
(...)of him, they sin upon malice, and therefore their blas^^^^^ against the
Holy Ghost, which is love and charity, 1 John, 4.
(...) no hope of their conversion, because our Savior has Math, 12.
already pronounced sentence of damnation against them, saying: Their sin
shall never be for given, neither in this life, nor in the life to come.

The third, profess the religion which is professed in the place where they
dwell, so far as laws may not take hold of them, but otherwise are of all
religions which may bring them profit, and are of no religion farther then to
serve their turn. For example whereof, I cannot instance in any man better,
then in William Rusus King of England, which professed him self to be a
Christian Hollend shed in his Cronicle.
for fear of the Pope and the Ecclesiastical censure, because else he could
not have held his Kingdom. Of him it is written, that the Jews being many in
England, one of them was converted to be a Christian, and the old Jew his
Father taking the matter greiuously, desired the King to interpose his
authority, and to command him to renounce his Christian faith again. The
King upon consideration of 80. Marks of silver (before hand paid unto him)
undertook the conversion of the young man to the Jewish religion again:
Whereupon the party was conu^nted before the King, he gave him charge to
renounce Christ, but he answered: Sir you profess Christ yourselfe, how then
can you persuade me to be a Jew? If you be a Christian in deed, you will not
persuade me to renounce Christ, but if your self professing Christ, will
command me to deny Christ, you are not of any religion, but an Atheist; and
if you be so, it is fit the Popes holiness should understand so much. The King
fearing the Popes displeasure, dismissed the man, but said in great furye: Get
thee out of my presence, else by S. Lukes face, I will scratch out thine eyes.
The old Jew his Father expostulated with the King, because the bargain was
not performed, and required restitution of his money: But the King answered,
hold ye contented Sir, here is half, I will have the other half for my
endeavor, I did the best I could. Of such Atheists we have many.

The fourth sort, are they which insinuate themselves into Noble-mens houses,
and Princes Courts, taking upon them to be the great Politicians of the world,
and account all men fools besides themselves. They also make open profession
of religion but for advantage: I mean them which have turn (...) Machiauel:
Their Divinity is policye, their zeal is (...) and their God is the devil.
These English Italiana* and (...) incarnat, do hold these damnable opinions:
That there was no creation of the world, that there shall be no day of
judgment, no resurrection, no immortallitye of the soul, no hell: they
dispute against the Bible, reckon up Genealogyes more ancient then Adam,
allege arguments, to prove that the story of Noah his Arc and the Deluge
were fables: Finally, they hold that the Scriptures were devised by men, only
for policye sake, to maintain peace in states and Kingdoms, to keep subjects
in obedience to laws, and loyalty to Magistrates, by thus terrifying them
from enormities when their consciences are possessed with an opinion of hell
fire, and alluring them to subjection by hope of eternal life, that so Princes
may enjoy outward peace and temporal prosperity. Examples of this last sort,
we have Leo the tenth of that name Bishop of Rome, who when he had heard Bembus
allege places out of the Scriptures concerning Christ, said unto him: Quid
mihi narras illam de Christo fabulam? why do thou tell me that fable of
Christ? Again, in ostentation of his riches, said: Vide quantum mihi profuit
illa de Christo fabula. See what treasure I have scraped together, by
publishing to the people that same fable concerning Christ! An example also is
Machiauel, which holds these principles and grounds of policy: Machiauell
principis. C, 1.
Princeps qui sapientia est praeditus, debet ea promissa vitare quae suis
commodis contraria fore videt. I am vero hominibus nunquam defuturae sunt
causae, quibus in violatam fidem colorem inducant. A wise Prince must not
regard his promise if he find it not for his profit, neither shall he at any
time be destitute of such shifts and euasions whereby he may justify and make
good the breach and falsifying of his oath. Qui sagatior fuerit, vt vulpinum
ingenium melius exprimeret, ei faelicius omnia ceciderant. That he must learn
to play the Fox, which will have his designs and proiects to take effect. He
proposes unto Princes the example of Pope Alexander the sixth to immitate, of
whom he says: Is nihil quam mortalium impostorem egit, nihil quam ad omne^
malitiam and fraudem (quo hominum genus falleret) mentem suam exercuit. In
asseuerando autem quis magis fuerit efficax, aut qui speciotius iurauit
iusiurandum vicissimque, qui minus praestiterit, nemo vnquam fuit. Nihilo
secius doli nunquam ei non commode ceciderunt. That is, he plotted nothing
more, then how he might be the cosoner and deceiuer of men: he set his mind
upon nothing but malice and fraud, whereby men might be by him supplanted and
overtaken, no man promised more largely, nor swore more deeply then he, and no
man performed less then he, and yet not-withstanding, his falsehood and
knavery, he never failed of his purpose. Proinde, non est quod Princeps omnes
eas superius descriptas virtutes ostentet: sunt enim aduersus tales
dissimulandae saepe numero callideque tegendae. And yet, for all that, falsehood
prevails better the^ plain dealing, yet a Prince must not make a show of a
large conscience, but he must dissemble, and carry him self cunningly before
the eyes of the world. Quocirca, ad omnem fortunae and ventorum conuersionem
versatile ingenium Princeps habeat necesse est, and ab eo quod bonum est ne
discedat: at, si necessitas vrgeat, edoctus sit et malum auertere. Wherefore a
Prince must frame him self for all times and seasons as occasions may serve:
let him embrace truth and do justice, unless he see cause to the contrary,
but if he do, let him be so wise that he do not disadvantage him self.
Princeps acram curam and diligentiam adhibeat, vt pietatom, fidem,
integritatem, humanitatem, religionem sancte colere videatur, atqui nihil magis
est quod prae se ferat quam illam virtutem: fere enim homines magis specie and
color rerum, quam rebus ipsis, permouentur, and iudicant. Nemo non videt quid
prae te feras, at paucissimi sunt, qui quid sis sensu percipiant. Vitam
princeps tueatur, curetque imperium conseruare: quibus autem idsiat rationibus,
ex modo honesti spaciem prae se ferant, nunquam non honor dignae, laudibusque
existimabuntur. Let a Prince especially take heed to him self, that he seem
godly, true, honest, courteous, and above all religious, because men for the
most part are carried away with the outward show of religion, and do judge
all things according to outward appearance. Every man can take notice of that
which you seem to be, but few men can sound the bottom of your heart, and
diue into your secret thoughts, so far as to discover what in deed you are,
to conceive what your intent and meaning is. Let a Prince look especially to
the defense of his own life and state, it makes no matter by what means he
do it, be they lawful or unlawful, so as they have an outward show and
color of honestye.

Chapter 2.
Of the causes of Atheism.

THat I may speak somewhat of the causes of Atheism, They are many: Some men
are become Atheists by building upon a false ground, by misconstruing and
wresting that place of Tully De natura De orum. lib, 1.
to their own perdition: Sunt qui negant Deos habere procurationem rerum
humanarum, quorum sententia falsa est, quia sic omnis religio inanis esset,
religione autem sublata tolleretur hominu^ sides, and magna sequeretur vitae
perturbatio and confusio. There are says Tully, some men which deny that there
is a God which takes upon him the care of humane affairs, whose opinion is
euicted to be false, for as much as if it were so, all religion were in vain,
and were it not for religion, there would be no fidelity or honesty among
men, nothing but disorder and confusion through the whole world. I cannot deny
but religion does maintain civil government, and kingdoms are best governed
where men have the greatest feeling of religion, because the fear of God
having taken a deep root in men's hearts by the often preaching of the word,
does bind subjects to their Princes far more fast then humane laws, and the
fear of the Princes displeasure. And I must needs confess that the King and
the whole state of England are to ascribe this long peace which we have had,
and yet do enjoy, as also this great increase of wealth, and loyaltye of the
subjects, more to the diligent preaching of the Ministers then to the sincere
government of the Magistrates, to Divines then to Politicians, how little
soever now Divines be regarded, and how highly soever Politicians be esteemed.
Subjects are now more obedient to Laws and loyal to Princes then in times
past they have been, because the Gospel is more preached among them then it
was in former ages. So then, it is not for fear, but for conscience sake, not
because they fear him that can kill the body, but because they fear him that
is able to destroy both body and soul in hell Math, 10.
fire. And yet the Proverb in many has been fulfilled, Filia deuorauit matrem,
that the daughter has devoured her own mother, For religion is the mother of
peace, and peace is the daughter of religion, because the preaching of
Christian religion has brought peace into the world. All godly Divines preach
the doctrine of St. Paul: Si fieri potest, quantum in vobis est, cum omnibus
Rom, 12,
pacem habetote, if it be possible and as much as lies in you, have peace with
all men. But this long peace which we have enjoyed has increased our riches,
and riches have made us to forget God, and so (like an unnatural daughter)
peace has devoured religion, which bred and maintained peace in the world. The
Prophecy is verifyed: In these last days, since the mountain of Esaias, 2.
the house of God has been prepared in the top of the mountains, and has
been exalted above the hills, and all nations have flowed unto it, and many
people have gone and said: Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will
walk in his paths: our swords have been broken into mattocks, and our
spears into sythes, nation has not lifted up a sword against nation, neither
have they learned to fight any more. The Lamb dwelling with the Wolf has
been in safety, the Kid with the Leopard, the Cow feeding with the Bear, the
Calfe with the Lion, the sucking Child has played upon the hole of the Asp,
the weaned Child has put his hand into the hole of the Cockatrice Esaias, 11,
without any hurt, and the reason is alleged by the Prophet: Because the earth
was full of the knowledge of the Lord, even as the waters that cover the sea.
This Prophecye you see is fulfilled. But these sayings are by them mistaken.
For Tully does not argue in this manner: that we must hold there is a God, and
maintain religion, that so civil government may be maintained, and men may
live orderly in a common wealth. But his meaning is clean contrary: that we
must perform all civil duties in a common wealth for religion sake, and we
must be religious for Gods sake, because there is a God which has ingraffed
religion in our hearts, whereby civil states may be the better maintained, and
which will punish all such as are not religious, that is, which have not a true
feeling of religion. And it was not the meaning of the Prophet Esaias, that after
the knowledge of true religion had planted peace among us, and peace had
brought prosperity, then we should cease to be religious, and so forget God,
but rather increase our zeal, and having received such benefits at his hands
whom we serve, continue faithful in his service.

A second cause of Atheism may be the want of due and right hearing of the
word preached, because faith comes by hearing, and therefore where there is
a want of hearing faith fails, Rom, 10.
and, by a consequent, Pagisme and infidelity increases. For many of them do
not hear, but absent themselves, or if they be present, they stand not for
figures but for ciphers, they do not by the word preached as the virgin Mary
did by the sayings of Luc, 2.
our Savior Christ, which laid the^ up in her heart: or as Abraham Gen, 18.
did by the Angels, which received them into his house, or as the Sunamite
woman did by Elizeus, or the widow by Elias, 2 Reg, 4. 1 Reg, 17.
which entertained them with willingness. The word to them is not as the rain
of heaven falling upon the earth, or the deawe of Deuteronomy, 11. Psalm, 133. Math, 7,
and 15 Matb, 13. Math, 10.
Hermon upon mount Sion, but as the Childrens bread cast before whelps, or
pearls cast before swine, seed sown by the high way side, and the peace of
the Apostles bestowed upon unworthy houses, and therefore returns back
again. They stop their cares with the Adder, or sleep with Eutichus, or make
love as the Act, 20. Ezech, 23.
Egiptians did to Aholah and Aholibah, clothed with blewe silk and diverse
suites, pleasant young men, that they may set Aholah and Aholibah on fire,
bruise the breasts of their virginitye, and power out their adultery upon
them, as the Prophet speaks. Some hear the Preacher with great attention,
but as the Pharisees Math, 22.
did our Savior to intrappe him in his speech, to take exception against his
words, as the Athenians did St. Paul to scoff at Act, 17.
his simplicity, they read the Bible but as Porphurye did, to find (as they
profanely call them) absurdities and contradictions in the word of God, not
as the Be which gathers honye, but as the Spider which sucketh poison out of
wholesome flowers.

A third cause of Atheism, proceeds from the long suffering of God, which
does not presently punish Atheists. For he does not only with patience suffer
them to blaspheme his holy name, but also in his wisdom which no man can
sound, and in his judgments whom no man can search, blesses them with
worldly blessings, as if he did reward their ungodliness. It is not my complaint
alone, but it is the complaint of the Prophet David which Psalm, 10.
cries out in this manner: Why stand thou so far off o Lord and hydest
thee in due time, even in affliction? the wicked has made boast of his own
hearts desire, and the covetous blesses himself, he contemns the Lord, he
is so proud that he seeks not for God, he thinks always there is no God,
his ways always prosper, he says in his heart: I shall never be moved, nor
be in danger. Nay it may very well be said, as it was of Job: that the Lord
has made an hedge about him and his house, and about Job, 1,
all that he has on every side, he has blessed the work of his hands, and
his substance is increased in the Land. The Lord suffered his own Arc to be
taken by the Philistines his enemies, 1, Sam, 4
and his own people the Irae^lites which fought his battle, to be overthrown
in the battle. And this commendation is given of the godly King Josias, that
he read the law of the Lord before the people, he made a covenant with the
Lord that the people should 2, Reg. 23
walk after the Lord, and keep his commandments, his testimonies and
statutes, with all their hearts, all their souls, and all the people stood to
the covenant, he purged the Temple, and put down the Idols, he slew the
idolatrous Priests, he kept such a passover in honor of God, as never the
like was holden, from the days of the Judges yt judged Israel, nor in all the
days of the Kings of Israel and the Kings of Judah, he took away the^ which
had familier spirits and the soothsayers, and the Images, and the Idols, and
all the abominations that were espied in the Land of Judah and Jerusalem, that
like unto him there was no King before him that turned to the Lord with all his
heart, all his soul, and all his might, according to all the law of Moses,
neither after him arose there any like him. And yet, see how the Lord rewarded
him. The very next thing which follows in the same Text, is this: Pharao
slew him at Megiddo. Thus you see how the Lord rewarded faithful Josias which
served him, and trusted in him, with death in this world, and overthrow in
sighting of his own battle, and gave the victory to Pharao an heathen King,
which put no trust nor considence in him. Likewise Nabucodonozor burned Gods 2,
Reg, 25
house, robbed his Temple in contempt of him and his service, and yet God
prospered him as if he had rewarded him for so doing, Valerius Maximus cites
out of Tully the example of Dionysius the Tirant, which did brag and boast of
his sacrilege, that when he sailed to the Temple of Proserpina which was at
Locris to Lib. 1. Cap. de neglect religione.
rob the same, the wind and weather did so much favor him, as if it had
been a pleasing thing to that Goddess to do her violence, as if she had the
rather prospered his navigations, and given success unto his business because he
did rob and spoil her Temple. When the Turks and Hungarians join in
battle, the Hungarians army cries out aloud Jesus, Jesus, The Turks name
their prophet Mahomet, but Mahomet preuayleth against Jesus. The greatest part
of the world are insidels, and they increase daily, but the number of
Christians do decrease. And this is agreeable to that which Prateolus
observes, which all eageth De haeres. Lib. 1.
that among many causes of Atheism this is not the least, namely, Euentus
mirabiles quorum causas ignorant, and putant long aliter fore, si Deus
existeret omnia cernens and curans, vt sunt faelicitas impiorum, infaelicitas
piorum, and eius Dei longanimitas qui atrocissimos peccatores statim non punit.
Strange events which continually fall out, contrary to the sense and reason of
man, the causes whereof man understands not, but thinks that it would be
otherwise, if there were a God which did see and regard humane affairs, as
for example, the happiness of the ungodly, the unhappy estate of the godly, and
the long suffering of God him self which suffers grievous offenders so long
to escape unpunished: whereas contrariwise, if God would be pleased to show
present examples of his justice upon sinners, as he did when he turned Lots
wife into a pillar of Salt for looking back, destroyed Gen, 19 1, Reg, 13, 1,
Sam, 4,
Sodom with fire and brimstone for pride, caused Jeroboam his hand to wither
for burning Incence, Eli to break his neck for suffering his Children to
abuse the Priests office: the earth to swallowe up Core, Dathan and Abiram for
their rebellion: the Bears Numb, 16,
to devour the Children for mocking Elisaeus, the dogs to eat 2 Reg, 2 2
Reg, 9. Leuit, 10 1, Sam, 15 Dan, 5 Luc, 1, Act. 8. Act. 5, 2. Reg: 5 Deuteronomy, 32
Iosabell for oppressing Naboth, the fire to burn up Nadah and Abihu for using
profane fire upon the Altar, which took away Saul his Kingdom for disobeying
Samuel, stroke Zachary with dumnes for unbelief, Elymas with blindenes for
hindering the course of the Gospel, Balthazar with death for profaning the
holy vessels, Ananias and Saphira for telling a lie, Gehezi with Leprosy for
taking bribes, and shut Moses out of the Land of Canaan for trespassing at the
waters of Meriba: I say, if God would vouchsafe to dwell with us as he did with
them, and show such examples among us as he did among them, punish whole lands
as he did Egypt for not letting his people go, no dout but Exodus, 8
Atheism would cease, and ungodly men would confess that there is a God. It
is a sign that our sins are great, and God does not love us as he loved them.

And yet the Atheists have but mistaken all this while, for these be arguments
rather to prove unto them that there is a God. For this is the Lords long
suffering to bring them to repentance as St. Peter teaches saying: The Lord is
not slack as some men 2 Pet, 3.
account slacknes, but is pacient toward us, and would have no man to perish,
but would have all men to come to repentance. And as St. Paul says: Thou o
man, despisest thou the riches of Rom, 2.
his bountifulnes, and patience, and long suffering, not knowing that the
bountifulnes of God leads thee to repentance? but thou after thine hardness,
and heart that cannot repent, heapest up as a treasure unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath and of the declaration of the just judgment of God.
But therefore the Prophet David in the Psalm above rehearsed, where he Psalm,
10.
says: The wicked has made boast of his hearts desire, his ways always
prosper: he inserteth these words in the middle of the sentence: Thy
judgments o Lord are far above his sight. And St. Augustine does fully
satisfy this point, where he says: Diuina miserecordia ad impios and ingratos
peruenit. Primo quia Deus De Ciui: Dei, Lib, 1. Chap, 8.
facit oriri Solemn super bonos pariter and malos, and pluit super iustos and
iniustos. Secundo vt quidam ista cogitantes ab impietate se corrigant. Tertio,
vt quidam diuitias longanimitatis eius contemnentes sibi thesaurrizentiram.
Quarto, patientia Dei ad poenitentiam inuitat malos, sicut flagellum Dei ad
patientia^ erudit bonos. Quinto, quia placuit diuinae prouidentiae praeparare
imposteru^ bona justice quibus mali non fruentur, et mala impij quibus boni non
cruciabuntur. Again, Si nunc omne peccatum plecteretur poenis temporalibus,
nihil vltimo iudicio reseruari putaretur, and, si nullum peccatum nunc
puniretur, nulla Dei prouidentia esse crederetur. Gods mercy is extended to the
godless and unthankful men for these causes following: First, because he
makes his Sun to shine as well upon the unjust as the just, and his rain to
fall upon the godless as well as the godly. Secondly, that some of them
considering these things, might repent them of their sins. Thirdly, that
othersome despising the riches of his longanimitye might heap up wrath unto
themselves. Fourthly, the patience of God does invite and allure the wicked to
repentance, even as the scourge of God does instruct the godly unto patience.
Fifthly, because thath seemed good to the providence of God to prepare in an
other world joys for the righteous, whereof the unrighteous shall not be
partakers, and punishments for the wicked which the godly shall not feel.
And, last of all, if all offenses were now punished with temporal punishments,
it would be thought that nothing were reserved for the day of judgment, as
contrariwise, if nothing were punished temporallye in this world, men would
make a dout of Gods providence.

A fourth cause of Atheism is the malice of Satan, as the Apostle shows us:
If (says he) our Gospel be yet hidden, it is 2 COL 4.
hidden to them which are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds, that is, of the infidels that the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should not shine in them. Behold Satan his malice and cunning, from
time to time. In the first two hundred years after the Passion of our Savior
Christ, he busied himself about the first Article of the Creed to overthrow
that, and therefore stirred up the Marcionists, the Gnosties, the Maniches to
teach that there was not one God the Father almightye maker of heaven and
earth, but diverse Gods. But finding not his success therein answerable to his
malice, ceased there and went to an other Article, and so stirred up Praxeas,
Noetus, Paulus Saniosatanus to overthrow the diuinitye of our Savior Christ
his Son, afterwad haeretickes to disprove his conception by the holy Ghost,
his birth of the Virgin Mary, and the other Articles of faith which are to be
believed concerning him. Being not able to prevail therein, he descended to the
Article of the holy Ghost, and so stirred up Macedonius to deny the Godhead of
the holy Ghost. Being not able to prevail therein he went to the Articles
concerning the Church, and so in sundry ages has gone from one Article to an
other, until he has gone over all the Articles of the Creed. Now, being
disproued in them all, he does not so rest, but returns again to the first
at which he began, not to prove a multiplicitie of Gods as he did before
endeavor, but to prove a nullitie of any God, by disprouing the Godhead either
of the Father, or of the Son, or of the holy Ghost, of all three; But he
goes to work with greater violence, to chop off all faith, all religion at
one blow, by proving that there is never a God, and to this purpose has he
armed his Politicians with arguments against the Bible. But to them may be
applied the words of Policarpus to Marcian the haereticke, who being asked of
him: Agnoscis me o Policarpe? Do thou acknowledge me o Policarpus? answered
him: Agnosco te esse primogenitum Satanae, I know thee very well, thou art the
son and heir of the Devil.

The last cause of Atheism is the lenitye and over great mildnes of Princes
and Governors, which do suffer Atheists to escape unpunished. I may justly
say it is their fault that there are Atheists that will suffer Atheists, For so
says the holy Ghost concerning Azariah the King of Judah: He did uprightly in
the 2, Reg, 15
sight of the Lord, according to all that his Father Amaziah did: but the high
places were not taken away, for the people yet offered, and burned Incense in
the high places. And the Lord smote the King, and he was a leper unto the day
of his death. The King himself you see is commanded to be a godly man, not
he, but his subjects committed idolatrye, yet God punishes him for the
idolatrye of his subjects, But that could not stand with the justice of God to
punish the King for his subjects offenses unless it were the Kings fault that
the subjects offended. Where the Spanish Inquisition is, it is a very rare
thing to hear of an Atheist, which I speak not to that end as if I did wish
that Inquisition to be brought into any Christian Kingdom, but only to show
that it is better to live where there is too much severity rather then too
much loosenes, and where nothing is lawful, rather then where all things are
permitted as if they were lawful. The Lord of his mercy stir up the hearts
of all his anointed Princes, and inflame their Zeal, that they may not only
hate Atheism, as I hope they do, with a perfect hatred, but also banish such
impietye, that hereafter not only the opinions but also the very name of
Atheist may be as it were buried in hell, and no more heard of in their
Kingdoms.

Chapter 3.
How Atheism may be rooted out of all Christian lands.

AS prosperity causes many men to forget God, and others to deny God: so
adversity, sickness, imprisonment and such like chastisements of God for sin,
will make wicked men not only to acknowledge and confess God, but also to
stoop down before him, and to fly for succor unto him. When Julian the
apostata was deadly wounded by a dart from heaven, he could not be silent, but
that plague extorted out of his mouth a confession of the power of Jesus Christ
whom before he had denied, and he cried out: Vicisti Galilaee, Jesus of Galile
the conquest is thine. Though Pharao in his prosperity had said: who is the
Lord? I Exodus, 5.
know him not, I will not let the people go: yet when his land was plagued
with Frogs, he called for Moses and Aaron and said: Pray ye for me unto the
Lord, that he may take away the Frogs from me and from my people, and I will
let the people Exodus, 8.
go, that they may do sacrifice to the Lord, But as soon as God gave him a
little rest, that the plague ceased, he was hardened again. When the hand of
the Lord was heavy upon the men of Ashdod, and he destroyed them and smote
them with Emeroides 1 Samuel, 5.
they removed the Arc out of the house of Dagon, and said: Let us send the
Ark of God unto his own place, that he slay us not, and our people. When
Nabuchodonozer was deprived of his Dan, 4.
Kingdom, and turned into an Ass to graze in the field for the space of seven
years: then he began to be humble, to understand himself better, to lift up
his eyes to heaven, to give thanks to the most high, to praise and honor him
that lives for ever, to confess that his power is an everlasting power, that
his Kingdom indureth from generation to generation, that all the inhabita^nts
of the earth are reputed as nothing, that according to his will he works in
the army of heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, that none can stay
his hand, nor say unto him, what do thou? Then he could make both an humble
and a large consession, and say: I Nabuchodonozer praise, and extol, and
magnify the King of heaven, whose works are all truth, and his ways
judgment, and those that walk in pride he is able to abase. But for as much
as now such miracles do cease, and it belongs to Gods anointed Kings to be
ielous of his glory, if they will abanden Atheism out of their Kingdoms: first
of all they must withdraw their countenace from all ungodly livers. For so
long as the Prince does look cheerfully upon them, the eyes of the people
will be defixed upon them also, they will admire them, and think their vices to
be virtues. You know what Hamon said: Esther, 6.
Thus shall he be honored whom the King does honor: and again the argument
must follow as well on the contrary side: Thus, and thus, shall he be
dishonored whom the King does dishonor, You are not ignorant of the saying
of Solomon: Indignatio Pro, 19, and 20
Regis est nuncius mortis, The displeasure of the King is but a forerunner of
death. If the King give countenance to Atheists, the people will respect them
by his example, if he frown upon them, the people will trample over them. The
King is like the mayor preposition in a Sillogisme, the people are like the
conclusion. But it is a most certain rule in Logic: Conclusio sequitur
deteriorem partem. If the mayor be negative or particular, the conclusion will
be so, if any thing be worser then other in the King the people will be sure
to follow that.

Secondly, they must be assisting unto their Ministers. For God in the
Primitive Church gave them the gift of working miracles to credit their office
and calling whereby they did chastise Gods enemies. So St. Paul stroke Elymas
the sorcerer with blindenes Act. 13.
for perverting and seducing the Deputye from the faith. And St. Peter stroke
Ananias and Saephira with present death for telling a Act, 5.
lie to the holy Ghost. And because miracles after a short time were to cease,
our Savior Christ left the sword of excommunication in his Church to be in
place of miracles, and to continue unto the end of the world. And since the
Church has no other sword now, but the ce^sure of excommunication, which is so
greatly despised: if it would please God to put it the hearts of Princes to
strengthen excommunication with their Princely authority, to add the sword
of the Kingdom to the keys of the Church, not to suffer any person that is
noted of impietye to dwell in the land, none that is tanquam Publicanus and
Ethnicus, as an heathen or infidel to dwell among Christians, but to deliver
them over to the hangman whom the Church has delivered over to Suthan, unless
they he heartily openitent, and speedily reformed: no dout but then God would
be better known in Judah, and his name in Jerusalem would be greater. I say, if
any man be an Atheist, let him not be honored among the people, but let him
have Micheas 1 Reg. 21.
his entertainment, which was to be fed with the bread of affliction, and water
of affliction, or let him be banished out of the land, not by Ostracisme, as
Arist^des was for his virtues, but as Ovid was for his vices, and that I may
use the phrase of the holy Ghost, let his house be made a Takes. As Tully
wished, that it Dan, 3.
were written in every man's forhead what he thought of the commonwealth of
Rome, that so true-hearted subjects might be known from Traitors: so, I wish
it were written in all men's forheads, what they think of God and of Christian
religion. We can judge no farther of them then we hear by their blasphemy,
and profane words which they utter, and see by their loose lives and
conuersations. But so far we may judge as we hear and see, and we find
there are so many, that we have good cause to cry out with the Prophet David,
and to say: Help Lord help, there Psalm. 12.
is not a godly man left, for the faithful are failed from among the children
of men, they speak deceitfully every one with his neighbor, flattering with
their lips, and speak with a double heart, the Lord cut off all flattering
lips, and the tongue that speaks proud things. Thus much I am fare: there is
no policye to religion, no wisdom to well doing, and most firm is the estate
of that man, be he high or of low degree, which procures God to be his friend.

Chapter 4.
That there is a God.

THey which call themselves the damned Crew, yet do think there is no
damnation, they swear continually by the name of God, and yet they think there
is no God. See how they are overtaken unawares. As St. Paul might very well
dispute with Act, 17.
the Athenians in the defense of that God whom he preached unto them; and say:
There is a God besides all those Gods which you superstitiouslye do worship;
and is yet unknown unto you, witness your selves and your own Altar, Do not
think it absurd that I preach unto you such a God for if there be not, why do
you then erect an Altar unto him and write this superscriptio^ upon it? IGNOTO
DEO, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. So I dispute against them: if they be, as they
confess their selves, a damned crew, how shall they think to escape
damnation? If they swearo by the name of God, why do they deny God? for in
swearing by him unawares they do confess him. They wear by the wounds and
blood of Christ and yet deny the merits of the death of Christ. The man of God
calls such men fools, and such Psalm, 14.
fools may be rebuked even out of their own Book, entitled THE SHIP OF
FOOLS.

Preb scelus horrendum, blasphema tricuspide telo
Gent humana petit genitum Patris Altitonautis,
Atque illi exprobat quod nostros induit artus.
Languoresque tulit nostros, miseratus abalto
Casum insaelicen quo primus corruit Adam. What heinous sin, blasphemous
mangainst Gods beloved Son
Do thou commit? up brayding him who did for us become?
Our self-same: flesh: who bore our sin, and pitved from his Throne
That most vhappy state of ours from whence Adam was thrown.


To them I say no more then out of their own Book.

Desine sacrilegis iterum crucifigere labris
Virgineum partum, poenamque horresce propinquane. With such uncircumcised
lips forbear (o wretch) again
To Crucifye the Virgins soune, and fear eternal pain.


They were thought worthy to be put into the Ship of Fools which are swearers,
but much more do they show them selves to be fools which swear by God, and
yet say there is no God But I will prove to the damned Atheist by these
reasons, that there is a God.

First they read every day in the book of nature that there is a God. I mean
by the book of nature, the great frame of heaven and earth. For what is this
whole visible world, but Epistola a Deo scripta ad humanum genus? A letter or
Epistle written from God unto mankind? For, in it we may read of the invisible
God in his works, and his name is engraven there in hierographicall letters.
Lactantius proves it out of Tully (an heathen Philosopher) by the same
argument, his words are these: Nemo est tamrudis, tam De falsae religione. L.
1. C. 2
seris moribus, quin oculos suos in coelum tollens, tametsi nesciat cuius Dei
prouidentia regatur hoc omne quod cernitur, aliquam tamen esse intelligat ex
ipsa rerum magnitudine, moles, dispositione, constantia, vtilitate,
pulchritudine, temperatione, nec possefieri, quis id quod mirabiliratione
constat, consilio maiori aliquo sit instructu^. No man is such a rusticke, so
brutish and void of common sense and reason, but as often as he looks up to
heaven, if he deny this, his own eyes shall witness against him, for although
this be not sufficient to bring him to the perfect understanding of that God
by whose providence he sees the world is governed, yet what his eye has
seen, his tongue may tell. The very greatness of the frame of heaven, the
constant motion of the stars, the wonderful temperature of the elements,
does show there is a God which guides these things, and by a consequent
there is a God which made these things. Mercurius Trismegistus does Ad filium
suu^ Tatium quod manifestus Deus manifestissimus est.
prove it. Singula haec astra non similem and aqualem cursum faciunt in coelo.
Quis est qui euique modum and magnitudinem cursus terminauit? vrsa haec quae
circase voluitur, and vniuersum mundum secum circumferens; quis est qui ei
fabrifecit instrumentum? quis est qui mariterminum imposuit? quis est qui
terram stabiliuit? est enim aliquis o Tati, qui herum omnium factor est and
Dominus. Impossible enim est, vellocum, vel numerum, vel mensuram terminari
absque factore. When we see the motion of the planets and fixed stars
contrary one to an other, the celestial spheres in continual volubilitye, the
multiplicitye of their motions, their diurnall or daily course from the East
to the West, their retrograde and vyolent motion from the West to the East,
their trepidat motion from the South to the North. When we see the sea far
higher then the earth, and a fluide or liquid body, yet confined within the
banks that it cannot drown the earth, the earth solid and firm under our
feet that we cannot sink, we must confess o son Tatius that there is one
which is Lord and maker of these things, for it is impossible that every thing
should continue in due place, number and meeasure, and so just a preportion
should be observed without a maker, and who could make these things but God?
therefore there is a God. To this book of nature agrees the book of the
Bible, who says: The heavens Psalm, 19.
declare the power of God, the firmament shows the work of his hands, one
day teaches another, and one night gives knowledge to another. Again, the
wrath of God is revealed from heaven Rom, 1.
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which detain the truth of
God in vnrrighteousnes, for as much as that which may be known of God is
manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them, for the invisible things
of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are seen by the creation of
the world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be
without excuse. David says: he covers him self with light as with a
garment, and spreads the heavens like a curtayne, he Psalm, 104.
lays the beams of his chamber in the waters, makes the clouds his
chariots, and walks upon the wings of the wind. In which words, I do not
press them with the authority of the Scriptures, because the Scriptures are
not of sufficient credit with them, but with the reasons which are used in the
Scriptures, which if they cannot answer, they must yield unto, and confess
that there is a God. And therefore I conclude against them in this manner: We
see daily effects before our eyes in all the elements, continual motions in
the heavens, but there can be no effect without a cause, there can be no
motion without a mouer, no action without an agent, no work without a
workman: these be relatiues, and therefore one could not be without the other.
Mercurius Trismegistus could say: Statuam sieve imaginem fieri sine statuario
aut pictore nemo dicit. Hoc vero opificium fine opifice Ad filiu^ Tatiu^
factum est? O multam cacitatem, o multam impietatem, o multam ignorantiam,
nunquam o sili Tati priuaueris opifice opificia. A picture cannot be made
without a Painter; or a graven image without a Caruer, And can such a piece of
work be made without a work van? It is blindenes, it is impietye, it is
gross to entertain such a conceit. So then we take these for undoubted
principles in natural Phiosophye that they may not be denied, to wit: Every
effect has his cause, every action his agent, every motion his mouer. But, as
there be many secondary causes, agents and mouers, so there must needs be one
principal and above the rest. There is ordo causarum, qui in rerum natura non
procedit in infinitum, an order of causes sub-ordinate one to an other, and
therefore there is no infinite ascension up in the subordination of causes, but
at the length by asce^ding we must come to the highest, and we must in ea
consistere, stay when we come there, because we can go no higher, and that is
God. What natural body soever is moved, I say it is moved by some other which
is higher then it self. For example: The sphere of the Moon which is the
lowest of the heavens, is moved by the sphere of Merc. which is higher the^
it, Mer. is moved by Venus which is higher then it, Venus by the Sun, the Sun
by Mars, Mars by Jupiter, Jupiter by Saturn, Saturn by the sphere of the
fixed staries, and so we ascend until we can go no higher, that is unto the
heaven which is called Primum mobile, yt first and highest body wc is subject
to motion and volubility. That also is moved as well as the rest, not of it
self, because no natural body can move it self, therefore it has motion
from some other, not from any other body, because there can be no other body
above the highest, therefore it must of necessitye be moved by that which is a
Spirit and not a body, not natural but metaphisicall, Phisic: l, 2. c, 1
and that can be nothing else but God. In like manner, the Sun and a man do
beget a man, the Sun and putrefaction do engender Flies, and these things
being subject to outward senses are therefore natural bodies, and because they
are natural bodies they have four causes, two inward which are matter and
form, and two outward efficient and final, and there is nature which has his
secret motion, tell me therefore what is that? You will say peradventure that
is nature which Aristotle defines to be principium motus the beginning of
motion: you say rightly, but that is inward, therefore you must besides this
assign an outward cause of motion, and what is that? If you say the air, that
is but a middle cause, and therefore you must ascend higher, for, if there be
causa media, there is also prima, if there be a midde or subordinate cause,
there is also a principal and first cause. And what is that, but only God,
that is causa causarum the cause of all other causes, and from whence all other
things have their being? Again, all agents do not work alike, for one thing
works of necessitye, and that is nature, an other thing works (in these
outward and indifferent things) partly of will, and partly of necessitye, and
that is man, there you see medium participationis, a mean which participateth
with the extremity, but there can be no mean without two extremes, and there
can be no one extreme without the other, and therefore of necessitye there
must be a third agent which works freely as nature works of necessitye, and
man partly of will and partly of necessitye. And that can be nothing else, but
Deus liberrimum agens, even God which works freelye that no power is able to
withstand his work. Therefore I conclude this point with Job: Ask the beasts
and they will teach thee, the fowls of the heaven, and they will show Job, 12.
thee: speak to the earth, and it will tell thee: the fishes of the sea, and
they shall declare unto thee: who is ignorant of all these, but the hand of the
Lord has made all these?

Secondly, to leave the work-manship of the whole world, and to come to man
alone which is but one little part of the same. If man go no farther then him
self, he shall see God most lively in him self three manner of ways: First
in his conscience and understanding, Secondly in his natural inclination he
has to religion, Thirdly in the excellencye of the work-manship both of his
body and his soul. Concerning the first: I say there is in every man at some
time or other an inward feeling of his conscience, which will he nill he, makes
him to confess there is a God. For, suppose a man for his wickedness to be a
monster of men, a very slander and reproach to mankind, as Nero was that slew
his Mother, his Master and him self: when he has committed any heinous crime,
he does in his conscience see that God does behold it, that God does pursue
him, that God will work revenge although there be no witness to accuse him, no
humane power above him to execute justice upon him. I will not dwell upon many
examples, neither will I instance in Adam, which as soon as ever he had eaten
the Apple hid him self from the presence of God Gen, 3.
in the thicket: in Herod which when he had beheaded John the Baptist
wrongfully, did think yt he was haunted by John the Baptist Math, 14.
his ghost, saying of Christ: surely this is John risen from the dead, nor in
Cain which but intending to murder his brother, Gen, 4.
watched a time when he was in the field out of the sight of his parents. I
will not allege the authority of the Prophet which says: Impius fugit,
nemine persequente. The wicked man flies Pro, 28.
when no man does pursue him: And of the Apostle which says, Rom, 2.
The Gentiles which have not the law written (meaning the Bible) yet have by
nature the effect of the law of God written in their hearts, their conscience
bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing or excusing one an other: because
they think the Bible to be a partial judge, and no way competent between
them and us, and therefore I will allege one or two examples out of
indifferent Authors tending to the same purpose. Tully pleading for a Oratione
pro. S. Roscio Amorine.
man which was accused as a Parecide, or one which had murdered his own
father, alleges this as an especial proof of his innocence, that in the
whole course of his behavior after his father was slain, nothing could be
observed in him which did savor of a troubled conscience. And for the better
clearing of Sextus Roscius whose cause was then in hand, he alleges a former
example of a father and his son, which in their travail took up their
lodging, and after supper lay together in one bed: the morrow after, the master
of the house coming by chance into the chamber, found the father strangled in
his bed and the son sleping by his side: when the matter was examined by the
Judges, the son was acquitted by the equitye of the law as a man innocent,
because it was then held and by them so adjudged to be a matter impossible,
that he should in so short a time have slept if so be that he had committed
murder. A man says Tully which Pro, 15
has slain his father, shall feel a thousand vexations and furyes of hell
tormenting his conscience, according to that saying of the Esaias, 57.
wise man: A good conscience is a continual feast, but non est pax impijs, no
inward peace, no quietness of conscience with such men as are notoriouslye
wicked. A man I say, that has committed any crying sin, shall betraye him
self by the working of his own conscience, it will not suffer him to take his
bodily rest, it will alter his very face and countenance, as the Poet says:

Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere vult^? Ouidij metamorpho:

Oh how hard a thing is it for a man to keep his countenance, and not to blush
which has committed an offense? The Lord said to Cain after he had committed
murder: Why is thy countenance cast down? such a man fears the wagging of
every leaf, Gen, 4.
and the flying of every bird. An obnox ous man watching, is like to a frenzy
man sleeping, for the one rests not sleeping, and the other rests not
waking, he cannot sit still he cannot lie still, he cannot stand still, nor
abide long in any place. Caligula the tyrant was afeard of every blast. Nero
when he had massacred Suco^^^^ Ca^gul: Cap, 15
the christians, put St. Paul to the sword, St. Peter to the gibbet, was so
terryfied by apparitions, as he thought, of St, Paul and St. Peter which
appeared at his bedside in a dream: and after he had put his mother Agrippina
to death, he was so terrified in his conscience, that he knew not where to
bestow him self, at the end for very grief of mind, he ran into a priuye,
and there stabbed himself. ^is in Nerone


That I may come to religion. Tully says: Sunt qui negant Deos procurationem
habere rerum humanarum, quorum sententia De natura De^^^, Lib, 1.
falsa est, quoniam sic omnis religio inanis esset. Religion shows there is a
God, for if there were no God, then could there be no religion. But every man's
soul naturally has sometimes a feeling of religion, although he despise God
and religion never so much. This appears by the very heathens them selves,
which, be they never so rude and barbarous, and deprived of the knowledge of
God, yet do make unto themselves idols even of their own accord, as Mr.
Calvin very well observes: Dei conceptionis apud Institut: Lib, 1
Ethnicos, says he, idolotria satis est argumenti, quum lapidem potius quam
nullum deum colant, ye mansown conceit does naturally lead him to know there
is a God, the very idolatry of the heathens is a sufficient proof, which
chose rather to worship a stone, then no God at all. And as Statius says:
Primus in orb Deos fecit timor, as soon as men be in danger and extremity,
be they never so ungodly, yet they erect Altars, carue Images, fly to the^ for
succor, showing that in their own natural judgment which they have by the
light and instinct of nature, there is one higher then them selves, one whose
power is above the power of man to whom they ought to fly unto for help and
delivery out of trouble, and who is that but God? Nay, witness in this point the
Atheistes them selves that there is a God, for in their extremity of grief
they cry out o God. It is an old and true Proverb: Qui nescit orare transeat
mare, if a man know not how to serve God, let him sail upon the sea, and it
will make him to serve God. When the Lord sent a great wind that the Ship was
like to be Iouae, 1.
rent, the Mariners were afeard, and every one cried unto his God, they said
unto Jonas: Thou sleeper arise, and call upon thy God, if so be that God will
think upon us that we perish not, and (as the Text says) Then the men feared
the Lord exceedingly, and offered sacrifices unto him, and made vows. And for
this cause namely, that men by the instinct of nature do incline to religion,
and a man is as much distinguished from a beast by his feeling of religion as
by his reasonable soul; After the flood, Mercurius Trismegistus and Menna
prescribed laws and rules of religion to the Aegiptians, Melissus to the
Cratians, Ianus, to the Latins, Numa Pompilius to the Romans, Orpheus and
Cadmus to the Grecians, as well as Moses and Aaron to the Hebrews, the
difference only this, that the Hebrews were in the right way, all the rest in
the wrong. But yet all nations besides had their Priests, their Altars, their
Gods, their rules and principles of the religion which they professed, which is
an argument, that by nature they knew there was a GOD.

And that I may descend unto the work-manship of man to show that there is a
God, It is truly said, that hominis fabricatio est innumeris Dei testimonijs
ornata, the very work-manship of man him self does abundantly witness that
there is a God. Let us therefore first of all look into the soul of man, and
afterward into the state of his body. There is in it not only an infinite
capacitye, in so much that the more it knows, the more it is able to learn,
It is able to conceive not only the whole world, but also two worlds, yea
infinite worlds, It is of infinite desire Pro, 27. Dan, 9.
which is never satisfied. I will not speak of Daniel which was called: vir
multorum disideriorum a man of many desires, nor of Moses which in this
transitorye life desired to see the very face of Exodus, 33.
God, but of Alexander the great, which when he thought he had subdued the
whole world, yet was not therewith contented, but affected more worlds: and
hearing a Philosopher say there were infinite worlds, wept for grief to
think how great a labor it should be for him to subdue them all, as if he had
hoped to conquer all. Man's appetite is never satisfied: give him a City, he
desires a Kingdom: give him a kingdom, he affects an Empire: give him an
Empire, he desires a world. If he could be made Lord of the whole world, and
knew that besides that there were no more, yet would he not rest there, but
desire somewhat which is greater then the world, And what can that be but only
God? So then, forasmuch as man is not satisfied with knowledge and
contemplation, but labors to know more (that still Aristotle's proposition
shall be veryfied in him: Omnes homines naturaliter Metaphy: Lib, 1. Cap, 1.
scire desiderant, all men naturallye are desirous of knowledge) neither yet
with possession, but desires to have more: what can that be but Dei maiestas
in mente and voluntate tanquam in speculis reflexa et vnita, even the Majesty
of God in man's mind and in his will as it were in two glasses seen, and
reflected back again? Again, forasmuch as the proper object of the mind is
truth as Tully writes, but the mind of man is infinite, Officioru^, si, 1.
as I have declared, the object must be correspondent unto the mind, therefore
truth must be infinite, and there must be no end of the knowledge and
apprehension of truth. And forasmuch as that truth which is in creatures
depends upon vncertaintyes, therefore there is some other truth which is
immutable and most certain, and that is God. Also, the substance of man's soul
has not his original or beginning from any material thing, because it is not
of seed, as in due course I will prove unto you, neither yet is it mortal, as
I will show when I come to speak of the soul, Therefore it is not of any
natural cause, but is the effect of such a cause as is supernatural, and
metaphisicall, and that is God.

But to leave the soul of man and come to his body. Mercurius Trismegistus
writes of it in this sort: Si vis opisicem etiam per mortalia intueri, cogita
o fili, hominis in vtero fabricam, and opificis (...) Tatiu^
exact artificium expende, and disce quisuam artifex pulchram hanc and diuinam
hominis imaginem cordat, quisnam sit qui oculos circumscribat, nares and aures
perforauerit, os aperuerit, nertias extenderit and colligauerit, venas in
canales efformauerit, ossa indurauerit, carni cutam circum diderit, digitos and
articulos distiuxerit, pedibus basim dilatauerit, splenem extenderit, poros
cauauerit, heper latum fecerit, pulmonem perforauerit, ventrem capac^^ fecerit,
honorabilia palam figurauerit, turpia absconderit? vide quot arts in vna
materia quis haec omnia fecit? qua matter? quis pates? nisi solus immanifestus
Deus? If thou (o man) wilt see the invisible workman, do but think upon man
how he is framed in the womb: who made his eyes round, his ears and nostrels
holowe, his mouth open? who stretched out his sinews, hardened his bones,
skinned his flesh, parted his fingers? who made the passage from his veins?
who widened the bottomes of his feet, dilated his spleen, who opened his pores
and his lunges, dilated his liver, made his belly of such capacitye, his honest
parts to be open, and his secret parts to be hidden? who did all these
things but only the invisible God?

A third reason to prove there is a God, is the general consent, not only of
the learned men of the world, but also of the world it self. And why should
any few wicked men think them selves wiser then the world? The denyers of
the God head have been these men of name: Diagoras, Theodotus, Cyrenaeus,
Euemarus Tegeates, Callimachus, Podicus, Caeus, Plinius, Lucianus, Lucretius,
Doletus, Epicurus: some of them denying that there was a God, others that he
took the care of governing and guiding the world, and besides these, very
few. But as for the famous and learned Philosophers of the world, they
confessed there was a God. Empedooles said: Deus est cuius centrum est vbique,
circumferentia autem nusquam, God his center is every where, his circumference
no where. Socrates called him magnum Iudicem the great Judge, as Tully
witnesses: Plato acknowledged Cicero in some: Stip: Phisico: Lib, 7. Cap, 2.
and 10. Phes L, 8 C 6, de coelo. l, 1, ^, 9 Lib, 2, Cap, 3. Metaphy: Lib, 11,
Cap, 7.
him in all his works, Aristotle the greatest of all, which in deed was
equivalent to all the Philosophers, I may iustlye say, there is almost no leaf
in his works, but in it he inserteth the name of God (even as almost no page
of the Bible but in it is understood the name of Christ) who is called by him:
prima causa, causa causarum, ens entium, primus mortor, author omnium, lux
aterna, simplicissimus actus, conditor mundi, infinitus, immensus, inaffabilis
Deus, The first cause, the cause of causes, the essence of all things of whom
all things have their being, the first mouer, the author of all things, the
eternal light, most pure act, maker of the world, infinite, unmeasurable,
unspeakable God. Aristotle Lae^rtius de vita Aristot:
when he lived, was accused by Hiero the Priest, because, Contra patrios mores
and ritus multitudine deorum vnum solum and ^erum Deum agnouit, Contrary to the
religion of his country where many Gods were worshipped, he acknowledged but
one only true God. And when he dyed, the last words which he spoke were
these: Ens entium miserere mei, God have mercy upon me. The like was
acknowledged by Mercurius Trismegistus. Quid Deus? immutabile bonum. Mundus
factus est propter hominem, and homo propter Deum. What is God? an immutable
goodness, the world was made for man, and man for God. Ego filt, et humanitatis
gratia et erga Deum pictatis haec scribo. De pietate et Philosophia. Paenander
Sermo sacar
I write this tract (my son) in regard of my love to vardes man, and my
duty toward God. Illud vero ex mente lucidum verbi^s filius Det, that same
pure word which is borne of God is the son of God. Natura diuina principium
entium, the divine nature is the beginning of all things. Deus et pater, and
bonum eandem habent naturam, quid est Deus, pater, and bonum, quam omnium esse?
Glauis.
God the Father, and Goodness, have the same nature, what is God, the Father,
and Goodness, but the very essence, and being of all things? Here is a manifest
acknowledgement of the Trinitye. To leave particular men, what answer the
Atheists to the judgment of the world? the consent of nations? Tully draws
his argument in this manner: Deus esse non est dubitandum, De natu: deo^^^. L,
1.
quoniam little notitiam omnium animis ipsa impressit natura, that there is a
God, it is without question, because all nations do acknowledge and confess
him by the instinct of nature. But in an other place says he: Omnium consensus
vox naturae est, the consent of all men is the voice of nature it self. I have
showed how ^^seuls quest: Lab. 1.
all nations embrace some religion or other, have their Altars, their Priests,
their Gods: as the Hebrews from Moses, so the Egiptians from Mercury, the
Cretians from Melissus, the Latins from Ianus, the Romans from Numa, the
Greckes from Orpheus and Cadmus, and all nations from one or other. St.
Augustine says, concerning miracles: Non nunc necessaria sunt, vt olim,
miracula, tum facta erant necessario priusquam crederet mundus, ad hoc vt
crederet mundus, quisquis autem adhuc, vt credat prodigia requirit, magnum
Ciuitatis Dei, L. 22, Cap. 8
est ipse prodigium, qui mundo credente, non credit. Now miracles are not so
necessary as in times past they were, before they were necessary, that so the
world might believe, but now he is a miracle his self that will not believe,
because the world believes. But say I, as he is a wonder that will not believe
that which the world believes: so he is a monster which will not confess
that which the world confesses.

A fourth argument to prove there is a God, is the great multitude of miracles
which have been manifested to the world, even such things as are far above
the strength of nature, and therefore needs must proceed from some higher and
supernatural cause, and who is that metaphysicall cause but even Natura
naturans, God him self. For example, slightly to pass over so many
earthquakes, which have overthrown whole Cities, as Eutropius shows how the
year after St. Paul's death, the City of Colossus was swallowed up for
despising St. Paul's doctine. They are Vide Carcaum de meteoris.
not unacquainted with the Historiographers which show how by an earthquake
the Island of Sicily was made an Island being before one maine continent with
Italy, how Europe and Africa were parted when Spain was divided from Barbary
which before were one land? And that I may speak that which mine eyes have
seen, Vienna the chief City of Austria is now more subject to earthquakes
then other places in the world besides, in so much that there is scarce one
house in the City which has not one rent or other in the stone wall, which
came only by earthquakes. And because that place has been more subject to
earthquakes then other places, one of the Bishops of that Sea heretofore
devised a certain prayer continually to be said in the Charion in his
Chronicles.
Churches of Vienna to this effect, that God would defend that City from
earthquakes. Let the Atheist satisfy me by a natural reason concerning this
point, else let him confess that there is a supernatural cause, which if they
do, that is God. What can they say to so many strange Eclipses, to so many
prodigious raines? as when it rayned blood, flesh, stones, coals of fire, of
which Plutarch in ^ita Fabii. Luuius. l. 4. Decad. 3. et L. 3. dec 1.
they may read at large in Liuy, Plutarch and other authors? what say they to
so many comets appearing in the air, after which still do ensue the death of
so many Princes, as namely the Comet which appeared in the year 1506. after
which ensued the death of Philip King of Spayn son and heir to Maximlian the
Emperor, Philip Prince Elector of Rhene, Albert Duke of Bauaria, Pope July the
second, John King of Suecia and Noruegia, Lewis king of France, Maximilia^ the
Emperor, the Bish. of Spire, the Archbishops of Colen and Magdeburg, the
venetia^ wars, the wars between the Turk and the Persian, the King of Denmark
Christian driven out of his Kingdom, Hungary invaded and Rhodes taken by the
Turk. Lewis King of Hungary slain, who can give a natural reason of this,
and many other like unto this? But I will stand especially upon two things
which have troubled the wise men of the world, let the Atheists yield natural
reasons how these things could be, else let the^ confess there is a God wc is
above nature. First the Star which apeared at the birth of our Savior being
neither a fixed star, nor yet a Planet, for it was nothing Math. 2.
like unto either of them, if we do respect the motion of it, the place
where, and the time when it apeared, and the use whereunto it served, For, it
neither moved as the fixed stars from the Est to the West, nor as the Planets
from the West to the Est, but from the Est to the South, the like never heard
of before nor since. When the Sun shined it also shone, when the wise men
came to Palestina it went before them, when they came to Jerusalem it vanished
away, when they went to Bethleem it went before them again, as if it were a
creature endued with reason and understanding, it showed them the very house
where the Child did lie, whereas a natural star by reason of the great
distance between heaven and earth, could not discover unto them the place and
situation of a great City, much less of a small house: when they went
forward, it went forward, when they stood still, it stood still, And as St.
Augustine says: Quid erat illa stellanisi magnifica lingua coeli, quae nec
vnquam antea inter sidera apparuit, nec postea demonstranda perntansit? quid
erat nisi magnifica lingua coeli, quae gloriam Dei narraret, quae inusitatum
virginis partum inusitato fulgore clamaret, cui non postea apparenti euangelium
toto Orb succederet? What star was that which was never seen before nor
since, but the wonderful voice of heaven which should declare the glory of
God, and publish to the world, the unusual Childbearing of a Virgin, by an
unusual brightness, which should never afterward apeare again, but in steed of
it should be the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ? If you ask me what proof I
have besides the Gospel that ever there apeared such a star: witness Ignatius
which saw our Savior in the flesh, Prudentius the Poet, Macrobius a professed
enemy to Ignatius ad Ephesians. Lib. 2. Sa^turnal.
Christian religion, which testifies the same. And it is not unworthy of
observation, that not the Maniches. not Celsus, not Porphu^y, not Julian in all
their cauels against the story of the Gospel, did no way so much as in a word
take exception against this storye of the star^ might eleuate or extenuate the
truth thereof. And therefore Ad Ephe.
concerning this, I may say with Ignatius, Hinc euanuir mundi sapientia,
praestigiae factae sunt nugae, magia risus, omnes ritus malitiae aboliti,
ignorantiae caligo fugata, quum Deus and homo apparuit, and homo vt Deus
operabatur. In this the wisdom of the world was preued to be but follye, the
wise in their wisdomeme it proved but a toy, their magic ridiculous, all
their superstitious rites were abolished, the clouds of ignorance dispersed,
when God apeared to the world as a man, and man as if he were God. And
secondly what natural cause can they allege of that great Eclipse Math. 26.
of the Sun, which contrary to nature lasted from the sixth hour to the ninth,
and darkened the face of the whole earth? For first of all the Astrologers knew
well that al eclipses of the Sun which have been from the beginning of the
world (that only excepted) have been according to the rules of Art and the
nature of an eclipse, which Johannes de sacrobusto desineth in this manner: Est
interpositio Lunae inter aspectum nostrum and solare Libello de Sph^ra.
corpus, An interposition of the Moon between the body of the Sun and our
sight, which, as he says, cannot be; but quum Luna fuerit in capite vel cauda
Draconis, vel prope, vel infra metas supradictas, and in coniunctione cum Sole.
When the Moon is in the head or tail of the Dragon, or there abouts, and in
conjunction with the Sun. And forasmuch therefore as the Eclipse of the Sun
which was at the time of the passion of our Savior Christ, was when it was
plenilumium, a full Moon, not coniunctio sieve nouilunium, not a conjunction of
the Sun with the Moon, or new Moon, he concludes that it was no natural
Eclipse, but clean contrary to the rules of Astronomye and the course of
nature. Again, he shows that when the Sun is Eclipsed, all the earth is
not darkened, but only one Climat, because of the difference of the aspectes
in diverse Chmats, but this Eclipse darkened the whole earth, therefore it was
supernatural, and to the astonishment of the world, insomuch yt Dionysius the
Arcepagi^e at the very time of the Eclipse, beholding of it, cried out on a
sudden Aut Deus naturae paetitur, aut mundi machina dissoluitur. Either the
God of nature does this day suffer, or the frame of the world shall be
dissolved. Again, darkness continued for the space of three hours which could
not be, if it had been a natural Eclipse, therefore it was supernatural, and
of it says St. Chrisostom: Non Sermon de pasions.
poterat far creatura iniuriam creatoris, vnde Sol detraxit radios suos, ue
videret impiorum facinora. The creature could not with pacienceindure the wrong
done to the Creator, and therefore the Sun withdrewe his beams because he
would not behold so wicked a fact as that the Lord of glory should so
vngraciouslye be put to death. But the Atheists will ask me, how I can make
proof by any saving the Evangelist, that there was ever such an Eclipse? I
answered forasmuch as at that time when the Eclipse was, darkness was not only
in Judea but through all the whole world, and therefore at that time not only
Dionysius the Arcopagite, but also the inhabitants of the whole earth could
witness, as St, Origin answered. But least they should think we are utterly
void Contra Celsum L, 2.
of the testimoney of heathen writers: Origin disputing against Celsus the
Epicure, an enemy to the Christian faith, proves it unto him, not by the the
testimony of the Gospel, but of Phlegon a famous Chronicler, seruantto Adrian
the Emperer as Suidas Vide de ed Fusins apud Suidam.
recites Phlegons words, Phlegon his self did give his own judgment of
this Eclipse that it was prodigious. And Tertullian disputing with the
Gentiles, proves the same Eclipse out of their Apologia aduersus gentes.
own Writers, saying: Et eum mundi casum relatum in archiuis vestris habetis.
Ye have the very same occurrent registered in your own records.

A fifte reason to prove there is a God, is the varietye of punishments which
have been inflicted upon the Atheists from time to time which have denied God:
Holophernes which being so great a warrior, beheaded in the middle of his own
Camp by Judith. 11 Theodo: bist: L, 3. C. 23. Sabell: anae. 8. L. 2. C, 11
Fulgentius, lib, 7, and 6.
a sillye woman, Lucian devoured with dogs, Julian the Apostata strooke^ dead
with a darte from heaven, Arrius who died with his belly breaking and his
bowelles gushing out as he sat upon the priuye, Olympius washing him self in
a bathe, and blaspheming the Trinitye, while many men looked upon him, was
consumed suddenly with three fierye darts, the points of all three meeting in
one. Let the Atheists show how these things could otherwise be done, but by
the extraordinary hand of Almighty God, or else if they cannot, let them
confess the God which did these things.

A sixth reason to prove there is a God, is the confession of the devils them
selves. For what one devil confesses, is the confession of them all, for
regnum diuisum non potest stare, the kingdom of Satan being divided within it
self cannot stand. Neither will I for confirmation hereof allege the
authority of St James which Mat. lac. 2.
says, They believe and tremble, of St. Luke which writes of the devils
confession saying: Christ I know, and Paul I know: of Act. 19. Marci. 1. Ex.
7. Ex. 8. 1. Sam
St. Mark, where the devil says to our Savior: I know thee that thou art
even that holy one of God, neither how Moses his rod devoured the serpents
which was made by the sorcerers of Aegipt, how they could not make lyce,
because their power was restrained by an higher power, the finger of God, how
Dagon fell down before the Ark of God, and could not stand in the Chapel
where it stood: because they snall not say I am partial. But what answer can
they make to the general silence of all Oracles, Vide Ciceronem Lib. 2. de
diuinat. Arnobius aduersus Gentil Lib. 3. Sueton in Octau. C. 94. C, 70 Chap,
29 Niceph. hist. L 1. C, 17. Susdas.
that so many Oracles speaking before the time of our Savior Christ, all were
by him put to silence? What answer can they make to that famous storye of the
Oracle of Apollo at Delphus, which when Augustus the Emperor offered sacrifice
unto him, to know the reason of that unwonted silence unheard of in former
times: gave this for the last answer, as being never to speak again.

Me puer Hebraeus, diuos deus ipse gubernans
Cedere sede iubet, tristemque redire sub orcum.
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abcedito nostris. An Hebrus Child, his selsea God,
which other Gods does quell.
Bids me be silent, leave my seat, and get me down to hell.
From this same place depart therefore:
This Oracle will speak no more.


Which answer being given, Augustus erected an Altar in the Capitol of Rome,
with this inscription engraven upon it: ARA PRIMOGENITI DEI. The Altar of the
first begotten Son of God. Seeing therefore the devils have confessed God the
Father and his Son Christ, such men as will not confess the same, are in
that point worsse then devils.

Last of all, it stan leth with good reason that it should be the safest
opinion for the Atheists to hold that there is a God. For if so be that there
were no God, there could come no hurt unto them for thinking so, because all
men besides them selves holding the same, there were none that would punish
them for their opinion. But if so be that there be a God, (as I have prcued
unto them that there is) surely one day he will torment them in hell fire for
their contempt, because they would not belceue in him, and confess his name.
Therefore I conclude with the Apostle: Cord creditur ad iusticiam, orefit
confessio ad salutem, Let the heart belecue to righteousness, and the tongue
consesle unto salvation. At the To. 10.
name of Jesus let every knee bow, both of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth, and let every tongue Phil. 2.
confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God the Father.

Amen.
Chapter 5.
What God is?

SAint Chrisostom says: Ego omne quod intelligo, sinc Christo, and Spiritu
Sancto, and Patre, nolo intelligere, nisienim intellexero in Trinitate quae me
seruabit, mihi dulceesse non potest quod intelligo. In Marcum (...). 14.
I can understand no other God, when I hear the name of God mentioned, but the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. For unless I vnderstandd it to be meant
by the holy and undivided Trinitye, whereby I am saved, my understanding shall
content me nothing. So the^, according to S. Auguste: God is a divine Meditat.
Cap. 31.
nature, consisting of three persons, the Father, the Son, the holy Ghost,
God, the Lord, the Co^forter, He which begets, which is begotten, he which
regenerateth and new begets, Of one all things, In one al things, By one al
things, From whence, By whom, and in whom are al things, Life wc lives, Life
of him which lives, the quickner of al things which are living, One of him
self, One of an other, One of the^ both. The principles of humane arts and
liberal sciences are by themselves (...) not to be proved by the same arts.
An Arithmetician cannot prove by Arithmeticke that Omnis numerus est par aut
impar, every number is even or odd. The Musician cannot prove by his own
Art that two crotchets make a quauer, because these be principles of
Arithmeticke and Music. All principles, as Aristoile teaches Poster Lib: 1
C. 3.
in his Demonstrations, if they be demonstrated, must be demonstrated by the
Metaphysics which are of an higher nature, but that the principles of the
Metaphysics cannot be demonstrated because there is no higher science. But
forasmuch as Diuinitye is the highest, it is enough for us to belceue the
principles thereof without farther serching, and happy is the man which sees
not the reason how they should be so, and yet belecueth that they are so. No
man has seen God at any time, because he is invisible. Tully says:
Vtioculus, it a anima, sereliqua videns seipsum non videt, John. 3.
The eye sees not it self, and the soul understands other things better
then it self, And that this saying: Nosce teipsum, Tuscul: quast. Lib. 1.
know thy self, is meant in regard of the soul of man, because it is so hard
to conceive what it is. But if so be that an eye cannot see it self, no
marvel though it have not seen God, if a man cannot fullye understand him
self, how should he so perfectly conceive and define what God is, which is so
infinitelye above himself? That which is finite him which is infinite, the
creature the To. 9.
Creator, the pipkin the pipkin maker, he which is made of vile claye him that
has made all things of nothing? But as Moses when he was a mortal and
sinful man was not able to behold Ex, 33.
the glory of God, and therefore saw but his back parts only as he passed
by: So let us which have but shallowe brains so far demonstrate faith by
reason, as faith may be discerned by reason.

The Philosophers, as S. Augustine says, seeking after the nature Magister
sentent. L. 1. did. 3.
of God, found that he could not be a body, and therefore concluded that he was
far more excellent then all bodies, and therefore a Spirit: that he could not
be subject to change, and therefore that he was above all bodies and souls
which are subject to alteration: that all mutable things have their beginning
from that which is without all shadow of change or mutabilitye, and that he
which is not thus subject is simply of him self depending of nothing but all
other things have their dependence on him.

Again, they considered that al substances are other bodies or Spirits, and
that a Spirit is more excellent then a body, but that to be most excellent
which has made both the body and the Spirit. They considered likewise, that
the shape of the body is discerned by the outward senses, and the spirit is
perceived by the understanding, but that which is only understood is better
then that which is seen, and that there was something more excellent then both
these, and by so many ways God is known. Therefore, for as much as God is one
simple essence, not compounded of any parts, not consisting of any accidents,
and yet subsisting, and the Apostle speaks of him in the plural number
saying: To. 1
the invisible things of him are seen by the creation of the world because
the truth of God is known and perceived by many means through the things
which he has made: by the continuance of his creatures is understood his
eternity, by the greatness of them his omnipotency, by the excellent order
whereby he has disposed them his wisdom, by his government and preservation of
them in that comely and decent order, his goodness, and all these things do
belong to the unity of his substance.

Therefore not to speak of the authority of the holy Bible, where at the
Baptism of our Savior, the blessed Trinity did sencibly appear, the Father
in a voice, the Son in a man, the holy Mat. 3,
Ghost in a dove, how in the beginning the Father made, the Son spoke, and the
holy Ghost moved upon the waters, Bara elohins Gen, 3,
creauit dij, seu Deus Trinus, a verb of the singular number is Joined to a
nominative case of the plural to show that these three Gen, 18
are one, how when three Angels came to Abraham his house, he prostrated
himself to them as unto God, which could not be Esaias, 6.
without the crime of idolatry, unless they had bin God: how sometimes he
spoke to them in the plural number as unto three persons, and sometimes in the
singular as unto one God: how the Angels cry in heaven, Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of Sabbath, three times holy and once Lord to show that there were three
persons and one God. But if I come only to show the back parts of God, so
far as by earthly comparisons he may be made manifest unto sinful man: the
Atheist does ask how it can stand, with sense and reason that three should be
one, and one should be three? First let the Atheist take example by Olimpius
the Arrian, which washing himself in the Bathe contempteously asked how this
might be? but was suddenly distroyed by three fiery darts sent Saballius Anoe
ad, 8, L. C. 11,
from heaven, and the points of these three joining all in one, to teach
others by his example, how it is necessary to believe, but no way safe to
make a doubt of the principles of Divinity, and to call into question such
deep mysteries of our faith, and yet to show that three might be one, and one
three.

Secondly, the number of three are one number, and yet three unities in
Arithmetic, a triangle is three angles and one figure in Geometry, three
gimballes compacted together are one ring, and yet three as they be disioyned,
and concerning these things do doubt is made. So you see by familiar examples
how one may be three, and these three notwitstanding one.

Thirdly, in the Sun which shines in the firmament, there are the body of
the Sun, the brightness which proceeds from the body, and the heat which
proceeds from them both. So in the Trinity, there is the Father from whom
all things are, the Son which is the brightness of his Fathers glory, and
engraven form of his person, and the holy Ghost, which is the heat and Heb, 1
love of them both.

Fourthly, in the fire there are light, flame, and heat, the fire cannot be
divided, neither can the Trinity. Peter Lomb: did: 3:


Fifthly, there are three powers and faculties of the soul of man, the memory,
the understanding, and the will, these three are several faculties, yet the
soul is one. All these three do comprehend Aug: de Trinitate, Lib. 4
one another. For man remembers that he has memory, will, and understanding.
The understanding likewise comprehends al three, for man understands that
he has understanding, will and memory. The will comprehends all three, for
man is willing that he shall will, understand, and remember. So the Father
comprehends him self, the Son and the holy Ghost, the Son comprehends
himself, the Father and the holy Ghost, the holy Ghost comprehends himself,
the Father and the Son.

Sixtlye, that which understands, and that which is understood, are all one,
when the mind reflected upon it self understands it self. So, God the
Father from everlasting understanding himself begat his Son coeternall with
himself: as a vninitie is not of any other, but of it self, and yet begets
a unity of it self: so God the Father which is of none, yet understanding of
himself, alierum se, non aliud generat, begets of himself an other, not in
nature, but in person from himself, which yet is all one with himself. Again
that which understands and is understood is all one with that which is
beloved, when the understanding does love it self, and then it is one and the
self same thing which loves, and is beloved, and there is the holy Ghost, all
one with the Father and the Son. And so, as it were in the glass of nature
is represented a lively image of that essential love and understanding by which
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost do love and understand each other
from all eternity.

Last of all, in every thing which is made and framed by the art of man, there
be necessarily three things, and yet these three make one, matter, shape, and
order: by the matter is represented the Father, by the shape the Son which is
the Image of his Father, by order the holy Ghost, which orders and disposes
all things.

I conclude with St. Augustine: Te patrem ingenitum, te filium vnigenitum, te
spiritum paracletum ab vtrisg, procede^tem, colimus and veneramur, we praise
and worship thee o God the Father unbegotten, the Son only begotten, the
holy Spirit the comforter proceeding from them both.

Chapter. 6.
That there is but one God.

David says that the God of Gods even the Lord has spoken, and called the
earth even from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof. In which
words notwithstanding, Psalm, 50,
he does not intimate that there be many Gods, but one, for he called the other
Gods so, by a figure called Ironia, or Sarcasmus as. God did by Adam when he
said: Behold Adam is like one of us, when he meant nothing less. Such Gods are
but creatures as Gen, 3.
I have showed, and by nature they are not Gods. Such Gods were the Idols of
the nations, of which S. Paul says: they turned the Ephe, 2 To. 1,
truth of God into a lie, and worshipped the creature for the creator. Such
Gods were Dagon, Remphan, Astoroth, the Gods of the Philistines, Moabites,
Sidonians. But even as Aarons rod devoured Exodus, 7,
the Serpents of the sorcerers, so the God of the Philistines Dagon fell down
before. Arc the of the covenant where the true God was present, to show that
such Gods were but counter faite Gods, and vain like them which put their
trust in them. Of such 1, Sam, 5.
Gods says S. Augustine. Nec ideo Troiaperijt quia Mineruam perdidit, quid enim
ipsa prius Mincrua perdidit vt periret? an forte, De eiuitate Dei, Lib, 1, C: 2
custodes suos? hoc sane verum est, quippe illis, coesis potuit auferri, neque
homines a simulachro, at simulacrum ab hominibus sernabatur Quo modo ergo
celebratur vt patriam custodiret et ciues, quae suos non potuit custodire
custodes? Troy was not therefore overthrown, because it lost the idol of the
Goddess Minerua, but tell I pray you what the Idol did loose, first, that
itself should be also lost? you will say she lost her keepers, and ye say the
truth, for when the keepers of her Temple were slain, it was no masterie to
steal the Goddess away, for it was not the idol that kept the man, but the
man did keep the Idol. How absurd a thing therefore was it to worship such
a Goddess as a defendour and keeper of the City, which was not able to keep
her self, nor the keepers of her Chapel? whereas Virgill says: Victosque
Deos, paruumque nepotem, Aenaad, Lib, 2
suosque tibi commendat Troia penates: Si autem Virgilius tales deos, and
victos dicit, et vt vel victi quo quo modo euaderent, homini commendatos, que
dementia est existimare his tutoribus Roman sapienter fuisse commissam, and
nisi eos amisissat, non potuisse vastari? Imo, Deos victos tanquam defensores
colere, quid aliud est quam non numina bona, sed daemonia mala? Non Roma
perijsset si illi, perijssent; sed illi multo antea perijssent, nisi eos Roma
seruasset. Hector in Virgill says: his God was conquered, and he commends
them to the tuition of Aenaeas. But what madness was it to imagine that Rome
was wisely committed to the protection of such Gods as were conquered, and had
need their selves of man's protection, and that Rome could not be sacked so
long as these Gods were in safety? Nay to worship conquered Gods as patrons of
the City, is not to serve blessed Gods but damned devils. Rome had not bin
sacked over the sooner because they, were taken, but they had bin taken sooner,
had they not bin kept by the City. The Kingdom of the Jews, says St.
Augustine, De ciuitate Dei. L. 4. Cap. 34.
was founded by one God, and not by a multitude of Gods, and was maintained by
that one God so long as they served him. That one God multiplied the people in
Aegipt, but neither did their women use the help of Lucina in their
childe-birth, neither did the man use the help of Neptune when they passed
over the Red Sea, neither of the Nymphs when they drank water out of the
Rock, neither of Mars when they conquered Amalac, but they obtained more at
the hands of their own God, then ever did the Romans at the hands of their
multitude of Gods whom they served.

Lactantius proposes this question, whether the world is governed Defalsa
religione. Lib. 1. C. 3
by one God or many? Not to stand upon his authority because he was a
Christian, but to wey his reasons, because I dispute against neathens and
insidels, which, as I showed in the first Chapter are also comprehended under
name of Atheistes, although they do not deny God, because they serve, as the
Apostle says: the things which by nature are not Gods. What need says
Lactantius, has the world of many Gods? Unless they Gal. 4.
suppose that one of himself is not sufficient to undergo so great a burden?
which needs must be granted, if every God of himself be not able without
the assistance and help of an other. If any of them of himself be not
omnipotent, then he is not a God, if he be omnipotent the^he needs not any
partner. If God of him self bomnipotent, there can be but one, for if the
divine power be divided among many Gods the^ no one can be all sufficient of
himself, but by how many more they are in number, by so much the weaker they
must be in power. He concludes: Quid quod summa illa and diuina potestas, ne
semel quidem diuidi potest, quicquid enim capit diuisionem, and interitum
necesse est, si autem interitus, procul est a Deo. The divine power which
belongs unto God cannot be imparted unto many, for whatsoever is capable of
division is also subject to corruption, the^ the which thing, nothing can be
more repugnant to the nature of God. Therefore there is but one God. I say
therefore with the Apostle: Now to the 1. Tim, 1,
King everlasting, immortal, invisible, unto God only wise, be honor and
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Chapter. 7.
That the Books of the Bible are the word of God.

I Made mention before, of the Book of nature, which might worthily be called
Gods book, because as I said, it was a letter or Epistle wherein God did make
himself known unto mankind, and did instruct us so far as to know and
confess that there was a God. But because that knowledge was but bare and
naked and no way sufficient to bring us to salvation, only it served to make
us search and inquire farther, that by inquiring farther we might be saved:
there is an other book which is more especially called Gods book, I mean his
holy Bible, wherein we are taught not only to know God in his vissible
creatures, but also, in his Son Jesus Christ whereby we are saved. And it
stood verse much with his Divine wisdom so providing for every thing, as the
several nature and quallitie of each creature does require, to write such a
book for man's instruction in his fear and true worship, because man
consists of a body as well a of as soul, and conceaueth visible things easier
then such things as are only spiritual and are not seen, and by such things
as are subject to his outward senses, man is brought to understand. It pleased
him therefore of his great mercy to instruct us by these visible Characters,
and written Letters which daily we do read. And as S. Augustine says: De illa
ciuitate vnde peregrinamur, hae literae In. Psalm. 90.
nobis venerunt, ipsae sunt Scripturae quae nos hortantur vt been viuaenius.
These letters sent unto us from that City the heavenly Jerusalem from whence
yet we do wander, and they are the Scriptures which do exhort us to live
well. And I cannot deny, but the writers themselves of these holy books, were
so immediately instructed from God himself which is the fountain of all
heavenly wisdom, that they needed no writings. But yet with us it is
otherwise, they are the foundation, we are but the walls which are builded
upon that foundation, we (says the Apostle) are builded Ephesians, 2,
upon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apostles. Because by their
writings we are edified, but they by whose means we are edified and builded,
do lean their selves immediately upon the chief corner stone which is Jesus
Christ. There are great odds between the high mountains and the little
hillocks, and low valleys, they are lightened immediately upon the first
rising of the Sun, but light and heat comes by degrees from them to the
lower parts. As also God foresawe in his wisdom, and we know by experience of
the former ages from the beginning of the world unto Moses, when there was no
written word, that there could not be veritatis et doctrinae puritatis salua
custodia sine scripto, soundness of doctrine could not be preserved, but by
committing of it to writing. And therefore it pleased God that these Volumes of
the Bible should be written. And that these are the holy Scriptures given by
inspiration of God, profitable to teach, to convince, to correct, and to
instruct, that the man of God 2. Tim. 3.
may be absolute to all good works: That the man of God which writ them,
spoke inspired by the holy Ghost, that they were written for the salvation of
men's souls, and not for the maintenance 2 (...) et. 1
of civil government, I prove by these arguments following.

The first is the truth of all the prophecyes which have failed in nothing, wc
spoke of things long before they came to pass, so certainly as if they had
bin already fulfilled. And yt I may make due proof thereof, certissimus and
fidelissimus vaticiniorum interpres est euentus: the surest and faithful est
interpreter of prophecies is the event of things: Now we see their
predictions are already come to pass, we are eye witnesses that they are
true, which truth argues that they were written by the finger of God which is
the holy Ghost, which only could not err in writing, and not by man, for
as much as all men are liars, humanum est errare, it is the To. ^
nature and property of a man to e^^e* in so much that if he be without
error, he is not a man. And therefore it is impossible but in so many
predictions foretold so many years before the time and so co^nary to humane
reason, but they should have bin deceived if men had bin the authors of these
books. I will instance for brevity sake in some one or two especial things
which may best serve for this purpose. The Scriptures foretold long before the
time that the world should be converted to Christian Religion, all Nations
should believe and submit themselves to the obedience of the Faith, a thing in
man's judgment not to be expected. For the Prophet said concerning the
Kingdom of Psalm, 2.
Christ, I mean his Kingdom of the Gospel or of Grace. The Heathens raged,
and the people murmured against the Lord and his Christ, but in vain, the
Kings of the earth stood up and banded them selves, and the Princes assembled
themselves together. But he that sits in heaven shall laugh them to scorn,
the Lord shall have them in derision. Even I have set my King upon Sion mine
holy mountain, I will declare the decree: that is, the Lord has said to
me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, ask of me, and I shall
give thue the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy
possession. There could not be a more unlikely thing foretold, and yet it was
fulfilled long since, no Atheist can deny it. Tertullian to this purpose
says: who was able to govern the world, but only Christ Aduersus Indaeos. C.
7. 8
of whom it was foretold that his Kingdom should be extended over the whole
world? The Kingdom of Solomon says her was confined within the Land of Iudaea
from Dan to Beersheba, and his territories did reach no farther. Darius reigned
over the Pabylonians and Persians, but no farther, Pharao over the Aegiptians,
and there his dominion ceased. Nabuchodonozer was a great Monarche, yet he
reigned not over the whole world, but only from India unto Aethiopia: the
like may be said of the Greeks and the Romans, which were called the Lords
of the world, and yet the whole world was not known unto them, much less
subdued by them. But as for the Kingdom of Christ, it has extended it self
far and wide, the Gospel has bin preached in all Act. 2.
places, and received of all Nations of the Parthians, Medes, Elamites, the
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Armenia, Phnygia, Cappadocia, Aegipt, Pamphilla,
Asia, Africa, and the uttermost Indies. Of this assertion there be so many
records, that it cannot be denied. As for some few things which are foretold
in the Scriptures and not yet fulfilled, as namely, the conversion of the
Jews, and the destruction of Antichrist, the time is not yet come to pass
that they should be fulfilled, for all things must be performed in that due
time which God in his secret wisdom has appointed. There are other things
also foretold which must go immediately before the end of the world, which
are not yet performed because as you see the end is not yet. But it is a
sufficient argument to induce Infidelles to believe that all these things
shall come to pass, because they see all other things already performed in
their time and order. For as he that sometimes lies shall not be believed
though he tell the truth so he which always has told the truth, cannot
without impiety be suspected of fallhood, God cannot deceive or be deceived.
And which is not to be omitted: St. Peter did prophecy that at the latter end
there should be such Atheistes, which should deny these 2, Pet, 3.
things, and the Prophecy is now verified, otherwise this my labor might
have been spared, their impiety makes it good which the Prophet has foretold.

Again there is in Daniel an ancient Prophecy concerning the death of our
Savior Christ, even the very time and computation Dan, 9.
of years is defined when he should be put to death. Seauenty weeks, (says
he,) are determined upon thy people, and upon the holy City, to finish the
wickedness, and seal up the sins, and reconcile the iniquity, and bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to annoint the most holy. From the going
forth of the commandment to bring again the people, and build Jerusalem: to
Messiah the Prince shall be 69. weeks, and after he shall be slain, but so,
that for one week he shall teach, but in the middle of the week he shall
cause the Sacrifice and oblation to cease. But these weeks are annuae
hebdomadae, every week is seven years and so reckoning weeks consisting of
years, and not only of days, as for every day in the week should be
reckoned a year, 70. of Daniels weeks make 490. years. But the Temple which
was the first and chiefest thing reaedified in Jerusalem began in the second
year of Cyrus, the builders were hindered 42. years as it appears out of the
Gospel, and in the 46. year it was finished, because the last 4. years they
had quietness. John, 2.
Longimanus in the second year of his reign giving forth a new edict that
they should build without molestation, and no man under pain of death should
hinder the workmen, as in times past they had done. From the second year
therefore of Longimanus the Emperor, to Alexander the great, were 145. years,
from Alexander to the natiuitye of our Savior 310. from his birth to his
baptism 30. these being put together, make years 485. so the 69. weeks make
482. years, but at his baptism the whole 482. years that is 69, were fullye
complete and ended. In the next week or 7. years, our Savior taught the
people, and in the middle thereof, that is in the fourth year he was put to
death: What Jew or Atheist can except against the truth of this Prophecye?

A second proof that the books of the Bible are the word of God, is the
general consent and agreement of so many writers, which writ at diverse times,
in diverse places remote one from an other, in diverse languages, and upon diverse
occasions, all writing of one and the selfsame subject, all agreeing in
Doctrine, none contradicting other, that they might not so fitly be termed
diverse writers as diverse pens of the same writer. The books of Moses were
written in the wilderness, of Joshua, Judges, and the Kings in the land of
Promise: of Daniell in Babylon: the works of St. Paul some at Rome, some in
other places as Athens, Ephesus, Laodicea, Nicapolis: St. John's revelation in
Pathmos, the Book of Job no man knows by whom, when, nor where. The Books
of Moses about 2554. years after the creation of the world: the Psalms, some
of them 605. years after Moses, the books of Ezra after the return from
Captivity about 605. years after David by whom many of the Psalms were
made. Between David and the Captivity, Esaias and Osee under King Ioathan,
Achaz, and Ezechiaz: Jeremy under Josias, Ioachim, and Zedechias, Ezechiel,
Abacuc and Daniel in Captivity, and the whole new Testament long after the
old, yet all agree as the diverse thunders which have one voice, four Beasts
which sing one song, Vox tamen vna manet, qualem decet esse sororum. Apoc, 4.
De Fide. lib, 4.
Damascen compares them to a Garden bedecked with varyetie of herbs of
excellent virtue, which are to be gathered one by one, and yet to make one
Garland: or diverse precious stones in one breast plate of Aaron the Priest: and
as Cyrillus speaks, The Kings daughter has a Coat of diverse colors, Psalm,
45,
yet one garment Colligitis flores ad spirituales texandas coronas sed ex omni
flore spiritus sancti spirat fragnantia. Whereas if man had written, not being
guided by the holy Ghost; they would have differed as much one from the other,
as a Mulberrye Tree does from a Myrtle, as John the Baptist did from Ieremye,
and Dan, 13. Math. 16,
Christ from John the Baptist, as the Judges of Susanna, or the witnesses which
made report of our Savior Christ.

A third proof is the style, and manner of writing, the old Testament being
written in Hebrew, because it was written to the Jews, The new in Greek,
because it was written to the Gentiles, to whom that language was most
familiar, and best understood, although they were not Grecians that did write
it. And yet the tongues in which the old and new Testament were written, so
differing one from the other: the same idiotisme and proprietye of speech in
both Testaments used, continual Hebraeismes as well in the new as in the old,
do show that they were written by one and the selfsame spirit, that still
God might speak like unto him self. The languages also being more fit for
the word of God to be written in then other tongues, as more significant, more
copious, and indeed, no other language being capable enough of that sacred
storye, as Benedictus Arias Montanus very learnedly has observed. For, first,
says he, Eorum, qui Prafat in Biblea interlinear.
transferunt duplex est consilium, alij enim student perspicuitati, alij
proprietati, quorum vtrumque vna opera prestari non potest, quum tamen vtrumque
sit in archetypo eodem opera a spiritu sancto demandatum, suggestum, neutrum
vllo modo praetermissum. These, says he, which translate the Bible, some of
them endeavor to be perspicuous, others to keep the proprietye of the tongue,
but neither can perform both, that is, to observe the propriety of the tongue,
and yet be perspicuous, whereas the holy Ghost in the original has observed
both. Secondly, Ea the nata quae carent punctis vary legi possunt secundum
varias Gra^maticae regulas, quae autenpunctis distincta sunt, varias admittunt
significationes, quae tamen Spiritue Dei exsua sapien ianobis ambigua tradidit,
vt omnia quae varietas illa complectitur, intimis sensibus reponamus. Eadem
autem vox quae in archetypo, ambigua est, non potest alia lingua reddi ambigua,
si vero ambigua reddi non possit vt est in archetypo, fit vt illa sententia non
reddatur integra sed manca, quam Spiritus sanctus de industria ambigua^
tradidit, vt in vtramque partem interpretaremur. Those Hebrew roots which are
without pricks, may be read and co^stered diverse ways according to the
Gramatticall rules, they which are distinguished with pricks, are also
ambiguous, which notwithstanding the holy Ghost, did upon setpurpose deliver
thus ambiguous unto us, of his infinite wisdom, that we might understand and
conster them diverse ways. But the word which is thus ambiguous in the Hebruew
or Greek, cannot be fitted by a word in latin or any other language which
shall be answerable to it in ambiguity, and because it cannot be ambiguous in
the interpreter as well as in the Original, it is delivered unto us maimed and
as it were defective, which the holy Ghost would have to be more full and
perfect, containing this variety of senses, by reason of the ambiguitie. And
therefore all tongues saving the Greek and Hebrew, in comparison of them, are
unworthy of that great majesty of the holy Ghost. For example, the word Barac
in the Hebrew tongue signifies both to bless and to curse, the word is used
in the story of Jacob which Gen, 49, 28.
called his Children before him as he lay in his deathbed, and prophesied to
them, in which Prophecy some he blessed and some he cursed. Now the
translation has: Benedixit, he blessed: thus their Father spoke unto them,
every one of them blessed he with a several blessing. Ieroms translation has
it in this manner: Haec loquutus est eis pater suus, benedixitque siagulis
benedictionibus proprijs. Now it cannot be a perfect translation, when it is
thus translated: He blessed them al. For he curssed some. Neither yet had it
been well translated in this manner: He curssed them all. For he blessed some.
Because therefore there is no word answerable to Barac which signifies both
to bless and to curse, no tongue is so capable of this storye as the Hebrew.
As for Reuben, when he said unto him: Thou wast light as water, thou shall not
be excellent because thou wentest unto thy Fathers bed, then did their defile
my bed, thy dignitye is gone; It was no blessing. And when he said unto Simeon
and Leui, Brethren in evil, the instruments of crueltye are in their
habitations, into their secret let not my soul come, my glory be not thou
joined with their assemblye, for in their wrath they slew a man, and in their
selfewill they dug down a wall, curssed be their wrath, for it was fierce,
and their rage, for it was cruel, I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them
in Israel: These words were not such words as might importe any blessing,
Therefore says he; Ideo visum est Deo scripturas hac potissimum lingua
exaratas voluisse, qui simplici sua inimensaque sapientia omnia inuenit, vt
multa etiam consilij sui mysteria vnica voce declararet. It pleased God, which
by his single and infinite wisdom sound out and devised all things, to
deliver the Scriptures in this tongue above others, that so in one simple word
he might declare many mysteryes unto us. The Greek tongue goes before the
Latin, because it is more copious and significa^t. For example: this word (...)
is by some translated: incredulitye, by others disobedience, and it signifies
both, But the translator could find no Latin word which may include both
disobedience and incredulitye. But as for the Hebrew, it goes far beyond it,
maiestate, pondere, numero, significatione, in majesty, weight, number,
signification, witness the Son of Syrach in the very prologue before his book.

Likewise, besides the two tongues Hebrew and Greek wherein the Bible is
written, and the idiotisme or propryetye of the Hebrew only in both, to show
that the same spirit writ both, that God, whether he spoke Hebrew or Greek
unto us, still he might speak after one manner, and so be like none but him
self: the very simplicitye of the style not favoring of humane eloquence,
and the very discretion which is used in every book concerning the style,
still applied to the capacitye of them who especially and above others were
written unto, do argue that men could not be the authors of these books. If we
do examine the words, the sentences, the arguments, the matter, form: we
shall find many times that there is difficultye in the words, grauitye in the
sentences, acutenes in the arguments, rare invention and great choice in the
matter, a scholler-like method observed in the form of writing, tropes,
grammar figures, exornations of rhethoricke, all things proved according to
the rules of logic, and yet notwithstanding all these, a vulgar and familiar
kind of speech is used. For God him self, the Angels, the Prophets speaking
unto men, do accommodate them selves to our capacitye, to the understanding of
plow-men, of shepherds, of women, of children, that the conversion of the world
may not be ascribed unto man's wisdom, or humane eloquence, or any other thing
that is in man. The holy Ghost does not write like Demosthenes, that it may be
said: Where is the Scribe, the subtle disputer? etc. he has made their wisdom
foolishnes. But St. Peter was able to persuade more with one Sermon, then all
the nations of the 1 Cor, 1.
world with their Orations, more in an hour then they in their life, more by
his simple kind of style, the^ they by all their eloquence. Magnus Ciprianus
Orator, sed mayor Petrus Piscator. Ille misit sagenam in mare and piscatus est
orbem. Non per oratorem Deus lucratus est piscatorem sed per piscatorem
oratorem, Says a learned Father, Aug. in John, chrysostom. hom. 4. in Esaiae
verba vide dominum stantem super thronum
St. Ciprian was a great Orator, but St. Peter a greater Fisher, He cast his
net into the sea and caught the world, God did not convert the Fisherman by
the Orator, but he converted the Orator by the Fisher. St. Paul when he writ to
the Romans, writ learnedly and profoundly, because he writ to men that bore
high minds, and did expect learning at his hands, he writ to the Corinthians
after an other manner, as unto men not of so great capacitye: when he writ to
the Galathians he altered his style, unto the Hebrews which had a prejudice of
his person, in such sort that they might not suspecte the Epistle to come from
him. St. John writing to a Lady, writ in a lowely manner, and in such sort as
he might best befit a woman. There is the discretion and wisdom of the holy
Ghost, which in men is never seen.

The fourth proof that the Bible is the word of God, is even God his self,
which never would suffer that book to be profaned. For Ptolomye marueyling why
no Poets nor Historiographers writ concerning these misteryes of Faith? answer
was made unto him by Demetrius Phalerius, that it was the holy Scripture,
Josephus en Aristo. antique Lib. 12, C, 2. Eusebius. Lib. 8. Peup even. C. 1.
and therefore that all profane writers which went about to write of the same,
were presently plagued of God from heaven, and so caused to desist and
relinquish their work which they took in hand: that Theopompus because he
went about to illustrate some part of the Scripture in the Greek tongue, was
so troubled in his mind, that he could proceed no farther. And that Theodorus
a maker of Tragoedyes, because he endeavored to insert some part of the
Scriptures into his Tragoedye, was presently stricken blind, like Elymas the
Sorcerer, of whom we read in the story of Act. 13.
the Gospel.

Fifthly, the argument follows well which Necodemus uses to confirm the
doctrine of our Savior Christ. Master says he, I know thou art a teacher
come from God, for no man can do John. 3.
these things which thou do unless God were with him. And, therefore our
Savior says in an other place: Operibus credit Believe the works. And
therefore against Alexander the great, and Domitian the Tyrant, which would
have been accounted Gods, St Ambrose uses this arguement: Do these and these
things, and then I will confess that ye are Gods. When Canutus the King of
Danes had conquered England, and sitting in his Chair by the sea side, had
boasted the like of him self that he was a God: It was said unto him, Sit in
this place one hour longer, and I will confesle you are a God, but if you
cannot sit until the full tide, and command the waters that they shall not
carye you away, you are no God. But the Scriptures have been confirmed to be
the word of God, by such miracles as no power of man or devil could effect.
The birth of our Savior Christ was confirmed by the appearing of a Star
which troubled all the Star gazers of the world, The resurrection of our
Savior by an Eclipse which troubled the great Astrologians of the world, the
Math. 2. Math 26. John. 9.
healing of a blind man with claye made of dust and spittle troubled Galen the
great Physician of the world: But as our Savior confirmed his doctrine by
miracles, as Moses confirmed his embassage to come from God by making Serpents:
So the Apostles Ex, 4.
confirmed their Sermons which they Preached, and doctrine which they left
behind them in writing, to be the word of God, by casting out devils, raising
up the dead, healing diseases etc.

Sixthly, the antquitye of the Bible proves it self to be Gods word, for as
God is antiquus dierum, the ancient of days, because Dan. 7.
he was before all other, so the books of Moses are more ancient then all
other brokes. Josephus makes mention of certain Pillars: in which some
things were written by the sons of Seth Antiqu Lib. Vide Polidoru^ Virgil de
mue^t
before the Flood, whereof one (he says) remained to be seen in Syria in his
own time. But be it so, these letters were but Hyeroglyphicall, like to the
letters of the Egiptians, not Abedarye letters, but shapes and Images of
beasts, not written in books, but engraven in stone. But as for the Abedarye
letters, that is Grammatical letters, whereby we write words and sentences,
they were not devised before Moses delivered them to the Hebrews, Vide Eusebius:
de temporibus et 10. de praepavat: euang et Lib 8.
from whence the Phaenicians learned them, and the Greeks received them from
the Phaenicians, and the Romans did learn to write of the Grecians. And Moses
was more ancient then Cadmus which brought letters into Greece, or any other
which brought them into other places, as Eusebius does plainly prove.

Now, forasmuch as no laws, no precepts of life, no Chronicles, no rules
concerning the worship of God, no contract between man and man, no antiquitye
can be kept in memory but by writing: Therefore it was necessary for the true
knowledge and worship of God, that such a book should be written wherein God
might be known, and in what sort he would be worshipped. But there is no book
of that nature besides the Bible which is of any antiquitye, neither the
Alcaron of the Turks, nor the Talmod of the Jews: witness the Talmod and
Alcaron them selves, nor any other book of religion, but they were written
long since the Bible. Religion cannot be new, as God him self cannot be new,
therefore that is only the true religion which is the ancientest of all, and
it is impossible to know or judge of the antiquitye of religion, but by the
antiquity of the books and records wherein the precepts of Religion are
delivered and set down, and again it is impossible to know what is religion,
or how God is to be worshipped, but by books wherein are contained the rules of
his worship. For as much therefore, as the books of Moses are more ancient
then all other books, therefore that religion is the truest which is contained
in them, and because there can be but one true Religion, the only truth is in
them, therefore they are the word of God. And, as for the other books of the
Bible which were written long since, they handle the same subject, they hold
the same doctrine as the books of Moses, and are but all parts and members
which make one body of the Bible, written by the same Spirit, and of the same
nature, and therefore are also the word of God, and there is no other written
book of God, but the Bible.

In the seventh place, I could allege for witness that the Bible is Gods
word, the great multitudes of Martyrs, which have dyed in the defense of the
Bible, and sealed the same with their own blood, both before, and in, and
after the times of the ten bloody persecutions, to whom God gave the gift of
patience to suffer death willingly for the testimony of the word. Neither
could so many of them have suffered in such manner, unless God had
strengthened them in so good a cause. But because this argument is not so
forcible to persuade Atheists, as it is to exhort christians, I pass it over.

Last of all, the testimonye of the Gentiles proves the Bible to be the word
of God. For, because God the Father had eternally decreed to send his Son to
take flesh for the salvation both of Jews and Gentiles, and unless they
believed in him, there could be no salvation purchased by his death, neither
for Jew nor Gentile: That he might be received by the consent of each people,
it could not seem good unto his heavenly wisdom, unless he did long before
our Savior should come publish his coming both to the Jews and Gentiles. And
therefore Christ was published to the Jews many ways, as the Apostle speaks,
by dreams, visions, Angels, but especially by their own Prophets, David,
Esaias, Heb, 1
Ieremye, Moses, Daniell and the rest, which were Jews, and in that respect
called their own Prophets, that they might give the more credit unto them. To
the Gentiles also he was made known by the heathen Prophets and Prophetesses,
Baalam, Mercurius Trismegistus, Hidaspes, and especially the ten Virgins
called Sybils the heathenish Prophetesses, of which we may read at large in the
works not only of the heathens, but also of the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical
writers of the Primative Church. Now forasmuch as the Gentiles were
unacquainted with Moses and the Jewish Prophets, and not accustomed to read the
Canonical writers, Lactant. Lib. 1 c. 6.
and destitute for the most part, of the Bible, and therefore would give no
credit to the testimonies cyted out of these books, and Hieron cont: Intuian:
L, 1,
yet were to be converted to the Faith by virtue of the Commission given to the
Apostles Math: 28. where our Savior said: Go, Preach, and baptize all
Nations: The Apostles and Disciples in the Primitive Church at their first
Preaching to the Gentiles, Theophi: Atio chonus ad Auto. Lib: 2. Clem: A
exstro: Lib 2. Contra Celsum. L. 5
proved the Bible by the testimonye of heathen writers, the Sybils, Hydaspes,
Mercurius, as St. Origin and Lactantius declare at large. In such sort did St
Paul deal with the Inhabitants of Creet, alleging for authority the verse of
their own Poet Epimenides which Cicero and Lacrtius do report to have been
a kind of Prophet or Diuiner among them. And therefore St. Paul De diuinat.
Lib. 1. Tit. 1.
says: a Prophet of their own said of them: (...). The Cretians are always
liars, foul beasts and slow bellyes. Likewise, to the Greeks he alleges
the testimonye of a Greek Poet Menander. (...). Evil words 1. Cor. 15.
Menander in Thaide.
corrupt good manners. And to the Scholars at Athens, the testimonye of the
Poet Aratus (...). we are his generation, Act. 17.
meaning God. And, for this cause, the heathens called the Christians
Sybillistes, because Christian religion was most of all proved out of the
Sybils Oracles, which writ more plainly and plentifully, then all other heathen
writers. And, as Clemens Alexandrinus writes: S. Paul in one of his Sermons
said unto the people: Libros Strom, Lib. 6
quoque Graecos sumite, agnoscite Sybillam, quo modo vnum Deum significet, and
ea quae sunt futura, take in hand your Greek authors, read Sybil, see how she
teaches that there is one God, and fore-telleth things to come. Hydaspen
sumite, and legite, and inuenietis De: filium multo clarius and apertius esse
scriptum. Do but vouchsafe to read Hydaspes, and ye shall find in him a
clear and euydent testimonye of the Son of God. And, because the Christians
were so frequent in alleging of the Sybils Oracles for confirmation of
Christian Faith unto the Gentiles, and converted so many unto Christ by these
books, as Justin Martyr writes: In oratione ad Autonium P^um.
Proclamation was made, that upon pain of death no man should read them any
longer, nor Hydaspes his writings, yet the people would not refrain from
reading them. And again, Gods providence did wonderfully appear in the
perseruation of the Sybills verses for the behoof of the Gentiles, as of the
Bible for the Jews, in that they were very faithfully kept in the Capitol of
Rome and that being once lost by a mischance when the Capitol was burned, yet
by publik edicte of the Senate, diligent search Vide Dionisium helicar: hist.
Romans L. 4 Lactantius, L. 1, C, 6 Cornelius Tacitus annal. l. (...)
and inquiry was made for all coppies that could be gotten, that so an other
book was newly written and kept in record, being duly examined, corrected
and purged of all faults that might else have escaped. And to that purpose
commission was given to diverse learned men fit to be employed in such a
service, which was performed with all diligence, and the book was laid up in
the capitol again, eue^ as the books of Moses, were kept in the Arc of the
covenant. So when the Christians labored the conversion of the Romans, they
were not only furnished with proofs of their Doctrine out of the Sibilles, to
convince the Romans and their idolatry, but also they were freed from
suspicion of corrupting those books or any clause in them contained, because
whatsoever was by them alleged, was consonant and agreeable to their own:
Coppie which they kept in their Tower, or Capitol, or treasure house, which
was the chiefest place of their records. Now, for as much as nihil est iam
dictum quod non fuit dictum prius, there can be no new or strange invention
now Eccles. 1.
which has not bin thought of before, as the wise man speaks: I cannot find
any way to disprooue the Atheists better then that which the Apostles used to
disprove the infidels, that is, by the testimony and witness of heathen
Authors. For, if they will neither stand to arguments drawn from reason,
neither yet to authority, neither Divine nor Humane, then they reject all the
Topics of Aristotle and places whereby they should be confuted, they renounce
the laws of Schools and order of disputation and by a consequent, they show
themselves meerily ignorant, and contra indoctos non est disputandum,
disputations are not to be held and maintained against them which know not
the laws of disputation. Therefore, that I may come to particulars, to show
that the story of the Bible may be proved by profane authors:

The first revealing to the Gentiles of the time and place when, and where our
Savior was borne, was by the conduct of a star, Math, 2.
What moved the Gentiles, I mean the wisemen which came from the East, to come
to our Savior Christ by the leading of that Star, and being with him to adore
him as God? but even the Prophecy of Baalam their own Prophet? The Prophecy of
Balaam which lived in the days of Moses is inserted into Moses his works.
Numb. 24.
Orietur stella ex Iaacob, a star shall arise out of the house of Jacob.
Concerning this Star says Chalcidius a Philosopher: Est Chalesdius commentin
Timaum Platon:
alia sanctior et venerabilior historia, quae perhibet de ortu stellae
cuiusdam, non morbos mortesque denunciantis, sed dese ensum Dei venerabilis, ad
humanae conuersationis, rerumque mortalium gratiam: quam stellam, quum nocturno
itinere conspexissent Chaldaeorum profecto sapientes viri, et consideratione
rerum caelestium satis exercitati, quaesisse dicuntur recentem Dei ortum,
repertaque illa maiestate puerili, veneratiesse, et vota tanto Deo conuenicutia
nuncupasse. There is an other more holy and venerable story which makes
mention of the rising of a certain Star, which did not portend sickness and
death, but the descending of God down from heaven to converse among men after
a humane manner, which star when the wise men of Chalde had observed, as they
trauayled in the night, being skillful and excercised in the study of the
motions of the stars, are said to have enquired out the very place where God
was newlye borne, and when they had found it out, to have worshipped him, and
offered vows unto him. And therefore says S. Origin: Si a Mose prophetiae
Baalam sacris insertae sunt voluminibus, In numeros house: 13.
quanto magis ab his descriptae sunt qui inhabitant tunc Mesopotamiam apud quam
magnificus habebatur Balaam, quosque artis eius constat fuisse discipulos? ex
illo denique fertur Magorum genus et institutio in partibus orientis vigere,
qui descripta apud se habent omnia quae prophetauit Balaam, etiam hoc habuerunt
scriptum: Quod orietur stella ex Jaacob, and exurget homo ex Israel. Haec
scripta habebant Magi apud scipsos, and ideo quando natus est Jesus, agnouerunt
stellam, and intellexerunt impleri prophetiam, magis ipsi quam populus Israel
qui prophetarum sanctorum verba audire contempsit. Illi ergo ex his tantum quae
Balaam scripta reliquerat, agnoscentes adesse tempus, venerunt, and requirentes
eum, statim adorarunt. If Balaams prophecy were by Moses himself in erted
into the holy Scriptures, how much more was it kept of the inhabitants of
Mesapotamia among whom Balaam was so famous, and which were Balaams Disciples?
The Magitians which flourish in the East part of the world, had their first
beginning and institution derived from this Balaam, and they which had all
Balaams prophecyes recorded among them, could not be ignorant of this
prophecye, to wit: That a Star should arise out of Iaacob and a man out of
Israel. The Wise men had this prophecye written in their own books, and
therefore when Jesus was borne, they acknowledged the Star, they understood
that the prophecye was fulfilled, better then the people of Israel which
contemned the writings of the holy Prophets and understood the^ not. They
therefore, by that which they had learned out of Balaams writings, acknowledging
the time to be come, went and worshipped Jesus Christ.

Of the slaughter of the Infants at Bethleem by Herod, we have Mat. 2.
Saturnal: L, 2. Cap. 4. Math, 26. John, 9.
the testimonye of Macrobius an heathen man: of the burning of Sodom we have
the testimonye of the place it self which yet remains and shows it self:
of the Eclipse which was at the time of the Passion of our Savior, we have
the testimonye of Phlegon a profane writer but an excellent historian, as I
have already showed: of Noah's flood, we have the testimony of Ovid a Poet: of
the resurrection of our Savior, we have the testimony Metamor: L, 1 Antiquit:
L, 8 Cap, 4.
of Josephus a Jew and no Christian, where he says: Eodem tempore fuit Jesus
vir sapiens, si tamen virum fas est dicere, erat enim mirabilium operum
patrator, and Doctor eorum qui libenter vera suscipiunt, plurimosque tum de
Iudaeis tum de Gentilibus sectatores habuit. Christus hic erat, quem accusatum
a nostrae gentis principibns Pilatus quum addixisset Cruci, nihilominus non
destiterunt illu^ diligere, qui ab initio caeperunt. Apparuit enim ijs tertio
die viuus, ita, vt diuinitus de eo vates hoc and alia multa miranda
praedixerunt. At that time was Jesus a wise man, if it may be lawful to call
him a man, for he was a worker of miracles, and a teacher of such as were
willing to embrace the truth, he had many Disciples both of Jews and Gentiles.
This was Christ, whom when Pilat had Crucified upon the accusation of our
Princes, notwithstanding, they which loved him before, did love him still. But
after the third day, he appeared unto them alive, according as the Prophets
(being inspired from above) fore-tolde this and many other wonderful things
concerning him. That which the Apostle says: that God made all things by his
word, is also confirmed by Mercurius Trismegistus the wise man of Aegipt,
which says Gen, 1, John, 1.
of him: Sanctus es, qui verbo constituisti entia omnia, Thou art holy which
have made all things by thy word. Likewise the incarnation of the word.
Exilijt statim ex deorsum latis elementis Paemandus. Ibidem.
Dei verbum, in purum naturae opificium, et vnitum est opifici menti. The word
of God came out of the lowest element, and became the workmanship of nature,
and is united to the mind. What is the lowest element but the Virgins womb
which is earth as all other flesh? he became the workmanship of nature, that
is, he was made man, he is united to the mind, that is, God the father, which
throughout his books is so called. Again, man made unto Gods image. Omnium
vero Pater, Men's quum esset vita and lux, parturijt hominem sibi similem, quem
adamauit vt proprium partum, pulcher enim erat Patris imaginem habens, reuera
enim Deus dilexit propriam formam, eique tradidit omnia sua ipificia. But the
Mind which is the Father of all things, when his self was life and light,
brought forth man like to him self, loved him as his own offspring, for he was
fair and beautiful, because he was after the Fathers image, for God indeed
loved his own likeness, and gave unto his use and service all his creatures.
What are the chief points of religion contained in the Bible? but the creation
of the world, of Adam and Eve, their placing in Paradise, their seduction by
the Serpent, their expulsion, Noah a Preacher of righteousness before the Flood,
the Deluge, the birth of Christ, his miracles, his death and resurrection, the
Virginitye of Mary, the day of judgment: but all these things are set down
in the first book of Sybils Centra Fausti^s Manichaeum: Lib, 3, Cap, 19.
Oracles. I conclude this point with S. Augustine: Sybilla porro vel Orpheus et
nescio quis Homerus, and si qui alij vates, vel theologi vel sapie^tes, vel
philosophi gentiliu^ de Filio Dei, aut Patre Deo vera praedixisse, seu dixisse
perhibentur, valet quidem aliquid ad Paganorum vanitatem reuincendam, non tame^
ad istorum authoritatem amplectendam, quum illum Deum nos colere ostendimus, de
quo nec illi tacere potuerunt, qui suos congentiles populos idola and demonia
colentes partim docere ausi sunt, and partim prohibere ausi non sunt. If Sybil,
or Orpheus, or Homer, or any other Prophets, or Divines, or Wisards, or
Philosophers of the Gentiles, are said to have either told or fore-tolde true
things concerning God, or the Son of God, that is auaylable to refute the
vanitye of the Gentiles, although not to get sufficient credit to their
works, that therefore whatsoever they write should be embraced, when we can
show that we worship the same God, concerning whom they could not be silent
their selves, when they took upon them to instruct their fellow Pagans, and
idolators, and worshippers of devils in the true knowledge and worship so far
as they durst.

You have heard it (I hope) sufficiently proved, that the books of the Bible
are the word of God, and I am sure we have them among us very true and
uncorrupted. If any Jew or Atheist shall dare to say that they are not now so
pure and free from errors and corruptions as from the beginning they were: I
argue against them in this manner: If they had been corrupted before the time
of our Savior, or in his time, no dout but when he commanded Ioh, 5.
us to search the Scriptures, he would have given us warning to take heed of
such corruptions. And, that since his time they have not been corrupted we may
be secure, because the testimonies which have been alleged in the new
Testament out of the old, do all agree with the old, and the testimonies
which are cyted by the Fathers out of the new Testament, do also agree with
the original out of which they are cyted. To say that the Jews have corrupted
the old Testament it were madness, without proof or just cause of suspicion. I
would that such men as suggest these things, would either certisie vt eus
bono? unto what end the Jews should now in the latter end of the world
corrupt the Hebrew, or else how it should be possible for them being so
scattered, and dispersed in places so far distant and remote one from an
other, corrupt their own books without notice of the whole world? much less
then were they able to corrupt the books which were in the hands of
Christians. But, for as much as our Hebrew Bibles and theirs do agree, and all
new Testaments do likewise agree, it is manifest that neither the old nor
the new Testament are corrupted. Wherefore we may conclude, that we have
(praised be God) his word pure and intyre without any corruption or
diminution, as it was left us by the holy Ghost, which (as the Apostle writes)
is able to make us wise 2 Timothy 3.
to salvation through the Faith which is in Jesus Christ.

Chapter, 8.
Of the will and sufferance of God.

THe Atheists do obiecte as a reproach to Diuinitye, that we know not the
difference between the will of God and his sufferance, And because (say they)
we cannot aptly distinguish these, therefore we cannot define what God is, and
by a consequent, we are not sure that there is a God. This is all one as if
they should say: because the professers of humane arts and liberal sciences
cannot assign to every species their essential differences and proper
passions, therefore there are no such differences nor proper passions belonging
unto them, and by a consequent there are no such things, and by an other
consequent no such species: and again, that these things be not known unto
nature, because they are not known unto us. So man's ignorance shall overthrow
the certaintye and undoubted truth of liberal sciences, and make the secrets of
nature to be no secrets.

But, it is no marvel if we cannot show the difference between the things
which have no difference. In man I confess that will is one thing, and
sufferance is an other, because man is not so powerful, but that his will is
often with-stood, and therefore he suffers against his will. So Moses his
will was, the people Numb. 16.
should have been obedient, but they were rebellious, and he did suffer their
rebellion which he could not hinder. As also men do suffer oftentimes against
their will, that which is in their power to hinder, but not without a greater
mischeife, and so Moses his will being they should keep their wives, yet did
suffer them Dent. 24, Math. 19.
by a bil of diuorcement to put them away, but he did suffer them for the
hardness of their hearts, because, had he not suffered them they would have
slain their wives. But, God is omnipotent as the Apostle speaks: why does he
yet complain? for who resisted his will? he will have mercy upon whom he
will have Rom, 9
mercy, and whom he will he hardne^h. And, as our Savior Math, 11, Luc, 10,
says: Thou have hidden these things from the wise men of the world, because
it was thy will and pleasure. So God suffers so much as he is willing to have
effected, and he wills no more then he suffers, and, if he had not this
omnipotencye, he were not God, and therefore with God to will and to suffer,
are all one. But, idem respectu eiusdem non potest differ a seipso, the same
thing in the same respect cannot differ from it self. These things be lippis
and tonsoribus aeque nota, so common and obuious to every simple man's
understanding, that I marvel how any man should be ignorant of them.

But as for Gods revealed will, it is often contrary to his sufferance, in as
much as it is contrary to his secret will which is all one with his
sufferance. For example, in his revealed will he says: Thou shall not steal,
thou shall not commit adultery, murder, Exodus, 20,
Idolatry, and yet, in his secret will he suffered the Chaldeans to steal,
Aaron to commit idolatry, David to commit murder and Job, 1, Exodus 33, 2, Sam,
16
adultery, for had it not stood with his will they could not have done these
things, because he is omnipotent, and nothing can be done against his will.
Neither can the Atheists scoff at this distinction of Gods secret will and his
revealed will, because they see it so plainly proved. For they find his
revealed will revealed unto them in his written word, where he says: Thou
shall not commit Exodus, 20
adultery, and again they find his secret will to be centrarie to that which
he published and revealed in his word, because he suffered Daniel to commit
adultery, unless they will blasphemously, and contrary to sense and reason,
say that the power of God was so weak, yt he was not able to hinder David's
adultery, so indeed it might follow that there were never a God, for unless he
be omnipotent he is no God. Now his revealed will is many times contrary to his
sufferance, because he suffers that which he has willed and commanded to the
contrary, as I have showed you in David and the rest. And this will and his
sufferance do differ in these points, first, in respect of our knowledge,
secondly in respect of the diverse ends whereunto lie wills and suffers.
Concerning our knowledge, we know his revealed will, ever since it was written
and published in his word, but what he will suffer contrary to that his
commandment, is hidden from us, and until it come to pass, and we see that
he has suffered it. As for diversity of ends which he purposes in his will
and his sufferance, I will show you by a familiar example. He wills that no
man shall steal, that so no theife may excuse himself by pleading ignorance,
and yet he suffered the Chaldaeans to steal Jobs Cattle, that so he might
make open trial of Jobs patience. He willed that Judas should not betray him,
that if he did betray him he should not be excusable, yet secretly he
willed Math, 26, Act, 1, Math, 7,
the contrary and suffered the contrary, that so might he wrought the work
of our redemption. And that this distinction of wills may not seem impossible
in God, we find it also in man, when a earthly Prince many times makes a
public Proclamation that this or that law shall be executed, and yet
notwitstanding has a secret meaning to hinder many particulars, contrary to
that which he has published and to dispense with his own Proclamation
although the people take no notice thereof.

Again these things are said to differ in this manner, only in regard of
our understanding, as his will and his suffera^ce are diversely apprehended by
us, but as they are in God himself, they cannot differ, because in him, power,
wisdom, will, strength, sufferance, and all other things, are all one with
himself. In God, and with God there are no accidents, his will is his self,
his wisdom is his self, and his sufferance is his self, I prove there can be
no accidents with God or in him, because he is not any universal or
particular thing comprehended in the praedicament of substance which is
subject unto accidents. And because he is a transcendent, going above all the
coordinations which are in the praedicamentall line, and actually infinite so
that he cannot be included within the compass of any praedicament, there can
be no kind of differences either accidental or essential in him, he cannot
generically, or numerically, or specifically differ from himself, or in him
self. And so this question is easily answered, and whatsoever the Atheist can
allege against us.

Chapeer, 9.
That the World had a beginning.

MOses writes, that in the beginning God made heaven and Gen, 1.
earth. That is, in the first moment of time, or, when time first began, then
God began his work of the creation of the world. Which time, forasmuch as it
is defined to be Numerus or mensura motus, the measure of the motion of all
natural bodies, and the subject of time is the very body of heaven which is
first moved, and by which all other natural bodies are secondarily moved: time
was not before nor after the heavens, but they were created both together: and,
because after the end of the world motion shall cease: even as before the
beginning, so after the ending there shall be no more time. So then, whereas it
is said: in the beginning God made heaven and earth, it is all one as if he
had said, that once he made them.

By this making is meant creation, which is to make a thing of nothing, having
no matter praecedent out of which he should make it, and this must necessarilye
follow, because if there had been any matter before whereof he should have
made the world, that matter had been in some place, so then, if there were
place and matter, there was a world before the creation of the world, and the
world could not be the first thing that was made. Creation is an action of
God, not intentionall but real, not inward but outward, not immanent but
transient, by the which he gives to things their being. For, although the
will of God alone with reference to the things which are made, were
sufficient, yet there is a kind of influence of Gods power executing his will,
which does afterward follow in his work. It is an action both necessary and
voluntarye: necessary because he decreed, and yet voluntarye because it was
his will to create the world. And that it was no hard thing for him to create
the world of nothing, neither absurd to say that God did create any thing of
nothing, it is apparent, forasmuch as we see creat on in the Angels, which are
immateriall, and therefore cannot be of any praecedent matter, as also the
souls of men, which he then did, and now continually does, create, which are a
manifest argument to prove creation.

Out of this doctrine also follows an other conclusion, that God only is
eternal and before time, because he did once create the heaven and the earth,
and gave them their beginning, whereas before they were not, neither was there
any thing besides himself.

God before the world was made, was in him self, and unto him self instead
of the world, and he was alone, because there was nothing but him self, and
yet not so alone, but that he had all power, wisdom, and happiness in him self.

He had no need of the world or any thing contained in it, for as much as he
was eternally without it, and therefore could stand without it, and had not his
dependence of it. He was infinitely happy in him self, and therefore the
creation of it could add no happynes unto him, and if he had needed it, he
could have made it before. Neither did he then make it because he was wearye of
being without it, or that it displeased him that he had not made it before,
because he did not make that which he would not, but he would have that which
he made, and that which he would he did make in order, and therefore he made it
not rashly but deliberatly, not casually but wisely, and in time he did all
things, and in time, especially he made thee o thou Atheist, that whilst thou
have time to live, thou should acknowledge and worship him.

The manner how he made it, even as Kings do, by his commandment only. He
said the word, and it was done. If you ask how God should speak? or who
should hear his voice when there was nothing besides him self? he spoke, that
is, he decreed with him self that it should be so. If you ask what moved him
to create it, when he could be as well without it? being delighted with the
reflection of his own glory which he saw in him self, made creatures,
because he would have some to be partakers also of that his happiness, as men
and Angels, and for their sakes he made the world, that they might be
contained in it, Angels in heaven, men upon the superficies of the earth, and
all other creatures for the use of man, that so Angels and men seeing his
goodness, whereof they were made partakers, should praise him.

As for the Philosophers, and Poets, and great wise men of the world, although
they enjoyed not the Bible, as were Mercurius Trismegistus, Homer, Hesiodus,
Aristotle, Tully, Ovid, they all held that the world had a beginning, and that
God was the maker of it. How then is it that now our Atheists deny the same?
Surely they think themselves wise, and are become foolish, as the Apostle
speaks. For they think there may be an effect Romans 1.
without a cause, a motion without a moouer, a work without a workman. But
because disputation is not to be held with them which are ignorant, but with
the learned, and the learned will not prejudice their knowledge so much, as to
be thought not able to yield a reason of their assertions: let us examine the
reasons which they allege, why they should hold that the world w^^ (...) out
beginning?

Aristotle (say they) affirms, that there can be no motion without a mouer,
and there must be a due proportion inter motorem and id quod mouetur, between
that which is moved and that by whom it is moved: there is one Sphere which is
called primum mobile, the first body which is moved, so there must be one
first agent to move the same, but he did move from eternity, there was
therefore some thing which from eternitye was to be moved by him, and that is
the highest Sphere. For (say they) if he did not from all eternitye move this
Sphere, but began the world, then non agens factum est agens, of no agent he
was made an agent, which could not be without alteration, but that could not be
because God is not subject to alteration, for then should he also be subject to
corruption, and so should be no God. The argument I say, does not follow, for,
although that God is said to be primus motor ab aeterno, the first mouer from
eternitye, yet he did not actu mouere ab aterno, this motion of his was not in
action eternallye, and therefore it is not rightly inferred that there should
before that cause any change in God. For God what-soeuer in his eternal
foreknowledge he intended to do, is said to do it in the same manner as he
intended it, and that motion which was not in rerum natura subsistens,
subsisting in the nature of things as they term it, yet in God was always
subsisting, with whom all future things are present, which called the things
that were not, by their names, as if they were. He ordained every thing that it
should be, even before the foundation of the world was laid, the reason is,
because that eternal and divine essence does not acknowledge time, he sees
things past, present, and future, not successiuelye, but all at once.
Therefore they have not yet attained to the true understanding of Aristotle's
meaning, which argue in this manner.

Naturally I confess, motion is without beginning, because one motion cannot
begin without an other precaedent motion, so likewise it cannot end without
alteration, because in omni vere continuo physico, in every true natural
thing whose parts have their coherence together, as this has, there is a
perpetual succession which may be divided into infinite parts of the same
proportion. For even as in time, and every part thereof, there is one present
moment or instant, which argues that there is an other past, and an other
future: so in every motion which is measured by time, there is one present
mutation, which argues one motion precedent, and an other subsequent, because
every motion is a change, either of substance, or of quantitye, or of qualitye,
or ofplace. And therefore the first moment of time cannot be assigned, nor the
first mutation which is in motion. The natural Philosophers could not discern
by nature, whether was first the Hen or the egg, because one cannot be without
the other, and therefore they supposed that eternallye the generation of one was
the corruption of an other, and so there should be an eternal revolution of
things, which indeed naturally must be so, but metaphisically it is not so,
because there is a God above nature by whom nature is ouer-ruled. Neither is
it marvel though Philosophye and Faith do not speak alike concerning the
beginning of the world, when the Metaphysics and their principles differ so
much from the Physics and their principles, and Aristotle dissenteth so much
from Aristotle, one and the self same man from himself.

It is one thing to affirm that the world simply had no beginning, and an
other thing to say that nature did not make the world, and that by the power
of nature it shall have no end, for, God and Nature are diverse things.
Aristotle confessed that the world began, and shall have an end, in respect of
the divine and supernatural power, because he said that God as he is the first
mouer, so he is the first cause of motion, and actuallye infinite, a most free
agent, not tied to any secondary causes, instruments, and means whereby he
works. He which is eternal was before all motion, and can be without motion
or time, because he made both motion and time. Aristotle denies that any thing
which is eternal can be measured by time, he denies God to be in time, and by
a consequent he denies him to be tied unto motion which is measured by time.

God moved eternallye, but his motion was metaphysicall, which was nothing
else, but to will, to nill, and to understand. The world therefore is not
without beginning in respect of the first cause which is God, but of the second
cause which is nature, for then nature should be injurious unto her self, if
she should do vyolence unto her self, and be a cause of her own destruction.
And therefore, according to nature there is a reference and due proportion
between him which moves and that which is moved, and the motion it self,
and so the eternity of the mouer must argue the eternity of the thing which
by him is moved, and of the motion, but God has, and exercises his
metaphysical power and authority over all things, whereby he counterchecketh,
and over rules these things.

The arguments therefore which the Philosophers produce to prove the eternity
of the world, are reduced unto these. First, if there were any first motion,
the mouer and the mo^ued body from whence this motion proceeded had their
beginning, or they were without beginning, if they had a beginning they began
by a precedent motion, because nothing can begin but by motion, and so that
which is called the first motion could not be the first because another went
before it. But if they were without beginning, it is a great absurdity to say
that he which was an eternal mouer, yet did not move, and that which was
always moved, notwithstanding was without motion. Secondly, time is eternal,
for it is in the definition of time, that there is always in it a present
instant or moment, which joins together that which is past and that which is
future, and therefore the first instant of time cannot be assigned, and
therefore motion is also eternal because there is a just proportion between
the measure which is time, and the thing measured, with is motion. Thirdly, there
must be a proportion between the cause and the effect, the mouer and that which
is moved, because there can be no comparison between that which is infinite
and that which is finit, that which is eternal and that which is temporal.
But this one answer is instead of David his sling to kill Golias, of Iudeth her
sword to cut of the 1. Sam. 17. Judith. 11. Exodus 7. Iudic. 16.
head of Holophernes, of Sampsons Iawe bone to slay all the Phillistins, and of
Moses his rod to devour the Serpents of the Sorcerers of Aegipt, to wit that
these things hold only in natural mouers which are tied unto instruments
and means, but not in God which is a supernatural and free agent, these
arguments hold in things that be finit not infinite, physical not
metaphisicall, which work of necessity and not of will, but otherwise they be
no good consequence, they do not hold.

Let this therefore be the state of the question. God had eternally the very
shape and Idea of the world which he conceived in his mind, and he eternally
decreed when and how it should be, even as when a workman determines to
frame a piece of work, he first frames it in his mind, but does not
presently begin the same: so he decreed eternally, and before all time, when,
and how the world should be in time. He which is the eternal fountain of
goodness, which fountain notwithstanding did not eternally issue forth into
streams, but in time, did not eternally communicate unto others, this his
goodness, but was a Fountain of water, which for a long season lies hidden
in the earth before it does gush out. But he was not as a Carpenter which
makes an house because he has need of an house. Therefore he did not
eternally create, not because he could not but because he would not, and he
would not because he had eternally decreed that the world should be in time,
and he so decreed, that so he might bring us to the knowledge of himself, for
as much as when we know that the world was not always, we are forced to
confess that there is a superior cause from whence it had his beginning,
whereas if it had bin created from eternity, and had had no beginning, we
could not so easily have discerned how God should have bin the creator of it.
And therefore it cannot follow in this place, that there was in God any
mutation or mutabilitie, because before the world was made he was not willing
that it should be made, and afterward when it was made he was willing. S.
Augustine says: Nouit Deus agens quiescore, and DeCluit, Doi. Lib. 12. Ca. 17
quiescens agere, potest ad actionem nouam sempiternum adhibere consilium,
idque sine mutatione sui, quoniam in infinitum non cadit mutatio. God knows
how to be an agent doing nothing, and to do nothing being an agent, to bring
his eternal decree to a new action without any alteration of himself,
because that which is infinite is not subject to alteration. You cannot say
properly that God made not the world sooner because he would not, because with
God there is nothing sooner or later, for although God does work in time, yet
he cannot be apprehended by time, his actions are measured by time, not in
respect of himself, but only in respect of us, that so his actions may be
demonstrated, and made manifest unto us. Neither ought these things to seem
strange unto us, because the very light of natural reason gives us thus much
to understand, yt there is an order of causes, and that one being subordinate
unto an other, we must still ascend up until we come to one which is above all
the rest, which is of it self actually infinite, and that is God. And again,
reason does tell us that because God is of an infinite nature, his essence is
simple, not tied to means by which he works (for according to the rules of
Philosophy, that agent is most noble which needs the fewest means), and
being not tied to means he needs no matter to work by. Also reason does
tell us that as every thing is, so it works, but God is of himself absolute
and not depending of any, and therefore works in the same manner, that he is
a free agent and therefore cannot be compelled, that he is omnipote^t and
therefore nothing can be held or difficulte unto him, and because he is
infinite, he is transcendent above all the bounds of nature. Out of all these
principles I conclude. The world had a beginning, God which is everlasting made
it in time, and he made it of nothing, that is, without any matter precedent
or going before the creation of it.

Chapter. 10.
Of the Soul of man, what it is? whence it comes? and the immortallitie of
it.

AN Atheist having heard a Preacher in his Sermon make mention of the soul:
the Sermon being ended, asked him what the Soul was? and whether it were any
thing or nothing? After disputation between them both, the Atheist said: I
will show you what it is. So he caused a candle to be lighted and brought to
the Table, he blew it out, and said: your soul is no more then the flame of
that candle, you see an end of that, it is blown out, and so shall it be with
your soul when you die. Paraduenture, some cause of this ungodly assertion
might be the ambiguitie of the word. For S. Augustine in diverse places
calls the Soul by no better name then Flatus which properly signifies no
more then a breath, or a blast, Deus fecit omnem flatum says he, God made
every blast, meaning every soul, and it is Adoptatum epist. 157. Gen 2
written that God breathed into Adam the breath of life. And in the Scriptures
it is sometimes confounded with (...) which is a breath, and so (...) and
(...), anima and spiritus, a Soul and a breath or a blast, in signification
are all one. Therefore that I may distinguish the aequiuocation or ambiguitie
of the word, that nothing may be mistaken, it signifies these things, 1. the
life of any thing, anima mea est in manibus meis says David, my soul is in
mine hands, meaning his life. 2 a desire, so the soul of Psalm. 18.
David was joined to the soul of Jonathan. 3. the whole man 1. Sam. 18. Gen,
40, 2. Sam. 1.
consisting of body and soul, so 76. souls descended with Jacob into Aegipt.
4. a blast, or breath, Saul said to the Amelakite, I pray thee come upon me
and slay me, for anguish is come upon me, anxietas apprehendit me, etiamsi
anima mea adhuc in me est, because my Soul is yet within me. And it was said
of Eutychus which fell down dead for sleeping at S. Paul's Sermon, anima eius
est in ipso, his soul is yet in him, that is, there is yet breath in his body
that he may be revived again. 5. It is also taken for nothing, so said the
Prophet: we have conceived, and Act, 20.
bin in Travel, and we have brought forth a soul, poperimus Esa. 26.
spiritum, that is nothing, because the soul or spirit although it be some
thing, and a most excellent thing, yet because it is not visible, nor any
sensible thing, he calls it nothing. 6. It is taken for that which is
regenerate by the spirit of God, so says the Apostle: Gal. 5.
(...). the spirit lusts against the flesh, that is, the spirit as it is
guided by God, does strive and wrestle with it self. 7. when the soul and the
spirit do concur together in the same sentence, the soul signifies man's
will, and the spirit his understanding, so the Apostle says: I pray God that
your whole spirit and soul and 1. These. 5
body may be kept blameles, etc. But last of all, and in this place it is that
which is defined by Aristotle: Actus corporis organici in potentia vitam
habentis, an act or perfection of the body which gives unto the body life,
sense, motion, vegetation, etc. And of this signification of the soul we are
to dispute in this place.

Concerning the original of the soul, which I proposed in the second place,
it is agreed upon by the best Divines and Philosophers, that since the first
Sabbath, God ceased from creating any more visible things, but yt he does
Quotidie noues animas creare, create new souls querie day and hour, and
moment, for as much as every moment young Children are quickened in their
mothers wombes, and that Anima hominis creando infunditur et infundendo
creatur, man's soul is in one moment infused by creation, and created by
infusion of it into the body. But Optatur desires to be resolved by S.
Augustine concerning this doubt of the original August epist. 157
of the soul: vtrum animae vt corpora, propagatione nascantur, sintque ex illa
vna anima quae primo homini creata est, vel Deus sine vlla propagatione animas
nouas faciat singulis proprias? Whether every man's soul is made out of Adams
souie, as every man's body is made out of Adams body, that so, by propagation
a soul should come out of a soul, as a body comes out of a body? or
whether God does especially create to every man's body a new soul proper only
to that body? He answers: that in the same manner as God made Adams soul of
nothing, so he made all men's souls of nothing, and he proves it thus. 1.
When Adam Gen, 2,
says of Eve: flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone, he does not say, soul
of my soul. 2. If any man hold that the soul of man comes of man, he must
show that as one light is kindled of an other, and one fire lighted of an
other without diminishing of their former light and heat: so the soul must
proceed out of an other soul, the same soul out of which it proceeds being
not diminished, which cannot be expressed how it might be by the wit of man.
And besides, says he, it is dangerous to hold so, least ye fall into the
error of Tertullian which deemed the soul to be a body and not a spirit, for
so it must be borne (...) of seed, as the body is. If they speak of semen
incorporeum a spiritual seed infused inuisibly into the body at the time of
ma^s conception: suppose that which is often seen, that that which is
conceived does prove an obortiue and untimely fruit when it is Embrio, or non
homo, not a perfect man, not fully shaped in the womb that spiritual seed
must either return whence it came, which it cannot do, or perish with the
body, and then will follow this absurdity, that an immortal soul is borne of
corruptible and mortal seed. Tolet the Jesuit shows that man's soul cannot
come ax traduce, by any Propagation, for these causes. 1. No natural De anima
Lib 3
agent can produce and bring forth that which is above it self, but the soul
of man is above nature, because it comprehends supernatural things. The
mayor is plain because no natural agent can work, but it must work upon
matter, the action must be a material action, whereas the soul is
immateriall. 2. Every natural agent, as I have showed, does work upon matter
and the matter is capable of division, but the soul of man is indivisible. 3.
God has created souls in the same manner as he created Angels, but the
Angels were created of nothing, therefore men's souls were created of nothing.

And because I have entered into this discourse concerning the soul, that I may
leave the Atheist for a little season, and handle one point for the instruction
of the Divine. The question arises upon this discourse, how the soul comes
to be infected with sin? Pope Gregory the great disputes in this manner:
Si anima oriatur cum carne ex substantia Adae, cur non simul moritur Ad Secun
linu^ epist. 53.
eum carne? si cum carne non nascitur, cur peccato obligatur? The soul is
either borne together with the body of the substance of Adam, or else it is
only infused from above: if it be borne with the body of the substance of
Adam, then should it also die with the body: if it be infused of God, how can
it being newly created, and immediately coming from God which is perfectly
righteous, be originally and naturally sinful, as is the flesh which
originally descends from a sinful man? Optatus desires to be instructed
how, when, and where, the soul which of it self is pure, begins to take
infection? S. Augustine answers that he is not able to give him full
satisfaction therein. Pelagius obiecteth against S. Augustine in this manner. If
the flesh only descended from Adam, then is the flesh only polluted with
sin, and not the soul, quia iniustum est vt hodie nata anima non ex Adae
massa tam antiquum peccatum portet alienum, quia nulla ratione conceditur vt
Deus qui propria peccata dimittit vnum imputet alienum, because it cannot stand
with the justice of God, that the soul which is newly borne and not descended
of Adam, and therefore having no sin of her own, should bear the sin of an
other man, namely of Adam, which was committed so long before, For it is not to
be thought that God which forgiueth us our own sins will impute an other
man's sins unto us. The soul says he, at the first creation is either pure
or corrupted, impure it cannot be, because it comes immediately from God, and
being at the first clean, how comes it to be unclean? how can a spirit be
infected by a body? that which is immateriall be polluted by that which is
material? But Mr. Calvin does satisfy that doubt saying: Iustitut Lib. 1
that although corruption be inherent both in the soul and the body, yet the
cause of that hereditarye corruption is not in the substance either of the body
or the soul, but only it was ordained of God that the imperfections of the
first parents should be common to all the Children, even as according to the
laws of earthly Princes such as are descended of parents attainted of high
treason, are also stained in their blood, prejudiced in respect of their lands
and honors by their fathers offenses committed before their time, and whereof
they were ignorant, and it is but imitatio diuinae iusticiae, an imitatio^ of
that justice wc is with God. So the^ we are borne of impure seed as the
Psalmist teaches, and not Psalm. 50.
only the body, but also the soul is infected with sin, by reason of this
our birth, although sin be more apparent in the body, then in the soul, and
the only cause why the soul is thus infected is this our impure and unclean
birth, and yet the soul is not of seed, or any material thing, but it
comes immediately from God. And it is a weak argument which Pelagius uses:
that because believing parents do sanctify their Children, therefore 1. Cor.
7.
Children cannot receive infection from their Parents which are regenerate. For
the children do lineally descend from their parents by carnal generation, but
not by spiritual regeneration, because regeneration is not from beneath, but
from above, not from men, but from the holy Ghost. Sanctification is an
especial blessing John. 3,
given in particular: but so, that the general course of al mankind may take
hold of all men, for as much as they all are the Sons of men. Natus est homo
natura, sanctificatus ex supernaturali gratia, that we are borne, it is the
work of nature, that we are sanctified it is supernatural, and of the
especial grace of God. But I return to the Atheist.

The soul I say, as it appears by these premises, is of a more excellent and
divine nature the^ that it should be subject to mortality and corruption. And
therefore, that we may not complain with Theophrastus, who accused Nature
because she gave to Ravens and Hearts a long life whom length of life did no
way profit, but made ma^s life of that shortness, vt tum extingueretur quum
incaepisset sapere, that even then he was cut off and utterly extinguished
when he did but begin to be wise: I will produce these arguments which are
alleged by natural Philosophers to prove the immortallitie of the soul,
that I may refute Theophrastus, and show plainly that we are not utterly
extinguished by death, and that although we do but then begin to be wise
when we are near our death, yet we do not then cease to be wise, but then
we increase in wisdom when the soul is separated from the body. My reasons
are these.

The first is drawn from the understanding of man, for man's soul is of
infinite capacity, the more it understands the more it is able to understand.
It is able to comprehend not only the whole world, but infinite worlds. In
numbering it can add and multiply so far, that of addition and multiplication
there shall be no end. It is able to imagine infinite perfection. But,
whatsoever is infinite in capacity, is also infinite in continuance, because, as
the propriety of any thing is, so is the existence of the same. But, for
as much as it is infinitlye capable in this life, and cannot be satisfied in
this life, therefore it must be satisfied in the life to come.

2. The object of man's understanding is truth, as Tully speaks, not in
particular, but in general, which is the way whereby Officiorum lib. ^
all things are known, And therefore it cannot be satisfied until it come
unto that in which all truth consists, and that is God, which is truth it
self according to his essence, for no accidents are in him. And for as much as
this cannot be attained unto in this life, therefore it is reserved unto a
better life.

3. The object of man's understanding is ENS, every thing that is, but because
there are some things material, and some spiritual, it must conceive them
both, and as for the things which be immateriall and without bodies, it cannot
distinctly conceive them in this frail body, therefore the conceiving of them
belongs to the soul when it is separated from the body.

4. All men by nature desire knowledge as the Philosopher speaks, but scire
est rem per causas cognoscere, to know Metaphisicorum. L. 1. C. 1.
Postereorum. Lib. 1. C, 2
a thing is to judge and discern of the causes of it. So then because it is
natural to every man when he sees any effect, to search out the causes of
that effect: and again, when he has found out the cause, to search farther,
and examine what is the cause of that cause, and so to ascend higher until he
come to the highest cause which is God. And that cannot be in this life,
because the essence of God is not conceived by discoursing of him, but by
perfectly seeing of him, and beholding of him face to face even as he is.

My second reason is drawn from the will of man. That also is infinite, for he
can love that which is good, not only in the first degree, but also in the
second and third, neither can there be any end of his love, but still his
loving and liking may increase, as St. Augustine says in his Meditations: En
amo te Domine, et si hoc non sufficit, amo teplus, et si hoc parum est amabo te
validius, Behold Lord I love thee, if this be not enough, I will love thee more,
and if that be not yet enough, I will still love thee more. Man may desire that
which is infinitely good, and this infinite capacitye of the will must be
fulfilled, and because not in this life, therefore after death.

2. The liberty also and freedom of man's will (I mean not in Divine but in
civil and Domestical affairs) is of an infinite power, which is a sufficient
argument to prove the immortality of the soul. For if man will not, no
creature is able to force his will to love this thing or that, voluntas potest
cogi, who can impose a necessity upon man to be willing or unwilling to do
this or that? but only God which has created both the will and understanding
and is therefore above them both.

3. The object of the will is that whatsoever is good, I mean all goodness in
general, and therefore never rests, but still wills and desires, until
it come to the perfect fruition of God in whom all goodness is included, who
is essentially good in himself.

4. The will of man moves it self to one thing and an other, and is not
moved by any natural agent, and as the will is, so is the essence it self,
and therefore not subject to corruption.

A third reason, the very appetit of man is also infinite, it finds no
contentment among all the things which are under the Sun, it is never
satisfied with the desire of happiness, knowledge, honor, glory, riches, and
eternity, that it may live after death. But to whatsoever nature has given
this appetite, it has also appointed how this appetite shall be satisfied,
and that must be only after death.

A fourth, the very operations of the soul it self without any reference
unto the body. As for example, to believe, goes far above sense, and is an
act separated from it. To distinguish between a body and a spirit, to imagine
those things which are but only imaginary, as vacuum, infinitum, in rerum
natura, emptines, infinitenes in worldly and natural things, mathematical
lines, to make sillogismes, to define, divide, demonstrate. And these things
it does without the conditions and proprieties of the body, and it does these
things the better, the more it is abstracted from the body, and therefore does
then, best of all when it is altogether out of the body, and at full liberty,
these things which do not depend upon the body neither can be accomplished by
the Organs and Instruments of the body.

A fifth, nothing can be destroyed by that wherein the perfection of it does
consist, but ye very perfection of the soul does consist it, the abstraction
and separation of it from the body which appears by the judgment of all
moral Philosophers which hold the very highest perfection of virtue to be
then when man does not follow the passions and perturbations of the body, but
does subdue them wholly to the mind and understanding.

The sixth, There is a kind of reflection of the mind and all the faculties
thereof, above it self the understanding understands that it does
understand, the will wills that it shall be willing, the memory remembers
that it does remember, so it understands that it wills and does remember,
which no bodily nor mortal thing can perform, it is therefore spiritual and
immortal.

The seventh. Besides the usual manner of attaining to knowledge which is
proper to it self, the soul has also a more divine knowledge by the
influence of an higher cause, which is by revelation and infusion. But when it
has such revelations it is abstracted from the body, and therefore it is in a
more perfect estate when it is not at all in the body.

The eight. The first original or beginning of the soul is not by any
natural agent, because it is more perfect then the body, for no effect which
is more perfect can proceed from a cause which is of less perfection. Therefore
as it proceeded not from any natural cause, so it cannot be destroyed by any
natural cause, and therefore it cannot dye by separation of it from the body.

The nynth. The soul subsisteth by it self, and therefore it cannot die by
any accident: The antecedent I prove, because it has operations proper to it
self, as I have showed.

The tenth. Every thing which is corrupted has his bane and destruction
either by that which is contrary to it self, as heat by cold, drynes by
moisture, or by the absence of that whereby it is preserved and nourished, as
the lamp goes out for want of oil, or by the corruption of the subject in
which it is, as the heat of the fire when the fire is extinguished, but
nothing is contrary to the soul because it is a substance and not an
accident, neither does it depend upon any material cause, but only on God,
neither has it any subject because it is no accident.

The eleventh. That which dies with the body must also languish and decay with
the body, and wax old when the body is old, as it appears by sense, motion
and vegetation, which in old men do fail, but understanding does increase in
age.

The twelfe is the very conuenience and agreement which the soul has with
God, and the Angels it argues the immortality thereof, for why are they said
to be immortal, but because they are as the soul is, spiritual, immateriall,
simple, no way mixed or depending of the body?

The thirteenth. What is more common in this life, then the prosperitye of the
wicked and the aduersitye of the godly? But it cannot stand with Gods justice
nor his providence, that there should be no reward for wel-doers, and no
punishment for ungodly men, therefore because it is not in this life, it must
needs be in an other life with cannot be unless the souls of men be immortal.

To conclude, It is incident to good men to hope well, to evil men to fear
and be troubled in their minds because of their offenses, there is Conscience.
But there cannot be Conscience without immortality of the soul. Therefore I
conclude, that the soul of man is immortal.

Chapter, 11.
Of Noah his Arc and the Deluge.

THe Atheists dispute against the storye of Noah his Arc, and the manner of the
drowning of the world with water, saying: it was an impossibilitye that so
many creatures should be preserved in so small a vessel, or that the world
should be so destroyed. For the better satisfaction of such vngoldly men,
concerning that storye, I observe these things which follow.

Concerning the multitude of Beasts which were in the Arc, of those which
were clean were 7. of every sort, that is, 3, couples for increase, for meat
when it should be permitted to eat flesh, for labor, and other uses of man,
and the odd beast for Sacrifice. Of unclean beasts, 2. of every sort for
increase. As for Fishes, they were in the Sea, and not destroyed, because they
were farther separated from the sins of men, for they were in an other
element, as also such other creatures as can live in the waters, as Otters,
seawolues, Swannes, water-soules etc. Agairie, from the kinds of beasts which
were in the Arc were excluded such as bred not by generation, as Mules, such
Serpents and creeping things as are engendered by the Sun out of putrefaction,
such as being wholye perished might be restored again in other creatures which
were preserved, as Mules which are engendered of an horse and a she Ass.
Therefore these beasts which were in the Arc, were only such as lived upon
the dry, and proceeded by generation. The number of beasts (according to
Plinye and Gesner) are not Naturalihist. Cap. 10. De Animalibus.
known to be above one hundredth and fiftye kinds. And it is very likely that
they which are not known, should be neither great, nor many. And of them which
are great, there are not above fortye kinds.

As for the capacitye of the Arc, it was 300. cubits in length, 50, in breadth,
30. in height: there were 3. chambers or floores in it, therefore there was
room enough to receive all these beasts, and many more, and meat for them
for a long time, that we need not for the defense of this storye to fly to
Geometrical cubits, saying: that Moses being learned in Geometrye and all the
arts of the Egiptians, did understand Geometrical cubits, but plain Act, 7.
cubits. Such a cubit is the length of a man's arm from his elboe to the top of
his middle finger. Though (no dout) such cubits were longer then now they are,
because men were of higher stature then now they are. But the length thereof
being 300. cubits, shows that it was 5. times the length of Salomons Temple
which 1 Reg, 6.
was but 60. cubits long, the breadth of it being 50. it was twice and an half
as broad as being but 20. cubits broad. But, the length of it being 300. cubits
and the breadth 50. being joined together, do make of square measure, by the
common rules of art 15. thousand cubits. Moreover, it contained in the height
of it 3. stories as I have showed, one being above the other, in regard
whereof, it was 3. times as capable of the creatures, containing 3. times the
measure of the lowest room, excepting only the thickness of the boordes
which made the partition between the floores, that is in the whole 45.
thousand cubits, and every several floor containing 10. cubits in height.
The food of the beasts, whatsoever it was before, it might behaye, herbs and
berryes, for what food would not hunger cause them to eat?

The worke-manship, though it were above the knowledge of man to devise it, and
contriue it in such sort, and above his cunning and strength to guide so great
a vessel on the water, and to keep it from wrackes: it was an hundred years
in building, it needed not to be lanched out into the water as Ships are,
because the water of itself did bear it up when all the earth was overflowed.

From whence had God such great quantity of water to drown the world? There
were two immediate causes, the Sea beneath, because the fountaynes of the deep
were opened, and the heaven above, for the windows of the heaven were also
open. Concerning the waters from beneath: The veins and pores of the earth
were broken up to send forth more abundance of water, the waters which were
before gathered together into certain places began to swell, and being
rarefied over flowered the banks, that, as before, according to nature the
water was to hide and cover the whole earth, yet, secundum naturae consilium,
according to the counsel and dispensation of nature, for the preservation of
these creatures the water and the earth made but one globe: so now again, for
the destruction of these creatures, the waters did hyde and cover the whole
earth, as according to nature they ought to do. And we see by our own
experience, though not in general, because God has promised otherwise, yet in
particular, how often Gen ^
the water goes beyond the banks, and makes breaches into the land. And it
is in man's reason impossible how it should be otherwise, but that the water
being a liquid and fluid substance, so far in quantitye exceeding the earth,
and in place higher then the earth, should presentlye drown the earth. But
only God does supernaturally govern it, and restrain it against the nature
of the first creation. The windows of heaven were open, that is, as the Text
does expound it, it rayned 40. days and 40. nights, all the clouds were
melted and dissolved into rain, and whereas before God separated and divided
the waters from the waters that some Gen, 1.
were beneath in the Sea and rivers, and part of the earth and some in the
air frozen and congealed into clouds: now to make a deluge and general
ouer-flowing, he brake the partition, and let them be at liberty as they were
before.

I could for their better contentment stand upon such natural causes as are
besides the Text, as some Divines and Philosophers have done, which by the
windows of heaven understand Cancer Pisces, Heiades, Pleiades, and Orion among
the stars, Mars, Venus and Luna among the planets. Also I could allege
Mechlinus the scholar of Albertus Magnus in his Co^mentaryes, which In magnas
Albumasaris coniunctiones.
writes that before the flood there was a Conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn
in the end of Cancer, contrary to the Ship called Argo, which represented the
Arc, and that this Conjunction did portend an inundation, although I need not
to stand upon these things, because the natural causes which I have alleged
out of the Text are sufficient.

But they object, that the waters covered the mountains 15. cubits upward, as
it is in the Text, and they ask how that could be, seeing there were but two
causes, the swelling of the waters beneath, and the rain from above. For some
mountains are higher then the middle region of the air, and by a consequent
Selius Polihist: Cap. 18. Herodian. Herodotise in Melpo^^^^^.
they are higher then the clouds, as namely Olympus in Thessaly, Artas in
Barbary, the Alps etc: My answer is, that if any part of the earth is above
the clouds, it is natural for the water also to be above that part of the
earth, be it never so high, therefore it is not to be wondered at, much less
is it impossible or absurd. Again, though the clouds are not above these few
mountains, yet the firmament or middle region of the air it self is far
above them, and although some of these mountains are found to be by the
plum-lyne or perpendiculer 15. surlonges ascending from the plain, and the
clouds are commonly lifted up but 10. furlonges above us, yet sometimes they
are lifted up 40. furlonges as Pliny shows. Again, the very waters of the
deep do stand Lib: 2 cap 23.
above the mountains. You ask how that may be? you say they are beneath the
firmament, and that therefore they cannot be above the mountains, seeing these
above the firmament are the clouds which are a great deal lower then the
mountains, unless the waters which are beneath the firmament, should be above
the waters which are above the firmament? To this I answer, that the mistes
which are in the vallyes are reckoned among the waters which are above the
firmament, and yet are sometimes dissolved into rain before they are drawn up
so high as the mountains, for which cause they seem to them which be in the
vallyes, to be gathered together in the tops of the mountains, and do hyde
the mountains with darkness: in the tops of which mountains, yet Springes do
arise, which are of the waters beneath the firmament.

For an other cauell, they object, that the flood began the 17. day of the
second month, that the rain continued 40. days, that the waters prevailed
150. days, whereupon they ask how it could be that the Arc rested upon the
mount of Armenia the 7. day of the 7. month, which by this account was 4. days
before the falling of the water? to them I answer: the waters prevailed on the
earth 150. days, albeit they began to be diminished before the full end of
150. days. albeit they began to be deminished before ye full end of 150. days.
For nothing lets but yt they might well be said to prevail, that is to be
strong and deep upon the earth, albeit they were in part diminished, and that
the Arc might draw so deep of water, as the mount being high, to rest upon
it. And where it is said after the Arc rested upon the mountain then the
waters were abated, that is, it might then more plainly and sensibly be
perceived and apeare to the eyes of Noah.

The heathen historyes do mention this Deluge, although after a corrupt manner,
which is not sufficient to strengthen the truth, Giuitat: Dei. Lib. 18.
but yet serves to convince the Atheist. And though S. Augustine says:
Diluuium gentium nec Latina nec Graeca nouit historia, no heathenish writers
do remember it, meaning, without corruption: yet Josephus says: Huius arstem
diluuij and arcae meminerunt omnes Barbaricae historiae scriptores, that all
Barbarian historiographers have mentioned this Deluge and Arc of Noah, Anti,
Li: ca. 4.
whereof he reckons these: namely Berosus the Chaldaean, Hicronimus the
Egiptian, Phoenix Mnasseas, Nicholaus Damascenus. And Eusebius remembers
Greek writers, Alexandrum Polihistorem, Lib: 9. de preparat: Euang: Metam:
Lib. 1.
Molonem, Empoleneum and others which have written of it under the name of
Deucalion, as they have received it from others by report. Ovid makes a
lively description of this Deluge under the name of Deucalio^. And Justin
Martyr says: we Christians call him Noah whom the heathens call Deucalion.
Plutarch says, that the Dove which was sent out of Deucalion his Arc Apolog:
1, Lib: de industria Animalium, Lib, d: dea Syria.
brought to him a token of the fall of the water. And Lucian an A theist yet
says: that this generation of man which now is, was not from the beginning,
but that it wholye perished which then was, and that this progenye which now
is, is an other which descended from Deucalion. And of the generation which
perished, that they were cruel, wicked, perjured, they harbored not
strangers, they were inexorable, for which cause they suffered great calamitye,
for suddenlye the earth poured out great store of water, great quantitye of
rain fell from the sky, the rivers swelled, the Sea arose to such an height,
that the world was drowned and all things perished. Of that multitude only
Deucalion was left alive who was preserved by these means: He put him self
with his wife and children in a great Arc which he had made, when he had
imbarqued him self, there came unto him Swine, Horses, Lions, and all other
Beasts which the earth nourished, two of every sort. So God left not him
self without witness among the heathen, that thereby he might stir them up to
search out the truth, which only remained in the Church of God.

Chapter, 12.
Of the destruction of Sodom.

WHen Lot had entered into Zoar, the Lord rayned upon Sodom fire and brimstone,
and burned the City, and the plain, Gen, 19, Deuteronomy. 29. Esa. 13.
and all the inhabitants, and all that grew upon the earth. And Lots wife
behind him looked back, and she was turned into a Pillar of Salt. This is
the slorie of the Bible, and what ground has any Atheist to deny it? The
Christian may easily confound the Atheist, because the relics of it do yet
remain, and the place does show it self. Concerning the time when it was
done, it is set down in the Text, that it was burned in the days of Abraham,
which arose early in the morning and beheld the smoke of it mounting up as the
smoke of a Furnace. And by just computation it is well known to have been
about 392. years after the sloud. The place is well known to all
Cosmographers, and is daily seen by many trauaylers: it is one of the three
famous Lakes which are in the Land of Canaan, which are commonly by the figure
catachresis called seas. For in that Land there are three such waters, the Sea
of Galilie where Peter, Andrew, James, Math. 4.
and John, were about their nets, when our Savior did call them to be
Apostles. The Sea of the Gaderens, into which the heard of Math, 8,
swine did run hedlong when the Devils had entered into them by the permission
of our Savior Christ being beyond Jorden toward Arabia, and the waters are at
this time venomous, and as it is thought, polluted by those swines. The third
is this which we are now to speak of and the subject of our discourse. A
great part of it, which then was land is now all water, and is called
Asphaltites of (...) which signifies pitch, because great quantity Vide
Garcaei meteora.
of pitch boyleth out of it, and it is also called Mare mortuum the dead Sea,
or mare mortuorum the sea of the dead, because no fish nor other creatures can
live in it. The nature of it is such that if any bordes be thrown into it,
they will presently sink to the bottom, if any vessel be upon it which has
men in it, so long as the men live it will be above the water, but as soon as
the men are dead being poisoned with the stink of it, the vessel will presently
sink. In so much that when Vespasian the Emperor had caused certain men to
have their hands tied behind them that they might not be able to shift for
themselves, and so to be violently plunged into the botome: they were presently
driven up again with as great a violence unto the top, and so sloted upon the
superficies of the water until they were dead. The quantity of this stinking
lake is about 8. high Almaigne miles, with in the compass of it were situated
these five Cities, Sodom, Gomorah, Adama, Seboim, and Segor, which were
destroyed with fire and brimstone, of the which the chief and principal was
Sodom. In this water stands a Rock, which to them that behold it,
represents the image of a woman, that is Lots wife. In the banks round about
it, and all the ground which is near it, are some relics of these Cities yet
remaining, for the earth does look like ashes taken out of a furnace, there
are great stones and pieces of rocks which look as if they had bin in the
fire, great heaps of salt, a smell of fire as if the place were still
burning, a filthye savor of brimstone, such smokes and vapors continually
rising out of the ground, that they do annoy the villages and inhabitants
which are any way nere that place. Some Trees do grow there, and bring
fruit, but the fruits thereof never come to rypenes: if a man gather one of
the Apples and cut it with his knife, they are full of nothing but sparkles of
fire and noisome smoakes. And therefore, for the confirmation of this story,
besides the witness of the Scriptures, we need no more then the testimony of the
place it self, which does most plainly discover it self. And therefore, the
best counsel that I can give the Atheist that reads this storye is this:
that hereafter he do no more deny the truth of it, or make any question how
it might be, but rather thus: Quotiescunque legit historiam timeas ne ipse flat
historia, so often as he reads the storye, let him tremble at Gods
judgments, least he become also an acter of such a Tragedye, and the subject
of the like storye, that is, least he be turned into a stone as Lots wife was,
or consumed with fire and brimstone as Sodom was.

Chapter. 13.
Of Christ.

I Have (I trust) sufficiently proved that there is a God, that the Atheists
might be converted unto the true God. But, because this knoweledge of God in
his creatures, is only sufficient to give them occasion to seek further, and
no way in it self able to save their souls, they must also know him in his
Son, by whom only salvation comes. When the fulness of time was Gal. 4.
come says the Apostle, God sent his Son made of a woman etc That I may
therefore prove unto them God in his Son our Savior Christ, by humane
authorityes and reasons, because they will not stand to the authority of the
Scriptures: I will not allege the testimony of the devils out of the Gospel,
which said: Jesus thou Son of God, what have we to do with thee? art thou
come hither to torment us before ye time? but out of profane Mat, 8.
historyes, which said in effect the same thing. For, being silenced at his
coming, that their Oracles could give no more answer, and being asked a reason
of their silence, one of them answered, as in the 4. Chapter I have already
showed unto you.

Me puer Hebraeus diuos Deus ipse gubernans
Cedere sede iubet, tristemque redire sub orcum.
Aris ergo dehinc tacitus abcedito nostris.
Upon which answer by them given, Augustus the Emperor erected an Altar in the
Capitol of Rome with this inscription: ARA PRIMO-GENITI DEI, An Altar
dedicated to the first begotten Son of GOD. I cannot see how any thing can be
playner then the devils confession by the Oracle of Apollo, wherein he is
called: Puer Hebraeus, an Hebrew Child, and Deus a God. A child there is, his
birth and humane nature, like that of the Prophet Esaias: Natus est nobis puer, a
Child is borne unto Esaias. 9. Heb. 2, Symbolum Athanasis.
us, and an Hebrew as the Apostle speaks: He descended not of Angels, but
of the seed of Abraham. And God, there is his Divine nature, God is become a
child, there is Christ God and man.

Our Savior showed himself many ways to the Infidels to be God, and yet to
be borne, but they understood him not. Tully cites De diuina Hone. L. 2.
the prophecy of Sybel for proof yt a King should be borne, and that none
should be saved unless they did embrace him, and yet, neither he nor the rest of
the Romans had the grace to apply it rightly. Tully his self did only
aleadge it, but not believe it, for he thought it to be some invention of man
te^ding to the alteration of the state of Rome. Lentulus applied it unto
himself, hoping he should be that King, and therefore joined in conspiracy
with Cataline. Virgill applied it to Solonius the Son of Pollio because he
Lucius Florus. L, 4. C. 1. aglog. 4.
was his good Patron, and was desirous to; honor and magnify him above other
men. And it is very likely that Virgil had heard something concerning this
matter of the Hebrews themselves, because (as Josephus writes) when so ever
Herod the King of Iudaea came to Rome he lodged at Pollio his house, unto which
house Virgill often resorted. But afterward Constantine the great did expound
Antiquit. Lib. 15. C. 13. Oratione ad sanctum caetum. Belts Indeici. L. 7. C.
12. In octan, Aug. C. 94.
that prophecy to be understood only of the incarnation of Christ. Josephus
writes that there was an ancient prophecy among the Romans, that a King
should come out of Iudaea, which should be the great man of the world. But
they were so blind that they could not apply it unto Christ, of whom it was
meant, but they understood it of Vespacian the Emperor because he conquered
the Jews. Swetonius makes mention of a strange accident which fell out at
Rome before the birth of Christ, by which it was publicly acknowledged that
Nature did beeede a King which should reign over the people of Rome, and what
that wonder was, Dio shows: In the Capitol many images were overthrown Romans
hist. Lib 37
from heaven, writings in graven in Marble pillars were blotted out. But they
had not so much light as to understand that the Kingdom of Christ his Gospel
should overthrow idolatry, and prescribe new Christian laws, whereby his
Church should be governed. Great was the blindenes of Augustus which could
erect an altar to the Son of God, and yet could not acknowledge the Son of
God when he was borne and published to the world, and being himself a tipe and
figure of Christ, yet did not see christ in his self, of whom he was a
figure. And, that it may not seem to any man absurd which I have said, that
Augustus, was a tipe of Christ, we find the like in the Prophet Esaias
concerning Cyrus the King of Persia: I have likened thee to my self, though
thou have Esaias, 45.
not known me. Cyrus was a tipe of Christ though he knew not Christ, in that
he delivered Gods people out of Captivity, by giving them leave to return to
their country and to build the Temple. So was Augustus a tipe of Christ in
his happy and peaceable government of the Empire, in that he was saluted
first by that name of Augustus the sixth day of January, and the same day was
Christ worshipped as a God and King by the wise men which came from the East:
that under him were burnt the records and Mat, 2.
specialties of the debts with were due to the treasure house or chamber of the
Empire; for so by our Savior was cancelled the handwriting Col, 2, Orasius
hist. L, 6, C, 20.
of ordinance which was against us, and it, was nailed on the Cross, when our
Savior was borne: great quantity of oil did miraculously issue out of the
earth, what was that but the birth of the Lords anointed with was anointed with
the oil of gladness above al his fellows? upon that miracle Augustus was so
astonished yt he made proclamation, yt after that time no man should Heb. 1.
call him Lord, and what was that but a manifest acknowledgeme^t that a greater
Lord was borne then Augustus was?

To this also I may add the testimonye of the starces and constellations in
heaven, to show the Atheist the birth of the Son Mat. 2.
of God upon the earth. The wisemen, as I have showed before, sought out our
Savior Christ by the leading of a Star, which Staire I have proved to be
miraculous. And yet although the birth of the Son of God was not subject to
constellations, but was far above the capacity of Astrologers and the course
of the heavens: yet the very Astrologicall predictions, and Aspects of other
natural Stars were enough to give occasion to the Gentiles to seek farther
and so to come to the knowledge of the birth of Christ, for as much as they did
yield benignos influxus et amica lumina, as the Astrologers call them; the
best influences; and most favorable Aspects unto the nativity of him, of
whom they received their influences, their lights, their Aspects, and all
their heavenly virtues. The wise men which came from Persia to Bethleem,
although they could not know Christ by the heavens, yet the heavens gave them
two manner of ways to understand that a man should be borne, which in glory
and honor, virtue and piety, should far exceed all other men. For first,
the sixth year before our Savior was borne, there was a conjunction of Jupiter
and Saturn in Cancer, which moved all the Astrologers then living, to say,
that shortly after there should ensue a very great change and alteration of
Religion. Secondly the constitution of the heaven which was at the time of our
Savior his birth in the 42. year of the Empire of Augustus the 24. of
December a little before midnight did testify the same. For in it the Petrus
Aliacus Card: quest in Genesis 30.
Horoscopus was the eight part of Virgo, which signifies change of Religion,
Saturn was in the highest part of the heaven, Sol in the lowest, which did
show that such a Child was borne which might cause the world to wonder. And
as Albertus Magnus cites out of Albumasar the great Astrologer: ascendi in
prema Inspeculo.
facie illius signi virgo pulchra et honesta habens in manu sua duas spicas et
nutrit puerum, et vocat ipsum puerum quaedam ge^s Ipsum, et ascendit cum
eastella virginis; Non quod subiaceret stellarum motui qui creauit ipsas
stellas, sed quia quum extenderet coelum sicvt In maiori introdactorio,
tractatis sexta.
pellem, formans librum vniuersitatis, noluit literis eiusdem de esse ex his
quae secundum prudentiam suam in libro aeternitatis sunt scriptae etiam
elegantissimum illud a natura quod de virgin nasceretur, et per hoc innueretur
homo carnalis et verus, qui non naturaliter nascebatur. There arose in the
first aspect of the sign Virgo, a fair and chaste Virgin, having two ears of
Corn in her hand, and a Child in her arms, which Child some nations do
call Jesus, not as if he that made the stars were any way subject to the
motion of the Stars, but that he which stretches forth the heavens as a
scrole of Parchment, when he writ the book of nature, might not want witness
out of the book of nature, of that which before was contained in the book of
aeternitie, which was his secret decree, that a Virgin should bring forth a
Child, and so he should be described to us to be a natural man although not
borne after a natural manner.

Thus, have I proved the coming of Christ by many witnesses, of me^, of
devils, of stars and senseles creatures, cyted out of profane stories, because
the Atheist will not believe the testimony of God and Angels in the holy Bible.
Yet for their better satisfaction concerning diverse particulars, I will allege
them reason so far as faith may be made manifest by reason, that if possibly
it may be, they may be brought to the acknowledgment of the truth.

They ask us what need there was that the Son of God should take our flesh?
and whether God was not able to save us by other means? I answer, Man offended
God, and therefore it behooved man to make satisfaction, but man alone was not
able to satisfye, therefore God and man were joined together. I prove the
minor, that man alone was not able to satisfy, because God would not be
satisfied but by sacrifice, and no sacrifice unless it were infinite, could
suffice. That an infinite sacrifice was requisite, I prove by these reasons: An
infinite offense cannot be purged but by a sacrifice answerable to the offense,
but man's offense was infinite in two respects, first, of the infinite Godhead
with was offended, secondly of man himself with was the offender, which although he
be finite, yet voluntate peccandi in infinitum rapitur, he has an infinite
will and desire to commit offenses. And again, as man alone was not sufficient,
so it was not for God alone to work this work of our redemption, because
there was no sacrifice sufficient to pacify God but by death, and, as man
without God could not overcome death, so God without man could not suffer
death, and therefore it was required that the Savior of the world should be
God incarnate, and so God and man to make one Christ might be united together.

They ask how it came to pass that man offended? For their satisfaction I
answer: God made two especial creatures to his own Image, endued with
understanding, Angels and men: he gave the^ two gifts whereby they might
continue their happy estate, knowledge to distinguish between good and evil,
and freedom of will to choose one and leave the other, so that they might
choose whether they would fall or stand. The Angels first fell, the cause of
their fall was pride, the object by which they were puffed up, the reflection
of themselves upon their own selves beholding their own glory and that
excellency whereunto they were created. For they could not be proud without an
object, and there could be no other object to make the^ proud but themselves.
For God was so far above them in glory, that the sight of him would make
them rather to have a mean conceit of themselves and as for man he was far
beneath them, that they took no such delight in looking so stedfastlye upon
him, as to compare him with themselves. And therefore they beheld themselves in
themselves, and so being delighted with their own glory, many of them forgot
their own selves how they were subordinate unto God, and so their service and
duty toward God was interrupted, which did consist in perfect love, sincere
adoration, and imitation of him. And for this cause they were cast down. After
their fall they envied that man should stand, and moved him to disobedience,
the outward object which allured him to disobedience being an Apple, they
moved him to take the Apple by false suggestions; that so his estate should
be advanced. Now both Angels and men had fallen, it pleased God to restore
man again, but not Angels, for these two causes: First, the Angels being
first in the praeuarication seduced man, and were the cause of his fall.
Secondly, the Angels being Spirits and not bodies were of greater perfection
then man was, and therefore better able to withstand sin and all manner of
temptations then man was, and therefore God was more highly displeased with the
sin of Angels then he was with the sin of men. And therefore he sent his
Son for the redemption of Man, but not of Angels.

They ask why the Father took not flesh rather then the Son? why the Son
being incarnate had his conception of the holy Ghost without begetting how he
could be borne of a Virgin, and wherefore he was so borne? to which questions I
answer as follows:

The incarnation of the Son was the work of the whole Trinitye, yet one
person was incarnate, as if three sisters should make a Coat, and one put it
on. Pater and Spiritus imple erunt carnem Christi maiestate, Filius tantum
assumptione, The Father and the holy Ghost filled the flesh of Christ by their
majesty, but the Son by assumptio^ of it unto him self Quia congruum fuit,
vt qui erat in deitate Filius Dei, esset in humanitate filius hominis, It was
most fit that the Son only should be incarnate, and not the father, nor the
holy Ghost, that he which in his divinity was the Son of God, might be in his
humanitye the Son of man.

He could not have been man, had he not been conceived. And forasmuch as he
came into the world to redeem mankind, which he could not do unless he were
without sin, and he could not have been without sin, had he not been
conceived only and not begotten, For if man had begotten him he had begotten
him in sin, because omne simile generat sui simile, every thing which
begets does beget that which is like to it self, and therefore he was not
begotten, but only conceived without the help of man, and he could not have
been so conceived, but by the holy Ghost. He was therefore conceived by the
holy Ghost, that he might be conceived without sin.

As he was conceived by the holy Ghost that he might be conceived without
sin, so he was borne of a Virgin that he might be borne without sin. But
they ask how he could be borne of a Virgin? I could ask them how Eve could be
borne of Adam without a mother? or Adam of the earth without father or mother?
why could not Christ as well be borne of a mother without a father, as Eve of a
man without a woman, or Adam without man or woman? And because this does not
only concern the A theist, but also the Jew and the Maniche, S. Augustine for
confutation of them both says: Ego tibi ostendam incredule Iudaee and
detestande Manichaee, peperisse Virginem, I will prove to the unbelieving Jew,
and the curssed Maniche, how a Virgin may bring forth a Child. Against the
Jew he alleges that twelve rods according to the number of the 12. Tribes
were put into the Arc of the covenant, among the rest, Aarons rod wanting
Numb. 27.
moisture, and all the rightes of nature, contrary to nature brought forth
fruit. Quod virga potuit, virgo non potuit? virga potuit contra naturam Nuces
producere, nunquid and Virgo non potuit contra naturam Dei filium generare?
ostendas mihi quo modo virga Nuces pratulit, and ego tibi ostendam quo modo
Virgo filium peperit. That which a rod could do, could not a Virgin do? a
rod could contrary to nature bring forth Almonds, and could not a Virgin
contrary to nature bring forth the Son of God? show me how the rod brought
forth Almonds, and I will show thee how a Virgin brought forth a Child. Rubus
sust^uit ignem, and non amisit viriditatem, sic Virgo peperit Christum and non
amisit virginitatem. The Bush burned and yet continued green, but as the Bush
bore the heat of the fire without loss of viriditye, so the Virgin bore a
Child wtthout loss of virginitye. This may suffice Exodus 3.
to confute the Jew which does allow the authority of the books of Moses,
but it will not serve for the confutatio^ of the Atheist, for he will ask me
how it may stand with humane reason and with the rules of art how this may be?
and how there may be penetratio corporum, that one body should penetrate an
other? I will not therefore cite the authorityes and examples of the scriptures,
how Christ arose out of his grave, the grave being shut up, and the stone not
rolled away: how after his resurrection he went into the house where his
Disciples were, the doors being locked: how at his ascension he peirced the
heavens: how he is (as before I have Math, 28, Luc, 24, Marc, 16, Ioh, 20. and
21
showed) liberrimum agens, and medijs non alligatum, a free agent, and not tied
to means whereby he works: how he has metaphysicum imperium in singula, a
supernatural power whereby he ouer-ruleth all creatures. But I will dispute by
reason against the Atheist, as S. Augustine does against the Maniche: Solis
radius specular penetrat, and soliditatem illius insensibili soliditate
pertransit, and talis videtur foris qualis intus, nec quum ingreditur violat,
nec quum egreditur dissipat, quoniam ad ingressum and egressum specular
integrum perseuerat. Specular non rumpit solaris radius, neque igitur
integritatem Virginis vitiare potuit ingressus aut egressus Deitatis. The
Sun-beame peirceth through the glass, and the glasseis not broken, how it
passes through so solid and hard a body, the eye or sense of man cannot
perceive, it looks alike both within and without: when it enters in, the
glass is not cracked by the entrance of it, when it goes out again, the
glass remains without blemish as it was before: and so it is with our
Savior Christ which passed through the Virgins womb.

He came in form of a servant that he might suffer, si enim cognouissent,
Dominum gloriae non crucifixissent, for if he had been outwardly glorious,
that the Jews had known him to be the Lord of glory, they had never put him
to so vnglorious a death. And seeing that he came to dye, it behooved him to dye
upon the Cross, and to choose that death above all other. Placuit Deo hominem
reconciliasse eodem modo quo nouit cecidisse: homo damnatus est in ligno,
reconciliatus est in ligno, vixit in ligno vitae, mortuus est in ligno
scientiae, reuixit in ligno Crucis. Quia primus Adam deceptus est in ligno,
secu^dus Adam passus est in ligno. It pleased God that man should rise by the
same manner as he fell, but ma^s salvation came by the wood of ye tree, and
therefore his salvation came through the wood of the tree. Because the first Adam
was deceived in the tree, the second Ada^ suffered in the tree. Man lived in
the wood of life, man dyed in the wood of knowledge, man reuyued again in the
wood of the cross. The difference being showed between creating and redeming,
and how hard it was for the Son to redeem, over that it was for the Father to
create, as namely the Father did his work by speaking, the Son his work by
doing, the Father commau^ding, the Son by obeying, the father in 6. days, the
Son in no less time the^ 33. years, the father with ease, the Son with groaning,
the Father as an age^t, the Son as a pacie^t, the Father with the letter (...)
He, which is but an aspiration, the Son in the letter (...) Thau, which
represents the gallows, or the Cross.

After reproach, by due course did follow glory, after suffering death,
victory and triumph over death, else he could not have delivered us from
death. And because understanding creatures are in three places, devils and
damned souls in hell, men upon earth, Angels and blessed souls in Heaven,
due course required that he should descend into hell to triumph among the
Devils and damned souls, arise from the dead to triumph before men, and ascend
up into heaven to Triumph among the Angels, and blessed souls which are in
heaven. It was no strange thing for him to descend into hell, because that
descension was only in soul, and therefore an easy passage. Of his
resurection from the dead we see many resemblances, for out of the ashes of
the dead Phoenix does arise a live Phoenix, of the Corn buried and rotted in
the earth, foringeth up Corn again in greater measure then it was sowed, all
these things being as unlikely, and as impossible as the resurection from the
dead. In Alcumistrie they see that when gold is brought to powder there is a
speedy reduction of that same powder into gold again, and so ofal other
metalles: the heavens yield no moisture to the earth, but they take it up
again. And as for his ascension up into heaven it was most natural unto him,
for where should a glorified body be, but in a place of glory, and where should
God be but in heaven, which is his throne and dwelling place.

Chapter, 14
The end of the world.

THe Atheist thinks the world shall have no end, but he alleges no
reasons to prove his ungodly assertion, more then have bin already answered by
St. Peter. Our reasons to prove an end and consummation of all things are
these. 1. What-soeuer had a beginning must also have an end. That the world
had a beginning, I have already proved in the 8. Chapter, and the 2, Pet, 3,
sequel follows in natural Philosophy, yt it must therefore have and end
because it had a beginning. There must be resolutio in materiam primam, a
resolution into that chaos whereof it was first made according to Aristotle the
great Philosopher of the world. 2. Man is commonly called (...) a little world,
and for his sake the great world was partly made, for if he stretched forth
Phis. L. 1.
his arms at length, from the ends of his two middle fingers, to his head and
foot, may be drawn a circle, his head is as the North pole, his feet instead
of the South, his arms as the expansion of heaven, his hands as the East and
West, his Nauel as the Center. In him are cold, heat, moisture, dryness as
the four Elements, his heart still moving represents heaven which is in
continual motion, his soul an immortal Spirit guiding and moving the body,
resembles God the guider of the world, But man which is the lesser world
declineth, it follows therefore as a good consequent, that the greater world
also does decline, and where there is declination there is also corruption, and
death. That man declineth, it is manifest, for men are of lower stature, lesser
bones and strength, and shorter life then their fore fathers were, but
whatsoever is languishing, faynting and declining, does grow to an end, and
whence comes this but from the declining estate of the greater world? The
earth we see, with is the lower part of it, is not so fruitful as before it
was, but begins to be baren, like the womb of Sara, the fruits which she
does bring forth yield not so much nutriment as before they did. And how
comes that to pass, but because the heaven also faints, the Planets wax
old, and cannot afford so great virtue and influence to these lower bodies,
as in times past they did? as I'liny and Aulus Gellius testify. But this is a
manifest proof seeing less and weaker bodies are conceived every age in the
womb of nature, that nature Natural hist, L, 7, C. 16. N^ct, At: L. 13, C, 1,
waxes old and wearye of conceiving, and cuiuscunque est senectus illius est
mors, whatsoever waxes old, that also dies and has an end. 3. If a man do
but behold the face of heaven, the Moon looks pale and wan, Mars less
rubicund, Sol less orient, Jupiter not of so amiable and favorable
countenance, Venus more hipocriticall, all the rest both of the wandering and
fixed stars, more weak and suspicious then they did before. That mighty Giant
Psalm. 19.
which was wo^t to run his unwearied race, now waxes weary, as if he would
stand still in heaven, as he did in the days of iosue, shines more dimly,
apeareth more sildome then before, what is this but an argument that shortly
the high Arch of heaven which is erected over our heads, will fall and dissolve
it self? 4. What do so many irregular and threatening Eclipses portend, such
vn-vsuall aspects of the stars, such fearful Coniunctious of Planets, such
To. 8,
prodigious apparitions of Comets? but, that as the Apostle speaks: The
fervent desire of the creature wayteth when the sons of God shall be revealed,
every creature groneth with us, and trauaileth in pain together unto this
present, that they may be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God? 5. Empires, and kingdoms, and all
estates have their fatal periods. Daniel his exposition of Nabuchodozer his
dream is now almost fulfilled, the head of gold, the shoulders of Silver, the
belly of brass, are already worn out, nothing of that image is now left but
the very stumps of clay, their dates are ended, their periods determined long
since, and how is it possible that feet of claye should continue for ever,
seeing gold, silver, brass, and iron, such strong metals are consumed? what
now remains therefore, but the stone cut out of the rock without hands which
bruiseth this image in pieces? The everlasting kingdom Dan. 2,
of Jesus Christ in an other world, unto which all the temporal kingdoms in
this world must give place, that all these being expired Christ in heavenly
kingdom may rule for ever? what remains now but that we look daily and
howerly for this kingdom, Gen, 28,
that now we begin to climb Jacob his Ladder, a peccato ad poenitentiam, a
poenitentia ad opera, ab operibus ad iudicium, a iudicio ad miserccordiam, a
misericordia ad gloriam, from sin to repentance, from repentance to good
works, from works to judgment, from judgment to mercy, from mercy to
glory? there is the glory of God standing upon the top of the Ladder. Last of
all that the world shall have an end, and be consumed with fire, witness not
only St. Peter the Apostle, but also Ovid the Poet, his 2 Pet. 3,
words be these:

Esse quoque infatis reminiscitur affore tempus, Metamor: Lib: 1.

Quo mare, quo tellus, correptaque regia coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret. And there he shows how't is ordaynd
of old,
that time shall come, when both the earth and sea,
With heavens Arche, so glorious to behold,
shall burn, and all shall turn unto decay.


That the world shall have an end, witness Lucretius, his words are these:

Vna dies dabit exitio, multosque per annos Lib: 5.

Sustentata ruet moles, and machina mundi,
Accidet exitium Coeli, terraeque futurum. The world which stood so many years
Shall in one day destroyed be:
Destruction likewise shall appear
for heaven and earth most suddenly.


To this also agrees the Poet Lucan, his words be these:

Inuida fatorum series, summisque negatum Belliciuilis Lib: 1.

Stare diu, nimioque graves sub pondere lapsus,
Nec se Roma ferens. Sic cum compage soluta
Secula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora
Antiquum repetens iterum Chaos, omnia mistis
Sidera sideribus concurrent, igneapontum
Astrapetent, tellus extendere littora nolet,
Excutietque fretum. Fratri contraria Phoebe
Ibit, and obliquum bigas agitare per orbem
Indignata diem poscet sibi, totaque, discors
Machina, diuulsi turbabit foedera mundi,
The fates envy the states of mortal men,
The highest seats do not continue long:
Great is the fall under the greater burden,
(and greatest things do to them selves great'st wrong)
Rome was so great (whom all the world did fear)
that Rome her self she could no longer bear.
So when this well couch't frame of world shall burn,
And the last hour so many ages end:
To former Chaos all things shall return,
(the enuyous fates this issue do portend)
Then all the Planets shall confusedly meet,
And fires Caelestiall on the floods shall sleete.
The earth shall grudge to make the sea a shore,
And cast it off, and push the fload away:
The Moon enraged shall cross her brother sore,
And seek to alter course, to shine by day:
Thus all at odds, in strife and out of frame,
They shall disturb the world, and spoil the same.
Chapter, 15.
Of Hell fire.

THus you have heard, how by the course of nature the world shall have an end.
What then follows? I say to the Atheist Rom, 2.
with S. Paul; And think thou o man that thou shall escape the judgment of
God? shall men think there is no punishment for wicked men after this life? I
wish that they would believe S. Ambros: Christus moriens in nouissimo Testamento
singula singulis, officia distribuebat, Patri spiritum, militibus vestimenta,
corpus Iudaeis, pacem Discipulis, Crucem. Apostolis, latroni paraedisium,
peccatoribus infernum. When Christ dyed in his last will and Testament, he
bequeathed diverse Legacyes: To his Father he commended his soul, to the Jews
his body, to the Soldiers his garments, to his Disciples peace, to his
Apostles the Cross, Paradise to the good. Thief which was crucified by him,
but hell fire to ungodly men. But to persuade these unbelievers that there is an
hell, my reasons are these:

First, I have manifestly proved that there is a God, and it cannot stand with
the nature of God, but that he must be just, and there can be no justice in God
unless he punish offenders, they for the most part do escape punishment in this
world, Gods judgments do not over take them in this life therefore that God
may be just, their judgment is reserved unto another world that they may be
punished in an other place, and where is that, but in Hell-sire.

Secondly whereas Tully a Philosopher, Claudius Claudianus Tuscul: quaest: Lib,
1.
a Poet, Seneca, and others being so many, in their description of Hell, make
mention of Minos and Rhadamanthus, the Judges there so cruel and inexorable,
the furies, the fire, Tantalus his everlasting thirste, ^xion his wheel
always rolling, Titius upon whose bowels the vultures are eternally feding,
what is this but the same description of hell, which is in the Scriptures,
eternal fire prepared for the devil and his Angels, and as the Prophet Esaias
writes: Mat. 25.
fire that shall never be quenched, and a worm of conscience gnawing always
and never dying? Esa. 66.


Thirdly, witness the Atheist that there is a hell for wicked men. For many
times having committed heinous offenses, though so secret that no man can
detect them, and he so mighty that he fears no man that should punish him,
yet he is inwardly troubled and vexed in his Conscience: what is this his
Conscience but a secret fear that God will punish him? he soeth that God does
not punish in this world according to the qualitye of such an offense, therefore
he fears punishment in an other world, then witness the Atheist his own
Conscience there is a hell.

Fourthly witness, the Atheist that there is an hell, all be it he denies
Hell. For he knows, and also very well considerreth, that in the time of
his health he is subject to sickness, poverty, imprisonment, a whole sea of
gall and bitterness, nay a world of discontentments, yet he would not dye Nay
when he is grievously sick, his panges intolerable, his disease incurable, he
would give a great sum of money yet to prolonge his pain upon earth, to live
here continually though in continual sickness. And why is all this, but
because he is loath to die? why is that, but because he fears death? But if
he thought his soul were extinguished by death, that after death there should
be no judgment, no hell, no feeling of sorrow, then why should he fear
death? Nay why should not an Atheist which is so worldly wise, and which loves
his own ease so much, desire to die, and so to be at rest rather then to live
in continual sickness, if he thought that death were an end of sorrow?
Therefore it follows as a necessary consequent, that he fears death,
because he thinks that a farther reckning is to be made of the things which
he did in this life, that greater panges and torments shall ensue after death
then could be incident unto him in this life, and that can be nothing else
but Hellfier.

Fifthly, let the Atheist for his better satisfaction concerning this point, but
travail into the Land of Canaan, to behold the lake Asphaltites, where Sodom
stood, and he shall see the very Image and Idea of Hell before his eyes oven
in this life. When he comes thither these things shall present themselves
unto him: Tetrus odor, aspectus horrendus, lacus fietidus, fumus venenosus,
poma quae morsu tentata, in fumum et fauillam or to fatiscente vanescunt. An
ugly and loathsome smell of brimstone, horrible and dreadful prospect, a
stinking lake poisoning smoke, Apples full of filthy vapors and sparks of
fire, the things which he shall see with his eyes, smell with his Nostrells,
and taste with his tongue, will make him to confess there is an hell.

To them which ask whether hell be a material place or no? I answer, it must
of necessity be so, because in it are to be tormented not only souls, but
also bodies. It is no imaginary thing, because when they come there, it shall be
no imaginary punishe^t which they shall suffer. If they ask where hell is?
surely it is in the lowest parts of the earth, because they are farthest from
Heaven. But I wish them not to be so curious in disputing, and inquiring (...)


