A PROCLAMATION devised by the Kings majesty, with the assent of his hyghnes
counsel, by the authority of the act made for proclamations, for the
vittalynge of the Kings majesty's town of Caleys, Guysnes, Hammes, and the
marches of the same, made the.xx. day of May, in the.xxxiii. year of the kings
hyghnes reygne.
ALBEIT BY A proclamation devised by the kings most royal majesty, with the
assent and advise of his hyghnes counsel, according to the act of parlyament
in that case provided, which proclamation hears date the.xvi. day of
February, in the.xxii. year of his majesty's reygne, it is ordained and
declared among other things, after what sort form facion and condition any
person or persons may transporte and convey to the kings majesty's town of
Caleys, vitayles and other things expressed in the said proclamation,
necessary for the vytaylyng of the said town, and for the castles of Guysnes
Hamnes in the matches of the same: yet nevertheless the kings most royal
majesty, minding more spedyer remedy for the vyttaylynge of his said town of
Caleys and castles, and the marches theof, than is ordained by his said
proclamation, is therefore pleased and contented, and also ordeyneth by this his
hyghnes proclamation, made and devised by his majesty, by the advise and
consent of his hyghnes counsel, by authority of the said act, that it
shall be laufull to all and syngular his subjects, to transporte and conueye to
his hyghnes said town of Caleys, or the marches of the same, all and syngular
such kinds of vytaylles and other things, as is specified in the said
former proclamation, without any certificat to be made to his hyghnes counsel,
from his gracis deputy of Caleys and other his hyghnes capitaynes officers and
mynysters of his said town of Caleys and marches of the same, and without his
majesty's license under his gracis greatte seal to be opteyned for the same:
as is lymytted and ordained by his said former proclamation: Any thing in the
said foriner proclamation to the contrary thereof not withstanding. So that
always such person or persons as shall carye or transporte to his hyghnes
said town of Caleys or marches of the same, any such vyttayles or things
mentioned in the said former proclamation, before the shyppyng thereof, shall be
bound with one sufficient suertie with him, unto the customer and comptroller
of the port or creke, where such vittailes or other things shall be shypped, or
to their deputies, by an obligation sufficient in the law to the kings use in
a certain sum of money, amountyng to the double value of the vyttayle or
things that shall be so transported, that the said vittayles and other things
so shypped, shall be truly, without fraud or couyne, transported and conucyed
to the said town of Calyes, of the marches of the same, for the vyttaylyng
and relief thereof: and not to discharge the same in any other place out of the
kings dominions. And that also the transporters and conueyers of such
vittayles or things aforesaid, shall within such conuenyent time, as shall
be lymytted by the dyscretion of the customer and comptroller, or their
deputies, taking such bond, bring a true and just certificate from the
kings deputy of Caleys, and lyeftenantes and capytaynes of the castelles of
Caleys, Guysnes, and Hammes, and the treasourer, marshall, comptroller, porter,
captain of Rise bank, and under marshall of the said town and marches, or
from three of them, under their seals and names, or under the seals and names
of three of them at the least, that the said vyttaylles and things so shipped,
were there dyscharged and delivered accordyngly.

AND THE kings most royal majesty declares and sygnifyeth by this his
highness present prodamation, that if any person or persons, that shall
provide and take upon him to convey and transport such vyttaylles or things
to his hyghnes said town of Caleys, as is aforesaid, do not the same
accordyngly, but salsely and untruly convey such vyttayles and things to
other places out of his domynyons, or if by fraud or couyne of any of the said
deputy capiteynes and other mynysters aforesaid of his said town and
castelles, or by any his subjectes or inhabytantes in the same the said
vyttayles or things thither transported, and there delivered for the relyefe
thereof, shall be conueyde and carried from thense out of the ky^^^s domynyons:
that than the offenders in such and in all other cases, not repugnaunt or
contraryant to this present proclamation, nor dyspensed with by the same, shall
incur and run into the dangers, losses, peynes, and penalities expressed
and mentioned in the said former proclamation, made the said.xvi. day of
February. in the.xxxii. year of the kings maiestyes reygne: Any thing in this
his hyghnes present proclamation to the contrary thereof not withstanding.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
Tho. Berthelet regius impressor excudebat.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO M.D.XLI.

