A Sermon preached at the Tower of London, by M. Dering the xi. day of
Dece^ber. 1569.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis per Decennium.

John 6. 34. Then they said unto him, Lord give us evermore of this bread. And
Jesus said unto them. I am the bread of life: he that comes unto me shall
not hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst.


WE have (dearlye beloved in our Lord and savior Christ) we have in this
portion of scripture to consider: First this petition or request which ye Jews
make unto Christ in these words: Lord give us evermore of this bread. Then,
the answer that our Savior Christ makes again? I am the bread of life, etc.
Their request rises of certain words, spoken immediately before, where Christ
says: My Father gives unto you from heaven the true bread. For the bread of
God is he that comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world.
Through which words they break out straight into this prayer: O Lord give us
always this bread. These words they do not utter with any good affection, or
longing desires to be partakers of the mercies, which are offered unto all in
Christ Jesu: but rather of a diste^pered mind, drawn into contrary desires,
seeking by all means to fill themselves with happiness, and yet to jeste and
scoff at the doctrine of Christ. The thoughts of them minds are made
manifest, both by these words of Christ: Joh. 6. 26.
Ye seek me because you eat of the loaves and were filled: and also by their
own words to the same effect, Joh. 6. 31.
where they say: our fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, likewise
requiring yt Christ would so feed them still by miracle, and then they would
follow him. And afterward also when Christ had further taught them yt he would
in no such sort feed them deintelye on earth, but if they would eat of the
bread that he would give they must renounce such fleshly concupiscence, crucify
themselves unto the world, and be with a liuelye faith incorporate into his
body, then they should eat of living bread: as soon as they had heard this,
they murmured at him, showing yt he was not the bread that they did seek for,
and then declared what was their scoffing spirit, and said openly: Joh. 6. 4.
Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose Father and mother we know? how
came he down from heaven? Thus dearly beloved, we learn what minds these men
had yt would so fayn have been fed with the bread of life. They would live for
ever ^ but they would live as they list. Joh 6, 28
They would follow Christ: but they would neither hunger nor thirst. They
would do the will of God: but they would not crucify their affections. They
would come unto heaven, but they would not be led by Jesus the poor Carpenters
son. Their carnal fancies beguyled them. Their scoffing at Jesus Christ made
their hearts so blind: and their desire of happiness was nothing but the show
of their own folly. Now let us beware by other men's harms. Heb. 4. 11.
Let us not fall after the same example of disobedience. If we bring our
carnal fancies to the word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 14.
we shall never understand it. The natural man perceyueth not the things that
are of God. Such gross imaginations deceived Nicodemus, Joh: 3, 4.
that he knew not what it was to be borne a new. John. 4, 15
Such fancies made blind the weoman of Samaria, that she knew not how to ask
for the water of life. Mar, 16. 38.
Such carnal imaginations made the children of Zebedie to ask of our Savior
Christ, they knew not what. Luke. 18, 38.
Yea all the disciples of our savior Christ, by such fleshly desires
oftentimes understood him not. And how much more ought we to take heed that
have so barren hearts, not watered so ple^tifully with gods sprite? Whether
shall we be led, if we bring unto Gods word our sensual appetites? sure eue^
thither, whether these Jews are gone before us, to murmur against Christ, and
despise his cross. Let us the^ take heed while it is yet time, and in
obedience of Gods word banishe far from us our own understanding, and if we
will be taught of the Lord God, 2. Cor, 19.
let us lead into captivity all our own cogitations and seek no better estate
for the Gospel of God, then he himself has appointed by his holy wisdom.
Otherwise it will surely come upon us, that came so long agone upon these
carnal Jews, and we shall have so good liking of our own delight, yt we
shall contemn the poor Galilean, and with a proud countenance we shall
think much scorn, that the Carpenters son should be our master. This is
the fruit yt grows out of man's wisdom. Here it is plainly testified in
this 6. of John. It is testified in the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 27.
that so often scoffed at our Savior Christ: in the Soldiers that upon the
Cross had him in such derision: in the whole multitude of the Jews yt stroke
him and spitte on him, Math. 26. 8.
and bid him areade, who had hurt him. Thus after that by carnal reason they
would needs judge of Christ, they grew more and more in hardness of heart,
till they thought it good wisdom to speak so great blasphemye. Such
Gospellers there were many in the primitive Church, that thought themselves
wise in making a ieste of Christ. So Iulianus the Apostata when ye Christians
asked help against all their iniuryes with mockes and scoffs he would ask
why they did complain, Math 5. 49.
when the Galilean their master bad them do good for evil: if any would take
away their coat, that then they should give him also their cloak. So, many
wicked Magistrates spoiled the Christians of their monye, and would taunt them
merelye with the saying of their God: Prudence
Quod Caesaris scis, Caesari da, give that unto Cesare that thou know is
Cesars. Such Gospellers at this day, we have a great many in England, yt laugh
smothly in their sleeves, at their madness (as they think) that follow so
earnestly y^ Gospel. ^et. 44.
So S. Peter has borne witness generally of the wicked of all ages: that they
shall think it much madness, that other will not run to like effusion of
riot: but let them alone yt seek willingly to go so far astray. This is the
time of their rejoicing. The days of repentance are not yet come. When they
have done with their mocking, them selves shall be then mocked at, and for all
their pleasant sporting, they shall be called to Judgment.

An other thing I noted unto you in ye petition of these Jews, and that was a
desire of happiness which they wished to come unto: and in ye mids of their
malice, yet an inward sighing of spirit, that they might once eat of the
bread of life. They pleased them selves exceedingly in fighting against Christ,
and yet again in remorse of conscience, they wished to be partakers of
eternal life. And this is that sparkeling of the grace of god, which is
kindled in the hearts of all men, John. 1. 9.
of which S. John says, that Christ lighteneth all men that come into this
world. Cayne had this light, Gene, 4. 13.
when the burden of his sin seemed so heavy unto him, that it could not be
pardoned. Gene, 27. 38.
Esau had this light, when for loss of his fathers blessing, he lifted up his
voice and wept. Pharaoh had this light, when in remembrance of all his
plagues he cried at the last: Exo. 9. 27.
The Lord is righteous, Exo, 8, 19.
but I and my people are wicked. The sorcerers of Egypt, they had this light,
when God confounded their wisdom in a most vile creature, and they confessed
before Pharaoh: This is the finger of God. Math. 2^ 24,
Pilate had this light: when he washed his hands, and cried before all the
Jews, that he was innocent from the blood of Christ. Act. 8. 13.
Simon Magus had this light when he wondered at the signs and miracles that
were wrought by ye Apostles, and would have given monye for the holy Ghost.
Math. 6.
The Gentiles themselves, they had all this light. Antiochus when he wept for
all the evil that he had done at Jerusalem. Julianus when he cried, vicisti
Galilaee, O man of Galile, thou have gotten the victory. Adrian at his death,
when he spoke unto himself, Animula vagula, blandula, hospes comesque
corporis, quae nunc abibis in loca, n^^ vt soles dabis iocos, pallidula,
rigida, nudula? Brutus had this light, when the night before he was slain, he
thought he saw a sprite that cried thus unto him: Ego sum tuus malus genius
Brute: hodie me in Phillippis videbis, But what need I (dearly beloved) to
make this long by examples, You your selves (I am sure) you can witness with
this truth. There is none of you so far given over to uncleanness, but I am sure
sometime you say with these unclean Jews: O Lord give us one day the bread of
life. This is the triumph that virtue has our vice, that whereso ever she is
most hated, there she is often wished for. And this is the great punishment
that God brings upon the wicked, even as the Poet said: Virtutem vt
videant, intabescantque relicta, that though they love not virtue, nor can not
like to follow her, yet they should pyne away with a lo^ging desire after her.
And this I am sure it strikes deep, and wounds the conscience of the
wicked. Though they have set their heart as an Adamant stone, and made their
face like stint, yet grace perseth throughout their concupisce^ce and they say
sometime, ye way of virtue is better. There was never so impure and disolute
and adulterer, but he has said sometime: ye chaste body is best. There was
never so blasphemous nor vile a swerer, but sometime he has tre^bled at Gods
Majesty. ^a^. 5. 2.
There was never man so proud and ambitious, but sometime he remembers he is
but earth and ashes. There was never such an usurer, nor covetous wretch, but
sometime he thinks his Gold and silver shall canker, and the ruste of it
shall be a witness against him. There was never so riotous a person, sumptuous
and prodigal, but sometime he condemns his own doing, Psalm. 37, 12
and says with the Prophet: The unrighteous man boroweth and pays not
again. And what should I say more? There was never so high minded nor
vayneglorious a king, but he has sometime thought his crown would fall from
his head, and the crown of righteousness was better, which was in the kingdom
of Heaven. And this dearly beloved, as it is in a wicked life, so likewise it
is in corrupt religion. Truth that is strongest and overcomes all, in
Religion forces the enemy oftentimes to confess her. There was never papist
that so magnified merits, and talked of his works of supererogation, but
oftentimes in his conscience he would surely confess, Luc. 17, 16.
that when he had done all, yet he was unprofitable. There was never any so
great an enemy to faith, but when his conscience was touched with the grief of
sin, he would cry a loud: Faith alone does justify. There was never (I am
sure) papist yet so dronken, that made so much of all his fleshlye
worshippinges, of Organes, and singing, of altares and altareclothes, of
francomesence and sweet (...) savors: of banners and streamers: of goodlye
tunes and melody: Esa. 1. 12.
of silver crosses and chalices, Joh. 4. 23.
but he has said sometime, who required these things at our hands? the true
worshippers do worship in spirit and verity. There was never Papist in so
deep a sleep of pardons and of purgatory, but he has surely said it, such
weak engines can break down but paper walls, and such could water can
quench but painted fyres. There was never Pope nor general counsel so
desperately bent to set up worshipping of Images, but their own hearts have
often cried within them: they have mouths and speak not, Psalm. 115. 5
they have eyes and see not, they have ears and hear not, they have noses and
smell not, they have hands and touch not, they have feet and walk not: thou
shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. There was never Papist so
blinded with the great absurdity of transubstantiation, but some time seeing
the wine in the chalice, he has been afraid to say: by this and by nothing
else, let my sins be washed and seeing the cake in the Priests hands: thou
alone have redeemed me, and alone by thee I look to be saved. This doubt ye not
(dearly beloved) is the working of the Lord in the hearts of all his enemies.
Refuse him how ye will in life or in Religion, you shall carry day and night a
witness in your breast against your selves, and your hearts will condemn you,
that cry evermore against you: yt way unto true happiness is neither by sin
nor superstition: neither by open rebellion, nor yet by accursed idolatry. And
thus far out of this petition of ye froward Jews I have noted unto you,
what I have thought best for our common instruction. The Lord grant us that
we make the like request, but with a better spyrite and pray evermore unto him:
O Lord give us always the bread of life. Joh. 6. 34.
Now let us consider the other part which (I said) is ye an^swere of our
Savior Christ. in these words: I am the bread of life, he that comes unto
me shall never hunger, John. 6. 35
and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Out of this place (dearly
beloved) I will note unto you, as the text gives me occasion, these three
points. First who is the bread of life, then by what means he is eaten, and
thyrdly, what fruit comes of such sustenaunce. Who is this bread, Christ
shows in these words: I am the bread of life. By what means he is eaten, it
is showed in these words: He that comes unto me, he that believes in me.
What fruit comes of it, it is showed in these words: he shall never hunger,
he shall never thyrst. I am the bread of life. These words they signify thus
much, that in Christ alone we have life, and all confidence of salvation must
be grounded on him and on none else. Christ crucified is a continual sacrifice
of reconciliation standing between God and us, so that what so ever grace,
mercy, and peace is poured upon us by God the Father, it comes down through
the body of Christ upon the cross: and what soever joy or comfort we can have
in being vesseles of mercy, thus it is made perfect: when with a lively faith
we look through Christ crucified, and so go with boldness unto the throne of
grace. Thus Christ is called the bread of life: the food of our soul and
nourisher up of our consciences to a perpetual quietness. This the scriptures
testyfy most plentifully in all places witnessing, that when soever we feel
our selves hungrye, Math. 11. 28.
that is, laboring and heavy lode^ with the burden of our sins, we must come
unto Christ: and he will refresh us. From our first father Adam until the last
man that shall be borne upon earth, never was nor shall be one yt shall find
other food of life. Adam by whose sin we were all condemned, when he was
cast out of Paradise, that is, out of Gods favor and the place of rest, he
could not feed his soul neither with the labor of his hand, nor with the
sweat of his brows, but the first food of life he found in this promise,
that the seed of the Woman should tread down the head of the serpent. Gene.
3. 15.
Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, in all their wandryng iorneyes, they lived not by
this, that their posterity should be multiplied, and enjoy a land that flowed
with milk and honey, but this was the bread of life that made their heart
glad, even the sight of Christ, and by this promise every one of them lived:
Gene. 12. 3 and 26. 4. and 28. 14.
In thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. The law that came
after and taught us true obedience, Romans 7. 7.
we learned nothing by it, Rom 5. 20
but the knowledge of our sin, nor it wrought nothing in us but the
multiplying of our iniquity. The laws and ordinances, Heb. 9. 9.
which were in meats and drinks, Heb. 10. 4.
and carnal rites and ceremonies, they could not feed the conscience of him
that did the service: the sacrifices and offeringes were not such yt they
could give unto us the food of life: Gal. 3. 24.
It was al: together impossible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats should
take away sins, but so far the law did feed our souls, as it shut us up
in the faith that should be reveled, and led us as a scholemaster unto Christ
The Prophets that came after, raised up of God to teach his people, they
showed no other mark to look on, nor other hope to live by, but that child
that should be borne unto them, and that son that should be given them,
Esa. 9, 6
whose name was wonderful, cou^seler, the mighty God, the everlasting Father
the Prince of peace. Ephe, 4, 11
The Apostles and Evangelists now sent in these latter days for the work of
the ministry, to gather together the saints, and buyld up the body of
Christ, they feed us not with the food of our own works or weldoing, but to
make our faith strong, and the promise of God sure, they tell us: Christ is our
peace, and there is no other name under Heaven given unto men, Rom, 4. 16
by which we shall live, Ephe. 2. 14
save only the name of Jesus Christ. Act. 4. 22
Thus Christ is our bread of life, and if we will build our selves upon
Abraham, Isaak, or Jacob, to be of their posterity if we will be led by the
law and the Prophets, by the Apostles and Evangelists, to find the food of
life: if we hear Christ himself, or will be his disciples, the^ this is our
Religion: Christ is the bread of life, to to wretched have the preachers been
yt have called you from this bread, to feed you with their corrupt leaven, from
this fountain and welspring, to their own puddles that can hold no water.
Thus they have all done that have led you any whether saving to Christ
alone, yt have taught you to pray unto saints, angels, or archangeles, to be
your mediators, that have told you of justification in your own works, that
have sold unto you their Masses as sacrifices propitiatory for the quick and
dead, that have bid you trust in pardons and indulgences for remission of
sins, yt have brought you unto the Pope, a sick head of an ill disposed
sinagoge, to hang your faith upon his sleaue, that has told you of general
Councils, they could not err, but what so ever they should decree, you
should so receive it, as the holy Eua^gelists. Thus have these mo^sters
spoken, and thus they have deluded you, and yet they say still: wherein have we
offended? but the Lord be praised, that has delivered us out of the kingdom
of such darkness, and brought us again into the light of his Gospel. Let us
now walk in it accordingly, and confess Christ alone to be the bread of
life. The second thing that I noted unto you in this aunsweare of our Savior
Christ, is: how we do eat of this bread, and that (I said) was showed in these
words, he that comes unto me, he that believes in me. To come unto Christ,
to believe in Christ, this is to eat Christ, so that we may well say as S.
August. August. tract 25
said: Quid paras dentes aut ventrem, creed and manducasti? Upon the (...) of
John.
It is no need to prepare tooth or belly, believe and thou have eaten. But here
(dearlye beloved) I must first admonish you that this place, nor this vi.
Chapter of John. is not meant of the Sacrament, as some popish interpreters have
ignora^tly told you. The Sacrament was not yet instituted, nor any now present
knew whether he would ever ordain any such Sacrament of his body and blood,
or no: So that if he had spoken thereof, he had told them that, which they
could not understand. But this Christ does, without all consideration either
of Sacrament or no Sacrament. He tells them how and by what means his body
can be eaten, whether it be in your inward faith, when secretly and with your
self you feed upon his body, or whether it be in outward sign or
Sacrament, which is a help of our infirmity, the more liuelye to taste of his
mercies. There is but one and the same way, neither to eat his flesh, nor to
drink his blood: the which way plainly and expressly here is delivered us
by Christ, that we need not to err except we will. And this was Christ's
great mercy to prepare the hearts of his children, that they should not be
offended with any manner of understanding, when they should hear in the
institution of the sacrament, take, eat, this is my body. They are before well
instructed, and they know what to believe. The gross and carnal fancyes of
transubstantiation, could not disquiete them. They knew there was no way to
eat Christ, but to come unto him, nor to drink his blood, but to believe in
him. And thus faith was ye more precious, the further of his bodily presence
was removed from them, Heb, 13.
They knew faith was the taking hold and substance of things we hoped for, and
the sure apprehension and proof of things that were not seen. So that they
knew how to feed of his body with great boldness to lift up their soul,
and take hold of his mercy that sits in heaven at the right hand of his
Father. Whence undoubtedly all the merits of his passion do presentlye flow
upon his poor children. His conflictes and agonies with sin and
condemnation, to set us free from Gods wrath and displeasure, and all his
obedience showed here in flesh, from his corporal, real, and substantial
body, comes down upon us, to cloth us with righteousness, that we may be
found unblameable before his father. Thns much y^ disciples well understood,
and they murmured not at these words, this is my body. Thus much let us
learn out of this place against we come unto the sacrament, that to come unto
Christ and to believe in Christ, that is truly to eat Christ. This being
proved true unto you, you well soon set your selves free from all popish
idolatry. And how true it is, mark well, I beseech you, what are the words. I
am says Christ, the bread of life. He that comes unto me shall not hunger.
If Christ had spoken still properly, according to ye metaphore, he had said
thus: I am the bread of life, he that eats me, shall not hunger. Now he
himself has said: he that comes, in stead of this, he that eats, if you
will believe him you must needs confess it. To eat Christ, is to come unto
him. So in this other sentence. He that believes in me, shall not thyrst. If he
had kept ye property of speech, he had said thus: he that drinks of me shall
not thyrst. In stead of, drinks, he says, believes, and therefore it is
most certain, to drink of Christ, is to believe in Christ. So that this is
now an undoubted truth, to eat Christ, to drink Christ, to come unto
Christ, to believe in Christ, these are all one. And who has ears to hear
and hears not this? or whose judgment is so blind that he can not perceive
it? John. 5 ^;
Compare the sayings of Christ in this chapter: you can not (if you will not) be
deceived. He that believes in me has everlasting life. And after. He that
eats of this bread, has everlasting life. Exceptye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. He that believes
on him that sent me, John. ^^
has life everlasting. Joh. ^^
You will not come unto me that you may live. Who sees it not here, to eat,
to come, to believe, is all one, Again: He that believes in me, I will raise
him at the last day. And he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, Joh,
6. 54.
I will raise him up at the last day. After all those sayings of eating his
flesh in deed, and drinking his blood in deed, at which the Capharnaites were
offended, and diverse of his disciples forsook him, Christ says then unto
his Apostles, will you also go away? As if he should have said, are these
words so strange that you also will be driven a way? Unto which Peter
answered: Lord to whom shall we go, thou have the words of eternal life,
and we believe and know, that thou art Christ the son of the living Lord. Lo
here, how Saint Peter himself, of whose name the Pope braggeth so much, and
yet utterly renounceth his faith. S. Peter (I say) understands, all these
words of life, of the eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and his blood, he
expounds them thus: to believe in Christ, and to know him to be the son
of the living God, even as Christ him self had before taught him: The words
that I speak are spirit aad life, it is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing. If all this be not plain enough, look yet, and let
S. John expound him self. Here Christ says: he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him. The same S. John that wrote
this, 1. Joh. 4, 15,
says thus again: Who so confesses that Jesus is the son of God, God
dwells in him, and he in God. Whereby it is plain, he that confesses thus
of Christ, he eats his flesh and drinks his blood. This (dearly beloved)
is no new doctrine but taught by Christ, received by his Apostles, written
for all ages by his holy Evangelists, now preached to ye comfort of all true
Christians, and in the primitive Church believed of all the holy Fathers. I
would allege you their own sayings but that the time passes, and you have
the^ plentifully set out unto you, you may read them when you will. These
places alleged out of the Scriptures, one expou^dyng an other, they are the
surest witnesses, to know the meaning of the holy Ghost. And what if here I
should reason out of our Christ's own words to prove, there can be no
transubstantiation. He says for proof, that his natural body is risen. See
my hands and my feet, touch me and handle me, Luke 24. 33.
it is even I. Seeing Christ will have our senses to judge of his body, let us
do so. See feel, touch, taste, is it ought but bread? this argument me thinks
is good and well warranted by Christ him self, and it seems not so only to
me, but S. Augustine thought so now eleven hundred year agon. See, De
doctrina Christian. lib. 3. cap. 16. and there yon shall find it. But the time
passes, and I will come unto that, that I think you look for, and which the
Pope has made the substance of all his masses. Christ says thus: Take, Math.
26. 26.
eat, this is my body. And what then? is there any obscuritye in these words?
Is it not often and plainly spoken, what it is to eat is body? are not his
disciples well taught? knew they it not long before? As it is plainly said:
this is my body, so is it not plainly expounded, these words are spirit and
life? Joh. 6. 14
No man can here be offended, but he that is dull of hearing, and has not
harkened before to the wholesome doctrine of truth. But you will say, why could
not Christ as well have said: this is a figure, or sign, or token of my body.
I answer. First these words are without danger, that his disciples should
dream of tra^substa^tiation: they are so assuredly taught before how they
should eat or drink Christ. Then I say, this our savior Christ did choose to
speak, to show his great and aboundaut love to ward us, that we should be so
fully persuaded that he were our head, and we his members, as if his natural
and real body, were substantiallye within us, that we should know, what so
ever we could wish from his mercy to comfort us, by this Sacrament or
couenaunte of his mercy we should so assure our selves of it, as if we eat
his very flesh, or drink his natural blood. The like phrases or speeches are
plain and often in the scripture, Ephesians. 5. 24
Christ is our head, and we his members he dwells in us and we in him. He
is the corner stone, and we are the building up. Ephe. 2. ^.
He the vine, and we the branches. John. 1(...);
His body is the meat and we the eaters. Whose heart is so dull that is not
stirred up with these speeches? or who understands not by these speeches yt
Christ would show the abou^dance of his love toward us, and the great boldness
that Christ will have us to put in his mercy? As for transubstantiation, it is
so strange from the sense of the scripture, that if the Pope had not been, I
think it never had been thought of. And if the Council of Lateranne had not
been, it had never been named. But let us way the words a little, and confer
the^ with these late popish follies. Christ says, Math. 26.
take, eat, this is my body. But the Pope says, take not, eat not, site a
far of, and took on, fall down and worship. This is my body. Was not this
their manner of preaching? How else could this have bine your manner of
practice, when you came to the Sacrament, or as you rather called it, the
sacringe of your Mass? Christ says: Drink you al of this: Math. 26.
this is my blood. The Pope utterly denies it, and proves it by good reason.
His body (says he) cannot be with his blood: there is concomitantia, the one
follows the other, and therefore you shall not drink it, yet it is his blood.
Christ says, Cor. 11.
as often as you do this, preach forth the death of the Lord until he come.
The Pope says, that is not necessary. If you say Mass daily, it skilleth
little, though you preach not once in a year. What manner of vicar call you
this man, that dispenses his masters doctrine thus deceitfully? or what hope
can you have of tra^substa^tiation, when it ha^geth upon his credit, ye deals
thus vnfaithfullie? O (dearly beloved) be not deceived. These things be to
plain to be dissembled. It is his own mouth that speaks these things,
which (says he) can not err. We know that there is no truth in him, and
whatsoever he does, it is against Christ, and his eternal Gospel. For the
words, this is my body (I trust) I have proved it, they be not words of
error, to make you believe the thing that is not: the meaning is plain. The
bread is a warrant, and pledge unto you, that as sure as you eat it, which is
the sign? so sure your faith feeds on all the fruytes of his Passion, and
the righteousness and true holiness of his human body covers all your
sins before God his Father, and clotheth you round about with joy and
gladness. These are the riches of Gods abundant graces, which make the poor
penitent sinner to seem more glorious, then all ye worldly treasure. This is
the secret Manna with which God fedeth his elect, yt makes the hungry heart
more glad and joyful, then all the bread of Princes. (...)
These riches they have spoiled you of, that have sold unto you so dear their
transubstantiation. This food they have taken from you, yt have fed you so
long with a fancy of Christ's natural body. For the words, this is my body,
are not strange. (...)
Such phrases in ye scripture are ever used upon like occasion. In ye 33
chapter of Gene. Jacob calls his altar the mighty God of Israel: (...) 24.
yet ye altar was not God, but set up in memory how mightily God had preserved
him. In the 12. of Exodus God said to Moses of ye Pascall La^be. This is the
Lords passover, and yet it was not the passover, (...) 12, 1.
but the sacrifice of the Lords passover, when in killing the first borne in
the land of Egypt, he passed over the houses of the children of Israel. In
y^ 7. chapter of Leuitieus, where God gives to Aaron, ye shoulder and breast of
the sacrifices for his portion, Leuit 7. 3.
he says thus: this is the annoynting of Aaron, yet the breast and shoulder of
the beasts, were not the oil wherewith Aaron was anointed, but a sign or
token of his annoynting. In the 6. of Numery, when God sets forth the law of
the Nazarites, he forbids them to defile them selves at the death of their
father, mother brother, sister, and added this clause: Because the consecration
of his God is upon his head. Number. 6.
Yet the hear upon his head was not his consecration, but the sign of his
consecration. In the 5, of Numery, where God sets forth the law of gelousie,
the water whereby the woman is tried, (...) 5. 11
is called often the cursed water, and yet the water was not cursed, but showed
the woman to be accursed and detestable. In the 19. of Deuteronomye, speaking
of a false witness, both parties are bid to stand before the Lord. ^ut. 19
Yet he means before the Priest, in whose breast was Urim and Thummin, a
liuelye representation of the Lord. In the 26. of Deuteronomye, teaching what
they shall do that offer their first fruytes, (...) 26. 5.
it is written: Thou shall say this before the Lord: Yet he means before the
altar, a present sign of the Lord. (...) 31. 11. (...)2
Oftentimes in the law, the Arc is called the Lord God. Yet the Arc was not
God but a lively representation of the Lord God. In the 17. of Genesis, God
speaks of circumcision: this is my covenant: (...) 17 (...) 11.
Which yet God him self expounds in the verse following, this is the token
of my covenant. And what can be more plain the^ this? so S. Paul says: the
rock was Christ. 1, Cor. 19. 3.
Yet Christ was not the rock that was in Horeb: but the water of the rock was
the sign of Christ's blood, which quenches the thirst of all his elect and
chose^. So S. Paul calls Baptism, Tit. 3. 5.
Lauacru^ regenerationis, the washing of the new birth: yet ye water does not
regenerate but the holy Ghost. An hundredth such speeches you have in the
scripture, where the sign has the name of the thing signified. And how are
you so bewitched, that in this one Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
you can not bear yt phrase which is so usual in the scriptures? But so it is,
S. Paul's prayer has taken effect in the Popish kingdom: he that is
ignorant, 1. Cor. 14. 38.
let him be ignorant still. But I hope (dearly beloved) better of you. God I
trust has lightened you, and you do understand his holy scriptures. You will
come inspirite and truth to these holy mysteries, and you have forsaken your
old leaven of al Romish Idolatry. Now a word or two of the fruit of eating
and drinking Christ, and so I will make an end. To eat and drink Christ, is
as I have said, to come unto Christ, to believe in Christ, and the fruit of
this is: he that comes unto him, he shall not hunger. Again, and he that
believes in him, shall not thirst any more. This (dearly beloved) is that great
fruit, that vnspeaable benefit, yt endless mercy, which they taste and eat
of that labor and are laden and come unto Christ: My tongue can not express
it: your ears cannot hear it: our hearts can not imagine it, what is ye
fulness of joy that springs out of this fou^tain. To thirst no more, to be no
more an hungered, is to see God as he is and to contemn the world, to have al
tears wiped away from our eyes, and be no more sorrowful, to have the glory of
God to shine upon us, and no more to regard the light of Sun or Moon. This
shall be then perfect, when Christ shall appear in glory and majesty, and we
shall be clothed with righteousness and immortality. Now in this body of sin,
this happiness is tasted of, when we feel the spirit of adoption to cry unto
our spirit, Gala. 4. 6
Abba Father. When the mercies of Jesus Christ do so compass the inner man,
that we see and feel the kingdom of Heaven pictured in our consciences, when
with a great and longing desire, even as the heart longs after the water
brooks, Psalm. 12. 51
we cry with saint Paul: Phil. 1. 21.
Cupio dissolui. When we be touched inwardly, Apoc. 22.
and say with the saints in ye revelation: Come Lord Jesu, come quickly. These
are yt beginnings of those everlasting joys, that can never be madefull till
this mortallitie have put on immortality, 1. Cor. 15. 53.
and this corruptible, incorruption, and we have given into our mouths, the
songs of our triu^phe: O death where is thy styng? 1. Cor. 15. 55.
O hell where is thy victory? The songs of our joy, Apoc. 14. (...)
such as none can understand, save the hundredth and four and forty thousand,
that are bought from the earth. He that eats of Christ to this purpose, he
is nourished, and he that drinks of Christ to this hope, he is quickened. With
this meat and drink, Abraham was filled, Gene. 12. 1.
when he forsook his fathers house, his kindred, his country, to go into a
land that God would show him. With this meat and drink Moses was filled,
when he rather chose to be a miserable servant among his brethren of Israel,
(...) 11
then to be a mighty Prince in the court of Pharaoh. Psa. 84. 1
With this meat and drink was David filled, when he wished rather to be a
door keeper in the house of God, then to dwell in the Palaces of Princes. With
this meat and drink was Paul filled, Phil. 3. 8.
when he said, he accounted all the world as dunge that he might win
Christ. With this meat and drink who so ever is filled, Math. 19. 19.
he will forsake father and mother, Luke. 14. 26,
brother and sister, wife and children, house and lands, yea even his own
soul, and take up his cross and follow Christ. The remembrance of
immortality that Christ shall give unto him, will make him heartily to confess,
yt this life is but a moment. The length of his days that lives for ever,
will make him behold his own body, Esaias. 4. 6.
and say: all flesh is grass. The glory of his majesty that shines world
without end, will prove the glory of man to be but as a flower in the field.
It will make his heart to cry often within him: Ioh. 16. 34.
Lord feed us ever with this bread. And sure (dearelye beloved) the cause is
soon espied, why the world is so droncken, with these transitorye vanities:
they never felt what the things are, that abide for ever. He never tasted of
Christ that hungreth and thirsts after vain glory, to become honorable in
this world. He never tasted of Christ, yt heapeth up silver and gold, and
cannot tell for whom he gathers it. He never tasted of Christ, that spends
his days in wantonness, and harkeneth not to the sentence that shall be spoken
unto him: Luke 16. 3
Come, give account of thy stewardshipe. He never tasted of Christ yt has his
eyes open to behold vanity, and sees not Christ crucified for his sins. He
never tasted of Christ, that has his ears open to al ungodly (...) and
hears not the Trumpet that one day shall blow a loud: Arise ye dead, and
come unto judgment. To be short he never tasted of Christ, that is not
crucified unto the world, and the world unto him, so far that sin raygne
not in his mortal body. The Prince never tasted of Christ, yt puts the
glory of his court in concupiscence, in pride, in blasphemy. The noble man
never tasted of Christ, that braggeth and boasts of his parentage, and
knows not yt he is but dust. The magistrate never tasted of Christ that
sufferth this great carding and dising, that leaves sin unpunished, and
virtue unrewarded. The Man or Woman never tasted of Christ, that cries not in
spirit: O Lord thou art mine inheritance. The Father of all mercy, and God
of all consolation, stre^gthen us with his grace, that we may taste of Christ
(...)


