A SERMON preached at Paul's Cross, the sixth of February. 1596.

In which are discussed these three conclusions. 1 It is not the will of God
that all men should be saved. 2 The absolute will of God, and his secret decree
from all eternity, is the cause why some are predestined to salvation,
others to destruction, and not any foresight of faith, or good works in the
one, or infidelity, neglect, or contempt in the other. 3 Christ died not
effectually for all.


By John Dove, Doctor of Divinity.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed by T. C. for R. Dexter. 1597.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Thomas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.
RIght Honorable (my singular good Lord) Your integrity in bestowing
spiritual livings, and making choice of learned men upon whom you bestow them,
has satisfied the common expectation, and fully answered that great hope which
the Clergy of England has conceived of you. It is the voice of all them
which are religiously affected, that God in his mercy has raised you up to be
an especial instrument of his glory. My self, among many other of both the
Universities, had set my heart at rest, as one resolved to die within the
precinctes of the College, like a Monk shut up in his cell, or an Heremite
mured up within the compass of a wall, without hope of ever being called to
any Ecclesiastial preferment in this corrupt and simoniacall age, (had I not
been by your Honor preferred). Wherefore in duty I could do no less, the^ for
my poor portion of learning, to offer unto you this my labor as a scholars
myte, which here I humbly present unto your Honor, as unto my good L. unto
whom I am especially bound. It may please your Lordship to weigh it, not
accorcording to my skill, which is but weak, but according to the soundness
of the doctrine therein contained, which is warranted by the authority of the
scriptures, the same scriptures being rightly understood: as it appears by
the analogy of the scriptures: the consent both of the Fathers of the
primitive Church, and the new writers of our times, which do concur in
judgment, and agree upon the same interpretation. The Lord continue this your
great love of godliness, and singular zeal in furthering of religion, that
here you may live long to his glory, and hereafter live for ever to your own
everlasting comfort.

Your Honors in all humble duty, John Dove.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the sixth of February. 1596.
Ezech. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no delight in the death
of a sinner.
A Protestation against the house of Israel. In which three things offer
themselves to our consideration: The majesty of the person which does protest:
the manner how he makes his protestation, and what he protests. The person
being God, the manner, by swearing by himself, he protests that he has no
delight in the death of a sinner.

Of the person, Med. c. 25
I say with Augustine: Huius mysterij profunditatem, men's humana non potest
concipere, nec oratoria lingua narrare, nec bibliothecarum volumina explicare,
si vniuersum mundum libri repleant. His majesty is an hidden mystery, whose
depth and bottom the wit of man can not sound, the tongue of sinful man can not
utter, the whole world being supposed to be but one library of books, would
be a brief and compendious epitomie, not large and voluminous enough to
express it. Genesis 18.
To whom Abraham the nearer he approached, the more he perceived himself to
be but dust and ashes, Esaias. 6.
at whose presence the Cherubins and Seraphins do hide their faces, as not able
to behold his glory, Esaias. 24.
at whose appearance the Moon shall be abashed, Exodus 33.
and the Sun ashamed: whose face Moses could not see without present death,
Job. 9.
who is wise in heart, mighty in strength, Job. 11.
remooueth the mountains out of their places, causes the pillars of the earth
to shake, commands the Sun, and it rises not, closes up the stars as
under a signet, spreads out the heavens, and walks on the height of the
sea, makes the stars Arctuarus, Orion, and Pliades, and the climates of the
South, whose wonderful works are infinite, and without number, whose
perfection is higher then heaven, deeper then hell, longer then the earth,
Esaias. 6.
wider then the sea. When the Prophet saw the Lord sitting on an high Throne,
and the Seraphins stood upon it, and one cried to another, and said, Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord God of hoasts, the whole world is full of his
glory, and the lintils of the door cheeks moved at the voice of him that
cried, and the house was filled with smoke, he said: woe is me for I am
undone, because I am a man of polluted lips, for mine eyes have seen the King
and the Lord of hoasts. Then flewe one of the Cherubins to him with an hot
cole in his hand, which he had taken from the altar with the tongs, and he
touched his mouth, and said: Lo, this has touched thy lips. If the Cherubin
had sanctified my lips, Esa. 40. 4.
as he did the Prophets in this place, if he had given me the tongue of the
learned, Iere. 1. 9.
as he did unto him in another place: or if he had put his words into my
mouth, as he did to Jeremy, yet should I not be able to express it, for
neither Esaias nor Jeremy could express it. For between his reach, and the
shallowness of man's heart, there is as great a wirlepoole, or swallowing
pit, as that which is between hell mouth, and Abraham's bosom. If I should
wade in the channel thereof, I should sink into as deep a gulf as the water
of Ezechiel, which the first time came up to his ankles, the second time to his
knees, Ezec. 4. 7.
the third time to his loins, the fourth time it was a deep river, and and not
to be passed over, that he was feign to be brought back again to the
brinke thereof, so that the farther he waded, the deeper he was plunged. The
Philosophers compare him to a circle, because he is infinite, without
beginning, and without ending, but such a circle as is repugnant to the
principles of Geometry, whose center is every where, Mat. 5. 34 35.
but his circumference is no where: his throne is heaven, his footstool earth,
his holy city Jerusalem. He is al eye, for he sees all things: all ear, for
he hears all things: all arm, for he comprehends al things: John 4. 24
and yet he is none of al these, for he is a spirit, 2. Cor. 3 17.
and in spirit to be worshipped. Medit. 12. 24.
He is great without quantity, good without quality, everlasting without
time: in his greatness infinite, in his power omnipotent, in his wisdom
inestimable, in his counsels terrible, in his judgments just: his thoughts
secret, his words true, his works holy: invisible, yet seeing all things:
immutable, yet changing all things: immovable himself, yet in whom all other
things have their being and moving.

As I live, says the Lord God. We read of many Gods in the holy scriptures:
for Satan is called Deus huius seculi, 2. Cor. 4.
the God of this world. Sometime the name of God is ascribed unto men, Psalm. 82.
Ego dixi vos dij estis, I have said, ye are Gods, meaning kings, rulers, and
magistrates, to whom the sword of justice is committed, because they represent
the person of God, but they shall die like men: Exodus 32.
sometimes to Idols: Faciamus Deos qui praecedant nos, Let us make Gods to go
before us. It was the voice of the people to Aaron, when Moses was in the
Mount, of which Paul speaks: Gal. 4.
Even then when they knew not God, they did service unto such things as by
nature are not gods. And, When they knew God, Romans 1.
they glorified him not as God, but became vain in their imaginations, their
foolish heart was full of darkness: when they professed themselves wise, they
became foolish, for they turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into the
image of a corruptible man, and of birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping
things. Such gods are made with hands, Baruch. 6.
and cannot save themselves, 1. Samu. 12.
they are vanity, abomination, 1. Reg. 16.
the doctrine of vanity, teachers of lies, Deuter. 7.
expressly forbidden in Gods book, They have eyes and see not, Deuteronomy. 27.
ears and hear not, Ier. 10.
noses and smell not, hands and touch not: Habac. 2.
feet and walk not: they that make them are like unto them, Deuteronomy. 26.
and so are all they that trust in them. Deuteronomy. 18.
But the Prophet speaks of one God in this place, Esaias. 2.
which is omnipotent, Esaias. 14.
which is a spirit, which is every where present, Mich. 5.
and sees al things, which is immortal, Psalm. 115.
which is called in a word, the Lord God, Genesis 17.
and the God of gods. Sing unto the Lord a new song, Genesis 35.
sing to the Lord all the earth, John. 14.
sing to the Lord and praise his name, declare his salvation from day to day,
Ier. 23.
for the Lord is great and much to be praised, 1. Tim. 1. 6
he is to be feared of all Gods. Psalm. 96.
For all the gods of the people are Idols, Psalm. 50.
but the Lord has made the heavens. 1. Tim. 1.
And, The God of gods even the Lord has spoken, and called the earth, even
from the rising of the Sun, to the going down thereof. I conclude this first
part with Saint Paul: Now unto the King everlasting, immortal, invisible,
unto God only wise, be honor and glory, for ever and ever.

As I live, 1. Cor. 8.
As there is but one God to the faithful, Zach. 14.
which has but one name, that he may have no fellowship with the gods of the
Nations: 1. Tim. 1.
so is he immortal, 1. Tim. 6.
only has immortality, and dwells in the light that none can attain unto,
whom never man saw, nor can see, that he may be distinguished from princes
which also are Gods, Psalm. 82.
but they shall die like men: Exodus 29.
and he is a living God, Leuit. 26.
that he may be distinguished from Idols, 2. Cor. 6.
which are but dead Gods, and therefore he says: Psalm. 115.
As I live, I delight not. etc. In which words I observe two things: to wit,
the Lord swears: and he swears by his life that is, Psalm. 96.
by himself. He swore in his wrath, Number. 92.
that they should not enter into his rest. None (says he) of the men which
came out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land
concerning which I swore to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, because they have not
wholye followed me, excepting Caleb and Joshua. And as God swore, Ex. 20. 17
so sometime man swear, and that lawfully, Liu. 19. 20
notwithstanding the general prohibition wherein oaths are forbidden. Dent. 5.
11.
Thomas Aquinas alleges the authority of Saint August. Iam. 5. 12
Contra mendacium, mat. 5. 33.
where he shows, that all oaths are not simply forbidden, Pars. 2. quaest.
89. artic. 2.
but upon respects. Ne iurando ad facilitate^ iurandi veniamns, deinde ad
consuetudinem, demum ad periurium. Least often swearing breed in us a delight,
and delight grow to an habit, and at the length, De sermon. do. in mon.
to perjury. And in another place: Si iurare cogeris, scias de necessitate
venire infirmitatis illorum, quibus suades, quae infirmitas mala est, non male
facis qui been vteris iuramento vt alteri vtiliter persuadeas, sed a malo est
illius cuius infirmitate iurare cogeris. If thou be constrained to swear, it
is long of their weakness, which will not believe thee without swearing, which
weakness of theirs is sin: thou art not in fault which take a lawful oath,
to make faith unto an other, but he is in the fault whose incredulity is such
that he will not believe thee without an oath. So to confirm a truth, Genesis
21. and 26.
Jacob and Laban made a covenant between themselves, by swearing one to the
other. Ruth. 3.
By an oath Boaz promised marriage to Ruth. Abdias being a just man, 1. Reg. 18.
and fearing God, swore unto Elias, Paul to the Romans. Romans 19.
God is my witness whom I serve in my spirit, in the Gospel of his son,
that without ceasing I make mention of you in my prayers. And in swearing,
diverse ceremonies have been observed, according to the times and places as in
the time of Abraham, they swore, laying their hands under their thighs.
Afterward the Jews taking the law of Moses in their hands, the Christian
touching the Gospel. But as a learned man says, Ceremonia iuramenti nihil est,
modo res iusta sit animus iuraniis bonus, and religiosum iuramentum. It is not
material what outward ceremony is used in swering, so as it be in a lawful
cause, the conscience of him which swears being good, and the oath religious
which he takes. But whosoever swears, he must swear by the Lord, and
when the Lord swears, he swears by himself. So the Angel swore by him
that lives for evermore, Apo. 10. 6.
there should be no more time. By my self have I sworn (says the Lord to
Abraham) because thou have done this thing, Genesis 22. 16.
and have not spared thine only son, therefore I will bless thee, and
multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven. Nu^. 14. 26
As I live (says the Lord) I will do unto you, as you have spoken in mine
ears, your carcasses shall fall in the wilderness. But the reason why men
swear by the Lord, and the Lord by himself* is alleged by the Apostle. Heb.
6. 13.
An oath for confirmation is the end of all strife: so God, willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the stablenesse of his counsel,
bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable things wherein it is
impossible that God should lie, we might have strong consolation, which have
our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before us. Now men swear by him
that is greater the^ themselves: but when God made the promise to Abraham,
because he had no greater to swear by, he swore by himself. But I come to the
last and essential point, where he protests, that he delights not in the
death of a sinner.

That he delights not in the death of a sinner, we need no further proof,
then this, that he sent his son to die for the salvation of sinners. John 12.
God sent not his son to condemn the world, but that through him the world
might be saved. And notwithstanding the enmity between God and us continued
no longer, Romans 5. 10
then until we were reconciled unto him through his son: Col. 1. 21.
yet unless he had of his free mercy loved us from the beginning, he had
never sent his son to reconcile us. For so writes Augustine: Tract. in John.
100
Incomprehensibilis and immutabilis est Dei dilectio, non enim ex quo ei
reconciliati sumus per saenguinem filij eius cepit nos diligere, sed ante mundi
constitutionem dilexit nos, vt cum eius vnigenito nos filij eius essemus
antequam omnino aliquid essemus. Incomprehensible and immutable is the love of
God, for his love toward us did not then first begin, when we were reconciled
to him by the death of his son, but his love was from the beginning, for he
ordained us when as yet we were not sons, to be heirs with his only son. John.
3.
Ita deus dilexit mundu^, etc. So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son for us, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
life everlasting. In which words of our savior Christ, I note six things,
which al do savor of the infinite mercy of god showed to sinful men. The first
is, that god is the only author and efficient cause of yt salvation of sinners.
The 2. is, what moved God to save sinners: his great love toward them: the 3.
how far this love of god is extended: even to all sinners, for he so loved the
world: the 4. the means how he wrought the salvation of sinners: by which
salvation he made his love known unto the^: by giving his son, yt highest
degree of compassion, he gave the innocent for the noce^t, the righteous for
the unrighteous, and that not a stranger, but a kinsman, not a kinsman but a
son, and not a son only, but an only son. The 5. what sinners take hold of
this his mercy, not simply al sinners, but all beleening sinners: the 6. is,
the end of his compassion upon sinners, that they should not perish in their
sins, but have life everlasting. These things being so, that we have so many
arguments of his mercy showed to sinners, that he is the only author of their
salvation, and that it proceeds from his love, and for the working of it, he
spared not his only son, and that it extended not to a few, but to all:
for as much as he loved the world. And, which is a more evident proof of his
mercy, seeing he would have none to perish, but all to come to repentance, 2.
Pet. 3. 9.
seeing he would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, for as much as there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man,
the man Jesus Christ, which gave himself a ransom for all men, 1. Tim. 2. 4
to be a testimony in due time, seeing every one which calls on the name of
the Lord shall be saved. Joel. 2.
And our Savior Christ inuiteth them saying. Come to me all that be laden,
Matthew. 11.
and I will refresh you, Psalm, 145.
if Gods mercy be greater then all his works, if he be more ready to save
then to destroy, to absolve, then to condemn, as it appears in that
immediately upon the sin by Adam committed in Paradise, he pronounced the
sentence of salvation before the doom of condemnation, promising the Messiah
the blessed seed, Genesis 3.
before he threatened him with misery and death, that he might raise him up to a
lively hope, and not throw him down into the pit of desperation. And as
saint Augustine says, Quando peccauit homo miserabiliter, condonauit Deus
misericorditer, When man sinned most miserably, God forgave him most
mercifully, Et licet o Deus in cunctis tuis operibus mirabilis es, tamen
mirabilior esse crederis in operibus pietatis. Though he be wonderful in all
his works, yet he is more to be wondered at for his works of pity. In so
great a cloud of witnesses of Gods mercy, which is extended to all, and that
he delights not in the death of any sinner, how can it be that many are
called, Ma. 20. 16
and few are chosen? that great is the way that leads to perdition, and many
there be that find it, Mat. 7. 13.
and narrow is the gate which leads to salvation, Luke 13. 24
and few there be that enter therein? That when Esau and Jacob had done
neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
election, not by works, but by him that calls: before they were borne God
loved Jacob, Romans 9.
and hated Esau? chose one, and refused the other? Mat. 1.
that he will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, Exodus 33.
and show compassion on whom he will show compassion? Esa. 10. 21, 22.
That it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, Romans 9. 27.
but in God that shows mercy? That he has mercy on whom he will, and who^
he will he hardens? though the children of Israel were in number as the
sands of the sea, but a remnant shall be saved? I have thought good to handle
this point at large: and for the better discussing thereof to collect and gather
out these three conclusions.

The first, that it is not the will of God that all men should be saved.

The second, that the absolute will of God, and his secret decree from all
eternitye, is the cause why some are predestined to salvation, others to
death and destruction, and not any foresight of faith or good works in the
one, or of infidelity, neglect, or contempt in the other.

The third, that Christ died not effectually for all.

Of the first S. Augustine disputes in this manner, Enchirid. ad Laur. cap. 95,
and 97.
That God will not have all men to be saved, it is manifest, forasmuch as our
Savior wrought many works in the unthankful cities, Mat. 11. 21
Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, which he knew would not repent, but he
refrained from showing any such examples in Tire and Sidon, and Gomorrha and
Sodom, which if he had done there, Tire and Sydon had repented in sackcloth and
ashes, and Sodom had remained until this day. Moreover, says he, I give thee
thanks, o father, lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things
(meaning the mysteries of salvation) from the wise and understanding, and have
opened them to babes, it is so, o father, because thy good will was such. But
how then, says he, shall we answer the objection of S. Paul? 1. Tim. 2.
Quo modo dicit apostolus deus vult omnes homines saluari quum plurimi non
fiant salui? If God will have all men to be saved, as the apostle writes, how
is it that the greatest part are damned? Deus multa potest quae non vult, sed
nihil vult quod non potest? his power is greater the^ his will, and his will
extends not it self so far as his power: his will is not to do all that he
can, but he can do whatsoever is his will, as the prophet speaks. Psalm. 115.
3.
Our god is in heaven, and he does what he lists. If it be his will to save
all, and his power is omnipotent to do what he will, why then are but a remnant
saved? Some, says August. do answer, that the cause is in themselves, as if
God will, but they will not, Mat. 23. 27.
as it is in the gospel, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and
stonest the^ which are sent to thee, Luke. 13. 34.
how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers
her chickens, but thou would not? Tanquam dei voluntas superata sit hominum
vnluntate, and infirmissimis nolendo agentibus facere non potuerit
potentissimus quod volebat. Vbi tum est eius omnipotentia qua omnia quaecu^que
voluit facit si colligare voluit filios Jerusalem and non facit? As though the
will of God could be crossed by the will of men, and the almighty could be
hindered of his purpose by the weakest vessels. how the^ was he omnipotent, if
he were willing to gather the children of Jerusalem, but did it not? That text
being not understood, would at the first sight seem to import so much, as if
the will of God were made frustrate, and of none effect by the will of men,
where then were his omnipotency? An potius and ipsa filios suos ab illo
colligi noluit, sed ea quoque nolente filios eius collegit ipse quos voluit?
Nay, rather Jerusalem in deed, forasmuch as lay in her, would not have her
children gathered together, but his will was not frustrate, for as much as he
against her will gathered together as many of them as seemed good to his own
will and pleasure. And in another place he does answer it more fullye, Enchi.
ad Lau. c. 100
where he says. Quantum ad ipsos attinet, quod Deus noluit fecerunt, quantum
vero ad omnipotentiam Dei, nullo modo id efficere valuerunt. Hoc quippe ipso
quod contra voluntatem Dei fecerunt, de ipsis facta est voluntas Dei. Miro and
ineffabili modo no^ fit praeter eius voluntatem quod fit contra eius voluntate^
quia non fieret si non sineret: nec vtique nolens sinit sed vole^s, nec sineret
bonus fieri male, nisi omnipotens de male etiam facere posset been. For their
parts, and as much in as them lay, they did that which God would not have to be
done, but if ye consider the omnipotency of God, they could not do otherways
then was his will. For, in as much as they did contrary to the will of God, in
them so doing was fulfilled the will of God. And it is a wonderful mystery to
see, that which is against his will, is not otherwise then he has willed; for
but by his sufferance it could not be, neither does he suffer it against his
will, but with his will: neither would God which is good suffer any thing to be
done which is evil, unless his omnipotency were such that he could make
good of that which is evil. Finally, to this objection out of Saint Paul,
(having first disputed antagonistico) he makes his own answer dogmatice,
Enchir. c. 100.
and that two manner of ways. The first is this: Quod Deus vult omnes saluari,
and tamen plurimi non saluantur, ita intelligendus est ac si diceret, nullum
hominem saluum nisi quem saluum fieri ipse voluerit, non quod nullus sit quem
non saluum fieri valit, sed quod nullus saluus fiat nisi quam velit, and ideo
rogandus sit vt valit, quia necesse est fieri si voluerit, de orando quippe Deo
agebat apostolus vt hoc diceret. Where it is written, that God wills all men
to be saved, and yet the greatest part of men are not saved, it is so to be
understood. God wills all men to be saved, that is, no man is saved against
his will, but whosoever is saved, it is by his will, not as though there were
none whom he would not have saved, but that none are saved, unless he will,
and they only whom he will, and therefore he is to be prayed unto that he
would, because it cannot otherwise be, but they shall be saved if he will,
for the Apostle alleges this as an argument, that we should pray to him for
the salvation of all men, because it is by his will that they are saved. And
because the safest and most sound interpretation of the Scriptures, is by other
like places of the Scriptures, we read the like kind of saying in the first
of. John, concerning Christ: Illuminat omnem hominem venientem in mundum, non
quia nullus hominum est qui non illuminatur, sed quia nisi ab ipso nullus
illuminatur. He lighteneth all men which come into the world, and yet many
sit in palpable darkness, as Papists, John. 1.
Jews, Turks, Infidels, and in the shadow of death, therefore it is not so
to be understood, as if all men were lightened by him, but so, that that no
man is lightened but by him. His second answer is this: That whereas he
wills all men to be saved, this word All, is be understood, as it is
often times used in the Schools, not De singulis generum, sed de generibus
singulorum, Not as if he would have every one in particular, of all sorts
of people to be saved, but of all sorts some to be saved. For thus he
says: Omnes homines vult saluos fieri, non quod nullus hominum esset quem
saluum fieri nollet, qui virtutes miraculorum facere noluit, apud eos quoi
dicit acturos poenite^tiam si fecisset: sed vt per omnes homines omne hominum
genus intelligamus per quascunque differe^tias distributum, reges, priuatos,
pauperes, mares, faeminas, etc. By all men we must understand all kind of men.
Whereas it is written, he will have all men to be saved, it is not to be
understood, as though there were no man who^ he would not have saved, for as
much as he would not work wonders among the^, which (as he says) had bin
converted, if he had wrought them among them: but by every man, all sorts of
men, as kings, subjects, rich, and poor, are to be understood. Nam Apostolus
ibi praecepit vt oremus pro singulis, specialiter addit, pro regibus qui
poterant superbia seculari ab humilitate Christiana abhorrere. For the Apostle
in that place exhorts, that supplications be made for all men, but especially
for princes, and such as are in authority, because such men may be more easily
by the prosperity of this life, drawn away from the humilitye of faith.

Hoc dicit esse bonu^ vt pro talibus ^retur, statim vt desperationem tolleret,
addit: Quia deus vult omnes saluari. Therefore, says the Apostle, it is good
and acceptable in the sight of God, that such men be prayed for, and that we
may hope well of all, and despair of none, he adds: For God wills all men
to be saved. Wherefore in a word, God will not have all men in particular,
but all men in a generality, that is, all kinds of men to be saved, as in
the words going before, he will have prayers to be made for all men, that is,
not for all men in particular, but all kinds of men: for there be some men in
particular, for whom we may not pray. 1. Ioh. 5. 16.
If any see his brother sin a sin which is not to death, let him ask, and
life shall be given him: but there is a sin to death, that is against the
holy Ghost, which cannot be forgiven, and for that thou shall not pray.
Likewise our Savior says: Luke 11. 24
Woe be to you Pharisees, for you tithe mint and rewe, and all herbs, but pass
over judgment and the love of God. Yet they tithed not all herbs, but all
kinds of herbs, not omnia oleta, sed omne genus olerum. So God wills all men
to be saved: not all men, but all kinds of men. To these two answers of Saint
Augustine, which are both consonant and agreeable, not only to the analogy of
faith, but also of that place of Saint Paul, I will add a third answer, for
the more fuller satisfying of all such as desire to attain unto the knowledge
of the truth, and that is this: Forasmuch as God will have all men to be
saved, we must distinguish of his will, which is two fold, Voluntas reuelata,
and voluntas beneplacita, his hidden or secret will, which is only known unto
himself, and his written or revealed will, which is imparted unto man in his
holy Scriptures. According to his written will, Mat. 11.
he wills all men to be saved. Matt. 26. 27.
For he says: Come unto me all: Drink of this all: his Gospel has been
preached unto all nations. Psalm. 19.
The sound of them, meaning the voice of the Apostles, Ma. 28 29
has been heard in all lands, Mar. 16. 20.
Go, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the father, Act. 2. 5.
etc. They went forth and preached every where. There were at Jerusalem men
that feared God, of every nation under the cope of heaven, and every one heard
the Apostles preach in his own language, that by their means the fame of the
Gospel might be spredde abroad in all the corners of the earth, that no
infidel might hold himself excused by pleading ignorance at the day of
judgment. But according to his secret will few are saved: and that is it of
which the Apostle speaks, saying: The foundation of God remains sure, 2.
Tim. 2. 19.
and has this seal or privy signet: Solus deus nouit suos: only god knows
who be his. And least any should think, that this distinction of the will of
God into his secret will, and revealed will, is but an idle and frivolous
distinction, sauouring of curiosity more then of substance, I will prove it by
such evident places of Scripture, that it cannot be denied. In one and the self
same action of the treason of Judas, when he sold his Lord and master, appear
two sundry wills of God, the one hidden, the other revealed, and one contrary to
the other. His secret will was that Judas should betray him: his revealed will
was, that he should not betray him: and yet both these wills, in respect of
God, were good and just. His revealed will was, that Judas should not betray
him. For it is not only forbidden in a generality, where it is written:
Exodus 20.
Thou shall not kill, or consent to murder: And among those things which the
Lord hates, Pro. 6. 17.
one is: Manus effundentes innoxium sanguinem, Hands that shed innocen blood:
But also he is forbidden by a particular caveat, where our Savior said as
he sat at meat, verily I say unto you, Matt. 26. 21.
that one of you shall betray me, even he which dippeth his hand with me into
the dish, he shall betray me, but woe be to that man by whom the son of man
is betrayed, it had been good for that man if he had never been borne. And at
the very instant when he did betray him, he rebuked him, Luke 22. 48
saying: Judas, do thou betray the son of man with a kiss? Act. 2. 22
And yet Peter speaks plainly, that God in his secret will had appointed
that Judas should betray him: for, says he: Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
among you with great works and wonders which God did by him in the midst of
you, as ye your selves know, him I say, have ye taken by the hands of the
wicked, being delivered by the determinate counsel and providence of God, Act.
4. 25.
and have crucified and slain. And it is the voice and consent of all the
apostles. Psalm. 2. 1. 2.
Thou have said by the mouth of thy servant David: Why did the Gentiles rage,
and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth stood up, and
took counsel against the Lord, and his Christ. For doubtless, against thine
holy son Jesus who^ thou had anointed, both Herod, and Pilat, with the
gentiles and people of Israel, gathered themselves together to do whatsoever
thine hand and thy counsel had determined before to be done. This conclusion
being thus determined, two doubts or scruples may arise. The first: These
things be granted that God has two wills, the one contrary to the other,
whether it may be said at any time, that God is contrary to himself? The
second is: If whatsoever the wicked do, be done according to the will of God,
why are they not blameless for doing his will? To this first I answer:
Voluntas Dei in se est simplex, nobis tamen apparet multiplex qui quo modo idem
diuerso modo fieri, and non fieri velit non comprehendimus. God is not
contrary to himself, albeit his revealed will, and his secret will, are not
one: for the will of God in it self is one, but it is said to be diverse, as
it appears unto us, whose dullness is such, that we cannot conceive how in
diverse respects he he will, and he will not. Or else we may safely answer
with Calvin. Contrariae sunt Dei voluntates, sed in diuersis institutis. His
wills be different, but to diverse purposes. But in respect of us his will is
always one, and the same, because for our parts he exacteth always the same
duty at our hands to be performed, that thereby we may be void of excuse, if
we perform it not. He commands us always to do the same, if in his secret
will he will put in our hearts to to do otherwise then he has commanded, it
is either for our punishment, or the setting forth of his own glory, or the
executing of his secret purpose. In vna voluntate illius elucescit Dei
iustitia, in altera proditur crimen hominis. In one of his wills is made
manifest the justice of God: in the other the offense of man. To the second: If
the wicked do but the will of God, are they therefore to be excused? Nothing
less. For first: Licet Deus Illud voluerit, tamen aliud ijs praecepit.
Howsoever God willed one thing, he commanded an other thing by them to be
done. We must not inquire after his secret will, but we must follow his
written commandment. Secondly howsoever the wicked do the will of god, yet they
do it not to that end, to obey his will, but to satisfy their own desire.
Hugo de sancto victore de sacra pars 4. cap. 15.
As Hugo writes. Non sua voluntate diriguntur ad implendam Dei voluntatem, sed
occulta illiu. dispositione. They are not moved by their own will to fulfill
the will of God, (for they mean nothing less) but by Gods secret inclination,
whereby he moves them so to do, they do his will, not knowing themselves that
God has appointed them to do so. And as Augustine says: Epist. 48. ad Vincen.
Quum pater tradidit filium, and Dominus corpus suum, and Judas dominum, cur in
hac traditione Dominus est iustus, and Judas reus, nisi quod in vna re quam
fecerunt, causa non erat vna ob quam fecerunt? When God the father gave his
Son, and the Son gave his own body, and Judas gave our Lord, the action
being one and the same, why were God the father and the son just, but Judas
guilty, unless, because the thing being one, which they did, the end and
intent was not one for which they did it. For God gave his son for the
redemption of mankind, the son gave himself to be our redeemer, but Judas
gave him for thirty pieces of silver, because he was a thief and loved the
purse. As in another place saint Augustine speaks most fitly to this purpose
in this manner. Enchir. c. 100.
Quandoque bona voluntate ho^mo vult quod Deus non vult, quum tamen dei
voluntas sit bona: vt si bonus filius velit patrem viuere quem Deus bona
voluntate vult mori. Et potest fieri vt homo velit id voluntate mala quod Deus
vult bona, vt si malus filius velit mori patrem, velit hoc etiam Deus: Tantum
interest quid velle homini, quid Deo congruat, and ad quem finem suam quisque
referat voluntatem, vt approbetur vel improbetur. Deus quasdam voluntates suas
bonas implet per hominum voluntates malas, sicut per Iudaeos maleuolos, bona
voluntate patris Christus occisus est, quod ita bonum fuit, vt Matt. 16. quando
Petrus id fieri nolebat, Satanas ab eo qui occidi venerat diceretur. Sometimes
the will of man is contrary to the will of God, and yet his will is good:
sometimes again, the will of man concurreth with the will of God, and yet the
will of God is good, the will of man evil. As for example: A good son
desires that his father may live, when the will of God is that he shall die,
there the will of man is pleasing to God, though the one be contrary to the
other. Likewise, an evil son is willing that his father shall die, God wills
the same, the will of God and man are the same, yet one is just, the other is
sin, etc. I come to the second conclusion.

The absolute will of God, and his secret decree from all eternity, is the
cause why some are ordained to salvation, others to death and destruction, and
not any foresight of faith or good works in the one, or of infidelity, neglect,
or contempt, in the other.

This conclusion is the doctrine of no less Doctor in divinity then Saint
Paul himself most learnedly and profoundly delivered, in the Epistle to the
Romans, cap. 9. from the 11. to the 23. verse, where he writes in this manner.

11 For before the children were borne, and when they had done neither good nor
evil, (that the purpose of God might remain according to election, not by
works but by him that calls.)

12 It was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger.

13 As it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.

14 What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid.

15 For he said to Moses: I will have mercy on him on whom I will have mercy,
and will have compassion on him on who^ I will have compassion.

16 So then, it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy.

17 For the Scripture says to Pharao: for this purpose have I stirred thee up,
that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared through
all the earth.

18 Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens.

19 Thou will say then unto me, why does he yet complain? for who has
resisted his will?

20 But O man, who art thou which pleadest against God? shall the thing formed,
say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?

21 Has not the potter power over the clay to make of the same lump one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor?

22 What if God would to show his wrath, and to make his power known, suffer
with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction?

23 And that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory?

In which words are contained three things: first, Ver. 11, 12 13, 14, 15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
the conclusion it self.

Secondly, That notwithstanding he loves some, and hates others, before they
are borne, when they have done neither good nor evil, yet God in so doing is
not cruel, or unjust.

Thirdly, Albeit God hardens the hearts of men to do evil, as he did the
heart of Pharao, and that according to his own will and pleasure, and it is
not in the power of man to avoid it, for who can resist the will of God? yet
Gods wrath is justly kindeled against them whom he hardens.

The conclusion in these words: For before the Children were borne (meaning
the two twins of Rebecca, Esau and Jacob,) and when they had done neither
good nor evil, it was said to her, (that is to Rebecca) Genesis 25. the elder
shall serve the younger, (that is, Esau shall serve Jacob.) And because it may
be a question, what is meant by these words, The elder shall serve the
younger: he does interpret them by a playner place of Scripture, out of
Malachy, that is: God has loved Jacob, and hated Esau.

The reason why God loved the one, and hated the other, before they were borne,
and when they had done neither good nor evil, is alleged in the parenthesis,
that the purpose or secret decree of god in choosing one and refusing the
other, might remain according to election, not by works, but by him that
calls, which is God alone. There is plainly set down the eternal decree of
God, in choosing some, and rejecting others, proceeding merely from himself,
without any respect or regard of the persons, which are elect or reprobate, or
any thing foreseen in them, where he says: Not by works, but by him that
calls. And here is prevented the answer of the Papists, which confess
that Jacob was loved before he was borne, but ex praeuisis operibus, for the
good works which God foresawe in him, as also of Huberus, and other Lutherans
of our times, the brochers of strange opinions, which hold that some are
predestined to be vessels of honor, but expreuisa fide, because of their
faith, which God did foresee to be in them, others of dishonor, but ex mero
contemptu, aut neglectu, non ex Dei decreto, not by any decree of God, but
because he had in them a foresight either of neglect, or contempt: as if the
causes of their predestination were in themselves and not in God, whereas in
deed these words: Not by works, but by him that calls, do end all
controversy, showing that the whole causes of election and reprobation, are in
himself and not in us, and therefore not long of any faith, or works of ours.
And as Saint Augustine says: Si futura opera quae Deus vtique praesciebat,
Enchir. c. 98.
vellet intelligi, nequaquam diceret, non ex operibus, sed ex futuris operibus,
eoque modo istam solueret quaestionem, immo, nullam quam solui opus esset
faceret quaestionem. If the Apostle did understand any good works foreseen in
Jacob, to be the cause why God did love him, he would not say as he does: Not
of works: but he would rather say, God loved him because of his works which
he foresaw in him, and so he would not only end this controversy, but make
it so plain that it should be indeed without all controversy. Again, the
Apostle does explain his own meaning, that he loved Jacob, and hated Esau,
without respect of any thing in them worthy of love or hatred, by the objection
following, where he says: What shall we say then? Is there iniquity with
God? God forbid. Because it seems to flesh and blood not to stand with the
justice of God, to condemn men before they are borne, but to be cruelty in
him to hate the^ which never did evil: therefore the apostle preuenteth that
objection, and purges God of that suspicion which men might conceive against
him, which he should not need to do, if God did love or hate upon any
foresight of faith or good works in the one, or neglect and contempt in the
other; for that were in the judgment of men, a sufficient cause of love and
hatred, without all show of injustice. Thirdly, he makes it yet more plain,
by the words which follow, verse. 18. where he says: He will have mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. He makes two causes
of salvation, and damnation, and both subordinate to an higher and more
principal cause, the subordinate cause of salvation being mercy, because
none is saved but by mercy: of damnation hardening, or obdurating, for they
which be damned, are hardened in their sins, that they cannot repent, and
both those inferior causes are subordinate to his will, as the highest cause,
and only in himself, and these inferior causes do both proceed from his
will. And finally, when he says: It is not (meaning election) in him that
wills (that is, in the endeavors of man) nor in him that runs, (that is in
the works of men) but in God only that shows mercy: he teaches that the
only rule of predestination, and reprobation, whereby God is directed, and the
only law which he tieth himself to observe therein, is his will: so that no part
of our election is ascribed to our selves, or any thing which may be in us.

Secondly, to answer this objection. Is there iniquity with God? God forbid.
He clears that two manner of ways. First, God is not unjust by being partial
in saving, he does not err in his choice by preferring Jacob before Esau,
when the case of them both was one, both unborn, neither of them had done
good, why he should be chosen, or evil, why he should be refused. For God
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy. Non potest peccare in dolectu,
cuius voluntas est iusticiae regula. He cannot err in his choice, when that
is just, whatsosoeuer is his will. When two thieves have committed murder, and
both deserved death, may not the King without suspicion of injustice show
mercy in pardoning the one, and do judgment in executing the other?

Jacob and Esau were both as we all are, by nature the children of wrath, could
not God justly have compassion on Jacob, Ephe. 2.
and let Esau die in his sins? That any are saved it is his mercy, and he
may have mercy on whom he will. It is worthy of observation that the Apostle
does say: when they had done neither good nor evil. But he does not say:
when they were neither good nor evil. For true it is that they had done
neither good nor evil, because they were unborn, and therefore could not
commit any actual sin: but they were both of them evil, for both were
infected with original sin, in their mothers womb, which they drew by
inheritance from Isaac their father, and Rebecca their mother, Enchir. cap. 98.
and therefore says Augustine: Ambo gemini natura filijirae nascebantur,
nullis quidem operibus proprijs, sed originaliter in Adam, vinculo damnationis
obstricti: Iacobum igitur dilexit per miscricordiam gratuitam, Esaum odit per
iudicium debitum, quod quum deberetur ambobus, in altero tantum alter agnouit,
non de suis meritis sibi gloriandum, sed de diuinae misericordiae largitate,
quia non est volentis, neque currentis, sed Dei miserentis. Cap. 94.
Remanentibus reprobis in aeterna poena, sancti scient planius quid illis
contulerit gratia: tum vebus ipsis apparebit, quod Psalm. 100. scriptum est:
misericordiam and iudicium tibi cantabo domine, quia nisi per indebitam
misericordiam nemo saluatur, nisi per debitum iudicium nemo da^natur. Cap. 95.
Ex duobus paruulis alter assumiter per dei misericordiam, alter relinquitur,
per Dei iudicium, in quo is qui assumitur, agnoscit quid sibi per iudicium
debebatur nisi misericordia subueniret. Cur iste assumitur magis quam ille, cum
vna causa esset ambobus? eade^ est causa cur apud quosdam no^ sunt factae
virtutes nempe in Tiro and Sidone. Mat. 11. Quae si factae fuissent
poenitentiam egissent, sed in Corazin and Bethsaida factae sunt, qui non erant
credituri. Cap. 99. Quum Dei misericordiam commendasset dicens, non est
volentis neque currentis etc. deinde iudiciu^ commendat, quoniam in quo non fit
misericordia, non fit iniquitas, sed iudicium. They were both by nature the
children of wrath, not by reason of any offense which themselves had committed,
but for y^ first offense of Adam: they were in state of damnation, as all the
rest of Adams posterity: wherefore that God loved Jacob, it was free mercy and
undeserved grace: that he hated Esau, it was no wrong, but justice, a
punishment due unto his sins: which punishment being due unto them both, was
in justice inflicted upon one, and in mercy but upon the one: that as one was
an example of his justice: so the other might be a vessel of mercy, that
none may boast of his own merits, because it is not in him that wills, nor
in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. When the wicked shall be
tormented in hell fire, then shall Gods saints clearly perceive how much his
grace and mercy did avail them: then shall they find it true by their own
experience, as a thing verified in themselves, which David speaks in his
hundred Psalm. My song shall be of mercy and judgment. For that they are
saved, it is free mercy: that the other are damned, it is just judgment. When
of two infants one is chosen through mercy, the other refused in justice: he
which is chosen, cannot but confess, what in justice was due unto himself,
had not mercy been showed unto him, So then, where mercy is not showed, there
is not iniquity, but just judgment inflicted. I remember, Saint Augustine
speaks very fitly to this purpose, in an other place, though upon an other
occasion: for in his 157. Epistle to Optatus, he proposes this question, why
God has ordained so few to be saved? and foreseeing that so many millions of
men are to be damned for their sins, why he does creaate them? Why so
merciful a God should be glorified more by the damnation, then salvation of
his own creatures? For if his glory did consist in saving rather then in
destroying, it should seem without doubt, that the greatest number should be
saved, and that he would not create those whom he does foreknowe to be but
reprobate.

He makes this answer: Merito iniustum videretur, quod fiunt vasa ad
perditionem, nisi esset vniuersa ex Adam massa damnata. Indeed it might seem
very injurious, that any should be ordained to be vessels of wrath, if it
were not, that the whole lump of which the vessels of wrath are framed, had
been damned before in Adam, but now: Quod fiunt nascendo vasa irae, pertinet
ad debitam paenam: quod fiunt renascendo vasa misericordiae, pertinet ad
indebitam gratiam: That many are borne vessels of wrath, it is but a just
punishment due to their original sin: that a few by their regeneration are
made vessels of mercy, it is undeserved favor. But if all which are borne of
Adam, should be regenerate, and borne anew, and none should be damned, then:
Lateret beneficium quod donatur indignis: Then Gods mercy which is extended to
them that are saved (which indeed are all unworthy of their salvation) would
not be so apparent as now it is when but a few are saved. Plures Deus fecit
damnandos quam saluandos incomparabili multitudine, vt reiectorum multitudine
ostenderetur, quam nulli momenti sit apud Deum iustum quan^ talibet numerositas
iustissime damnatorum, atque vt hinc quoque intelligant, qui ex ipsa damnatione
redimuntur, hoc fuisse massae illi vniuersae debitum quod tam magnae eius parti
redditum, cernerent. But therefore GOD has ordained, without all comparison
more to be damned then to be saved, for these two causes. First, that it
might appear by the great multitudes of them which are damned: how little
GOD, which is most just, regards the outcryes of whole multitudes of sinners,
which are iustlye punished: Secondlye, that they which are redeemed from that
damnation, may by their own redemption, confess, when they see the greater
part damned, that that damnation was due to the whole lump, (and therefore to
their own selves) which was adjudged to the greater part. Secondly, he is not
unjust by any parciality in punishing, because, first he may, because it is
his will and pleasure, justly condemn some, as it appears by Pharao:
secondly, as in election, so in reprobation, between his decree, and the
execution of his decree, there be subordinate causes: for although his will be
the first and principal cause, that he decrees who shall be saved, and who
shall be damned: yet between his decree to save, and salvation it self, there
is mercy, for none is saved but by mercy: and between his decree to
condemn, and the damnation, there is hardening that men can not repent, but
continue in their sins. So that albeit the cause why he decreed that men
should be damned, is only in himself because his own will is the cause of
that decree, there is found cause of damnation inherent in themselves, which is
infidelity and hardness of heart: so that none are condemned, but first there
is found in them matter enough worthy of condemnation, as the Prophet speaks:
Perditio tua ex te, Ose. 14. 13.
salus ex me Israel, Thy salvation, o Israel, comes only from me, but thy
damnation from thy self. 2. Pet. 2. 12.
And as the apostle speaks. These which as bruit beasts lead with
sensualities, speak evil of the things they know not, shall perish through
their own corruption.

Lastly, Verse. 19.
where it is written: Thou will say unto me, why does he yet complain? for
who has resisted his will? He grants two antecedents, that God hardens
who^ he will, And that no man has power to resist his will, And yet the
argument is denied as a weak consequent, that therefore Gods wrath is unjustly
kindled against them who^ he thus hardens, and constrains to do his will,
showing that man may not thus expostulate: which he proves by two reasons.
First, an argument, called in Logic, a comparatis, Verse. 21.
where he says: Nunquid deo non licebit quod figulo licet: The potter may of
his own clay make vessels for the bed, as well as for the board, and may not
God much more, of the same lump make vessels of wrath. The second is, Ab
optimo fine diuini concilij, drawn from the end which God does propose, where
he says: What if God would, to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath, prepared to destruction? And
that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
Verse. 22. 23.
whom he has prepared to glory, who can accuse him of injustice? Then he
shows that neither the salvation of the elect, nor the damnation of the
wicked, is the last end of his eternal decree and purpose, but that he
proposes a further and better end, which is his own glory, that he may show
his wrath, and make his power known, as also he may declare the riches of his
glory. A point of so deep divinity, would require both a learned and large
discourse, especially before so honorable, frequent, and judicious an
auditorie; but two hours are too short a scantling, and I am constrained to be
briefer then I would. But that you may be fully satisfied concerning this
point, I will with as great brevity as I can, answer three objections, which
do seem to make against this doctrine of predestination, which I have
delivered unto you.

The first is of Samuel Huberus a Lutheran, which affirms that this place of
Saint Paul, concerning Esau and Jacob, is not meant of any particular men, but
of whole nations, not of heavenly things, but temporal blessings, and
therefore makes nothing to prove predestination.

The second, of the Papists, which infer this absurdity, that if God
hardens men to do evil, then God is the author of sin.

The third of the Atheistes and carnal men, which deny the providence of GOD
and dispute with themselves in this manner: If GOD have predestined me to
Hell, then in vain is it for me to lead a godly life? If he have
predestined me to salvation, what need I to confourme my self unto his
Word? For his will and purpose must needs take place, I can not avoid his
secret Decree, it is like the law of the Persians, it can not be altered.

Touching the first, Sam. Huberus Hell uetius Ber nensis, pastor Ecclesiae
Derendum gensis in Ducatu Witten^ bergensi.
For as much as it is written: I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau: Samuel
Huberus a Lutheran first distinguishes the ambiguitie of the names, Easu and
Jacob, as also of love and hatred, affirming that Esau and Jacob are to be
understood collectiue, not distributive, not personally, but nationally, as by
Jacob is meant all the posterity of Jacob, and by Esau, all the families and
ofsprings of Esau: as for example, often times in the Scripture, Israel, Edom,
Ismael, Amon, Moab, Judah, Leui, are understood, not of particular men, but of
whole nations: so likewise the love of God to the one, and hatred to the other,
is not to be understood of spiritual graces, but temporal blessings: not in
the life to come, but in this life: not to belong to their own persons, but to
appertain to their posterity, and thereupon he infers this conclusion:
that these words of the Apostle do make nothing at all, either to prove
election, or reprobation. And because this doctrine of Saint Paul is quoted
out of Malachy, Malac. 1.
and that of Malachy out of Genesis, Genesis 25.
he examineth these three places of scripture, and by the coherence of the
text, seems to allege many arguments to that purpose. His arguments out of
Paul are these. 14. 1. A great prerogative is granted to the Jews above
other people, To. 9. 4. 15
but they are the whole posterity of Jacob. Ver. 7. unto 13.
2. That prerogative is drawn from the covenant, which the Lord did make with
Abraham, which covenant is belonging to many, and not appropriated to Abraham
alone. 3 He deriueth this prerogative from Isaac to Jacob, and separateth Esau
from it, as one which was no partaker of that blessing: but what is this
prerogative which is given to Jacob above Esau? namely, that in his posterity
should be continued the true worship of God, that in his posterity the Messiah
should be born, that in his posterity should be established a temporal
kingdom, neither was that prerogative, and glory always to continue in
Jacobs posterity, but only for a time, for as much as at the length, the Jews
which were Jacobs posterity, were rejected, and and the Gentiles chosen in
their place.

4 Whereas is written: Verse. 12, 13.
The elder shall serve the younger, it was never verified of the person of Esau,
nor during the life of Jacob, because Esau did never serve his brother Jacob,
but only his posterity did serve his brothers posterity, when the Israelites
had brought the Edomites into subjection.

5 He says: Verse. 24.
Whom the Lord has chosen, not only of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles:
where he mentions whole nations and kinreds. Ose. 2.
6 He urges the authority of Ose, saying: I will call them my people which
are not my people. Esaias 10.
7 The authority of Esaias: Though the number of the children were as the sands
of the sea, but a remnant shall be saved. 8 He opposes all the Gentiles to
the whole nation of the Jews, Verse. 30.
saying: The Gentiles which followed not righteousness, have obtained unto
righteousness, which is of faith: but Israel which followed the law of
righteousness, could not attain to the law of righteousness. 9 He shows
that Jacob has not the true knowledge of God: Cap. 10. 2, 3 ver. 9 and 12
which could not without impiety be understood of the person of Jacob. 10
Out of Deuteronomy. 32. and Esaias 63. He commends the obedience of the Gentiles, and
reprehendeth the contumacy of the Jews. Cap. 11. verse, 2, 3, 4* 5* 8, 9, 10,
ab 11. ad 29* 30, 31
11 he says: Has God cast away his people* god forbid. 12 He shows that of
the posterity of Jacob some are saved, but the greatest part are gone astray.
13 He compares together the zeal of both nations, as well Jews as Gentiles.
14 He concludes of both Nations in in this manner: As you in times past have
not believed God, yet have obtained mercy through their unbelief: so now have
they not believed God, by the mercy showed unto you, that they also may receive
mercy.

As for the Prophet Malachy, where he says: Mal. 1.
I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau, he expounds himself, and declares with
what kind of hatred he hated Esau. Namely, he made his mountains waste, and
his heritage a wilderness for dragons: which was never brought to pass while
Esau lived, but long after his death. And notwithstanding he bloued Jacob, yet
he abhors his unthankfulness: which ingratitude could not be objected to
his person, but to his posterity, as in that whole chap. he discourses, not of
one in particular, but of a whole nation. Verse. 23.
To come to the examination of the words contained in the 25. of Genesis The lord
said to Rebecca: Two Nations are in thy womb, two manner of people shall be
divided out of thy bowels, and the one people shall be mightier then the other,
and the elder shall serve the younger. Where it is most manifest by the
coherence of the words, that he speaks not of persons, but of peoples: so
that where he says: The elder shall serve the younger, he means the elder
people shall serve the younger people, or the posterity of the elder son,
shall serve the posterity of his younger brother. In another place, Isaac says
to Jacob: Let peoples be thy servants, Genesis 27. 29
and Nations bow to thee: be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers
Children honor thee. But this can not be verifyed of the person of Jacob,
because his brethren did not bow unto him, neither were people his servants,
neither did his mothers children honor him, but he served others: himself was
a fugitive in Mesapotomia, and did obeisance to his brother Esau: but only the
posterity of Esau served the posterity of Jacob, 2. Sam. 8.
when they were by David subdued and brought into subjection.

As for the love of the one, and hatred of the other, it consisted only in
temporal things, which he proves by these three reasons. 1 One could not be a
servant to the other in the life to come, Gene. 27.
because there is freedom and no service, every one is noua creatura in
Domino, a new creature in the Lord. 2 When Isaac blessed Jacob, he said:
Behold, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord has
blessed, God give thee therefore of the dew of heaven, and fatness of the
earth, and plenty of wheat and wine. But with the same blessing he blessed
Esau, though not in so great and ample manner, Verse. 39.
saying: Behold, the fatness of the earth shall be thy dwelling place, and
thou shall have of the dew of heaven from above. But all these things are
temporal respects, 3 If these things had been spiritual, and to be understood
of the life to come, then Jacob and Esau standing in opposition one against the
other, in so much that one should be chosen, the other damned, then both of
them could not have been blessed.

That I may answer with as great brevity as I can. The Argument does not
follow, that because Saint Paul does discourse of whole nations, and not of
particular persons: therefore these words do make against predestination. For,
if we do well consider the drift and scope of the Apostle in this place, we
shall find the contrary most plainly to appear. For although the argument
which the Apostle handles in that Chapter, and the two other Chapters
following, is a special discourse of the general apostacy and reiection of
the Jews, and the vocation of the Gentiles, yet by a kind of occupation, he
enters into a particular tract of predestination, although it be obiter, and
by the way, as a question most necessary to be touched, for the right
understanding of a place of Scripture, which seems at the first sight flatly
to make against this doctrine, which he has delivered concerning the general
reiection of the Jews, and so he inintreateth of predestination, for the
preventing of an objection. For, in the beginning of the same chapter, having
lamented the rejecting of his kindred the Jews, he makes this objection with
himself: If it be so that God has rejected the Jews, and called the
Gentiles in their place, it should seem to be contrary to the covenant which
he made with Abraham, (for his promise to Abraham was otherwise) and that his
word should be of none effect. To which objection he answers, that albeit
the general rejecting of the Jews, yet the promise which the Lord made to
Abrahaem remains sure and steadfast, for as much as notwithstanding their
general apostasy and infidelity, the Lord in his secret counsel chooses of
them some in particular whom he lists, whom he has before predestined to
salvation. For he made the promise to Abraham, and his seed, not in a
generality to all his seed, according to the flesh, but in particular, to all
those of his seed which should be his children according to the faith, even as
he was the father of the faithful. And therefore the state of this question
thus stands: That this grace is offered to all the posterity of Abraham,
without exception, that he would be their God, and they should be his
people, but it is sealed only to the faithful: the virtue and efficacy
thereof appertains only unto them of the seed of Abraham, which be of the
number of Gods elect, which are predestined, which he proves by two
examples, the one of Abraham, and the other of Isaac. Concerning Abraham: he
had two sons, Isaac, and Ismael, though Ismael were the son of Abraham,
as well as Isaac, yea, and circumcised before Isaac, had received the
circumcision, yet by the ordinance of God was Isaac only reputed the son of
Abraham, and the heir of the promise, and Ismael rejected: he yields this
reason, because they which are the children according to the flesh, are not as
children: but only the children of the promise, are accounted for the seed.
Concerning Isaac also he had two sons, Esau and Jacob, both they were
twins, and nearer one to the other then Isaac and Ismael, because they had
both the same father and mother, yet before either was borne, one was chosen,
the other refused, to show that notwithstanding the general reiection of the
Jews, yet God kept his promise with Abraham, forasmuch as it concerns only
those children of Abraham which are according to faith, and not according to
the flesh alone, whom he predestined before they were borne, not for any
foresight of any good thing in them, but of his own good will and pleasure,
because it was his will and pleasure, which in deed are in number but a few,
being compared with the great multitude of them whom he has hated, although
they be of the stock of Abraham. And as for that love and hatred wherewith he
loved one, and hated the other, although it be historically understood, as it
is in Moses, and Malachy, consists of temporal and worldly blessings: yet in
this Epistle of Saint Paul, it cannot otherwise be constered, then of the
kingdom of heaven, and of the life to come, as Paul himself the best
interpreter of himself, does in the words which follow explain his
meaning. For he shows that the hatred of Esau was such, as the hardening of
Pharao a reprobate, not only in this life, but also in the life to come.
Moreover, he terms the^ which are so hated the vessels of wrath, prepared
to destruction, and them which were so loved, as Jacob was loved, the vessels
of mercy prepared to glory, saying: God to show his wrath, and to make his
power known, does suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared to
destruction, and to declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. Furthermore, least we should be
like the Jews, 2. Cor. 3.
which when the veil was put upon Moses his face, did not look to the end of
that which should be abolished: and therefore their minds are hardened, and
till this day does remain the same covering untaken away: in the reading of
the old Testament we must not be ignorant that it receives two
interpretations, the one hystoricall, the other mystical: Biblioth. sanc. lib.
3. de vtilitate credendi ad Honoratum, c. 3
as Sixtus Senensis, and Saint Augustine did well observe. As for example.
Christ speaks of Judas in this manner: I speak not of you all, I know whom I
have chosen, but it is that the scripture might be fulfilled: he that eats
bread with me has lifted up his heel against me. John 13.
But if ye confer these words with the words of the prophet from whence
they are taken, Psalm. 41. 9.
they do hystorically concern the person of David, and his acquaintance, and
cannot be understood of Christ and Judas, because Christ was without sin,
but in the fourth verse of that Psalm, he says: Have mercy on me, and heal
my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Yet Christ in the new Testament does
mystically expound it of himself, and the treason of Judas against his
person. Likewise Peter interprets this saying of David, Let his habitation be
void, and no man dwell therein, Act. 1. 54.
of Judas, where in that place the prophet speaks in the plural number, Psalm.
69. 25
not of one, but of many, saying, Let their habition be void, and none dwell
in their tents, speaking of the whole nation of the Jews, that the just
punishment of God should be justly inflicted upon the^ for crucifying of
Christ, that their city should be sacked, and they dispersed by the Roman
Emperor. And seeing the soundest interpretation of the scriptures, is by other
places of scripture, yt these blessings and cursings, love and hatred, which in
the old testament are historical, are in ye new testament mistical, as in this
promise made to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their posterity, it is made
manifest by the apostle, Heb. 11. 8.
saying: By faith Abraham abode in the land of promise, as in a strange land,
as one that dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob heirs with him of the same
promise, for he looked for a foundation, whose builder and maker is god. But I
come to the 2. objection.

Romans 9. 17. 18. The Apostle writes in this manner: For the scripture says
unto Pharao, for this purpose I have stirred thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all earth.
Therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth. What
then, if God hardened the heart of Pharao, and caused him to sin, is not God the
author of sin? Nothing less, forasmuch as God is goodness it self, his very
essence is good, and nothing can proceed from him, but that which is exceeding
good. True it is, as the Prophet says, Amos. 3.
Non est malum in vrbe quod non fecit Dominus, There is no evil in the city
but the Lord did it. The lord does not only suffer the wicked to do evil, but
himself is a doer, and principal agent therein. I know there be some of
greater modesty then judgment in divinity, which for reverence to the person
of God, do affirm, that all the actions of satan, and the wicked, are not
done by the will, but only by the permission and sufferance of God: by which
opinion of theirs they fall into two absurdities: the one is, they deny his
providence which does so moderat and dispose of al things, that nothing can
come to pass otherwise the^ he has appointed and decreed before. The other is,
they derogate much and detract from his omnipotency, as if he should suffer
any thing to be don against his will. I know some have translated the lords
prayer in this manner: suffer us not to be led into tentatio^: but the Greek
text has (...), which is, Lead us not into temptation: so that if we be
tempted, he is the leader. And likewise whereas it is written, Mat. 6. 13
(...). Romans 1. 24* 26. 28.
He gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto uncleanness, and to a reprobate
sense: he gave them up unto vile affections: some translated it, Permisit eos
libidinibus, and he suffered them to follow their own lusts. These things as
they proceed from God, are good, but in respect of the men which do them, they
are evil. Enchir. c. 100.
Saint Augustine says: Deus been vtitur malis tanquam sum bonus, ad eorum
damnationem quos just praedestinauit ad poenam, and illorum salutem quos digne
praedestinauit ad gratiam. Vult peccata, no^ vt probet, sed vt iudicium suum
exequatur, sic malis instrumentis been vtitur. Vsus est Iudae proditione and
pontificum crudelitate, ad illorum perniciem, sed ad nostram salutem. Pharaonem
indurauit ad suam ipsius gloriam, and ad eius poenam: sed aliud fuit illius,
aliud Dei institutum. God which is infinitely good, does use the ministry and
service of them which are evil, to their damnation whom he has justly
predestined to death, and to their salvation whom he has predestined to
glory. He will have offenses to be committed, not as if he did allow and
approve them, but that by them he might execute his judgment, and so he does
make use of the evil as his instruments, himself being good. He used the
treason of Judas, and the cruelty of the Jews, to their destruction, but to
our salvation: he hardened Pharao, to his own glory, but for Pharaos
punishment. But the intent and purpose of Pharao, was not the same which God
intended: though the action which God and Pharao did were the same, yet in God
it was good, in Pharao it was evil, because the intent of them both was not
the same. Sometime God causes men to sin for their punishment, because
oftentimes he punishes one sin with an other: when man has sinned
grievously, God causes him to commit a more grievous sin, or a punishment of
his former sin, and so one sin is heaped upon an other, that at the day of
judgment their damnation may be the greater, if they do not repent, As Saint
Augustine observes. As for example. Contra Julian.
Romans 1. The Israelites did serve the creature for the Creator, which is
blessed for ever, Pelag. li. 5. cap. 3.
Amen. There is guilt of sin, but the Lord did punish this sin of theirs by
causing them to commit an other sin, for he gave them over into a repobat
sense, to do those abominations which were not convenient, as it is
particularly specified in the text, and so they received the reward of their
error. 2. These. 2.
So likewise speaking of them which were to be seduced by Antichrist. They
loved not the truth that they might be saved, that was a grievous sin, the Lord
punished it with another sin, therefore God shall send them strong delusions,
that they should believe lies. 1. Reg. 22.
Micheas saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, and the host of heaven stood on
his right hand, and on his left, and the Lord said: Who will seduce Achab, that
he may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead? Then there came forth a spirit and stood
before the Lord, and said: I will seduce him: I will go out, and be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his prophets: then the Lord said, thou shall seduce
him, and thou shall prevail. Now therefore behold the Lord has put a lying
spirit in the mouth of al those thy prophets, and the Lord has appointed evil
against thee. Therefore in a word I answer according as it is a doctrine
received in the schools. Deus est author mali, sed mali poenae, non mali
culpa, quatenus est in hominibus culpa est, quatenus proficiscitur a Deo paena
est, culpa non est, iustae vindictae deus author est, and Satan minister. God
is the author of evil, but of what evil, our school learning teaches us to
distinguish of evils: one is a sin, the other a punishment, God is the cause
we do evil, but as we do it, it is sin, as he does cause it, it is no
sin, but a punishment for our sins. And so as it is a punishment or revenge,
God is the author, Satan is the executor of the same. Part. 1. quaest. 1.
artic. 6.
Thomas Aquinas shows, that in sin two things must be considered, which
are, Actio, ac actionis vitium, res and qualitas rei, actio quatenus res and
opus est, bona est, and a Deo proficiscitur, quatenus vitiosa est, non a Deo
sed ab hominis natura corrupta: vt est peccatum, Deus non iubet, sed
vl^iscitur. The action it self, and the fault or unlawfulness of the action,
the thing it self, and the quality thereof: as for example: in the treason of
Judas we must observe, first, the action it self, of delivering Christ to the
Jews to be crucified, that in it self it was good, and proceeded from god for
the redemption of mankind: the quality of that fact as it was wilful murder,
so it was evil, and did proceed from the corrupt nature of Judas, which was a
thief, and desired thereby to enrich himself, so that the action comes from
God, in whom we have our being, and moving, but the offense comes from our
selves, because god which causes us to do ye action, does propose a good end
and purpose which is secret and known to himself, but man which does the
action, proposes an other end and purpose, contrary to the end and purpose
which God does propose, and therefore in man it is an offense. In the self same
action, both God and the devil do work in the hearts of the wicked, and yet so
that he cannot be excused, because God concurreth with the^, nor yet God
accused for doing that which the devil and the wicked do* for their doings
being the same, yet they are different two manner of ways, to wit, in the end
which they propose, and in the manner of their working. As for example: When the
cattle of Job were stolen away, Job. 1.
in the same action were three agents, God, the devil, and the Chaldeans: but
they differed in the manner of doing, because God was the author, the devil
was but a minister, or executor of the will of God, and the Chaldees were the
instruments of the devil to bring it to pass, as also they differed in the end
whereunto they did this. For the intent of God was, only to try the patience
of Job, and his faith: the intent of the devil was clean contrary, to drive
Job to desperation: the intent of the Chaldees was neither of these, but to
enrich themselves.

What then? shall we say with the wicked: If it be so that God has
predestined me to die the death, to what end shall I conform my self to do
his will and commandments? His counsel and eternal decree cannot be
altered, if he have ordained me to be saved, I cannot be damned: if he have
ordained me to be damned, I cannot be saved, what course of life soever I
take: for my salvation depends not on my endeavors, but on his decree, which
must needs stand. This is like the disputation of servant of Leno the Stoike
Philosopher, which when he was led to the gallows for his offense, his
master coming thither, said to him: O perdite quis ad hoc te impulit? to whom
he answered: O stulte philosophe, quis me hoc fatum docuit? O fool what
brought thee hither? O foolish Philosopher, thou have taught me, that
whatsoever was my destiny it could not be avoided. But we which are
Christians, must not be ignorant, that in matters of our salvation, God
works by his means: as he ordains salvation, so he appoynteth means to
the attainment thereof, and these means are not to be neglected. God decreed
that Abraham should be saved, therefore he gave Abraham the gift of faith,
without which there is no salvation: and as he could not but be saved: so he
could not but believe. For howsoever these things in respect of our knowledge
are contingent, yet in respect of Gods ordinance they be necessary, and can
not otherwise be, because he has so appointed. He decreed that Pharao
should be damned, therefore he hardened his heart that he could not turn
unto the Lord: for if he had turned, he had been saved. He decreed that
Judas should be a castaway, therefore he gave him not his grace to repent,
whereas true repentance is a mean to salvation. And if he had truly
repented, without doubt he had been saved. 2. Reg. 20.
If GOD have decreed to add to the days of Ezechias, fifteen years longer,
he has also appointed that Ezechias during those fifteen years, should take
his refections and bodily sustenaunce whereby life is preserved. Wherefore let
us for our parts follow the means which God has appointed to salvation, as
prayer, hearing, the word, receiving the Sacraments, faith, amendment of
life, godly and Christian conversation, and then we may secure our selves, that
as God has vouchsafed us the means so he has predestined us to salvation.
But I come to the third and last conclusion.

Christ died not effectually for all,

Though the death of Christ were sufficient for the redemption of all mankind,
yet he dyed not effectually for all, for as much as all men are not saved,
therefore to many, that is, to them which are not saved, the death of Christ
is of no effect. Mat. 20.
We read that many are called, but few are chosen. John 12,
The Jews could not believe, John 20.
because the Lord blinded their eyes. Matt. 11
They do not believe, because they are none of his sheep. Matt. 27.
God the father has hidden the mysteries of salvation from the wise men of the
world. 2 Timothy 2.
Everlasting fire is prepared for the wicked. John 17.
Some are vessels of dishonor. Our Savior Christ says: I pray for them whom
thou have given me out of this world, but I pray not for the world. But to
them which are only called, and are not chosen, whose eyes are blinded that
they should not believe, which are not Christ's sheep, which are vessels of
dishonor, from whom God has hidden the mysteries of salvation, for whom
everlasting fire is prepared, to those for whom Christ does not pray, to them
the death of Christ does nothing avail, to those his death is of no effect.

Huberus a brocher of new and strange opinions, whereof this is one, that
Christ died effectually for all, alleges so many common places, being
altogether frivolous, and nothing pertaining to the purpose, as would be
tedious for me to repeat them, and I wish it would not offend your patience
to hear them. Himself divides them into three classes, as he does term
them. The first tend to this purpose: to prove that Christ died effectually
for all, in a generality without exception. The second, to show that he died
as effectually for Cain and Judas, as for Peter and Paul, for the godly, as
for the godless. The third, to show that he died for all, or else (as he
says) which is dictu horrendum, not to be spoken. Deum grauissimorum scelerum
reum peragi, That God is guilty of heinous crimes. A very strange and
blasphemous speech.

His places to prove that Christ died effectually for all in a generality,
Genesis 3.
are these that follow. John 16.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head: He^. 2.
The prince of this world is cast out: 1. Cors 15.
By death he has abolished him which has the power of death, that is the
devil. He shall abolish all powers, and tread all his enemies under his feet.
But these things (says he) cannot be, that the Serpents head should be
broken, that the prince of this world should be cast out, that the devil
should be abolished, if yet the greatest part of men are vnredeemed. Moreover,
the restoring again of man, is in as ample manner as was the fall of man. Romans
5. 19.
But as by the disobedience of one (that is Adam) many were made sinners: so by
the obedience of one (that is Christ) many are made righteous. Where, by many,
all are understood: so then, as in Adam all are damned, so in Christ all are
redeemed. The kingdom of Christ the conqueror, 1. Tim. 2.
is larger then the kingdom of the devil, 2. Pet. 3.
which is conquered. Romans 8.
God wills all men to be saved. Romans 16.
He will have none to perish. He spared not his only begotten son, 2. Cor. 5.
but gave him for all. The Gospel is preached to all nations. God has
reconciled the world unto himself, And many other places, if different in
words, yet parallel to these, and in effect one and the same. Which places
indeed are very sufficient to prove that Christ died for all, but not that
his death appertained to all, or that he died effectually for all, but only
for the believers. And therefore they are but a fallacy in Logic, called
Petitio principij, they prove only that salvation is offered unto all, which
we do not deny, but they do not prove that salvation is sealed to any more
then to the faithful, which is the question in controversy between us.

Besides that, some of these places are by him mistaken. For the broosing of
the serpents head, is not to be understood of the nullitie or paucitie of them
which shall be subject to the kingdom of Satan, as though the Serpents head
being broken, and the devil vanquished, all mankind were so delivered, that
all were saved, and none damned: But it is to be understood of the triumph of
Christ over the devil, over sin, and over death, that as by the devil
mankind was overthrown, so by man the devil should be subdued again: that
as before all men were bondslaues to Satan, now Satan himself should be
brought under subjection, that now he should have no more power but by Christ's
permission, for as much as he has the key of the bottomless pit, Apoc. 20.
and the great chain in his hand, and he binds the great dragon which
before prevailed against us. Saint Paul makes comparison between our fall by
the first Adam, and our rising again by the second, and shows that a greater
good is derived to man by the obedience of the second, the^ was the punishment
which was inflicted by the disobedience of the first. But how? Not as then al
which before in Adam were damned, now in Christ were saved. But as in Adam all
were damned, so in Christ some are saved: for if all were saved in Christ, the^
were no use of hell, of the devil and his angels, which are appointed for the
torme^ting of wicked men. But in these three respects appears the largeness
of the benefit derived unto us by the death of Christ, above the loss which we
endured by Adams fall. First, our redemption is a greater and worthier work
then our creation: Facilius est creare quam lapsos restituere, ex nihilo bonu^
quam ex malo bonum facere. It is more easy to create us then to restore us,
when we had declined from our first integrity, of nothing to make us good,
the^ being evil to make us good: and therefore by our redemption a more rich
treasure is heaped upon us, but so that it is to be understood of the life to
come, not of this present life. Secondly, by the fall of Adam was lost a
earthly kingdom, by the death of christ was gained an heavenly kingdom, which
is so much the greater benefit, by how much heaven is higher then the earth.

Thirdly, although before the fall of Adam the righteousness of man was pure and
perfect, now it is full of imperfections: it was the^ inherent, Romans 7.
it is now but only by imputation (for as Paul speaks of himself, in me,
that is my flesh, dwells no good) yet that righteousness which was in man
before his fall, had not only annexed unto it Possibilitatem peccandi,
Possibility to sin, but also Procliuitatem ad peccatum, It was very prone
and apt to sin, and continued in him but a very short time, but the
righteousness which we shall be endued withal by the death of Christ, in the
life to come shall far exceed, because it shall also be inherent in us, and
that not for a season, but for ever, and it shall have all possibility of
falling taken away. So that in a word, where the Apostle says: By the
disobedience of one man, many are made sinners, by many he means all: but
where he says, by the obedience of one many are made righteous, by many he
means not all, but some: yet we gain more by Christ's death, then by Adams
fall, I mean we which are redeemed, but the greatness of this benefit
bestowed upon us by his death, does not consist in the multitude of them which
are to be saved, but in the great prerogative given to the paucitie of them
which are saved. Mat. 7.
For, if we weigh the number, Strait is the gate which leads to life, and
few there be that find it, but broad is the way which leads to destruction,
and many there be that enter in.

In his second order of common places, he comes nearer to the purpose, to
show that Christ died effectually for them which are damned in as much as they
were by him redeemed, but afterward voluntarily, and by their own free will
they made an apostacy, and renounced this benefit of their redemption,
whereof they were once made partakers. His places are these, and others like
unto them: Heb. 6. 4.
For it is impossible, that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, if they fall
away, should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify again to
themselves the son of God, and make a mock of him. Do ye not know that ye
are the Temple of GOD, 1. Cor. 3.
and that the spirit of GOD dwells in you? If any man destroy the Temple of
God, him will God destroy, for the temple of God is holy which you are. 1. Cor.
8. 11.
Through they knowledge shall the weak brother perish, 2. Pet. 2. 1.
for who^ Christ died. False prophets shall bring in damnable heresies, denying
the Lord that has bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. He
that has not these things is blind, 2. Pet. 1. 9.
and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Gal. 5. 4.
Ye are abolished from Christ who so ever are justified by the law, John 15.
ye are fallen from grace. Romans 11. 12.
I am the true Vine, and who so abides not in me is cast forth. Behold the
bountifulness of God toward thee, if thou continue in his bountifulness, or
else thou shall be cut off.

Upon which common places he infers this conclusion: They once believed,
they were lightened, they received y^ knowledge of the truth, they were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, tasted of the heavenly gift, were washed,
sanctified, made the temples of God, the members of Christ, the Lord bought
them. Therefore they were redeemed, and Christ dyed effectually for them, and
that they are not saved, it is not any decree of God from everlasting, but the
free will which was in themselves, that being redeemed, they renounced the
benefit of their redemption, when it was in their power to have received it.
To these places I answer: That indeed in outward appearance they were washed,
sanctified, redeemed, made the members of Christ, and Temples of the holy
Ghost, but not in truth and in verity, for as much as they which are indeed
the children of God, can never revolt and start back from the faith, and their
state of salvation. Our Savior says: John 10.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me and I give them
eternal life and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
mine hand, my father which gave me them is greater then all, and none is able
to take them out of my Fathers hand. And the Apostle says of the false
prophets: they went from us, 1. Ioh. 12. 19
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us, but this comes to pass, that it might appear that they
were not all of us. And concerning free will which he affirms to be the
cause of their apostacy, the time will not permit me to say much, only this
in a word: The will of man is neither as the Eagle which always with steadfast
eyes beholds the brightness of the Sun, neither as a stone which always
falls down from the top to the bottom, for neither does it always soar up
aloft, nor decline to the center, but sometime it is in divine conte^plation,
some times again it meditateth upon vanity. It is not dead, and yet it lives
not: it is not blind, and yet it sees not: as the seed sown in the ground is
not consumed, and yet it springs not up without the warmth and comfort of the
Sun: as the eye in darkness is not blind, and yet it neither lives nor
sees, without the especial grace of God.

There are three sorts of agents: the one is ex Placito, and that is God: the
other is, ex necessitate, and that is nature, then there must needs be a
third, which consists in a mediocritie between them both: for, Positis
extremis ponuntur and Media. No man is good against his will: so no man has
power to will any thing that is good, unless God give him the will. Ier. 10.
For as the Prophet speaks. The way of man is not in himself, neither is it
in man to walk and direct his steps. We are not of our selves sufficient to
think a good thought, as of our selves, 1. Cor. 3.
but all our sufficiency is of God. John. 6.
No man comes to Christ unless his father draw him. Romans 7.
What good I would do that do I not: the evil which I would not do, that do
I, (says the Apostle.) But there is a school distinction between compulsion
and necessity: For, Qui necessario peccat, nihilominus voluntario peccat.
Though man cannot choose but offend, yet he is willing to offend, but that is
no liberty, or freedom of his will.

In the third he does not so much dispute against the question, as blaspheme
against the majesty of God. As, if all mankind be not redeemed by Christ,
neither was by his decree ordained to life, that he may be justly accused of
notorious cruelty an injustice, his words are, Immensae iniusticiae, doli,
crudelitatis, omnium flagitioru^ quae saeuissimo competunt tyranno, (...), that
he is not (...) but (...): They be such reproachful words, that you may blush
to hear them, and I, when I do but think of them. Job. 4.
I may say with Job: Fear comes upon me, and dread, which causes all my
bones to tremble. I am ashamed to repeat them in English, because I would not
defile your religious ears. He does (says he) moreover, condemn men their
cause being not heard: or if it be heard, himself does enforce them to offend,
and leads them into snares to be intrapped, he does punish them for the
contempt of that benefit of their redemption, to whom he never meant that it
should appertain: he is like an householder which chasteneth his family for
refusing their dinner, for whom no dinner was ordained: like the master of a
feast, which inuiteth guestes to his Table, but entertained a very few of
them, and entreats the most of them hardly when they come thither: he did
when he wept over Jerusalem, Fundere lachrymas Crocodili, that he was not
verus, but mendax, and periurus. To these ungodly and irreligious speeches,
derogatorie to the highness and majesty of the Son of God, I say with Saint
Paul, 1. Cor. 15.
Evil words corrupt good manners, Epist. Iud.
and with Michael the Archangel, when he disputed with the devil about the
body of Moses, the Lord rebuke thee. But to come to the reasons which he
alleges, setting aside his blasphemous words, he argues in this manner: To
hold with Calvin, that Christ dyed not to save all, but only those which in
his will be had predestined, were plain Mahometisme, Paganism,
Sarasanisme. For first, that were to take away all comfort, which is derived
unto us by the passion of Christ, to annihilate the virtue of his death, to
overthrow the foundation of faith, for faith cannot stand being grounded upon
particulars, the universality of the redemption of mankind being denied,
because then every man in particular may doubt of himself, whether Christ be
his Redeemer or no, when it is held that he has redeemed but a few.
Secondly, it were to abolish the ministry of the Gospel, for as much as the
duty of the Minister of Gods word is to preach repentance, and to pronounce
remission of sins through Christ unto all, to minister the Sacraments to all,
and not to a few. To these absurd conclusions, I may say with Jerome: Ad
C^^siph. aduer.
Sententias vestras prodidisse, refutasse est. The very recital is a
sufficient confutation of their absurdities. Pelag. c. 4
For what man but meanly instructed in the rudiments of Christian Religion,
can be ignorant that faith is grounded upon the truth of Gods promise in
his son Jesus Christ, but the application thereof must not be made to all in
general, but to every one in particular by his own self? For, a true,
liuelye, and justifying faith of a Christian man, is thus defined: To be a
sure and certain knowledge of the love of God toward himself, which being
grounded upon the truth of Gods promise in Christ is revealed and sealed by the
holy Ghost. And that is it which the Prophet speaks, Habak. 2.
Iustus sua fide viuet. The just man shall live by his own faith: and the
Apostles Creed begins Credo, I believe, not Credimus, We believe. And Job
says of himself in particular: Job. 19.
I know that my redeemer lives, that though worms destroy this body, yet I
shall see God in my flesh. Romans 8.
The spirit of God bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of
God. Gal. 4.
Because (says Paul) ye are sons, God has sent the spirit of his son
into your hearts, which cries Abba, father. So that every true Christian may
by this doctrine of predestination, that Christ died only for them whom he
has predestined before, comfort himself that he is one of them which are
predestined, forasmuch as he believes, and the spirit of God which is within
him, even that spirit of comfort, does witness to his spirit that he is the
son of God, and therefore assure himself of his own salvation, without
entering into the secrets of God, to judge of other men whether they shall be
saved or no. As for the ministry of the Gospel, it continues the same which
it was ever from the first institution. For though few are chosen, yet many
are called, and only God knows who are his. Therefore the Minister must preach
salvation to al, Paul must plant, Apollo must water, and leave it to God to
give the increase, Peter must cast his net into the sea, and leave to God the
success of his labors. The Ministers of Gods word must do as the servants of
the great king, when he made a marriage for his son, which went out into the
high way, and invited all without exception, eue^ every one whom they could
find, both good and badde, and bid them to the wedding. As God suffers the
sun to shine, and rain to rain upon the badde, as well as the good, with
all indifferency. No man knows whom God has called, or at what hour he
will call men, or whether he will call them or not, and therefore we must not
refuse to do our endeavor, we must not despair of any man's conversion unto
the faith, or perseverance after his conversion in the faith. And because God
has two wills, one secret, and known to himself alone, the other revealed
in the scriptures, and imparted to us: in his secret will he will have some
to be saved: in his revealed will he commands that the Gospel should be
preached to all, we must not inquire after his secret will, which is known
only to himself, but his revealed will which is known to our selves: for
that servant which knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten
with many stripes. Thus counsailing every one that will enter into the
consideration of such deep points of divinity, that they would sapere, non
altum, but ad sobrietatem, that they would be wise, but with sobriety, and
confess with saint Paul: Romans 11.
O the deepenesse of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? For who has
known the mind of God? or who was his counsayler? (We must not demand
reason in matters of faith, because faith goes beyond reason) I conclude with
the godly Meditation of saint Augustine: Miserum me, quo modo sic induruit cor
meum, Chap. 30.
vt oculi me^ non indesmenter fundant flumina lachrymarum dum seruus
sermocinatur cum Domino, homo cum Deo, creatura cum creatore, qui factus est
limo ex cum eo qui omnia fecit ex nihilo? Wretched man that I am, how is my
heart hardened like the Adamant, that mine eyes do not power out streams of
tears to consider that the servant expostulateth with his master, man with
God, the creature with the Creator, he which is made of the molde of the earth,
with him which made al things of nothing. To him one invisible and immortal
God, the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, be all glory, and honor, for
ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

